
"Why, this. If you'll just allow me to take the pick of your wardrobe I
can take away the things and sell them. I'll soon bring back the eight
pounds--yes, and for that matter ten too."

"Sell my clothes?" said Kitty. She stared at the other girl as if she
did not believe the evidence of her own senses.

"Yes. Did you never hear of a pawnshop, you dear little wiseacre?"

"A pawnshop! Do you think I would allow my clothes to go to a pawnshop?"

"I know nothing whatever about it; but I make you the proposal. I will
transact the business for you if you'll allow me ten per cent, upon it.
I can get you the money."

"Oh, Carrie, it seems such a bitter shame," said Kitty. Her face was
crimson; she went to the other side of the room, opened the window and
put out her head. She wanted the cool air to soothe her scorched cheeks;
her heart was thumping in her breast. Had matters indeed come to this,
that she, Kitty Malone, was to pawn her pretty dresses, her trinkets,
her whatnots! Alas! she could not do it.

"I have often had to do it," said Carrie. "I know just how to manage. If
you'll allow me to select the most suitable of your things, I'll bring
you back the money in no time."

"You are sure?" said Kitty, beginning to yield.

"Certain--sure--positive. But you must allow me ten per cent."

"I know nothing about percentage; but you may take every scrap that is
over after you have got me the eight pounds."

"Very well, that's a liberal offer," said Carrie. "Now, then, I may as
well take a look at your clothes."

"Oh, it seems such an awful thing to do," said Kitty. "Are you sure,
quite sure, that no one will find it out?"

"Not a bit of it; that is, if you'll be quick and not allow that other
girl--Alice, you call her--to come into the room."

"I'll lock the door," said Kitty. She rushed across the room with new
hope, turned the key, and came back again to Carrie.

"I never heard of anything quite so extraordinary in my life," she said.
"And you--you call yourself a lady?"

"No, I don't; I call myself a good-natured lump of a girl."

"Well, perhaps you are; but to pawn one's things! Do you mean that I
will never see them again?"

"Oh, yes; whenever you like to return the money. They'll be kept safe
enough for you. If you don't return the money, of course, they belong to
the pawnbroker; but you have lots of time to think of that. Look here,
I'll pawn them for a month; that will give you heaps of time to look
round."

"So it will," said Kitty. "And are you quite, quite certain that I shall
have the money to-night?"

"Oh, yes, if you won't talk so much, only act. Now, then, open your
wardrobe."

Kitty unlocked the door of the mahogany wardrobe which she shared with
Alice, and Carrie began to pull her choice little garments about.

Kitty went and stood by the window.

"Don't you want to know what I am taking?" said Carrie. "Don't you want
to make a selection?"

"No; I'll leave it all to you. I can't bear to see them. Take--take what
you want."

"Goodness, what a girl!" thought Carrie to herself. "Here's an
opportunity for me."

She made a hasty and very wise selection, choosing the richest dresses,
the most stylish jackets, skirts, shoes, ribbons, gloves--clipping the
feathers out of the hats and the flowers from the toques--throwing in
some of the finest cambric handkerchiefs; and then, taking a sheet of
brown paper which she had put into a basket on her arm when she left
home, she folded the things into it and fastened her parcel with stout
string.

"Here I am," she said; "and this is my parcel. I have looked through
your wardrobe; your clothes are neat, fine, some of them gaudy, but all
good. I can get from three to four pounds for this lot."

"But why don't you take enough to get the eight pounds?" said Kitty, who
had quite made up her mind by this time.

"I could not carry any more. Now, then, open your jewel-case, quick."

"My jewel-case. Oh! I cannot part with my jewels."

"You must, if you want your eight pounds by to-night. I know my
pawnbroker. He won't give five pounds for this little parcel. Now then,
be quick. Oh, there I see Alice Denvers coming up the road with that
other fine young lady, Bessie Challoner. Where's your jewel-case?"

Kitty's face was like a sheet.

"I have not any jewels," she said; "or scarcely any worth mentioning. I
didn't bring any jewels with me. But here's my watch; will that do?"

"Do--rather! Why, it's a beauty. Don't say a word to the others; keep
your own counsel. Now, then, I'll be off to the pawnshop, and you shall
have the money to-night. _Au revoir! an revoir!_"




CHAPTER XXI.

THE LADY FROM BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.


Mrs. Steward was a great contrast to Mrs. Lewis. Mrs. Steward was a
tall, thin, rather refined-looking woman. Mrs. Lewis was fat and dumpy,
decidedly untidy in appearance, with a melancholy air and a habit of
constantly indulging in low weeping. Mrs. Steward looked as if she had
never wept in her life; she sat upright as a dart, her movements were
quick, her manners independent; she had a vivacious eye, a somewhat
short nose, thin lips, and a very decided manner.

Mrs. Steward and Mrs. Lewis had a long conversation in the untidy, ugly
little parlor, while they waited for Elma to return from school. Maggie
had been going in and out, glancing with some apprehension at the lady,
and then whisking back to her kitchen to sigh profoundly and mourn for
the violets which were no longer in her possession.

"I should like something to eat," said Mrs. Steward to her sister. "I
thought I would come to you for lunch, Caroline. Have you got anything
in the house--a lamb chop or even cold lamb and salad will do quite
nicely."

"My dear Charlotte," said Mrs. Lewis, laying her fat, tremulous hand
upon her sister's firm but thin arm, "do you think it likely that we
often have lamb chops or even cold lamb and salad for lunch? It is true
that since the Australian meat came in we can now and then indulge in a
very small joint of lamb for Sundays, but certainly on no other day. Ah,
Charlotte, you little know the poverty to which your poor sister is
subjected."

"I know all about it," said Mrs. Stewart, shaking herself angrily, "and
my plain answer to you is this--as you sow you must reap. What else did
you expect when you married that fool of a man, James Lewis?"

Mrs. Lewis made a great endeavor to rise from the sofa, she made a
further effort to look dignified; but all she could really accomplish
was to burst into a fresh wail of low weeping and to murmur under her
breath, "Charlotte, you are cruel to me, you are cruel."

"I don't mean to be, my dear; but really, Caroline, you do annoy me.
Have you no spunk at all in your composition? Are you still fretting
your heart out for that good-for-nothing man?"

"Well, you see, I love him," said the poor wife. "The parting from my
dear husband was a terrible trial. I think of him at all hours both day
and night. I often have an uncontrollable desire to join him in
Australia."

"Pray yield to it," said Mrs. Steward in the calmest of voices, "and
when you go, take that great lout of a Caroline with you. She is as like
you in appearance as one pea is like another. I am ashamed of you. Now,
let us turn to a more congenial topic. Little Elma, I am glad to say,
is made of very different stuff."

"Oh, Elma is a good girl," said Mrs. Lewis. At that moment Maggie came
into the room.

"Have you ordered your servant to prepare any lunch for me?" said Mrs.
Steward.

"Well, really--" Mrs. Lewis looked imploringly and with a vacant eye at
Maggie.

"There's the remains of the salt beef, mum," said that small worthy,
dropping a bob of a courtesy as she spoke.

"I couldn't touch it," said Mrs. Steward with a shudder. "Have you got a
fresh egg in the house?"

"Oh, my dear, nothing of the kind--a fresh egg! Fresh eggs are worth
their weight in gold. We have a stale egg, if you don't mind that."

Mrs. Steward indulged in another shudder even more violent than the
last.

"My good girl," she said then, "pray get me a cup of tea and some thin
toast, and be quick about it. See that the tea is really strong and the
cream fresh."

"Cream!" murmured Mrs. Lewis; but Maggie had withdrawn.

"Well, now, that is comfortably settled," said Mrs. Steward, "and I can
tell you what really brought me to town--I have come about Elma."

"Indeed, and what about her?"

"I mean to take her from you."

"To take Elma away from me, my own dear child?"

"Oh, now, come, Caroline, don't sicken me with your false sentiment. It
is a precious good thing for Elma that she has got an aunt ready and
willing to help her. I have just arranged to send her to a first-class
German school. Her English, I should say, was fair, and she will be
taken as pupil-teacher; she will thus have the advantage of learning
German. I heard of this through a great friend of mine, Fraeulein Van
Brunt. She is going to Germany herself next week, and will take Elma, if
you can spare her."

"If I can spare her? But it will break my heart--such a sensible girl
as she is," said poor Mrs. Lewis.

"Come, come, Carrie, no more nonsense; when I explain all the advantages
you will see for yourself how all-important it is that Elma should go.
The school is in the Harz Mountains, a splendid place; magnificent air,
and all the rest. If Elma stays there for two years, I will then have
her home, and send her to Girton as I promised. I will further arrange
that she spends her holidays with me, as I think really--" here Mrs.
Steward glanced round the shabby room--"I think that the less she
remains with her own family for the present the better."

"I see what you mean. I am beneath my own child."

"Beneath her. Well, it is a painful thing to say; but, as you put it so
frankly, I must reply in the affirmative," replied Mrs. Steward. "Ah,
who is this now?"

The door was flung open, and Carrie, very red about the face, and with
her parcel under her arm, entered the room. Her intention was to ask her
mother to accompany her to the pawnshop. It had not been the first nor
the second nor the third time that the unfortunate lady had been obliged
to pawn her things. Carrie thought that her parent could make a better
bargain than she could herself, and she hoped that she would have been
in time to transact this little business before the arrival of her aunt.
She now gave a start of dismay, and, dropping the parcel, sank down on
the nearest chair. As she did so Kitty's watch and chain tumbled out of
the front of her dress, where she had very insecurely fastened them. The
watch was a lovely one, with an enameled back studded with pearls, and
the chain was made of eighteen-carat gold. Owing to a warning glance
from Carrie, Mrs. Lewis refrained from saying a word; but Mrs. Steward
had no idea of keeping her emotions to herself.

"You, I presume, are Carrie," she said, looking at her niece. "Come
here, Carrie, and speak to your aunt."

Carrie advanced as if she were treading on buttered eggs. She held out
one dimpled hand gingerly.

"How do you do, my dear? Allow me to congratulate you on the acquisition
of that very lovely little watch and that splendid chain. Now, I am
devoured with curiosity to know who has given them to you. Surely not
your mother? Surely, Caroline, with all your faults, you have not----"

"Oh, dear me, no," said Mrs. Lewis.

Carrie indulged in a loud laugh.

"Bless us, aunt," she cried, "do you suppose mother can afford to give
me these? No, I--" She grew red and turned away.

Mrs. Lewis fidgeted on her seat, and appeared thoroughly uncomfortable.

"I do not wish to pry into your secrets, Caroline," said Mrs. Steward,
favoring the untidy and vulgar-looking girl with a glance full of
reprehension. "You are at liberty to wear handsome watches and chains
made of the best gold if your mother cares to see you with things so
unsuitable to your class and appearance. Your doings in life are no
affair of mine. But now, as you happen to be my niece, will you have the
kindness to go immediately into the kitchen and tell Maggie, or whatever
the name of your servant is, to hurry with that tea and toast."

Carrie was only too glad to dart from the room. She picked up her
parcel, and resorted to the kitchen.

"Oh, Miss Carrie, I do wish you would help me," said Maggie, who was
flying distractedly about. "There's the kitchen fire all but out, and
the lady ordered toast as crisp as you please. I don't believe we can do
it for her. Wouldn't she be content with thin bread and butter curled in
rolls?"

"Oh, of course she would, and must," said Carrie. "She is in no end of a
temper, and for my part I don't wish to humor her. Yes, of course,
Maggie. I'll cut the bread and butter and make it into rolls, and you
see to the tea."

"Thank you, miss, I'm sure I'm much obliged, and perhaps, miss, you
wouldn't mind taking it into the dining-room, for her eyes do fasten on
to you that fierce that I get all of a tremble, and as likely as not
I'll drop the tray."

Carrie laughed, and being at heart good-natured in her own way, helped
Maggie with some vigor to prepare the tea.

At last a meal, which could not be remarked for its abundance, was
forthcoming, and was brought into the dining-room.

"I ordered toast," said Mrs. Steward in an angry voice.

"I am sorry, Aunt Charlotte," said Carrie; "but the fire happened to be
out in the kitchen. You see," she added, somewhat spitefully, "we are
obliged to economize with coals, and we don't keep a fire up in the
middle of the day."

"Well, I am really so famished that I am content with anything," said
the good lady. "Pour me out a cup of tea at once, my dear, and just put
the bread and butter where I can reach it."

Carrie did so, winking at her mother as she arranged the tray. The next
moment Mrs. Lewis went out into the passage. Carrie followed her,
closing the door behind their guest.

"Mother, I want you to come with me to the Sign of the Three Balls."

"What in the world for, Carrie?"

"I have got to pawn some things, some beautiful things, and I am to get
ten per cent, on the commission. I shall turn over a nice little bit of
money, and you can have your favorite supper. You will come, won't you,
mother? And I'll give you half a crown into the bargain."

"Oh, dear, dear," said Mrs. Lewis, "I wish she had not come! She never
helps me in any way. All she does is to scold me and make me more
depressed than I am already. And she blames me so for marrying your poor
father, Carrie; as if I could help that now. And what do you think she
is going to do? She says she is going to take Elma from us."

"And a good thing, too," said Carrie.

"Carrie, what an unnatural girl you are! Do you mean to say you would be
glad to part from your sister?"

"I would, because I am fond of her, and she has got into the most awful
scrape at school. Don't you put any spoke in her wheel, mother, for
goodness' sake!"

At that moment the latchkey was heard in the lock, and Elma herself
appeared on the scene.

"Oh, good gracious! Elma," cried Carrie, darting up to her sister, and
beginning to whisper vigorously into her ear.

"What?" said Elma, with a start of dismay. "So soon?"

"Yes, yes; she's been here for nearly an hour. She is devouring rolled
bread and butter and tea in the dining-room at present. She asked for
toast----"

