they, continue to despise wilderness wile and stratagem, and in a
manner that is amazing. They walk continually into ambush, and are cut
up before they can get out of it. I am not one to cheapen the valor
of British and British Colonials. It has been proved too often on
desperate fields, but in the kind of war we must wage here deep in the
wilds of North America, valor is often unavailing, and I think, sir,
that we can rely upon one fact. The enemy will take us too lightly. He
is sure to do something that will keep him from using his whole force
at the right moment against us. Our forest knowledge will work all
the time in our behalf. I entreat you, sir, to keep the army here at
Ticonderoga and await the attack."

St. Luc spoke with intense earnestness, and his words had all the ring
of conviction. Montcalm's dark face was illumined. Again he walked
back and forth, in deep thought.

"The engineer, Lotbiniere, a man whose opinion I respect, is of
your mind," he said at last. "He says that whether Crown Point or
Ticonderoga, it's merely either horn of the dilemma, and naturally, if
the dangers of the two places are even, we prefer Ticonderoga and no
retreat. The Marquis de Vaudreuil had a plan to save Ticonderoga by
means of a diversion with a heavy force under Bourlamaque, De Levis
and Longueuil into the Mohawk Valley. But some American rangers taken
near Lake George by Langy told him that Abercrombie already had thirty
thousand men at the head of George and the Marquis at once abandoned
the scheme. It was lucky for us the rangers exaggerated so much that
the plan was destined to failure, as we needed here the men who were
sent on it. We save or lose Ticonderoga by fighting at Ticonderoga
itself and by nothing else. I thank you, Colonel de St. Luc, for your
gallant and timely words, I have been wavering and they have decided
me. We stay here and await the Anglo-American army."

"And the star of France will not fail us," said St Luc, with intense
conviction.

"I trust not. I feel more confidence since I have decided, and I
do know this: the young men who are my lieutenants are as brave and
skillful leaders as any chief could desire. And the troops will fight
even ten to one, if I ask it of them. It is a pleasure and a glory to
command troops of such incomparable bravery as the French. But we must
try to keep the Indians with us. I confess that I know little about
dealing with them. Has this savage chief, Tandakora, come back to
Ticonderoga?"

"I think he is here, sir. Do you wish me to talk with him?"

"I do. I wish it very much."

"He is very sullen, sir. He holds that the Indians have received no
rewards for their services."

"We have given them blankets and food and muskets and ammunition."

"He takes those as a matter of course. But he means something else.
To tell you the truth, sir, the savages want us to give prisoners to
them."

Montcalm's face clouded again.

"To burn at the stake, or to torture to death otherwise!" he
exclaimed. "My reputation and what is more, the reputation of France,
suffers already from the massacre at William Henry, though God knows
I would have prevented it if I could. It happened so suddenly and so
unexpectedly that I could not stop it, until the harm was done. But
never, St. Luc, never will I give up a prisoner to them for their
tortures, though every savage in our armies desert us!"

"I hold with you, sir, that we cannot surrender prisoners to them,
even though the cause of France should suffer."

"Then talk to this savage chief. Make him see reason. Promise him and
his people what you wish in muskets, ammunition, blankets and such
things, but no prisoners, not one."

St. Luc, with a respectful salute, left the tent. He was torn by
conflicting emotions. He was depressed over the smallness of the
French numbers, and yet he was elated by Montcalm's decision to stay
at Ticonderoga and await Abercrombie. He was confident, as he had
said, that some lucky chance would happen, and that the overwhelming
superiority of the Anglo-American army would be nullified.

The Chevalier cast a discriminating eye over the French position. The
staunch battalion of Berry lay near the foot of Lake George, but the
greater part of the army under the direct command of Montcalm was in
camp near a saw mill. The valiant Bourlamaque was at the head of
the portage, and another force held the point of embarkation on Lake
George. But he knew that Montcalm would change these dispositions when
the day of battle came.

On the westward side of the camp several fires burned and dark
figures lay near them. St. Luc marked one of these, a gigantic savage,
stretched at his ease, and he walked toward him. He pretended, at
first, that his errand had nothing to do with Tandakora, but stood
thoughtfully by the fire, for a minute or two. Nor did the Ojibway
chief take any notice. He lay at ease, and it was impossible to tell
what thoughts were hidden behind his sullen face.

"Does Tandakora know what the commander of the French army has decided
to do?" said St. Luc, at last.

"Tandakora is not thinking much about it," replied the chief.

"Montcalm is a brave general. He shows that he is not afraid of the
great army the English and the Bostonnais have gathered. He will not
retreat to Crown Point or anywhere else, but will stay at Ticonderoga
and defeat his foes."

The black eyes of the Ojibway flickered.

"Tandakora does not undertake to tell Montcalm what he must do," he
said, "nor must Montcalm undertake to tell Tandakora what he should
do. What Montcalm may do will not now keep Tandakora awake."

St. Luc's heart filled with hot anger, but he was used to dealing
with Indians. He understood their minds from the inside, and he had a
superb self-control of his own.

"We know that Tandakora is a great chief," he said evenly. "We know
too that he and his men are as free as the winds. As they blow where
they please so the warriors of Tandakora go where they wish. But
Onontio [The Governor-General of Canada.] and Tandakora have long been
friends. They have been allies, they have fought side by side in many
a battle. If Onontio falls, Tandakora falls with him. If the British
and Bostonnais are victorious, there will be room for none of the
tribes save the League of the Hodenosaunee, and them Tandakora hates.
Onontio will not be able to protect them any more, and they will be
driven from all their hunting grounds."

He paused to watch his words take effect and they obviously stirred
the soul of the savage chief who moved uneasily.

"It is true," he said. "Sharp Sword never tells a falsehood. If
Onontio is struck down then the British, the Bostonnais and the
Hodenosaunee triumph, but my warriors bring me word that our enemies
have gathered the greatest force the world has ever seen at the head
of Andiatarocte. They come thicker than the leaves of the forest. They
have more guns than we can count. They will trample Montcalm and his
soldiers under their feet. So, according to our custom, Tandakora and
his warriors would go away into the forest, until the British and
the Bostonnais scatter, unable to find us. Then, when they are not
looking, we will strike them and take many scalps."

Tandakora spoke in his most impressive manner, and, when he ceased,
his eyes met St. Luc's defiantly. Again the blood of the Chevalier
burned with wrath, but as before he restrained himself, and his smooth
voice gave no hint of anger as he replied:

"Odds are of no avail against Montcalm. The children of Onontio are
used to dealing with them. Remember, Tandakora, the great victories
Montcalm won at Oswego and William Henry. He has the soul of a mighty
chief. He has decided to stay here at Ticonderoga and await the enemy,
confident that he will win the victory. Tandakora is a great warrior,
is he willing to have no share in such a triumph?"

The cruel eyes of the Ojibway glistened.

"The heart of Tandakora is heavy within him," he said. "He and his
warriors are not afraid of the British and the Bostonnais. They
have fought by the side of Montcalm, but they do not receive all the
rewards that Onontio owes them."

"Onontio has given to them freely of his muskets and powder and
bullets, and of his blankets and food."

"But he takes from them the prisoners. We have no scalps to carry
home."

"It is against the custom of the French to put prisoners to death or
torture. Moreover, we have no prisoners here. The rangers taken by
Langy have already been sent to Canada."

"There is one in the camp now. He was captured by three of my
warriors, those you sent out, and by the law of war he belongs to me.
Yet Sharp Sword and Montcalm hold him. I speak of the youth Lennox,
the comrade of the Onondaga, Tayoga, who is my bitterest enemy. I hate
Lennox too because he has stood so often in my way and I demand him,
to do with as I please, because it is my right."

The Ojibway moved close to St. Luc and the fierce black eyes glared
into those of stern blue. The Chevalier did not change his smooth,
placatory tone as he replied:

"I cannot give up Lennox. It is true that he was taken by your
warriors, but they were then in my service, so he is my prisoner. But
he is only a single captive, a lad. Ask for some other and greater
reward, Tandakora, and it shall be yours."

"Give me the prisoner, Lennox, and I and my warriors stay and fight
with you at Ticonderoga. Refuse him and we go."

The chief's words were sharp and decisive and St. Luc understood him.
He knew that the savage Ojibway hated young Lennox intensely, and
would put him to the torture. He never hesitated an instant.

"I cannot yield the prisoner to you," he said. "The custom of the
French will not permit it."

"The warriors are a great help in battle, and the reward I ask is but
small. St. Luc knows that Montcalm needs men here. What is this boy to
St. Luc that he refuses so great a price for him?"

"It cannot be done, Tandakora. I keep the prisoner, Lennox, and later
I will send him to Canada to be held there until the war is over."

"Then the forest to-morrow will swallow up Tandakora and his
warriors."

The chief returned to the fire and lay at ease in his blanket. St. Luc
walked thoughtfully back toward the tent of Montcalm. He knew that it
was his duty to report the offer of Tandakora to his chief, but he did
so reluctantly.

"You have refused it already?" said the Marquis.

"I have, sir," replied St. Luc.

"Then you have done well. I confirm you in the refusal."

St. Luc saluted with great respect, and again retired from the tent.




CHAPTER XIII

EVE OF BATTLE


Robert awoke the next morning, well physically, but depressed
mentally. He believed that a great battle--and a great victory for the
Anglo-American army--was coming, and he would have no part in it. The
losses of Braddock's defeat and the taking of Fort William Henry by
Montcalm would be repaired, once more the flag of his native land and
of his ancestral land, would be triumphant, but he would be merely
a spectator, even if he were as much as that. It was a bitter
reflection, and again he thought of escape. But no plan seemed
possible. He was held as firmly in the center of an army, as if he
were in the jaws of a powerful vise. Nor was it possible for Tayoga,
however great his skill and daring, to reach him there. He strove
to be philosophical, but it is hard for youth to reconcile itself at
first, though it may soon forget.

Breakfast was given to him, and he was permitted to go outside the
tent into a small open space, though not beyond. On all sides of him
stretched the impassable lines of the French army. There were several
other prisoners within the enclosure, a ranger, a hunter, and three or
four farmers who had been taken in forays farther south.

The fresh air and the brilliant sunshine revived Robert's spirits. He
looked eagerly about him, striving to divine the French intentions,
but he could make nothing of them. He knew, however, upon reflection,
that this would be so. The French would not put any prisoners in a
position to obtain information that would be of great value in the
possible event of escape.

He undertook to talk with the other prisoners, but they were a
melancholy lot, not to be cheered. They were all thinking of a long,
in truth, an indefinite, imprisonment in Canada, and they mourned.
Many people had been taken into Canada by French and Indians in former
forays and had been lost forever.

Robert turned away from his comrades and sat down on a stone, where
he speculated idly on what was passing about him. He believed that the
French would withdraw to Crown Point, at least, and might retreat all
the way to Canada, leaving Lake Champlain, as well as Lake George, to
the complete control of the Anglo-American forces. He expected to see
preparations to that effect, and, when he saw none, he concluded that
they were merely postponed for a day or two. So far as he could judge,
the aspect of the French army was leisurely. He did not observe any
signs of trepidation, but then, withdrawal was always easy in the
great North American wilderness. There was yet plenty of time for it.

He noticed a complete absence of Indians, and the fact struck him with
great surprise. While he was advancing various theories to account
for it, young Captain Louis de Galissonniere came, and greeted him
cordially.

"I hope you understand that we French know how to treat a prisoner,"
he said.

"I've nothing of which to complain," replied Robert. "This is the
second time that I've been with you, and on this occasion, as on the
first, I seem to be more of a guest than a captive."

"You're the special prisoner of Colonel de St. Luc, who stands
extremely high with the Marquis de Montcalm. The colonel wishes you to
be treated well and seems to favor you. Why is it?"

"Frankly, I don't know, but I learned long since that he was a most
chivalrous foe. I suppose I am to be sent into Canada along with the
other prisoners?"

"I suppose so, but there is no way for you to go just now."

"Why can't I go with your army?"

"With our army?"

"It retreats, of course, before our overwhelming force."

De Galissonniere laughed.

"You are disposed to be facetious," he said. "You will observe that we
are not retreating. You see no preparations to do so, but that's all
I will tell you. More would be valuable information for the enemy,
should you escape."

