on a spade and bending his lean body over a hole in the earth, with
one hand extended to grasp something that he had found. But close
behind him, with a fiendish laugh on his features, appeared a figure
with horns, a tufted tail and a cloven hoof.

"Avaunt, Satan!" cried Peter. "The man shall have his gold." Uplifting
his axe, he hit the horned gentleman such a blow on the head as not
only demolished him, but the treasure-seeker also, and caused the
whole scene to vanish like magic. Moreover, his axe broke quite
through the plaster and laths and discovered a cavity.

"Mercy on us, Mr. Peter! Are you quarrelling with the Old Scratch?"
said Tabitha, who was seeking some fuel to put under the dinner-pot.

Without answering the old woman, Peter broke down a further space of
the wall, and laid open a small closet or cupboard on one side of the
fireplace, about breast-high from the ground. It contained nothing but
a brass lamp covered with verdigris, and a dusty piece of parchment.
While Peter inspected the latter, Tabitha seized the lamp and began to
rub it with her apron.

"There is no use in rubbing it, Tabitha," said Peter. "It is not
Aladdin's lamp, though I take it to be a token of as much luck. Look
here, Tabby!"

Tabitha took the parchment and held it close to her nose, which was
saddled with a pair of iron-bound spectacles. But no sooner had she
begun to puzzle over it than she burst into a chuckling laugh, holding
both her hands against her sides.

"You can't make a fool of the old woman," cried she. "This is your own
handwriting, Mr. Peter, the same as in the letter you sent me from
Mexico."

"There is certainly a considerable resemblance," said Peter, again
examining the parchment. "But you know yourself, Tabby, that this
closet must have been plastered up before you came to the house or I
came into the world. No; this is old Peter Goldthwaite's writing.
These columns of pounds, shillings and pence are his figures, denoting
the amount of the treasure, and this, at the bottom, is doubtless a
reference to the place of concealment. But the ink has either faded or
peeled off, so that it is absolutely illegible. What a pity!"

"Well, this lamp is as good as new. That's some comfort," said
Tabitha.

"A lamp!" thought Peter. "That indicates light on my researches."

For the present Peter felt more inclined to ponder on this discovery
than to resume his labors. After Tabitha had gone down stairs he stood
poring over the parchment at one of the front windows, which was so
obscured with dust that the sun could barely throw an uncertain shadow
of the casement across the floor. Peter forced it open and looked out
upon the great street of the town, while the sun looked in at his old
house. The air, though mild, and even warm, thrilled Peter as with a
dash of water.

It was the first day of the January thaw. The snow lay deep upon the
housetops, but was rapidly dissolving into millions of water-drops,
which sparkled downward through the sunshine with the noise of a
summer shower beneath the eaves. Along the street the trodden snow was
as hard and solid as a pavement of white marble, and had not yet grown
moist in the spring-like temperature. But when Peter thrust forth his
head, he saw that the inhabitants, if not the town, were already
thawed out by this warm day, after two or three weeks of winter
weather. It gladdened him--a gladness with a sigh breathing through
it--to see the stream of ladies gliding along the slippery sidewalks
with their red cheeks set off by quilted hoods, boas and sable capes
like roses amidst a new kind of foliage. The sleigh bells jingled to
and fro continually, sometimes announcing the arrival of a sleigh from
Vermont laden with the frozen bodies of porkers or sheep, and perhaps
a deer or two; sometimes, of a regular marketman with chickens, geese
and turkeys, comprising the whole colony of a barn-yard; and
sometimes, of a farmer and his dame who had come to town partly for
the ride, partly to go a-shopping and partly for the sale of some eggs
and butter. This couple rode in an old-fashioned square sleigh which
had served them twenty winters and stood twenty summers in the sun
beside their door. Now a gentleman and lady skimmed the snow in an
elegant car shaped somewhat like a cockle-shell; now a stage-sleigh
with its cloth curtains thrust aside to admit the sun dashed rapidly
down the street, whirling in and out among the vehicles that
obstructed its passage; now came round a corner the similitude of
Noah's ark on runners, being an immense open sleigh with seats for
fifty people and drawn by a dozen horses. This spacious receptacle was
populous with merry maids and merry bachelors, merry girls and boys
and merry old folks, all alive with fun and grinning to the full width
of their mouths. They kept up a buzz of babbling voices and low
laughter, and sometimes burst into a deep, joyous shout which the
spectators answered with three cheers, while a gang of roguish boys
let drive their snow-balls right among the pleasure-party. The sleigh
passed on, and when concealed by a bend of the street was still
audible by a distant cry of merriment.

Never had Peter beheld a livelier scene than was constituted by all
these accessories--the bright sun, the flashing water-drops, the
gleaming snow, the cheerful multitude, the variety of rapid vehicles
and the jingle-jangle of merry bells which made the heart dance to
their music. Nothing dismal was to be seen except that peaked piece of
antiquity Peter Goldthwaite's house, which might well look sad
externally, since such a terrible consumption was preying on its
insides. And Peter's gaunt figure, half visible in the projecting
second story, was worthy of his house.

"Peter! How goes it, friend Peter?" cried a voice across the street as
Peter was drawing in his head. "Look out here, Peter!"

Peter looked, and saw his old partner, Mr. John Brown, on the opposite
sidewalk, portly and comfortable, with his furred cloak thrown open,
disclosing a handsome surtout beneath. His voice had directed the
attention of the whole town to Peter Goldthwaite's window, and to the
dusty scarecrow which appeared at it.

"I say, Peter!" cried Mr. Brown, again; "what the devil are you about
there, that I hear such a racket whenever I pass by? You are repairing
the old house, I suppose, making a new one of it? Eh?"

"Too late for that, I am afraid, Mr. Brown," replied Peter. "If I make
it new, it will be new inside and out, from the cellar upward."

"Had not you better let me take the job?" said Mr. Brown,
significantly.

"Not yet," answered Peter, hastily shutting the window; for ever since
he had been in search of the treasure he hated to have people stare at
him.

As he drew back, ashamed of his outward poverty, yet proud of the
secret wealth within his grasp, a haughty smile shone out on Peter's
visage with precisely the effect of the dim sunbeams in the squalid
chamber. He endeavored to assume such a mien as his ancestor had
probably worn when he gloried in the building of a strong house for a
home to many generations of his posterity. But the chamber was very
dark to his snow-dazzled eyes, and very dismal, too, in contrast with
the living scene that he had just looked upon. His brief glimpse into
the street had given him a forcible impression of the manner in which
the world kept itself cheerful and prosperous by social pleasures and
an intercourse of business, while he in seclusion was pursuing an
object that might possibly be a phantasm by a method which most people
would call madness. It is one great advantage of a gregarious mode of
life that each person rectifies his mind by other minds and squares
his conduct to that of his neighbors, so as seldom to be lost in
eccentricity. Peter Goldthwaite had exposed himself to this influence
by merely looking out of the window. For a while he doubted whether
there were any hidden chest of gold, and in that case whether it was
so exceedingly wise to tear the house down only to be convinced of its
non-existence.

But this was momentary. Peter the Destroyer resumed the task which
Fate had assigned him, nor faltered again till it was accomplished. In
the course of his search he met with many things that are usually
found in the ruins of an old house, and also with some that are not.
What seemed most to the purpose was a rusty key which had been thrust
into a chink of the wall, with a wooden label appended to the handle,
bearing the initials "P.G." Another singular discovery was that of a
bottle of wine walled up in an old oven. A tradition ran in the family
that Peter's grandfather, a jovial officer in the old French war, had
set aside many dozens of the precious liquor for the benefit of topers
then unborn. Peter needed no cordial to sustain his hopes, and
therefore kept the wine to gladden his success. Many half-pence did he
pick up that had been lost through the cracks of the floor, and some
few Spanish coins, and the half of a broken sixpence which had
doubtless been a love-token. There was likewise a silver coronation
medal of George III. But old Peter Goldthwaite's strong-box fled from
one dark corner to another, or otherwise eluded the second Peter's
clutches till, should he seek much farther, he must burrow into the
earth.

We will not follow him in his triumphant progress step by step.
Suffice it that Peter worked like a steam-engine and finished in that
one winter the job which all the former inhabitants of the house, with
time and the elements to aid them, had only half done in a century.
Except the kitchen, every room and chamber was now gutted. The house
was nothing but a shell, the apparition of a house, as unreal as the
painted edifices of a theatre. It was like the perfect rind of a great
cheese in which a mouse had dwelt and nibbled till it was a cheese no
more. And Peter was the mouse.

What Peter had torn down, Tabitha had burnt up, for she wisely
considered that without a house they should need no wood to warm it,
and therefore economy was nonsense. Thus the whole house might be said
to have dissolved in smoke and flown up among the clouds through the
great black flue of the kitchen chimney. It was an admirable parallel
to the feat of the man who jumped down his own throat.

On the night between the last day of winter and the first of spring
every chink and cranny had been ransacked except within the precincts
of the kitchen. This fated evening was an ugly one. A snow-storm had
set in some hours before, and was still driven and tossed about the
atmosphere by a real hurricane which fought against the house as if
the prince of the air in person were putting the final stroke to
Peter's labors. The framework being so much weakened and the inward
props removed, it would have been no marvel if in some stronger
wrestle of the blast the rotten walls of the edifice and all the
peaked roofs had come crashing down upon the owner's head. He,
however, was careless of the peril, but as wild and restless as the
night itself, or as the flame that quivered up the chimney at each
roar of the tempestuous wind.

"The wine, Tabitha," he cried--"my grandfather's rich old wine! We
will drink it now."

Tabitha arose from her smoke-blackened bench in the chimney-corner and
placed the bottle before Peter, close beside the old brass lamp which
had likewise been the prize of his researches. Peter held it before
his eyes, and, looking through the liquid medium, beheld the kitchen
illuminated with a golden glory which also enveloped Tabitha and
gilded her silver hair and converted her mean garments into robes of
queenly splendor. It reminded him of his golden dream.

"Mr. Peter," remarked Tabitha, "must the wine be drunk before the
money is found?"

"The money _is_ found!" exclaimed Peter, with a sort of fierceness.
"The chest is within my reach; I will not sleep till I have turned
this key in the rusty lock. But first of all let us drink."

There being no corkscrew in the house, he smote the neck of the bottle
with old Peter Goldthwaite's rusty key, and decapitated the sealed
cork at a single blow. He then filled two little china teacups which
Tabitha had brought from the cupboard. So clear and brilliant was this
aged wine that it shone within the cups and rendered the sprig of
scarlet flowers at the bottom of each more distinctly visible than
when there had been no wine there. Its rich and delicate perfume
wasted itself round the kitchen.

"Drink, Tabitha!" cried Peter. "Blessings on the honest old fellow who
set aside this good liquor for you and me! And here's to Peter
Goldthwaite's memory!"

"And good cause have we to remember him," quoth Tabitha as she drank.

How many years, and through what changes of fortune and various
calamity, had that bottle hoarded up its effervescent joy, to be
quaffed at last by two such boon-companions! A portion of the
happiness of a former age had been kept for them, and was now set free
in a crowd of rejoicing visions to sport amid the storm and desolation
of the present time. Until they have finished the bottle we must turn
our eyes elsewhere.

It so chanced that on this stormy night Mr. John Brown found himself
ill at ease in his wire-cushioned arm-chair by the glowing grate of
anthracite which heated his handsome parlor. He was naturally a good
sort of a man, and kind and pitiful whenever the misfortunes of others
happened to reach his heart through the padded vest of his own
prosperity. This evening he had thought much about his old partner,
Peter Goldthwaite, his strange vagaries and continual ill-luck, the
poverty of his dwelling at Mr. Brown's last visit, and Peter's crazed
and haggard aspect when he had talked with him at the window.

"Poor fellow!" thought Mr. John Brown. "Poor crack-brained Peter
Goldthwaite! For old acquaintance' sake I ought to have taken care
that he was comfortable this rough winter." These feelings grew so
powerful that, in spite of the inclement weather, he resolved to visit
Peter Goldthwaite immediately.

The strength of the impulse was really singular. Every shriek of the
blast seemed a summons, or would have seemed so had Mr. Brown been
accustomed to hear the echoes of his own fancy in the wind. Much
amazed at such active benevolence, he huddled himself in his cloak,
muffled his throat and ears in comforters and handkerchiefs, and, thus
fortified, bade defiance to the tempest. But the powers of the air had
rather the best of the battle. Mr. Brown was just weathering the
corner by Peter Goldthwaite's house when the hurricane caught him off
his feet, tossed him face downward into a snow-bank and proceeded to
bury his protuberant part beneath fresh drifts. There seemed little
hope of his reappearance earlier than the next thaw. At the same
moment his hat was snatched away and whirled aloft into some
far-distant region whence no tidings have as yet returned.

Nevertheless Mr. Brown contrived to burrow a passage through the
snow-drift, and with his bare head bent against the storm floundered
onward to Peter's door. There was such a creaking and groaning and
rattling, and such an ominous shaking, throughout the crazy edifice
that the loudest rap would have been inaudible to those within. He
therefore entered without ceremony, and groped his way to the kitchen.
His intrusion even there was unnoticed. Peter and Tabitha stood with
their backs to the door, stooping over a large chest which apparently
they had just dragged from a cavity or concealed closet on the left
side of the chimney. By the lamp in the old woman's hand Mr. Brown saw
that the chest was barred and clamped with iron, strengthened with
iron plates and studded with iron nails, so as to be a fit receptacle
in which the wealth of one century might be hoarded up for the wants
of another.

Peter Goldthwaite was inserting a key into the lock.

"Oh, Tabitha," cried he, with tremulous rapture, "how shall I endure
the effulgence? The gold!--the bright, bright gold! Methinks I can
remember my last glance at it just as the iron-plated lid fell down.
And ever since, being seventy years, it has been blazing in secret and
gathering its splendor against this glorious moment. It will flash
upon us like the noonday sun."

"Then shade your eyes, Mr. Peter!" said Tabitha, with somewhat less
patience than usual. "But, for mercy's sake, do turn the key!"

And with a strong effort of both hands Peter did force the rusty key
through the intricacies of the rusty lock. Mr. Brown, in the mean
time, had drawn near and thrust his eager visage between those of the
other two at the instant that Peter threw up the lid. No sudden blaze
illuminated the kitchen.

"What's here?" exclaimed Tabitha, adjusting her spectacles and holding
the lamp over the open chest. "Old Peter Goldthwaite's hoard of old
rags!"

"Pretty much so, Tabby," said Mr. Brown, lifting a handful of the
treasure.

Oh what a ghost of dead and buried wealth had Peter Goldthwaite raised
to scare himself out of his scanty wits withal! Here was the semblance
of an incalculable sum, enough to purchase the whole town and build
every street anew, but which, vast as it was, no sane man would have
given a solid sixpence for. What, then, in sober earnest, were the
delusive treasures of the chest? Why, here were old provincial bills
of credit and treasury notes and bills of land-banks, and all other
bubbles of the sort, from the first issue--above a century and a half
ago--down nearly to the Revolution. Bills of a thousand pounds were
intermixed with parchment pennies, and worth no more than they.

"And this, then, is old Peter Goldthwaite's treasure!" said John
Brown. "Your namesake, Peter, was something like yourself; and when
the provincial currency had depreciated fifty or seventy-five per
cent, he bought it up in expectation of a rise. I have heard my
grandfather say that old Peter gave his father a mortgage of this very
house and land to raise cash for his silly project. But the currency
kept sinking till nobody would take it as a gift, and there was old
Peter Goldthwaite, like Peter the second, with thousands in his
strong-box and hardly a coat to his back. He went mad upon the
strength of it. But never mind, Peter; it is just the sort of capital
for building castles in the air."

"The house will be down about our ears," cried Tabitha as the wind
shook it with increasing violence.

"Let it fall," said Peter, folding his arms, as he seated himself upon
the chest.

"No, no, my old friend Peter!" said John Brown. "I have house-room for
you and Tabby, and a safe vault for the chest of treasure. To-morrow
we will try to come to an agreement about the sale of this old house;
real estate is well up, and I could afford you a pretty handsome
price."

"And I," observed Peter Goldthwaite, with reviving spirits, "have a
plan for laying out the cash to great advantage."

"Why, as to that," muttered John Brown to himself, "we must apply to
the next court for a guardian to take care of the solid cash; and if
Peter insists upon speculating, he may do it to his heart's content
with old Peter Goldthwaite's treasure."




CHIPPINGS WITH A CHISEL.


Passing a summer several years since at Edgartown, on the island of
Martha's Vineyard, I became acquainted with a certain carver of
tombstones who had travelled and voyaged thither from the interior of
Massachusetts in search of professional employment. The speculation
had turned out so successful that my friend expected to transmute
slate and marble into silver and gold to the amount of at least a
thousand dollars during the few months of his sojourn at Nantucket and
the Vineyard. The secluded life and the simple and primitive spirit
which still characterizes the inhabitants of those islands, especially
of Martha's Vineyard, insure their dead friends a longer and dearer
remembrance than the daily novelty and revolving bustle of the world
can elsewhere afford to beings of the past. Yet, while every family is
anxious to erect a memorial to its departed members, the untainted
breath of Ocean bestows such health and length of days upon the people
of the isles as would cause a melancholy dearth of business to a
resident artist in that line. His own monument, recording his decease
by starvation, would probably be an early specimen of his skill.
Gravestones, therefore, have generally been an article of imported
merchandise.

In my walks through the burial-ground of Edgartown--where the dead
have lain so long that the soil, once enriched by their decay, has
returned to its original barrenness--in that ancient burial-ground I
noticed much variety of monumental sculpture. The elder stones, dated
a century back or more, have borders elaborately carved with flowers
and are adorned with a multiplicity of death's-heads, crossbones,
scythes, hour-glasses, and other lugubrious emblems of mortality, with
here and there a winged cherub to direct the mourner's spirit upward.
These productions of Gothic taste must have been quite beyond the
colonial skill of the day, and were probably carved in London and
brought across the ocean to commemorate the defunct worthies of this
lonely isle. The more recent monuments are mere slabs of slate in the
ordinary style, without any superfluous flourishes to set off the bald
inscriptions. But others--and those far the most impressive both to my
taste and feelings--were roughly hewn from the gray rocks of the
island, evidently by the unskilled hands of surviving friends and
relatives. On some there were merely the initials of a name; some were
inscribed with misspelt prose or rhyme, in deep letters which the moss
and wintry rain of many years had not been able to obliterate. These,
these were graves where loved ones slept. It is an old theme of
satire, the falsehood and vanity of monumental eulogies; but when
affection and sorrow grave the letters with their own painful labor,
then we may be sure that they copy from the record on their hearts.

My acquaintance the sculptor--he may share that title with Greenough,
since the dauber of signs is a painter as well as Raphael--had found a
ready market for all his blank slabs of marble and full occupation in
lettering and ornamenting them. He was an elderly man, a descendant of
the old Puritan family of Wigglesworth, with a certain simplicity and
singleness both of heart and mind which, methinks, is more rarely
found among us Yankees than in any other community of people. In spite
of his gray head and wrinkled brow, he was quite like a child in all
matters save what had some reference to his own business; he seemed,
unless my fancy misled me, to view mankind in no other relation than
as people in want of tombstones, and his literary attainments
evidently comprehended very little either of prose of poetry which had
not at one time or other been inscribed on slate or marble. His sole
task and office among the immortal pilgrims of the tomb--the duty for
which Providence had sent the old man into the world, as it were with
a chisel in his hand--was to label the dead bodies, lest their names
should be forgotten at the resurrection. Yet he had not failed, within
a narrow scope, to gather a few sprigs of earthly, and more than
earthly, wisdom--the harvest of many a grave. And, lugubrious as his
calling might appear, he was as cheerful an old soul as health and
integrity and lack of care could make him, and used to set to work
upon one sorrowful inscription or another with that sort of spirit
which impels a man to sing at his labor. On the whole, I found Mr.
Wigglesworth an entertaining, and often instructive, if not an
interesting, character; and, partly for the charm of his society, and
still more because his work has an invariable attraction for "man that
is born of woman," I was accustomed to spend some hours a day at his
workshop. The quaintness of his remarks and their not infrequent
truth--a truth condensed and pointed by the limited sphere of his
view--gave a raciness to his talk which mere worldliness and general
cultivation would at once have destroyed.

Sometimes we would discuss the respective merits of the various
qualities of marble, numerous slabs of which were resting against the
walls of the shop, or sometimes an hour or two would pass quietly
without a word on either side while I watched how neatly his chisel
struck out letter after letter of the names of the Nortons, the
Mayhews, the Luces, the Daggets, and other immemorial families of the
Vineyard. Often with an artist's pride the good old sculptor would
speak of favorite productions of his skill which were scattered
throughout the village graveyards of New England. But my chief and
most instructive amusement was to witness his interviews with his
customers, who held interminable consultations about the form and
fashion of the desired monuments, the buried excellence to be
commemorated, the anguish to be expressed, and finally the lowest
price in dollars and cents for which a marble transcript of their
feelings might be obtained. Really, my mind received many fresh ideas
which perhaps may remain in it even longer than Mr. Wigglesworth's
hardest marble will retain the deepest strokes of his chisel.

An elderly lady came to bespeak a monument for her first love, who had
been killed by a whale in the Pacific Ocean no less than forty years
before. It was singular that so strong an impression of early feeling
should have survived through the changes of her subsequent life, in
the course of which she had been a wife and a mother, and, so far as I
could judge, a comfortable and happy woman. Reflecting within myself,
it appeared to me that this lifelong sorrow--as, in all good faith,
she deemed it--was one of the most fortunate circumstances of her
history. It had given an ideality to her mind; it had kept her purer
and less earthy than she would otherwise have been by drawing a
portion of her sympathies apart from earth. Amid the throng of
enjoyments and the pressure of worldly care and all the warm
materialism of this life she had communed with a vision, and had been
the better for such intercourse. Faithful to the husband of her
maturity, and loving him with a far more real affection than she ever
could have felt for this dream of her girlhood, there had still been
an imaginative faith to the ocean-buried; so that an ordinary
character had thus been elevated and refined. Her sighs had been the
breath of Heaven to her soul. The good lady earnestly desired that the
proposed monument should be ornamented with a carved border of marine
plants interwined with twisted sea-shells, such as were probably
waving over her lover's skeleton or strewn around it in the far depths
of the Pacific. But, Mr. Wigglesworth's chisel being inadequate to the
task, she was forced to content herself with a rose hanging its head
from a broken stem.

After her departure I remarked that the symbol was none of the most
apt.

"And yet," said my friend the sculptor, embodying in this image the
thoughts that had been passing through my own mind, "that broken rose
has shed its sweet smell through forty years of the good woman's
life."

It was seldom that I could find such pleasant food for contemplation
as in the above instance. None of the applicants, I think, affected me
more disagreeably than an old man who came, with his fourth wife
hanging on his arm, to bespeak gravestones for the three former
occupants of his marriage-bed. I watched with some anxiety to see
whether his remembrance of either were more affectionate than of the
other two, but could discover no symptom of the kind. The three
monuments were all to be of the same material and form, and each
decorated in bas-relief with two weeping willows, one of these
sympathetic trees bending over its fellow, which was to be broken in
the midst and rest upon a sepulchral urn. This, indeed, was Mr.
Wigglesworth's standing emblem of conjugal bereavement. I shuddered at
the gray polygamist who had so utterly lost the holy sense of
individuality in wedlock that methought he was fain to reckon upon his
