  "Alas! that man should never be aware
  Of what may be the meaning of his prayer!
      To catch the robber of my flocks,
    O king of gods, I pledged a calf to thee:
    If from his clutches thou wilt rescue me,
      I'll raise my offering to an ox."



  The Animals Sick of the Plague

  The sorest ill that Heaven hath
  Sent on this lower world in wrath--
  The Plague (to call it by its name)
      One single day of which
      Would Pluto's ferryman enrich--
  Waged war on beasts, both wild and tame.
  They died not all, but all were sick:
  No hunting now, by force or trick,
  To save what might so soon expire,
  No food excited their desire;
  Nor wolf nor fox now watch'd to slay
  The innocent and tender prey.
          The turtles fled;
  So love and therefore joy were dead.
  The Lion council held, and said:
  "My friends, I do believe
  This awful scourge, for which we grieve,
  Is for our sins a punishment
  Most righteously by Heaven sent.
  Let us our guiltiest beast resign,
  A sacrifice to wrath divine.
  Perhaps this offering, truly small,
  May gain me life and health of all.
  By history we find it noted
  That lives have been just so devoted.
  Then let us all turn eyes within,
  And ferret out the hidden sin.
  Himself let no one spare nor flatter,
  But make clean conscience in the matter.
  For me, my appetite has play'd the glutton
  Too much and often upon mutton.
  What harm had e'er my victims done?
      I answer, truly, None.
  Perhaps, sometimes, by hunger pressed,
  I've eat the shepherd with the rest.
  I yield myself, if need there be;
  And yet I think, in equity,
  Each should confess his sins with me;
  For laws of right and justice cry,
  The guiltiest alone should die."
  "Sire," said the Fox, "your majesty
  Is humbler than a king should be,
  And over-squeamish in the case.
    What! eating stupid sheep a crime?
    No, never, sire, at any time.
  It rather was an act of grace,
  A mark of honour to their race.
  And as to shepherds, one may swear,
    The fate your majesty describes
  Is recompense less full than fair
    For such usurpers o'er our tribes."

    Thus Reynard glibly spoke,
  And loud applause from flatterers broke,
  Of neither tiger, boar, nor bear,
  Did any keen inquirer dare
  To ask for crimes of high degree;
    The fighters, biters, scratchers, all
  From every mortal sin were free;
    The very dogs, both great and small,
  Were saints, as far as dogs could be.

    The Ass, confessing in his turn,
  Thus spoke in tones of deep concern:
  "I happen'd through a mead to pass;
  The monks, its owners, were at mass;
  Keen hunger, leisure, tender grass,
    And add to these the devil too,
    All tempted me the deed to do.
  I browsed the bigness of my tongue;
  Since truth must out, I own it wrong."

  On this, a hue and cry arose,
  As if the beasts were all his foes:
  A Wolf, haranguing lawyer-wise,
  Denounced the Ass for sacrifice--
  The bald-pate, scabby, ragged lout,
  By whom the plague had come, no doubt.
  His fault was judged a hanging crime.
    "What? eat another's grass?  O shame!
  The noose of rope and death sublime,
    For that offence, were all too tame!"
    And soon poor Grizzle felt the same.

    _Thus human courts acquit the strong,
    And doom the weak, as therefore wrong._



  The Fowler, the Hawk, and the Lark

  From wrongs of wicked men we draw
    Excuses for our own;
  Such is the universal law.
    Would you have mercy shown,
    Let yours be clearly known.

  A Fowler's mirror served to snare
  The little tenants of the air.
  A Lark there saw her pretty face,
  And was approaching to the place.
    A Hawk, that sailed on high,
    Like vapour in the sky,
  Came down, as still as infant's breath,
  On her who sang so near her death.
  She thus escaped the Fowler's steel,
  The Hawk's malignant claws to feel.
    While in his cruel way,
    The pirate plucked his prey,
  Upon himself the net was sprung.
    "O Fowler," prayed he in the hawkish tongue,
    "Release me in thy clemency!
  I never did a wrong to thee."
  The man replied, "'Tis true;
  And did the Lark to you?"



  Phoebus and Boreas

  Old Boreas and the Sun, one day,
  Espied a traveller on his way,
  Whose dress did happily provide
  Against whatever might betide.
  The time was autumn, when, indeed,
  All prudent travellers take heed.
  The rains that then the sunshine dash,
  And Iris with her splendid sash,
  Warn one who does not like to soak
  To wear abroad a good thick coat.
  Our man was therefore well bedight
  With double mantle, strong and tight.
  "This fellow," said the Wind, "has meant
  To guard from every ill event;
  But little does he wot that I
    Can blow him such a blast
    That, not a button fast,
  His cloak shall cleave the sky.
  Come, here's a pleasant game.  Sir Sun!
    Wilt play?"  Said Phoebus, "Done!
    We'll bet between us here
    Which first will take the gear
    From off this cavalier.
    Begin, and shut away
    The brightness of my ray."
  "Enough."  Our blower, on the bet,
    Swelled out his pursy form
    With all the stuff for storm--
  The thunder, hail, and drenching wet,
  And all the fury he could muster;
  Then, with a very demon's bluster,
  He whistled, whirled, and splashed,
  And down the torrents dashed,
    Full many a roof uptearing
      He never did before,
    Full many a vessel bearing
      To wreck upon the shore--
    And all to doff a single cloak.
    But vain the furious stroke;
      The traveller was stout,
      And kept the tempest out,
      Defied the hurricane,
      Defied the pelting rain;
  And as the fiercer roared the blast,
  His cloak the tighter held he fast.
  The Sun broke out, to win the bet;
    He caused the clouds to disappear,
    Refreshed and warmed the cavalier,
  And through his mantle made him sweat,
    Till off it came, of course,
  In less than half an hour;
  And yet the Sun saved half his power--
    So much does mildness more than force.



  The Stag and the Vine

  A Stag, by favour of a Vine,
  Which grew where suns most genial shine,
  And formed a thick and matted bower
  Which might have turned a summer shower,
  Was saved by ruinous assault.
  The hunters thought their dogs at fault,
  And called them off.  In danger now no more
    The Stag, a thankless wretch and vile,
  Began to browse his benefactress o'er.
    The hunters listening the while,
  The rustling heard, came back,
  With all their yelping pack,
    And seized him in that very place.
  "This is," said he, "but justice, in my case.
    Let every black ingrate
    Henceforward profit by my fate."
  The dogs fell to--'twere wasting breath
  To pray those hunters at the death.
  They left, and we will not revile 'em,
  A warning for profaners of asylum.



  The Peacock Complaining to Juno

  The Peacock to the Queen of heaven
    Complained in some such words:
  "Great goddess, you have given
    To me, the laughing stock of birds,
  A voice which fills, by taste quite just,
      All nature with disgust;
  Whereas that little paltry thing,
    The nightingale, pours from her throat
    So sweet and ravishing a note;
  She bears alone the honours of the spring."
    In anger Juno heard,
  And cried, "Shame on you, jealous bird!
  Grudge you the nightingale her voice,
  Who in the rainbow neck rejoice,
  Than costliest silks more richly tinted,
  In charms of grace and form unstinted--
    Who strut in kingly pride,
    Your glorious tail spread wide
  With brilliants which in sheen do
  Outshine the jeweller's bow window?
  Is there a bird beneath the blue
  That has more charms than you?
  No animal in everything can shine.
  By just partition of our gifts divine,
  Each has its full and proper share.
  Among the birds that cleave the air
  The hawk's a swift, the eagle is a brave one,
  For omens serves the hoarse old raven,
  The rook's of coming ills the prophet;
    And if there's any discontent,
      I've heard not of it.
  Cease, then, your envious complaint;
  Or I, instead of making up your lack,
  Will take your boasted plumage from your back."



  The Eagle and the Beetle

  John Rabbit, by Dame Eagle chased,
  Was making for his hole in haste,
  When, on his way, he met a Beetle's burrow.
    I leave you all to think
    If such a little chink
  Could to a rabbit give protection thorough;
    But, since no better could be got,
    John Rabbit, there was fain to squat.
    Of course, in an asylum so absurd,
    John felt ere long the talons of the bird.
    But first the Beetle, interceding, cried,
    "Great queen of birds, it cannot be denied
  That, maugre my protection, you can bear
  My trembling guest, John Rabbit, through the air,
    But do not give me such affront, I pray;
      And since he craves your grace,
      In pity of his case,
  Grant him his life, or take us both away;
  For he's my gossip, friend and neighbour."
  In vain the Beetle's friendly labour;
  The Eagle clutched her prey without reply,
  And as she flapped her vasty wings to fly,
    Struck down our orator and stilled him--
    The wonder is she hadn't killed him.
  The Beetle soon, of sweet revenge in quest
    Flew to the old, gnarled mountain oak,
  Which proudly bore that haughty Eagle's nest.
      And while the bird was gone,
    Her eggs, her cherished eggs, he broke,
          Not sparing one.
  Returning from her flight, the Eagle's cry
  Of rage and bitter anguish filled the sky,
    But, by excess of passion blind,
    Her enemy she failed to find.
  Her wrath in vain, that year it was her fate
  To live a mourning mother, desolate.
  The next, she built a loftier nest; 'twas vain;
  The Beetle found and dashed her eggs again.

    John Rabbit's death was thus avenged anew.
  The second mourning for her murdered brood
  Was such that through the giant mountain wood,
    For six long months, the sleepless echo flew.
      The bird, once Ganymede, now made
      Her prayer to Jupiter for aid;
  And, laying them within his godship's lap,
  She thought her eggs now safe from all mishap;
  The god his own could not but make them--
  No wretch would venture there to break them.
      And no one did.  Their enemy, this time,
      Upsoaring to a place sublime,
    Let fall upon his royal robes some dirt,
    Which Jove just shaking, with a sudden flirt,
    Threw out the eggs, no one knows whither.
      When Jupiter informed her how th' event
      Occurred by purest accident,
  The Eagle raved; there was no reasoning with her;
    She gave out threats of leaving court,
    To make the desert her resort,
    And other brav'ries of this sort.
      Poor Jupiter in silence heard
      The uproar of his favourite bird.
    Before his throne the Beetle now appeared,
    And by a clear complaint the mystery cleared.
    The god pronounced the Eagle in the wrong.
    But still, their hatred was so old and strong,
  These enemies could not be reconciled;
  And, that the general peace might not be spoiled--
  The best that he could do--the god arranged
  That thence the Eagle's pairing should be changed,
  To come when Beetle folks are only found
  Concealed and dormant under ground.




FABLES FROM THE SPANISH

OF

CARLOS YRIARTE*


"_As the impressions made upon a new vessel are not easily to be
effaced, so here youth are taught prudence through the allurement of
fable._"


*Translated by Richard Andrew


  FABLES FROM THE SPANISH

  The Bee and the Cuckoo
