
Suzanne appeared that moment in the doorway and stood there unnoticed.
She looked at them grimly and then came the rare smile that gave her
face that wonderful softness.

"Come, Mademoiselle Julie and Mr. John," she said. "Dinner is ready and
I tell you now that I've never prepared a better one. This prince has a
taste in food and wine that I did not think to find in any German."

"And all that was his is ours now," said John. "Fortune of war."

Suzanne's promise was true to the last detail. The dinner was superb and
they had an Austrian white wine that never finds its way into the
channels of commerce.

"To you, Julie, and our happy return to Paris," said John, looking over
the edge of his glass. Suzanne was in the kitchen then and he dared to
drop the "Mademoiselle."

"To you, John," she said, as she touched the wine to her lips--she too
dared to drop the "Mr."

And then gray depths looked into blue depths and blue into gray,
speaking a language that each understood.

"We're the chosen of fortune," said John, "The hotel at Chastel
presented itself to us when we needed it most, and again when we need it
most this lodge gives us all hospitality."

"Fortune has been truly kind," said Julie.

After dinner they went back to the great room where the fire still
blazed and Suzanne, when she had cleared everything away, joined them.
She quietly took a chair next to the wall and went to work on some
sewing that she had found in the lodge. But John saw that she had
installed herself as a sort of guardian of them both, and she meant to
watch over them as her children. Yet however often she might appear to
him in her old grim guise he would always be able to see beneath it.

Now they talked but little. John saw after a while that Julie was
growing sleepy, and truly a slender girl who had been through so much in
one day had a right to rest. He caught Suzanne's eye and nodded. Rising,
the Frenchwoman said in the tone of command which perhaps she had often
used to Julie as a child:

"It's time we were off to bed, Mademoiselle. The storm will make us both
sleep all the better."

"Good night, Mr. John," said Julie.

"Good night. Miss Julie."

Once more the stern face of Suzanne softened under a smile, but she and
her charge marched briskly away, and left John alone before the fire. He
had decided that he would not sleep upstairs, but would occupy the
gunroom from which a window looked out upon the front of the house.
There he made himself a bed with blankets and pillows that he brought
from above and lay down amid arms.

The gunroom was certainly well stocked. It held repeating rifles and
fowling-pieces, large and small, and revolvers. One big breech-loader
had the weight of an elephant rifle, and there were also swords,
bayonets and weapons of ancient type. But John looked longest at the
big rifle. He felt that if need be he could hold the lodge against
almost anything except cannon.

"It's the first time I ever had a whole armory to myself," he said,
looking around proudly at the noble array.

But he was quite sure that no one could come for days except Muller, and
the mystery of the forester's absence again troubled him, although not
very long. Another look at the driving snow, and, wrapping himself in
his blankets, he fell asleep to the music of the storm. John awoke once
far in the night, and his sense of comfort, as he lay between the
blankets on the sofa that he had dragged into the gunroom, was so great
that he merely luxuriated there for a little while and listened to the
roar of the storm, which he could yet hear, despite the thickness of the
walls. But he rose at last, and went to the window.

The thick snowy blast was still driving past, and his eyes could not
penetrate it more than a dozen feet. But he rejoiced. Their castle was
growing stronger and stronger all the time, as nature steadily built her
fortifications higher and higher around it. Mulier himself, carrying out
his duties of huntsman, might have gone to some isolated point in the
mountains, and would not be able to return for days. He wished no harm
to Muller, but he hoped the possibility would become a fact.

He went back to his blanket and when he awoke in the morning the great
Alpine storm was still raging. But he bathed and refreshed himself and
found a store of clothing better than that of the forester. It did not
fit him very well, nevertheless he was neatly arrayed in civilian attire
and he went to the kitchen, meaning to put himself to use and cook the
breakfast. But Suzanne was already there, and she saluted him with stern
and rebuking words.

"I reign here," she said. "Go back and talk to Mademoiselle Julie. Since
we're alone and are likely to be so, for God knows how long, it's your
duty to see that she keeps up her spirits. I'd have kept you two apart
if I could, but it has been willed otherwise, and maybe it's for the
best."

"What has happened shows it's for the best, Suzanne. And, as you know,
you've never had any real objection to me except that I'm not a
Frenchman. And am I not becoming such as fast as possible?"

"You don't look very much like one, but you act like one and often you
talk like one."

"Thanks, Suzanne. That's praise coming from you."

"Now be off with you. My mistress is surely in the great room, and if
you care for her as much as you pretend, you will see that she is not
lonely, and don't talk nonsense, either."

John, chuckling, withdrew. As Suzanne had predicted he found Julie in
the large room, and she was quite composed, when she bade him good
morning.

"I see that the storm goes on," she said.

"So much the better. It is raising higher the wall between us and our
enemies. Our fire has burned out in the night, leaving only coals, but
there is a huge store of wood in the back part of the lodge."

He brought in an armful of billets to find her fanning the coals into a
blaze.

"You didn't think, sir," said she, "did you, that I mean to be a guest
here, waited upon by you and Suzanne?"

"But Suzanne and I are strong and willing! Don't lean too near that
blaze, Julie! You'll set your beautiful hair on fire!"

"And so you think my hair beautiful?"

"Very beautiful."

"It's not proper for you to say so. We're not in America."

"Nor are we in France, where young girls are surrounded by triple rows
of brass or steel. We're in a snowstorm on top of a high mountain in
Austria. There are no conventions, and Suzanne, your guardian, is in the
kitchen."

"But I can call her and she'll come."

"She'd come, I know, but you won't call her. There, our fire is blazing
beautifully, and we don't have to nurse it any longer. You sit here in
this chair, and I'll sit there in that chair at a respectful distance.
Now you realize that we are going to be here a long time, don't you
Julie?"

"Miss Julie or Mademoiselle Julie would be better and perhaps
Mademoiselle Lannes would be most fitting."

"No, I've said Julie several times and as it always gives me a pleasant
thrill I'm sure it's best. I intend to use it continually hereafter,
except when Suzanne is present."

"You're taking a high stand, Mr. John."

"John is best also."

"Well, then--John!"

"I'm taking it for your good and my pleasure."

"I wonder if Suzanne is ready with the breakfast!"

"You needn't go to see. You know it's not, and you know, too, that
Suzanne will call us when it is ready. A wonderfully capable woman, that
Suzanne. She didn't look upon me with favor at first, but I believe she
is really beginning to like me, to view me perhaps with approval as a
sort of candidate."

"Look how the snow is coming down!"

"But that's an old story. Let's go back to Suzanne."

"Oh no. She's coming for us."

It was true. The incomparable Suzanne stood in the doorway and summoned
them to breakfast.




CHAPTER XIII

THE DANGEROUS FLIGHT


It snowed all that day and all the next night. The lateness of the
season seemed to add to the violence of the storm, as if it would make
one supreme effort on these heights before yielding to the coming
spring. Many of the pines were blown down, and the snow lay several feet
deep everywhere. Now and then they heard thunderous sounds from the
gorges telling them that great slides were taking place, and it was
absolutely certain now that no one from the valley below could reach the
lodge for days.

The sight from the windows of the house, when the driving snow thinned
enough to permit a view, was magnificent. They saw far away peak on peak
and ridge on ridge, clothed in white, and sometimes they beheld the
valley filled with vast clouds of mists and vapors. Once John thought he
caught a glimpse of Zillenstein, a menacing gray shadow far below, but
the clouds in an instant floated between and he was not sure.

Yet it was a period of enchantment in the life of John Scott. Their very
isolation on the mountain, with Suzanne there in the double role of
servant and guardian, seemed to draw Julie and him more closely
together. The world had practically melted away beneath their feet. The
great war was gone for them. He was only twenty-two, but his experience
had made him mentally much older, and she, too, had gained in knowledge
and command of herself by all through which she had passed.

She showed to John a spirit and courage which he had never seen
surpassed in any woman, and mingled with it all was a lightness and wit
that filled the whole house with sunshine, despite the great storm that
raged continually without. In the music-room was a piano, and she played
upon it the beautiful French "little songs" that John loved. There were
books and magazines in plenty, and now he read to her and then she read
to him. Sometimes they sat in silence and through the thick glass of the
windows watched the snow driving by.

The hours were too few for John. He served her as the crusader served
his chosen lady. The spirit of the old knights of chivalry that had
descended upon him still held him in a spell that he did not wish to
break. Often she mocked at him and laughed at him, and then he liked her
all the better. No placid, submissive woman, shrinking before the
dangers, would have pleased him. In her light laughter and her banter,
even at his expense, he read a noble courage and a lofty soul, and in
their singular isolation it was given to him to see her spirit, so
strong and yet so rarely sweet in a manner that the circumstances of
ordinary life could never have brought forth. And the faithful Suzanne,
still in her double role of servant and guardian, served and guarded
them both.

John at this time began to feel a more forgiving spirit toward
Auersperg. It might well be that this man of middle years, so thoroughly
surrounded by old, dead things that he had never seen the world as it
really was, had been bewitched. A sort of moon madness had made him
commit his extraordinary deed, and John could view it with increasing
tolerance because he had been bewitched himself.

He made another and more extended survey of their stores and confirmed
his first opinion that the lodge was furnished in full princely style.
They need not lack for any of the comforts, nor for many luxuries, no
matter how long they remained.

On the morning of the third day the storm ceased and they looked out
upon a white, shining world of snow, lofty and impressive, peaks and
ridges outlined sharply against a steel-blue sky. John had found a pair
of powerful glasses in the lodge and with them he was now able to make
out Zillenstein quite clearly. Clothed in snow, a castle all in white,
it was nevertheless more menacing than ever.

John believed that Muller would surely come, and many and many a time he
thought over the problem how to deal with him. But the new, windless day
passed and there was no sign of the forester. John himself went forth,
breaking paths here and there through the snow, but he discovered
nothing. He began to believe that Muller had been forced to take shelter
at the start of the storm and could not now return. His hope that it was
so strong that his mind turned it into a fact, and Muller disappeared
from his thoughts.

The garage, besides the great automobile, contained a smaller one, but
John kept the limousine in mind. He intended when the time came to
escape in it with the two women, if possible. There might be a road
leading down the other side of the mountain, and toward Italy. If so, he
would surely try to get through when the melting of the snow permitted.

Meanwhile he devoted himself with uncommon zest to household duties. He
cleared new paths about the lodge, moved in much of the wood where it
would be more convenient for Suzanne, cleaned and polished the guns and
revolvers in the little armory, inspected the limousine and put it in
perfect order, and did everything else that he could think of to make
their mountain castle luxurious and defensible.

Julie often joined him in these tasks, and John did not remonstrate,
knowing that work and occupation kept a mind healthy. Wrapped in her
great red cloak and wearing the smallest pair of high boots that he
could find in the lodge, she often shoveled snow with him, as he
increased the number of runways to the small outlying buildings, or to
other parts of their domain. Thus they filled up the hours and prevented
the suspense which otherwise would have been acute, despite their
comfortable house.

She continually revealed herself to him now. The shell that encloses a
young French girl had been broken by the hammer of war and she had
stepped forth, a woman with a thinking and reasoning mind of uncommon
power. It seemed often to John that the soul of the great Lannes had
descended upon this slender maid who was of his own blood. Like many
another American, he had thought often of those marshals of Napoleon who
had risen from obscurity to such heights, and of them all, the
republican and steadfast Lannes had been his favorite. Her spirit was
the same. He found in it a like simplicity and courage. They seldom
talked of the war, but when they did she expressed unbounded faith in
the final triumph of her nation and of those allied with it.

"I have read what the world was saying of France," she said one day when
they stood together on the snowy slope. "We hear, we girls, although we
are mostly behind the walls. They have told us that we were declining as
a nation, and many of our own people believed it."

"The charge will never be made again against the French Republic," said
John. "The French, by their patience and courage in the face of
preliminary defeat and their dauntless resolution, have won the
admiration of all the world."

"And many Americans are fighting for us. Tell me, John, why did you join
our armies?"

"An accident first, as you know. There was that meeting with your
brother at the Austrian border, and my appearance in the apparent role
of a spy, and then my great sympathy with the French, who I thought and
still think were attacked by a powerful and prepared enemy bent upon
their destruction. Then I thought and still think that France and
England represent democracy against absolutism, and then, although
every one of these reasons is powerful enough alone, yet another has
influenced me strongly."

"And what is that other, John?"

"It's intangible, Julie. It has been weighed and measured by nearly all
the great philosophers, but I don't think any two of them have ever
agreed about the result."

"You are a philosopher, sir, too, are you not? How do you define it?"

"I don't know that I've arrived at any conclusion."

"And yet, John, I thought that you were a man of decision."

