reached her destination.

The Rector was in--Beatrice would find him in his study. The old
housekeeper did not dream of conducting Miss Meadowsweet to this
apartment. She smiled at her affectionately, told her she knew the way
herself, and left her.

When Beatrice entered the study the Rector got up and took his favorite
by both her hands.

"I am glad to see you, my child," he said. "I was just feeling the
slightest _soupcon_ of loneliness, so you have come in opportunely.
Sit down, Bee. I suppose Bertram will call for you presently."

Beatrice did not make any response to this remark, but she drew a little
cane chair forward and sat down.

"Except your mother, no one will miss you more than I shall when you
leave us, Beatrice," said the Rector. "You are quite right to go, my
dear. Quite right. I see a useful and honorable career before you. But I
may be allowed just once to say that I shall be lonely without my
favorite."

"Dear Rector," said Beatrice. She came a little nearer, and almost
timidly laid her hand on his knee. Then she looked in his face. "I am
not going to leave you," she said.

"God bless my soul! What do you mean, child? Is anything wrong? You
don't look quite yourself. Has that young scoundrel--if I thought--" the
Rector got up. His face was red, he clenched his hand in no clerical
style.

Beatrice also rose to her feet.

"He is not a scoundrel," she said. "Although if our engagement had gone
on, and I had been married to Captain Bertram, he would have been one."

"Then you are not engaged? You have broken it off."

"I am not engaged. I have released Captain Bertram from his engagement
to me."

"Beatrice! I did not expect this from you. His mother is attached to
you--so are his sisters, while he himself, poor lad--! Bee, it was
better you should find out your heart in time, but I am surprised--I am
grieved. You should have known it before--before things went as far as
this, my dear girl."

"Please, Mr. Ingram, listen to me. Sit down again, for I have a long
story to tell. I have not changed my mind, nor am I guilty of any
special fickleness. But circumstances have arisen which make it
impossible for me to keep my engagement. Captain Bertram sees this as
plainly as I do. He is very thankful to be released."

"Then he is a scoundrel, I thought as much."

"No, he isn't that. But he has been weak, poor fellow, and harassed, and
tempted. And his mother has used all her influence. I know now what she
wanted me for. Just for my money. But I've been saved in time."

"God bless me, this is very strange and dreadful. You puzzle me
awfully."

"I will tell you the story, Rector, then you won't be puzzled. Do you
remember once speaking to me about a girl you saw at the Manor lodge.
She was living there for a little. Her name was Hart."

"Yes, yes, a very handsome, queer girl. I spoke to Mrs. Bertram about
her. She seemed to me to have taken an unjust prejudice against the poor
lonely child."

"Mr. Ingram, Miss Hart is engaged to Loftus Bertram, and he will marry
her next Tuesday."

"Beatrice, have you gone quite mad?

"No, I am as sane as any other girl who has got a shock, but who is
resolved to do right. Captain Bertram shall marry Nina, because in heart
they are married already, because they love each other, as I never could
love him, nor he me, because they were betrothed to each other before he
and I ever met, because Nina was dying for love of him, and only
marrying him can save her. Oh, it was pitiable to see Nina, Mr. Ingram,
and I am thankful--I shall be thankful to my dying day--that I saw her
in time to save her."

"Beatrice, this is very strange and inexplicable. Where did you see Miss
Hart? I thought she had left Northbury."

"She came back, because she could not stay away. She is at the Bells'. I
saw her there to day, and I brought Loftus to her, and--Rector, they
love each other. Oh, yes, yes--when I see how much they love each other.
I am thankful I am not to be married with only the shadow of such a
reality."

"Then you never gave your heart to this young man?"

"Never! I thought I could help him. But my heart has not even stirred."

"You did not seem unhappy."

"I was not unhappy. It always gives me pleasure to help people. And
Catherine seemed so bright, and Mrs. Bertram so delighted, and Loftus
himself--there was much to win my regard in Loftus. I did not know it
was only my money they wanted."

"Poor child! And yet you are wrong. No one who looks at you, Beatrice,
can only want you for your money."

"Dear Rector, in this case my money was the charm. Well, my money shall
still have power. You are my guardian as well as my trustee. I want you
to help me. You can, you must. I will take no denial. Loftus and I have
had a long, long talk this afternoon. I have found at last the very
bottom of Bertram's heart. He came to me to save him, and I am
determined to be his deliverer. One quarter of my fortune I give to
Loftus Bertram, and he shall marry Nina, and his debts shall be paid,
and his mother relieved from the dreadful strain of anxiety she is now
undergoing, and Loftus and Nina shall be happy and good. Oh, yes, I know
they will be good as well as happy. You will help me, Rector, you will,
you must."

"Beatrice, you are the most quixotic, extraordinary, unworldly,
unpractical creature that ever breathed. What sort of guardian should I
be if I listened to so mad a scheme? What right has Loftus Bertram to
one farthing of your money, without you?"

"He can't have it with me, Rector. I would not marry him now at any
price."

"Then he must do without the money."

"No, he must have the money. Steps must be taken to secure it to him at
once, and he must keep his wedding-day with Nina instead of me. Nina
shall have my trousseau; we are exactly of one height--You have got to
change the name in the marriage license. If that is impossible there
shall be a special license. I am rich, I can pay for it. Oh, the joy
that sometimes money brings!"

"My dear ward, you are a little off your head to-night. How could you
possibly expect your guardian to be such a faithless old man."

"Faithless? Mr. Ingram, have you quite forgotten my father?"

"No, Beatrice, I remember him to-night."

"Let his face rise before you. Picture his face--his unworldly face."

"I see it, Beatrice. Yes, Meadowsweet was not cankered by the sordid
cares of life."

"Truly he was not? Go on thinking about him. He made money. How did he
spend it?"

"My dear child, your father was a very good man. His charities were
extraordinary and extensive. He gave away, hoping for nothing in return;
he was too liberal, I often told him so."

"You were his clergyman and you told him so."

A flash of indignation came out of Beatrice Meadowsweet's eyes.

"I don't think, Mr. Ingram, that a Greater than you has ever said that
to my father."

"Well, child, perhaps not. You reprove me, perhaps justly. Few of us
have your father's unworldly spirit."

"Don't you think his only daughter may inherit a little of it? Mr.
Ingram, what is money for?"

"Beatrice, you could argue any one into thinking with you. But I must
exercise my own common-sense."

"No, you must not. You must exercise your unworldly sense, and help me
in this matter."

"What! And help you to throw away a quarter of your fortune?"

"I shall have fifteen thousand pounds left, more than enough for the
requirements of any girl."

"I doubt if the wording of your father's will could give me the power
for a moment."

"I am sure it could. I am confident that in drawing his will he trusted
you absolutely and me absolutely. He often spoke to me about money, and
told me what a solemn trust riches were. He charged me like the man in
the parable not to bury my talent in a napkin, but to put it out to
usury. He said that he made you my guardian, because you were the most
unworldly-minded man he knew, and he told me many times that although he
could not give me absolute control of my money before I was twenty-one,
yet that no reasonable wish of mine would be refused by you."

"And you call this a reasonable wish?"

"I do. And so would my father if he were alive. Bring his face once
again before you, Rector, and you will agree with me."

The Rector sat down in his arm-chair, and shaded his eyes with one of
his long white hands. He sat for a long time motionless, and without
speaking. Beatrice stood by the mantelpiece; there was a small fire in
the grate; now and then a flame leaped up, and cast its reflection on
her face.

Suddenly the Rector started upright.

"What day is this?" he asked.

"Thursday--Thursday night."

"And you are to be married on Tuesday?"

"No, I may never marry. Nina Hart and Loftus Bertram are to be married
on Tuesday."

"God bless me! Beatrice, you have put me into a nice fix. Guardians are
not always to be envied. What's the hour, child?"

Beatrice glanced at the clock.

"It is half-past nine," she said.

"You say that this--this Miss Hart is staying at the Bells'?"

"Yes."

"I must go to her. I must see her to-night."

"Remember she is weak and ill. You will be gentle with her."

"Beatrice, am I as a rule rough with people? Come, I will see you home,
and then call on Miss Hart."




CHAPTER XXXI.

CIVIL WAR AT NORTHBURY.


It is often very difficult to trace Rumor to his foundation. His
beginning is sometimes as small as a particle of sand; the first dawning
of his existence as impalpable as the air.

From these small beginnings, however, rumor arises, strong as a giant,
cruel as death. Perhaps no foe has more injured mankind than idle rumor.

He was abroad now in the little town of Northbury, and no one quite knew
the exact place of his birth. A good many people traced his existence to
Hunt, the baker, who sold many loaves of bread, and many sweet and tasty
cakes by reason of his love of gossip--some people laid it to Miss
Peters' door, some to Mrs. Gorman Stanley's, some again to Mrs.
Morris's; but soon, in the excitement which the Giant Rumor caused,
people had no time to talk of the place of his birth--he was there, he
was among them, and he was the only subject now discussed.

A great many afternoon teas, and small social gatherings were given
during the next few days in his honor. As to the Bells' house it became
quite notorious. People paused as they passed the windows, and even the
paving stones round the time-worn steps were fraught with interest.

At the club the men talked of nothing but the story which was abroad.
They took the opportunity to make bets and wagers. Their tongues were
not so cruel as those of the women, but still their tongues did wag, and
there was more than one wife in the town who felt the effect of Beatrice
Meadowsweet's engagement for many a long day, because the father of the
family had jeopardized a considerable sum in a wager on the probable
issue of events.

When Rumor in his full magnitude gets abroad he never spares the young,
the beautiful, the innocent. Beatrice was loved by every one at
Northbury, but the inhabitants of this good, old-fashioned little town
would have been immaculate had they not said evil things of her now.

Sides were taken on the occasion, and the people of the town divided
themselves pretty equally, and in an incredibly short time started a
fierce sort of civil war. The "Beatricites," and the "Hartites," they
were called, and the war of tongues between them became so fierce that
long before Saturday night one party would not speak to another.

Mrs. Bell was at the head of the Hartites, and Mrs. Butler was the
general of the Beatrice army.

Mrs. Bell spoke in the following terms of the girl who had hitherto been
everybody's favorite:

"Ah, she's a deep one, is Beatrice Meadowsweet. You never know what
those quiet ones are till they are tried. I spoke to her, I warned her,
but she wouldn't listen. 'Beatrice,' I said, that young man cares no
more for you than he does for the blackberries on the hedges. Beatrice,
that young man's affections are given elsewhere.' Heed me, would she?
No, not she. But follow him she would, follow him from place to place,
out on the water in her boat, and at the Hector's garden party until it
was disgraceful to see. It's my firm belief she popped the question
herself, and we all know what followed. Poor Captain Bertram gave in for
a time, thinking of her fortune, which is none so great, if rumors are
correct, but love her, no, not he. Why, over and over and over he has
said as much to my child, Matty. Matty was stiff to him, I'll say that;
he was an audacious flirt, and he tried hard to bring Matty into a
scrape too, but would she encourage him? No, though she was persecuted
by his attentions, and now what's the result? Matty is honorably engaged
to a man who is a Bayard for knightliness, and that poor Beatrice is
jilted. Was she in hysterics in my house? Well, it isn't for me to say.
Did she go down on her knees to Captain Bertram, and wring his hand, and
kiss it and beg of him not to forsake her, with the tears streaming like
rain down her cheeks, and implore of him to give up his true love, who
was in a dead faint before their two eyes, and to be true to her who had
given her heart to him, neighbor, did these things happen in this very
house? You ask me that question, neighbor, and I say, answer it I won't,
for I'm a woman, and I have known that unfortunate, misguided girl and
her poor mother for years. Yes, neighbor, I cast a veil over what I
might say."

This was the sort of gossip spread by Mrs. Bell, who further praised up
Miss Hart, saying much about her beauty and her charms, and giving such
a ravishing account of Bertram's love for her, and her adoration for
him, that the neighbors who were on this side of the civil war crowned
Josephine Hart as their chosen queen on the spot.

Mrs. Butler, who led the van of the "Beatricites," was less voluble than
Mrs. Bell, but her words were weighted with a very deadly shaft of
poison. After Mrs. Butler had extolled Beatrice as a perfect model of
all womanly graces and virtue, she proceeded, with keen relish, to take
Josephine Hart to pieces. When she began to dissect Miss Hart she
invariably sent her innocent sister, Maria, out of the room. It is
unnecessary to repeat what passed behind the doors which were so cruelly
closed on eager and curious Miss Peters, but it is not too much to say
that poor Josephine had not a rag of character left to her when the good
woman's tongue ceased to wag.

Thus the town of Northbury was in a distressing state of uproar during
the three or four days which preceded Captain Bertram's wedding. And
perhaps the cruellest thing about this fierce civil war was that none of
the combatants, not even the leaders, knew what was really about to take
place, nor who was to be married to whom on Tuesday, nor whether there
was to be any wedding at all. The bridal dresses came home, and some of
the ladies wept when they looked at them. Beatrice still received
wedding presents, and the bridal robe of ivory-white silk trimmed with
quantities of Honiton lace was absolutely sent down from London, all
complete and ready for Beatrice to wear. Half the ladies in Northbury
rushed up to the station when the news was brought to them that the box
had arrived, and the porter, Payne by name, who carried the box to Mrs.
Meadowsweet's, was followed by quite a little mob.

Thus time went on apace, and Rumor did his work, each lady saying when
she met another:

"Well, what's the news? What's the latest? What did you hear last?"

Each Hartite bowed coldly to each Beatricite, or else cut each other
dead, and, in short, the usual symptoms which accompany civil war made
themselves felt.

It is a fact frequently noted that when Rumor, with his double-edged
tongue is abroad, the persons most concerned often know nothing of the
storm which is raging around them. In the present instance, two people
who were keenly interested in coming events were in this position. One
of them was Mrs. Meadowsweet, the other, Mrs. Bertram. The time would
come when Beatrice would confide in her mother, but that moment had not
yet arrived. The old lady wondered why she had so many visitors, and why
