    Man shall alone the wreck of worlds survive;
    'Mid falling spheres, immortal man shall live."
                                                         --Jane Taylor.


DEFINITIONS.--2. Dis-tinc'tion, a point of difference. Im'ple-ments,
utensils, tools. Wigwam, an Indian hut. 3. Bur'rows, holes in the earth
where animals lodge. 4. Dis-cus'sion, the act of arguing a point, debate.
5. Me-dic'i-nal, healing. 8. En-dowed', furnished with any gift, quality,
etc. Fac'ul-ty, ability to act or perform. Rec'ti-fied, corrected.



XCVI. THE BLIND MEN AND THE ELEPHANT.

John Godfrey Saxe (b. 1816, d.1887), an American humorist, lawyer, and
journalist, was born at Highgate, Vt. He graduated at Middlebury College
in 1839; was admitted to the bar in 1843; and practiced law until 1850,
when he became editor of the "Burlington Sentinel." In 1851, he was
elected State's attorney. "Progress, a Satire, and Other Poems," his first
volume, was published in 1849, and several other volumes of great merit
attest his originality. For genial humor and good-natured satire, Saxe's
writings rank among the best of their kind, and are very popular.

1. It was six men of Indostan,
     To learning much inclined,
   Who went to see the elephant,
     (Though all of them were blind,)
   That each by observation
     Might satisfy his mind.

2. The first approached the elephant,
     And, happening to fall
   Against his broad and sturdy side,
     At once began to bawl:
   "God bless me! but the elephant
     Is very like a wall!"

3. The second, feeling of the tusk,
     Cried: "Ha! what have we here,
   So very round, and smooth, and sharp?
     To me 't is very clear,
   This wonder of an elephant
     Is very like a spear!"

4. The third approached the animal,
     And, happening to take
   The squirming trunk within his hands,
     Thus boldly up he spake:
   "I see," quoth he, "the elephant
     Is very like a snake!"

5. The fourth reached out his eager hand,
     And fell about the knee:
   "What most this wondrous beast is like,
     Is very plain," quoth he;
   " 'T is clear enough the elephant
     Is very like a tree!"

6. The fifth, who chanced to touch the ear,
     Said: "E'en the blindest man
   Can tell what this resembles most:
     Deny the fact who can,
   This marvel of an elephant
     Is very like a fan!"

7. The sixth no sooner had begun
     About the beast to grope,
   Than, seizing on the swinging tail
     That fell within his scope,
   "I see," quoth he, "the elephant
     Is very like a rope!"

8. And so these men of Indostan
     Disputed loud and long,
   Each in his own opinion
     Exceeding stiff and strong,
   Though each was partly in the right,
     And all were in the wrong!



XCVII. A HOME SCENE.

Donald Grant Mitchell (b. 1822,--). This popular American writer was born
in Norwich, Conn. He graduated at Yale in 1841. In 1844 he went to
England, and, after traveling through that country on foot, spent some
time on the continent. His first volume, "Fresh Gleanings, or a New Sheaf
from the Old Fields of Continental Europe, by Ik Marvel," was published in
1847, soon after his return home. He revisited Europe in 1848. On his
return, he published "The Battle Summer." Mr. Mitchell has contributed to
the "Knickerbocker Magazine," the "Atlantic Monthly," and several
agricultural journals. His most popular works are "The Reveries of a
Bachelor," 1850, and "Dream Life," 1851. Besides these, he has written "My
Farm of Edgewood," "Wet Days at Edgewood," "Doctor Johns," a novel "Rural
Studies," and other works. He is a charming writer. In 1853 he was
appointed United States consul at Venice. In 1855 he settled on a farm
near New Haven, Conn., where he now resides. The following selection is
from "Dream Life."

1. Little does the boy know, as the tide of years drifts by, floating him
out insensibly from the harbor of his home, upon the great sea of
life,--what joys, what opportunities, what affections, are slipping from
him into the shades of that inexorable Past, where no man can go, save on
the wings of his dreams.

2. Little does he think, as he leans upon the lap of his mother, with his
eye turned to her, in some earnest pleading for a fancied pleasure of the
hour, or in some important story of his griefs, that such sharing of his
sorrows, and such sympathy with his wishes, he will find nowhere again.

3. Little does he imagine that the fond sister Nelly, ever thoughtful of
his pleasures, ever smiling away his griefs, will soon be beyond the reach
of either; and that the waves of the years which come rocking so gently
under him will soon toss her far away, upon the great swell of life.

4. But now, you are there. The fire light glimmers upon the walls of your
cherished home. The big chair of your father is drawn to its wonted corner
by the chimney side; his head, just touched with gray, lies back upon its
oaken top. Opposite sits your mother: her figure is thin, her look
cheerful, yet subdued;--her arm perhaps resting on your shoulder, as she
talks to you in tones of tender admonition, of the days that are to come.

5. The cat is purring on the hearth; the clock that ticked so plainly when
Charlie died is ticking on the mantel still. The great table in the middle
of the room, with its books and work, waits only for the lighting of the
evening lamp, to see a return to its stores of embroidery and of story.

6. Upon a little stand under the mirror, which catches now and then a
flicker of the fire light, and makes it play, as if in wanton, upon the
ceiling, lies that big book, reverenced of your New England parents--the
Family Bible. It is a ponderous, square volume, with heavy silver clasps,
that you have often pressed open for a look at its quaint, old pictures,
for a study of those prettily bordered pages, which lie between the
Testaments, and which hold the Family Record.

7. There are the Births;--your father's and your mother's; it seems as if
they were born a long time ago; and even your own date of birth appears an
almost incredible distance back. Then there are the Marriages;--only one
as yet; and your mother's name looks oddly to you: it is hard to think of
her as anyone else than your doting parent.

8. Last of all come the Deaths;--only one. Poor Charlie! How it looks!--"
Died, 12 September, 18--, Charles Henry, aged four years." You know just
how it looks. You have turned to it often; there you seem to be joined to
him, though only by the turning of a leaf.

9. And over your thoughts, as you look at that page of the Record, there
sometimes wanders a vague, shadowy fear, which will come,--that your own
name may soon be there. You try to drop the notion, as if it were not
fairly your own; you affect to slight it, as you would slight a boy who
presumed on your acquaintance, but whom you have no desire to know.

10. Yet your mother--how strange it is!--has no fears of such dark
fancies. Even now, as you stand beside her, and as the twilight deepens in
the room, her low, silvery voice is stealing upon your ear, telling you
that she can not be long with you;--that the time is coming, when you must
be guided by your own judgment, and struggle with the world unaided by the
friends of your boyhood.

11. There is a little pride, and a great deal more of anxiety, in your
thoughts now, as you look steadfastly into the home blaze, while those
delicate fingers, so tender of your happiness, play with the locks upon
your brow. To struggle with the world,--that is a proud thing; to struggle
alone,--there lies the doubt! Then crowds in swift upon the calm of
boyhood the first anxious thought of youth.

12. The hands of the old clock upon the mantel that ticked off the hours
when Charlie sighed and when Charlie died, draw on toward midnight. The
shadows that the fireflame makes grow dimmer and dimmer. And thus it is,
that Home,--boy home, passes away forever,--like the swaying of a
pendulum,--like the fading of a shadow on the floor.


DEFINITIONS.--l. In-ex'or-a-ble, not to be changed. 4. Wont'ed,
accustomed. Ad-mo-ni'tion (pro. ad-mo'nish'un), counseling against fault
or error. 13. Pon'der-ous, very heavy. Quaint (pro. kwant), odd and
antique. 7. In-cred'i-ble, impossible to be believed. Dot'-ing, loving to
excess. 9. Vague (pro. vag), indefinite. Pre-sumed', pushed upon or
intruded in an impudent manner.



XCVIII. THE LIGHT OF OTHER DAYS.

Thomas Moore (b. 1779. d. 1852) was born in Dublin, Ireland, and he was
educated at Trinity College in that city. In 1799, he entered the Middle
Temple, London, as a student of law. Soon after the publication of his
first poetical productions, he was sent to Bermuda in an official
capacity. He subsequently visited the United States. Moore's most famous
works are: "Lalla Rookh," an Oriental romance, 1817; "The Loves of the
Angels," 1823; and "Irish Melodies," 1834; a "Life of Lord Byron," and
"The Epicurean, an Eastern Tale." "Moore's excellencies," says Dr. Angus,
"consist in the gracefulness of his thoughts, the wit and fancy of his
allusions and imagery, and the music and refinement of his versification."

1. Oft in the stilly night
     Ere slumber's chain has bound me,
   Fond memory brings the light
     Of other days around me:
       The smiles, the tears
       Of boyhood's years,
     The words of love then spoken;
       The eyes that shone,
       Now dimmed and gone,
     The cheerful hearts now broken!
   Thus in the stilly night
     Ere slumber's chain has bound me,
   Sad memory brings the light
     Of other days around me.

2. When I remember all
     The friends so linked together
   I've seen around me fall
     Like leaves in wintry weather,
       I feel like one
       Who treads alone
     Some banquet hall deserted,
       Whose lights are fled
       Whose garlands dead,
     And all but he departed.
   Thus in the stilly night
     Ere slumber's chain has bound me,
   Sad memory brings the light
     Of other days around me.



XCIX. A CHASE IN THE ENGLISH CHANNEL.

James Fenimore Cooper (b. 1789, d. 1851). This celebrated American
novelist was born in Burlington, N.J. His father removed to the state of
New York about 1790, and founded Cooperstown, on Otsego Lake. He studied
three years at Yale, and then entered the navy as a common sailor. He
became a midshipman in 1806, and was afterwards promoted to the rank of
lieutenant; but he left the service in 1811. His first novel,
"Precaution," was published in 1819; his best work, "The Spy," a tale of
the Revolutionary War, in 1821. The success of "The Spy" was almost
unprecedented, and its author at once took rank among the most popular
writers of the day. "The Pilot" and "The Red Rover" are considered his
best sea novels. "The Pioneers," "The Last of the Mohicans," "The
Prairie," "The Pathfinder," and "The Deerslayer" are among the best of his
tales of frontier life. The best of his novels have been translated into
nearly all of the European languages, and into some of those of Asia. "The
creations of his genius," says Bryant, "shall survive through centuries to
come, and only perish with our language." The following selection is from
"The Pilot."

1. The ship which the American frigate had now to oppose, was a vessel of
near her own size and equipage; and when Griffith looked at her again, he
perceived that she had made her preparations to assert her equality in
manful fight.

2. Her sails had been gradually reduced to the usual quantity, and, by
certain movements on her decks, the lieutenant and his constant attendant,
the Pilot, well understood that she only wanted to lessen the distance a
few hundred yards to begin the action.

"Now spread everything," whispered the stranger.

3. Griffith applied the trumpet to his mouth, and shouted, in a voice that
was carried even to his enemy, "Let fall--out with your booms--sheet
home--hoist away of everything!"

4. The inspiring cry was answered by a universal bustle. Fifty men flew
out on the dizzy heights of the different spars, while broad sheets of
canvas rose as suddenly along the masts, as if some mighty bird were
spreading its wings. The Englishman instantly perceived his mistake, and
he answered the artifice by a roar of artillery. Griffith watched the
effects of the broadside with an absorbing interest as the shot whistled
above his head; but when he perceived his masts untouched, and the few
unimportant ropes, only, that were cut, he replied to the uproar with a
burst of pleasure.

5. A few men were, however, seen clinging with wild frenzy to the cordage,
dropping from rope to rope, like wounded birds fluttering through a tree,
until they fell heavily into the ocean, the sullen ship sweeping by them
in a cold indifference. At the next instant, the spars and masts of their
enemy exhibited a display of men similar to their own, when Griffith again
placed the trumpet to his mouth, and shouted aloud, "Give it to them;
drive them from their yards, boys; scatter them with your grape; unreeve
their rigging!"

6. The crew of the American wanted but little encouragement to enter on
this experiment with hearty good will, and the close of his cheering words
was uttered amid the deafening roar of his own cannon. The Pilot had,
however, mistaken the skill and readiness of their foe; for,
notwithstanding the disadvantageous circumstances under which the
Englishman increased his sail, the duty was steadily and dexterously
performed.

7. The two ships were now running rapidly on parallel lines, hurling at
each other their instruments of destruction with furious industry, and
with severe and certain loss to both, though with no manifest advantage in
favor of either. Both Griffith and the Pilot witnessed, with deep concern,
this unexpected defeat of their hopes; for they could not conceal from
themselves that each moment lessened their velocity through the water, as
the shot of the enemy stripped the canvas from the yards, or dashed aside
the lighter spars in their terrible progress.

8. "We find our equal here," said Griffith to the stranger. "The ninety is
heaving up again like a mountain; and if we continue to shorten sail at
this rate, she will soon be down upon us!"

"You say true, sir," returned the Pilot, musing, "the man shows judgment
as well as spirit; but--"

9. He was interrupted by Merry, who rushed from the forward part of the
vessel, his whole face betokening the eagerness of his spirit and the
importance of his intelligence.--

"The breakers!" he cried, when nigh enough to be heard amid the din; "we
are running dead on a ripple, and the sea is white not two hundred yards
ahead."

10. The Pilot jumped on a gun, and, bending to catch a glimpse through the
smoke, he shouted, in those clear, piercing tones, that could be even
heard among the roaring of the cannon,--

"Port, port your helm! we are on the Devil's Grip! Pass up the trumpet,
sir; port your helm, fellow; give it to them, boys--give it to the proud
English dogs!"

11. Griffith unhesitatingly relinquished the symbol of his rank, fastening
his own firm look on the calm but quick eye of the Pilot, and gathering
assurance from the high confidence he read in the countenance of the
stranger. The seamen were too busy with their cannon and the rigging to
regard the new danger; and the frigate entered one of the dangerous passes
of the shoals, in the heat of a severely contested battle.

12. The wondering looks of a few of the older sailors glanced at the
sheets of foam that flew by them, in doubt whether the wild gambols of the
waves were occasioned by the shot of the enemy, when suddenly the noise of
cannon was succeeded by the sullen wash of the disturbed element, and
presently the vessel glided out of her smoky shroud, and was boldly
steering in the center of the narrow passages.

13. For ten breathless minutes longer the Pilot continued to hold an
uninterrupted sway, during which the vessel ran swiftly by ripples and
breakers, by streaks of foam and darker passages of deep water, when he
threw down his trumpet and exclaimed--

"What threatened to be our destruction has proved our salvation.--Keep
yonder hill crowned with wood one point open from the church tower at its
base, and steer east and by north; you will run through these shoals on
that course in an hour, and by so doing you will gain five leagues of your
enemy, who will have to double their trail."

14. Every officer in the ship, after the breathless suspense of
uncertainty had passed, rushed to those places where a view might be taken
of their enemies. The ninety was still steering boldly onward, and had
already approached the two-and-thirty, which lay a helpless wreck, rolling
on the unruly seas that were rudely tossing her on their wanton billows.
The frigate last engaged was running along the edge of the ripple, with
her torn sails flying loosely in the air, her ragged spars tottering in
the breeze, and everything above her hull exhibiting the confusion of a
sudden and unlooked-for check to her progress.

15. The exulting taunts and mirthful congratulations of the seamen, as
they gazed at the English ships, were, however, soon forgotten in the
attention that was required to their own vessel. The drums beat the
retreat, the guns were lashed, the wounded again removed, and every
individual able to keep the deck was required to lend his assistance in
repairing the damages to the frigate, and securing her masts.

16. The promised hour carried the ship safely through all the dangers,
which were much lessened by daylight; and by the time the sun had begun to
fall over the land, Griffith, who had not quitted the deck during the day,
beheld his vessel once more cleared of the confusion of the chase and
battle, and ready to meet another foe.


DEFINITIONS.--1. Frig'ate, a war vessel, usually carrying from
twenty-eight to forty-four guns, arranged in two tiers on each side.
Eq'ui-page (pro. ek'wi-paj), furniture, fitting out. 4. Ar'ti-fice.
skillful contrivance, trick. Broad'side, a discharge of all the guns on
one side of a ship, above and below, at the same time. 7. Man'i-fest,
visible to the eye, apparent. 11. As-sur'ance (pro. a-shur'ans), full
confidence, courage. 13. Sway, control, rule.


NOTES.--2. The Pilot, who appears in this story, under disguise, is John
Paul Jones, a celebrated American naval officer during the Revolution. He
was born in Scotland, in 1747, and was apprenticed when only twelve years
old as a sailor. He was familiar with the waters about the British
Islands, and during part of the war he hovered about their coasts in a
daring way, capturing many vessels, often against heavy odds, and causing
great terror to the enemy.

8. The ninety, refers to a large ninety-gun ship, part of a fleet which
was chasing the American vessel.

10. The Devil's Grip; the name of a dangerous reef in the English Channel.

13. One point open. Directions for steering, referring to the compass.

14. The two-and-thirty; i.e., another of the enemy's ships, carrying
thirty-two guns.



C. BURIAL OF SIR JOHN MOORE.

Charles Wolfe (b. 1791, d. 1823), an Irish poet and clergyman, was born in
Dublin. He was educated in several schools, and graduated at the
university of his native city. He was ordained in 1817, and soon became
noted for his zeal and energy as a clergyman. His literary productions
were collected and published in 1825. "The Burial of Sir John Moore," one
of the finest poems of its kind in the English language, was written in
1817, and first appeared in the "Newry Telegraph," a newspaper, with the
author's initials, but without his knowledge. Byron said of this ballad
that he would rather be the author of it than of any one ever written.

1. Not a drum was heard, not a funeral note,
     As his corse to the rampart we hurried;
   Not a soldier discharged his farewell shot
     O'er the grave where our hero we buried.

2. We buried him darkly, at dead of night,
     The sods with our bayonets turning,
   By the struggling moonbeam's misty light,
     And the lantern dimly burning.

3. No useless coffin inclosed his breast,
     Not in sheet nor in shroud we wound him;
   But he lay like a warrior taking his rest,
     With his martial cloak around him.

4. Few and short were the prayers we said,
     And we spoke not a word of sorrow;
   But we steadfastly gazed on the face of the dead
     And we bitterly thought of the morrow.

5. We thought, as we hollowed his narrow bed,
     And smoothed down his lonely pillow,
   That the foe and the stranger would tread o'er his head,
     And we far away on the billow!

6. Lightly they'll talk of the spirit that's gone
     And o'er his cold ashes upbraid him;
   But little he'll reck, if they'll let him sleep on
     In a grave where a Briton has laid him.

7. But half of our heavy task was done,
