had returned to her own home, Cassandra sat with her head in her hands
for the best part of an hour. Her mother asked her what ailed her.

"I have a headache," she replied. "I was with a girl to-day who is fifty
times too good for me."

"What nonsense you are talking, Cassandra! There are few people good
enough for you."

"To think of her gives me a headache," continued Cassandra. "If you
don't mind, mother, I will go to bed now."

Meanwhile things were moving rather rapidly in another direction.
Kathleen O'Hara, walking home that day in the company of Susy Hopkins,
eagerly questioned that young lady.

"How prim and proper every one looked in the school to-day!" she said.
"What is wrong?"

"There is plenty wrong," said Susy. "I tell you what it is, Kathleen, I
feel rather frightened. I suppose it will come to our all being
expelled."

"Oh, not a bit of it," said Kathleen.

"Well, it looks rather like it," said Susy. "Do you know what they are
doing?"

"What?"

"They are bringing pressure to bear upon Ruth Craven. The governors
convened a special meeting yesterday; they had Ruth before them, and
then tried by every means in their power to get her to tell. You see,
she is in the position of the person who knows everything. She belonged
to us for a time, and now she doesn't belong to us."

"Well?" said Kathleen, feeling interested and a little startled.

"She wouldn't tell."

"Of course she wouldn't. She is a brick. The Ruth Cravens of the world
are not traitors," said Kathleen. "And so that is what the governors are
doing--horrid, sneaky, disagreeable things! But they are not going to
subdue me, so they needn't think it. I tell you what it is, Susy. Why
should we put off till next week our picnic to town? Can't we have it
this week?"

"I wish we could," said Susy. "It would be glorious," she continued. "I
do think somehow, Kathleen, that they will catch us in the long run. It
might be dangerous to put off our glorious time till next week."

"It might? It certainly would," said Kathleen. "We will go to-morrow
evening. School is always over at four. We can meet at the railway
station between five and six, and go off all by ourselves to--But where
shall we go when we get to town?"

"Couldn't we go to a theatre--to the pit at one of the theatres?"

"If only Aunt Katie O'Flynn was with us it would be as right as right,"
said Kathleen; "but dare we go alone?"

"I am sure we dare. I shouldn't be frightened. I think some of the girls
know exactly how to manage."

"Well, I tell you what. You know most of the names of the members. Go
round to-day and see as many as you can. Tell them that I am game for a
real bit of fun, and that I will stand treat. We will go to town by the
quarter-to-six train to-morrow evening. We will have some refreshments
at a restaurant, and then we will go to the pit of one of the theatres.
It will be a lark. There will be about forty of us altogether."

"We are sure to be found out. It is too risky; and yet I think we'll do
it," said Susy. "Oh, there never was such a lark!"

"Nothing could happen to forty of us," said Kathleen. "I am going to do
it just to defy them. How dare they try to make dear little Ruth betray
us? But she won't. I am certain she won't."

Susy talked a little longer to Kathleen, and finally agreed to take her
message to as many of the Wild Irish Girls as she could possibly reach.

"They will all hear of it safe enough," said Susy. "The whole forty of
us will meet you at the station to-morrow night. Oh dear! of course it
is wrong."

"It is magnificently wrong; that is the glorious part of it," said
Kathleen. "Oh dear! I feel almost as jolly as though I were in old
Ireland again."

She laughed merrily, parted from Susy, and ran all the rest of the way
home.




CHAPTER XXIV.

KATHLEEN AND GRANDFATHER CRAVEN.


Friday was emphatically a summer's day in winter. The sky was cloudless;
the few leaves that still remained on the trees looked brilliant in
their autumn coloring. The ground was crisp under foot; the air was
soft, gentle, and pleasant. Girls, like all other creatures, are
susceptible to weather; they do their best work and have their best
feelings aroused when the sun shines and the day looks cheerful. The
sunshiny weather puts heart into them. But it is sad to relate that when
a girl is bent on mischief she is even more mischievous, more daring,
more defiant when the sun shines and the earth looks gay.

Kathleen awoke on the special morning after a night of wild dreams. She
raised herself on her elbow and looked across at Alice.

"What a lovely day! Why, I see sunshine quite plainly from where I am
lying. Wake up, won't you, Alice?" she said.

"How tiresome of you to rouse me!" said Alice, opening her eyes and
looking crossly at Kathleen.

Kathleen smiled back at her. Her face was rosy. Her hair was tossed in
wild confusion about her head and shoulders; it tumbled also over her
forehead, and made her eyes look more dancing and mischievous than ever
beneath its heavy shadow.

"I wonder--" said Kathleen softly.

If she had spoken in a loud voice Alice would have taken no notice, but
there was something pathetic and beautiful in her tone, and Alice raised
herself and looked at her.

"I wonder," she said "why you hate me so much?'

"Fudge!" said Alice.

"But Alice, it isn't fudge. Why should I have made myself so terribly
obnoxious to you? The others are fond of me; they don't think me
perfect--and indeed I don't want them to--but they love me for those
qualities in me which are worthy of love."

"How you chatter!" said Alice. "I have hitherto failed to perceive the
qualities in you that are worthy of love. It wants another quarter of an
hour before our hot water is brought in. Do you greatly object to my
sleeping during that time?"

"No, cross patch," said Kathleen, turning angrily on her pillow. "You
may sleep till doomsday as far as I am concerned."

"Polite," muttered Alice.

She shut her eyes, folded her arms, and prepared for further slumber;
but somehow Kathleen had effectually aroused her. She could not get the
radiant face out of her head, nor the words, a little sad in their
meaning, out of her ears. She looked up as though moved to say
something.

"As you have asked me a question, I will give you an answer. I know a
way in which you can secure my good opinion."

"Really!" said Kathleen, who was too angry now to be properly polite.
"And what may that way be?"

"Why, this: if you will tell the truth about your horrible society, and
spare dear little Ruth Craven, and make Cassandra Weldon happy."

"I don't care twopence about your tiresome Cassandra; but little
Ruth--what ails her?"

"The governors are going to insist upon her telling what she knows."

"But she won't," said Kathleen, laughing merrily. "She is too much of a
brick."

"Then she'll be expelled."

"What nonsense!"

"You wait and see. You don't know the Great Shirley School as well as I
do. However, I have spoken; I have nothing more to say. It is time to
get up, after all."

The girls dressed in silence. Alice had long ceased to torment Kathleen
about her own side of the room. Provided Alice's side was left in peace,
she determined to shut her eyes to untidy wardrobes, to the chest of
drawers full to bursting, to a boot kicked off here and a shoe
disporting itself there, to ribbons and laces and handkerchiefs and
scarves and blouses scattered on the bed, and even on the floor. Alice
had learnt to put up with these things; she turned her back on them, so
to speak.

The two girls ran downstairs together. Just for a moment Kathleen had
felt frightened at Alice's words, but then she cast them from her mind.
It was quite, quite impossible to suppose that anything so monstrously
unfair as that a little girl should be expelled from the school could
happen. Ruth, too, of all the girls--Ruth who was absolutely goodness
itself. So Kathleen ate her breakfast with appetite, remarked on the
brightness of the day to Mrs. Tennant and the boys, and then with Alice
started off to school with her satchel of books slung over her shoulder,
her gay, pretty dress making her look a most remarkable figure amongst
all the girls who were going towards the great school, and her saucy
bright face attracting attention on all sides. There was nothing about
Kathleen to indicate that that evening she meant to steal from home
and, in company with forty companions, go to London. She was able to
keep her own counsel, and this last daring scheme was locked tightly up
in her heart. On her way to school she met Ruth.

"There is Ruth," she said, turning to Alice. "Oh! and there's Susy in
the distance. I want to speak to them both. You can go on, of course,
Alice; I will follow presently."

"We are rather late as it is," said Alice. "In addition to your
misdemeanors, I should advise you not to be late for prayers just at
present."

"Thanks so much!" said Kathleen in a sarcastic tone.

She left Alice and ran towards Ruth.

"Why, Ruth," she said, "you do look pale."

"Oh, I am all right," said Ruth, brightening at the sight of Kathleen.

"Then you don't look it. Ruth, is it true that they want you to tell?"

"They want me to, Kathleen," said Ruth; "but I am not going to. You can
rest quite satisfied on that point."

"You are a splendid, darling brick," said Kathleen, "and I love you to
distraction. Dear Ruth, what can I do for you?"

"Give up the society as fast as you can," said Ruth.

"What? And yet you won't tell!"

"It's because it's dishonorable to tell," said Ruth. "Don't keep me now,
Kathleen; I want to get into school in good time. Grandfather is not
well, and I must hurry back to him."

"Your nice white-haired grandfather that you have talked to me about?"

"He was ill all night. He talked about you a little. Do you know,
Kathleen, I think he'd like to see you. Would you greatly mind coming
back with me after school, just to see him for a minute? I have told him
so much about you, and I have told granny too, and they both picture you
somewhat as you are. Do you think you could come, just to give them both
pleasure?"

"Come?" said Kathleen gaily. "Why, of course I'll come, heart of my
life. I'd do anything on earth to please you. I'll join you after
school, and well go straight away. It doesn't matter a bit about my
being late for dinner at the Tennants'. Ah! there's Susy. I want to have
a word with her."

Kathleen pushed past Ruth and ran up to Susy. Susy was looking intensely
agitated: there were vivid spots of color on her cheeks, and her eyes
were as bright as stars.

"I have managed everything," she said in a whisper. "It's all right;
it's splendidly right. We are all coming; not one of us will stay
behind. We know what it means, of course."

"You look very mysterious," said Kathleen. "I wonder why you talk like
that. What does it mean, in your opinion?"

"Oh, Kathleen, can't you understand? And one does it sometimes in life.
I have read about it in story-books, and there are cases of it in
history; you have one great tremendous fling; you do what is wrong; you
have a good--a very good--time, and you know it won't last; you know
that afterwards will come--the deluge."

"You are a silly!" said Kathleen. "Why, what could happen? Nobody need
know; we will be far too careful for that. I can't tell you how
splendidly I have planned things. I have got up my headache already, in
order to go to my room and thus avoid all suspicion."

"Oh dear!" said Susy. "It doesn't sound right, does it?"

"Right or wrong, it is fun," said Kathleen. "I am going to have it so.
I have got the money, and I mean to have a magnificent time. Now don't
keep me; I must run into school. It is horrid of them to grudge us our
little bit of amusement."

Susy agreed with her friend; indeed, during those days she was nearly
lifted off her feet, so excited was she, so charmed, so altogether
amazed at Kathleen O'Hara's condescension to her. Before Kathleen
arrived at the school Susy was a good little girl, who helped her mother
in the shop, and had dreams of going into another shop herself
by-and-by. In those days she did not consider herself a lady, nor expect
ladies to take any special notice of her. But those dull and stupid days
were no more. Gold and sunshine and rich color and marvellous dreams had
all come into her life since the arrival of Kathleen at Merrifield. For
Kathleen had discrimination; it mattered nothing to her whether a girl
paid or did not pay for her lessons, whether she belonged to the
despised foundationers or was respected and looked up to by paying
girls. Indeed, if anything, Kathleen had a decided leaning towards the
foundationers; and she, Kathleen, was a lady--she belonged to what her
mother and Aunt Church called the "real quality." "None of your
upstarts," Aunt Church had said, "but one who for generations has
belonged to the aristocrats; and they are of the kind who are too great
in themselves to be proud. They are proud in the right way, but they
never look down on folks." Yes, Susy was a happy girl now.

But, after all, was she quite happy? Was she not at this very minute
more or less oppressed by a secret fear? Suppose any single individual
in Merrifield heard of the midnight picnic--the great, daring, midnight
excursion into the heart of London. Susy knew far better than Kathleen
what a mad action the girls were about to perpetrate. She knew because
she lived with the class who discussed such things very openly. If their
frolic was not discovered, all would be well; if it was, it would be
ruin--ruin complete and absolute. The ladies of the town would fight shy
of her mother's shop. Aunt Church would be very unlikely to get her
little almshouse in Ireland, for surely even Kathleen's friends would be
very angry with her if they knew. Susy herself would be expelled from
the school, and she in her fall would bring down her mother and brother.
Yes, terrible would be the consequences _if_ they were discovered. But
then, they needn't be. Plucky people were not as a rule brought into
trouble of that sort. It only needed a brave heart and a firm foot, and
courage which nothing could daunt; and the other girls, the thirty-eight
who were to join Kathleen and Susy, would keep them company.
Nevertheless Susy was as unhappy as she was happy that day. She was so
absorbed in her feelings, and in wondering what would happen during the
next twenty-four hours, that she was not attentive at her lessons, and
did not notice how the teachers watched her and made remarks. It was
very evident to an onlooker that the teachers were particularly alert
that morning, and that their gaze was principally fixed upon the
foundationers.

No remarks, however, were made. The school came to an end quite in the
usual manner. Immediately afterwards Kathleen dashed off to find Ruth.
Ruth was waiting for her just outside the gates.

"Here I am," said Kathleen. "Take my arm, won't you, Ruthie? I shall be
very glad indeed to be introduced to your grandfather."

Ruth made no answer. Her face was white, but this fact only increased
the rare delicacy, the sort of fragrance, which her appearance always
presented. Kathleen and Ruth, did they but know it, made a most charming
contrast as they walked arm-in-arm across the common; for Ruth belonged
more or less to the twilight and the evening star, and Kathleen--her
face, her eyes, her voice, her actions--spoke to those who had eyes to
see of the morning. Kathleen was all enthusiasm, gay life, valor,
daring; Ruth's gentle face and quiet voice gave little indication of the
real depth of character which lay beneath.

"This is such a lovely day," said Kathleen, "and somehow I feel so
downright happy. Perhaps I am wrong, perhaps I am right, but I feel
happy. I think it is on account of the day."

They had now reached the little path which led up to the cottage. Ruth
went first, and Kathleen followed. What a tiny place for her darling
favorite to live in! But Kathleen felt she loved her all the better for
it.

Ruth softly unlatched the door and peeped in. The front-door opened
right into the kitchen, and Mrs. Craven was seated by the fire.

"Hush!" she said, putting her finger to her lips; "he is asleep."

"I have brought Kathleen O'Hara, granny. I thought you'd like to see
her, and I thought granddad would like to see her."

"To be sure, child," said Mrs. Craven, bustling up and removing her
cooking-apron. "Bring Miss O'Hara in at once. Is she waiting outside?
Where are your manners, Ruth?--Ah, Miss O'Hara, I'm right pleased to see
you! I am sorry my dear husband is not as well as could be wished; but
perhaps if you'd be good enough to sit down for a minute or two, he
would wake up before you go."

Kathleen entered, held out her hand, greeted Mrs. Craven with a frank
smile, showing a row of pearly teeth, and then sat down near the fire.

"This is cosy," she said. "Aren't you going to give me a little bit of
dinner, Mrs. Craven?"

"Oh, my dear young lady, but we live so plain!"

"And so do I when I am at home," said Kathleen. "I do hate messy dishes.
I like potatoes better than anything in the world. Often at home I go
off with my boy cousins, and we have such a good feed. I think potatoes
are better than anything in the world."

"Well, miss, if you'd like a potato it's at your service."

"I should if it is in its jacket."

"What did you say, miss?"

"If the potato is boiled in its jacket. Ah! I see they are. Please let
me have one."

Kathleen did not wait for Mrs. Craven's reply. She herself fetched a
plate and the salt-cellar from the dresser, and putting these on the
table, helped herself to a potato from the pot.

"Now," she said, "this is good. I can fancy I am back in old Ireland."

Mrs. Craven began to laugh.

"Ruth, do have a potato with me," said Kathleen; "they are first-rate
when you don't put a knife or fork near them."

But Ruth had no inclination for potatoes eaten in the Irish way.

"I will go in and see how grandfather is, granny," she said, and she
disappeared into the little parlor.

