authority."

"What do you intend to do?" asked Alvarez.

The words came from a dry throat, and they had a harsh, rasping sound.

"The galleon, Dona Isabel, returns to Spain next week. You will remain a
prisoner in one of the forts until then, when you are to go to Spain on
the galleon to answer there for your acts here. The man, Wyatt, is not a
Spanish subject, but he must leave New Orleans within an hour. The five
who have been held in the fort are released from this moment. Lieutenant
Bernal, take away the prisoner."

It was the cause of intense gratification to Lieutenant Diego Bernal that
he had been permitted to see the last and most striking part of this
drama. Francisco Alvarez had treated him with scorn more than once, and it
was not his part or that of Bernardo Galvez to insult a fallen enemy. He
merely put his hand lightly on the sleeve of Alvarez, and the prisoner,
without a word, followed him.




CHAPTER XVIII

NORTHWARD WITH THE FLEET


When Alvarez was gone, the five rose and thanked the Governor General.
They, too, did not wish to rejoice over a fallen foe, but it was the
moment of their complete triumph. Success had come better than they had
ever hoped and the great three-faced conspiracy was shattered. It was
Spanish cannon that they had dreaded and now they could not thunder
against the wooden walls in Kentucky. They crowded around the priest, too,
and shook his hand and were grateful for his timely assistance. He had
come at the most opportune of all moments.

It was Paul who acted as spokesman for them with Bernardo Galvez.

"Your Excellency, we came this vast distance confiding in your justice,
and we have found our confidence well placed," he said.

Bernardo Galvez smiled. It was a moment of triumph for him, too. A bold
conspiracy against him had been crushed, and the five had been the chief
instruments in the crushing of it. Even without the aid of his good heart,
his feelings toward them would have been very kindly.

"If New Orleans has proved inhospitable to you for a time," he said, "she
is now ready to make atonement. Your good friend, Mr. Pollock, will care
for you."

The five withdrew with the merchant, still elated, still feeling the full
sense of victory. Mr. Pollock had been very quiet but when they reached
the open air he burst forth.

"Lads," he said, "'tis a great task that you have done. You have saved
Kentucky--and these things are far-reaching--you may have saved all the
colonies beside. If the Mississippi had been closed to us we could not
reach our friends in the east with the supplies that they need so badly.
But I can't say more. You were surely inspired when you set out upon this
errand, and there is a tremendous debt of gratitude coming to you."

He shook hands with them all, one by one. But Long Jim heaved a mighty
sigh of relief.

"Is it all over, Paul?" he asked.

"I think so, Jim. We seem to have destroyed for good and all the great
three-cornered conspiracy against us."

"Then," said Jim, "ef it's all done I want to talk sense. I'm in favor uv
our startin' to Kentucky right away, that is, in about five minutes. Them
big woods keep callin' to me, I heard 'em callin' last night in my dreams,
an' I hear 'em callin' now when I'm awake. I've breathed indoor air long
enough. It's layin' heavy on my lungs, an' I want to put in its place air
that's swep' clean across from the Pacific Ocean an' that ain't hit not
bin' foul on the way."

"Five minutes is too short notice, Jim," laughed Paul, "but we'll surely
start soon, though it's a tremendously long tramp through the woods and
even if we had 'The Galleon' we'd have to pull and sail against the
current."

Oliver Pollock was watching them as they talked and his eyes gleamed, but
he said nothing until they were within his house, where he took them and
gave them refreshments. There he had a proposition to make.

"The boat, of course, you have lost," he said, "as it belongs to Spain,
but your arms and other equipment are all in my possession--they were
given to me to keep for you. But our fleet of canoes loaded with arms and
supplies will start north in three days. Will you go on it? Not to work,
not to paddle, unless you wish, but to guide and to fight. It is no favor
that I am conferring upon you, but one that you can confer upon me if you
will. We need such as you and with you I shall feel that the fleet is
safer."

It was a most welcome offer. They could serve the cause and themselves at
the same time. All things seemed to fall out as they wished.

"Sir, we thank you," said Henry speaking for them all. "You do not have to
make such an offer twice."

"Good! Good!" said Oliver Pollock. "Then the main feature of the bargain
is closed and now I must have you to know the captain of the fleet. Oh, I
think that you will agree with him famously. He will be in charge of the
navigation and the fleet, though not of you. You are to remain in your
role of free rangers."

He clapped his hand upon a little bell on the table and one of the
stalwart, sunbrowned clerks entered.

"Bring in Captain Colfax. I want him to make some new friends," said
Oliver Pollock, who was in the greatest of good humors.

Captain Adam Colfax of New Hampshire, who found the climate of New Orleans
very warm, came in in a minute or two, and his was a figure to attract the
attention of anybody. Middle aged, nearly as tall as Jim Hart, red haired,
with a sharp little tuft of red whisker on his chin, and with features
that seemed to be carved out of some kind of metal, he was a combination
of the seaman and landsman, as tough and wiry as they ever grow to be. He
regarded Oliver Pollock out of twinkling little blue eyes that could be
merry or severe, as they pleased.

"Captain Colfax," said Oliver Pollock, "These are the five from Kentucky
of whom you heard. They are to go with you on your great journey as far as
Kentucky, but they are to do as they please. They are scouts, warriors,
and free rangers. You will find them of great service."

He introduced them one by one, and Adam Colfax gave them a hearty grip
with a hand which seemed to be made of woven steel wire.

"Good woodsmen and good riflemen I take it," he said, "and we may need
both. I hear that the Creeks, Cherokees, and others, are feeling full of
fight. Now, I ain't looking for a fight, but if it happens to get in my
way I'm not running from it."

"You old war horse," said Oliver Pollock, laughing, "it's your business to
get these supplies through, not to be shooting at Indians. I wish I could
go with you. It's a wonderful journey, but I have to stay here in New
Orleans. This is the gate and we must see that it is not closed. How many
canoes and boats have we now, Adam?"

"About sixty, and they are manned by at least three hundred men. As I see
it, we can take care of ourselves."

"Adam," said Mr. Pollock laughing, "I believe you're really looking for a
fight."

Adam Colfax showed two rows of fine, white teeth, but said nothing. After
a little more hearty talk he went away to look after his fleet, and Mr.
Pollock made arrangements for the five to stay at his house until their
departure north. They were to occupy a single big room, and their rifles,
other arms, and general equipment were already there waiting for them.

"I'll miss 'The Galleon,'" said Paul, "I'd like to be going back in her. I
suppose it's sentiment, but I became attached to that boat."

"She wuz shorely comf'table," said Shif'less Sol. "I had a good time
floatin' down her on the Missip'. Now I reckon Jim here will hev to row me
or paddle me all the way back to Kaintuck."

"Ef you wait fur me to row or paddle you, you won't ever travel more'n six
inches," said Long Jim.

"Jest like you, Jim; you ain't got no gratitood at all fur me gittin' you
away from New Orlee-yuns."

Paul, who had been speaking to Henry in a low tone, now turned again to
Mr. Pollock.

"There is one more thing that we want you to do for us, if you will, Mr.
Pollock," he said. "We took the boat from Alvarez because he attacked us
first, and we put it to what we think was a good use. But it really
belonged to Spain and Bernardo Galvez. So if any wages are coming to us we
wish that you would take enough in advance and pay the Governor General
for the use of the boat and what stores we may have consumed."

"It shall be done," said Oliver Pollock, "and I like your spirit in
wishing it to be done."

It was a promise that he kept faithfully.

When they reached their room they found their rifles and other arms in
perfect order. Lieutenant Diego Bernal had taken good care of them. Long
Jim picked up his rifle and handled it lovingly.

"It feels good jest to tech it," he said. "I didn't think I could ever
like a Spaniard ez well ez I do that thar little leftenant. I'll miss him
when we go ploughin' up the river."

They were preparing to leave the room and breathe all out of doors, as Sol
put it, when they were stopped by the entrance of Father Montigny. They
crowded around him, expressing anew the gratitude that they had shown to
him at the house of the Governor General.

"It was really you, Father Montigny, who saved everything," said Paul.

The priest smiled and shook his head.

"No," he said, "It was not I, but your courage and tenacity. I had the
rare good fortune to find the letter among the Chickasaws and obtain it.
It was sent by the Shawnees and Miamis as a sort of token, a war belt as
it were. It was only a remote chance that brought it back to New Orleans,
and even then Alvarez confidently expected to be Governor General."

"What will become of Alvarez?" asked Paul.

"It is the plan to send him a prisoner to Spain on the galleon, Dona
Isabel, as you know, but I fear that we have not heard the last of him. He
is a man of fierce temper, and now he is wild with rage and mortification.
Moreover, he has many followers here in New Orleans. All the desperadoes,
adventurers, former galley slaves, and others of that type would have been
ready to rally around him. But I have come to tell you good-bye. I go
again in my canoe up the Mississippi."

"Can't you stay a while in New Orleans and rest?" asked Paul--the sympathy
between Paul and the priest was strong, each having a certain spiritual
quality that was in agreement.

"No," replied Father Montigny, "I cannot stay. You came on your task in
spite of hardships and dangers because you felt that a power urged you to
it. Farewell. We may meet again or we may not, as Heaven wills."

They followed him to the door and when he was almost out of sight he
turned and waved his hand to them.

The next day New Orleans, which was already deeply stirred by news of the
plot of Alvarez and its discovery, had another thrill. It was Lieutenant
Diego Bernal who told the five of it at the counting house of Oliver
Pollock.

"Francisco Alvarez has escaped," he said. "The watch at the prison was
none too strict; it may be that some of the guards themselves were friends
of his. In any event, he is gone from the city, and his going has been
followed by the departure of many men whom New Orleans could well spare.
But whether their going now will be to our benefit I cannot tell."

"Do you mean to say," asked Henry, "that all these men have gone away to
join Alvarez in some desperate adventure?"

"I have an impression, although my impressions are usually false," replied
the Lieutenant, "that such is the case. The Chickasaws, the Creeks, and
other tribes of these regions are his friends because he has promised them
much. A capable officer with a hundred desperate white men at his back and
a horde of Indians might create stirring events."

The five became very thoughtful over what he said, but when Lieutenant
Diego Bernal was taking his leave he looked at them rather enviously.

"You five inspire me with a certain jealousy," he said. "I have an
impression, although my impressions are usually wrong and my memory always
weak, that you are strongly attached to one another, that no one ever
hesitates to risk death for the others, that you are bound together by a
hundred ties, and that you act together for the common good. Ah, that is
something like friendship, real friendship, I should like to be one of a
band like yours, but I look in vain for such a thing in New Orleans."

"I wish that you were going with us," said Henry heartily.

"I wish it, too. Often I long for the great forests and the free air as
you do, but my service is due here to Bernardo Galvez, who is my good
friend. But it is pleasant to see that you have triumphed so finely."

"We may encounter great dangers yet," said Henry.

"It is quite likely, but I have an impression, and upon this occasion at
least I am sure my impression is not wrong, that you will overcome them as
you have done before."

When he was gone, and every one of the five felt genuine regret at his
departure, they went down to the river, where their fleet was anchored,
and were welcomed by Adam Colfax.

"We're certainly going to-morrow," said the captain, "but nobody can tell
when we'll get to Fort Pitt."

It was indeed a fine fleet of canoes and boats to be propelled by paddle,
oar, and sail, and it bore a most precious cargo. Eight of the larger
boats carried a twelve pound brass cannon apiece to be used if need be on
the way, but destined for that far-distant and struggling army in the
northeast. Stored in the other boats and canoes were five hundred muskets,
mostly from France, barrels of powder, scores of bars of lead, precious
medicines worth their weight in gold, blankets, cloth for uniforms and
underclothing. It was the most valuable cargo ever started up the
Mississippi and there were many strong and brave men to guard it.

"We carry things both to kill and to cure," said Paul.

"An' we're goin', too!" said Long Jim, heaving again that mighty sigh of
relief. "That's the big thing!"

They started the next day at the appointed time. Henry, Paul, and Long Jim
were In one of the leading boats, and Tom Ross and Shif'less Sol were in
another near them. The population of New Orleans was on the levee to see
them go, and some wished them good luck and many wished them bad. The
majority of the French were for them, and the majority of the Spanish
against them.

But the five, now that the time was at hand, felt only elation. The breeze
blew strong and fresh over the mighty river that came from their
beloved-forests and vast unknown regions beyond. They seemed to feel in it
some of the tang and sparkle of the north.

"Good-bye, New Orleans," said Jim Hart, waving a long hand on a long arm;
"I'm glad I've seed you, I'm glad I've laid my weary head to rest inside
your walls fur a few nights, but I'm glad I don't stay in you, nor in any
other town. Good-bye."

One of the brass cannon fired a salute, cannon on the fort and the
galleon, Dona Isabel, replied. Adam Colfax gave the word, and at the same
instant hundreds of oars and paddles dipped into the muddy current of the
Mississippi. The great supply fleet leaped forward as if it were one
whole, and soon New Orleans and its intrigues sank under the curve behind
them.

Henry and Paul, although they did not have to work, pulled at the oars
with the others, and more than one man noticed how the mighty muscles of
Henry Ware's arm swelled and bunched as he made the boat leap forward. But
they did not maintain their high rate of speed long. As the rivers ran it
was a good two thousand miles to Fort Pitt, and they did not wish to
exhaust themselves on the first twenty. Long Jim at last let his oar rest
and patted Paul joyfully on the shoulder.

"Ain't you noticed nothin', Paul?" he asked.

"I've noticed a lot of river, and a fine little fleet on it."

"But somethin' better than that. Look at the trees, Paul, all along on
either side, an' not a house in sight, an' not a human bein' 'cept
ourselves, not a single trail uv smoke to dirty the sky. Nothin' but the
woods ez God made 'em. I tell you, Paul, it's pow'ful fine jest to live!"

Paul shared his enthusiasm, but his feelings went further. Beyond a doubt
they had been successful in their great journey to the south, but another
and large purpose was yet left. Their task had brought them into contact
with the world outside, and Paul devoutly hoped that the supply train
would reach Fort Pitt in time.

The day went smoothly on. The fleet kept its formation something, like
that of an arrow, with Adam Colfax's boat the point of the arrow, and
those containing the five just behind. The river assumed a wholly
wilderness aspect. Spanish or French boats were few and they gave the
fleet a wide berth. Wild fowl swarmed once more, and they saw a bear on
the bank regarding them with a half wise, half comic countenance.

When the sun was low the boats containing the five were turned toward the
land. There they found a cove in which the boats could be safely tied and
a fine grove in which they could cook, and which would also furnish a good
place for those who wished to sleep ashore. Henry Ware and Shif'less Sol
scouted in the country about but saw no sign of anything that might
disturb.

All five slept on land wrapped in their blankets under the trees, and
