Willet and Tayoga and they had a reunion.

"When we take Quebec," said Tayoga to Grosvenor, "Red Coat must go back
with us into the wilderness and learn to become a great warrior. We can
go beyond the Great Lakes and stay two or three years."

"I wish I could," laughed Grosvenor, "but that is one of the things I
must deny myself. If the war should be finished, I shall have to return
to England."

"St. Luc is in Quebec," said Willet. "We followed his trail a long
distance."

"Which means that our task here will be the harder," said Colden.

Robert went with Willet, Charteris and Tayoga the next day to Monckton's
camp at Point Levis, whence the English batteries had poured destruction
upon the lower town of Quebec, firing across the St. Lawrence, that most
magnificent of all rivers, where its channel was narrow. He could see
the houses lying in ashes or ruins, but above them the French flag
floated defiantly over the upper city.

"Montcalm and his lieutenants made great preparations to receive General
Wolfe," said Charteris. "As I was in Quebec then, I know something
about them, and I've learned more since I escaped. They threw up
earthworks, bastions and redoubts almost all the way from Quebec to
Montcalm's camp at Beauport. Over there at Beauport the Marquis' first
headquarters were located in a big stone house. Across the mouth of the
St. Charles they put a great boom of logs, fastened together by chains,
and strengthened further by two cut-down ships on which they mounted
batteries. Forces passing between the city and the Beauport camp crossed
the St. Charles on a bridge of boats, and each entrance of the bridge
was guarded by earthworks. In the city they closed and fortified every
gate, except the Palace Gate, through which they passed to the bridge or
from it. They had more than a hundred cannon on the walls, a floating
battery carried twelve more guns, and big ones too, and they had a lot
of gun-boats and fire ships and fire rafts. They gathered about fifteen
thousand men in the Beauport camp, besides Indians, with the regulars in
the center, and the militia on the flank. In addition to these there
were a couple of thousand in the city itself under De Ramesay, and I
think Montcalm had, all told, near to twenty thousand men, about double
our force, though 'tis true many of theirs are militia and we have a
powerful fleet. I suppose their numbers have not decreased, and it's a
great task we've undertaken, though I think we'll achieve it."

Robert looked again and with great emotion upon Quebec, that heart and
soul of the French power in North America. Truly much water had flowed
down the St. Lawrence since he was there before. He could not forget the
thrill with which he had first approached it, nor could he forget those
gallant young Frenchmen who had given him a welcome, although he was
already, in effect, an official enemy. And then, too, he had seen Bigot,
Pean, Cadet and their corrupt group who were doing so much to wreck the
fortunes of New France. Not all the valor of Montcalm, De Levis,
Bourlamaque, St. Luc and the others could stay the work of their
destructive hands.

The mills of God grind slowly, but they grind exceeding small. It was
true! The years had passed. The French victories in North America had
been numerous. Again and again they had hurled back the English and
Americans, and year after year they had dammed the flood. They had
struck terrible blows at Duquesne and Oswego, at William Henry and at
Ticonderoga. But the mills of God ground on, and here at last was the
might of Britain before Quebec, and Robert's heart, loyal as he was to
the mother country, always throbbed with pride when he recalled that his
own Americans were there too, the New England rangers and the staunch
regiment of Royal Americans, the bravest of the brave, who had already
given so much of their blood at Montmorency. In these world-shaking
events the Americans played their splendid part beside their English
kin, as they were destined to do one hundred and fifty-nine years later
upon the soil of Europe itself, closing up forever, as most of us hope,
the cleavage between nations of the same language and same ideals.

Robert looked long at Quebec on its heights, gleaming now in the sun
which turned it into a magic city, increasing its size, heightening the
splendor of the buildings and heightening, too, the formidable obstacles
over which Wolfe must prevail. Nature here had done wonders for the
defense. With its mighty river and mighty cliffs it seemed that a
capable general and a capable army could hold the city forever.

"Aye, it's strong, Lennox," said Charteris, who read his thoughts.
"General Wolfe, as I know, has written back to England that it's the
strongest place in the world, and he may be right, but we've had some
successes here, mingled with some failures. Aside from the Battle of
Montmorency most of the land fighting has been in our favor, and our
command of the river through our fleet is a powerful factor in our
favor. Yet, the short Quebec summer draws to a close, and if we take the
city we must take it soon. General Wolfe is lying ill again in a farm
house, but his spirit is not quenched and all our operations are
directed from his sick bed."

As Charteris spoke, the batteries on the Heights of Levis opened again,
pouring round shot, grape and canister upon the Lower Town. Fragments of
buildings crashed to the earth, and other fragments burst into flames.
Cannon on the frigates in the river also fired upon the devoted city and
from the great rock cannon replied. Coils of smoke arose, and, uniting
into a huge cloud, floated westward on the wind. It was a great
spectacle and Robert's heart throbbed. But he was sad too. He had much
pity for the people of Quebec, exposed to that terrible siege and the
rain of death.

"We've ravaged a good deal of the country around Quebec," continued
Charteris. "It's hard, but we're trying to cut off the subsistence of
the French army, and, on the other hand, bands of their Indian allies
raid our outposts and take scalps. It's the New England rangers mostly
that deal with these war parties, in which the French and Canadians
themselves take a part."

"Then Tandakora will find plenty of employment here," said Willet.
"Nothing will give him more joy than to steal upon a sentinel in the
dark and cut him down."

"And while Tandakora hunts our people," said Tayoga, "we will hunt him.
What better work can we do, Great Bear, than to meet these raiding
parties?"

"That's our task, Tayoga," replied the hunter.

As they turned away from the Heights of Levis the batteries were still
thundering, pouring their terrible flood of destruction upon the Lower
Town, and far up on the cliffs cannon were firing at the ships in the
river. Robert looked back and his heart leaped as before. The eyes of
the world he knew were on Quebec, and well it deserved the gaze of the
nations. It was fitting that the mighty drama should be played out
there, on that incomparable stage, where earth rose up to make a fitting
channel for its most magnificent river.

"It's all that you think it is," said Charteris, again reading his
thoughts; "a prize worth the efforts of the most warlike nations."

"The Quebec of the English and French," said Tayoga, "but the lost
Stadacona of the Mohawks, lost to them forever. Whatever the issue of
the war the Mohawks will not regain their own."

The others were silent, not knowing what to say. A little later a tall,
lank youth to whom Charteris gave a warm welcome met them.

"Been taking a look at the town, Leftenant?" he said.

"Aye, Zeb," replied Charteris. "I've been showing it to some friends of
mine who, however, have seen it before, though not under the same
conditions. These gentlemen are David Willet, Robert Lennox and Tayoga,
the Onondaga, and this is Zebedee Crane,[B] a wonderful scout to whom I
owe my escape from Quebec."

Willet seized the lank lad's hand and gave it a warm grasp.

"I've heard of you, Zeb Crane," he said. "You're from the Mohawk Valley
and you're one of the best scouts and trailers in the whole Province of
New York, or anywhere, for that matter."

"And I've heard uv all three uv you," said the boy, looking at them
appreciatively. "I wuz at Ticonderogy, an' two uv you at least wuz thar.
I didn't git to see you, but I heard uv you. You're a great hunter, Mr.
Willet, whom the Iroquois call the Great Bear, an' ez fur Tayoga I know
that he belongs to the Clan of the Bear uv the nation Onondaga, an' that
he's the grandest trailer the world hez ever seed."

Tayoga actually blushed under his bronze.

"The flattery of my friends should be received at a heavy discount," he
said in his prim, precise English.

"It ain't no flattery," said Zebedee. "It's the squar' an' solid truth.
I've heard tales uv you that are plum' impossible, but I know that they
hev happened all the same. Ef they wuz to tell me that you had tracked
the wild goose through the air or the leapin' salmon through the water
I'd believe 'em."

"It would be very little exaggeration," said Robert, earnestly. "Be
quiet, Tayoga! If we want to sing your praises we'll sing 'em and you
can't help it."

The five recrossed the river together, and went to Wolfe's camp below
the town facing the Montmorency, Charteris going back into camp with the
Royal Americans to whom he belonged, and the others going as free lances
with the New England rangers. Robert also resumed his acquaintance with
Captain Whyte and Lieutenant Lanhan of the _Hawk_, who were delighted to
meet him again.

Soon they found that there was much for them to do. Robert's heart bled
at the sight of the devastated country. Houses and farms were in ruins
and their people fled. Everywhere war had blazed a red path. Nor was it
safe for the rangers unless they were in strong parties. Ferocious
Indians roamed about and cut off all stragglers, sometimes those of
their own French or Canadian allies. Once they came upon the trail of
Tandakora. They found the dead bodies of four English soldiers lying
beside an abandoned farm house, and Tayoga, looking at the traces in the
earth, told the tale as truly as if he had been there.

"Tandakora and his warriors stood behind these vines," he said, going to
a little arbor. "See their traces and in the center of them the prints
left by the gigantic footsteps of the Ojibway chief. The house had been
plundered by some one, maybe by the warriors themselves, before the
soldiers came. Then the Ojibway and his band hid here and waited. It was
easy for them. The soldiers knew nothing of wilderness war, and they
came up to the house, unsuspecting. They were at the front door, when
Tandakora and his men fired. Three of them fell dead where they lie. The
fourth was wounded and tried to escape. Tandakora ran from behind the
vines. Here goes his trail and here he stopped, balanced himself and
threw his tomahawk."

"And it clove the wounded soldier's head," said Robert. "Here he lies,
telling the rest of the tale."

They buried the four, but they found new tragedies. Thus the month of
August with its successes and failures, its attacks and counter-attacks
dragged on, as the great siege of Quebec waged by Phipps and the New
Englanders nearly three-quarters of a century before had dragged.


    [A] The story of Edward Charteris is told in the author's novel, "A
        Soldier of Manhattan."

    [B] The story of Zeb Crane and his remarkable achievements is
        contained in the author's novel, "A Soldier of Manhattan."




CHAPTER XV

THE LONE CHATEAU


Despite his courage and the new resolution that he had acquired during
his long months on the island, Robert's heart often sank. They seemed to
make no progress with the siege of Quebec. Just so far had they gone and
they could go no farther. The fortress of France in the New World
appeared impregnable. There it was, cut clear against the sky, the light
shining on its stone buildings, proud and defiant, saying with every new
day to those who attacked it that it could not be taken, while Montcalm,
De Levis, Bougainville, St. Luc and the others showed all their old
skill in defense. They heard too that Bourlamaque after his retreat from
Ticonderoga and Crown Point was sitting securely within his lines and
intrenchments at Isle-aux-Noix and that the cautious Amherst would delay
longer and yet longer.

It was now certain that no help could be expected from Amherst and his
strong army that year. The most that he would do would be to keep
Bourlamaque and his men from coming to the relief of Quebec. So far as
the capital of New France was concerned the issue must be fought out by
the forces now gathered there for the defense and the offense, the
French and the Indians against the English and the Americans.

Robert realized more keenly every day that the time was short and
becoming shorter. Hot summer days were passing, nights came on crisp and
cool, the foliage along the king of rivers and its tributaries began to
glow with the intense colors of decay, there was more than a touch of
autumn in the air. They must be up and doing before the fierce winter
came down on Quebec. Military operations would be impossible then.

In this depressing time Robert drew much courage from Charteris, who had
been a prisoner a long time in Quebec, and who understood even more
thoroughly than young Lennox the hollowness of the French power in North
America.

"It is upheld by a few brave and skillful men and a small but heroic
army," he said. "In effect, New France has been deserted by the Bourbon
monarchy. If it were not for the extraordinary situation of Quebec,
adapted so splendidly to purposes of defense, we could crush the Marquis
de Montcalm in a short time. The French regulars are as good as any
troops in the world and they will fight to the last, but the Canadian
militia is not disciplined well, and is likely to break under a fierce
attack. You know, Lennox, what militiamen always are, no matter to what
nation they belong. They may fight and die like heroes at one time, and,
at another time, they may run away at the first fire, struck with panic.
What we want is a fair chance at the French army in the open. General
Wolfe himself, though cursed by much illness, never loses hope. I've had
occasion to talk with him more than once owing to my knowledge of Quebec
and the surrounding country, and there's a spirit for you, Lennox. It's
in an ugly body but no man was ever animated by a finer temper and
courage."

Robert and Charteris formed a great friendship, a true friendship that
lasted all their long lives. But then Robert had a singular faculty for
making friends. Charteris interested him vastly. He had a proud,
reserved and somewhat haughty nature. Many people thought him exclusive,
but Robert soon learned that his fastidiousness was due to a certain shy
quality, and a natural taste for the best in everything. Under his
apparent coldness lay a brave and staunch nature and an absolute
integrity.

Robert's interest in Charteris was heightened by the delicate cloud of
romance that floated about him, a cloud that rose from the hints thrown
forth now and then by Zebedee Crane. The young French lady in Quebec who
loved him was as beautiful as the dawn and she had the spirit of a
queen. Charteris lived in the hope that they might take Quebec and her
with it. But Robert was far too fine of feeling ever to allude to such
an affair of the heart to Charteris, or in truth to any one else.

It was a period of waiting and yet it was a period of activity. The
partisans were incessant in their ways. Robert heard that his old
friend, Langlade, was leading a numerous band against the English, and
the evidences of Tandakora's murderous ferocity multiplied. Nor were the
outlying French themselves safe from him. News arrived that he intended
an attack upon a chateau called Chatillard farther up the river but
within the English lines. A band of the New England rangers, led by
Willet, was sent to drive him off, and to destroy the Ojibway pest, if
possible. Robert, Tayoga and Zeb Crane went with him.

They arrived at the chateau just before twilight. It was a solid stone
building overlooking the St. Lawrence, and the lands about it had a
narrow frontage on the river, but it ran back miles after the old French
custom in making such grants, in order that every estate might have a
river landing. Willet's troops numbered about forty men, and, respecting
the aged M. de Chatillard, who was quite ill and in bed, they did not
for the present go into the house, eating their own supper on the long,
narrow lawn, which was thick with dwarfed and clipped pines and other
shrubbery.

But they lighted no fires, and they kept very quiet, since they wished
for Tandakora to walk into an ambush. The information, most of which had
been obtained by Zeb Crane, was to the effect that Tandakora believed a
guard of English soldiers was in the house. After his custom he would
swoop down upon them, slaughter them, and then be up and away. It was a
trick in which the savage heart of the Ojibway delighted, and he had
achieved it more than once.

The August night came down thick and dark. A few lights shone in the
Chateau de Chatillard, but Willet and his rangers stood in black gloom.
Almost at their feet the great St. Lawrence flowed in its mighty
channel, a dim blue under the dusky sky. Nothing was visible there save
the slow stream, majestic, an incalculable weight of water. Nothing
appeared upon its surface, and the far shore was lost in the night. It
seemed to Robert, despite the stone walls of the chateau by their side,
that they were back in the wilderness. It was a northern wilderness too.
The light wind off the river made him shiver.

The front door of the house opened and a figure outlined against the
light appeared. It was an old man in a black robe, tall, thin and
ascetic, and Robert seeing him so clearly in the light of a lamp that he
held in his hand recognized him at once. It was Father Philibert
Drouillard, the same whom he had defeated in the test of oratory in the
vale of Onondaga before the wise sachems, when so much depended on
victory.

"Father Drouillard!" he exclaimed impulsively, stepping forward out of
the shadows.

"Who is it who speaks?" asked the priest, holding the lamp a little
higher.

"Father Drouillard, don't you know me?" exclaimed Robert, advancing
within the circle of light.

"Ah, it is young Lennox!" said the priest. "What a meeting! And under
what circumstances!"

"And there are others here whom you know," said Robert. "Look, this is
David Willet who commands us, and here also is Tayoga, whom you remember
in the vale of Onondaga."

Father Drouillard saluted them gravely.

"You are the enemies of my country," he said, "but I will not deny that
I am glad to see you here. I understand that the savage, Tandakora,
means to attack this house to-night, thinking that it holds a British
garrison. Well, it seems that he will not be far wrong in his thought."

A ghost of a smile flickered over the priest's pale face.

"A garrison but not the garrison that he expects to destroy," said
Willet. "Tandakora fights nominally under the flag of France, but as you
know, Father, he fights chiefly to gratify his own cruel desires."

"I know it too well. Come inside. M. de Chatillard wishes to see you."

Willet, Robert, Tayoga and Zeb Crane went in, and were shown into the
bedroom where the Seigneur Louis Henri Anatole de Chatillard, past
ninety years of age, lay upon his last bed. He was a large, handsome old
man, fair like so many of the Northern French, and his dying eyes were
full of fire. Two women of middle years, his granddaughters, knelt
weeping by each side of his bed, and two servants, tears on their faces,
stood at the foot. Willet and his comrades halted respectfully at the
door.

"Step closer," said the old man, "that I may see you well."

