desired to fight one battle to prove that, in the open field, they were
more than a match for the mercenaries of King William.

The council and lords justices, who were aghast at the proclamation,
which threatened to destroy their hopes of dividing among themselves and
their friends all the lands of the Catholics of Ireland, did their best
to prevent its acceptance, by spreading rumours that it was a mere bait,
and that its promises would not be fulfilled; while Saint Ruth and his
French officers did their best, also, to set the Irish against it.

Saint Ruth, who was really a good officer, was conscious that, so far
from having gained credit, as he had expected from a command in Ireland,
the misfortunes which had happened were entirely attributed to him, and
he longed for an opportunity of wiping out the slur on his military
reputation. He therefore urged upon the Irish generals that Ginckle had
indeed gained but little; that all the hopes of William rested upon that
army alone; and that, with its defeat, they could demand and obtain any
terms they liked to lay down; besides which, he was able to assure them,
by his advices from France, that Louis was making preparations for
assisting them on a vastly larger scale than he had previously done.
Thus, from a combination of circumstances, the proclamation elicited no
response.

While the siege of Athlone was being carried on, the main body of
Sarsfield's cavalry remained, for the most part, in the camp near the
town; but commanders of small bodies of men, like the corps of Captain
Davenant, which were regarded as irregulars, had liberty of action. Some
made long raids to the east, and often spread confusion and dismay among
the enemy, by appearing suddenly when no Irish troops were believed to be
within a hundred miles. Some went down and joined the peasants, who were
keeping up desultory fighting in the neighbourhood of Cork, harassing the
English whenever they moved from one point to another, or sent out
parties to collect forage or provisions.

Captain Davenant, who had more than once respectfully urged upon
Sarsfield the immense benefit which would result, were the whole of the
Irish cavalry to place themselves upon the line of the enemy's
communication, finding that the Irish general was unmoved by his
arguments, several times endeavoured to carry out his ideas, as far as
could be done with his own small force.

The inactivity of the Irish horse, throughout the long sieges of Athlone
and Limerick, except only upon the occasion of the raid upon the siege
train, is almost inexplicable. They had nothing to fear from the enemy's
cavalry, to whom they proved themselves immensely superior, whenever they
met during the war, and they had it in their power, for months, to cut
the British communications and so oblige them, either to detach so large
a force to keep the roads open that they would have been unable to push
on the siege, and would indeed have been in danger of being attacked and
destroyed by the Irish infantry; or to raise the siege, and fall back
upon their bases, Dublin and Waterford.

The only possible explanations that can be offered are--first, that
Sarsfield, although a dashing commander in action, was possessed of no
military genius whatever; second, that he was prevented from moving by
the jealousy of the French commanders-in-chief, who did not wish to see
the credit of compelling the enemy to fall back monopolized by the Irish
cavalry; or, third, that Sarsfield saw the advantages which could be
obtained by throwing himself, with his cavalry, in the rear of the enemy,
but deliberately remained inactive rather than leave the French generals
to act, unchecked by his presence at headquarters. It can never be
decided to which of these alternatives it was due that the Irish cavalry
remained for so long a time inactive, and that William, and after him
Ginckle, were permitted, unmolested save by a few detached bodies of
horse, to maintain their long line of communications to their base,
unchecked.

Upon one of his excursions in the rear of the English army, Captain
Davenant's troops dashed down upon a convoy of waggons. The dragoons who
were escorting them were killed or driven off. The drivers were collected
in a group, for Captain Davenant always ordered that these men should not
be injured, as they were not combatants, and were in most cases obliged
to accompany their teams, which had been requisitioned for the service.

The men were collecting the waggons together, preparatory to setting them
on fire, when Walter, on riding near the group of drivers, heard himself
called by name. Turning round, he leapt from his horse and ran up to one
of the prisoners.

"My dear John!" he exclaimed, "I am glad indeed to see you. Why, what
brings you here?"

After exchanging hearty greetings, Walter led him away from the group,
and the two sat down together on a bank.

"What brings you here?" Walter repeated.

"All the waggons within miles round Dublin have been requisitioned," John
said; "and as our three were called for, my father suggested that I
should accompany them, to see that the horses were fed and cared for."

"Which are your waggons?" Walter asked.

"The three last in the column."

Walter immediately ran to his father, told him what had happened, and
begged that the three waggons should be exempted from the general
destruction. Captain Davenant at once rode up to the men, and ordered the
waggons to be unloaded and their contents added to the pyre which was
being prepared, but that the waggons themselves should be taken back a
quarter of a mile along the road, and left there under the charge of
their drivers, who were not to move until joined by their owner. He then
rode back, and shook hands with John.

"I am glad to see you," he said. "All are well, I hope, at both our
homes?"

"Quite well, sir."

"Thank God for that! Now, I must leave you to see that our work is
thoroughly carried out. You will find your waggons safe, a quarter of a
mile along the road. I will leave you to tell all the home news to
Walter, who will retell it to me afterwards."

"Now tell me all the news," Walter said, when they were together again.

"The news is not altogether pleasant," John replied. "The whole of the
country round Dublin is being harried by the cavalry in garrison there.
They pay no attention whatever to papers of protection, and care but
little whether those they plunder are Protestant or Catholic, friend or
foe. They go about in small parties, like bands of brigands, through the
country; and those who go to Dublin to obtain redress for their exactions
are received with indifference, and sometimes with insult, by the
authorities. Then, too, we have had trouble at home.

"My grandfather became more bigoted than ever, and would, if he had the
power, have annihilated every Catholic in Ireland. My father and he had
frequent quarrels, and I was in daily expectation of an open breach
between them, and of my father giving up his share of the property, and
taking us to England. He was a backslider, in my grandfather's eyes. The
tales of battle, plunder, and murder seemed to have taken the latter back
to his own fighting days; and he was rather inclined to consider the
generals as lukewarm, than to join in the general indignation at their
atrocious conduct.

"Even the sufferings of the Protestants did not seem to affect him. The
Lord's work, he said, cannot be carried on without victims. It horrified
me to hear him talk. If this was the religion of our fathers, I was fast
coming to the conclusion that it was little better than no religion at
all.

"I think my father and mother saw it in the same light, and the breach
between them and my grandfather daily widened. But I have not told you
the worst, yet. A party of cavalry rode up the other day, and were about,
as usual, to seize upon some cattle. My father was out, and my
grandfather stepped forward and asked them 'how they could lay it to
their consciences to plunder Protestants when, a mile or two away, there
were Catholics lording it over the soil--Catholics whose husbands and
sons were fighting in the ranks of the army of James Stuart?'

"I was in the house with my mother, but we heard what was said; and she
whispered to me to slip out behind, and find my father, and tell him what
was being done. I made off; but before I had gone a quarter of a mile, I
saw the soldiers riding off towards the castle, with my grandfather
riding at their head. I was not long in finding my father, who at once
called the men off from their work, and sent them off in all directions
to raise the country; and in an hour two hundred men, armed with any
weapon they could snatch up, were marching towards the castle, my father
at their head. There were Catholics and Protestants among them--the
latter had come at my father's bidding, the former of their own free
will.

"We hurried along, anxiously fearing every moment to see flames rise from
the castle. Fortunately, the soldiers were too busy in plundering to
notice our approach, and we pounced down upon them and seized them
unawares. They were stripping the place of everything worth carrying
away, before setting it on fire. We burst into the hall, and there was a
sight which filled my father and myself with anger and shame. Your
grandmother was standing erect, looking with dignity mingled with disdain
at my grandfather; while your mother, holding your brother's hands, stood
beside her. My grandfather was standing upon a chair; in his hand he held
a Bible, and was pouring out a string of denouncing texts at the ladies,
and was, at the moment we entered, comparing them to the wicked who had
fallen into a net.

"I don't think, Walter, his senses are quite right now. He is crazed with
religion and hate, and I believe, at the time, he fancied himself in the
meeting house. Anyhow, there he was, while two sergeants, who were
supposed to be in command of the troop, were sitting on a table, with a
flagon of wine between them, looking on with amusement. Their expression
changed pretty quickly, when we rushed in.

"It needed all my father's efforts to prevent the whole party being hung,
so furious were all the rescuers at the outrage upon the good ladies of
the castle. But my father pointed out to them that, although such a
punishment was well deserved, it would do harm rather than good to the
ladies. They had orders of protection from the lords justices; and he
should proceed at once, with four or five witnesses, to lay the matter
before the general at Dublin, and demand the punishment of the offenders.
But if the party took the law into their own hands, and meted out the
punishment the fellows deserved, the facts of the case would be lost
sight of. There would be a cry of vengeance for the murder, as it would
be called, of a party of soldiers, and it would serve as an excuse for
harrying the whole district with fire and sword.

"Having at last persuaded the angry tenants and peasantry to lay aside
their project of vengeance, my father went to the soldiers, who, tied
hand and foot, were expecting nothing short of death. He ordered all
their pistols and ammunition to be taken away, and their bonds to be
loosed; then told them that their escape had been a narrow one, and that,
with great difficulty, he had persuaded those who had captured them while
engaged in deeds of outrage and plunder to spare them; but that a
complaint would at once be made before the military authorities, and the
law would deal with them. Finally, they were permitted to mount and ride
off, after having been closely examined to see that they were taking with
them none of the plunder of the house.

"Everything was then carefully replaced as they had found it; and my
father at once rode off, with six of the leading tenants--three
Protestants and three Catholics--and laid a complaint before the general.
The latter professed himself much shocked, and lamented the impossibility
of keeping strict discipline among the various regiments stationed in the
towns. However, he went down with them at once to the barracks of the
regiment, ordered them to be formed up, and asked my father if he could
identify the culprits.

"My father and those with him picked out fifteen, including the two
sergeants, as having formed part of the body of plunderers; and the
general had the whole tied up and flogged severely, then and there, and
declared that, the next time an outrage upon persons who had received
letters of protection came to his ears, he would shoot every man who was
proved to have been concerned in it. He also gave orders that a
well-conducted noncommissioned officer, and four men, should be sent at
once to Davenant Castle, and should there take up their quarters as a
guard against any party of marauders, with the strictest orders to cause
no annoyance or inconvenience to the inhabitants of the castle.

"I learned afterwards that Mr. Conyers, who had been interesting himself
greatly on behalf of the ladies of the castle, is a great friend of the
lords justices, and other members of the council, and is also acquainted
with the general, which will account for the prompt measures taken to
punish the marauders--a very rare and exceptional matter, I can tell
you."

"I am sure we are greatly indebted to your father and you, for so
promptly taking measures to assist my mother," Walter said. "I have no
doubt the castle would have been burned, as well as plundered, if it had
not been for your rescue of them."

"It is not worth thinking about, Walter. We are heavily your debtors,
still, for the kindness of your father and yourself to me at Derry, and
indeed on all other occasions. Besides, it was the least we could do,
seeing that it was my grandfather's hatred of your family which brought
the matter about."

"What became of your grandfather," Walter asked, "when you interrupted
his sermon?"

"He fell down in a fit," John replied; "and perhaps it was the best thing
he could do, for I don't know what my father and he would have said to
each other, had it not been so. He was carried home, and he has not been
the same man since. I don't think the subject was ever alluded to between
my father and him; but I think that being balked, just at the moment when
he thought he had obtained the object of his hopes and prayers for the
last forty years, has almost broken his heart.

"He goes about the house, scarce speaking a word, and seems to have lost
almost all his energy. He has ceased to read the family prayers, and to
hold forth morning and night. I do think he considers that the Lord has
cheated him out of his lawful vengeance. It is awfully sad, Walter,
though it is strange, to see such a travesty of religion as the tenets of
my grandfather and some of the old men who, like him, represent the views
of Cromwell's soldiers.

"Their religion cannot be called true Christianity. It is the Judaism of
the times when the Jews were among the most ignorant of peoples. To me it
is most shocking, and I would infinitely rather be a Mohammedan than hold
such a faith as theirs. I thank God that my father and mother have shaken
off such a yoke, and brought me up according to the teaching of the New
Testament, rather than that of the Old."

By this time the waggons, with the exception of those under John
Whitefoot's charge, had been collected in a mass, and fire had been
applied to them. They were now a pile of flame. A few of the best and
fastest looking of the horses were set aside to be carried off by the
troop. The rest were shot, as the great object of the raids was to
deprive the English army of its means of transport.

The troop then mounted. Captain Davenant and Walter took a hearty
farewell of John, and intrusted him with hastily-written letters for
home; and as the smoke of the burning train would soon bring down any
parties of the enemy who happened to be in the neighbourhood, the troop
then rode off at full speed, and arrived safely at Athlone without
meeting with any further adventures.

After the fall of the city, Ginckle remained inactive some time, but,
finding that his proclamation had no effect in inducing the Irish to lay
down their arms, he reluctantly prepared to advance against them. In the
interval, he occupied himself in repairing the western wall of the city,
and, as he had been joined by several regiments sent out to reinforce
him, he resumed his advance with a force larger than that with which he
had commenced the siege of Athlone. Before starting, he issued the most
peremptory orders against a repetition of the acts which had so disgraced
his army, and had done so much harm to the cause by banding the whole
peasantry against them.

Saint Ruth chose his position with great skill. His camp extended more
than two miles, along a range of hills called the heights of Kilcomeden.
His right was protected by a rivulet, and by hills and marshes. On his
left was a deep glen. Beyond this, along his whole front, a vast bog
extended, in most places impassable for horse or foot. On the borders of
the bog, on the left, stood the ruins of the little castle of Aughrim,
occupying the only spot of firm ground which led to the camp.

To pass the bog at this point, it was necessary to go close by the castle
wall, where there was a broken path only wide enough for two men to pass
abreast. The passage on the right of the bog was more open, but it was
marshy and unsafe.

This position was much stronger than that which the Irish had held at the
battle of the Boyne, and whereas, on that occasion, they had been very
inferior in numbers to their assailants, they were now superior by some
regiments in number. In the point of artillery the English had here, as
at the Boyne, an overwhelming superiority.

Ginckle moved forward slowly and with caution, halting on the river Suck
until he had been joined by every available soldier in Ireland.

On the morning of the 12th of July, the British army halted on the edge
of the bog, that, like a great belt, encircled the Irish within it. The
morning was foggy, and the mist did not clear off until towards noon. The
Irish prepared for battle by having divine service performed at the head
of their regiments, and Dr. Stafford, chaplain to the royal regiment of
foot, and some other priests, passed through the ranks, urging upon the
men their duty and obligation, as soldiers and Irishmen, to make every
effort they could to rescue their country from the oppression of the
Prince of Orange, and his army of foreigners.

Ginckle, on his part, as at Athlone, distributed money among the troops,
and promised them the plunder of the enemy's camp. As the day cleared up,
the British army was put in motion, and a strong column advanced against
the enemy's right, where stood the house and grounds of Urachree,
occupied by some Irish horse. A strong detachment of Danish cavalry
headed the British column. They moved forward boldly, quickening their
pace as they approached the Irish; but, on the latter charging them at
full gallop, they wheeled about and rode off at once in disorder.
