together, as if they would forbid even the indignant river to force its
wild way betwixt them. _Is_ there a path through the frowning gorge
other than that rocky way which is fiercely held by the current? Yes,
there is a narrow road, painfully grooved by the hand of man out of the
mountain side, now running along like a gallery, now dropping down to
the brink of the stream. But the glittering array winds on. There is the
heavy tread of the foot-soldiers, the trampling of horse, the dull
rumble of the guns, the waving and flapping of the colours, and the
angry remonstrance of the Inn. But all else is still as a midnight
sleep, except, indeed, when the eagles of the crag, startled from their
eyries, raise their shrill cry as they spread their living wings above
the gilded eagles of France.

Suddenly a voice is heard far up amid the mists of the heights--not the
eagle's cry _this_ time--not the freak of a wayward echo--but human
words, which say "_Shall we begin?_" Silence! It is a host that holds
its breath and listens. Was it a spirit of the upper air parleying with
its kind? If so, it has its answer countersigned across the dark gulf.
"_Noch nicht!_"--"_Not yet!_" The whole invading army pause: there is a
wavering and writhing in the glittering serpent-length of that mighty
force which is helplessly uncoiled along the base of the mountain. But
hark! the voice of the hills is heard again, and it says "_Now!_"

_Now_, then, descends the wild avalanche of destruction, and all is
tumult, dismay, and death. The very crags of the mountain side, loosened
in preparation, come bounding, thundering down. Trunks and roots of pine
trees, gathering speed on their headlong way, are launched down upon the
powerless foe, mingled with the deadly hail of the Tyrolese rifles. And
this fearful storm descends along the whole line at once. No marvel that
two-thirds of all that brilliant invading army are crushed to death
along the grooved pathway, or are tumbled, horse and man, into the
choked and swollen river.

Enough of horrors! Who would willingly linger on the hideous details of
such a scene? Sorrowful that man should come, with his evil ambitions
and his fierce revenges, to stain and to spoil such wonders of beauty as
the hand of the Creator has here moulded. Sorrowful that man, in league
with the serpent, should writhe into such scenes as these, and poison
them with the virus of sin.

Richter




    Who loves not Knowledge? Who shall rail
      Against her beauty? May she mix
      With men and prosper! Who shall fix
    Her pillars? Let her work prevail.
     ... Let her know her place;
    She is the second, not the first,
    A higher hand must make her mild,
      If all be not in vain; and guide
      Her footsteps, moving side by side
    With wisdom, like the younger child.

Tennyson




MARSTON MOOR

(A Cavalier Song)


    To horse! to horse! Sir Nicholas, the clarion's
      note is high!
    To horse! to horse! Sir Nicholas, the big drum
      makes reply!
    Ere this hath Lucas marched, with his gallant
      cavaliers,
    And the bray of Rupert's trumpets grows fainter
      in our ears.
    To horse! to horse! Sir Nicholas! White Guy is
      at the door,
    And the raven whets his beak o'er the field of
      Marston Moor.

    Up rose the Lady Alice, from her brief and
      broken prayer,
    And she brought a silken banner down the narrow
      turret-stair,
    Oh! many were the tears that those radiant eyes
      had shed,
    As she traced the bright word "Glory" in the
      gay and glancing thread;
    And mournful was the smile which o'er those
      lovely features ran
    As she said, "It is your lady's gift, unfurl
      it in the van!"

    "It shall flutter, noble wench, where the best
      and boldest ride,
    Midst the steel-clad files of Skippon, the
      black dragoons of Pride;
    The recreant heart of Fairfax shall feel a
      sicklier qualm,
    And the rebel lips of Oliver give out a
      louder psalm,
    When they see my lady's gewgaw flaunt proudly
      on their wing,
    And hear her loyal soldier's shout, 'For God
      and for the King.'"

    'Tis noon. The ranks are broken, along the
      royal line
    They fly, the braggarts of the court! the
      bullies of the Rhine!
    Stout Langdale's cheer is heard no more, and
      Astley's helm is down,
    And Rupert sheathes his rapier, with a curse
      and with a frown,
    And cold Newcastle mutters, as he follows in
      their flight,
    "The German boor had better far have supped in
      York to-night."

    The knight is left alone, his steel-cap cleft
      in twain,
    His good buff jerkin crimsoned o'er with many
      a gory stain;
    Yet still he waves his banner, and cries amid
      the rout,
    "For Church and King, fair gentlemen! spur on,
      and fight it out!"
    And now he wards a Roundhead's pike, and now he
      hums a stave,
    And now he quotes a stage-play, and now he
      fells a knave.

    God aid thee now, Sir Nicholas! thou hast no
      thought of fear;
    God aid thee now, Sir Nicholas! for fearful odds
      are here!
    The rebels hem thee in, and at every cut and
      thrust,
    "Down, down," they cry, "with Belial! down with
      him to the dust."
    "I would," quoth grim old Oliver, "that Belial's
      trusty sword
    This day were doing battle for the Saints and
      for the Lord!"

    The Lady Alice sits with her maidens in her
      bower,
    The gray-haired warder watches from the castle's
      topmost tower;
    "What news? what news, old Hubert?"--"The battle's
      lost and won;
    The royal troops are melting, like mists before
      the sun!
    And a wounded man approaches;--I'm blind, and
      cannot see,
    Yet sure I am that sturdy step my master's step
      must be!"

    "I've brought thee back thy banner, wench, from
      as rude and red a fray,
    As e'er was proof of soldier's thew or theme for
      minstrel's lay!
    Here, Hubert, bring the silver bowl, and liquor
      quantum suff.,
    I'll make a shift to drain it yet, ere I part with
      boots and buff;--
    Though Guy through many a gaping wound is breathing
      forth his life,
    And I come to thee a landless man, my fond and
      faithful wife!

    "Sweet! we will fill our money-bags, and freight
      a ship for France,
    And mourn in merry Paris for this poor land's
      mischance:
    For if the worst befall me, why, better axe
      and rope,
    Than life with Lenthal for a king, and Peters
      for a pope!
    Alas! alas! my gallant Guy!--curse on the
      crop-eared boor,
    Who sent me with my standard, on foot from
      Marston Moor!"


W. M. Praed




LONDON


The huge city perhaps never impressed the imagination more than when
approaching it by night on the top of a coach you saw its numberless
lights flaring, as Tennyson says "like a dreary dawn." The most
impressive approach is now by the river through the infinitude of docks,
quays, and shipping. London is not a city, but a province of brick and
stone. Hardly even from the top of St. Paul's or of the Monument can
anything like a view of the city as a whole be obtained. It is
indispensable, however, to make one or the other of those ascents when a
clear day can be found, not so much because the view is fine, as because
you will get a sensation of vastness and multitude not easily to be
forgotten. There is or was, not long ago, a point on the ridge that
connects Hampstead with Highgate from which, as you looked over London
to the Surrey Hills beyond, the modern Babylon presented something like
the aspect of a city. The ancient Babylon may have vied with London in
circumference, but the greater part of its area was occupied by open
spaces; the modern Babylon is a dense mass of humanity. London with its
suburbs has five millions of inhabitants, and still it grows. It grows
through the passion which seems to be seizing mankind everywhere, on
this continent as well as in Europe, for emigration from the country
into the town, not only as the centre of wealth and employment, but as
the centre of excitement, and, as the people fondly fancy, of enjoyment.
The Empire and the commercial relations of England draw representatives
of trading communities or subject races from all parts of the globe, and
the faces and costumes of the Hindoo, the Parsi, the Lascar, and the
ubiquitous Chinaman, mingle in the motley crowd with the merchants of
Europe and America. The streets of London are, in this respect, to the
modern, what the great Place of Tyre must have been to the ancient
world. But pile Carthage on Tyre, Venice on Carthage, Amsterdam on
Venice, and you will not make the equal, or anything near the equal, of
London. Here is the great mart of the world, to which the best and
richest products are brought from every land and clime, so that if you
have put money in your purse you may command every object of utility or
fancy which grows or is made anywhere, without going beyond the circuit
of the great cosmopolitan city. Parisian, German, Russian, Hindoo,
Japanese, Chinese industry is as much at your service here, if you have
the all-compelling talisman in your pocket, as in Paris, Berlin, St.
Petersburg, Benares, Yokohama or Pekin. That London is the great
distributing centre of the world is shown by the fleets of the carrying
trade of which the countless masts rise along her wharves and in her
docks. She is also the bank of the world. But we are reminded of the
vicissitudes of commerce and the precarious tenure by which its empire
is held when we consider that the bank of the world in the middle of the
last century was Amsterdam.

The first and perhaps the greatest marvel of London is the commissariat.
How can the five millions be regularly supplied with food, and
everything needful to life, even with such things as milk and those
kinds of fruit which can hardly be left beyond a day? Here again we see
reason for concluding that though there may be fraud and scamping in the
industrial world, genuine production, faithful service, disciplined
energy, and skill in organization cannot wholly have departed from the
earth. London is not only well fed, but well supplied with water and
well drained. Vastly and densely peopled as it is, it is a healthy city.
Yet the limit of practicable extension seems to be nearly reached. It
becomes a question how the increasing multitude shall be supplied not
only with food and water but with air.

There is something very impressive in the roar of the vast city. It is a
sound of a Niagara of human life. It ceases not except during the hour
or two before dawn, when the last carriages have rolled away from the
balls and the market carts have hardly begun to come in. Only in
returning from a very late ball is the visitor likely to have a chance
of seeing what Wordsworth saw from Westminster Bridge:

    "Earth has not anything to show more fair;
    Dull would he be of soul who could pass by
    A sight so touching in its majesty;
    This City now doth, like a garment, wear
    The beauty of the morning; silent, bare,
    Ships, towers, domes, theatres, and temples lie
    Open unto the fields, and to the sky;
    All bright and glittering in the open air.
    Never did sun more beautifully steep
    In his first splendour, valley, rock or hill;
    Ne'er saw I, never felt, a calm so deep!
    The river glideth at his own sweet will:
    Dear God! the very houses seem asleep;
    And all that mighty heart is lying still!"

Goldwin Smith: "A Trip to England."




HOW THEY BROUGHT THE GOOD NEWS FROM GHENT TO AIX


    I sprang to the stirrup, and Joris, and he;
    I galloped, Dirck galloped, we galloped all three;
    "Good speed!" cried the watch, as the gate-bolts undrew;
    "Speed!" echoed the wall to us galloping through;
    Behind shut the postern, the lights sank to rest,
    And into the midnight we galloped abreast.

    Not a word to each other; we kept the great pace
    Neck by neck, stride by stride, never changing our place;
    I turned in my saddle and made its girths tight,
    Then shortened each stirrup, and set the pique right,
    Rebuckled the cheek-strap, chained slacker the bit,
    Nor galloped less steadily Roland a whit.

    'Twas moonset at starting; but while we drew near
    Lokeren, the cocks crew, and twilight dawned clear;
    At Boom, a great yellow star came out to see;
    At Dueffeld, 'twas morning as plain as could be;
    And from Mecheln church-steeple we heard the half-chime,
    So, Joris broke silence with, "Yet there is time!"

    At Aershot, up leaped of a sudden the sun,
    And against him the cattle stood black every one,
    To stare thro' the mist at us galloping past,
    And I saw my stout galloper Roland at last,
    With resolute shoulders, each butting away
    The haze, as some bluff river headland its spray:

    And his low head and crest, just one sharp ear bent back
    For my voice, and the other pricked out on his track;
    And one eye's black intelligence--ever that glance
    O'er its white edge at me, his own master, askance!
    And the thick heavy spume-flakes which aye and anon
    His fierce lips shook upwards in galloping on.

    By Hasselt, Dirck groaned; and cried Joris, "Stay spur!
    Your Roos galloped bravely, the fault's not in her,
    We'll remember at Aix"--for one heard the quick wheeze
    Of her chest, saw the stretched neck, and staggering knees,
    And sunk tail, and horrible heave of the flank,
    As down on her haunches she shuddered and sank.

    So we were left galloping, Joris and I,
    Past Looz and past Tongres, no cloud in the sky;
    The broad sun above laughed a pitiless laugh,
    'Neath our feet broke the brittle bright stubble like chaff;
    Till over by Dalhem a dome-spire sprang white,
    And "Gallop," gasped Joris, "for Aix is in sight!"

    "How they'll greet us!"--and all in a moment his roan
    Rolled neck and croup over, lay dead as a stone;
    And there was my Roland to bear the whole weight
    Of the news, which alone could save Aix from her fate,
    With his nostrils like pits full of blood to the brim,
    And with circles of red for his eye-sockets' rim.

    Then I cast loose my buff-coat, each holster let fall,
    Shook off both my jack-boots, let go belt and all,
    Stood up in the stirrup, leaned, patted his ear,
    Called my Roland his pet-name, my horse without peer;
    Clapped my hands, laughed and sang, any noise, bad or good,
    Till at length into Aix Roland galloped and stood!

    And all I remember is,--friends flocking round,
    As I sat with his head 'twixt my knees on the ground;
    And no voice but was praising this Roland of mine,
    As I poured down his throat our last measure of wine,
    Which (the burgesses voted by common consent)
    Was no more than his due who brought good news from Ghent.

Browning




AN INCIDENT OF THE FRENCH CAMP


    You know, we French stormed Ratisbon:
      A mile or so away,
    On a little mound, Napoleon
