"We will certainly try before the fourteen days are up, Reuben; but
with what success, of course we cannot say. But if we lay our plans
well, we ought to manage to get off."

The villagers readily understood the harangue of Reuben, and
without delay the whole scattered into the wood and, returning with
bundles of palm leaves and some strong posts, at once began to
erect the hut. Fires were lighted as the evening came on, and
before they ceased their labor the hut was finished.

During this time the girls had remained sitting patiently in front
of the shrine. The lads now offered them their hand, and escorted
them with grave ceremony to the hut. The palm leaves which did
service as a door were placed before it, and the boys proceeded to
dance, one after the other in solemn order, fourteen times round
the hut.

They then signified to the natives that provisions, fruit, and
water must be daily brought for the use of their future wives; and
having made another harangue, thanking the natives for their
exertions, and signifying future protection and benefits, they
retired under the shelter of the shed, and the village subsided to
its ordinary state of tranquility.

"There are two difficulties in the way of making our escape," Ned
said. "In the first place, it is useless to think of leaving this
island, until we have a sufficient stock, of provisions and water
to put in a canoe, to last us until we can get back to Ternate. Did
we put into any island on the way, our position might be ten times
as bad as it now is. Here at least we are well treated and honored
and, did we choose, could no doubt live here in a sort of heathen
comfort, for the rest of our lives; just as many white sailors on
the western isles have turned natives, and given up all thought of
ever returning to their own country.

"The Golden Hind was four days on her journey from Ternate to the
place where she refitted; another two to the spot where she went on
the reef. The wind was very light, and her speed was not above five
knots an hour. We should be able to paddle back in the course of
ten days, and must take provisions sufficient for that time.

"The first point, of course, will be to find whether the old ship
is still on the reef. If she is not there she may have succeeded in
getting off, or she may have gone to pieces. I trust however that
the admiral, who is full of resource, has managed to get her off in
safety. He will, no doubt, have spent a day or two in looking for
us; but finding no signs of us, in the island to which we were
sent, or in the other lying in sight to the southward, he will have
shaped his way for the Cape.

"The first difficulty, then, is to procure sufficient provisions.
The next is to make our escape unseen. The four natives who, night
and day, watch at the corners of this shed, mean it as a great
honor, no doubt; but, like many other honors, it is an unpleasant
one. Our only plan will be to seize and gag them suddenly, each
pouncing upon one.

"Then there is the fear that the natives, who are, I must say, the
most restless sleepers I ever saw, may in their wanderings up to
look at us find that we have gone, before we are fairly beyond
reach of pursuit; for one of their great canoes will travel at
least two feet to our one.

"Hitherto we have only taken such provisions, from the piles they
have offered us, as were sufficient for our day's wants, and left
the rest for them to take away again next morning. In future we had
best, each day, abstract a considerable quantity; and place it
conspicuously in the center of this shed. The people will perhaps
wonder, but will probably conclude that we are laying it by, to
make a great feast upon our wedding day.

"As to water, we must do with the calabashes which they bring the
day before, and with the milk which the cocoas contain, and which
is to the full as quenching as water. With a good number of cocoas,
we ought to be able to shift for some days without other food; and
there is, indeed, an abundance of juice in many of the other fruits
which they offer us."

This programme was carried out. Every morning the lads danced in
solemn procession round the hut, lessening their rounds by one each
day. Daily the heap of fruit, dried fish, and vegetables under the
shed increased; and the natives, who believed that their new
deities were intent upon the thoughts of marriage, had no suspicion
whatever of any desire, on their part, to escape.

Having settled how to prevent their escape being detected before
morning, they accustomed themselves to go to sleep with the cloths,
woven of the fiber of the palm with which the natives had supplied
them, pulled over their heads.

Seven days after the fight with the other islanders, the lads
judged that the pile of provisions was sufficiently large for their
purpose, and determined upon making the attempt that night. A canoe
of about the size that they desired, which had been used during the
day for fishing, lay on the shore close to the water's edge.

They waited until the village was fairly hushed in sleep. An hour
later they believed that the four guards--or worshipers, for it
struck them that their attendants partook partly of both
characters--were beginning to feel drowsy; and each of the boys,
having furnished himself with a rope of twisted coconut fiber,
stole quietly up to one of these men.

To place their hands over their mouths, to seize and throw them
upon their faces, was but the work of a moment; and was
accomplished without the least noise, the natives being paralyzed
by the sudden and unexpected assault. A piece of wood was shoved
into the mouth of each, as a gag; and secured by a string, passing
round the back of the head, and holding it in its place. Their arms
and legs were tied, and they were set up against the posts, in the
same position they had before occupied.

Four of the great effigies were then taken from their places, and
laid down upon the ground and covered over with the mats, so that
to any casual observer they presented exactly the same appearance
as the boys, sleeping there.

Then, loading themselves with provisions, the boys stole backwards
and forwards, quietly, to the boat. Once they had to pause, as a
sleepless native came out from his hut, walked up to the shrine,
and bowed himself repeatedly before the supposed deities.
Fortunately he perceived nothing suspicious, and did not notice the
constrained attitude of the four guardians. When he retired the
boys continued their work, and soon had the whole of the store of
cocoas and other provisions in the canoe, together with some
calabashes of water.

Then with some difficulty they launched the boat and, taking their
places, paddled quietly away from the island. Once fairly beyond
the bay, they laid themselves to their work, and the light boat
sped rapidly across the waters. In order that they might be sure of
striking the point where they had left the ship, they made first
for the island where they had been captured, and when day broke
were close beside it. They then shaped their course northwards, and
after two hours' paddling were in sight of the low island, which
they had first visited. By noon they reached the spot where, as
they judged, the Golden Hind had gone on the reef; but no sign
whatever of her was to be discovered. By the position in which the
island they had left lay they were sure that, although they might
be two or three miles out in their direction, they must be within
sight of the vessel, were she still remaining as they had left her.

There had been no great storm since she had grounded; and it was
unlikely, therefore, that she could have gone entirely to pieces.
This afforded them great ground for hope that she had beaten off
the reef, and proceeded on her voyage. Hitherto they had been
buoyed up with the expectation of again meeting their friends; but
they now felt a truly unselfish pleasure, at the thought that their
comrades and admiral had escaped the peril which threatened the
downfall of their hopes, and the termination of an enterprise
fairly and successfully carried out, so far.

There was nothing now for them but to make for Ternate. They found
no difficulty whatever in doing without water, their thirst being
amply quenched by the milk of the cocoas, and the juice of the
guavas and other fruits. They paddled for two days longer, working
steadily all day and far into the night, and passed one or two
islands.

In the course of the next day's passage they went within a short
distance of another, and were horrified at seeing, from the narrow
bay, a large war canoe put out, and make rapidly towards them.

They had already talked over what would be their best course in
such a contingency, and proceeded at once to put their plans into
execution. They had, at starting, taken with them a supply of the
paints used in their decoration; and with these they proceeded to
touch up the coloring on their faces and white shirts, and on the
strange ornaments which had been affixed to their heads. Two of
them now took their place, one at the stern and the other at the
bow of the canoe. The other two stood up, and paddled very quietly
and slowly along; and as the canoe approached rapidly, the four
broke into a song--one of the old Devonshire catches, which they
had often sung together on board ship.

The war canoe, as it approached, gradually ceased paddling. The
aspect of this small boat, paddling quietly along and taking no
heed of their presence, filled its occupants with surprise. But
when the way on their canoe drifted them close to it, and they were
enabled to see the strange character of the freight, a panic of
astonishment and alarm seized them. That a boat, navigated by four
gods, should be seen proceeding calmly along the ocean, alone, was
a sight for which Indian legend gave them no precedent whatever;
and after gazing for a while, in superstitious dread at the strange
spectacle, they turned their boats' head and paddled rapidly back
to shore.

For an hour or two the boys continued their course, in the same
leisurely manner; but when once convinced that they were out of
sight of their late visitors, they again sat down, and the four
stretched themselves to their work.

On the evening of that day there was a heavy mist upon the water.
The stars were with difficulty seen through it, and the lads were
all convinced that a change of weather was at hand. Before
nightfall had set in, an island had been seen at a short distance
to the north, and they decided at once to make for this; as, if
caught in mid ocean by a storm, they had little hope of weathering
it in a craft like that in which they were placed; although the
natives, habituated to them, were able to keep the sea in very
rough weather in these little craft; which, to an English eye,
appeared no safer than cockleshells.

The boys rowed with all their strength in the direction in which
the island lay, but before they reached it sharp puffs of wind
struck the water, and the steerage of the canoe became extremely
difficult. Presently, however, they heard the sound of a dull roar,
and knew that this was caused by the slow heaving swell, of which
they were already sensible, breaking upon a beach.

Ten minutes later they were close to the shore. Had it been
daylight, they would have coasted round the island to search for a
convenient spot for landing; but the wind was already rising, so
fast that they deemed it better to risk breaking up their canoe,
than to run the hazard of being longer upon the sea.

Waiting, therefore, for a wave, they sped forward, with all their
strength. There was a crash, and then they all leaped out together
and, seizing the canoe, ran her up on the beach, before the next
wave arrived.

"I fear she has knocked a great hole in her bottom," Reuben said.

"Never mind," Ned replied. "We shall be able to make a shift to
mend it. The great point, now, is to drag it up so high among the
bushes, that it will not be noticed in the morning by any natives
who may happen to be about. Until this storm is over, at any rate,
we have got to shelter here."

The canoe, laden as she still was with provisions, was too heavy to
drag up; but the boys, emptying her out, lifted her on their
shoulders and carried her inland; until, at a distance of some
sixty or seventy yards, they entered a grove of coconut trees. Here
they laid her down, and made two journeys back to the beach to
fetch up their provisions, and then took refuge in the grove;
thankful that they had escaped on shore in time, for scarcely had
they landed when the hurricane, which had been brewing, burst with
terrific force.

Seas of immense height came rolling in upon the shore. The trees of
the grove waved to and fro before it, and shook the heavy nuts
down, with such force that the boys were glad to leave it and to
lie down on the open beach, rather than to run the risk of having
their skulls fractured by these missiles from above. The sound of
the wind deadened their voices, and even by shouting they could not
make themselves heard. Now and then, above the din of the storm,
was heard the crash of some falling tree; and even as they lay,
they were sometimes almost lifted from the ground by the force of
the wind.

For twenty-four hours the hurricane continued, and then cleared as
suddenly as it had commenced. The lads crept back to the grove,
refreshed themselves with the contents of two or three cocoas
apiece, and then, lying down under the canoe, which they had taken
the precaution of turning bottom upwards, enjoyed a peaceful sleep
till morning.




Chapter 20: A Portuguese Settlement.



The day broke bright and sunny. The first care of the boys was to
examine their canoe; and they found, as they had feared, that a
huge hole had been made, in her bottom, by the crash against the
rocks on landing. They looked for some time with rueful
countenances at it; and then, as usual, turned to Ned, to ask him
what he thought had best be done.

"There can be no doubt," he said, "that the natives make a sort of
glue out of some trees or shrubs growing in these islands, and we
shall have to endeavor to discover the tree from which they obtain
it. We can, of course, easily pull off the bark from some tree,
which will do to cover the hole. The great point is to find some
substance which will make it water tight."

The grove was a very large one, and appeared to extend along the
whole coast. Seaward, it was formed entirely of cocoa trees, but
inland a large number of other trees were mingled with the palms.
All day the boys attempted to find some semblance of gum oozing
from these trees. With sharp pieces of shell they made incisions in
the bark of each variety that they met with, to see if any fluid
exuded which might be useful for this purpose, but in vain.

"If we can kill some animal or other," Ned said, "we might boil
down its sinews and skin and make glue; as Tom and myself did, to
mend our bows with, among the Indians on the pampas. But even then,
I question whether the glue would stand the action of the water."

As to their subsistence they had no uneasiness. Besides the cocoas,
fruit of all sorts abounded. In the woods parrots and other birds
flew screaming among the branches at their approach, and although
at present they had no means of shooting or snaring these
creatures, they agreed that it would be easy to construct bows and
arrows, should their stay be prolonged. This, however, they shrank
from doing, as long as any possible method of escape presented
itself. Were it absolutely necessary, they agreed that they could
burn down a tree and construct a fresh canoe; but they were by no
means sanguine as to their boat-building capabilities, and were
reluctant to give up the idea of continuing their voyage in their
present craft, as long as a possibility of so doing remained.

So they passed four days; but succeeded in finding no gum, or other
substance, which appeared likely to suit their purpose.

"I should think," Reuben said one day, "that it would be possible
to make the canoe so buoyant that she would not sink, even if
filled with water."

"How would you do that?" Tom asked. "There are many light woods, no
doubt, among the trees that we see; but they would have to remain a
long time to dry, to be light enough to be of any use."

"I was thinking," Reuben said, "that we might use coconuts. There
are immense quantities upon the trees, and the ground is covered
with them, from the effects of the late gale. If we strip off the
whole of the outside husk, and then make holes in the little eyes
at the top and let out the milk, using young ones in which the
flesh has not yet formed, and cutting sticks to fit tightly into
the holes, they would support a considerable weight in the water. I
should think that if we treated several hundred nuts in this way,
put them in the bottom of the canoe, and keep them in their places
by a sort of net, which we might easily make from the fibers of the
cocoas, the boat would be buoyant enough to carry us."

The idea struck all as being feasible, and Reuben was much
congratulated upon his inventive powers. Without delay, they set to
work to carry out the plan. A piece of thin bark was first taken
and, by means of a long thorn used as a needle, was sewn over the
hole in the canoe, with the fibers of the cocoa. Then a large pile
of nuts was collected, and the boys set to work at the task of
emptying them of their contents. It took them some hours' work to
make and fit the pegs. Another two days were spent in manufacturing
a net, to stretch across the boat above them.

The nuts were then placed in the boat, the net put into shape and,
choosing a calm night for their trial--for they feared, during the
daytime, to show themselves beyond the margin of the forest--they
placed it in the water, and paddled a short distance out.

They found that their anticipations were justified, and that the
flotation of the cocoas was amply sufficient to keep the boat
afloat. She was, of course, far lower in the water than she had
before been, and her pace was greatly deteriorated. This, however,
they had expected and, returning to shore, they watched for the
next night. Then, taking in a load of provisions, they started at
once upon their way.

It was weary work now, for the water-logged canoe was a very
different boat to the light bark, which had yielded so easily to
their strokes. Fortunately, however, they met with no misadventure.
The weather continued calm. They were unseen, or at least not
followed, from any of the islands that they passed on their way.
But it was ten days after their final start before a large island,
which they all recognized as Ternate, was seen rising above the
water.

"Easy all," Ned said. "We may be thankful, indeed, that we have
arrived safely in sight of the island. But now that we are close,
and there is no fear of tempests, had we not better talk over
whether, after all, we shall land at Ternate?"

"Not land at Ternate?" the others exclaimed in consternation; for
indeed, the work during the last few days had been very heavy, and
they were rejoicing at the thought of an end to their labors "Why,
we thought it was arranged, all along, we should stop at Ternate."

"Yes, but we arranged that because at Ternate, alone, there seemed
a certainty of a welcome. But, as you know, Tidore only lies twelve
miles away from Ternate; and from the position we are now in, it
will not be more than five or six miles farther.

"You see, when we were there, the king was preparing for a war with
the Portuguese in Tidore, and he would certainly expect us to
assist him, and probably to lead his fighting men."

"But we should have no objection to that," Reuben said.

"Not in the least," Ned replied. "But you see, if we are ever to
get back to England, it must be through the Portuguese. Their ships
alone are to be found in these seas, and were we to join the King
of Ternate in an attack upon them, whether successful or not, we
could never hope to be received in Portuguese ships; and should
probably, indeed, be taken to Goa, and perhaps burned there as
heretics, if we were to seek an asylum on board.

"What do you think?"

Viewed in this light, it certainly appeared more prudent to go to
Tidore, and after some little discussion the boat's head was turned
more to the west, and the lads continued their weary work in
paddling the water-logged canoe. So slowly did she move that it was
late at night before they approached the island. They determined
not to land till morning, as they might be mistaken for natives,
and attacked. They therefore lay down in the canoe and went to
sleep, when within about a mile of the island; and the next morning
paddled along its shore until they saw some canoes hauled up,
together with an English boat, and supposed that they were at the
principal landing place of the island.

