tones through the trumpet from the officer balancing himself on the
Yarmouth's rail by holding on to a back-stay.  "Why don't you answer?"

"Ahoy the ship!" replied Seymour at last through his own trumpet.
"What ship is that?"

"His Britannic majesty's ship of the line, Yarmouth, Captain Vincent.
Who are you?  Answer, or I will fire!"

The flying boom of the Randolph was just pointing past the Yarmouth's
quarter, and the two ships were abreast each other; now, if ever, was
the time for action.

"This is the American Continental ship, Randolph, Captain Seymour,"
cried the latter, through the trumpet, in a voice heard in every part
of the ship of the line.

At least two hearts in the Yarmouth were powerfully affected by that
announcement.  Katharine's leaped within her bosom at the sound of her
lover's voice, and beat madly while she revelled in thought in his
proximity; and then as she noticed again the fearful odds with which he
was apparently about to contend, her heart sank into the depths once
more.  In one second she thrilled with pride, quivered with love,
trembled with despair.  He was there--he was hers--he would be killed!
She gripped the rail hard and clenched her teeth to keep from screaming
aloud his name, while her gaze strained out upon his handsome figure.
Pride, love, death,--an epitome of human life in that fleeting
moment,--all were hers!

On the main-deck of the frigate the name carried consternation to
Lieutenant Lord Desborough.  So Seymour was alive again!  Was that the
end of my lord's chance?  No.  Joy!  The rebel was under the guns of
the battle-ship!  Never, vowed the lieutenant, should guns be better
served than those under his command.  Unless the man surrendered, he
was doomed.  So, he spoke eagerly to his men, bidding them take good
aim and waste no shot, never doubting the inevitable issue.  These
thoughts took but a moment, however.  Beauchamp, who had done the
talking, now stepped aft to Captain Vincent's side, and replied to
Seymour's hail by calling out,--

"Do you strike, sir?"

"Yes, yes, of course; that's what we came down here for.  We'll strike
fast enough," was the answer.

A broad smile lighted up Captain Vincent's face; he turned to the
colonel, laughing, and said with a scarcely veiled sneer,--

"I told you they were not up to it.  The cad! he might have fired one
shot at least for the honor of his flag, don't you see?"

The colonel with a sinking heart could not see at all.  Cowardice in
Seymour, in any officer, was a thing he could not understand.  The
world turned black before Katharine.  What! strike without a blow!  Was
this her hero?  Rather death than a coward!  In spite of her faith in
her lover, as she heard what appeared to be a pusillanimous offer of
surrender, Desborough's chances took a sudden bound upward, while that
gentleman cursed the cowardice of his enemy and rival, which would
deprive him of a pleasing opportunity of blowing him out of the water.
Most of the men at the different guns relaxed their eager watchfulness,
while sneers and jeers at the "Yankee" went up on all sides.

"Heave to, then," continued Beauchamp, peremptorily and with much
disgust, "and send a boat aboard!"

"Ay, ay, sir!"

Oh, it was true, then; he was going to surrender tamely without--

"Stand by!" there was a note of preparation in the words in spite of
Seymour's effort to give them the ordinary intonation of a commonplace
order,--a note which had so much meaning to Katharine's sensitive ear
that her heart stopped its beating for a moment as she waited for the
next word.  It came with a roar of defiance.  "Back the maintopsail!"
But the braces were kept fast and the unexpected happened.  In an
instant sheets of flame shot out from the muzzles of the black guns of
the Randolph, which were immediately wreathed and shrouded in clouds of
smoke.  At the moment of command Seymour had quickly ordered the helm
shifted suddenly, and the Randolph had swung round so that she lay at a
broad angle off the quarter of the Yarmouth.  The thunderous roar of
the heavy guns at short range was immediately followed by the crashing
of timber, as the heavy shot took deadly effect, amid the cheers and
yells and curses and groans and shrieks of the wounded and startled men
on the liner, while three hearty cheers rang out from the Randolph.

The advantage of the first blow in the grim game, the unequal combat,
was with the little one.

"How now, captain!" shouted the colonel, in high exultation.  "Won't
fight, eh!  What do you call this?"

"Fire! fire!  Let him have it, men, and be damned to you!  The man 's a
hero; 't was cleverly done," roared the captain, excitedly.  "I
retract.  Give it to him, boys!  Give it to the impudent rebel!" he
roared.

Katharine, forgot by every one in the breathless excitement of the past
few moments, bowed her head on her hands on the rail, and breathed a
prayer of thankfulness, oblivious of everything but that her lover had
proved himself worthy the devotion her heart so ungrudgingly extended
him.  There was great confusion on board the Yarmouth from this sudden
and unexpected discharge, which, delivered at short range, had done no
little execution on the crowded ship; but the officers rallied their
men speedily with cool words of encouragement.

"Steady, men, steady."

"Give it back to them."

"Look sharp now."

"Aim!  Fire!"

And the forty-odd heavy guns roared out in answer to the determined
attack.  The effect of such a broadside at close range would have been
frightful, had not the Randolph drawn so far ahead, and her course been
so changed, that a large part of it passed harmlessly astern of her.
One gun, however, found its target, and that was one aimed and fired by
the hand of Lord Desborough himself: a heavy shot, a thirty-two, from
one of the massive lower-deck guns of the Yarmouth, which the pleasant
weather permitted them to use effectively, came through one of the
after gun-ports of the Randolph, and swept away the line of men on the
port side of the gun.  Some of the other shot did slight damage also
among the spars and gear, and several of the crew were killed or
wounded in different parts of the ship; but the Randolph was
practically unharmed, and standing boldly down to cross the stern of
the Yarmouth to rake her.  But the English captain was a seaman, every
inch of him, and his ship could not have been better handled; divining
his bold little antagonist's purpose, the Yarmouth's helm was put up at
once, and in the smoke she fell off and came before the wind almost as
rapidly as did the Randolph, her promptness frustrating the endeavor,
as Seymour was only able to make an ineffectual effort to rake her, as
she flew round on her heels.  The starboard battery of the Yarmouth had
been manned as she fell off, and the port battery of the Randolph was
rapidly reloaded again.  The manoeuvre had given the Englishmen the
weather-gage once more, the two ships now having the wind on the port
quarter.  The two batteries were discharged simultaneously, and now
began a running fight of near an hour's duration.

Seymour was everywhere.  Up and down the deck he walked, helping and
sustaining his men, building up new gun's crews out of the shattered
remains of decimated groups of men, lending a hand himself on a tackle
on occasion; cool, calm, unwearied, unremitting, determined, he
desperately fought his ship as few vessels were ever fought before or
since, imbuing, by his presence and example and word, his men with his
own unquailing spirit, until they died as uncomplainingly and as nobly
as did those prototypes of heroes,--another three hundred in the pass
at Thermopylae!

The guns were served on the Randolph with the desperate rapidity of men
who, awfully pressed for time, had abandoned hope and only fought to
cripple and delay before they were silenced; those on the Yarmouth, on
the contrary, were fired with much more deliberation, and did dreadful
execution.  The different guns were disabled on the Randolph by heavy
shot; adjacent ports were knocked into one, the sides shattered, boats
smashed, rails knocked to pieces, all of the weather-shrouds cut, the
mizzenmast carried away under the top, and the wreck fell into the
sea,--fortunately, on the lee side, the little body of men in the top
going to a sudden death with the rest.  The decks were slippery with
blood and ploughed with plunging shot, which the superior height of the
Yarmouth permitted to be fired with depressed guns from an elevation.
Solid shot from the heavy main-deck batteries swept through and through
the devoted frigate; half the Randolph's guns were useless because of
the lack of men to serve them; the cockpit overflowed with the wounded;
the surgeon and his mates, covered with blood, worked like butchers, in
the steerage and finally in the ward room; dead and dying men lay where
they fell; there were no hands to spare to take them below, no place in
which they could lie with safety, no immunity from the searching hail
which drove through every part of the doomed ship.  Still the men,
cheered and encouraged by their officers, stood to their guns and
fought on.  Presently the foretopmast went by the board also, as the
long moments dragged along,  Seymour was now lying on the quarter-deck,
a bullet having broken his leg, another having made a flesh-wound in
his arm; he had refused to go below to have his wounds dressed, and one
of the midshipmen was kneeling by his side, applying such unskilful
bandages as he might to the two bleeding wounds.  Nason had been sent
for, and was in charge, under Seymour's direction.  That young man, all
his nervousness gone, was most ably seconding his dauntless captain.

The two ships were covered with smoke.  It was impossible to tell on
one what was happening on the other; but the steady persistence with
which the Randolph clung to her big enemy had its effect on the
Yarmouth also, and the well-delivered fire did not allow that vessel
any immunity.  In fact, while nothing like that on the frigate, the
damage was so great, and so many men had fallen, that Captain Vincent
determined to end the conflict at once by boarding the frigate.  The
necessary orders were given, and a strong party of boarders was called
away and mustered on the forecastle, headed by Beauchamp and Hollins;
among the number were little Montagu, with other midshipmen.  Taking
advantage of the smoke and of the weather-gage, the Yarmouth was
suddenly headed for the Randolph.  As the enormous bows of the
line-of-battle ship came slowly shoving out of the smoke, towering
above them, covered with men, cutlass or boarding pike in hand, Seymour
discerned at once the purpose of the manoeuvre.  Raising himself upon
his elbow to better direct the movement,--

"All hands repel boarders!" he shouted, his voice echoing through the
ship as powerfully as ever.

This was an unusual command, as it completely deprived the guns of
their crews; but he rightly judged that it would take all the men they
could muster to repel the coming attack, and none but the main-deck
guns of the Yarmouth would or could be fired, for fear of hitting their
own men in the melee on the deck.  The Randolph was a wreck below, at
best; but while anything held together above her plank shears, she
would be fought.  The men had reached that desperate condition when
they ceased to think of odds, and like maddened beasts fought and raved
and swore in the frenzy of the combat.  The thrice-decimated crew
sprang aft, rallying in the gangway to meet the shock, Nason at their
head, followed close by old Bentley, still unwounded.  As the bow of
the Yarmouth struck the Randolph with a crash, one or two wounded men,
unable to take part in repelling the boarders but still able to move,
who had remained beside the guns, exerted the remaining strength they
possessed to discharge such of the pieces as bore, in long raking
shots, through the bow of the liner; it was the last sound from their
hot muzzles.

The Yarmouth struck the Randolph just forward of the mainmast; the men,
swarming in dense masses on the rail and hanging over the bowsprit
ready to leap, dropped on her deck at once with loud cheers.  A sharp
volley from the few marines left on the frigate checked them for a
moment,--nobody noticing at the time that the Honorable Giles had
fallen in a limp heap back from the rail upon his own deck, the blood
staining his curly head; but they gathered themselves together at once,
and, gallantly led, sprang aft, handling their pistols and pikes and
waving their cutlasses.  Nason was shot in a moment by Hollins' pistol,
Beauchamp was cut in two by a tremendous sweep of the arm of the mighty
Bentley, and the combat became at once general.  Slowly but surely the
Americans were pressed back; the gangways were cleared; the
quarter-deck was gained; one by one the brave defenders had fallen.
The battle was about over when Seymour noticed a man running out in the
foreyard of the Yarmouth with a hand-grenade.  He raised his pistol and
fired; the man fell; but another resolutely started to follow him.

Bentley and a few other men, and one or two officers and a midshipman,
were all who were able to bear arms now.

"Good-by, Mr. Seymour," cried Bentley, waving his hand and setting his
back against the rail nearest to the Yarmouth, which had slowly swung
parallel to the Randolph and had been lashed there.  The old man was
covered with blood from two or three wounds, but still undaunted.  Two
or three men made a rush at him; but he held them at bay, no man caring
to come within sweep of that mighty arm which had already done so much,
when a bullet from above struck him, and he fell over backward on the
rail mortally wounded.

Seymour raised his remaining pistol and fired it at the second man, who
had nearly reached the foreyard arm; less successful this time, he
missed the man, who threw his grenade down the hatchway.  Seymour
fainted from loss of blood.

"Back, men! back to the ship, all you Yarmouths!" cried Captain
Vincent, as he saw the lighted grenade, which exploded and ignited a
little heap of cartridges left by a dead powder-boy before the
magazine.  Alas! there was no one there to check or stop the flames.
The English sailors sprang back and up the sides and through the ports
of their ship with frantic haste; the lashings were being rapidly cut
by them, and the braces handled.

"Come aboard, men, while you can," cried Captain Vincent to the
Americans.  "Your ship 's afire; you can do no more; you 'll blow up in
a moment!"

The little handful of Americans were left alone on their ship.  The
only officer still standing lifted his sword and shook it impotently at
the Yarmouth in reply; the rest did not stir.  The smoke of battle had
now settled away, and the whole ghastly scene was revealed.  A woman's
cry rang out fraught with agony,--"Seymour, Seymour!" and again was her
cry unheeded; her lover could not hear.  She cried again; and then,
with a frightful roar and crash, the Randolph blew up.




CHAPTER XXXVII

For Love of Country

The force of the explosion occurring so near to the line-of-battle ship
drove her over with irresistible power upon her beam-ends until she
buried her port main-deck guns under water; her time was not yet come,
however, for, after a trembling movement of sickening uncertainty, she
righted herself, slowly at first, but finally with a mighty roll and
rush as if on a tidal wave.  For a few seconds the air was filled with
pieces of wreck, arms, spars, bodies, many of which fell on the
Yarmouth.  The horrified spectators saw the two broken halves of the
ill-fated frigate gradually disappearing beneath the heaving sea,
sucking down in their inexorable vortex most of the bodies of those,
alive or dead, who floated near.  The fire had come in broad sheets
through the portholes of the main-deck guns of the ship from the
explosion, driving the men from their stations, and, by heating the
iron masses or igniting the priming, caused sudden and wild discharges
to add their quota of confusion to the awful scene.  Pieces of burning
wreck had also fallen in the tops, or upon the sails, or lodged in the
standing rigging, full of tar as usual, and dry and inflammable to the
last degree.  The Yarmouth, therefore, was in serious danger,--more so
than in any other period of the action,--her little antagonist having
inflicted the most damaging blow with the last gasp, as it were; for
little columns of flame and smoke began to rise ominously in a dozen
places.  Then was manifested the splendid discipline for which British
ships were famous the world over.  Rapidly and with unerring skill and
coolness the proper orders were given, and the tired men were set to
work desperately fighting once more to check and put out the fire.
Long and hard was the struggle, the issue much in doubt; but in the end
the efforts of her crew were crowned with merited success, and their
ship was eventually saved from the dangerous conflagration which had
menaced her with ruin, not less complete and disastrous than had
befallen the frigate.

While all this was being done, a little scene took place upon the
quarter-deck which was worthy of notice.  Something heavy and solid,
thrown upward by the tremendous force of the discharge, struck the rail
with a mighty crash at the moment of the explosion, just at the point
where Katharine, wide-eyed, petrified with horror, after that one vivid
glance in which she apparently saw her lover dead on his own
quarter-deck beneath her, stood clinging rigidly to the bulwarks as if
paralyzed.  It was the body of a man; instinctively she threw out her
strong young arm and saved it from falling again into the sea on the
return roll of the ship.  One or two of the seamen standing by came to
her assistance, and the body was dragged on board and laid on the deck
at her feet.  Something familiar in the figure moved Katharine to a
further examination.  She knelt down and wiped the blood and smoke and
dust from the face of the prostrate man, and recognized him at once.
It was old Bentley, desperately wounded, his clothes soaked with blood
from several severe wounds, and apparently dying fast, but still
breathing.  A small tightly rolled up ball of bunting was lying near
her on the deck; it was a flag from the Randolph, which had been blown
there by the force of the explosion.  She quickly picked it up and
pillowed the head of the unconscious man upon it.  Then she ran below
to her cabin, coming back in a moment with water and a cordial, with
which she bathed the head and wiped the lips of the dying man.  The
fires were all forward, and, the wind being aft, the danger was in the
fore part of the ship; no one therefore paid the least attention to
her.  There was, in fact, save the captain and one or two midshipmen,
no one else on the poop-deck except her father, who like herself had
been overwhelmed by the sudden and awful ending of the battle.  Being
without anything to do, the colonel, who had been watching the men
fight with the fire, happened to look aft for a moment and saw his
