Annie did not regard her share in the matter so cheerfully and lightly
when she was in the privacy of a ward of St. Ebbe's, where she had
begged to sit up with an unconscious patient, just to keep her hand in
and compose her feelings.

"What mischievous little wretches we were," she reflected, as she
deftly changed the wet cloth on the sick woman's hot forehead. "How
happy he might have made Dora, and how happy she might have made him!
She is so single-minded and tender-hearted, that she could hardly have
failed to see his merits, if we had given him the chance, let her
alone, and left the pair to themselves. Then, if the worst were to
come to the worst," and Annie frowned with anxiety and grief, as well
as with wholesome humiliation, "if poor father and mother cannot get
along, and none of us girls can help them effectually, his house might
have been their home, where he would never have let them feel other
than honoured guests. He would have been a son to them. But the
mischief is done, and there is no help for it. If Dora and he were an
ordinary couple, it might be mended; but now she will not look at him
when we none of us have a penny, because she refused him when we were
in comfortable circumstances; and he will not renew his suit with the
thought in his mind that it would look and feel to her as if any
favour he has magnanimously conferred on us, were a mere bribe to
compel her to listen to him. So, Annie Millar, this is a pretty kettle
of fish, of which you have been chief cook! There is the greater
reason for you to make up your mind from this moment to devote
yourself wholly to your family, and let nothing--_nothing_," she
protested with suspicious vehemence, "come between you and them."

"What is it, you poor soul?" the young nurse responded quickly to a
movement of the helpless ailing creature beside her. "Do you know there
is somebody here? Will it ease you to have your head raised on my arm,
do you think? You cannot hear or answer, but we'll try that, and then it
is just possible you may drop asleep." And for the rest of the watch
Annie was absorbed in care for her patient.




CHAPTER XX.

REDCROSS AGAIN.


Tom Robinson's subscription list attained the respectable sum-total of
two thousand pounds. Many of the subscribers were not only patients of
Dr. Millar, but creditors of the bank whose claims he had striven with
sturdy honesty to satisfy, till the task proved too hard for his years.

The little Doctor received the token of how greatly his courage and
staunchness in the fulfilment of his obligations had been respected,
with half pained, half pleased gratitude, and this was very much the
attitude of mind of his daughter Annie. The rest of his womankind, from
Mrs. Millar to May, only felt a glad surprise, and a soft, proud
thankfulness.

The relief from present difficulties was great, but of course the gift
did not obviate the necessity for the girls seeking work and wages. Even
May, when she ventured to hope that she might stay at home for a month
or two and be coached by her father and Tom Robinson in anticipation of
a more successful campaign at St. Ambrose's, was eagerly speculating
whether she might not become a coach in her turn. She was fain to earn a
little money by helping the very youngest of the Grammar School boys to
prepare their Latin grammar in the evenings, supposing she could get
them to sit still, and give over wishing her to play with them.

Mr. Pemberton had not only himself called on the Miss Millar who was the
artist, he had brought Lady Mary with him, and both husband and wife had
turned out the refined, thoroughly unassuming, kindly disposed couple
they had looked. They spoke warmly of Tom Robinson as their very good
friend, and went so far as to express enthusiasm for his beautiful old
shop. Mr. Pemberton did better than merely say a few words of languid,
indiscriminating praise of Rose's picture, and then bow himself out. He
examined the picture closely, and looked at her thoughtfully and
attentively out of the dark gray eyes, the only good feature in his
face. The next moment, to Hester Jennings's great edification, he
addressed Rose seriously as a member of the Guild of St. Luke--not an
amateur, "one of ourselves, so that you must not mind what I say to you,
Miss Millar." He first displayed a generous capacity for discovering
something good, whether it were to be found in the work of a tyro or of
a veteran. Next he took the trouble of pointing out the faults, and
urging their remedy, telling her the picture was worth the pains of
making it as true as possible, until Rose hung her head in blended pride
and humility.

What was more, he offered to enter into negotiations with a
picture-dealer on her behalf, and brought them to a triumphant
conclusion, making Rose happy with so fair a price as materially to
lighten the millstone of her resigned office at the Misses Stone's
hanging round her neck.

It was settled that May should go home and profit by the coaching which
awaited her at Redcross, taking the chance of finding some little boys
whose Latin grammar would be the better of her supervision.

Next Mr. Pemberton wrote that Lady Mary had been so charmed with the
neighbourhood of Redcross, and had spoken so highly of it to one of her
cousins, who had a great liking for English landscape, and was just
refurnishing his town house, that he wished to commission a set of
water-colour sketches of such and such spots for his morning-room. It
was Mr. Pemberton's opinion that Miss Rose Millar could execute the
commission to Sir John Neville's satisfaction, if she cared to accept of
it.

"It is to help me," said Rose humbly, "for there are hundreds of good
artists who would take the work and be thankful, and do it far better,
though I will do my very best. Tom Robinson is at the bottom of it
directly or indirectly, but he is like an old friend. I don't know a man
to whom I would sooner be obliged."

In the third instance, a totally unforeseen application was made to
Annie. A fever, in certain respects unfamiliar in its type, broke out at
Stokeleigh, one of several suburban villages on the outskirts of
Redcross. Some authorities called the fever Russian, and declared it had
been imported--they did not pretend to say how--from that remote empire.
Others insisted it was a slow fever, of English growth, with curious
complications. It appeared doubtful whether it were infectious; but
there was one thing which was unmistakable, that, whatever kind of
malaria brooding in the summer air was at the root of the complaint,
that malaria showed a disposition to spread extensively. It passed from
Stokeleigh to the adjoining village of Woodleigh, whence it took a bend
in the direction of the town, and proceeded to squat, as malarias can
squat, and settle indefinitely on all the low-lying districts of
Redcross. Neither did the epidemic improve in character with the change
of locality. For, whereas on the higher, less encumbered ground the
fever had been rarely fatal, the mortality increased with the transfer
of the disease to the crowded, damp purlieus of the older part of the
town, built more or less on the Dewes, and liable to be invaded by the
river in flood.

A combined meeting of the Town Council and Vestry, with the Mayor, who
happened to be a public-spirited man, and the Rector heading it,
determined on taking prompt action to stop the mischief. The town had
lately built a Corn Exchange in one of the highest, best-ventilated
situations in Redcross. It was to be committed to the care of a town's
officer and his wife, who were to have the adjoining rooms rent-free for
a domicile, together with certain perquisites, in return for sweeping,
scrubbing, and looking after the hall. But the place was just finished,
and had not yet been occupied in the manner intended. It was proposed to
convert it, in the absence of other accommodation, into a temporary ward
for the sufferers from fever. The doctors consulted, pledged themselves
that there was every probability of the unwelcome visitor being thus
stamped out, while the chances of recovery for the patients would be
multiplied. It was also agreed to bring a trained nurse from some
nursing institution, to mould the raw nursing materials which Redcross
supplied on the emergency. Dr. Millar's successor had a bright idea that
it might be a graceful act on his part to mention the old Doctor's
daughter, who had gone in for nursing as a profession. She had already
served nearly a year in a great London hospital, and was no doubt
competent to undertake the duties required. It would be a compliment to
her and her father to try and get her for the occasion, and there would
be a certain _eclat_ in her coming to the help of her native town in its
need. Dr. Capes was right as to the popularity of his motion. It was
received with unanimous approval. Annie, the matron, and the directors
of St. Ebbe's, were immediately applied to in proper form. Annie burned
to go, if such a step were admissible at the present stage of her
career. The favour she had won on all sides aided in the fulfilment of
her wishes. She was promoted from the ranks of the probationers to those
of the nurses while yet her year wanted a fraction of its complete
round, and was officially sent down to represent the nurses of St.
Ebbe's at Redcross.

"Of course, Dora, you cannot be left behind to go on by yourself hunting
for a situation with three-fourths of the great world out of town. I am
afraid you would make a poor job of it at the best, Dora dear, and at
the worst it is not to be thought of; it would be a waste of
nerve-tissue and muscle, as well as of pounds, shillings, and pence. You
will come too; we'll be all together, or nearly together, again, for a
holiday, after all."

Dora, who had been waiting patiently for Annie's decision, was nothing
loth.

"Rose's expenses and mine are more than paid," calculated the practical
Annie, "so that we shall be no drag on father and mother. I don't know
if Robarts's accommodation will extend beyond the additional bedroom for
Rose and May, but that can be easily managed. Oh! I have it, Dora, you
will stay with me at the hospital--the Corn Exchange I mean--and save me
from having a housekeeper for the short time one will be wanted. I'll
take care that no infection, if there be infection, will come near you.
Oh, 'won't it be jolly,' as Rose says, for you and me to keep house by
ourselves at dear old Redcross, of all places in the world?"

It was arranged so, with only a little demur from Mrs. Millar,
over-ruled by her husband.

There was another person, without right or power to enter his veto
against the existing order of things, who nevertheless decidedly
demurred at them. Tom Robinson showed that though he might be a humane
man there were bounds to his humanity. "It is all very well for Annie
Millar to come down and nurse the fever patients, it is in the way of
her business, she does as much every day, she is well acquainted with
all the precautions to take. But Dora is not a nurse, she never thinks
of herself, she will forget to take the precautions if she has ever
heard of them. She has not strong nerves, and she is used up with this
preposterous stumping of London in July in search of a situation. What
in the name of common sense and natural affection do they mean by
lugging Dora into the risk!" he grumbled and worried. "Oh! yes, of
course she would follow Annie or any of the rest of them fast enough if
she had the opportunity, though she were to die at the end of it; but
she ought never to have had the opportunity, it was preposterous to let
her. The whole thing is monstrous. I never heard of such rashness. What
can Dr. and Mrs. Millar be thinking of?"

It felt queer, to say the least of it, as well as "jolly," to be at
Redcross and not at the Old Doctor's House, over which a bride of
yesterday was presiding, for Dr. Capes's marriage had taken place
simultaneously with his purchase of Dr. Millar's practice.

Annie used to look over from the opposite side of the street, as she was
walking along, at the alterations which were being made in the garden,
and the new arrangement of the window curtains, and try to criticize
them impartially. Then she had to call and see Dr. Capes, and wait in
the familiar consulting-room till he insisted on taking her to the
drawing-room, in order to introduce her to his wife, who had come a
stranger to Redcross. Annie felt as if she were a disembodied spirit, or
a dreamer in a dream from which she could not awake, while she gazed on
the changed yet well-known aspect of everything around her. But she had
to think of Dr. and Mrs. Capes, in whose house she was, and talk civilly
to them of their improvements(!). She had to emulate the submission of
Dora, who had seen the transfer coming and taken part in it. She had to
copy the mercurial spirits of Rose and May. They were so pleased to be
with their father and mother again, and to take possession of Phyllis
Carey's every free moment, that they declared the Robarts's apartments
were the very nicest the girls had ever seen. They, the apartments, were
delightfully cosy (which meant stuffy in July). They were more cheerful
(noisier) than the Old Doctor's House. It was great fun for the pair to
stow themselves and their belongings within such narrow compass.

A serious vexation to Annie at the commencement of her enterprise was
the arrival of Dr. Harry Ironside to diagnose and make what he could of
the fever.

"What is he doing here? His coming at all is most impertinent," cried
Annie indignantly, sitting down on one of the still empty beds in the
barrack-like hall, and as it were daring Rose and May, who had brought
the news, and Dora who was listening to them, to contradict her.

"He is come in the pursuit of knowledge," said Rose, with full command
of her countenance. "He does not understand Russian fever, or whatever
it is, and he thinks he had better make its acquaintance as a wind up to
taking his degree. He is still a doctor at large; he has not fixed on
where he is to go and what he is to do next, so his sister Kate writes
to me."

"Then he and his sister Kate had better make up their minds to go away
together, somewhere else, and not trouble other people," cried Annie
quite illogically.

"Why, Annie, father thinks it is very praiseworthy of Dr. Ironside to
seek to get all the information he can before settling down as a
doctor," remonstrated May in the guilelessness of her heart. "He has
just been calling on father, who is delighted with him--so is mother;
and, for _my_ part," finished the speaker with unconscious emphasis, as
if her opinion were of the utmost consequence, "I have thought him very
nice since the first time I met him at Mrs. Jennings's. He is so big and
handsome, without being stuck up, or a swell, like what Cyril Carey used
to be--just frank and pleasant as a man should be. I cannot comprehend
why you have such a dislike to him."

"Upon my word!" exclaimed Annie, with a gasp. "But I don't care," she
added vehemently; "he shall not come and carry on his investigations
here. Dr. Capes and I, with father to appeal to, and Mr. Newton to call
in and consult, if necessary, are more than sufficient for all the
patients we are likely to get. I tell you, if he forces his way into my
hospital I'll have nothing more to do with it; I'll throw it all up and
go back to St. Ebbe's at once."

"But it is not your hospital, Annie," said Rose with provoking
matter-of-factness. "It is the town's, or if it is under the control of
any private person, it is under Dr. Capes's orders. For the sake of his
professional character, medical etiquette, and all that kind of thing,
he will not refuse to allow a fellow-doctor to study the fever cases
under his care. Dr. Harry was going to stay at the 'Crown,' but he met
Tom Robinson, who said he should be his guest, and carried him off to
his house."

"Just like Tom Robinson!" declared Annie with amazing asperity.

"Come along, May." Rose hurried away her sister and satellite, and then
let loose her glee. "It is too funny, May; too preposterously funny. It
is ever so much better than Dora and Tom Robinson. He was so easily
rebuffed, and she was so reluctant to rebuff him. But here is Annie
like one of the furies, and Harry Ironside is silly enough to mind her,
so that he can hardly open his mouth before her, and looks as if he had
lost his wits. Before Annie! What is our Annie, I should like to know,
that she should daunt a clever, high-spirited young fellow such as he
is? What strange glamour has she thrown over him? But he has plenty of
mettle and determination for all that, and she will no more manage by
her tirades to stop him from coming after her and laying siege to her
ladyship, than she can keep the sun from shining or the rain from
falling. For that matter, I believe the poor fellow cannot help himself;
it is the case of the moth and the candle."

"But what is it all about?" demanded May, in an utter confusion of
ideas. "She speaks as if she hated him, and I thought he had come to
Redcross to trace the course of the Russian fever."

"To trace the course of his own fortunes. I beg your pardon, my dear,
but you might have known enough of human nature to guess that there was
a private personal motive at the bottom of his philanthropy."

"Then it is the worse for him and a great pity," said May, with the
sweet seriousness into which one phase of her childishness was passing.
"I wonder you can laugh, Rose. I am always affronted when I remember
how we laughed at Tom Robinson and poor Dora, making game of what was no
joke to them. And Dora was not half so much opposed to Tom as Annie is
to this unfortunate, nice, pleasant young doctor. I could find it in my
heart to be very sorry for him."

"Oh! you are a simpleton apart from Latin and Greek. Don't you see that
Annie's wrath is neither more nor less than fright? She is frightened
out of her senses at him, because she wants to keep her independence and
share our fortunes. As I do not remember to have seen her in such a
scare before, I should say that she is paying him a high compliment."

"I think it is rather a queer compliment," objected May in much
