down the road.  With the Colonel and his staff rode Sir Gervaise Yeovil
and his son.  They had asked permission and it had been accorded them.
Indeed, the staff was scanty.  Young St. Laurent and an orderly, besides
the two Englishmen, alone accompanied the old man.  Realizing how
critical the situation was, and how important it was that the town should
be held, he had left every officer and man upon whom he could count with
the cavalry, and with instructions to watch Labedoyere particularly, and
check any disloyalty, if possible.  If the Marquis alone could not effect
his purpose with the regiment, no staff officer could aid him.  He was a
lonely old man and a hard that morning.  The odds against him were
tremendous, and his weapons were flawed and breaking in his hand.  That
only made him the more firmly resolute.  He knew how sometimes one man
could enforce his will on unwilling thousands.  Was he that man that day?
He would see.

Some miles south of the town the winding road ran along the side of a
high and rocky hill.  On the side opposite to the hill was a deep morass.
This place was known as the Gap.  The Marquis, who had apparently thought
of everything, had reconnoitered the country, and had decided upon the
defensibleness of a place like this in the case of such an emergency as
he was about to face, for along that hillside ran the main highway to the
coast of France.

The troops reached it about noon-time.  The road was high up on the
hillside.  The Marquis, riding in advance of his regiment, saw far down
the long road and across a little river a moving column of men.  Above
them floated the tricolor flag, the blue and the red vividly distinct in
the bright sun, which seemed to be reflected, as it were, from a crown of
glory at the top of the staff.  There were perhaps twelve hundred
soldiers on foot and a few score on horseback.  They were coming steadily
along the road.  The distance was almost too great to distinguish men,
but one rode a white horse at the head.  The soldiers could see with
their minds and hearts better than their eyes, and they recognized that
gray-coated figure on that familiar white horse.  They could hear the
beating of drums faintly.  The bridges had not been broken.  The fords
were not guarded.  The advance parties had failed.  Presage of disaster!

The Marquis congratulated himself that he was in time to repair the
disobedience of orders, which he promised himself to punish at the first
opportunity.  Instantly he directed Major Lestoype to deploy the men from
column into line, so that they filled the road, which was here very broad
and spacious.  On a sloping hillside he placed flanking companies.  The
command was given to load, and the ramrods soon rang in the gun-barrels.
Major Lestoype's voice shook as he gave the commands, which were repeated
hoarsely, brokenly, nervously, by the company and the platoon officers.
The dispositions of the men were soon concluded.  The place of the
Marquis was behind the line, but he rode to the right of it in a little
depression cut out by the rains of winter in the side of the hill,
underneath a great tree which was just beginning to show its leaves in
the soft spring air and sunshine.  From there he could command every part
of the line with his glance, or move to the front or rear as the occasion
might warrant.  There he could see and be seen.

He was always pale, his old face seamed and drawn, but to his friends,
the Englishmen, he seemed paler and older than ever, as he sat quietly
calming his nervous horse.  And Sir Gervaise Yeovil was pale, too.  Not
that he had any bodily fear, but the incident was so fraught with
consequences which a man as experienced as he could so easily foresee,
appreciate and dread, that its possibilities oppressed his heart.  Young
Frank Yeovil was all excitement, however.  Napoleon had been buried in
Elba, but none mentioned his name in any country in Europe without a
thrill.  Few do it now without a thrill, for that matter.  The young man,
modestly in the background, as was proper, leaned forward in his saddle
and stared at the approaching men and the figure to the fore.  So this
was the great Bonaparte?  He longed earnestly for a nearer view.

"Think you, my lord," whispered the Baronet to the old Marquis, his great
anxiety showing in his voice, "that your men are to be depended upon?
That they will----"

The Marquis shook his head, stared down the ranks at the men standing
grim and tensely silent at parade-rest.

"They look steady," he replied, shrugging his shoulders.  "They have
taken an oath to the King, and--God only knows."

"What shall you do?"

"The best I can with the means at hand," was the indomitable answer.

"And if----"

"There are no 'ifs,' monsieur," was the imperious way in which the
Marquis silenced the other.

Recognizing that he had said enough, and indeed pitying the old man so
alone, the Baronet drew back a little.

"By heaven," whispered young Frank Yeovil to his father, "I wouldn't be
elsewhere for a thousand pounds."

"It may cost you that before you get away, and more," said the old man
grimly.  "It will cost England millions, unless----"

"_Monsieur le Commandant_," said old Major Lestoype, riding up to the
group and saluting respectfully.

"Major Lestoype."

"The command is formed and ready, sir."

"Very good.  Take your place and be prepared."

"Will _Monsieur le Marquis_ permit me?" asked the old soldier, who had
acquired a genuine respect for the old noble.

"Permit you what?"

"To return his advice," was the not unexpected reply.

"The thought of me, which is evidently back of your words, sir, inclines
me to overlook their meaning and its impropriety.  Know, sir, that I am
always ready," was the grim comment of the ancient soldier.

"Indeed, sir--" began the other, but the Marquis cut him short with an
imperious gesture and a word.

"Retire."

The Major saluted, resumed his place in the line.  No one spoke.  The
approaching soldiers were nearer now.  They were coming.  The
Fifth-of-the-Line sensed rather than heard a command down the road.  They
saw the guns of that little army come from their shoulders to a slanting
position across the breast--arms aport!  It was the habit of the Guard to
go into action at arms aport.  What had Dorsenne, _Le Beau Dorsenne_,
said on that famous day?  "The Guard fights at the point of the bayonet!"
Would the guns come down to a charge?  Would they have to meet bayonet
thrusts from these terrible soldiers?

There was something ominous in the slow movements of the men, picked men
they were, the grenadiers of the Elba Guard especially being of great
size, their huge bearskins towering above them.  They were marching in
columns of fours, but the road was wide; another sharp command and the
men with slow yet beautiful precision deployed into a close column of
companies at half distance--the very formation for a charge in mass!  The
brass drums were rolling a famous march, "La Grenadiere," the grenadier's
march.  The hearts of the Fifth-of-the-Line were keeping time to the
beating of those drums.

Ah, they were splendid soldiers, that regiment of infantry.  Even the
youths got something from the veterans.  They stood still, quiet, at
parade-rest, staring.  The distance was growing shorter, shorter and
shorter.  Some of the officers looked toward the Marquis.  Even his
nervous horse seemed to have caught the spirit of the moment, for he was
at last still.  The old man sat there immobile, his lips pressed, his
eyes fixed on the approaching troops and shining like sword-blades in the
sunlight--horse and man carved, as it were, out of the rock of the
mountains.  Presently that high, thin, sharp voice rang out.  Men heard
it above the rolling of the drums.

"Attention!" he cried.  The men straightened up, swung the heavy muskets
to their sides.  "Carry arms."  As one man the battalion lifted its
weapons.  "Make ready!"  With a little crash the guns were dropped into
the outstretched hands.

The approaching men were nearer now.  Still they came on with arms aport.
Still the drums ruffled and rolled at their head.  They were not going to
make any response apparently to the fire of the Fifth-of-the-Line.  Were
they, indeed, to come to death's grapple at the bayonet's point with that
irresistible Guard?  But no, there was a sudden movement, a change in the
approaching ranks.

"Secure arms," cried old Cambronne, and with their guns reversed and
comfortably tucked under their arms, the old soldiers came on.

The meaning was plain, the battle was to be a moral one, evidently!

"Aim!" cried the sharp voice of the Marquis, and the guns came up to the
shoulders of the long line, as they bent their heads and mechanically
squinted along the barrels.

The moment had come!  Out in the front had ridden the familiar figure on
the white horse.  They could see the details of his person now.  His pale
face was flushed under the familiar black, three-cornered cocked hat with
its tricolor cockade, his gray redingote was buttoned across his breast.
He suddenly raised his hand.  The drums stopped beating, the moving
grenadiers halted.  Ah, at last!

The Emperor sprang from his horse, not heavily, as of late, but with some
of the alertness of a boy.  He nodded to the ranks.  Old General
Cambronne, in command of the Guard, stepped forward.  He took from the
colour-bearer the Eagle.  Four grenadiers of the Colour Guard closed
about him--one of them was called Bullet-Stopper, by the way.  In rear
and a little to the right of the Emperor he moved, holding up the flag
and the Eagle.  A deep breath, almost a sob, ran down the line of the
regiment.  Protended guns wavered.  Napoleon stepped forward.  He threw
back his gray overcoat, disclosing the familiar green uniform of the
Chasseurs of the Guard, which he affected.  The cross of the Legion of
Honor glittered on his breast, a shining mark at which to aim.

The flush on his ivory face died as quickly as it had come.  He was
apparently as composed and as steady as if he had been cut out of
granite.  But tiny beads of sweat bedewed his brow, shaded by that
familiar cocked hat.  What would the next moment disclose?  Would he be a
prisoner, the laughing stock, the jest of Europe?  Or would he lie dead
in the road, a French bullet in his heart?  He had faced the guns of
every people in Europe, but he had never faced French guns before.  Would
any finger in that line press a trigger?  Only God knew, but the Emperor
would soon find out.  Better death than exile without wife, child,
friend, or France.  On the hazard of the moment he staked all.  Yet he
who could have looked into that broad breast could have seen that heart
beating as never before.  Firmly he stepped on.




CHAPTER XXVII

COMRADE!  GENERAL!  EMPEROR!

"Behold the traitor," shouted the Marquis, his emotion lending depth to
that thin voice.  "Fire, soldiers!"

No finger pressed a trigger.  The silence was ghastly.

Ah! a thrill of hope in the breast of the greater Captain, of despair
in the heart of the lesser.

"By God!" muttered Yeovil, "he has lost them!"

The Marquis spurred his horse forward.

"Your oath!  For France!  The King!  Fire!" he shouted.

And now a greater voice broke the silence.

"Comrades!  Do you not know me?" said the Emperor.  Was there a tremble
in his clear, magnificent voice?  He paused, his speech stopped.
"Behold your General," he resumed.  He waited a few seconds again and
then finally, desperately, "Let any one among you who wishes to kill
his Emperor fire--now."

He raised his voice tremendously with that last word.  It almost came
with the force and clearness of a battle-cry.  The Marquis sat
stupefied, his face ghastly pale.

"There is yet time," he cried hoarsely at last.  "Is there none here
faithful to his King?  Fire!"

But the gun-barrels were coming down.  "_Comrade!  General!  Emperor!_"
who could be indifferent to that appeal?  Disregarding the old Marquis
absolutely, as if he were not on the earth, the Emperor came nearer
smiling.  He was irresistible to these soldiers when he smiled.

"Well," he said, his hands outstretched and open, "soldiers of the
Fifth, who were with me in Italy, how are you all?  I am come back to
see you again, _mes enfants_," he went on genially.  "Is there any one
of you who wishes to kill me?"

"No, no, Sire.  Certainly not," came the cry.

"Escape," whispered the Marquis to the Englishman, "while there is yet
time to take my niece away.  To you I commit her. . . .  St. Laurent,
to the town with the tidings!"

"By God, no," growled Yeovil, as St. Laurent saluted and galloped
rapidly down the road.  "I am going to see the end of this.  The damned
cravens!" he muttered, looking at the soldiers.

"And yet," continued Napoleon to the troops, "you presented your guns
at me."

"Sire," cried one of the veterans, dropping his musket and running his
ramrod down the barrel, "it is not loaded.  We only went through the
motions."

The Emperor laughed.  He was nearer.

"Lestoype," he said, "is it thou, old comrade, and Grenier and Drehon!"

It was astonishing that he should remember them, but so he did.  He
went down the line, speaking to the men, inspecting them just as of
old.  The officers could not keep them in line.  They crowded about
their old leader.  Shouts of "_Vive l'Empereur!_" rent the air.  Men
took off their caps, tore out the hated white cockades, trampled them
under foot, and from pockets where they had concealed them for this
very moment, they replaced them with the tricolor.

In his movements the Emperor at last confronted the Marquis.

"And who is this?" asked Napoleon, staring up at him curiously.

The Marquis' heart was broken.  It was not in the human power of any
servant of the King to dominate that scene.  A greater personality than
his was there.  The Emperor had shown himself as of yore, and exhibited
his mastery.  But no greater ideal possessed any man than that in the
heart of the old noble.  He hated, he loathed, he abominated the man
who looked up at him.  He saw in the action of the soldiery a picture
of the action of France, the downfall of the King.  Well, it flashed
into his mind that he at least, and perhaps he alone, might put a stop
to it.  From his holster he whipped out a pistol and leveled it at the
Emperor.  Lestoype, riding near, struck up his hand, the bullet sped
harmlessly, the Emperor stood unharmed.  A roar of rage burst from the
soldiers who came running.  Dropping the weapon and reining his
startled horse violently back, so as to give himself a certain present
and temporary freedom of action, the Marquis drew his other pistol.
Lestoype spurred his horse in front of the Emperor, but Napoleon was
not menaced.

"Have no fear," said the Marquis almost gently.  "I have failed my
King.  The bullet goes into a truer heart--my own," he added proudly.

Before any one could stop him there was a flash, a muffled report, the
spare figure reeled and fell forward on the saddle.  He, at least,
after the manner of his house, would not survive a failure which,
although he could not prevent it, must inevitably be charged against
him.

"A brave man," said the Emperor coolly, staring at him with his hard,
bright, gray eyes.  "See that his body is cared for in accordance with
his rank and his courage.  But who are these?" he asked, remounting his
horse and facing the two Englishmen, who had dismounted and received
the body of the Marquis, stone dead instantly.  "As I live, it is the
man of law," he said, his marvelous memory serving him well again, "who
was at the Chateau d'Aumenier.  It only needs Marteau----"

"He is alive, your Majesty," interposed Lestoype eagerly.  "He brought
back our Eagle and is----"

"Where is it, and why is he not with you?"

"The Eagle is in hiding somewhere in Grenoble, Marteau in prison.  He
hid it, and because he would not tell where, the Marquis yonder
condemned him to death."

"He has not yet been shot?"

"Not yet, Sire.  He waits the return of the regiment."

"Good," said the Emperor.  "We will surprise him.  Face the men about.
We shall go on to Grenoble and see what welcome awaits us there."

He was in high spirits.  In this first clash with the troops of King
Louis he found that he exercised the old influence over them and from
the army, at least, he now realized that he had nothing to fear.

One of the men who had stood nearest the Emperor back of Cambronne was
an old grenadier.  He had recognized the Marquis d'Aumenier, he had
heard the Emperor's conversation and the name of Marteau, and a thrill
went through the heart of old Bal-Arret when he learned that his
beloved officer and friend was yet alive.

The body of the old Marquis--covered with his cloak, and over his heart
the now discarded royal standard, for which nobody cared since he was
dead--was placed on a farm wagon and escorted back to Grenoble by some
of the officers of the regiment and two companies, with reversed arms.
He was watched over by the two Englishmen, whom Napoleon freely
permitted to follow their own pleasure in their movements, being
desirous of not adding fuel to any possible fire of animosity and of
showing every respect to every Frenchman, whatever his predilection.

With the Fifth-of-the-Line in the lead, the army moved forward after a
halt for noonday meal.  The greatly relieved, happy and confident
