meteor rising on the waves and disappearing in the hollows; then the
flames grew fierce, and spread a halo round the doomed ship that shone
out vividly against the surrounding darkness.  This latter was rendered
intensely deep by contrast with the light.  Then the masts went over the
side, and a bright volume of sparks and scattered tongues of flame shot
up into, the sky, after which the hull shone like a glow-worm until they
drew quite near.  The busy workers at the raft were too anxiously intent
on their occupation to observe the approach of the "Trident," whose
black hull was nearly invisible, and whose small lanterns might well
have been overlooked on such an occasion.

"They don't see us," observed Mr Denham.

This was abundantly evident.  Within the circle of red light, they could
see the raft and the boats floating close to it; the men in cork-jackets
toiling in the water and on floating spars, with ropes, handspikes, and
axes.  It was not until the "Trident" herself came within the circle of
light, and hove-to, with flapping sails, that the people in the boats
became aware of her presence.

Then, indeed, there arose a shout of joy such as could be uttered only
by men and women snatched suddenly and unexpectedly from the very jaws
of death.  Again and again it burst forth, and was replied to by the
people in the "Trident," many of whom were so excited by the scene, and
so overjoyed at the thought of having come up in time to save so many
human beings, that they burst into tears; while others went down on
their knees and thanked God fervently.

Seeing that the people were getting excited, and knowing that order must
be preserved, if the work that lay before them was to be done speedily
and without accident, the captain sprang into the rigging, ordered the
women and children to go below, and assured the male passengers that if
any of them showed a disposition to be obstinate or unruly they also
should be ordered below.  This had the desired effect.  Order was at
once restored, and the captain then called for volunteers from among the
stoutest of those on board to go into the chains, and lift the women and
children out of the boats.

The appeal was responded to by all the strong men in the ship--foremost
and, strongest among whom was our friend Bax.  From among these the
captain selected the men that seemed best able for the work they
undertook to do; and this, be it understood, was no child's play.

The state of the sea rendered it extremely difficult and dangerous to
bring the boats alongside, heavily laden as they were with human beings.
To get the men on board would be difficult enough, even although they
would in most cases be able to spring, and lay hold of ropes, and
otherwise help themselves; but to get out the women and children by such
means was not to be thought of.  The men of the "Trident" who had the
strongest arms and chests were therefore sent into the chains, where
they leaned forward in slings with outstretched arms, and whenever the
boats sheered up close enough they caught the women or children in their
vice-like grasp and dragged them on board.

Bax, owing to his unusual strength and breadth of shoulders, was
peculiarly fitted for this laborious duty.  His long reach of arm
enabled him to stretch far beyond the others, and in several instances
he caught hold of and rescued women after his companions had failed.
Thus a much larger portion of the work fell upon him than on any of the
others.

In this sort of work Tommy Bogey was of no use whatever; and severely
did his youth and want of physical strength press upon his spirits that
night, poor boy!  But Tommy's nature would not allow him to sit down and
do nothing.  Feeling that he could not do manly work, he set himself
with right good-will to womanly employment.  He assisted in carrying the
children below when they were handed over the side, helped to strip
them, and brought dry clothing and blankets, besides doing an immense
amount of what may be termed stewardess' work for the poor ladies.
There were others on board who worked willingly and well, but none who
were so ubiquitous as he; none who knew so thoroughly what to do and how
to do it, and none, certainly, who did everything with such a
superabundance of energy.

Once or twice Tommy stopped in the middle of these occupations to see
how Bax was getting on; for to his rather partial eyes it seemed that
his friend was doing the whole work, and that everybody else was merely
looking on!

On one of these occasions he saw Bax sustaining the weight of an old man
and a young woman.

The girl was the old man's daughter; she had clung to him in the boat
and refused to let him go, having lost self-command through terror.
Ignorant of this, and observing that the old man could not help himself,
Bax grasped him under the arms the first time he came within reach.  The
boat was immediately swept away by the passing wave, leaving the old man
and the girl, who still clung with a death-like grasp to him, suspended
in the air.  Bax's great strength enabled him to support this double
weight, but he could not draw them up.  A comrade stooped to assist him,
but the strain on the sling was so great that it gave way, and Bax, with
his burden, fell into the sea like lead.

Tommy saw this happen.  There were plenty of loose ropes about.  He
seized the end of one and leaped overboard instantly.  He sank for a
second or two, and on coming to the surface looked hastily round.  A
hand was raised above the water near him.  He knew it to be that of his
friend, and struck out for it, but it disappeared.  Again it rose, and
there was a convulsive grasping of the fingers.  Tommy made one stroke
and placed the rope in it.  The fingers closed like a vice.  Next moment
the ship rose and lifted Bax completely out of the water, with the old
man and the girl still clinging to him.  Before the ship sank again the
boat sheered up, and they were all pulled into it!

To leap on board the "Trident" again, and resume his position with a new
and stronger sling, was comparatively easy work for Bax.  Tommy
clambered up, too, close behind him.  Passing a strong rope round his
friend's waist, he said quietly:

"It won't do to risk that again."

"True, Tommy," said Bax; "run below and fetch me a glass o' brandy, lad.
That last plunge almost floored me."

The boy leaped over the side and dived below.  He reappeared in a few
seconds with a tin can, with which he clambered over the side into the
chains, and held it to his friend's lips.  Bax drained it at a draught,
and Tommy left him without another word.

The whole of this scene was enacted with the utmost speed and energy.
The spectators seemed to be paralysed with amazement at the quiet
self-possession of the man and the boy, both of whom appeared to divine
each other's thoughts, and to work into each other's hands with the
precision and certainty of a machine; they did it all, too, as if they
were entirely alone in the work.  Until now they had been watched with
breathless anxiety; but when Tommy gave Bax the can of brandy, and then
gravely went below with a baby that had just been rescued in his arms,
there arose a wild cheer of admiration, not unmingled with laughter,
from those who had witnessed his conduct.

But their attention was soon turned again to the boats, two of which
still remained with their freight on the heaving water.  Many incidents
of a thrilling nature were enacted that night.  One of the most
interesting, perhaps, occurred soon after that which has just been
related.

In one of the boats was the young wife of an emigrant, who, having been
compelled to separate from his wife and child when they left the burning
ship in the first boat, had come alongside of the "Trident" in another
boat.  Being an active man, he had caught a rope and hauled himself on
board some time before his wife was rescued.  The poor young mother had
tied her infant tightly to her bosom by means of a shawl, in order to
make sure that she should share its fate, whatever that might be.

When the boat sheered up alongside, her husband was standing in the
chains, anxious to render her assistance.  The woman chanced to come
near to Bax, but not sufficiently so to grasp him.  She had witnessed
his great power and success in saving others, and a feeling of strong
confidence made her resolve to be caught hold of by him, if possible.
She therefore drew back from the grasp of a stout fellow who held out
his brawny arms to her.

Bax noticed this occur twice, and understood the poor woman's motive.
Feeling proud of the confidence thus placed in him, he watched his
opportunity.  The boat surged up, but did not come near enough.  It
swept away from the ship, and the poor woman's hands played nervously
about the folds of the shawl, as she tried to adjust them more securely
round her infant.  Again the boat rose on a wave; the woman stood ready,
and Bax stooped.  It did not come quite near enough, but the
disappointed woman, becoming desperate, suddenly put her foot on the
gunwale, stood up at full length, and stretched out her arms.  Bax just
caught her by the hands when the boat was swept from under her.

Similar incidents had occurred so often that little anxiety was felt;
but our hero's strength was now thoroughly exhausted.  He could not haul
her up, he could only hold on and shout for assistance.  It was promptly
rendered, but before the poor woman could be rescued the infant slipped
from the shawl, which the straightening of the mother's arms and her
suspended position had loosened.  A cry burst from the agonised father,
who stooped, and stood in the attitude of one ready to plunge into the
sea.  The mother felt the child slipping, and a piercing shriek escaped
from her as she raised her knees and caught it between them.  With
muscular power, intensified by a mother's love, she held the infant in
this strange position until both were drawn up and placed in safety on
the deck!

This was the last of Bax's achievements on that eventful night.  He was
so thoroughly worn out by the long-continued and tremendous exertions he
had been called on to make, that his strength, great though it was,
broke down.  He staggered down into the cabin, flung himself, wet as he
was, on a couch, and almost instantly fell into a sleep so deep that he
could not be roused for more than a moment or two at a time.  Seeing
this, Tommy bade the bystanders leave him alone for a few minutes until
he should come back, when, according to his own expression, "he would
screw him up all right and tight!"  Every one was by this time so
thoroughly convinced that the boy was quite able to manage his friend
that they stood still awaiting his return with much curiosity.

Tommy soon returned with a tumbler of hot brandy and water, followed by
the steward with a pile of blankets.

"Hold that a minute," said the boy, handing the tumbler to a little old
gentleman who stood swaying to and fro with the motion of the vessel,
and staring at Bax as if he had been a half-drowned sea-monster.

"Now, then," cried Tommy, punching his friend severely in the ribs,
seizing the hair of his head with both hands, and shaking him until his
neck seemed dislocated,--to the surprise of all and the horror of not a
few!

The result was that Bax grumbled angrily, half awoke, and raised himself
on one elbow.

"Drink, you tom-tit!" said the boy, catching the tumbler from the old
gentleman, and applying it to his friend's lips.

Bax smiled, drank, and fell back on the pillow with a deep sigh of
satisfaction.  Then Tommy spread blanket after blanket over him, and
"tucked him in" so neatly and with such a business-like air, that two or
three mothers then present expressed their admiration and wonder in
audible whispers.

While Bax was being thus carefully tended by Tommy and a knot of
sympathisers, the passengers and crew vied with each other in making the
rescued people as comfortable as circumstances would permit.

Meanwhile the "Trident" was again laid on her course, and, thus crowded
with human beings, steered before favouring breezes for the shores of
old England.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

MYSTERIOUS DOINGS.

We return, now, to the coast of Kent, and beg the reader to follow us
into the Smuggler's Cave at Saint Margaret's Bay.

Here, in a dark corner, sat old Jeph.  It was a stormy Sunday afternoon.
The old man had gone to the Bay to visit Coleman, and accompany him to
his place of worship.  Jeph had wandered alone in the direction of the
cave after church.  He found that some one had recently cleared its
mouth of the rubbish that usually filled it, and that, by bending low,
he could gain an entrance.

Being of an adventurous disposition, the old man went in, and, seating
himself on a projecting rock in a dark corner, fell into a profound
reverie.  He was startled out of this by the sound of approaching
footsteps.

"Come in, come in," said a deep hoarse voice, which Jeph at once
recognised as that of Long Orrick, his old enemy.  "Come in, Nick; you
seem to have got a'feer'd o' the dark of late.  We'll be out o' sight
here, and I'll amuse ye till this squall blows over with an account o'
what I heer'd the old man say."

"This squall, as ye call it, won't blow over so soon as ye think,"
replied Rodney Nick in a sulky tone.  "Hows'ever, we may as well wait
here as anywhere else; or die here for all that I care!"

"Hallo! messmate, wot's ado that ye should go into the blues when we're
on the pint o' making our fortins?" said Orrick.

"Ado!" cried Rodney angrily, "is it not bad enough to be called messmate
by _you_, and not be able to deny it?"

"You're civil, anyhow," said Orrick, with an oath.

"I mean to be," retorted Nick, fiercely.

"Come, come, it's no use quarrelling," said Orrick, with an affectation
of good-humour.  "Never say die!  Nick; them's the words o' the
immortial Nelson, w'en he gave the signal to blaze away at Trafalgar.
But sit ye down here on this rock, and I'll tell ye all about wot I
see'd last night.  Ye'd like to know, I dessay."

"I'd like to have know'd sooner, if you had seen fit to tell me," said
Rodney Nick, in a gruff tone.

"Well, then, keep yer mind easy, and here goes.  You know as how I
chanced to hear old Jeph make an appointment with that young puppy, Guy
Foster, to meet him at the darkest hour o' night at the tomb o' Mary
Bax.  Thinks I, it won't be for nothin' you're goin' to meet at sich an
hour in sich a place, my hearties, so I'll go an' keep ye company in a
_private_ way!

"You may be sure I was up to time.  Two hours did I wait in the ditch
behind the tomb, and I can tell ye, Nick, it's desprit eerie work
a-sittin' there all alone of a dark night, a-countin' of the beatins of
yer 'art, an' thinkin' every shadow of the clouds is a ghost.
Hows'ever, the old man came at last, and lies down flat on the grave,
and begins to groan a bit.  Arter that he takes to prayin', an', d'ye
know, the way that old feller prays is a caution.  The parsons couldn't
hold a candle to him.  Not that I ever heer'd ony of 'em, but I _s'pose_
they couldn't!

"Well, he was cut short in the middle by the arrival of the puppy--."

"Wot puppy?" inquired Rodney.

"Guy, to be sure; ain't he the biggest puppy in Deal?" said Orrick.

"Mayhap, but he ain't the _longest_," retorted Rodney; "go on."

"Humph!--well, down sits Guy on the head o' the tombstone, and pats old
Jeph on the shoulder.

"`Here I am, Jeph; come now, what is it you are so anxious to tell me?'

"The old man sat up: `I'm goin' to die,' says he.

"`Nonsense,' cried the young 'un, in a cheerie tone, by way of "don't
say that."  `You're as tough as an old bo'sn.  Come, that wasn't what
you wanted to tell me, I'm sure.'

"`Ay, but it was,' says the old man in sich an earnest voice that the
young 'un was forced to become serious.  `Listen, Guy,' he goes on, `I'm
goin' to die, an' there's no one in this world as I've got to look after
me.'

"Guy was goin' to interrupt him at this point, but he laid his hand on
his shoulder and bade him be silent.

"`I've got no relations, Guy, except two,' says he, `an' I've no
childer.  I never married.  The only girl I ever loved lies under the
cold, cold sod.  You know that I'm a poor man, an' the two relations I
spoke of are rich--rich--ay, and they're fond o' money.  Mayhap that's
the reason they _are_ rich!  Moreover, they know I've got the matter o'
forty pounds or thereabouts, and I know that when I die they'll fight
for it--small though it is, and rich though they be--and my poor fortune
will either go to them or to the lawyers.  Now, Guy, this must not be;
so I want you to do me a kindness.  I'm too old and frail to go about
matters o' business, an' I never was good at wot they call business in
my best days, so I want you to pay all my debts for me, and bring me the
receipts.'

"`I'll do it, Jeph,' said Guy, `and much more than that, if you'll only
tell me how I can serve you; but you mustn't speak in that sorrowful way
about dying.'

"`Sorrowful!' cries the old man, quite surprised like; `bless your
heart, I'm not sorrowful.  Don't the Book say, "It's better to be absent
from the body and present with the Lord?"' (ah, you may grin as you
please, Nick, but I give ye the 'xact words o' the old hypocrite.) `No,
no, Guy,' continued Jeph, `I'll be right glad to go; many a sad yet
pleasant hour have I spent here, but I'm weary now, and would fain go,
if the Lord will.  Now, it's my opinion that I've just two weeks to
