men and ships as he deems needful, and go into yonder small fiord where
there is a pine wood on the hillside.  There let him make a long and
strong boom of timber, while we are engaged in the fight.  I will drive
as many of the ships as I can into Horlingfiord, and when that is done
let him come out and stretch the boom right across, so that none of them
shall escape.  And, harkee, see that the man thou choosest for this duty
is an able man, and does it well, else shall his head be lopped off."

After issuing this command the King resigned the helm, and ordered his
banner to be set up, which was done immediately.  At the same time his
opponents shook out their banners, and both fleets were put in order of
battle.

As both were arrayed much in the same way, it will be sufficient to
describe the arrangements made by Haldor the Fierce, who had been
elected commander-in-chief of the small kings' fleet.

When Haldor saw the King's banner displayed, he unfurled his own in the
centre of the fleet, and arranged his force for attack right against it.
Alongside of him on the right was Ulf of Romsdal with thirty ships, and
on his left was old Guttorm Stoutheart with twenty-five ships.  These
composed the centre of the line.  Kettle Flatnose commanded the men on
the forecastle in Ulf's longship, and Thorer the Thick was over those in
Haldor's vessel.

The right wing was commanded by Solve Klofe, under whom were Eric of
Hordaland with fifteen ships; Sulke of Rogaland and his brother Sote
with thirty ships, as well as Kiotve of Agder, and some others with many
ships--all of large size.

The left wing was led by King Hakon of Drontheim, under whom were Roald
Ryg and Hadd the Hard, and Thor Haklang, with a good many ships.  Solve
Klofe laid his ships against King Harald's left wing, which was under
Eindrid, son of Mornef, and Hakon laid his against King Sigurd of Royer,
who led Harald's right wing.  All the chiefs on either side laid their
ships according as they were bold or well equipped.  When all was ready,
they bound the ships together by the stems, and advanced towards each
other at the sound of the war-trumpet.  But as the fleets were so large,
many of the smaller vessels remained loose, and, as it were, went about
skirmishing independently.  These were laid forward in the fight,
according to the courage of their commanders, which was very unequal.

Among these roving warriors were our heroes Erling and Glumm, each in
one of his own small cutters, with about forty men.

As soon as the war-blast sounded the men rode forward to the attack, and
soon narrowed the small space that lay between the hostile fleets.  Then
Haldor and the other commanders went down to the sides of their ships,
where the men stood so thick that their shields touched all round, and
encouraged them to fight well for the freedom of old Norway--to which
they replied with loud huzzas.  Immediately after the air was darkened
with a cloud of arrows, and the fight began.

There were scalds in both fleets at that fight, these afterwards wrote a
poem descriptive of it, part of which we now quote:

  "With falcon eye and courage bright,
  Haldor the Fierce prepared for fight;
  `Hand up the arms to one and all!'
  He cries.  `My men, we'll win or fall!
  Sooner than fly, heaped on each other,
  Each man will fall across his brother!'
  Thus spake, and through his vessels' throng
  His mighty warship moved along.
  He ran her gaily to the front,
  To meet the coming battle's brunt--
  Then gave the word the ships to bind
  And shake his banner to the wind.
  Our oars were stowed, our lances high
  Swung to and fro athwart the sky.
  Haldor the Fierce went through the ranks,
  Drawn up beside the rowers' banks,
  Where rows of shields seemed to enclose
  The ship's deck from the boarding foes,
  Encouraging his chosen crew,
  He tells his brave lads to stand true,
  And rows against--while arrows sing--
  The Dragon of the tyrant King.
  With glowing hearts and loud huzzas,
  His men lay on in freedom's cause.
  The sea-steeds foam; they plunge and rock:
  The warriors meet in battle shock;
  The ring-linked coats of strongest mail
  Could not withstand the iron hail.
  The fire of battle raged around;
  Odin's steel shirts flew all unbound.
  The pelting shower of stone and steel,
  Caused many a Norseman stout to reel,
  The red blood poured like summer rain;
  The foam was scarlet on the main;
  But, all unmoved like oak in wood,
  Silent and grim fierce Haldor stood,
  Until his axe could reach the foe--
  Then--swift he thundered blow on blow.
  And ever, as his axe came down,
  It cleft or crushed another crown.
  Elsewhere the chiefs on either side
  Fought gallantly above the tide.
  King Hakon pressed King Sigurd sore,
  And Ulf made Hake the berserk roar,
  And Kettle Flatnose dared to spring
  On board the ship of Norway's King.
  Old Guttorm Stoutheart's mighty shout
  Above the din was heard throughout,
  And Solve Klofe, 'gainst Mornef's son,
  Slew right and left till day was done.
  While, all around the loose ships rowed--
  Where'er they went the red stream flowed.
  Chief among these was Erling bold
  And Glumm the Gruff, of whom 'tis told
  They rushed in thickest of the fray--
  Whatever part the line gave way--
  And twice, and thrice, retrieved the day.
  But heart, and strength, and courage true,
  Could not avail where one fought two.
  King Harald, foremost in the fight,
  With flashing sword, resistless might,
  Pushed on and slew, and dyed with red
  The bright steel cap on many a head.
  Against the hero's shield in vain,
  The arrow-storm sends forth its rain.
  The javelins and spear-thrusts fail
  To pierce his coat of ringed mail.
  The King stands on the blood-stained deck;
  Trampling on many a foeman's neck;
  And high above the dinning stound
  Of helm and axe, and ringing sound
  Of blade, and shield, and raven's cry
  Is heard the shout of--`Victory!'"

In this poem the scald gives only an outline of the great fight.  Let us
follow more closely the action of those in whom we are peculiarly
interested.

For more than two hours the battle raged with unabated fury--victory
inclining to neither side; but as the day advanced, the energy with
which Solve Klofe pushed the right wing began to tell, and the King's
men gave way a little at that part.  Harald, however, was on the alert.
He sent some of his loose ships to reinforce them, and so regained his
position.  A short time after that, some of Solve's ships were boarded,
but at that moment Erling and Glumm chanced to pass in their cutters--
for they kept always close together--and they gave such a shout, while
they turned and pulled to the rescue, that the men, who were wavering,
took heart again and drove the foe overboard.  Just then the ship on the
right of Solve Klofe's vessel was also boarded by the enemy.  Seeing
this, Erling called to Glumm that there was need of succour there, and
they rowed swiftly to the spot.

"Art thou hard pressed, Solve?" asked Erling, as he ranged up to the
stern of his friend's ship.

Solve was so furious that he could not answer, but pointed to the ship
next his, and sprang on the edge of his own, intending to leap into that
of the enemy, and get to the forefront.  At the same time Eindrid, son
of Mornef, stood up on the high foredeck of his ship with a large stone
in his hand.  He was a very powerful man, and hurled the stone with such
force against Solve's shield that it battered him down, and he fell back
into his own ship much stunned.  Seeing this, Erling bade two of his men
follow him, leaped into Solve's ship, and thence into the one where the
fight was sharpest.  Glumm followed him closely with his long two-handed
sword, and these two fought so dreadfully that Eindrid's men were driven
back into their own ship again.  Then Erling ran to the place where the
high stern was wedged between two of the enemy's ships, and sprang on
the forecastle of Eindrid's ship.

"Thou art a bold man!" said Eindrid, turning on him.

"That may be as thou sayest," replied Erling, at the same time catching
a thrust on his shield, which he returned with such interest with his
axe that Eindrid's head was nearly severed from his body.  At the same
moment Glumm cut down a famous berserk who ran at him, and in a few
minutes they had cleared the deck of the ship, and taken possession of
it.  But this was scarcely accomplished when a cry arose that the left
wing under King Hakon was giving way.

At once Erling and Glumm ran back to their cutters, and made towards
that part of the line, followed by several of the loose ships.  Here
they found that King Hakon was very hard pressed by Sigurd of Royer, so
they pushed in among the ships, and soon Erling's well-known war-cry was
heard, and his tall form was seen sweeping men down before him with his
great axe, like a mower cutting grass.  Glumm, however, did not keep
close to him this time, but made direct for Hakon's ship, for he
remembered that he was Ada's father, and thought he might do him some
service.

As he was coming near he saw Swankie, a famous berserk, fighting
furiously on board Hakon's ship, and roaring, as was the wont of
berserkers sometimes, like a wild bull.  Hakon's men had formed a
shield-circle round their chief, and were defending him bravely; but the
berserk was an uncommonly stout man, very brisk and active, and
exceedingly furious, as well as dexterous with his weapons.  He slew so
many men that the shield-circle was broken, and he made at Hakon just as
Glumm leaped into the ship at the stern.  King Hakon was a stout man and
brave, but he was getting old, and not so active as he used to be.
Nevertheless he met Swankie like a man, and dealt him a blow on his
helmet which made him stagger.  The berserk uttered a fearful roar, and
struck at Hakon so fiercely that he split the upper part of his shield
and cut open his helmet.  Hakon fell, but before he could repeat the
blow Glumm was upon him.

"What! is it thou, Swankie?" he cried.  "Dog, methought I had killed
thee long ago!"

"That is yet to be done," cried the berserk, leaping upon Glumm with a
sweeping blow of his sword.  Glumm stooped quickly, and the blow passed
over his head; then he fetched a sudden cut at Swankie, and split him
down from the neck to the waist, saying, "It is done now, methinks," as
he drew out his sword.  Glumm did not go forward, but let his men drive
back the foe, while he turned and kneeled beside Hakon.

"Has the dog hurt thee badly?" he asked, raising the old warrior's head
on his knee, and speaking in a voice of almost womanly tenderness.

Hakon made an effort to speak, but for some time was unable to do so,
and Glumm held his shield over him to keep off the stones and arrows
which fell thickly around them.  After a few moments Hakon wiped away
the blood which flowed from a deep wound in his forehead, and looked up
wildly in Glumm's face.  He tried again to speak, and Glumm,
misunderstanding the few words he muttered, said: "Thou art already
avenged, King Hakon; Swankie the berserk is dead."

The dying man made another effort to speak, and was successful.

"That concerns me little, Glumm.  Thou lovest Ada, I know.  This ring--
take it to her, say her father's last thoughts were of her.  Be a good
husband, Glumm.  The brooch--see."

"Which?" asked Glumm, looking at several silver brooches with which the
old warrior's armour was fastened--"this one on thy breast?"

"Aye, take it--it was--her mother's."

The warrior's spirit seemed to be relieved when he had said this.  He
sank down into a state resembling sleep.  Once or twice afterwards he
opened his eyes and gazed up into the bright sky with a doubtful yet
earnest and enquiring gaze.  Gradually the breathing became fainter,
until it ceased altogether, and Glumm saw that the old man was dead.

Fastening the brooch on his own broad chest, and putting the ring on his
finger, Glumm rose, seized his sword, and rushed again into the thick of
the fight with tenfold more fury than he had yet displayed, and ere long
the danger that threatened the left wing was for the time averted.

Meanwhile in the centre there was an equally uncertain and obstinate
conflict--for the chiefs on either side were mighty men of valour.
Wherever Old Guttorm's voice was heard, there victory inclined.  Haldor,
on the other hand, did not shout, but he laid about him with such wild
ferocity that many men quailed at the very sight of him, and wherever he
went he was victorious.  It was some time before he managed to get
alongside of King Harald Fairhair's ship, but when he did so the fight
became sharp in the extreme.

All the men in King Harald's ship, except the berserks, were clad in
coats of ring mail, and wore foreign helmets, and most of them had white
shields.  Besides, as has been said, each man was celebrated for
personal strength and daring, so that none of those who were opposed to
them could make head against them.  The arrows and spears fell harmless
from their shields, casques, and coats of mail, and it was only now and
then--as when a shaft happened to enter a man's eye--that any fell.
When Haldor's forecastle men attacked the berserkers on the high fore
deck of the Dragon, the fighting was terrible, for the berserkers all
roared aloud and fought with the wild fury of madmen, and so fierce was
their onslaught that Haldor's men were forced at first to give back.
But Thorer the Thick guarded himself warily, and being well armed
escaped injury for a time.  When he saw the berserkers beginning to
flag, he leaped forward like a lion, and hewed them down right and left,
so that his men drove the enemy back into the Dragon.  Some of them
slipped on the gun-wales, and so did some of Haldor's men, all of whom
fell into the sea, and a few of them were drowned, while others were
killed, but one or two escaped by swimming.

Ulf's ship was also pretty close to the Dragon, and he wished greatly to
board it, but was so hard beset by the ship of Nicolas Skialdvarsson
that he could not do so for a long time.  Here Kettle Flatnose did
prodigies of valour.  He stood on the high fore-deck with his favourite
weapon, the hook, and therewith pulled a great number of men off the
enemy's deck into the sea.  At last he got a footing on their gunwale,
dropped his hook, drew his sword, and soon cleared his way aft.  Ulf
leaped after him, drove the men into the waist, and then the most of
them were slain, and lay in heaps one upon another.  After that it was
not difficult to clear the poop.  Skialdvarsson defended it well, but he
could not stand before Ulf, who finally cut off his head, and so the
ship was won.

This vessel lay alongside that of King Harald; and although the King was
fully engaged with Haldor at the time, he observed the conquest of
Skialdvarsson by Ulf, and also perceived that Ulf's men were crowding
the side of the vessel, and throwing grappling-irons into his own ship
with a view to board it; for there was a space between the ships a
little too wide for men to leap.  Springing to the side, the King cut
the grappling-irons with a sweep of his sword.

"That was well tried," he said.

"It shall be tried again," cried Ulf, heaving another iron, which nearly
struck the King, but Harald's sword flashed through the air, and again
the iron was cut.

At that moment Kettle Flatnose stepped back a few paces, and with a
mighty rush leaped right over the space in all his war gear, and
alighted on the Dragon's deck within a yard of the King.  It was a
tremendous leap, and so nearly beyond the compass of Kettle's powers
that he was scarcely able to retain his foothold, but stood for a moment
on the edge of the vessel with shield and sword upheaved, as he
staggered to regain his balance.  Thus exposed, he might have easily
been slain; but the King, instead of using his sword, stepped forward,
and with his left hand pushed the Irishman overboard.  The cheer which
greeted his daring leap had scarcely ceased to ring when he fell heavily
into the sea.

"A goodly man, and a bold attempt," said the King, with a smile, as he
turned to Jarl Rongvold.  "'Twould have been a pity to slay him
outright.  If he can swim he may yet live to fight another battle."

"True, sire," replied the jarl, who was looking over the side at the
place where Kettle fell; "but methinks he has struck his head on an oar,
and will never succeed in swimming towards a friendly hand."

This indeed seemed to be true; for Kettle lay with his arm over an oar,
and his head hanging down in the water, like a dead man.  Yet there was
life in him, for his fingers moved.  Ulf had witnessed all this, and was
on the point of attempting to leap across to Harald's ship when Kettle
fell.  He paused, and, seeing that his comrade was apparently being
drowned, at once dropped sword and shield, and sprang into the sea after
him.

At that moment a number of the King's boldest and best armed men
observed that the two ships had drawn a little nearer to each other.  In
a moment they leaped across the intervening space, took their opponents
by surprise, and quickly regained the ship.

While this had been going on at the poop, the fight on the forecastle
had raged with extreme fury, for Haldor the Fierce had gained a footing
on the Dragon's deck, and was engaged in mortal combat with Hake the
berserk, whom he was slowly but surely driving back.  His son Erling the
Bold, who observed what was going on, had run his cutter along the stern
of his father's ship, and was hastening to his aid, when King Harald
became aware that his men were giving way, and rushed to their support.
He went forward raging with anger, and as he ran he picked up a huge
stone, which he hurled before him.  Haldor was at the moment in the act
of fetching a deadly cut at Hake, whom he had disarmed.  The stone
struck him full in the chest, and he fell backward just as Erling
reached his side.

A great cheer arose at this time on the right; for there the wing of the
Southland men was broken, and everywhere King Harald's men were
victorious.

"Hold thou them in check, Glumm," cried Erling to his friend, as he
quickly raised his father in his arms and bore him away to his cutter.

Glumm, who had followed his friend like his shadow, sprang forward and
engaged Hake, who had recovered his sword, and who found this new enemy
little, if at all, less formidable than the other.

Erling placed his father carefully in the cutter.

"Here, Thorer," he said, "do thou guard my father, and hold thyself and
the carles in readiness to push off.  The day is lost, I see.  I go to
slay the King, and will return presently."

He leaped away as he spoke, and regained the foredeck of the Dragon,
where Glumm and his men were still engaged with the berserkers, just as
the King came to the front.  The instant he saw Erling he leaped upon
