A strange unaccountable thrill ran through the boy's frame.  He stooped,
looked under the brim of the hat, and beheld his father!

"Sammy--dear, dear Sammy," whispered the man, in a husky voice.

But Sammy could not reply.  He was thunderstruck.  Neither could his
father speak, for he was choking.

But Reggie North had heard enough.  He was quick-witted, and at once
guessed the situation.

"Now then, old gen'lm'n," he whispered, "don't you go an' make a fuss,
if you're wise.  Go out as quiet as you came in, an' leave this young
'un to me.  It's all right.  I'm on _your_ side."

Samuel Twitter senior was impressed with the honesty of the man's
manner, and the wisdom of his advice.  Letting go the hand, after a
parting squeeze, he rose up and left the room.  Two minutes later, North
and Sammy followed.

They found the old father outside, who again grasped his son's hand with
the words, "Sammy, my boy--dear Sammy;" but he never got further than
that.

Number 666 was there too.

"You'll find the cab at the end of the street, sir," he said, and next
moment Sammy found himself borne along--not unwillingly--by North and
his father.

A cab door was opened.  A female form was seen with outstretched arms.

"Mother!"

"Sammy--darling--"

The returning prodigal disappeared into the cab.  Mr Twitter turned
round.

"Thank you.  God bless you, whoever you are," he said, fumbling in his
vest pocket; having forgotten that he represented an abject beggar, and
had no money there.

"No thanks to me, sir.  Look higher," said the Bible-seller, thrusting
the old gentleman almost forcibly into the vehicle.  "Now then, cabby,
drive on."

The cabby obeyed.  Having already received his instructions he did not
drive home.  Where he drove to is a matter of small consequence.  It was
to an unknown house, and a perfect stranger to Sammy opened the door.
Mrs Twitter remained in the cab while Sammy and his father entered the
house, the latter carrying a bundle in his hand.  They were shown into
what the boy must have considered--if he considered anything at all just
then--a preposterously small room.

The lady of the house evidently expected them, for she said, "The bath
is quite ready, sir."

"Now, Sammy,--dear boy," said Mr Twitter, "off with your rags--and
g-git into that b-bath."

Obviously Mr Twitter did not speak with ease.  In truth it was all he
could do to contain himself, and he felt that his only chance of bearing
up was to say nothing more than was absolutely necessary in short
ejaculatory phrases.  Sammy was deeply touched, and began to wash his
dirty face with a few quiet tears before taking his bath.

"Now then, Sammy--look sharp!  You didn't use--to--be--so--slow! eh?"

"No, father.  I suppose it--it--is want of habit.  I haven't undressed
much of late."

This very nearly upset poor Mr Twitter.  He made no reply, but assisted
his son to disrobe with a degree of awkwardness that tended to delay
progress.

"It--it's not too hot--eh?"

"Oh! no, father.  It's--it's--v-very nice."

"Go at it with a will, Sammy.  Head and all, my boy--down with it.  And
don't spare the soap.  Lots of soap here, Sammy--no end of soap!"

The truth of which Mr Twitter proceeded to illustrate by covering his
son with a lather that caused him quickly to resemble whipped cream.

"Oh! hold on, father, it's getting into my eyes."

"My boy--dear Sammy--forgive me.  I didn't quite know what I was doing.
Never mind.  Down you go again, Sammy--head and all.  That's it.  Now,
that's enough; out you come."

"Oh! father," said the poor boy, while invisible tears trickled over his
wet face, as he stepped out of the bath, "it's so good of you to forgive
me so freely."

"Forgive you, my son! forgive! why, I'd--I'd--" He could say no more,
but suddenly clasped Sammy to his heart, thereby rendering his face and
person soap-suddy and wet to a ridiculous extent.

Unclasping his arms and stepping back, he looked down at himself.

"You dirty boy! what d'you mean by it?"

"It's your own fault, daddy," replied Sam, with a hysterical laugh, as
he enveloped himself in a towel.

A knock at the bath-room door here produced dead silence.

"Please, sir," said a female voice, "the lady in the cab sends to say
that she's gettin' impatient."

"Tell the lady in the cab to drive about and take an airing for ten
minutes," replied Mr Twitter with reckless hilarity.

"Yes, sir."

"Now, my boy, here's your toggery," said the irrepressible father,
hovering round his recovered son like a moth round a candle--"your best
suit, Sammy; the one you used to wear only on Sundays, you extravagant
fellow."

Sammy put it on with some difficulty from want of practice, and, after
combing out and brushing his hair, he presented such a changed
appearance that none of his late companions could have recognised him.
His father, after fastening up his coat with every button in its wrong
hole, and causing as much delay as possible by assisting him to dress,
finally hustled him down-stairs and into the cab, where he was
immediately re-enveloped by Mrs Twitter.

He was not permitted to see any one that night, but was taken straight
to his room, where his mother comforted, prayed with, fed and fondled
him, and then allowed him to go to bed.

Next morning early--before breakfast--Mrs Twitter assembled all the
little Twitters, and put them on chairs in a row--according to order,
for Mrs Twitter's mind was orderly in a remarkable degree.  They ranged
from right to left thus:--

Molly, Willie, Fred, Lucy, and Alice--with Alice's doll on a doll's
chair at the left flank of the line.

"Now children," said Mrs Twitter, sitting down in front of the row with
an aspect so solemn that they all immediately made their mouths very
small and their eyes very large--in which respect they brought
themselves into wonderful correspondence with Alice's doll.  "Now
children, your dear brother Sammy has come home."

"Oh! how nice!  Where has he been?  What has he seen?  Why has he been
away so long?  How jolly!" were the various expressions with which the
news was received.

"Silence."

The stillness that followed was almost oppressive, for the little
Twitters had been trained to prompt obedience.  To say truth they had
not been difficult to train, for they were all essentially mild.

"Now, remember, when he comes down to breakfast you are to take no
notice whatever of his having been away--no notice at all."

"Are we not even to say good-morning or kiss him, mamma?" asked little
Alice with a look of wonder.

"Dear child, you do not understand me.  We are all charmed to see Sammy
back, and so thankful--so glad--that he has come, and we will kiss him
and say whatever we please to him _except_," (here she cast an awful eye
along the line and dropped her voice), "_except_ ask him _where--he--
has--been_."

"Mayn't we ask him how he liked it, mamma?" said Alice.

"Liked what, child?"

"Where he has been, mamma."

"No, not a word about where he has been; only that we are so glad, so
very glad, to see him back."

Fred, who had an argumentative turn of mind, thought that this would be
a rather demonstrative though indirect recognition of the fact that
Sammy had been _somewhere_ that was wrong, but, having been trained to
unquestioning obedience, Fred said nothing.

"Now, dolly," whispered little Alice, bending down, "'member dat--you're
so glad Sammy's come back; mustn't say more--not a word more."

"It is enough for you to know, my darlings," continued Mrs Twitter,
"that Sammy has been wandering and has come back."

"Listen, Dolly, you hear?  Sammy's been wandering an' come back.  Dat's
'nuff for you."

"You see, dears," continued Mrs Twitter, with a slightly perplexed
look, caused by her desire to save poor Sammy's feelings, and her
anxiety to steer clear of the slightest approach to deception, "you see,
Sammy has been long away, and has been very tired, and won't like to be
troubled with too many questions at breakfast, you know, so I want you
all to talk a good deal about anything you like--your lessons,--for
instance, when he comes down."

"Before we say good-morning, mamma, or after?" asked Alice, who was
extremely conscientious.

"Darling child," exclaimed the perplexed mother, "you'll never take it
in.  What I want to impress on you is--"

She stopped, suddenly, and what it was she meant to impress we shall
never more clearly know, for at that moment the foot of Sammy himself
was heard on the stair.

"Now, mind, children, not a word--not--a--word!"

The almost preternatural solemnity induced by this injunction was at
once put to flight by Sammy, at whom the whole family flew with one
accord and a united shriek--pulling him down on a chair and embracing
him almost to extinction.

Fortunately for Sammy, and his anxious mother, that which the most
earnest desire to obey orders would have failed to accomplish was
brought about by the native selfishness of poor humanity, for, the first
burst of welcome over, Alice began an elaborate account of her Dolly's
recent proceedings, which seemed to consist of knocking her head against
articles of furniture, punching out her own eyes and flattening her own
nose; while Fred talked of his latest efforts in shipbuilding; Willie of
his hopes in regard to soldiering, and Lucy of her attempts to draw and
paint.

Mr and Mrs Twitter contented themselves with gazing on Sammy's
somewhat worn face, and lying in watch, so that, when Alice or any of
the young members of the flock seemed about to stray on the forbidden
ground, they should be ready to descend, like two wolves on the fold,
remorselessly change the subject of conversation, and carry all before
them.

Thus tenderly was that prodigal son received back to his father's house.



CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

CANADA AGAIN--AND SURPRISING NEWS.

It is most refreshing to those who have been long cooped up in a city to
fly on the wings of steam to the country and take refuge among the
scents of flowers and fields and trees.  We have said this, or something
like it, before, and remorselessly repeat it--for it is a grand truism.

Let us then indulge ourselves a little with a glance at the farm of
Brankly in Canada.

Lake Ontario, with its expanse of boundless blue, rolls like an ocean in
the far distance.  We can see it from the hill-top where the
sweet-smelling red-pines grow.  At the bottom of the hill lies Brankly
itself, with its orchards and homestead and fields of golden grain, and
its little river, with the little saw-mill going as pertinaciously as if
it, like the river, had resolved to go on for ever.  Cattle are there,
sheep are there, horses and wagons are there, wealth and prosperity are
there, above all happiness is there, because there also dwells the love
of God.

It is a good many years, reader, since you and I were last here.  Then,
the farm buildings and fences were brand-new.  Now, although of course
not old, they bear decided traces of exposure to the weather.  But these
marks only give compactness of look and unity of tone to everything,
improving the appearance of the place vastly.

The fences, which at first looked blank and staring, as if wondering how
they had got there, are now more in harmony with the fields they
enclose.  The plants which at first struggled as if unwillingly on the
dwelling-house, now cling to it and climb about it with the affectionate
embrace of old friends.  Everything is improved--Well, no, not
everything.  Mr Merryboy's legs have not improved.  They will not move
as actively as they were wont to do.  They will not go so far, and they
demand the assistance of a stick.  But Mr Merryboy's spirit has
improved--though it was pretty good before, and his tendency to
universal philanthropy has increased to such an extent that the people
of the district have got into a way of sending their bad men and boys to
work on his farm in order that they may become good!

Mrs Merryboy, however, has improved in every way, and is more blooming
than ever, as well as a trifle stouter, but Mrs Merryboy senior,
although advanced spiritually, has degenerated a little physically.  The
few teeth that kept her nose and chin apart having disappeared, her
mouth has also vanished, though there is a decided mark which tells
where it was--especially when she speaks or smiles.  The hair on her
forehead has become as pure white as the winter snows of Canada.
Wrinkles on her visage have become the rule, not the exception, but as
they all run into comical twists, and play in the forms of humour, they
may, perhaps, be regarded as a physical improvement.  She is stone deaf
now, but this also may be put to the credit side of her account, for it
has rendered needless those awkward efforts to speak loud and painful
attempts to hear which used to trouble the family in days gone by.  It
is quite clear, however, when you look into granny's coal-black eyes,
that if she were to live to the age of Methuselah she will never be
blind, nor ill-natured, nor less pleased with herself, her surroundings,
and the whole order of things created!

But who are these that sit so gravely and busily engaged with breakfast
as though they had not the prospect of another meal that year?  Two
young men and a young girl.  One young man is broad and powerful though
short, with an incipient moustache and a fluff of whisker.  The other is
rather tall, slim, and gentlemanly, and still beardless.  The girl is
little, neat, well-made, at the budding period of life, brown-haired,
brown-eyed, round, soft--just such a creature as one feels disposed to
pat on the head and say, "My little pet!"

Why, these are two "waifs" and a "stray!"  Don't you know them?  Look
again.  Is not the stout fellow our friend Bobby Frog, the slim one Tim
Lumpy, and the girl Martha Mild?  But who, in all London, would believe
that these were children who had bean picked out of the gutter?
Nobody--except those good Samaritans who had helped to pick them up, and
who could show you the photographs of what they once were and what they
now are.

Mr Merryboy, although changed a little as regards legs, was not in the
least deteriorated as to lungs.  As Granny, Mrs Merryboy, and the young
people sat at breakfast he was heard at an immense distance off,
gradually making his way towards the house.

"Something seems to be wrong with father this morning, I think," said
Mrs Merryboy, junior, listening.

Granny, observing the action, pretended to listen, and smiled.

"He's either unusually jolly or unusually savage--a little more tea,
mother," said Tim Lumpy, pushing in his cup.

Tim, being father-and-motherless, called Mr Merryboy father and the
wife mother.  So did Martha, but Bobby Frog, remembering those whom he
had left at home, loyally declined, though he did not object to call the
elder Mrs Merryboy granny.

"Something for good or evil must have happened," said Bobby, laying down
his knife and fork as the growling sound drew nearer.

At last the door flew open and the storm burst in.  And we may remark
that Mr Merryboy's stormy nature was, if possible, a little more
obtrusive than it used to be, for whereas in former days his toes and
heels did most of the rattling-thunder business, the stick now came into
play as a prominent creator of din--not only when flourished by hand,
but often on its own account and unexpectedly, when propped clumsily in
awkward places.

"Hallo! good people all, how are 'ee? morning--morning.  Boys, d'ee know
that the saw-mill's come to grief?"

"No, are you in earnest, father?" cried Tim, jumping up.

"In earnest!  Of course I am.  Pretty engineers you are.  Sawed its own
bed in two, or burst itself.  Don't know which, and what's more I don't
care.  Come, Martha, my bantam chicken, let's have a cup of tea.  Bother
that stick, it can't keep its legs much better than myself.  How are
you, mother?  Glorious weather, isn't it?"

Mr Merryboy ignored deafness.  He continued to speak to his mother just
as though she heard him.

And she continued to nod and smile, and make-believe to hear with more
demonstration of face and cap than ever.  After all, her total loss of
hearing made little difference, her sentiments being what Bobby Frog in
his early days would have described in the words, "Wot's the hodds so
long as you're 'appy?"

But Bobby had now ceased to drop or misapply his aitches--though he
still had some trouble with his R's.

As he was chief engineer of the saw-mill, having turned out quite a
mechanical genius, he ran down to the scene of disaster with much
concern on hearing the old gentleman's report.

And, truly, when he and Tim reached the picturesque spot where, at the
water's edge among fine trees and shrubs, the mill stood clearly
reflected in its own dam, they found that the mischief done was
considerable.  The machinery, by which the frame with its log to be sawn
was moved along quarter-inch by quarter-inch at each stroke, was indeed
