down, replaces the blanket carefully."

They had, indeed, before beginning to saw up the bamboos, fastened
the blanket to one of the cross pieces of the stretcher and,
cutting this to the width of the passage, had jammed it close up to
the roof; so that the curtain, hanging down, effectually shut off
the light.

Stanley then descended the steps, and rejoined Harry below. Before
going down further, Stanley, who had during the day informed Harry
of his plan, told him of the start that they had made.

"Of course, it all depends upon what stones you meet with," Harry
said. "If you come to a big solid block, I don't see how you are
going to get through it."

"We have the hatchets, and can whittle it away; and perhaps we can
make some chisels, from the ramrods of your guards' guns. A lot can
be done, with patience and plenty of hands."

Stanley then went down below, and explained to the others the plan
proposed. The news gave them great satisfaction; for although
Meinik had told them there was a staircase above blocked with
stones, it had seemed so impossible, to him, to clear it that he
had placed no stress upon the fact; and the preparations made by
the enemy to cut off any possible retreat had greatly depressed
them.

Stanley took one of the iron ramrods and, raking some of the embers
from the fire, placed it in them, about a foot from one end; then
he directed the others to fan the embers, until they raised them
almost to white heat. Taking the ramrod out, he laid the edge of
one of their knives upon it and, striking its back with a stone,
soon cut through the glowing rod. He repeated the operation and
had, then, three short rods of equal length. He now heated one end
of each and, laying it on an axe on the ground, hammered it into
chisel shape with the back of a light hatchet; repeating this
several times, until it had the required shape and sharpness; then
he plunged this into a pot of water. He did the same with the other
two; and had, now, three chisels with which he hoped to be able to
chip away the stones. The other ramrod he left intact, except that
he sharpened one end.

Then, going up to Harry's room, he lay down and slept for some
hours; putting the two boys on watch, and bidding the trooper look
after them. The two Burmans, with one of the guards, were to go to
work with him. Several times he woke. The last time, on looking
out, he thought that there was a faint light in the sky and, going
down, called up the three men and, bidding them bring up the two
heavy axes, a light hatchet, and the three short chisels, he led
them up the steps to the working party.

"How have you got on, Meinik?"

"We have cleared four feet, master; but there is a big stone
sticking up, now, and we can do nothing with it."

"We will have a try, and do you all go down, at once.

"Take off your cloth, one of you, and fill it with this rubbish on
the steps. Do it as quickly as you can. The day will be breaking,
in a few minutes."

Stanley now climbed up, and investigated the passage. The bottom
was level. Every crack and crevice between the stones being filled
up with rubbish. The obstacle Meinik had spoken of evidently formed
part of a flat slab. It reached within an inch of the roof and, at
one side, touched the rock wall; at the other there was an
interval, of some four or five inches, and the earth and rubbish
had already been scraped out from behind it. Putting his hand in,
he found that the block was some four inches in thickness.

He thought that if he could but get a fair blow at it, with the
back of one of the heavy axes, he might break it off; but this was
impossible. The total width of the passage did not exceed three
feet; and as the men had, as they went, worked down somewhat, there
was now about thirty inches between the bed of earth and rubbish,
on which he was lying, and the roof. Taking the handle of the axe
in both hands, he used the head as a battering ram; but without any
success. He then called up the slightest of the three men, and told
him to crawl in beside him and, with their united strength, they
pounded the stone for some time. Finding that nothing could be done
this way, Stanley sent the man back again; and then, taking one of
the three chisels and a small hatchet, he proceeded to mark a line
along the bottom of the stone; and then, for ten minutes, worked
away on it with the chisel and hammer. Then he called up one of the
others, and showed him what he was to do. All day they worked by
turns and, though progress was very slow, by nightfall the groove
was half an inch deep.

Stanley and the strongest Burman then went in together and, lying
on their backs again, tried the effect of the heavy axe; but still
without success. Then Stanley told the man to get down and take out
the wedge, at the top of the axe; and to cut away the wood below
the head, so that the latter would slip down, four or five inches;
then to take off the head of the other heavy axe and put it on
above it, and replace the wedge. In a few minutes, the man rejoined
him.

"We must strike it as near the roof as we can," Stanley said. Both
grasped the handle firmly. "We will sway it backwards and forwards
three times and, the third time, strike.

"One, two, three--hooray!"

As the two-headed axe, driven with their united force, struck the
stone, there was a sharp crack.

"That has done it," Stanley said, turning over.

There was a dark line along the groove, and the top of the stone
inclined back, two inches from the perpendicular; being kept in its
place by the rubbish behind it. Stanley put his hand into the hole,
and got his fingers behind the stone; while the Burmese put the
chisel into the crack, and used it as a lever. In two or three
minutes the stone was moved out of its position, taken out of the
hole, and laid down on the steps.

Half an hour later Meinik came up, with a trooper, another guard,
and one of the boys; and was delighted to find that the obstacle,
which had seemed to him fatal to their hopes, had been removed.
Stanley showed how they had carried out the work; and then, with
his party, went down into the rock chambers.

"It was pretty tiring work, Harry," he said, "though we were only
at it about a quarter of an hour, at a time. My wrists and arms and
shoulders are aching, as if I had been beaten with sticks. Tomorrow
I will take up a good supply of firewood. The chisels got blunted
before we had worked an hour; and we should get on a deal faster,
if we could sharpen them frequently."

"Is the stone hard?"

"No; it is a sort of marble, I think. We had the underpart of the
slab on our side, and I did not think of looking when we took it
down. Anyhow, it was not very hard and, with a good strong chisel
and a short, heavy hammer, I am sure we could have done it in an
hour.

"Anyhow, it is a comfort that nothing came down on top of us. I
examined the pile carefully, and there had not been the slightest
movement among the lower stones; so that part of the difficulty
seems to have been got over.

"Now, I must go down and get something to eat, and then I will go
in for a good sleep. You are feeling all right, I hope?"

"Could not be doing better, Stanley. I have eaten three solid
meals, today; and have been sitting up on the edge of my bed, for
some time. I tried standing, but it was no go; still, I do think
that, in a day or two, I shall manage it."

For six days the work continued. One party watched, another slept,
and the third worked, by turns. Some of the stones gave much
greater trouble than the first they had met with; but having the
fire close by proved a great assistance, as the chisels could be
frequently sharpened. The men became more accustomed to the work,
and the steady progress they made greatly excited their hopes.

At the end of the week, but one stone barred the way. This,
however, was much the most formidable that they had encountered. It
seemed to have been a pillar, or a huge gate post; and was square,
measuring some twenty inches on each face. The obstacle was all the
more formidable, as the upper end was inclined towards them,
greatly increasing the difficulty in using the chisel. Beyond this,
as far as they could see, there was merely a mass of smaller
stones.

The party who had been working upon this block were much
disheartened, when Stanley went up to relieve them. Owing to the
inclination of the stone, their chisels could get but little bite
and, though they had been working for six hours at it, they had
scarcely made any impression; indeed, at only one point had they so
far broken the face that the chisel would cut. Meinik had come down
two hours before, to report to Stanley the nature of the obstacle
and, when he went up, he took with him the second ramrod, which had
not hitherto been used.

He saw at once that, as Meinik had told him, it would be impossible
to get through this block by the same means as before for, as the
groove deepened, the labour would become greater and greater and,
from the inclination of the stone, they would in time arrive at a
point where the axe could no longer be used to strike the chisel.

The point at which the slight indentation had been made was nearly
at the corner of the stone. This was gradually enlarged, by
hammering upon it with the head of the axe and, after an hour's
work, the surface had been so far pounded that the chisel could get
a flat hold upon it. Then Stanley and one of the Burmans lay down,
and placed the cutting end of the long ramrod against it; and the
others, by turns, struck the end with the back of a light hatchet,
those holding the rod turning it, slightly, after each blow. Every
half hour the edge of the chisel was resharpened and, by the time
the next party relieved them, a hole of half an inch in diameter,
and two inches deep, had been drilled in the stone. Stanley
remained with the newcomers for half an hour, instructing them in
the work, and then went below.

"Well, Stanley, what are you going to do with this monstrous stone
Meinik tells me of?"

"There is only one thing to do with it, Harry; that is, to blast
it. The block is so inclined that one can do nothing with the
chisels, and we are now drilling a hole. I don't know that I shall
succeed but, at any rate, I am going to have a try. If it fails, I
must hit on some other way. The provisions are holding out all
right; and Meinik calculates that, with a little stinginess, we
could manage for another three weeks. We have drilled the hole in
two inches today and, as we get more accustomed to the work, I dare
say we could do three inches in each shift. The block is twenty
inches through on the straight, and may be two feet on the line
that we follow; so that in four days we shall be nearly through it.

"In three weeks we shall have made five holes, which will weaken it
so that we may be able to break it off. However, I hope we shall
find one hole sufficient. I shall make it fifteen inches deep, and
then charge it with the contents of a dozen cartridges. I think
that ought to do it."

In two days and a half, the hole was of the required depth. Harry
had progressed so rapidly that he was able, that morning, to walk
across his room.

"We must try the shot, at once," Stanley said, "because if it
fails, we must go on working. If it succeeds we can, if we like,
wait for another week before we make off. By that time you will be
strong enough to be got through that low passage, and walk for a
little distance; when we can cut some poles, and rig up that
hammock again.

"Do you know anything about mining, for I know nothing? I only had
an idea how to drill the hole from seeing some engineers at work at
Agra, years ago; but I am sure I don't know how they fired the
shot, or prepared it."

"I can tell you a little about it, Stanley; for I have been down a
coal mine once or twice, and watched the men doing it. They first
of all put in the charge; then they put in a wooden rod, just the
thickness of the fuse they use; then they dropped in a little dry
dust round it, which they pressed down very carefully, with a small
wooden rod; then they damped some dust, and hammered that down
hard. After putting in about half an inch of this, they used dust
slightly moistened, beating it down as before. When it was quite
full, they pulled out the centre stick, and put the fuse into the
hole that it left."

"We have not got any fuse," Stanley said, "but I think that if we
take a narrow strip of cloth, moisten it, and rub gunpowder into
it; let it dry, and then roll it up, it would be all right. Then we
could lay a train of damp powder to it, set the end alight, and
bolt."

"I should think that that would do," Harry agreed, "but you would
have to bolt very sharp for, if it went off before you got to the
bottom of the steps, it might be very awkward."

"I don't think the effect of the shock will be as great as that,
Harry. It may crack the stone, but I should hardly think it would
send anything flying out of the hole."



Chapter 16: Rejoining.


Every day, since the siege had begun, the defenders had fired an
occasional shot at the stockade; not with any idea of doing any
damage, but in order that the assailants should know that they were
still in the cavern. That evening, when the hole had got to the
proper depth, Stanley, having prepared his fuse, went up with
twenty cartridges in his pocket, accompanied by Meinik. The hole
was charged and tamped, and the fuse inserted. This took a
considerable time. The fuse had been cut so that an inch of it
projected outside the hole. The other eight cartridges were then
broken up, and the powder moistened; and a train some two feet long
laid, from the fuse towards the entrance of the hole. Then a piece
of rag was wrapped round one end of the ramrod; and this, again,
was tied to a long rod that had, the night before, been cut by one
of the boys, who had slipped out noiselessly from the entrance. The
rag had been moistened, and rubbed with gunpowder.

"Now, Meinik," Stanley said, "everything is ready. This rod is
sixteen feet long, so that, lying down, my feet will be just at the
edge of the hole; and I shall be able to drop down, as soon as I
have lighted the train, and bolt. I shall fix a torch, a foot or so
from the train; then I shall only have to lift the rod to it, light
the rag, set fire to the train, and then slide down and bolt.

"Now, you must go down first."

"No, master," Meinik said firmly; "I will light the train. I do not
think that there is any danger but, whether there is or not, I
shall undertake it. If I am killed, it does not matter; while if
you were killed all would be lost for, if the explosion did not
burst the stone, I am sure that we should never be able to get
through it, without you to direct us. No, master, if you stay, I
stay; and that would only lessen our chances of running down the
steps in time."

Stanley argued, and even ordered, but Meinik was obstinate and,
seeing that the faithful Burman was not to be moved, he reluctantly
left the matter in his hands, and went downstairs. He moved a short
distance along the ledge, and waited. The time seemed an age to
him, so that he gave an exclamation of delight when Meinik suddenly
came into sight, and took his place beside him.

"I have lit the train, master. The powder fizzed up, but did not
seem to burn very fast."

It was, indeed, another two minutes before a deep muffled roar was
heard. There was no further noise, but they heard shouts from the
Burmans, behind the stockades.

"They will be wondering what the sound is," Stanley said, "but they
will not be able to tell from what direction it came; for I expect
they were pretty nearly all sound asleep. Now, let us go up and see
the result."

They made their way up the steps, which were now in entire
darkness. The curtain still hung in its place, some ten feet below
the obstacle. They lit a torch, from the embers in the pan; and
then Stanley climbed up into the passage, and hastily crawled
along.

He gave a cry of satisfaction, as he approached the end. The
explosion had been completely successful--the end of the block lay
on the ground. Whether the whole of it had been blown off, or not,
he could not see; but he felt sure that the greater portion must
have split off. It was evident that it would take a considerable
amount of time, and would require the strength of several men, to
get the block out. They therefore descended, at once, to gladden
the hearts of those below; with the news that the way out was now
available to them, whenever they chose to leave.

Harry manifested no surprise, whatever, at the news.

"I made sure that you would succeed, Stanley. After getting me off,
as you did; and making your own escape, before, it seems to me that
you have got hold of the 'open sesame' of Ali Baba, and have only
to use the cabalistic words to walk in and out, wherever you want
to go."

"I don't feel, by any means, so certain of my own powers as you
seem to be, Harry; and I can assure you I was very doubtful whether
that shot would succeed. I hoped, at any rate, that it would blow a
good bit of the stone out and, in that case, we could have got the
chisels to work again. It was the slanting position of the block
that beat us. However, thank goodness, the work is done now; and
you have only to get a bit stronger, and we will be off."

"I am quite ready to start now, Stanley. I think it is absurd
waiting any longer, for there is never any saying what might take
place. That Burmese general, who seems to be an obstinate beggar,
might take it into his head to place a guard on the top of the
hill; and then all your labour will have been thrown away."

"That is true enough, Harry; and as I really don't think that
travelling now would be likely to do you any serious harm, I will
decide on tomorrow. At any rate, I will take some men up, at once,
and get that stone out."

The task was a difficult one. The block of stone was so nearly the
size of the passage that they could not get a rope round behind it
and, after trying for two hours, in vain, they determined that the
only course was to push it before them. They soon found, however,
that this was impossible; and that a part, at least, of the stone
was remaining in its place. Finally, they succeeded in pushing a
loop in the rope over the top of the block; and then, by main
force, eight of them pulled it out of the hole, and lowered it on
to the top step.

By the time that they had done this, dawn was approaching; and they
therefore returned, at once, to the chambers below.

The men were all much pleased, when Stanley told them that they
would leave that night. Confident as they felt that the Burmese
could not force their way in, a new feeling of nervousness seized
them, now that the way was open, lest some unforeseen circumstances
might occur to prevent their going. The rice that remained was made
up into three or four packages. The meat had long before been
finished.

Stanley had a discussion, with Meinik, as to how Harry had best be
taken through the passage. He could, they agreed, walk along the
ledge, with one before and one behind to steady him; and could then
be carried up the steps, in a blanket, by four men. He must, of
course, be lifted into the passage, and dragged through it to the
end; after that, it would be easy enough. Six men could carry him,
in a blanket, until far enough away for them to chop poles, without
the sound of the axes being heard by the Burmese.

From the time they began their work, every pains had been taken to
deaden sounds. The blanket hung across the passage had acted as a
muffler, to some extent; but a piece of cloth had always been tied
over the hammer heads of the axes, to prevent the sharp clinking
