hotly-contested ground, the wheels of the heavy ordnance and the hoofs
of the half-mad horses crashing over the heads said limbs of all who
chanced to lie in their way.

Oh! it is _bitter_ to reflect on the grand courage that is mis-displayed
in the accursed service of war!  Beaten, overwhelmed, crushed, all but
annihilated, the poor peasant-soldiers of Turkey, who probably knew
nothing whatever about the cause for which they fought, took shelter at
last behind the broken wagons under which they had advanced, and then
turned at bay.  Others made for the deep banks of the Vid, where they
re-formed, and instantly began to return the Russian fire.

The sortie was now virtually repulsed.  It was about half-past eight.
The Turks, evidently apprehensive that the enemy would charge and drive
them back into the gorge which led to Plevna, remained on the defensive.
The Russians, obviously afraid lest the enemy should attempt another
sortie, also remained on the defensive.  For four hours they continued
in this condition, "during which period the battle raged," it was said,
"with the utmost fury," but it is also admitted that very little damage
was done to either side, "for both armies were under cover!"  In other
words, the belligerents remained for four hours in the condition of a
couple of angry costermongers, hooting and howling at each other without
coming to blows, while shot and shell and powder and lead were being
expended for nothing, at a rate which added thousands sterling to the
burdens of the peace-loving members of both countries!

"About twelve o'clock," according to an eye-witness, "the firing began
to diminish on both sides, as if by mutual agreement."

I have a very thorough appreciation of this idea of "mutual agreement."
It is well known among schoolboys.  When two of these specimens of the
rising generation have been smashing each other's faces, blackening each
other's eyes, and bleeding each other's noses for three-quarters of an
hour, without having decided a victory, they both feel a strong desire
to stop, are ready to "give in," and, on the smallest encouragement from
"seconds," will shake hands.  Indeed, this well-known and somewhat
contemptible state of mind is familiar to a larger growth of boys--
happily not in England--called duellists.  We deliberately call the
state of mind "contemptible," because, if a matter is worth fighting for
(physically), it ought to be fought for to the "bitter end."  If it is
not worth fighting for, there should be no fighting at all!

However, as I have said, the fire began to slacken about mid-day, and
then gradually ceased.  The silence that succeeded was deeply
impressive--also suggestive.  Half-an-hour later a white flag was seen
waving from the road that ran round the cliffs beyond the bridge.

Plevna had fallen.  Osman Pasha and his army had surrendered.  In other
words--the fate of the Turkish Empire was sealed!



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

WOE TO THE "AUBURN HAIR!"  AFTER THE BATTLE--PROWLING VILLAINS PUNISHED.

When the white flag was seen a loud shout went up from the Russian army.
Then a party of officers rode forward, and two Turkish horsemen were
seen advancing.  They stated that Osman himself was coming to treat with
the Russians.

The spot on which they stood was covered with the grim relics of battle.
The earth had been uptorn by exploding shells.  Here lay a horse
groaning and struggling in its agony.  Close to it lay an ox, silently
bleeding to death, his great, round, patient eyes looking mournfully at
the scene around him.  Close by, was a cart with a dead horse lying in
the yoke as he had fallen, and a Turkish soldier, stretched alongside,
whose head had been carried away by a cannon shot.  Under the wagon was
a wounded man, and close to him four others, who, drained of nearly all
their life-blood, lay crouched together in helplessness, with the hoods
of their ragged grey overcoats drawn down on their faces.  These latter
gazed at the murky sky in listless indifference, or at what was going on
in a sort of weary surprise.  Among them was Nicholas Naranovitsch.

Russian surgeons were already moving about the field of battle, doing
what they could, but their efforts were trifling compared with the vast
necessity.

At last there was a shout of "Osman!"  "He comes!"

"We will give him a respectful reception," exclaimed one Russian
officer, in what is supposed by some to be the "gallant spirit of true
chivalry."

"That we will," cried another; "we must all salute him, and the soldiers
must present arms."

"He is a great soldier," exclaimed a third, "and has made a heroic
defence."

Even Skobeleff himself seems to have been carried away by the feeling of
the moment, if we may credit report, for he is said to have exclaimed--

"He is the greatest general of the age, for he has saved the honour of
his country: I will proffer him my hand and tell him so."

"So," thought I, when afterwards meditating on this subject, "the Turks
have for centuries proved themselves to be utterly unworthy of
self-government; they have shown themselves to be ignorant of the first
principles of righteousness,--_meum_ and _tuum_; they (or rather their
rulers) have violated their engagements and deceived those who trusted
them; have of late repudiated their debts, and murdered, robbed,
violated, tortured those who differed from them in religious opinions,
as is generally admitted,--nevertheless now, because one of their
generals has shown somewhat superior ability to the rest, holding in
check a powerful enemy, and exhibiting, with his men, a degree of
bull-dog courage which, though admirable in itself, all history proves
to be a common characteristic of all nations--that `honour,' which the
country never possessed, is supposed to have been `saved'!"

All honour to the brave, truly, but when I remember the butcheries that
are admitted, by friend and foe of the Turk, to have been committed on
the Russian wounded by the army of Plevna (and which seem to have been
conveniently forgotten at this dramatic incident of the surrender),--
when I reflect on the frightful indifference of Osman Pasha to his own
wounded, and the equally horrible disregard of the same hapless wounded
by the Russians after they entered Plevna,--I cannot but feel that a
desperate amount of error is operating here, and that multitudes of
mankind, especially innocent, loving, and gentle mankind, to say nothing
of tender, enthusiastic, love-blinded womankind, are to some extent
deceived by the false ring of that which is not metal, and the falser
glitter of a tinsel which is anything but gold.

However, Osman did not come after all.  He had been wounded, and the
Russian generals were obliged to go to a neighbouring cottage to
transact the business of surrender.

As the cavalcade rode away in the direction of the cottage referred to,
a Russian surgeon turned aside to aid a wounded man.  He was a tall
strapping trooper.  His head rested on the leg of his horse, which lay
dead beside him.  He could not have been more than twenty years of age,
if so much.  He had carefully wrapped his cloak round him.  His carbine
and sabre were drawn close to his side, as if to protect the weapons
which it had always been his pride to keep bright and clean.  He was a
fresh handsome lad, with courage and loveableness equally stamped upon
his young brow.  He opened his eyes languidly as the doctor attended to
him.

"Come, my fine fellow, keep up your heart," said the doctor tenderly;
"you will perhaps--that is to say, the ambulance-wagons will be round
immediately, and--"

"Thank you," interrupted the trooper quietly, "God's blessing rest upon
you.  I know what you mean.--Look, sir."

He tried to take a locket from his neck as he spoke, but could not.  The
doctor gently assisted him.  "See," he said, "take this to Dobri
Petroff--the scout.  You know him?  Every one knows dashing Dobri!"

"I know him.  Well?"

"Tell him to give it to her--he knows who--and--and--say it has kept me
in--in heaven when sometimes it seemed to me as if I had got into hell."

"From whom?" asked the doctor, anxiously, as the youth's head sank
forward, and the terrible pallor of approaching death came on.

"From Andre--"

Alas! alas for Maria with the auburn hair!

The doctor rose.  His services were no longer needed.  Mounting his
horse, he rode away.

The ground over which he galloped was strewn with weapons.  The formal
surrender had been made, and each Turk, obeying literally the order to
lay down his arms, had deposited his rifle in the mud where he stood.

That night a faint light shone through the murky clouds, and dimly
illumined the grim battle-field.

It was deserted by all but the dead and dying, with now and then a
passing picket or fatigue-party.  As the night advanced, and the cold
became piercing, even these seemed to have finally retired from the
ghastly scene.  Towards morning the moon rose high, and, piercing the
clouds, at times lit up the whole battle-field.  Ah! there was many a
pale countenance turned wistfully on the moon that night, gazing at it
until the eyes became fixed in death.  There was one countenance, which,
deadly white, and gashed by a Turkish sabre, had been ruddy with young
life in the morning.  It was that of Nicholas Naranovitsch.  He lay on
his back near his dead horse, and close to a heap of slaughtered men.
He was so faint and so shattered by sabre-cuts and bullets as to be
utterly unable to move anything but his eyes.  Though almost in a state
of stupor, he retained sufficient consciousness to observe what went on
around him.  The night, or rather the early morning, had become very
still, but it was not silent, for deep sighs and low moanings, as of men
suffering from prolonged and weary pain, struck on his listening ear.
Now and then some wretch, unable to bear his misery, would make a
desperate effort to rise, only, however, to fall back with a sharp cry
or a deep-despairing groan.  Here and there a man might be seen creeping
a few paces on his hands and knees, and then dropping to rest for a
time, after which the creeping was resumed, in the vain hope, no doubt,
that some place of shelter or an ambulance might be reached at last.
One of these struggling men passed close to Nicholas, and stopped to
rest almost at his side.  In a few minutes he rose again, and attempted
to advance, but instead of doing so writhed in a hideous contortion over
on his back, and stretching himself with a convulsive shudder, died with
his teeth clenched and his protruding eyeballs glaring at the sky.

Suddenly a low sweet sound broke on Nicholas's ear.  It swelled
gradually, and was at length recognised as a hymn with which he had been
familiar in childhood.  Some dying Christian soldier near him had
apparently sought relief in singing praise to God.  Nicholas wept as he
listened.  He soon found that there were sympathetic listeners besides
himself, for the strains were taken up by one and another, and another,
until the hymn appeared to rise from all parts of the battle-field.  It
was faint, however, and tremulous, for the life-blood was draining
rapidly from the hearts of those who raised it.  Ere long it altogether
ceased.

For some time Nicholas had been aware that a wounded man was slowly
gasping out his life quite close to him, but, from the position in which
he lay, it was not possible to see more than his red fez.  Presently the
man made a powerful effort, raised himself on one elbow, and displayed
the ghastly black countenance of Hamed Pasha.  He looked unsteadily
round him for a moment, and then sank backward with a long-drawn sigh.

Close to him, under a heap of slain, Dobri Petroff himself lay.  For a
long time he was unconscious, and had been nearly crushed to death by
the weight of those above him.  But the life which had been so strong in
his huge body seemed to revive a little, and after a time he succeeded
in freeing himself from the load, and raising himself on his hands, but
he could not get up on his feet.  A wound in the neck, which had partly
closed while he was in a recumbent position, now burst out afresh.  He
looked at the blood with a faint sad smile, and sank down again.

Nicholas recognised him, and tried to speak, but he could neither speak
nor move.  It seemed to him that every part of his frame had been
paralysed except his brain and eyes.

Presently the scout felt for something at his side.  His flask was
there; putting it to his lips he drank a little and was evidently
refreshed, for he raised himself again and began to look about him.

Another moment and Petroff had discovered the Pasha, who lay near him
with a look of intense longing in his eyes as he saw the flask and heard
the gurgling water.  A fierce frown crossed the scout's brow for a
moment, but it was instantly chased away by a look of pity.  He dragged
himself slowly towards the dying Turk, and held the flask to his lips.

With a murmur of thankfulness and a look of gratitude at his late enemy,
the Pasha uttered a faint sigh and closed his eyes in the last long
sleep of death.

The effort to drag himself even a few paces served to show Petroff how
severely he had been wounded.  He was in the act of raising the flask to
his lips a second time, when Nicholas, by a desperate effort, succeeded
in uttering a low groan.

The scout turned quickly, observed his master, and crept to his side.

"Drink, sir," he said, knowing well that water was what Nicholas
required most at such a time.

The avidity with which the latter obeyed prevented him observing that
the scout was almost sinking.  The successive efforts he had made had
caused the blood to pour copiously from his wounds.

"You are badly hurt, Dobri, I fear," he said, when the life-giving
draught had sent new vigour into his frame, and loosed his tongue.

"Ay," replied the scout, with a faint smile.--"I shall soon be with you
now, Marika, and with the little ones and the dear Lord you loved so
well and tried so hard to make me follow too.  And you succeeded,
Marika, though you little th--"

He stopped abruptly, swayed a moment to and fro, then fell heavily
forward with his head on the bosom of his friend.

"Take some more water, Dobri," said Nicholas anxiously.  "Quick, before
you lose consciousness.  I have not power to move a limb to help you.--
Dobri!"

He called in vain,--the scout had fainted.

Nicholas had not power at first to remove the poor fellow's head from
his chest, and he felt as if he should be suffocated.  By degrees,
however, he managed to roll it slightly to one side, and, at the same
time, returning vigour enabled him to raise his right arm.  He observed
that his hand still grasped a revolver, but for some time he had no
power to unclasp it.  At last he succeeded, and raising Petroff's flask
with difficulty to his lips obtained another draught.

Just at that moment the moon, which had passed behind a dark cloud,
shone through an opening, and he saw three men not far off searching
among the dead.  He was about to call to them, but a thought occurred
and he restrained himself.

He was right; the three men, one of whom was habited like a priest, were
rifling the dead.  He saw them come up to a prostrate form which
struggled on being touched.  One of the three men instantly drew a knife
and stabbed the wounded man.  When they had searched the body and taken
from it what they required they came towards the spot where Nicholas
lay.

A feeling of horror came over him for a moment, but that seemed to give
him strength, for he instantly grasped his revolver.  Hoping, however
that they might pass without observing him, he shut his eyes and lay
quite still.

The three murderers drew near, talking in low tones, and seemed about to
pass, when one of them stopped.

"Here's a big-looking fellow whose boots will just fit me," he said,
stooping and seizing the scout's leg.

"There's an officer behind him," said the villain in the priest's dress;
"he will be more worth stripping."

Nicholas pointed his revolver full in the man's face and fired, but his
aim was unsteady.  He had missed.  Again he pulled the trigger, but it
had been the last shot.  The man sprang upon him.  The report, however,
had attracted the notice of a picket of Russian soldiers, who, well
aware of the deeds of foul villainy that are practised by the followers
of an army on battle-fields at night, immediately rushed up and secured
the three men.

"They are murderers," exclaimed Nicholas in reply to a question from the
sergeant in command.

"Lead them out," said the sergeant promptly.

The men were bound and set up in a row.

"Ready--present!"

A volley rang out in the night air, and three more corpses were added to
the death-roll of the day.

It was summary justice, but richly deserved.  Thereafter the soldiers
made a rough-and-ready stretcher of muskets, on which Nicholas, who had
fainted, was carefully laid and borne from the field.
