ambush at the mouth of a small gully or dell a few miles from the
enemy's camp, where they were almost certain to pass.  But with a degree
of caution that I thought highly creditable in so young and
inexperienced a general, he sent out a considerable number of the most
trustworthy men in advance, with instructions to proceed with the
stealth of leopards, and to bring back instant information of any change
of route on the part of the foe.

The troops placed in ambush at the dell above referred to were
Peterkin's hundred musketeers, supported by Jack's spear and bow men.  I
was ordered to advance by a circuitous route on the camp itself with my
fifty musketeers, followed by my small company of spearmen.  My
instructions were, to conceal my men as near to the camp as possible,
and there await the first discharge of firearms from the dell, when I
was to rise, advance upon the camp, utter a terrific shout when within
fifty yards, rush forward to within twenty-five yards, halt, pour in one
withering volley of blank cartridge, and charge without giving my men
time to load.

Of course I could not speak to my men; but this was a matter of little
consequence, as they were now well acquainted with our three words of
command, "Forward," "Halt," and "Fire," and fully understood that they
must under all circumstances follow their leader.  I knew well enough
that there must be no little danger in this arrangement, because the
leader would necessarily be always in front of the muzzles of the loaded
guns.  But there was no help for it, so I resolved to act upon my usual
principle--namely, that when a thing is inevitable, the best thing to do
is to treat it as being unavoidable.

Having conducted my men stealthily and successfully to the vicinity of
the enemy's camp, though with some difficulty, owing to the almost
impenetrable nature of the jungle through which we had to pass in making
the detour necessary to avoid falling in with the attacking force, we
proceeded to advance to within as short a distance of it as possible
without running the risk of being discovered.  This was not difficult,
for the men left to guard the camp, supposing, no doubt, that their
presence in that part of the country was not suspected, had taken no
precautions in the way of placing sentries; so we quickly arrived at the
foot of a small mound about sixty yards or so from the encampment.  At
the foot of this mound I caused my men to lie down, giving them to
understand, by signs, that they were on no account to move until I
should return.  Then I crept alone to the brow of the mound, and
obtained a clear view of the camp.

The men who should have guarded it were, I found, busily employed in
cooking their supper.  There were, perhaps, upwards of a hundred of
them.  To my great satisfaction, I observed the captives sitting near to
the fire; and although at so considerable a distance from them, I felt
certain that I recognised the figures of Mbango and Okandaga.  Hastening
back to my men, I endeavoured to give them as much information as
possible by means of signs, and then lay down beside them to await the
signal from Jack's party.

Although the attack of both our parties was to be simultaneous, the
first shot was to be fired by our troops in the dell.  I will therefore
describe their part of the engagement first.  Jack described it to me
minutely after all was over.

On reaching the dell Jack disposed his forces so as to command the only
approach to it.  The hundred musketeers he placed in a double row
directly across the deepest and darkest part.  The spearmen he divided
into two bodies, which he posted on the flanks of the musketeers among
the bushes.  He then showed the rear rank of the latter how to point
their pieces over the shoulders of the men in the front rank at a given
signal, but carefully reiterated the order not to touch a trigger until
the word "Fire" should be given.

"Now, Peterkin," said Jack, when these dispositions had been made, "it
is time for you to get ready.  Makarooroo and I can manage these
fellows, so you have my permission to go and play your own independent
part.  Only let me warn you to remember your last exploit in this way,
and see that you don't do yourself a damage."

"Thanks, noble general, for the permission," answered Peterkin, "of
which I shall avail myself.  In reference to your advice, I may remark
that it is exceedingly valuable--so much so, indeed, that I would advise
you not to part with it until asked for."

With that Peterkin ran into the jungle, and was soon lost to view.

On gaining a sufficient distance from the men, he took off the greater
part of his clothes, and wound round his person several pieces of
light-coloured cotton that he chanced to have with him, and some pieces
of old newspaper.  Then he decked his head with leaves and ragged
branches, as he had done before in the haunted cave, making himself, in
short, as wild and fantastic a looking creature as possible--the only
difference between his getting-up on this and the former occasion being
that he was white instead of black.  For he wisely judged that a white
demon must naturally appear infinitely more appalling and horrible to a
negro than one of his own colour.

The two cones of moistened powder, however, which he had prepared for
this occasion, were very much larger than the former, and had been
fitted into two wooden handles, or cups, for safety.  With these in his
hands, he crept to the top of a steep, sloping mound or hill near the
entrance to the dell, and considerably in advance of the troops.  Here
he sat down to await the approach of the enemy.

There is something very eerie and awe-inspiring in a solitary
night-watch, especially if it be kept in a wild, lonesome place.
Peterkin afterwards told me that, while sitting that night on the top of
the mound, looking out upon a plain, over which the enemy were expected
to approach, on the one hand, and down into the dark dell where our
troops were posted, on the other hand, his heart more than once misgave
him; and he could not help asking himself the questions, "What if our
plans miscarry?  What if our united volley and cheer, and my demoniac
display, should fail to intimidate the negroes?"  Such questions he did
not like to dwell upon, for he knew that in the event of failure a
regular pitched battle would be fought, and much blood would certainly
flow.

While indulging in such thoughts, he observed a dark form glide past the
foot of the mound on which he lay, and vanish in the obscurity of the
dell, which was so surrounded by crags and rocky places covered with
underwood that no light could penetrate into it.  At first he was
startled, and thought of giving the alarm to his comrades; but on second
thoughts he concluded the person must have been one of his own scouts
returned with news; at all events, he felt that one man could do no harm
worth speaking of to so large a party.

Presently he observed a large band of men coming over the plain towards
the entrance of the dell.  These, he felt assured, must be the enemy;
and he was right.  They came on in a large, compact body, and were
well-armed; yet, from the quick and unguarded manner of their approach,
he could perceive that they suspected no ambush.

They entered the dell in a confused though solid and silent body; and
Peterkin could observe, by the dim light, that they were led by one man,
who walked in advance, whom he rightly judged to be the Portuguese
slave-dealer.

The time for action had now come.  He examined the points of his
powder-cones, to ascertain that they were dry, then held a match in
readiness, and listened intently to the footsteps of the foe.

I have already explained that Jack had drawn his musketeers across the
dell, and placed the spearmen in the jungle on both flanks.  They were
arranged in such a way as to form three sides of a square, into which
the unsuspecting enemy now marched.  Jack allowed them to approach to
within thirty paces of his musketeers, and then gave, in a loud, deep,
sonorous tone, the word--"Hip! hip! hip!"

The compound cheer and yell that instantly followed the last hip was so
tremendous, coming, as it did, from all sides except the rear, that the
enemy were absolutely paralysed.  They stood rooted to the earth, as
motionless as if they had been transformed into stone.

Jack raised his hand, in which he held a bunch of white grass that could
be distinctly seen in the dark.

Every muzzle was pointed on the instant, but not a sound was heard save
the click of a hundred locks.

The sound was familiar to the enemy, although never before heard at one
moment in such numbers.  They started; but before a step could be taken,
the word "Fire" was given.

Instantly a sheet of flame swept across the entire dell, and the united
crash of a hundred guns seemed to rend the very earth.  The surrounding
cliffs reverberated and multiplied the horrid din, while, led by Jack,
cheer followed cheer, or rather howls and yells filled the air, and kept
awake the echoes of the place.

The enemy turned and fled, and the shrieks to which they gave utterance
as they ran betokened the extremity of their terror.  It wanted but one
touch to complete their consternation, and that touch was given when
Peterkin, lighting his powder-cones, showed himself on the mound,
dancing in a blaze of fire, and shrieking furiously as the horrified
tide of men swept by.

In the midst of his wild orgies, Peterkin acted an impromptu and
unintentional part by tripping over the brow of the hill, and rolling
down the steep declivity like a fire-wheel into the very midst of the
flying crew.  Jumping hastily up, he charged through the ranks of the
foe, flung the two hissing cones high into the air, and darting into the
jungle, hid himself effectually from view.

Meanwhile Jack still held the bunch of white straw aloft.  Every eye was
fixed on it, but not a man moved, because it remained stationary.  This
absence of pursuit in the midst of such appalling sights and sounds
must, undoubtedly, have added to the mystery and therefore to the
terrors of the scene.

Suddenly the white bunch was seen to dart forward.  Jack, who now
considered the enemy almost beyond the chance of being overtaken, gave
the word, "Forward!" in the voice of a Stentor, following it up with
"Hip, hip, hurrah!" and the whole host, musketeers and spearmen in a
mingled mass, rushed yelling out upon the plain, and gave chase to the
foe.

"Not so badly done," said Jack, with a quiet laugh, as he laid his hand
on Peterkin's shoulder.

"Why, Jack, how did you find me out?"

"Easily enough, when it is considered that I saw you go in.  The flame
of your wild-fire indicated your movements pretty plainly to me,
although terror and amazement no doubt blinded the eyes of every one
else.  Even Mak's teeth began to chatter when he saw you perform that
singular descent of the hill, and no wonder.  I hope no bones have been
broken?"

"No; all right as far as that goes," replied Peterkin within a laugh;
"but I've lost a good deal of skin.  However, it'll grow again.  I'm
glad it's no worse.  But I say, Jack, do you think our fellows won't
overtake these rascals?"

"No fear of that.  I took care to give them a good start, and if there
be any truth in the generally received idea that terror lends wings, I'm
pretty sure that each man in the enemy's ranks must have obtained the
loan of several pairs to-night.  But have you heard the sound of Ralph's
guns?"

"No; the din here was enough to drown anything so distant."

"Well, we must away to him as fast as we can.  I expect that poor Mak is
off before us."

"But you'll wait until I put on my clothes?" said Peterkin, hasting back
towards the place where he had undressed.

"Certainly, lad; only look alive."

Soon afterwards they left the place together.

While this was going on at the dell, I, on hearing the first shot, gave
the word "Forward!" in a low tone.  My men instantly rose and followed
me, and I could not, even at that anxious moment, help admiring the
serpent-like facility with which they glided from bush to bush, without
the slightest noise.  We descended a hill, crossed a small brook, and
approached to within thirty yards of the camp without being discovered.

Suddenly I leaped on the top of a hillock, and shouted at the utmost
pitch of my voice the single word "Halt!"

On hearing it all the men in the camp sprang to their arms, and stood
gazing round them with looks of consternation.

My next word was, "Fire!"

A firm, tremendous crash burst from among the bushes, and my single
person, enveloped in smoke and flame, was, I believe, the only object
visible to those in the camp.

"Hip, hip, hip, hurrah! forward!"  I shouted; and with a ferocious yell
we poured like a whirlwind upon the foe.

The same result that had occurred at the dell took place here.  The
enemy never awaited our charge.  They fled instantly, and so great was
their terror that they actually threw down their arms, in order to
facilitate their flight.

On gaining the camp, however, I found, to my sorrow, that we had done
the thing only too vigorously; for we had not only put the enemy to
flight, but we had also frightened away those whom we had come to
deliver!

At this point in the engagement I came to learn how incompetent I was to
command men in cases of emergency, for here my presence of mind utterly
forsook me.  In my anxiety to capture Mbango and his friends I ordered
an immediate pursuit.  Then it occurred to me that, in the event of my
men being successful in overtaking the fugitives, they would instantly
murder them all, so I tried to call them back; but, alas! they did not
understand my words, and they were by this time so excited as to be
beyond all restraint.  In a few minutes I found myself left alone in the
enemy's camp, and heard the shouts of pursued and pursuers growing
gradually fainter and more distant, as they scattered themselves through
the jungle.

Seating myself by the fire in a state of mind bordering on despair, I
buried my face in my hands, and endeavoured to collect myself, and
consider what, under the circumstances, should be now done.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

ARRANGEMENTS FOR PURSUING THE ENEMY, AND SUDDEN CHANGE OF PLANS.

"You seem to be taking it easy, old boy," said a voice close to my
elbow.

I started, and looked up hastily.

"Ah!  Peterkin.  You there?"

"Ay; and may I not reply, with some surprise, _you here_?"

"Truly you may,--but what could I do?  The men ran away from me, whether
I would or no; and you are aware I could not make myself understood, not
being able to--But where is Jack?"

I asked this abruptly, because it occurred to me at that moment that he
and Peterkin should have been together.

"Where is Jack?" echoed Peterkin; "I may ask that of you, for I am
ignorant on the point.  He and I got separated in endeavouring to escape
from the scrimmage caused by your valiant attack.  You seem to have
scattered the whole force to the winds.  Oh, here he is, and Mak along
with him."

Jack and our guide came running into the camp at that moment.

"Well, Ralph, what of Okandaga?"

"Ah! what of her indeed?" said Peterkin.  "I forgot her.  You don't moan
to say she was not in the camp?"

"Indeed she was," said I, "and so were Mbango, and his wife Njamie, and
one or two others whom I did not know; but my men went at them with such
ferocity that they fled along with our enemies."

"Fled!" cried Jack.

"Ay; and I fear much that it will fare ill with them if they are
overtaken, for the men were wild with excitement and passion."

"Come, this must be looked to," cried Jack, seizing his rifle and
tightening his belt; "we must follow, for if they escape our hands they
will certainly be retaken by their former captors."

We followed our comrade, without further remark, in the direction of the
fugitives; but although we ran fast and long, we failed to come up with
them.  For two hours did we dash through bush and brake, jungle and
morass, led by Makarooroo, and lighted by the pale beams of the moon.
Then we came to a halt, and sat down to consult.

"Dem be gone," said our wretched guide, whose cup of happiness was thus
dashed from his hand just as he was about to raise it to his lips.

"Now, don't look so dismal, Mak," cried Peterkin, slapping the man on
the shoulder.  "You may depend upon it, we will hunt her up somehow or
other.  Only let us keep stout hearts, and we can do anything."

"Very easily said, Master Peterkin," observed Jack; "but what course do
you propose we should follow just now?"

"Collect our scattered men; go back to the village; have a palaver with
King Jambai and his chiefs; get up a pursuit, and run the foxes to
earth."

"And suppose," said Jack, "that you don't know in which direction they
have fled, how can we pursue them?"

"It is very easy to suppose all manner of difficulties," retorted
Peterkin.  "If you have a better plan, out with it."

