these paroxysms it required two men to hold him down, while he indulged
in wild denunciations of his Poloe foes, with frequent allusions to
dread surgical operations to be performed on the body of Amalatok--
operations with which the Royal College of Surgeons is probably
unacquainted.  Leo, whose knowledge of the Eskimo tongue was rapidly
extending, sought to counteract the patient's ferocity by preaching
forgiveness and patience.  Being unsuccessful, he had recourse to a
soporific plant which he had recently discovered.  To administer an
overdose of this was not unnatural, perhaps, in a youthful doctor.
Absolute prostration was not the precise result he had hoped for, but it
_was_ the result, and it had the happy effect of calming the spirit of
Grabantak and rendering him open to conviction.

Fortunately the Flatlanders were on the look-out when the men of Poloe
drew near.  One of the Flatland braves was returning from a fishing
expedition at the time, saw the advancing host while they were yet well
out at sea, and came home at racing speed with the news.

"Strange that they should come to attack _us_," said Teyma to Leo at the
council of war which was immediately called.  "It has always, up to this
time, been our custom to attack _them_."

"Not so strange as you think," said Anders, who now, for the first time,
mentioned the sending of the message to Poloeland.

Black looks were turned on the interpreter, and several hands wandered
towards boots in search of daggers, when the prime minister interfered.

"You did not well, Unders, to act without letting us know," he said with
grave severity.  "We must now prepare to meet the men of Poloe, whether
they come as friends or foes.  Let the young men arm.  I go to consult
with our chief."

"You must not consult with Grabantak," said Leo firmly.  "He lies limp.
His backbone has no more strength than a piece of walrus line.  His son
must act for him at present."

"Boo!" exclaimed one of the warriors, with a look of ineffable contempt,
"Koyatuk is big enough, but he is brainless.  He can bluster and look
fierce like the walrus, but he has only the wisdom of an infant puffin.
No, we will be led by Teyma."

This sentiment was highly applauded by the entire council, which
included the entire army, indeed the whole grown-up male part of the
nation; so that Koyatuk was deposed on the spot, as all incompetents
ought to be, and one of the best men of Flatland was put in his place.

"But if I am to lead you," said the premier firmly, "it shall be to
peace, not to war!"

"Lead us to what you like; you have brains," returned the man who had
previously said "boo!"  "We know not what is best, but we can trust
you."

Again the approval was unanimous.

"Well, then, I accept the command until my chief's health is restored,"
said Teyma, rising.  "Now, the council is at an end.  To your huts,
warriors, and get your spears ready; and to your lamps, girls.  Prepare
supper for our warriors, and let the allowance of each be doubled."

This latter command caused no small degree of surprise, but no audible
comment was made, and strict obedience was rendered.

Leo returned to Grabantak's hut, where he found that fiery chief as limp
as ever, but with some of the old spirit left, for he was feebly making
uncomfortable references to the heart, liver, and other vital organs of
Amalatok and all his band.

Soon afterwards that band came on in battle array, on murderous deeds
intent.  The Flatlanders assembled on the beach to receive them.

"Leave your spears on the ground behind you," shouted Teyma to his host;
"advance to the water's edge, and at my signal, throw up your arms."

"They have been forewarned," growled Amalatok, grinding his teeth in
disappointment, and checking the advance of his fleet by holding up one
hand.

"No doubt," said Captain Vane, who, with Benjy, Alf, and Butterface, was
close to the Poloe chief in one of the india-rubber boats, "no doubt my
young countryman, having sent a message, expected us.  Surely--eh!
Benjy, is not that Leo standing in front of the rest with another man?"

The Captain applied his binocular telescope to his eyes as he spoke.

"Yes, it's him--thank God! and I see Anders too, quite plainly, and
Oblooria!"

"Are they bound hand and foot?" demanded Amalatok, savagely.

"No, they are as free as you are.  And the Eskimos are unarmed,
apparently."

"Ha! that is their deceit," growled the chief.  "The Flatlanders were
always sly; but they shall not deceive us.  Braves, get ready your
spears!"

"May it not be that Leo has influenced them peacefully, my father?"
suggested Chingatok.

"Not so, my son," said the chief savagely.  "Grabantak was always sly as
a white fox, fierce as a walrus, mean as a wolf, greedy as a black gull,
contemptible as--"

The catalogue of Grabantak's vices was cut short by the voice of Teyma
coming loud and strong over the sea.

"If the men of Poloe come as friends, let them land.  The men of
Flatland are about to feed, and will share their supper.  If the men of
Poloe come as foes, still I say let them land.  The braves of Flatland
have sharpened their spears!"

Teyma threw up both hands as he finished, and all his host followed
suit.

For a moment or two the Poloese hesitated.  They still feared deception.
Then the voice of Leo was heard loud and clear.

"Why do you hesitate? come on, uncle, supper's getting cold.  We've been
waiting for you a long time, and are all very hungry!"

This was received with a shout of laughter by the Englishmen, high above
which rose a wild cheer of joy from Benjy.  Amalatok swallowed his
warlike spirit, laid aside his spear, and seized his paddle.  Chingatok
gave the signal to advance, and, a few minutes later, those warriors of
the north--those fierce savages who, probably for centuries, had been
sworn hereditary foes--were seated round the igloe-lamps, amicably
smearing their fingers and faces with fat, as they feasted together on
chops of the walrus and cutlets of the polar bear.



CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

THE GREAT DISCOVERY.

Friendly relations having been established between the Flatlanders and
the Poloese, both nations turned their attention to the arts of peace.

Among other things, Captain Vane and his party devoted themselves once
more, with renewed energy, to the pursuit of discovery and scientific
investigation.  An expedition was planned to _Great Isle_, not now for
the purpose of consulting Makitok, the oracle, as to the best time for
going to war, but to gratify the wishes of Captain Vane, who had the
strongest reason for believing that he was in the immediate
neighbourhood of the Pole.

"Blackbeard says he must be very near nothing now," observed Chingatok
to Anders the day after their arrival.

"Near _nothing_!" exclaimed Teyma, who was sitting close by.

Of course the giant explained, and the premier looked incredulous.

"I wish I had not left my sextant behind me in the hurry of departure,"
said the Captain that evening to Leo.  "But we came off in such hot
haste that I forgot it.  However, I'll ask Amalatok to send a young man
back for it.  I'm persuaded we cannot now be more than a few miles
distant from our goal."

"I quite agree with you, uncle, for when I looked at the north star last
night it seemed to me as directly in the zenith as it was possible to
imagine."

"Ay, lad; but the unaided eye is deceptive.  A few miles of difference
cannot be distinguished by it.  When did the Pole star become visible?"

"Only last night; I fancied I had made it out the night before, but was
not quite sure, the daylight, even at the darkest hour, being still too
intense to let many of the stars be seen."

"Well, we shall see.  I am of opinion that we are still between twenty
and forty miles south of the Pole.  Meanwhile, I'll induce Teyma to get
up an expedition to the island of this Maki-what?"

"Tok," said Leo; "Makitok.  Everything almost ends in _tok_ or _tuk_
hereabouts."

"Who, and what, is this man?" asked the Captain.

"No one seems to know precisely.  His origin has been lost in the mists
of antiquity.  His first forefather--so tradition styles him--seems,
like Melchisedec, to have had no father or mother, and to have come from
no one knows where.  Anyhow he founded a colony in _Great Isle_, and
Makitok is the present head of all the families."

Leo then explained about the mystery-thing called _buk_, which was
wrapped up in innumerable pieces of sealskin.

"Strange," said the Captain, "passing strange.  All you tell me makes me
the more anxious to visit this man of the valley.  You say there is no
chance of Grabantak being able to take the reins of government again for
a long time?"

"None.  He has got a shake that will keep him helpless for some time to
come.  And this is well, for Teyma will be ready to favour any project
that tends towards peace or prosperity."

Now, while preparations for the northern expedition were being made, our
friend Oolichuk went a-wooing.  And this is the fashion in which he did
it.

Arraying himself one day, like any other lovesick swain, in his best, he
paid a ceremonial visit to Oblooria, who lived with Merkut, the wife of
Grabantak, in a hut at the eastern suburb of the village.  Oolichuk's
costume was simple, if not elegant.  It consisted of an undercoat of
bird-skins, with the feathers inwards; bearskin pantaloons with the hair
out; an upper coat of the grey seal; dogskin socks and sealskin boots.

That young Eskimo did not visit his bride empty-handed.  He carried a
bundle containing a gift--skins of the young eider-duck to make an
undergarment for his lady-love, two plump little auks with which to
gratify her palate, and a bladder of oil to wash them down and cause her
heart to rejoice.

Good fortune favoured this brave man, for he met Oblooria at a lonely
part of the shore among the boulders.

Romance lies deep in the heart of an Eskimo--so deep that it is not
perceptible to the naked eye.  Whatever the Poloe warrior and maiden
felt, they took care not to express in words.  But Oolichuk looked
unutterable things, and invited Oblooria to dine then and there.  The
lady at once assented with a bashful smile, and sat down on a boulder.
Oolichuk sat down beside her, and presented the bundle of
under-clothing.

While the lady was examining this with critical eyes, the gentleman
prepared the food.  Taking one of the auks, he twisted off its head, put
his forefinger under the integuments of the neck, drew the skin down
backwards, and the bird was skinned.  Then he ran his long thumb-nail
down the breast and sliced off a lump, which he presented to the lady
with the off-hand air of one who should say, "If you don't want it you
may let it alone!"

Raw though the morsel was, Oblooria accepted it with a pleased look, and
ate it with relish.  She also accepted the bladder, and, putting it to
her lips, pledged him in a bumper of oil.

Oolichuk continued this process until the first auk was finished.  He
then treated the second bird in the same manner, and assisted his
lady-love to consume it, as well as the remainder of the oil.
Conversation did not flow during the first part of the meal, but, after
having drunk deeply, their lips were opened and the feast of reason
began.  It consisted chiefly of a running commentary by the man on the
Kablunets and their ways, and appreciative giggles on the part of the
woman; but they were interrupted at the very commencement by the sudden
appearance of one of the Kablunets sauntering towards them.

They rose instantly and rambled away in opposite directions, absorbed in
contemplation--the one of the earth, and the other of the sky.

Three days after that, Captain Vane and his party approached the shores
of _Great Isle_.  It was low like the other islands of Flatland, but of
greater extent, insomuch that its entire circumference could not be seen
from its highest central point.  Like the other islands it was quite
destitute of trees, but the low bush was luxuriantly dense, and filled,
they were told, with herds of reindeer and musk-oxen.  Myriads of
wild-fowl--from the lordly swan to the twittering sandpiper--swarmed
among its sedgy lakelets, while grouse and ptarmigan were to be seen in
large flocks on its uplands.  The land was clothed in mosses and grasses
of the richest green, and decked with variegated wild-flowers and
berries.

The voyagers were received with deep interest and great hospitality by
the inhabitants of the coast, who, it seemed, never quarrelled with the
neighbouring islanders or went to war.

Makitok dwelt in the centre of the island.  Thither they therefore went
the following day.

It was afternoon when they came to the valley in which dwelt the
angekok, or, as Red Indians would have styled him, the medicine-man.

It was a peculiar valley.  Unlike other vales it had neither outlet or
inlet, but was a mere circular basin or depression of vast extent, the
lowest part of which was in its centre.  The slope towards the centre
was so gradual that the descent was hardly perceived, yet Captain Vane
could not resist the conviction that the lowest part of the vale must be
lower than the surface of the sea.

The rich luxuriance of herbage in Great Isle seemed to culminate in this
lovely vale.  At the centre and lowest part of the valley, Makitok, or
rather Makitok's forefathers, had built their dwelling.  It was a hut,
resembling the huts of the Eskimos.  No other hut was to be seen.  The
angekok loved solitude.

Beside the hut there stood a small truncated cone about fifteen feet
high, on the summit of which sat an old white-bearded man, who intently
watched the approaching travellers.

"Behold--Makitok!" said Teyma as they drew near.

The old man did not move.  He appeared to be over eighty years of age,
and, unlike Eskimos in general, had a bushy snow-white beard.  The thin
hair on his head was also white, and his features were good.

Our travellers were not disappointed with this strange recluse, who
received them with an air of refinement and urbanity so far removed from
Eskimo manners and character, that Captain Vane felt convinced he must
be descended from some other branch of the human family.  Makitok felt
and expressed a degree of interest in the objects of the expedition
which had not been observed in any Eskimo, except Chingatok, and he was
intelligent and quick of perception far before most of those who
surrounded him.

"And what have you to say about yourself?" asked the captain that
evening, after a long animated conversation on the country and its
productions.

"I have little to say," replied the old man, sadly.  "There is no
mystery about my family except its beginning in the long past."

"But is not _all_ mystery in the long past?" asked the Captain.

"True, my son, but there is a difference in _my_ mystery.  Other Eskimos
can trace back from son to father till they get confused and lost, as if
surrounded by the winter-fogs.  But when I trace back--far back--I come
to one man--my _first father_, who had no father, it is said, and who
came no one knows from where.  My mind is not confused or lost; it is
stopped!"

"Might not the mystery-bundle that you call _buk_ explain matters?"
asked Alf.

When this was translated, the old man for the first time looked
troubled.

"I dare not open it," he said in an undertone, as if speaking to
himself.  "From father to son we have held it sacred.  It must grow--
ever grow--never diminish!"

"It's a pity he looks at it in that light," remarked Leo to Benjy, as
they lay down to sleep that night.  "I have no doubt that the man whom
he styles first father wrapped up the thing, whatever it is, to keep it
safe, not to make a mystery of it, and that his successors, having begun
with a mistaken view, have now converted the re-wrapping of the bundle
by each successive heir into a sacred obligation.  However, we may
perhaps succeed in overcoming the old fellow's prejudices.  Good-night,
Benjy."

A snore from Benjy showed that Leo's words had been thrown away, so,
with a light laugh, he turned over, and soon joined his comrade in the
land of dreams.

For two weeks the party remained on _Great Isle_, hunting, shooting,
fishing, collecting, and investigating; also, we may add, astonishing
the natives.

During that period many adventures of a more or less exciting nature
befell them, which, however, we must pass over in silence.  At the end
of that time, the youth who had been sent for the Captain's sextant and
other philosophical instruments arrived with them all--thermometers,
barometers, chronometers, wind and water gauges, pendulums, etcetera,
safe and sound.

As the instruments reached _Cup Valley_, (so Benjy had styled Makitok's
home), in the morning, it was too early for taking trustworthy
observations.  The Captain therefore employed the time in erecting an
observatory.  For this purpose he selected, with Makitok's permission,
the truncated cone close to the recluse's dwelling.  Here, after taking
formal possession and hoisting the Union Jack, he busied himself, in a
state of subdued excitement, preparing for the intended observations.

"I'll fix the latitude and longitude in a few hours," he said.
"Meantime, Leo, you and Benjy had better go off with the rifle and fetch
us something good for dinner."

Leo and Benjy were always ready to go a-hunting.  They required no
second bidding, but were soon rambling over the slopes or wading among
the marshes of the island in pursuit of game.

Leo carried his repeater; Benjy the shot-gun.  Both wore native Eskimo
boots as long as the leg, which, being made of untanned hide, are, when
soaked, thoroughly waterproof.  (See Note.)

Oolichuk and Butterface carried the game-bags, and these were soon
