overboard, remarking in a quiet tone that, having served his purpose, he
didn't want mast or sail any longer.  In the same deliberate way he
unshipped the rudder and cast it away.  He followed this up by throwing
overboard one of the oars, and then taking the only remaining oar, he
sculled and steered the boat therewith gently.

Billy, who thought his companion must be either drunk or mad, could
contain himself no longer.

"I say, old fellow," he remarked, "you're comin' it pretty strong!  Wot
on earth _are_ you up to, and where in all the world are 'ee goin' to?"

"Oh come, you know," answered Jones in a remonstrative tone, "I _may_ be
an easy-goin' chap, but I can't be expected to tell all my secrets
except to friends."

"Well, well," said Billy, with a sigh, "it's no use tryin' to hold out.
I'll be as friendly as I can; only.  I tells you candid, I'll mizzle
whenever I gits ashore.  I'm not agoin' to tell no end o' lies to please
you any longer, so I give 'ee fair warning," said Billy stoutly.

"All right, my lad," said the wily Jones, who felt that having subdued
the boy thus far, he would have little difficulty in subduing him still
further, in course of time, and by dint of judicious treatment; "I don't
want 'ee to tell lies on my account, an' I'll let you go free as soon as
ever we get ashore.  So now, let's shake hands over it, and have a glass
o' grog and a bit o' breakfast."

Billy shook hands, and took a sip out of the case-bottle, by way of
clenching the reconciliation.  The two then had breakfast together, and,
while this meal was in progress, Jones informed his little friend of the
nature of the "game" he was engaged in playing out.

"You must know, my lad," said Mr Jones, "that you and I have been
wrecked.  We are the only survivors of the brig Skylark, which was run
down in a fog by a large three-masted screw steamer on the night of the
thirteenth--that's three nights ago, Billy.  The Skylark sank
immediately, and every soul on board was lost except you and me, because
the steamer, as is too often the case in such accidents, passed on and
left us to our fate.  You and I was saved by consequence of bein' smart
and gettin' into this here small boat--which is one o' the Skylark's
boats--only just in time to save ourselves; but she had only one oar in
her, and no mast, or sail, or rudder, as you see, Billy; nevertheless we
managed to keep her goin' with the one oar up to this time, and no
doubt," said Mr Jones with a grin, "we'll manage to keep her goin' till
we're picked up and carried safe into port."

Billy's eyes had opened very wide and very round as Mr Jones's
description proceeded; gradually, as his surprise increased, his mouth
also opened and elongated, but he said never a word, though he breathed
hard.

"Now, Billy, my boy," pursued Mr Jones, "I tell 'ee all this, of
course, in strict confidence.  The Skylark, you must know, was loaded
with a valuable cargo of fine herrings, worth about 200 pounds.  There
was 780 barrels of 'em, and 800 boxes.  The brig was worth 100 pounds,
so the whole affair was valued at 300 pounds sterling."

"You don't mean to tell me," said Billy, catching his breath, "that
there warn't never no such a wessel as the Skylark?"

"Never that I know of," replied Jones with a smile, "except in my brain,
and on the books o' several insurance companies."

Billy's eyes and mouth grew visibly rounder, but he said nothing more,
and Mr Jones, renewing his quid, went on--

"Well, my lad, before this here Skylark left the port of London for
Cherbourg, I insured her in no fewer than five insurance Companies.
You'll understand that that ain't regular, my boy, but at each office I
said that the vessel was not insured in any other, and they believed me.
You must know that a good deal of business is done by these Companies
in good faith, which gives a chance to smart fellows like me and you to
turn an honest penny, d'ye see?  They are pretty soft, luckily."

Mr Jones happened to be mistaken in this opinion, as the sequel will
show, but Billy believed him at the time, and wondered that they were
"so green."

"Yes," continued Jones, counting on his fingers, "I'm in for 300 pounds
with the _Advance_ Company, and 300 pounds with the _Tied Harbours_
Company, and 225 pounds with the _Home and Abroad_ Company, and 200
pounds with the _Submarine_ Company, and 300 pounds with the
_Friend-in-need_ Company--the whole makin' a snug little sum of 1325
pounds.  `In for a penny, in for a pound,' is my motto, you see; so,
lad, you and I shall make our fortunes, if all goes well, and you only
continue game and clever."

This last remark was a feeler, and Mr Jones paused to observe its
effect, but he could scarce refrain from laughter for Billy's eyes and
mouth now resembled three extremely round O's with his nose like a fat
mark of admiration in the midst.

A gusty sigh was all the response he gave, however, so Mr Jones
continued--

"We've been out about thirty hours, starvin' in this here little boat,
you and I, so now it's about time we wos picked up; and as I see a
vessel on our larboard-beam that looks like a foreigner, we'll throw the
grub overboard, have another pull at the grog, bottle, and hoist a
signal of distress."

In pursuance of these intentions Jones applied the case-bottle to his
lips, and took a long pull, after which he offered it to Billy, who
however declined.  He then threw the bread-bag into the sea, and tying
his handkerchief to the oar after the manner of a flag, set it up on end
and awaited the result.

The vessel alluded to was presently observed to alter its course and
bear down on the boat, and now Billy felt that the deciding time had
come.  He sat gazing at the approaching vessel in silence.  Was he to
give in to his fate and agree to tell lies through thick and thin in
order to further the designs of Mr Jones, or was he to reveal all the
moment he should get on board the vessel, and take the consequences?  He
thought of Katie, and resolved to give up the struggle against evil.
Then Nora rose up in his mind's eye, and he determined to do the right.
Then he thought of transportation for a prolonged term of years, with
which Jones threatened him, and he felt inclined to turn again into the
wrong road to escape from that; presently he remembered the Grotto, and
the lessons of truth to God and man that he had learned there, and he
made up his mind to fight in the cause of truth to the last gasp.

Mr Jones watched his face keenly, and came to the conclusion that he
had quelled the boy, and should now find him a willing and useful tool,
but in order to make still more sure, he employed the few minutes that
remained to him in commenting on the great discomfort of a convict's
life, and the great satisfaction that accrued from making one's fortune
at a single stroke.

This talk was not without its effect.  Billy wavered.  Before he could
make up his mind they were alongside the strange vessel, and next moment
on her deck.  Mr Jones quickly explained the circumstances of the loss
of the Skylark to the sympathetic captain.  Billy listened in silence,
and, by silence, had assented to the falsehood.  It was too late now to
mend matters, so he gave way to despair, which in him frequently, if not
usually, assumed the form of reckless joviality.

While this spirit was strong upon him he swore to anything.  He not only
admitted the truth of all that his tempter advanced, but entertained the
seamen with a lively and graphic account of the running down of the
Skylark, and entered into minute particulars--chiefly of a comical
nature--with such recklessness that the cause of Mr Jones bade fair to
resemble many a roast which is totally ruined by being overdone.  Jones
gave him a salutary check, however, on being landed next day at a
certain town on the Kentish coast, so that when Billy was taken before
the authorities, his statements were brought somewhat more into accord
with those of his tempter.

The wily Mr Jones went at once with Billy to the chief officer of the
coast-guard on that station, and reported the loss of his vessel with
much minuteness of detail--to the effect that she had sailed from London
at noon of a certain date, at the quarter ebb tide, the sky being cloudy
and wind sou'-west; that the casualty occurred at five p.m. on the day
following near the North Foreland Light, at half flood tide, the sky
being cloudy and wind west-sou'-west; that the vessel had sunk, and all
the crew had perished excepting himself and the boy.  This report, with
full particulars, was sent to the Board of Trade.  Mr Jones then went
to the agent for the Shipwrecked Mariners' Society and related his
pitiful tale to him.  That gentleman happening to be an astute man,
observed some discrepancies in the accounts given respectively by Billy
and his master.  He therefore put a variety of puzzling questions, and
took down a good many notes.  Mr Jones, however, had laid his plans so
well, and gave such a satisfactory and plausible account of himself,
that the agent felt constrained to extend to him the aid of the noble
Society which he represented, and by which so much good is done to
sailors directly, and indirectly to the community at large.  He paid
their passage to London, but resolved to make some further inquiries
with a view either to confirming or allaying his suspicions.

These little matters settled, and the loss having been duly advertised
in the newspapers, Mr Jones set out for London with the intention of
presenting his claims to the Insurance Companies.

In the train Billy had time to reflect on the wickedness of which he had
been guilty, and his heart was torn with conflicting emotions, among
which repentance was perhaps the most powerful.  But what, he thought,
was the use of repentance now?  The thing was done and could not be
undone.

Could it not?  Was it too late to mend?  At the Grotto he had been
taught that it was "never too late to mend"--but that it was sinful as
well as dangerous to delay on the strength of that fact; that "_now_ was
the accepted time, _now_ the day of salvation."  When Billy thought of
these things, and then looked at the stern inexorable face of the man by
whom he had been enslaved, he began to give way to despair.  When he
thought of his good angel Nora, he felt inclined to leap out of the
carriage window and escape or die!  He restrained himself, however, and
did nothing until the train arrived in London.  Then he suddenly burst
away from his captor, dived between the legs of a magnificent railway
guard, whose dignity and person were overthrown by the shock, eluded the
ticket-collector and several policemen, and used his active little legs
so well that in a few minutes his pursuers lost him in a labyrinth of
low streets not far distant from the station.

From this point he proceeded at a rapid though less furious pace direct
to the Grotto, where he presented himself to the superintendent with the
remark that he had "come back to make a clean breast of it."



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

ON THE SCENT.

Let us change the scene and put back the clock.  Ah, how many hearts
would rejoice if it were as easy to return on the track of Time in real
life as it is to do so in a tale!

It was the evening of the day in which Jones and Billy went to sea in
the little boat.  Ramsgate, Mr Durant's supper-table, with Stanley Hall
and Robert Queeker as guests.

They were all very happy and merry, for Stanley was recounting with
graphic power some of the incidents of his recent voyage.  Mr Durant
was rich enough to take the loss of his vessel with great equanimity--
all the more so that it had been fully insured.  Mr Queeker was in a
state of bliss in consequence of having been received graciously by
Fanny, whose soul was aflame with sentiment so powerful that she could
not express it except through the medium of a giggle.  Only once had
Fanny been enabled to do full justice to herself, and that was when,
alone with Katie in the mysterious gloom of a midnight confabulation,
she suddenly observed that size and looks in men were absolutely
nothing--less than nothing--and that in her estimation heart and
intellect were everything!

In the midst of his mirth Mr Durant suddenly turned to Queeker and
said--

"By the way, what made you so late of coming to-night, Queeker?  I
thought you had promised to come to tea."

"Well, yes, but--a--that is," stammered Queeker in confusion, "in fact I
was obliged to keep an appointment in connection with the--the
particular business--"

"The secret mission, in short," observed Katie, with a peculiar smile.

"Well, secret mission if you choose," laughed Queeker; "at all events it
was that which prevented my getting here sooner.  In truth, I did not
expect to have managed to come so soon, but we came to the boat--"

Queeker stopped short and blushed violently, feeling that he had
slightly, though unintentionally, committed himself.

Fanny looked at him, blushed in sympathy, and giggled.

"Oh, there's a _boat_ in the secret mission, is there?" cried Stanley;
"come, let us make a game of it.  Was it an iron boat?"

"No," replied Queeker, laughing, for he felt that at all events he was
safe in answering that question.

"Was it a wooden one?" asked Katie.

"Well--ye--"

"Was it a big one?" demanded Mr Durant, entering into the spirit of the
game.

"No, it was a little one," said Queeker, still feeling safe, although
anxious to evade reply.

"Was there a man in it?" said Katie.

Queeker hesitated.

"And a boy?" cried Stanley.

The question was put unwittingly, but being so put Queeker stammered,
and again blushed.

Katie on the contrary turned pale, for her previously expressed hope
that there might be some connection between Queeker's mission and Billy
Towler's troubles flashed into her mind.

"But _was_ there a boy in it?" she said, with a sudden earnestness that
induced every one to look at her in surprise.

"Really, I pray--I must beg," said Queeker, "that you won't make this a
matter of even jocular inquiry.  Of course I know that no one here would
make improper use of any information that I might give, but I have been
pledged to secrecy by my employers."

"But," continued Katie in the same anxious way as before, "it will not
surely be a breach of confidence merely to tell me if the boy was a
small, active, good-looking little fellow, with bright eyes and curly
hair."

"I am bound to admit," said Queeker, "that your description is correct."

To the amazement, not to say consternation, of every one, Katie covered
her face with her hands and burst into tears, exclaiming in an agony of
distress that she knew it; she had feared it after sending him away;
that she had ruined him, and that it was too late now to do anything.

"No, not too late, perhaps," she repeated, suddenly raising her large
beautiful eyes, which swam in tears; "oh papa, come with me up-stairs, I
must speak with you alone at once."

She seized her astonished father by the hand and led him unresisting
from the room.

Having hurriedly related all she knew about Billy Towler, Morley Jones,
and Nora, she looked up in his face and demanded to know what _was_ to
be done.

"Done, my dear child," he replied, looking perplexed, "we must go at
once and see how much can be undone.  You tell me you have Nora's
address.  Well, we'll go there at once."

"But--but," said Katie, "Nora does not know the full extent of her
father's wickedness, and we want to keep it from her if possible."

"A very proper desire to spare her pain, Katie, but in the circumstances
we cannot help ourselves; we must do what we can to frustrate this man's
designs and save the boy."

So saying Mr Durant descended to the dining-room.  He explained that
some suspicious facts had come to his daughter's knowledge which
necessitated instant action; said that he was sorry Mr Queeker felt it
incumbent on him to maintain secrecy in regard to his mission, but that
he could not think of pressing him to act in opposition to his
convictions, and, dismissing his guests with many apologies, went out
with Katie in search of the abode of Nora Jones.

Stanley Hall, whose curiosity was aroused by all that had passed, went
down to take a walk on the pier by way of wearing it off in a
philosophical manner.  He succeeded easily in getting rid of this
feeling, but he could not so easily get rid of the image of Katie
Durant.  He had suspected himself in love with her before he sailed for
India; his suspicions were increased on his return to England, and when
he saw the burst of deep feeling to which she had so recently given way,
and heard the genuine expressions of remorse, and beheld her sweet face
bedewed with tears of regret and pity, suspicion was swallowed up in
certainty.

He resolved then and there to win her, if he could, and marry her!  Here
a touch of perplexity assailed him, but he fought it off nobly.

He was young, no doubt, and had no money, but what then?--he was strong,
had good abilities, a father in a lucrative practice, with the prospect
of assisting and ultimately succeeding him.  That was enough, surely.
