order was the best that could be given at that stage of their
perplexities.  Having ascertained that there was not another steamer to
San Francisco for a week, they resolved to forget their anxieties as
much as possible, and enjoy themselves in the great city of Sacramento
during the next few days; while they instituted inquiries as to what had
become of their comrade, Bill Jones, who, they concluded, must still be
in the city, as they had not met him on the way down.



CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

GOLD NOT ALL-POWERFUL--REMARKABLE GROWTH OF SACRAMENTO--NEW STYLE OF
BRINGING A HOTEL INTO NOTICE--A SURPRISING DISCOVERY--DEATH OF A MEXICAN
HORSE-TAMER--THE CONCERT, AND ANOTHER DISCOVERY--MADEMOISELLE NELINA
CREATES A SENSATION.

It is said that gold can accomplish anything; and, in some respects, the
saying is full of truth; in some points of view, however, the saying is
altogether wrong.  Gold can, indeed, accomplish almost anything in the
material world--it can purchase stone, and metal, and timber; and
muscles, bones, thews, and sinews, with life in them, to any extent.  It
can go a step further--it can purchase brains, intellect, genius; and,
throwing the whole together, material and immaterial, it can cut, and
carve, and mould the world to such an extent that its occupants of fifty
years ago, were they permitted to return to earth, would find it hard to
recognise the scene of their brief existence.  But there are things and
powers which gold cannot purchase.  That worn-out old _millionnaire_
would give tons of it for a mere tithe of the health that yonder
ploughman enjoys.  Youth cannot be bought with gold.  Time cannot be
purchased with gold.  The prompt obedience of thousands of men and women
may be bought with that precious metal, but one powerful throb of a
loving heart could not be procured by all the yellow gold that ever did
or ever will enrich the human family.

But we are verging towards digression.  Let us return to the simple idea
with which we intended to begin this chapter--the wonder-working power
of gold.  In no country in the wide world, we venture to affirm, has
this power been exemplified so strikingly as in California.  The
knowledge of the discovery of gold was so suddenly and widely
disseminated over the earth, that human beings flowed into the
formerly-uninhabited wilderness like a mighty torrent, while thousands
of ships flooded the markets with the necessaries of life.  Then gold
was found to be so abundant, and, _at first_, so easily procured, that
the fever was kept up at white-heat for several years.  The result of
this was, as we have remarked elsewhere, that changes, worthy of
Aladdin's lamp or Harlequin's wand, were wrought in the course of a few
weeks, sometimes in a few days.

The city of Sacramento was one of the most remarkable of the many
strange and sudden growths in the country.  The river on which it stands
is a beautiful stream, from two to three hundred yards wide, and
navigable by large craft to a few miles above the city.  The banks, when
our friends were there, were fringed with rich foliage, and the wild
trees of the forest itself stood growing in the streets.  The city was
laid out in the form of a square, with streets crossing each other at
right angles; a forest of masts along the _embarcadero_ attested the
growing importance and wealth of the place; and nearly ten thousand
inhabitants swarmed in its streets.  Many of those streets were composed
of canvas tents, or erections scarcely more durable.  Yet here, little
more than a year before, there were only _four thousand_ in the place!

Those who chanced to be in possession of the land here were making
fortunes.  Lots, twenty feet by seventy, in the best situations, brought
upwards of 3500 dollars.  Rents, too, were enormous.  One hotel paid
30,000 dollars (6000 pounds) per annum; another, 35,000 dollars.  Small
stores fetched ten and twelve thousand dollars a year; while board at
the best hotels was five dollars a day.  Truly, if gold was plentiful,
it was needed; for the common necessaries of life, though plentiful,
were bought and sold at fabulous prices.  The circulation of gold was
enormous, and the growth of the city did not suffer a check even for a
day, although the cost of building was unprecedented.  And this
commercial prosperity continued in spite of the fact that the place was
unhealthy--being a furnace in summer, and in winter little better than a
swamp.

"It's a capital hotel," remarked Captain Bunting to his companions, as
they sat round their little table, enjoying their pipes after dinner; "I
wonder if they make a good thing out of it?"

"Sure, if they don't," said Larry, tilting his chair on its hind legs,
and calmly blowing a cloud of smoke towards the roof, "it's a losin'
game they're playin', for they sarve out the grub at a tearin' pace."

"They are doing well, I doubt not," said Ned Sinton; "and they deserve
to, for the owner--or owners, I don't know how many or few there are--
made a remarkable and enterprising start."

"How was that?" asked the captain.

"I heard of it when I was down here with Tom," continued Sinton.  "You
must know that this was the first regular hotel opened in the city, and
it was considered so great an event that it was celebrated by salvos of
artillery, and, on the part of the proprietors, by a great unlimited
feast to all who chose to come."

"What!" cried Larry, "free, gratis, for nothin'?"

"Ay, for nothing.  It was done in magnificent style, I assure you.  Any
one who chose came and called for what he wanted, and got it at once.
The attendance was prompt, and as cheerfully given as though it had been
paid for.  Gin-slings, cocktails, mint-juleps, and brandy-smashes went
round like a circular storm, even champagne flowed like water; and
venison, wild-fowl, salmon, grizzly-bear-steaks, and pastry--all the
delicacies of the season, in short--were literally to be had for the
asking.  What it cost the spirited proprietors I know not, but certainly
it was a daring stroke of genius that deserved patronage."

"Faix it did," said Larry, emphatically; "and they shall have it, too;--
here, waiter, a brandy-smash and a cheroot, and be aisy as to the cost;
I think me bank'll stand it."

"What say you to a stroll!" said Ned, rising.

"By all means," replied Captain Bunting, jumping up, and laying down his
pipe.  Larry preferred to remain where he was; so the two friends left
him to enjoy his cheroot, and wandered away, where fancy led, to see the
town.  There was much to be seen.  It required no theatrical
representation of life to amuse one in Sacramento at that time.  The
whole city was a vast series of plays in earnest.

Every conceivable species of comedy and farce met the eye at every turn.
Costumes the most remarkable, men the most varied and peculiar, and
things the most incomprehensible and unexpected, presented themselves in
endless succession.  Here a canvas restaurant stood, or, rather leaned
against a log-store.  There a tent spread its folds in juxtaposition to
a deck-cabin, which seemed to have walked ashore from a neighbouring
brig, without leave, and had been let out as a grog-shop by way of
punishment.  Chinamen in calico jostled sailors in canvas, or diggers in
scarlet flannel shirts, or dandies in broad-cloth and patent-leather, or
red Indians in nothing!  Bustle, and hurry, and uproar, and joviality
prevailed.  A good deal of drinking, too, unfortunately, went on, and
the results were occasional melodramas, and sometimes serious rows.

Tragedies, too, were enacted, but these seldom met the eye; as is
usually the case, they were done in the dark.

"What have we here?" cried Captain Bunting, stopping before a large
placard, and reading.  "`Grand concert, this evening--wonderful singer--
Mademoiselle Nelina, first appearance--Ethiopian serenaders.'  I say,
Ned, we must go to this; I've not heard a song for ages that was worth
listening to."

"At what hour?" inquired Ned--"oh! seven o'clock; well, we can stroll
back to the hotel, have a cup of coffee, and bring Larry O'Neil with us.
Come along."

That evening our three adventurers occupied the back seat of a large
concert-room in one of the most crowded thoroughfares of the town,
patiently awaiting the advent of the performers.  The room was filled to
overflowing, long before the hour for the commencement of the
performances, with every species of mortal, except woman.  Women were
exceedingly rare creatures at that time--the meetings of all sorts were
composed almost entirely of men, in their varied and motley garbs.

Considering the circumstances in which it was got up, the room was a
very creditable one, destitute, indeed, of ornament, but well lighted by
an enormous wooden chandelier, full of wax candles, which depended from
the centre of the ceiling.  At the further end of the room was a raised
stage, with foot-lights in front, and three chairs in the middle of it.
There was a small orchestra in front, consisting of two fiddles, a
cornopian, a trombone, a clarionet, and a flute; but at first the owners
of these instruments kept out of sight, wisely reserving themselves
until that precise moment when the impatient audience would--as all
audiences do on similar occasions--threaten to bring down the building
with stamping of feet, accompanied with steam-engine-like whistles, and
savage cries of "Music!"

While Ned Sinton and his friends were quietly looking round upon the
crowd, Larry O'Neil's attention was arrested by the conversation of two
men who sat just in front of him.  One was a rough-looking miner, in a
wide-awake and red-flannel shirt; the other was a negro, in a shirt of
blue-striped calico.

"Who be this Missey Nelina?" inquired the negro, turning to his
companion.

"I dun know; but I was here last night, an' I'd take my davy, I saw the
little gal in the ranche of a feller away in the plains, five hundred
miles to the east'ard, two months ago.  Her father, poor chap, was
killed by a wild horse."

"How was dat?" inquired the negro, with an expression of great interest.

"Well, it was this way it happened," replied the other, putting a quid
of tobacco into his cheek, such as only a sailor would venture to
masticate.  "I was up at the diggin's about six months, without gittin'
more gold than jist kep' me in life--for, ye see, I was always an
unlucky dog--when one day I goes down to my claim, and, at the very
first lick, dug up two chunks o' gold as big as yer fists; so I sold my
claim and shovel, and came down here for a spree.  Well, as I was
sayin', I come to the ranche o' a feller called Bangi, or Bongi, or
Bungi, or some sort o' bang, with a gi at the end o' 't.  He was
clappin' his little gal on the head, when I comed up, and said good-bye
to her.  I didn't rightly hear what she said; but I was so taken with
her pretty face that I couldn't help axin' if the little thing was
his'n.  `Yees,' says he--for he was a Mexican, and couldn't come round
the English lingo--`she me darter.'  I found the man was goin' to catch
a wild horse, so, says I, `I'll go with ye,' an', says he, `come 'long,'
so away we went, slappin' over the plains at a great rate, him and me,
and a Yankee, a friend o' his and three or four servants, after a drove
o' wild horses that had been seen that mornin' near the house.  Well,
away we went after the wild horses.  Oh! it was grand sport!  The man
had lent me one of his beasts, an' it went at such a spankin' pace, I
could scarce keep my seat, and had to hold on by the saddle--not bein'
used to ridin' much, d'ye see.  We soon picked out a horse--a
splendid-lookin' feller, with curved neck, and free gallop, and wide
nostrils.  My eye! how he did snort and plunge, when the Mexican threw
the lasso, it went right over his head the first cast, but the wild
horse pulled the rope out o' his grip.  `It's all up,' thought I; but
never a bit.  The Mexican put spurs to his horse, an' while at full
gallop, made a dive with his body, and actually caught the end o' the
line, as it trailed over the ground, and recovered his seat again.  It
was done in a crack; an', I believe, he held on by means of his spurs,
which were big enough, I think, to make wheels for a small carronade.
Takin' a turn o' the line round the horn of his saddle, he reined in a
bit, and then gave the spurs for another spurt, and soon after reined in
again--in fact, he jist played the wild horse like a trout, until he
well-nigh choked him; an', in an hour, or less, he was led steamin', and
startin', and jumpin', into the corral, where the man kept his other
horses."

At this point in the narrative, the cries for music became so deafening,
that the sailor was obliged to pause, to the evident annoyance of the
negro, who seemed intensely interested in what he had heard; and, also,
to the regret of Larry, who had listened eagerly the whole time.  In a
few minutes the "music" came in, in the shape of two bald-headed
Frenchmen, a wild-looking bearded German, and several lean men, who
might, as far as appearance went, have belonged to almost any nation;
and who would have, as far as musical ability went, been repudiated by
every nation, except, perhaps, the Chinese.  During the quarter of an
hour in which these performers quieted the impatient audience with sweet
sounds, the sailor continued his anecdote.

"Well, you see," said he to the negro, while Larry bent forward to
listen, "the Mexican mounted, and raced and spurred him for about an
hour; but, just at the last, the wild horse gave a tremendous leap and a
plunge, and we noticed the rider fall forward, as if he'd got a sprain.
The Yankee an' one o' the servants ran up, and caught the horse by the
head, but its rider didn't move--he was stone dead, and was held in his
seat by the spurs sticking in the saddle-cloth.  The last bound must
have ruptured some blood-vessel inside, for there was no sign of hurt
upon him anywhere."

"You don' say dat?" said the negro, with a look of horror.

"'Deed do I; an' we took the poor feller home, where his little daughter
cried for him as if she'd break her heart.  I asked the Yankee what we
should do, but he looked at me somewhat offended like, an' said he was a
relation o' the dead man's wife, and could manage the affairs o' the
family without help; so I bid him good mornin', and went my way.  But I
believe in my heart he was tellin' a lie, and that he's no right to go
hawkin' the poor gal about the country in this fashion."

Larry was deeply interested in this narrative, and felt so strong a
disposition to make further inquiries, that he made up his mind to
question the sailor, and was about to address him when a small bell
tinkled, the music ceased, and three Ethiopian minstrels, banjo in hand,
advanced to the foot-lights, made their bow, and then seated themselves
on the three chairs, with that intensity of consummate, impudent, easy
familiarity peculiar to the ebony sons of song.

"Go it, darkies!" shouted an enthusiastic individual in the middle of
the room.

"Three cheers for the niggers!" roared a sailor, who had just returned
from a twelvemonth's cruise at the mines, and whose delight at the
prospect of once more hearing a good song was quite irrepressible.

The audience responded to the call with shouts of laughter, and a cheer
that would have done your heart good to listen to, while the niggers
shewed their teeth in acknowledgment of the compliment.

The first song was "Lilly Dale," and the men, who, we need scarcely say,
were fictitious negroes, sang it so well that the audience listened with
breathless attention and evident delight, and encored it vociferously.
The next song was "Oh!  Massa, how he wopped me," a ditty of quite a
different stamp, but equally popular.  It also was encored, as indeed
was every song sting that evening; but the performers had counted on
this.  After the third song there was a hornpipe, in the performance of
which the dancer's chief aim seemed to be, to shew in what a variety of
complex ways he could shake himself to pieces if he chose.  Then there
was another trio, and then a short pause, in order duly to prepare the
public mind for the reception of the great _cantatrice_ Mademoiselle
Nelina.  When she was led to the foot-lights by the tallest of the three
negroes, there was a momentary pause, as if men caught their breath;
then there was a prolonged cheer of enthusiastic admiration.  And little
wonder, for the creature that appeared before these rough miners seemed
more like an angelic visitant than a mortal.

There was nothing strikingly beautiful about the child, but she
possessed that inexpressibly _sweet_ character of face that takes the
human heart by storm at first sight; and this, added to the fact that
she was almost the only one of her sex who had been seen for many months
by any of those present,--that she was fair, blue-eyed, delicate,
modestly dressed, and innocent, filled them with an amount of enthusiasm
that would have predisposed them to call a scream melodious, had it been
uttered by Mademoiselle Nelina.

But the voice which came timidly from her lips was in harmony with her
appearance.  There was no attempt at execution, and the poor child was
too frightened to succeed in imparting much expression to the simple
ballad which she warbled; but there was an inherent richness in the
tones of her voice that entranced the ear, and dwelt for weeks and
months afterwards on the memory of those who heard it that night.

It is needless to add, that all her songs were encored with rapturous
applause.  The second song she sang was the popular one, "Erin, my
country!" and it created quite a _furore_ among the audience, many of
whom were natives of the Green Isle.

"Oh! ye purty creature! sing it again, do!" yelled an Irishman in the
front seats, while he waved his hat, and cheered in mad enthusiasm.  The
multitude shouted, "Encore!" and the song was sung for the third time.

While it was singing, Larry O'Neil sat with his hands clasped before
him, his bosom heaving, and his eyes riveted on the child's face.

"Mr Sinton," he said, in a deep, earnest tone, touching Ned on the
shoulder, as the last sweet notes of the air were drowned in the thunder
of applause that followed Mademoiselle Nelina off the stage; "Mr
Sinton, I'd lay me life that it's _her_!"

"Who?" inquired Ned, smiling at the serious expression of his comrade's
face.

"Who but Nelly Morgan, av course.  She's the born image o' Kate.
They're as like as two paise.  Sure av it's her, I'll know it, I will;
an' I'll make that black thief of a Yankee explain how he comed to
possess stolen goods."

Ned and the captain at first expressed doubts as to Larry's being able
to swear to the identity of one whom he had never seen before; but the
earnest assurances of the Irishman convinced them that he must be right,
and they at once entered into his feelings, and planned, in an eager
undertone, how the child was to be communicated with.

"It won't do," said Ned, "to tax the man right out with his villainy.
The miners would say we wanted to get possession of the child to make
money by her."

"But if the child herself admitted that the man was not her relative!"
suggested Captain Bunting.

"Perhaps," returned Ned, "she might at the same time admit that she
didn't like the appearance of the strangers who made such earnest
inquiries about her, and prefer to remain with her present guardian."

"Niver fear," said Larry, in a hoarse whisper; "she'll not say that if I
tell her I know her sister Kate, and can take her to her.  Besides,
hasn't she got an Irish heart? an' don't I know the way to touch it?
Jist stay where ye are, both o' ye, an' I'll go behind the scenes.  The
niggers are comin' on again, so I'll try; maybe there's nobody there but
herself."

Before they could reply, Larry was gone.  In a few minutes he reached
the front seats, and, leaning his back against the wall, as if he were
watching the performers, he gradually edged himself into the dark corner
where the side curtain shut off the orchestra from the public.  To his
great satisfaction he found that this was only secured to the wall by
one or two nails, which he easily removed, and then, in the midst of an
uproarious laugh, caused by a joke of the serenaders, he pushed the
curtain aside, and stood before the astonished gaze of Mademoiselle
Nelina, who sat on a chair, with her hands clasped and resting on her
knee.  Unfortunately for the success of Larry's enterprise, he also
stood before the curtain-raiser--a broad, sturdy man, in rough miner's
costume--whose back was turned towards him, but whose surprised visage
instantly faced him on hearing the muffled noise caused by his entry.
There was a burly negro also in the place, seated on a small stool, who
looked at him with unqualified astonishment.

"Halloo! wot do _you_ want?" exclaimed the curtain-raiser.

"Eh! tare an' ages!" cried Larry, in amazement.  "May I niver!  Sure
it's draimin' I am; an' the ghost o' Bill Jones is comed to see me!"

It was, indeed, no other than Bill Jones who stood revealed before him;
