them down at night. There you are with your huge carcass crushing down
your poor legs all night long. You don't even care for your own legs--so
long as you can eat, eat, and sleep, sleep. You a horse indeed!"

"But I tell you I was lame."

"I'm not denying there was a puffy look about your off-pastern. But my
belief is, it wasn't even grease--it was fat."

"I tell you I put my foot on one of those horrid stones they make the
roads with, and it gave my ankle such a twist."

"Ankle indeed! Why should you ape your betters? Horses ain't got any
ankles: they're only pasterns. And so long as you don't lift your feet
better, but fall asleep between every step, you'll run a good chance
of laming all your ankles as you call them, one after another. It's not
your lively horse that comes to grief in that way. I tell you I believe
it wasn't much, and if it was, it was your own fault. There! I've done.
I'm going to sleep. I'll try to think as well of you as I can. If you
would but step out a bit and run off a little of your fat!" Here Diamond
began to double up his knees; but Ruby spoke again, and, as young
Diamond thought, in a rather different tone.

"I say, Diamond, I can't bear to have an honest old horse like you think
of me like that. I will tell you the truth: it was my own fault that I
fell lame."

"I told you so," returned the other, tumbling against the partition as
he rolled over on his side to give his legs every possible privilege in
their narrow circumstances.

"I meant to do it, Diamond."

At the words, the old horse arose with a scramble like thunder, shot his
angry head and glaring eye over into Ruby's stall, and said--

"Keep out of my way, you unworthy wretch, or I'll bite you. You a horse!
Why did you do that?"

"Because I wanted to grow fat."

"You grease-tub! Oh! my teeth and tail! I thought you were a humbug! Why
did you want to get fat? There's no truth to be got out of you but by
cross-questioning. You ain't fit to be a horse."

"Because once I am fat, my nature is to keep fat for a long time; and I
didn't know when master might come home and want to see me."

"You conceited, good-for-nothing brute! You're only fit for the
knacker's yard. You wanted to look handsome, did you? Hold your tongue,
or I'll break my halter and be at you--with your handsome fat!"

"Never mind, Diamond. You're a good horse. You can't hurt me."

"Can't hurt you! Just let me once try."

"No, you can't."

"Why then?"

"Because I'm an angel."

"What's that?"

"Of course you don't know."

"Indeed I don't."

"I know you don't. An ignorant, rude old human horse, like you, couldn't
know it. But there's young Diamond listening to all we're saying; and he
knows well enough there are horses in heaven for angels to ride upon,
as well as other animals, lions and eagles and bulls, in more important
situations. The horses the angels ride, must be angel-horses, else the
angels couldn't ride upon them. Well, I'm one of them."

"You ain't."

"Did you ever know a horse tell a lie?"

"Never before. But you've confessed to shamming lame."

"Nothing of the sort. It was necessary I should grow fat, and necessary
that good Joseph, your master, should grow lean. I could have pretended
to be lame, but that no horse, least of all an angel-horse would do. So
I must be lame, and so I sprained my ankle--for the angel-horses have
ankles--they don't talk horse-slang up there--and it hurt me very much,
I assure you, Diamond, though you mayn't be good enough to be able to
believe it."

Old Diamond made no reply. He had lain down again, and a sleepy snort,
very like a snore, revealed that, if he was not already asleep, he was
past understanding a word that Ruby was saying. When young Diamond found
this, he thought he might venture to take up the dropt shuttlecock of
the conversation.

"I'm good enough to believe it, Ruby," he said.

But Ruby never turned his head, or took any notice of him. I suppose
he did not understand more of English than just what the coachman and
stableman were in the habit of addressing him with. Finding, however,
that his companion made no reply, he shot his head over the partition
and looking down at him said--

"You just wait till to-morrow, and you'll see whether I'm speaking the
truth or not.--I declare the old horse is fast asleep!--Diamond!--No I
won't."

Ruby turned away, and began pulling at his hayrack in silence.

Diamond gave a shiver, and looking round saw that the door of the stable
was open. He began to feel as if he had been dreaming, and after a
glance about the stable to see if North Wind was anywhere visible, he
thought he had better go back to bed.




CHAPTER XXXIII. THE PROSPECT BRIGHTENS


THE next morning, Diamond's mother said to his father, "I'm not quite
comfortable about that child again."

"Which child, Martha?" asked Joseph. "You've got a choice now."

"Well, Diamond I mean. I'm afraid he's getting into his queer ways
again. He's been at his old trick of walking in his sleep. I saw him run
up the stair in the middle of the night."

"Didn't you go after him, wife?"

"Of course I did--and found him fast asleep in his bed. It's because
he's had so little meat for the last six weeks, I'm afraid."

"It may be that. I'm very sorry. But if it don't please God to send us
enough, what am I to do, wife?"

"You can't help it, I know, my dear good man," returned Martha. "And
after all I don't know. I don't see why he shouldn't get on as well as
the rest of us. There I'm nursing baby all this time, and I get along
pretty well. I'm sure, to hear the little man singing, you wouldn't
think there was much amiss with him."

For at that moment Diamond was singing like a lark in the clouds. He had
the new baby in his arms, while his mother was dressing herself. Joseph
was sitting at his breakfast--a little weak tea, dry bread, and very
dubious butter--which Nanny had set for him, and which he was enjoying
because he was hungry. He had groomed both horses, and had got old
Diamond harnessed ready to put to.

"Think of a fat angel, Dulcimer!" said Diamond.

The baby had not been christened yet, but Diamond, in reading his Bible,
had come upon the word dulcimer, and thought it so pretty that ever
after he called his sister Dulcimer!

"Think of a red, fat angel, Dulcimer!" he repeated; "for Ruby's an angel
of a horse, Dulcimer. He sprained his ankle and got fat on purpose."

"What purpose, Diamond?" asked his father.

"Ah! that I can't tell. I suppose to look handsome when his master
comes," answered Diamond.--"What do you think, Dulcimer? It must be for
some good, for Ruby's an angel."

"I wish I were rid of him, anyhow," said his father; "for he weighs
heavy on my mind."

"No wonder, father: he's so fat," said Diamond. "But you needn't be
afraid, for everybody says he's in better condition than when you had
him."

"Yes, but he may be as thin as a tin horse before his owner comes. It
was too bad to leave him on my hands this way."

"Perhaps he couldn't help it," suggested Diamond. "I daresay he has some
good reason for it."

"So I should have said," returned his father, "if he had not driven such
a hard bargain with me at first."

"But we don't know what may come of it yet, husband," said his wife.
"Mr. Raymond may give a little to boot, seeing you've had more of the
bargain than you wanted or reckoned upon."

"I'm afraid not: he's a hard man," said Joseph, as he rose and went to
get his cab out.

Diamond resumed his singing. For some time he carolled snatches of
everything or anything; but at last it settled down into something like
what follows. I cannot tell where or how he got it.


            Where did you come from, baby dear?
            Out of the everywhere into here.

            Where did you get your eyes so blue?
            Out of the sky as I came through.

            What makes the light in them sparkle and spin?
            Some of the starry spikes left in.

            Where did you get that little tear?
            I found it waiting when I got here.

            What makes your forehead so smooth and high?
            A soft hand stroked it as I went by.

            What makes your cheek like a warm white rose?
            I saw something better than any one knows.

            Whence that three-cornered smile of bliss?
            Three angels gave me at once a kiss.

            Where did you get this pearly ear?
            God spoke, and it came out to hear.

            Where did you get those arms and hands?
            Love made itself into hooks and bands.

            Feet, whence did you come, you darling things?
            From the same box as the cherubs' wings.

            How did they all just come to be you?
            God thought about me, and so I grew.

            But how did you come to us, you dear?
            God thought about you, and so I am here.

"You never made that song, Diamond," said his mother.

"No, mother. I wish I had. No, I don't. That would be to take it from
somebody else. But it's mine for all that."

"What makes it yours?"

"I love it so."

"Does loving a thing make it yours?"

"I think so, mother--at least more than anything else can. If I didn't
love baby (which couldn't be, you know) she wouldn't be mine a bit. But
I do love baby, and baby is my very own Dulcimer."

"The baby's mine, Diamond."

"That makes her the more mine, mother."

"How do you make that out?"

"Because you're mine, mother."

"Is that because you love me?"

"Yes, just because. Love makes the only myness," said Diamond.

When his father came home to have his dinner, and change Diamond for
Ruby, they saw him look very sad, and he told them he had not had a fare
worth mentioning the whole morning.

"We shall all have to go to the workhouse, wife," he said.

"It would be better to go to the back of the north wind," said Diamond,
dreamily, not intending to say it aloud.

"So it would," answered his father. "But how are we to get there,
Diamond?"

"We must wait till we're taken," returned Diamond.

Before his father could speak again, a knock came to the door, and in
walked Mr. Raymond with a smile on his face. Joseph got up and received
him respectfully, but not very cordially. Martha set a chair for him,
but he would not sit down.

"You are not very glad to see me," he said to Joseph. "You don't want to
part with the old horse."

"Indeed, sir, you are mistaken there. What with anxiety about him, and
bad luck, I've wished I were rid of him a thousand times. It was only to
be for three months, and here it's eight or nine."

"I'm sorry to hear such a statement," said Mr. Raymond. "Hasn't he been
of service to you?"

"Not much, not with his lameness"

"Ah!" said Mr. Raymond, hastily--"you've been laming him--have you? That
accounts for it. I see, I see."

"It wasn't my fault, and he's all right now. I don't know how it
happened, but--"

"He did it on purpose," said Diamond. "He put his foot on a stone just
to twist his ankle."

"How do you know that, Diamond?" said his father, turning to him. "I
never said so, for I could not think how it came."

"I heard it--in the stable," answered Diamond.

"Let's have a look at him," said Mr. Raymond.

"If you'll step into the yard," said Joseph, "I'll bring him out."

They went, and Joseph, having first taken off his harness, walked Ruby
into the middle of the yard.

"Why," said Mr. Raymond, "you've not been using him well."

"I don't know what you mean by that, sir. I didn't expect to hear that
from you. He's sound in wind and limb--as sound as a barrel."

"And as big, you might add. Why, he's as fat as a pig! You don't call
that good usage!"

Joseph was too angry to make any answer.

"You've not worked him enough, I say. That's not making good use of him.
That's not doing as you'd be done by."

"I shouldn't be sorry if I was served the same, sir."

"He's too fat, I say."

"There was a whole month I couldn't work him at all, and he did nothing
but eat his head off. He's an awful eater. I've taken the best part of
six hours a day out of him since, but I'm always afraid of his coming to
grief again, and so I couldn't make the most even of that. I declare to
you, sir, when he's between the shafts, I sit on the box as miserable as
if I'd stolen him. He looks all the time as if he was a bottling up of
complaints to make of me the minute he set eyes on you again. There!
look at him now, squinting round at me with one eye! I declare to you,
on my word, I haven't laid the whip on him more than three times."

"I'm glad to hear it. He never did want the whip."

"I didn't say that, sir. If ever a horse wanted the whip, he do. He's
brought me to beggary almost with his snail's pace. I'm very glad you've
come to rid me of him."

"I don't know that," said Mr. Raymond. "Suppose I were to ask you to buy
him of me--cheap."

"I wouldn't have him in a present, sir. I don't like him. And I wouldn't
drive a horse that I didn't like--no, not for gold. It can't come to
good where there's no love between 'em."

"Just bring out your own horse, and let me see what sort of a pair
they'd make."

Joseph laughed rather bitterly as he went to fetch Diamond.

When the two were placed side by side, Mr. Raymond could hardly keep
his countenance, but from a mingling of feelings. Beside the great,
red, round barrel, Ruby, all body and no legs, Diamond looked like a
clothes-horse with a skin thrown over it. There was hardly a spot of
him where you could not descry some sign of a bone underneath. Gaunt and
grim and weary he stood, kissing his master, and heeding no one else.
