harder than ever."

"That _was_ a good case, an' a _true_ one," said Joe Baldwin, with an
approving nod.

"And these divers, Mr Edgar," continued Joe, "sometimes go on their own
hook, like we have done this time, with more or less luck.  There was
one chum of mine who took it into his head to try his chances at the
wreck of the _Royal Charter_, long after all hope of further salvage had
been abandoned, and in a short time he managed to recover between three
and four hundred pounds sterling."

"An immense amount of money, they do say, was recovered from the _Royal
Charter_ by divers," observed Maxwell.

"That is true, and it happens," said Edgar, sadly, "that I know a few
interesting facts regarding that vessel.  I know of some people whose
hearts were broken by the loss of relatives in that wreck.  There were
many such--God comfort them!  But that is not what I meant to speak of.
The facts I refer to are connected with the treasure lost in the vessel.
Just before leaving London I had occasion to call on the gentleman who
had the management of the recovered gold, and he told me several
interesting things.  First of all, the whole of the gold that could be
identified was handed at once over to its owners; but this matter of
identification was not easy, for much of the gold was found quite loose
in the form of sovereigns and nuggets and dust.  The dust was ordered to
be sent up with the `dirt' that surrounded it, and a process of
gold-washing was instituted, after the regular diggings fashion, with a
bowl and water.  Tons of `dirt' were sent up and washed in this way, and
a large quantity of gold saved.  The agent showed me the bowl that was
used on this occasion.  He also showed me sovereigns that had been kept
as curious specimens.  Some of them were partly destroyed, as if they
had been caught between iron-plates and cut in half; others were more or
less defaced and bent, and a few had been squeezed almost into an
unrecognisable shape.  In one place, he told me, the divers saw a pile
of sovereigns through a rent in an iron-plate.  The rent was too small
to admit a man's arm, and the plates could not be dislodged.  The
divers, therefore, made a pair of iron tongs, with which they picked out
the sovereigns, and thus saved a large sum of money.  One very curious
case of identification occurred.  A bag of sovereigns was found with no
name on it.  A claimant appeared, but he could tell of no mark to prove
that he was the rightful owner.  Of course it could not be given up, and
it appeared as if the unfortunate man (who was indeed the owner) must
relinquish his claim, when in a happy moment his wife remembered that
she had put a brass `token' into the bag with the gold.  The bag was
searched, the token was found, and the gold was immediately handed to
them."

"Molly, my dear," said Rooney Machowl at this point, "you make a note o'
that; an' if ever you have to do with bags o' goold, just putt a brass
token or two into 'em."

"Ah!  Shut up, Rooney," said Mrs Machowl, in a voice so sweet that the
contrast between it and her language caused Edgar and Joe to laugh.

"Well, then," continued Edgar, "in many other curious ways gold was
identified and delivered to its owners: thus, in one case, an incomplete
seal, bearing part of the legs of a griffin, was found on a bag of two
thousand sovereigns, and the owner, showing the seal with which he had
stamped it, established his claim.  Of course in all cases where bars of
gold were found with the owners' names stamped on them, the property was
at once handed over; but after all was done that could be done by means
of the most painstaking inquiry, an immense amount of gold necessarily
remained unclaimed."

"And I s'pose if it wasn't for us divers," said Maxwell, "the whole
consarn would have remained a dead loss to mankind."

"True for ye," responded Rooney; "it's not often ye come out wid such a
blaze of wisdom as that, David!  It must be the puppy as has stirred ye
up, boy, or, mayhap, the baccy!"

"Take care _you_ don't stir me up, lad, else it may be worse for you,"
growled Maxwell.

"Och!  I'm safe," returned the Irishman, carelessly; "I'd putt Molly
betwain us, an' sure ye'd have to come over her dead body before ye'd
git at me.--It wasn't you, was it, David," continued Rooney, with sudden
earnestness, "that got knocked over by a blast at the works in Ringwall
harbour two or three years ago?"

"No, it warn't me," responded Maxwell; "it was long Tom Skinclip.  He
was too tall for a diver--he was.  They say he stood six futt four in
his socks; moreover he was as thin as a shadow from a bad gas-lamp.  He
was workin' one day down in the 'arbour, layin' stones at the
foundations of the noo breakwater, when they set off a blast about a
hundred yards off from where he was workin', an' so powerful was the
blast that it knocked him clean on his back.  He got such a fright that
he signalled violently to haul up, an' they did haul 'im up, expectin'
to find one of his glasses broke, or his toobes bu'sted.  There was
nothin' wotsomedever the matter with 'im, but he wouldn't go down again
that day.  'Owsever, he got over it, an' after that went down to work at
a wreck somewhere in the eastern seas--not far from Ceylon, I'm told.
When there 'e got another fright that well-nigh finished him, an' from
that day he gave up divin' an' tuck to gardening, for which he was much
better suited."

"What happened to him?" asked Edgar.

"I'm not rightly sure," answered Maxwell, refilling his pipe, "but I've
bin told he had to go down one day in shallow water among sea-weed.  It
was a beautiful sort o' submarine garden, so to speak, an' long Tom
Skinclip was so fond o' flowers an' gardens nat'rally, that he forgot
hisself, an' went wanderin' about what he called the `submarine groves'
till they thought he must have gone mad.  They could see him quite
plain, you see, from the boat, an' they watched him while he wandered
about.  The sea-weed was up'ard of six feet high, tufted on the top with
a sort o' thing you might a'most fancy was flowers.  The colours, too,
was bright.  Among the branches o' this submarine forest, or grove,
small lobsters, an' shrimps, an' other sorts o' shell-fish, were doin'
dooty as birds--hoppin' from one branch to another, an' creepin' about
in all directions.

"After a time long Tom Skinclip he sat down on a rock an' wiped the
perspiration off his brow--at least he tried to do it, which set the men
in the boat all off in roars of laughter, for, d'ee see, Skinclip was an
absent sort of a feller, an' used to do strange things.  No doubt when
he sat down on the rock he felt warm, an' bein' a narvish sort o' chap,
I make no question but he was a-sweatin' pretty hard, so, without
thinkin', he up with his arm, quite nat'ral like, an' drawed it across
where his brow would have bin if the helmet hadn't been on.  It didn't
seem to strike him as absurd, however, for he putt both hands on 'is
knees, an' sat lookin' straight before 'im.

"He hadn't sat long in this way when they see'd a huge fish--about two
futt long--comin' slowly through the grove behind 'im.  It was one o'
them creeters o' the deep as seems to have had its head born five or six
sizes too big for its tail--with eyes an' mouth to match.  It had also
two great horns above its eyes, an' a cravat or frill o' bristles round
its neck.  Its round eyes and half-open mouth gave it the appearance o'
bein' always more or less in a state of astonishment.  P'r'aps it was--
at the fact of its havin' bin born at all!  Anyhow, it swum'd slowly
along till it cotched sight o' Skinclip, when it went at him, an' looked
at the back of his helmet in great astonishment, an' appeared to smell
it, but evidently it could make nothin' of it.  Then it looked all down
his back with an equal want of appreciation.  Arter that it came round
to the front, and looked straight in at Skinclip's bull's-eye!  They do
say it was a sight to see the start he gave!

"He jump up as smart a'most as if he'd bin in the open air, an' they
obsarved, when he turned round, that a huge lobster of some unbeknown
species was holdin' on to his trousers with all its claws like a limpet!
The fish--or ripslang, as one of the men called it, who said he knowed
it well--turned out to be a pugnaceous creetur, for no sooner did it see
Skinclip's great eyes lookin' at it in horror, than it set up its frill
of spikes, threw for'ard the long horns, an' went slap at the bull's-eye
fit to drive it in.  Skinclip he putt down his head, an' the ripslang
made five or six charges at the helmet without much effect.  Then it
changed its tactics, turned on its side, wriggled under the helmet, an'
looked in at Skinclip with one of its glarin' eyes close to the glass.
At the same time the lobster gave him a tree-mendious tug behind.  This
was more than Skinclip could stand.  They see'd him jump round, seize
the life-line, an' give it four deadly pulls, but his comrades paid no
attention to it.  The lobster gave him another tug, an' the ripslang
prepared for another charge.  It seemed to have got some extra spikes
set up in its wrath, for its whole body was bristlin' more or less by
this time.

"Again Skinclip tugged like a maniac at the line.  The ripslang charged;
the lobster tugged; the poor feller stepped back hastily, got his heels
entangled in sea-weed, and went down head first into the grove!

"The men got alarmed by this time, so they pulled him up as fast as they
could, an' got him inboard in a few minutes; but they do say," added
Maxwell, with emphasis, "that that ripslang leaped right out o' the
water arter him, an' the lobster held on so that they had to chop its
claws off with a hatchet to make it let go.  They supped off it the game
night, and long Tom Skinclip, who owned an over strong appetite, had a
bad fit of indisgestion in consikence."



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

MORE ABOUT THE SEA.

Once more we beg our reader to accompany us to sea--out into the thick
darkness, over the wild waves, far from the abodes of man.

There, one night in December, a powerful steamer did battle with a
tempest.  The wind was against her, and, as a matter of course, also the
sea.  The first howled among her rigging with what might have been
styled vicious violence.  The seas hit her bows with a fury that caused
her to stagger, and, bursting right over her bulwarks at times, swept
the decks from stem to stern, but nothing could altogether stop her
onward progress.  The sleepless monster in the hold, with a heart of
fervent heat, and scalding breath of intense energy, and muscles of iron
mould, and an indomitable--yet to man submissive--will, wrought on night
and day unweariedly, driving the floating palace straight and steadily
on her course--homeward-bound.

Down in the cabin, in one of the side berths lay a female form.
Opposite to it, in a similar berth, lay another female form.  Both forms
were very limp.  The faces attached to the forms were pale yellow, edged
here and there with green.

"My dear," sighed one of the forms, "this _is_ dreadful!"

After a long silence, as though much time were required for the
inhalation of sufficient air for the purpose, the other form replied:--

"Yes, Laura, dear, it _is_ dreadful."

"'Ave a cup of tea, ladies?" said the stewardess, opening the door just
then, and appearing at an acute angle with the doorway, holding a cup in
each hand.

Miss Pritty shuddered and covered her head with the bed-clothes.  Aileen
made the form of "no, thanks," with her lips, and shut her eyes.

"_Do_ 'ave a cup," said the stewardess, persuasively.

The cups appeared at that moment inclined to "'ave" a little game of
hide-and-seek, which the stewardess nimbly prevented by suddenly forming
an obtuse angle with the floor, and following that action up with a
plunge to starboard, and a heel to port, that was suggestive--at least
to a landsman--of an intention to baptise Miss Pritty with hot tea, and
thereafter take a "header" through the cabin window into the boiling
sea!  She did neither, however, but, muttered something about "'ow she
do roll, to be sure," and, seeing that her mission was hopeless, left
the cabin with a balked stagger and a sudden rush, which was
appropriately followed up by the door shutting itself with a terrific
bang, as though it should say, "You might have known as much, goose!
Why did you open me?"

"Laura, dear," said Aileen, "did you hear what the captain said to some
one just now in the cabin, when the door was open?"

"N-no," replied Miss Pritty, faintly.

"I distinctly heard some one ask how fast we were going, but I could not
make out his reply."

"Oh!" exclaimed the other, brightening for a brief moment; "yes, I _did_
hear him.  He said we were going six knots.  Now I do _not_ understand
what that means."

"Did you mean that?" asked Aileen, turning her eyes languidly on her
friend, while a faint smile flickered on her mouth.

"Mean what?" said Miss Pritty, in evident surprise.

"No, I see you didn't.  Well, a knot means, I believe, a nautical mile."

"A notticle mile, Aileen; what is that?"

"A _nau_tical mile; dear me, how stupid you are, Laura!"

"Oh!  I understand.  But, really, the noise of that screw makes it
difficult to hear distinctly.  And, after all, it is no wonder if I _am_
stupid, for what between eating nothing but pickles for six weeks, and
this dreadful--there!  Oh!  It comes ag--"

Poor Miss Pritty stopped abruptly, and made a desperate effort to think
of home.  Aileen, albeit full of sympathy, turned her face to the wall,
and lay with closed eyes.

After a time the latter looked slowly round.

"Are you asleep, Laura?"

Miss Pritty gave a sharp semi-hysterical laugh at the bare idea of such
an impossible condition.

"Well, I was going to say," resumed Aileen, "that we cannot be very far
from land now, and when we do get there--"

"Happy day!" murmured Miss Pritty.

"We intend," continued Aileen, "to go straight home--I--I mean to our
old home, sell everything at once, and go to live in a cottage--quite a
tiny cottage--by the sea somewhere.  Now, I want you to come and visit
us the very day we get into our cottage.  I know you would like it--
would like being with me, wouldn't you?"

"Like it?  I should delight in it of all things."

"I knew you would.  Well, I was going to say that it would be such a
kindness to dear papa too, for you know he will naturally be very
low-spirited when we make the change--for it is a great change, Laura,
greater perhaps than you, who have never been very rich, can imagine,
and I doubt my capacity to be a good comforter to him though I have all
the will."

Two little spots of red appeared for the first time for many weeks on
Miss Pritty's cheeks, as she said in a tone of enthusiasm:--

"What!  _You_ not a good comforter?  I've a good mind to refuse your
invitation, since you dare to insinuate that I could in any degree
supplement _you_ in such a matter."

"Well, then, we won't make any more insinuations," returned Aileen, with
a sad smile; "but you'll come--that's settled.  You know, dear, that we
had lost everything, but ever since our jewel-case was found by--by--"

"By Edgar," said Miss Pritty; "why don't you go on?"

"Yes, by Mr Berrington," continued Aileen, "ever since that, papa has
been very hopeful.  I don't know exactly what his mind runs on, but I
can see that he is making heaps of plans in regard to the future, and
oh!  You can't think how glad and how thankful I am for the change.  The
state of dull, heartbreaking, weary depression that he fell into just
after getting the news of our failure was beginning to undermine his
health.  I could see that plainly, and felt quite wretched about him.
But now he is comparatively cheerful, and so gentle too.  Do you know, I
have been thinking a good deal lately of the psalmist's saying, `it is
good for me that I have been afflicted;' and, in the midst of it all,
our Heavenly Father remembered mercy, for it was He who sent our
jewel-box, as if to prevent the burden from being too heavy for papa."

Miss Pritty's kind face beamed agreement with these sentiments.

"Now," continued Aileen, "these jewels are, it seems, worth a great deal
of money--much more than I had any idea of--for there are among them a
number of very fine diamond rings and brooches.  In fact, papa told me
that he believed the whole were worth between eight and nine thousand
pounds.  This, you know, is a sum which will at least raise us above
want, (poor Miss Pritty, well did _she_ know that!)--though of course it
will not enable us to live very luxuriously.  How fortunate it was that
these pirates--"

"Oh!" screamed Miss Pritty, suddenly, as she drew the clothes over her
head.

"What's the matter?" exclaimed Aileen; "are you going to be--"

"Oh!  No, no, no," said Miss Pritty, peeping out again; "how could you
bring these dreadful creatures to my remembrance so abruptly?  I had
quite forgotten them for the time.  Why, oh why did you banish from my
mind that sweet idea of a charming cottage by the sea, and all its
little unluxurious elegancies, and call up in its place the h-h-horrors
of that village-nest--pig-sty--of the dreadful buccaneers?  But it can't
be helped now," added Miss Pritty, with a resigned shudder, "and we have
the greatest reason to be thankful that their hope of a good ransom made
them treat us as well as they did;--but go on, dear, you were saying
that it was fortunate that these p-pirates--"

"That they did not sell the jewels or take any of them out of the box,
or send them into the other prow which was sunk in deep water, where the
divers could not have gone down to recover them."

"Very true," assented Miss Pritty.

At this point the cabin door again burst open, and the amiable
stewardess appeared, bearing two cups of fresh tea, which she watched
with the eyes of a tigress and the smile of an angel, while her body
kept assuming sudden, and one would have thought impossible, attitudes.

"Now, ladies, _do_ try some tea.  Really you must.  I insist on it.
Why, you'll both die if you don't."

Impressed with the force of this reasoning, both ladies made an effort,
and got up on their respective elbows.  They smiled incredulously at
each other, and then, becoming suddenly grave, fell flat down on their
backs, and remained so for some time without speaking.

"Now, try again; do try, it will do you so much good--really."
