about yourself. Are you at work?"

"Not just at present," replied Edward, embarrassed.

"But I think I can get him another place in a day or two," said
Chester, quickly.

"If you need a little money, call on me," added the warm-hearted
Westerner. "You know you used to call me your uncle Nathaniel."

"I wouldn't like to borrow," said Edward, shyly.

"When was your birthday?"

"A month ago."

"Then I must give you a birthday present You can't object to that," and
Mr. Wilson took a ten-dollar gold piece from his pocket and pressed it
upon Edward.

"Thank you very much. I can't decline a birthday gift."

"That's what I thought. I am an old friend, and have a right to
remember you. Was Mr. Rand in the same office with you?"

"No; Chester is an artist."

"An artist! A boy like him!" ejaculated the Oregonian in surprise.

Chester smiled.

"I am getting older every day," he said.

"That's what's the matter with me," rejoined Mr. Wilson. "You haven't
any gray hair yet, while I have plenty."

"Not quite yet," smiled Chester.

"What kind of an artist are you?"

"I make drawings for an illustrated weekly. It is a comic paper."

"And perhaps you put your friends in occasionally?"

"Not friends exactly, but sometimes I sketch a face I meet in the
street."

"You may use me whenever you want a representative of the wild and
woolly West."

"Thank you, Mr. Wilson."

"But in that case you must send me a copy of the paper."

"I won't forget it."

"How long are you staying in New York, Mr. Wilson?" asked Edward.

"I go away to-morrow. You must spend the evening with me."

"I should like to do so. It seems good to see an old friend."

"By and by we will go to Delmonico's and have an ice cream. I suppose
you have been there?"

"No; office boys don't often patronize Delmonico. They are more likely
to go to Beefsteak John's."

"I never heard that name. Is it a fashionable place?"

"Yes, with those of small pocketbooks. It is a perfectly respectable
place, but people living on Fifth Avenue prefer the Brunswick or
Delmonico's."

Edward brightened up so much owing to the presence of a friend from his
distant home that Chester could hardly believe that it was the same boy
whom he had found but a short time before in the depths of despondency.

About nine o'clock they adjourned to Delmonico's and ordered ices and
cake.

"This seems a tiptop place," said the Oregonian, looking about him. "We
haven't got anything equal to it in Portland, but we may have sometime.
The Western people are progressive. We don't want to be at the tail end
of the procession. Mr. Rand, you ought to come out and see something of
the West, particularly of the Pacific coast. You may not feel an
interest in it at present, but----"

"I have more interest in it than you imagine, Mr. Wilson. I have some
property at Tacoma."

"You don't mean it! What kind of property?"

"I own five lots there."

"Then you are in luck. Lots in Tacoma are rising every day."

"But it wouldn't be well to sell at present, would it?"

"No; the railroad has only recently been completed, and the growth of
Tacoma has only just begun."

"I hope to go West some day."

"When you do you must call on me. Perhaps you will come, too, Edward?"

Edward Granger shook his head.

"It won't be worth while for me to go back while Mr. Trimble is alive.
He seems to have such an influence over my mother that it would not be
pleasant for me to go there and have a cold reception from her."

"I will call on her and mention your name. Then I can see how the land
lays. How she can prefer such a man as Abner Trimble to her own son I
can't understand."

About ten o'clock the two boys left Mr. Wilson, who had been going
about all day and showed signs of fatigue.

"Shan't I see you again, Mr. Wilson?" asked Edward.

"No; I must take an early start in the morning. You had better let me
lend you a little money."

"No, thank you, sir. Your generous gift will help me till I get a
place."

So the farewells were said, and the boys walked home.

"Now," said Edward, "I must try to get a place. This money will last me
two weeks, and in that time I ought to secure something."

He went from place to place, answering advertisements the next day, but
met with no luck. He was feeling rather depressed when Chester came
into his room.

"I have found a place for you," he said, brightly.

"You don't mean it! Where is it?" asked young Granger.

"At the office of _The Phoenix_. You will be in the mailing department.
The salary is small--only seven dollars a week--but----"

"I shall feel rich. It is two dollars more than I received at my last
place. When am I to go to work?"

"To-morrow. The mailing clerk has got a better place, and that makes an
opening for you."

"And I owe this good fortune to you," said Edward, gratefully. "How can
I repay you?"

"By being my friend!"

"That I shall be--for life!" replied Edward, fervently.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

AFTER A YEAR.


A year passed. Chester remained in the service of _The Phoenix_, which
had become an established success. His artistic work was so satisfactory
that his salary had been raised from twenty-five to thirty dollars per
week. Yet he had not increased his personal expenses, and now had
nearly a thousand dollars deposited in different savings banks.

He had concealed the extent of his prosperity from his mother, meaning
in time to surprise her agreeably.

About this period he received a letter from Wyncombe. It was from his
mother. It ran thus:

    "DEAR CHESTER: I am sorry to write you bad news. Miss Jane Dolby
    has decided to visit a sister in Chicago and remain a year. Of
    course this cuts off the liberal income I have received from her,
    and which has been adequate to meet my expenses. I may be able to
    earn something by sewing, but it will be only a little. I shall,
    therefore, have to accept the offer you made me sometime since to
    send me a weekly sum. I am sorry to be a burden to you, but it will
    only be for a year. At the end of that time Miss Dolby promises to
    come back and resume boarding with me.

    "I think we have reason to feel grateful for your continued success
    in New York. Silas Tripp called a few evenings since. He has had a
    great deal of trouble with boys. He says he has not had anyone to
    suit him since you left. He asked me if I thought you would come
    back for four dollars a week. This he seemed to consider a very
    liberal offer, and it was--for him. I didn't give him any
    encouragement, as I presume you prefer art to the grocery business.

    "You need not begin to send me money, at once, as I have been able
    to save a little from Miss Dolby's board.

    "Your affectionate mother,

    "SARAH RAND."

Chester answered at once:

    "DEAR MOTHER: Don't feel any anxiety about your loss of income
    through Miss Dolby's departure, and don't try to earn any money by
    sewing. My income is larger than you suppose, and I will send you
    weekly as much as you have been accustomed to receive from your
    boarder. Should it be more than you need, you can lay aside any
    surplus for future use.

    "Tell Mr. Tripp I prefer New York to Wyncombe as a place of
    business, and I am obliged to decline his generous offer. I cannot
    help thinking sometimes how fortunate it was that he declined over
    a year since to increase my pay, as in that case I might still have
    been working for him instead of establishing a reputation as an
    artist here. Last week I received a larger offer from another
    publication, but as the publishers of _The Phoenix_ have always
    treated me well, I didn't think that I would be justified in making
    a change. I mean in a week or two to come home to pass Sunday. I
    shall feel delighted to see my friends in Wyncombe, and most of
    all, my mother.

    "Your loving son, CHESTER ."

Mrs. Rand protested against Chester sending her eight dollars a week,
but he insisted upon it, advising her to lay aside what she did not
need.

One evening about this time Edward Granger, who still occupied the
small apartment adjoining, came into Chester's room, looking agitated.

"What is the matter?" asked Chester. "Have you had bad news?"

"Yes; I have had a letter from Mr. Wilson, of Portland, whom you
recollect we met about a year ago."

"I remember him."

"I will read you his letter. You will see that I have reason to feel
anxious."

The letter ran as follows:

    "DEAR EDWARD: I promised to send you any news I might pick up about
    your mother and her premising husband. Trimble is indulging in
    liquor more than ever, and I don't see how he can stand it unless
    he has a castiron constitution. From what I hear he has never given
    up trying to get your mother's property into his hands. She has
    held out pretty firm, but she may yield yet. I hear that he is
    circulating reports that you are dead. In that case he thinks she
    may be induced to make a will leaving her property to Mr. Trimble;
    having, as I believe, no near relatives, so that he would seem to
    be the natural heir.

    "I may be doing Trimble an injustice, but I think if such a will
    were made she wouldn't live long. Your stepfather is in great
    straits for money, it seems, and he might be tempted to do
    something desperate. As far as I can hear, Abner Trimble's plan is
    this: He took a pal of his around to the house who had been in New
    York recently, and the latter gave a circumstantial account of your
    dying with typhoid fever. Evidently your mother believed it, for
    she seemed quite broken down and has aged considerably since the
    news. No doubt her husband will seize this opportunity to induce
    her to make a will in his favor. Here lies the danger; and I think
    I ought to warn you of it, for your presence here is needed to
    defeat your stepfather's wicked plans. Come out at once, if you
    can.

    "Your friend,

    "NATHANIEL WILSON."

"What do you think of that, Chester?" asked Edward, in a troubled
voice.

"I think it very important. Your mother's life and your interests both
are in peril."

"And the worst of it is that I am helpless," said Edward, sadly. "I
ought to go out there, but you know how small my salary is. It has
required the utmost economy to live, and I haven't as much as five
dollars saved up. How can I make such a long and costly journey?"

"I see the difficulty, Edward, but I need time to think it over.
To-morrow afternoon come in and I may have some advice to give you."

"I know that you will advise me for the best, Chester."

"There is a good deal in age and experience," said Chester, smiling.

When Edward left the room Chester took from his pocket a letter
received the day previous, and postmarked Tacoma. It was to this effect:

    "MR. CHESTER RAND.

    "DEAR SIR: We learn that you own five lots on Main Street, numbered
    from 201 to 205. We have inquiries as to three of those lots as a
    location for a new hotel, which it is proposed to erect at an early
    date. We are, therefore, led to ask whether you are disposed to
    sell, and, if so, on what terms. We should be glad to have a
    personal interview with you, but if it is impracticable or
    inconvenient for you to come on to Tacoma we will undertake, as
    your agents, to carry on the negotiations.

    "Yours respectfully,

    "DEAN & DOWNIE,
    "Real Estate Agents."


"Why shouldn't I go to Tacoma?" thought Chester. "I can probably sell
the lots to better advantage than any agents, and should be entirely
unable to fix upon a suitable price unless I am on the ground. In case
I go on, I can take Edward with me, and trust to him to repay the money
advanced at some future time."

The more Chester thought of this plan the more favorable it struck him.

He went the next day to the office of _The Phoenix_, and after
delivering his sketches, said: "I should like leave of absence for two
months. Can you spare me?"

"Does your health require it, Mr. Rand?" asked the editor.

"No," answered Chester, "but I own a little property in Tacoma, and
there are parties out there who wish to buy. It is important that I
should go out there to attend to the matter."

The editor arched his brows in astonishment.

"What!" he said. "An artist, and own real estate? This is truly
