world, and I leave her so."

The professor retired with even greater applause than in the forenoon.
Since he spoke, China has been engaged in a great war with Japan; and
possibly his account of the country will assist those who are yet to
read the history of the conflict.




CHAPTER XXXIV

SIGHT-SEEING IN HONG-KONG AND CANTON


After the conclusion of the lecture in the afternoon, the passengers of
the two ships had another frolic, as Captain Ringgold called it, and
then dined in the cabin; after which those from the Blanche "went home,"
as the ladies termed it.

Towards the close of the following day, while the passengers of the
Guardian-Mother were seated on the promenade, the lookout forward
shouted, "Land, ho!" The announcement caused a sensation, as usual,
though it was an old story. It was reported off the port bow; and the
captain said it was Lema Island, a considerable distance from Hong-Kong.

"The Chinese name of Hong-Kong is Hiang-Kiang, which means 'sweet
waters,'" said the commander. "It is a ridge of rocks, the highest point
of which is over eighteen hundred feet above the water. It is ninety
miles south by east of Canton. The island has an area of twenty-nine
square miles, and is not more than half a mile from the main shore. It
is a barren rock, and you will hardly see a speck of vegetation on the
whole of it. In the south-west corner of the island is the city of
Victoria, with a population of two hundred and twenty-one thousand; and
it is one of the great centres of trade with Western nations. The
principal import is opium, and the principal exports are tea and silk.
We shall anchor soon in its splendid harbor."

An English pilot was taken; and at sunset the ship was at anchor, and
the party had abundant occupation in observing the rugged shores, the
shipping that filled the harbor, and especially the Chinese boats, in
charge of boat-women generally. A few junks were in sight; and they had
seen several of them among the islands which form an archipelago at the
mouth of Canton River, extending some distance up the stream.

"There are a number of hotels here with English names," said the captain
at dinner; "but I shall not trouble you to take a vote on the question
of going to one of them, for we shall not remain here long, not more
than one day. Our steamers can go up to Canton; but I think we had
better go up in one of the regular steamers, not Chinese."

After breakfast the next morning, the first thing in order was to ascend
the promontory for the view it would afford. But they could not walk up,
it was so difficult and tiresome. Before they left the ship the American
consul visited her, and proffered his assistance to the tourists; for he
had read about the ships in the papers of some of the ports they had
visited.

This gentleman was very kind and very polite, and while he was on board
the party from the Blanche came to the ship in the steam-launch. He was
introduced to everybody, and advised the travellers to take Chinese
sampans for their visit to the shore, for the novelty of the thing. The
water around the ship was covered with them, and a sufficient number of
them were taken to accommodate the party. "The colonel," as the consul
was generally called, talked "pidgin" English, which is practically a
dialect in itself, to the boat-women.

The captain, Mrs. Belgrave, the colonel, and a few others went in the
first sampan, and the lady was pleased with the women in charge of the
craft; and several children were in a coop at the stern. The price of
the craft was ten cents for half an hour. In a few minutes they were
landed at the town; and then a crowd of coolies, as the laborers are
called here, surrounded the party with sedans and rickshaws, and all
were anxious for a job. The passengers waited till all the company had
landed, and then took sedans or rickshaws for the Hong-Kong Hotel.

It required twenty of them to accommodate the party. The commander and
the consul went into the hotel; and a lunch, or tiffin as it is called
here as in India, was ordered for the tourists at one o'clock. Then the
colonel instructed the coolies where to go, and the procession started
for a round in the city. The buildings are constructed of granite, which
is the material of the surrounding heights, the dwellings with
verandas.

"How is the weather here, Colonel?" asked the captain, when they stopped
to examine a locality.

"The average temperature is seventy-five; and that, of course, gives us
some hot days in summer, which is a rainy season. Thunder-storms come
often; and once in a while a typhoon breaks in upon us, sometimes doing
an immense amount of damage," replied the consul. "But the climate is
not unhealthy. If the town had been built around the corner of the
island, it would have been cooler, though we could not have had this
magnificent harbor."

The company had all descended when a stop was made; and most of them
insisted upon walking along Queen's Road in order to have a better
opportunity to look into the stores, and see the street traders, for
most of the Chinese pursue their business in the open air. The stores
were filled with the curious goods peculiar to the East, such as China
crapes, porcelain vases, and other wares, and camphor-wood boxes, proof
against moths. The shop people were well dressed and extremely polite.
Several stores were visited, those indicated by the colonel.

One man, who appeared to be the "boss," sat at a desk with a little
brush, or camel's-hair pencil, for the natives do not write with pens,
and made a tea-chest character in a kind of book for every article sold.
The salesmen were very skilful in handling the goods, and showing them
in the most tempting manner. Mrs. Belgrave bought some things that she
fancied; and then came up the question as to how to pay for them, for
they had no Chinese money. The colonel helped them out by giving cards,
like bank-checks, payable by the steward of the Hong merchants.

Continuing the walk, they came to a money-changer. The commander put
down two English sovereigns, for which he received a bag full of the
current coins, which were not the native _cash_, but the pieces made for
Hong-Kong, as they are made for the island of Jamaica, where an English
penny will not pass. The smallest was of the value of a cash, or one
mill. A cent was about the size of our old copper one, and a ten-cent
piece was a little larger than our dime. The value was given in Chinese
as well as English for the benefit of the natives; and the cash piece
had a square hole in the centre, for the natives keep them on strings or
wires.

The captain gave about a half a dollar's worth of this money to each
person, so that none need be bothered about paying for small articles.
The boys invested a portion of their wealth for a quantity of Swatow
oranges, about the size of heavy bullets. They could not understand the
native seller, and permitted him to take his pay out of a handful of
coins; but he took next to nothing, and they were confident they were
not cheated, for he took the same coins from the hands of all.

Among the pedlers all sorts of vegetables were for sale, and the
groper-fish, shark-fin soup, meats minced with herbs and onions, poultry
cut up and sold in pieces, stewed goose, bird's-nest soup, rose-leaf
soup with garlic--heaven with the other place, Scott called it--and
scores of other eatables for native palates, and some of them would suit
the taste of Americans.

Taking their places in the vehicles, the tourists were borne through the
principal streets. There are only five or six thousand English in the
city, and Hong-Kong is substantially Chinese. At about eleven, the
coolies toted the sedans to the top of the peak, where an observatory is
located, following a zigzag path. The approach of every vessel of any
consequence is signalled from this elevation by flags. The ascent is
difficult, it is so steep; and the bearers of the sedans had to stop and
rest occasionally. The view is magnificent, and the consul pointed out
the objects of interest.

It was easier to get down the steep than to get up, and the party
reached the hotel at the appointed time. The lunch was ready, though it
was hardly first-class. When the captain asked about the expense of
living for Europeans in China, the colonel said that the price per day
at the best hotels was from four to six dollars, and that one could not
keep house for less than four thousand dollars a year. In summer the
people live in bungalows on the peaks, where quite a town has grown up.
The captain paid the bill in English gold. In the afternoon the company
made an excursion by a regular steamer to Macao, on the other side of
the river, forty miles distant. It has been a Portuguese settlement
since 1557; but it had little interest for the tourists, and they
returned by the same steamer, and went on board of the ship.

The colonel dined on board, and the captain announced his intention to
go to Canton the following day. The next morning the tourists were on
board of the steamer for that city. The colonel could not go with them;
but he procured a couple of English guides to attend them, one of whom
was Mr. Inch and the other Mr. Larch.

"Kwang-tung is the native name of the city to which we are going, and
from this the English had made Canton," said Mr. Larch, as the boat left
the shore; and he proceeded to name the islands in sight, and point out
all objects of interest, as he did all the way up the river.

The city is on the north side of the Choo-Chiang, or Pearl River, ninety
miles from Hong-Kong. They saw nothing of especial interest except a
temple on the shore, and a fort with a three-story pagoda rising from
the centre of it. On the arrival of the steamer off the city, she was
surrounded by boats as at Hong-Kong. The captain of the boat recommended
one he called Tommy, though it was a woman; and her craft was engaged,
with as many more as were needed, indicated by her.

At the landing-place Mr. Seymour, the American consul, to whom the
colonel had telegraphed, was waiting for them. He introduced himself,
and was soon on the best of terms with all the tourists. He advised
them to go to the International Hotel, and they went there. A score of
sedans and rickshaws were at once engaged; and Tommy and the other women
carried the valises and bags for them, each attended by the owner. They
were to remain three days in Canton. Dinner was the first ceremony they
performed after they went to the hotel, and the consul joined the party
by invitation.

"Canton is a city with a population estimated at a million and a half,
including the people that live in boats from one year's end to the
other, and doubtless you noticed their aquatic dwellings as you came up
the river," said the consul, who had been invited to tell the company
something about the place. "It is surrounded by a wall nine miles in
length, built of brick and sandstone, twenty-five to forty feet high,
and twenty feet thick, and divided by a partition wall into two unequal
parts. There are twelve outer gates, and also gates in the partition
wall. The names of these are curious, as Great Peace Gate, Eternal Rest
Gate, and others like them. There are more than six hundred streets,
lanes you will call them; for they are not often more than eight feet
wide, very crooked, and very dirty. This is the general idea of the
city, and the details you will see for yourselves."

[Illustration: TEMPLE AND GARDEN IN CHINA.

_Page 329._]

After breakfast the next morning the party was organized for
sight-seeing, and the sedans they had used the day before were ready for
them. The two guides insisted upon going on foot, the better to
discharge their duties. They rode through some of the principal streets,
looked into the shops, and observed the pedlers; but all was about the
same as in Hong-Kong, except that the streets were wider in the latter.
The same goods were for sale. They looked into a tea saloon; and the
gentlemen entered an opium den, which nearly made some of them sick.

"This is called the Plain pagoda," said Mr. Inch, when they came to it.
"It was built a thousand years ago, and is one hundred and sixty feet
high."

They were taken to a couple of Joss-houses, or temples. A sort of tower
attracted their attention; and they were told that the one before them,
and hundreds of others, were occupied each by a watchman at night to
call out the hours of the night, and give the alarm in case of fire.
They halted before the nine-story pagoda, the most interesting structure
they had seen, and the most peculiarly Chinese.

"It is one hundred and seventy feet high, and was built thirteen hundred
years ago," Mr. Larch explained. "Brick, covered with marble or glazed
tile, is the material used. Each story is smaller than the one below it,
and each has a balcony around it."

"Now we come to the Temple of Honam, which is one of the largest in
China," said Mr. Inch, as they halted before its gates, after the party
got out of the sedans. "With its grounds it covers seven acres, and one
hundred and seventy-five priests are employed in it."

"What is the religion of these people?" asked Mrs. Woolridge.

"The priests and nuns of Canton number more than two thousand, and
nine-tenths of them are Buddhists. The Temple of Five Hundred Genii
contains that number of statues, various in size, and was erected in
honor of Buddha and his disciples."

At the usual hour the party went to lunch, and were tired, though they
had done but little walking. The sedans were dismissed till the next
morning; the afternoon was devoted to an excursion on the river, and
Tommy had been directed to provide the boats. They moved through the
wilderness of floating dwelling-places, and looked them over with wonder
and surprise. Many of the sampans were made of three planks; and the
people on board of them, mostly women, were exceedingly amusing.

Large junks, some of them from five hundred to sixteen hundred tons
burden, were to be seen, and long, broad, flat Chinese men-of-war, with
twenty to forty guns; but the latter are out of fashion now, and
modern-built vessels take their places. They have two great painted eyes
on the bow to enable them, as the Chinese say, to find their way over
the sea. But the most beautiful sight was the flower-boats, having
galleries decorated with flowers, and arranged in most fantastic
designs. Each of these floating gardens contains one large apartment and
a number of cabinets. The walls are hung with mirrors and graceful
draperies of silk, and glass chandeliers and colored lanterns are
suspended from the ceiling. Elegant little baskets of flowers are hung
in various places. It seems very like fairy-land on these boats. They
are stationary, and dinners are given on board to the Chinese who can
afford them. They are also places of amusement by day and night, and
plays, ballets, and conjuring take place at them; but no respectable
females frequent them.

During the next two days the tourists continued to wander on foot and in
sedans over the city with the guides. One day they went to the great
examination hall, 1330 feet long by 583 wide, covering sixteen acres,
and containing 8653 cells, in which students are placed so that there
shall be no stealing others' work.

When a member of the party asked the meaning of certain tall buildings,
he was told that they were pawnbrokers' offices; for the Chinese have a
mania for pawning their clothes, or whatever they have, even if not in
need of the money, to save the trouble of taking care of the articles.
Before the third day of the stay in Canton was over, some of the party
had seen enough, and preferred to remain at the hotel while others were
out with the guides. The next day they returned to Hong-Kong, and were
glad to be once more on board the ships, for sight-seeing is the most
tiresome work in the world.




CHAPTER XXXV

SHANG-HAI AND THE YANG-TSZE-CHIANG


The passengers of the Guardian-Mother were on deck at an early hour the
next morning, and the smoke was rising from the funnel as though it was
the intention of the commander that she should sail soon; and some of
them began to wonder if they were to see anything more of China than
could be seen from the deck of the ship.

"Well, ladies and gentlemen, have you seen all you wish of China?" said
Captain Ringgold, as he seated himself at the head of the table at
breakfast.

"We can put it to vote," suggested Mrs. Belgrave.

"I don't think it is necessary," replied the commander, laughing. "We
shall sail this forenoon for Shang-hai, for I suppose that some of you
who keep hens wish to see the home of the famous rooster that bears that
name."

"I thought yesterday afternoon that I had seen enough of China to last
me the rest of my lifetime; but I feel a little different this morning
since I got rested," said Mrs. Woolridge.

"It is said that travellers enjoy their visits to foreign countries more
after they get home, and think over what they have seen, than they do
while going from place to place," added Mrs. Belgrave. "I think of a
hundred things I saw in Canton, and did not understand, that I shall
recall when I read about China, as I intend to do when I get home."

"That is just my idea!" exclaimed Mrs. Woolridge. "It will take me three
years, at least, after I get home to read up what I have seen on this
voyage."

Much more in the same general direction was said by others. When they
went on deck they found the pilot who had brought the ship into port
walking back and forth. He had brought off the _China Mail_, and three
other newspapers in English, and a pile of others in Chinese to be kept
as curiosities by the party. The captain had obtained his clearance and
other papers the day before, as soon as he arrived from Canton, with the
assistance of the colonel, who had come off with the pilot to make his
adieux. In less than half an hour the ship was under way again, with the
Blanche following her.

"How far is it to Shang-hai?" asked Mrs. Belgrave, as she met the
captain in front of the pilot-house.

"It is eight hundred and seventy miles, and the voyage will require two
days and fourteen hours," he replied. "I shall keep well to the
eastward, and if you are up by six to-morrow morning you will see the
island of Formosa. Then we shall be about on the Tropic of Cancer, when
we shall pass out of the Torrid Zone--out of the tropics."

This information was circulated by the lady among all the passengers.
Before noon the ship was out of sight of land, and the voyage was just
about the same as it had been in smooth seas and pleasant weather. All
the party were seated on the promenade at six o'clock the next morning.

"But there is land on both sides of us, Captain Ringgold," said Mrs.
Belgrave. "Which is Formosa?"

"That on your right. We are going through the Formosa Channel; and the
islands on the port side are the Pescadores, about twenty miles from
Formosa."

After breakfast, when the ship had passed the smaller islands, and the
passengers were seated on the promenade, the commander opened upon them
with a talk about Formosa: "The name of the island in Chinese is Taiwan;
and it is off the province of Fu-chien, and from ninety to two hundred
and twenty miles from it. It has an area of 14,978 square miles, or
about the size of the States of Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and
Connecticut put together. It has a chain of mountains through it, the
highest peak of which"--and the speaker looked at his memoranda--"is
12,847 feet high.

