riding rapidly forward into the wood to reconnoiter, he was, like
Jackson, struck down by the fire of his own men. He was carried to the
rear desperately, and it was feared for a time mortally wounded, and his
loss paralyzed the movement which he had prepared. Nevertheless during
the whole day the fight went on with varying success, sometimes one side
obtaining a slight advantage, the other then regaining the ground they
had lost.

Just as evening was closing in a Georgia brigade, with two other
regiments, made a detour, and fell furiously upon two brigades of the
enemy, and drove them back in headlong rout for a mile and a half,
capturing their two generals and many prisoners. The artillery, as on
the previous day, had been little used on either side, the work being
done at short range with the rifle, the loss being much heavier among
the thick masses of the Northerners than in the thinner lines of the
Confederates. Grant had failed in his efforts to turn Lee's right and to
accomplish his direct advance; he therefore changed his base and moved
his army round toward Spotsylvania.

Lee soon perceived his object, and succeeded in carrying his army to
Spotsylvania before the Federals reached it.

On the afternoon of Monday, the 9th, there was heavy fighting and on the
10th another pitched battle took place. This time the ground was more
open, and the artillery was employed with terrible effect on both sides.
It ended, however, as the previous battles had done, by the Confederates
holding their ground.

Upon the next day there was but little fighting. In the night the
Federals moved quietly through the wood, and at daybreak four divisions
fell upon Johnston's division of Ewell's corps, took them completely by
surprise, and captured the greater part of them.

But Lee's veterans soon recovered from their surprise and maintained
their position until noon. Then the whole Federal army advanced, and the
battle raged till nightfall terminated the struggle, leaving Lee in
possession of the whole line he had held, with the exception of the
ground lost in the morning.

For the next six days the armies faced each other, worn out by incessant
fighting, and prevented from moving by the heavy rain which fell
incessantly. They were now able to reckon up the losses. The Federals
found that they had lost, in killed, wounded, or missing, nearly 30,000
men; while Lee's army was diminished by about 12,000.

While these mighty battles had been raging the Federal cavalry under
Sheridan had advanced rapidly forward, and, after several skirmishes
with Stuart's cavalry, penetrated within the outer intrenchments round
Richmond. Here Stuart with two regiments of cavalry charged them and
drove them back, but the gallant Confederate officer received a wound
that before night proved fatal. His loss was a terrible blow to the
Confederacy, although his successor in the command of the cavalry,
General Wade Hampton, was also an officer of the highest merit.

In the meantime General Butler, who had at Fort Monroe under his command
two corps of infantry, 4,000 cavalry, and a fleet of gunboats and
transports, was threatening Richmond from the east. Shipping his men on
board the transports he steamed up the James River, under convoy of the
fleet, and landed on a neck of land known as Bermuda Hundred. To oppose
him all the troops from North Carolina had been brought up, the whole
force amounting to 19,000 men, under the command of General Beauregard.
Butler, after various futile movements, was driven back again to his
intrenched camp at Bermuda Hundred, where he was virtually besieged by
Beauregard with 10,000 men, the rest of that general's force being sent
up to reinforce Lee.

In western Virginia, Breckenridge, with 3,500 men, was called upon to
hold in check Sigel, with 15,000 men. Advancing to Staunton,
Breckenridge was joined by the pupils of the military college at
Lexington, 250 in number, lads of from 14 to 17 years of age. He came
upon Sigel on the line of march, and attacked him at once. The Federal
general placed a battery in a wood and opened fire with grape. The
commander of the Lexington boys ordered them to charge, and, gallantly
rushing in through the heavy fire, they charged in among the guns,
killed the artillerymen, drove back the infantry supports, and bayoneted
their colonel. The Federals now retired down the valley to Strasburg,
and Breckenridge was able to send a portion of his force to aid Lee in
his great struggle.

After his six days' pause in front of Lee's position at Spotsylvania,
Grant abandoned his plan of forcing his way through Lee's army to
Richmond, and endeavored to outflank it; but Lee again divined his
object, and moved round and still faced him. After various movements the
armies again stood face to face upon the old battle-grounds on the
Chickahominy. On the 3d of June the battle commenced at half-past four
in the morning. Hancock at first gained an advantage, but Hill's
division dashed down upon him and drove him back with great slaughter;
while no advantage was gained by them in other parts of the field. The
Federal loss on this day was 13,000, and the troops were so dispirited
that they refused to renew the battle in the afternoon.

Grant then determined to alter his plan altogether, and sending
imperative orders to Butler to obtain possession of Petersburg, embarked
Smith's corps in transports, and moved with the rest of his army to join
that general there. Smith's corps entered the James River, landed, and
marched against Petersburg. Beauregard had at Petersburg only two
infantry and two cavalry regiments under General Wise, while a single
brigade fronted Butler at Bermuda Hundred. With this handful of men he
was called upon to defend Petersburg and to keep Butler bottled up in
Bermuda Hundred until help could reach him from Lee. He telegraphed to
Richmond for all the assistance that could be sent to him, and was
reinforced by a brigade, which arrived just in time, for Smith had
already captured a portion of the intrenchments, but was now driven out.

The next day Beauregard was attacked both by Smith's and Hancock's
corps, which had now arrived. With 8,000 men he kept at bay the assaults
of two whole army corps, having in the meantime sent orders to Gracie,
the officer in command of the brigade before Butler, to leave a few
sentries there to deceive that general, and to march with the rest of
his force to his aid. It arrived at a critical moment. Overwhelmed by
vastly superior numbers, many of the Confederates had left their posts,
and Breckenridge was in vain trying to rally them when Gracie's brigade
came up. The position was reoccupied and the battle continued.

At noon Burnside with his corps arrived and joined the assailants; while
Butler, discovering at last that the troops in front of him were
withdrawn, moved out and barred the road against reinforcements from
Richmond. Nevertheless the Confederates held their ground all the
afternoon and until eleven o'clock at night, when the assault ceased.

At midnight Beauregard withdrew his troops from the defenses that they
were too few to hold, and set them to work to throw up fresh
intrenchments on a shorter line behind. All night the men worked with
their bayonets, canteens, and any tools that came to hand.

It was well for them that the enemy were so exhausted that it was noon
before they were ready to advance again, for by this time help was at
hand. Anderson, who had succeeded to the command of Longstreet's corps,
and was leading the van of Lee's army, forced his way through Butler's
troops and drove him back into the Bermuda Hundred, and leaving one
brigade to watch him marched with another into Petersburg just as the
attack was recommenced. Thus reinforced Beauregard successfully defeated
all the assaults of the enemy until night fell. Another Federal army
corps came up before morning, and the assault was again renewed, but the
defenders, who had strengthened their defenses during the night, drove
their assailants back with terrible loss. The whole of Lee's army now
arrived, and the rest of Grant's army also came up, and that general
found that after all his movements his way to Richmond was barred as
before. He was indeed in a far worse position than when he had crossed
the Rapidan, for the morale of his army was much injured by the repeated
repulses and terrible losses it had sustained. The new recruits that had
been sent to fill up the gaps were far inferior troops to those with
which he had commenced the campaign. To send forward such men against
the fortifications of Petersburg manned by Lee's veteran troops was to
court defeat, and he therefore began to throw up works for a regular
siege.

Fighting went on incessantly between the outposts, but only one great
attempt was made during the early months of the siege to capture the
Confederate position. The miners drove a gallery under the works, and
then drove other galleries right and left under them. These were charged
with eight thousand pounds of powder. When all was ready, masses of
troops were brought up to take advantage of the confusion which would be
caused by the explosion, and a division of black troops were to lead the
assault. At a quarter to five in the morning of the 30th of July the
great mine was exploded, blowing two guns, a battery, and its defenders
into the air, and forming a huge pit two hundred feet long and sixty
feet wide. Lee and Beauregard hurried to the scene, checked the panic
that prevailed, brought up troops, and before the great Federal columns
approached the breach the Confederates were ready to receive them. The
assault was made with little vigor, the approaches to the breach were
obstructed by abattis, and instead of rushing forward in a solid mass
they occupied the great pit, and contented themselves with firing over
the edge of the crater, where regiments and divisions were huddled
together. But the Confederate batteries were now manned, and from the
works on either side of the breach, and from behind, they swept the
approaches, and threw shell among the crowded mass. The black division
was now brought up, and entered the crater, but only added to the
confusion. There was no officer of sufficient authority among the
crowded mass there to assume the supreme command. No assistance could be
sent to them, for the arrival of fresh troops would but have added to
the confusion. All day the conflict went on, the Federals lining the
edge of the crater, and exchanging a heavy musketry fire with the
Confederate infantry, while the mass below suffered terribly from the
artillery fire. When night closed the survivors of the great column that
had marched forward in the morning, confident that victory was assured
to them, and that the explosion would lay Petersburg open to capture,
made their retreat, the Confederates, however, taking a considerable
number of prisoners. The Federal loss in killed, wounded and captured
was admitted by them to be 4,000; the Confederate accounts put it down
at 6,000.

After this terrible repulse it was a long time before Grant again
renewed active operations, but during the months that ensued his troops
suffered very heavily from the effects of fever, heightened by the
discouragement they felt at their want of success, and at the tremendous
losses they had suffered since they entered Virginia on their forward
march to Richmond.


CHAPTER XVIII. A PERILOUS UNDERTAKING.

Vincent Wingfield had had an arduous time of it with his squadron of
cavalry. He had taken part in the desperate charge that checked the
advance of Sheridan's great column of cavalry which approached within
three miles of Richmond, the charge that had cost the gallant Stuart his
life; and the death of his beloved general had been a heavy blow for
him. Jackson and Stuart, two of the bravest and noblest spirits of the
Confederate army, were gone. Both had been personally dear to Vincent,
and he felt how grievous was their loss to the cause for which he was
fighting; but he had little time for grief. The enemy, after the
tremendous battles of the Wilderness, swung their army round to Cold
Harbor, and Vincent's squadron was called up to aid Lee in his struggle
there. Then they were engaged night and day in harassing the enemy as
they marched down to take up their new base at Petersburg, and finally
received orders to ride round at full speed to aid in the defense of
that place.

They had arrived in the middle of the second day's fighting, and
dismounting his men Vincent had aided the hard-pressed Confederates in
holding their lines till Longstreet's division arrived to their
assistance. A short time before the terrible disaster that befell the
Federals in the mine they exploded under the Confederate works, he was
with General Wade Hampton, who had succeeded General Stuart in the
command of the cavalry, when General Lee rode up.

"They are erecting siege works in earnest," General Lee said. "I do not
think that we shall have any more attacks for the present. I wish I knew
exactly where they are intending to place their heavy batteries. If I
did we should know where to strengthen our defenses, and plant our
counter batteries. It is very important to find this out; but now that
their whole army has settled down in front of us, and Sheridan's cavalry
are scouring the woods, we shall get no news, for the farmers will no
longer be able to get through to tell us what is going on.

"I will try and ride round, if you like, general," Vincent said. "By
making a long detour one could get into the rear of their lines and pass
as a farmer going into camp to sell his goods."

"It would be a very dangerous service, sir," General Lee said. "You know
what the consequence would be if you were caught?"

"I know the consequence," Vincent said; "but I do not think, sir, that
the risk is greater than one runs every time one goes into battle."

"Perhaps not," General Lee replied; "but in one case one dies fighting
for one's country by an honorable death, in the other--" and he stopped.

"In the other one is shot in cold blood," Vincent said quietly. "One
dies for one's country in either case, sir; and it does not much matter,
so far as I can see, whether one is killed in battle or shot in cold
blood. As long as one is doing one's duty, one death is surely as
honorable as the other."

"That is true enough," General Lee said, "although it is not the way men
generally view the matter. Still, sir, if you volunteer for the work, I
do not feel justified in refusing the opportunity of acquiring
information that may be of vital consequence to us. When will you
start?"

"In half an hour, sir. I shall ride back to Richmond, obtain a disguise
there, and then go round by train to Burksville Junction and then ride
again until I get round behind their lines. Will you give me an order
for my horse and myself to be taken?"

"Very well, sir," General Lee said. "So be it. May God be with you on
your way and bring you safely back."

Vincent rode off to his quarters.

"Dan," he said, "I am going away on special duty for at least three
days. I have got a couple of letters to write, and shall be ready to
start in half an hour. Give the horse a good feed and have him at the
door again by that time."

"Am I to go with you, sah?"

"No, Dan; I must go by myself this time."

Dan felt anxious as he went out, for it was seldom that his master ever
went away without telling him where he was going, and he felt sure that
the service was one of unusual danger; nor was his anxiety lessened when
at the appointed time Vincent came out and handed him two letters.

"You are to keep these letters, Dan, until I return, or till you hear
that something has happened to me. If you hear that, you are to take one
of these letters to my mother, and take the other yourself to Miss
Kingston. Tell her before you give it her what has happened as gently as
you can. As for yourself, Dan, you had your letters of freedom long ago,
and I have left you five hundred dollars; so that you can get a cabin
and patch of your own, and settle down when these troubles are over."

"Let me go with you, master," Dan said, with the tears streaming down
his cheeks. "I would rather be killed with you a hundred times than get
on without you."

"I would take you if I could, Dan; but this is a service that I must do
alone. Good-by, my boy; let us hope that in three or four days at the
outside I shall be back here again safe and sound."

He wrung Dan's hand, and then started at a canter and kept on at that
pace until he reached Richmond. A train with stores was starting for the
south in a few minutes; General Lee's order enabled Vincent to have a
horse-box attached at once, and he was soon speeding on his way. He
alighted at Burksville Junction, and there purchased some rough clothes
for himself and some country-fashioned saddlery for his horse. Then,
after changing his clothes at an inn and putting the fresh saddlery on
his horse, he started.

It was getting late in the afternoon, but he rode on by unfrequented
roads, stopping occasionally to inquire if any of the Federal cavalry
had been seen in the neighborhood, and at last stopped for the night at
a little village inn. As soon as it was daybreak he resumed his journey.
He had purchased at Burksville some colored calico and articles of
female clothing, and fastened the parcel to the back of his saddle. As
he rode forward now he heard constant tales of the passing of parties of
the enemy's cavalry, but he was fortunate enough to get well round to
the rear of the Federal lines before he encountered any of them. Then he
came suddenly upon a troop.

"Where are you going to, and where have you come from?"

"Our farm is a mile away from Union Grove," he said, "and I have been
over to Sussex Courthouse to buy some things for my mother."

"Let me see what you have got there," the officer said. "You are rebels
to a man here, and there's no trusting any of you."

Vincent unfastened the parcel and opened it. The officer laughed.

"Well, we won't confiscate them as contraband of war."

So saying he set spurs to his horse and galloped on with his troop.
Vincent rode on to Union Grove, and then taking a road at random kept on
till he reached a small farmhouse. He knocked at the door, and a woman
came out.


"Mother," he said, "can you put me up for a couple of days? I am a
stranger here, and all the villages are full of soldiers."


The woman looked at him doubtfully.

"What are you doing here?" she asked at last. "This ain't a time for
strangers; besides a young fellow like you ought to be ashamed to show
yourself when you ought to be over there with Lee. My boys are both
there and my husband. You ought to be ashamed of yourself, a
strong-looking young fellow like you, to be riding about instead of
fighting the Yankees. Go along! you will get no shelter here. I would
scorn to have such as you inside my doors."

"Perhaps I have been fighting there," Vincent said significantly. "But
one can't be always fighting, and there are other things to do
sometimes. For instance, to find out what the Yankees are doing and what
are their plans."

"Is that so?" the woman asked doubtfully.

"That is so," he answered earnestly. "I am an officer in Wade Hampton's
cavalry, and, now Sheridan's troopers have cut off all communication, I
have come out to find for General Lee where the Yankees are building
their batteries before Petersburg."

"In that case you are welcome," the woman said. "Come straight in. I
will lead your horse out and fasten him up in the bush, and give him a
feed there. It will never do to put him in the stable; the Yankees come
in and out and they'd take him off sharp enough if their eyes fell on
him. I think you will be safe enough even if they do come. They will
take you for a son of mine, and if they ask any questions I will answer
them sharp enough."

"I wonder they have left you a feed of corn," Vincent said, when the
woman returned after taking away his horse.

"It's no thanks to them," she answered; "they have cleared out
everything that they could lay their hands on. But I have been expecting
it for months, and, as I have had nothing to do since my man and boys
went away, I have been digging a great pit in the wood over there, and
have buried most all my corn, and have salted my pigs down and buried
them in barrels; so they didn't find much. They took the old horse and
two cows; but I hope the old horse will fall down the first time they
uses him, and the cow meat will choke them as eats it. Now, is there
anything as I can do to help you?"

"I want a basket with some eggs and chickens or vegetables to take into
their camp to sell, but I am afraid I have not much chance of getting
them."

"I can help you there too," the woman said. "I turned all my chickens
into the wood the day I heard the Yankees had landed. They have got
rather wild like; but I go out and give them some corn every evening. I
expect if we look about we shall find some nests; indeed I know there
are one or two of them sitting. So if you will come out with me we can
soon knock down five or six of the creatures, and maybe get a score or
two of eggs. As for vegetables, a horde of locusts couldn't have
stripped the country cleaner than they have done."

They went out into the wood. Six hens were soon killed, and hunting
about they discovered several nests and gathered about three dozen eggs.
Vincent aided in plucking the chickens and they then returned to the
house.

"You had best take a bite before you go," she said. "It's noon now, and
you said you started at daybreak. Always get a meal when you can, say
I."

She produced a loaf and some bacon from a little cupboard hidden by her
bed, and Vincent, who, now he thought of it, was feeling hungry, made a
hearty meal.

"I will pay you for these chickens and eggs at once," he said. "There is
no saying whether I shall come back again."

"I will not say no to your paying for the chickens and eggs," she said,
"because money is scarce enough, and I may have long to wait before my
man and the boys come back; but as to lodging and food I would not touch
a cent. You are welcome to all I have when it's for the good cause."
Vincent started with the basket on his arm, and after walking three
miles came upon the Federal camps.

Some of the regiments were already under canvas, others were still
bivouacked in the open air, as the store-ships carrying the heavy
baggage had not yet arrived. The generals and their staffs had taken up
their quarters in the villages. Vincent had received accurate
instructions from his hostess as to the position of the various
villages, and avoided them carefully, for he did not want to sell out
his stock immediately. He had indeed stowed two of the fowls away in his
pocket so that in case any one insisted upon buying up all his stock he
could place these in his basket and still push on.

He avoided the camps as much as he could. He could see the smoke rising
in front of him, and the roar of guns was now close at hand. He saw on
his right an elevated piece of ground, from which a good view could be
obtained of the fortifications upon which the Federals were working. A
camp had been pitched there, and a large tent near the summit showed
that some officer of superior rank had his quarters there. He made a
detour so as to come up at the back of the hill and when he reached the
