
Phillip determined to strike the first blow, and, before the conclusion
of the truce, to regain possession of Calais. This town was commanded by
a Lombard officer named Almeric of Pavia. Free communication existed,
in consequence of the truce, between Calais and the surrounding
country, and Jeffrey de Charny, the governor of St. Omer, and one of
the commissioners especially appointed to maintain the truce, opened
communications with the Lombard captain. Deeming that like most
mercenaries he would be willing to change sides should his interest to
do so be made clear, he offered him a large sum of money to deliver the
castle to the French.

The Lombard at once agreed to the project. Jeffrey de Charny arranged
to be within a certain distance of the town on the night of the 1st of
January, bringing with him sufficient forces to master all opposition
if the way was once opened to the interior of the town. It was further
agreed that the money was to be paid over by a small party of French
who were to be sent forward for the purpose of examining the castle, in
order to ensure the main body against treachery. As a hostage for the
security of the detachment, the son of the governor was to remain in
the hands of the French without, until the safe return of the scouting
party.

Several weeks elapsed between the conclusion of the agreement and the
date fixed for its execution, and in the meantime the Lombard, either
from remorse or from a fear of the consequences which might arise from
a detection of the plot before its execution, or from the subsequent
vengeance of the English king, disclosed the whole transaction to
Edward.


The king bade him continue to carry out his arrangements with De Charny,
leaving it to him to counteract the plot. Had he issued orders for
the rapid assembly of the army the French would have taken alarm. He
therefore sent private messengers to a number of knights and gentlemen
of Kent and Sussex to meet him with their retainers at Dover on the 31st
of December.


Walter was one of those summoned, and although much surprised at the
secrecy with which he was charged, and of such a call being made while
the truce with France still existed, he repaired to Dover on the day
named, accompanied by Ralph and by twenty men, who were all who remained
capable of bearing arms on the estate.

He found the king himself with the Black Prince at Dover, where they had
arrived that day. Sir Walter Manny was in command of the force, which
consisted in all of 300 men-at-arms and 600 archers. A number of small
boats had been collected, and at midday on the 1st of January the little
expedition started, and arrived at Calais after nightfall.

In the chivalrous spirit of the times the king determined that Sir
Walter Manny should continue in command of the enterprise; he and the
Black Prince, disguised as simple knights, fighting under his banner.

In the meantime a considerable force had been collected at St. Omer,
where a large number of knights and gentlemen obeyed the summons of
Jeffrey de Charny. On the night appointed they marched for Calais, in
number five hundred lances and a corresponding number of footmen. They
reached the river and bridge of Nieullay a little after midnight, and
messengers were sent on to the governor, who was prepared to receive
them. On their report De Charny advanced still nearer to the town,
leaving the bridge and passages to the river guarded by a large body of
crossbow-men under the command of the Lord De Fiennes and a number
of other knights. At a little distance from the castle he was met by
Almeric de Pavia, who yielded his son as a hostage according to his
promise, calculating, as was the case, that he would be recaptured by
the English. Then, having received the greater portion of the money
agreed upon, he led a party of the French over the castle to satisfy
them of his sincerity. Upon receiving their report that all was quiet
De Charny detached twelve knights and a hundred men-at-arms to take
possession of the castle, while he himself waited at one of the gates of
the town with the principal portion of his force.

No sooner had the French entered the castle than the drawbridge
was raised. The English soldiers poured out from their places of
concealment, and the party which had entered the castle were forced
to lay down their arms. In the meantime the Black Prince issued with a
small body of troops from a gate near the sea, while De Manny, with
the king under his banner, marched by the sally-port which led into
the fields. A considerable detachment of the division was despatched to
dislodge the enemy at the bridge of Nieullay, and the rest, joining the
party of the Black Prince, advanced rapidly upon the forces of Jeffrey
de Charny which, in point of numbers, was double their own strength.

Although taken in turn by surprise the French prepared steadily for
the attack. De Charny ordered them all to dismount and to shorten their
lances to pikes five feet in length. The English also dismounted and
rushing forward on foot a furious contest commenced. The ranks of both
parties were soon broken in the darkness, and the combatants separating
into groups a number of separate battles raged around the different
banners.

For some hours the fight was continued with unabating obstinacy on both
sides. The king and the Black Prince fought with immense bravery, their
example encouraging even those of their soldiers who were ignorant
of the personality of the knights who were everywhere in front of the
combat. King Edward himself several times crossed swords with the famous
Eustace de Ribaumont, one of the most gallant knights in France. At
length towards daybreak the king, with only thirty companions, found
himself again opposed to De Ribaumont with a greatly superior force, and
the struggle was renewed between them.

Twice the king was beaten down on one knee by the thundering blows
of the French knight, twice he rose and renewed the attack, until De
Charny, seeing Sir Walter Manny's banner, beside which Edward fought,
defended by so small a force, also bore down to the attack, and in the
struggle Edward was separated from his opponent.

The combat now became desperate round the king, and Sir Guy Brian, who
bore De Manny's standard, though one of the strongest and most gallant
knights of the day, could scarce keep the banner erect. Still Edward
fought on, and in the excitement of the moment, forgetting his
incognito, he accompanied each blow with his customary war-cry--"Edward,
St. George! Edward, St. George!" At that battle-cry, which told the
French men-at-arms that the King of England was himself opposed to them,
they recoiled for a moment. The shout too reached the ears of the Prince
of Wales, who had been fighting with another group. Calling his knights
around him he fell upon the rear of De Charny's party and quickly
cleared a space around the king.


The fight was now everywhere going against the French, and the English
redoubling their efforts the victory was soon complete, and scarcely
one French knight left the ground alive and free. In the struggle Edward
again encountered De Ribaumont, who, separated from him by the charge of
De Charny, had not heard the king's war-cry. The conflict between them
was a short one. The French knight saw that almost all his companions
were dead or captured, his party completely defeated, and all prospects
of escape cut off. He therefore soon dropped the point of his sword and
surrendered to his unknown adversary. In the meantime the troops which
had been despatched to the bridge of Nieullay had defeated the French
forces left to guard the passage and clear the ground towards St. Omer.

Early in the morning Edward entered Calais in triumph, taking with him
thirty French nobles as prisoners, while two hundred more remained dead
on the field. That evening a great banquet was held, at which the French
prisoners were present. The king presided at the banquet, and the French
nobles were waited upon by the Black Prince and his knights. After the
feast was concluded the king bestowed on De Ribaumont the chaplet of
pearls which he wore round his crown, hailing him as the most gallant of
the knights who had that day fought, and granting him freedom to return
at once to his friends, presenting him with two horses, and a purse to
defray his expenses to the nearest French town.

De Charny was afterwards ransomed, and after his return to France
assembled a body of troops and attacked the castle which Edward had
bestowed upon Almeric of Pavia, and capturing the Lombard, carried him
to St. Omer, and had him there publicly flayed alive as a punishment for
his treachery.

Walter had as usual fought by the side of the Prince of Wales throughout
the battle of Calais and had much distinguished himself for his valour.
Ralph was severely wounded in the fight, but was able a month later to
rejoin Walter in England.

The battle of Calais and the chivalrous bearing of the king created
great enthusiasm and delight in England, and did much to rouse the
people from the state of grief into which they had been cast by the
ravages of the plague. The king did his utmost to maintain the spirit
which had been evoked, and the foundation of the order of the Garter,
and the erection of a splendid chapel at Windsor, and its dedication,
with great ceremony, to St. George, the patron saint of England, still
further raised the renown of the court of Edward throughout Europe as
the centre of the chivalry of the age.

Notwithstanding many treaties which had taken place, and the near
alliance which had been well-nigh carried out between the royal families
of England and Spain, Spanish pirates had never ceased to carry on a
series of aggressions upon the English vessels trading in the Bay of
Biscay. Ships were every day taken, and the crews cruelly butchered
in cold blood. Edward's remonstrances proved vain, and when threats of
retaliation were held out by Edward, followed by preparations to carry
those threats into effect, Pedro the Cruel, who had now succeeded to the
throne of Spain, despatched strong reinforcements to the fleet which had
already swept the English Channel.

The great Spanish fleet sailed north, and capturing on its way a number
of English merchantmen, put into Sluys, and prepared to sail back
in triumph with the prizes and merchandise it had captured. Knowing,
however, that Edward was preparing to oppose them, the Spaniards filled
up their complement of men, strengthened themselves by all sorts of the
war machines then in use, and started on their return for Spain with one
of the most powerful armadas that had ever put to sea.

Edward had collected on the coast of Sussex a fleet intended to oppose
them, and had summoned all the military forces of the south of England
to accompany him; and as soon as he heard that the Spaniards were about
to put to sea he set out for Winchelsea, where the fleet was collected.

The queen accompanied him to the sea-coast, and the Black Prince, now in
his twentieth year, was appointed to command one of the largest of the
English vessels.

The fleet put to sea when they heard that the Spaniards had started,
and the hostile fleets were soon in sight of each other. The number
of fighting men on board the Spanish ships was ten times those of the
English, and their vessels were of vastly superior size and strength.
They had, moreover, caused their ships to be fitted at Sluys with
large wooden towers, which furnished a commanding position to their
crossbow-men. The wind was direct in their favour, and they could have
easily avoided the contest, but, confiding in their enormously superior
force, they sailed boldly forward to the attack.

The king himself led the English line, and directing his vessel towards
a large Spanish ship, endeavoured to run her down. The shock was
tremendous, but the enemy's vessel was stronger as well as larger than
that of the king; and as the two ships recoiled from each other it was
found that the water was rushing into the English vessel, and that she
was rapidly sinking. The Spanish passed on in the confusion, but the
king ordered his ship to be instantly laid alongside another which was
following her, and to be firmly lashed to her. Then with his knights he
sprang on board the Spaniard, and after a short but desperate fight cut
down or drove the crew overboard. The royal standard was hoisted on the
prize, the sinking English vessel was cast adrift, and the king sailed
on to attack another adversary.



The battle now raged on all sides. The English strove to grapple with
and board the enemy, while the Spaniards poured upon them a shower of
bolts and quarrels from their cross-bows, hurled immense masses of stone
from their military engines, and, as they drew alongside, cast into them
heavy bars of iron, which pierced holes in the bottom of the ship.

Walter was on board the ship commanded by the Black Prince. This had
been steered towards one of the largest and most important of the
Spanish vessels. As they approached, the engines poured their missiles
into them. Several great holes were torn in the sides of the ship, which
was already sinking as she came alongside her foe.

"We must do our best, Sir Walter," the prince exclaimed, "for if we do
not capture her speedily our ship will assuredly sink beneath our feet."

The Spaniard stood far higher above the water than the English ship, and
the Black Prince and his knights in vain attempted to climb her sides,
while the seamen strove with pumps and buckets to keep the vessel
afloat. Every effort was in vain. The Spaniard's men-at-arms lined the
bulwarks, and repulsed every effort made by the English to climb up
them, while those on the towers rained down showers of bolts and arrows
and masses of iron and stone. The situation was desperate when the Earl
of Lancaster, passing by in his ship, saw the peril to which the prince
was exposed, and, ranging up on the other side of the Spaniard,
strove to board her there. The attention of the Spaniards being thus
distracted, the prince and his companions made another desperate effort,
and succeeded in winning their way on to the deck of the Spanish ship
just as their own vessel sank beneath their feet; after a few minutes'
desperate fighting the Spanish ship was captured.

The English were now everywhere getting the best of their enemies. Many
of the Spanish vessels had been captured or sunk, and after the fight
had raged for some hours, the rest began to disperse and seek safety
in flight. The English vessel commanded by Count Robert of Namur had
towards night engaged a Spanish vessel of more than twice its own
strength. His adversaries, seeing that the day was lost, set all sail,
but looking upon the little vessel beside them as a prey to be taken
possession of at their leisure, they fastened it tightly to their sides
by the grappling irons, and spreading all sail, made away. The Count
and his men were unable to free themselves, and were being dragged away,
when a follower of the count named Hennekin leapt suddenly on board the
Spanish ship. With a bound he reached the mast, and with a single blow
with his sword cut the halyards which supported the main-sail. The sail
fell at once. The Spaniards rushed to the spot to repair the disaster
which threatened to delay their ship. The count and his followers,
seeing the bulwarks of the Spanish vessel for the moment unguarded,
poured in, and after a furious conflict captured the vessel. By this
time twenty-four of the enemy's vessels had been taken, the rest were
either sunk or in full flight, and Edward at once returned to the
English shore.

The fight had taken place within sight of land, and Queen Philippa, from
the windows of the abbey, which stood on rising ground, had seen the
approach of the vast Spanish fleet, and had watched the conflict until
night fell. She remained in suspense as to the result until the king
himself with the Black Prince and Prince John, afterwards known as John
of Gaunt, who, although but ten years of age, had accompanied the Black
Prince in his ship, rode up with the news of the victory.

This great sea-fight was one of the brightest and most honourable in the
annals of English history, for not even in the case of that other great
Spanish Armada which suffered defeat in English waters were the odds so
immense or the victory so thorough and complete. The result of the fight
was, that after some negotiations a truce of twenty years was concluded
with Spain.



CHAPTER XX: POITIERS


After the great sea-fight at the end of August, 1350, England had peace
for some years. Phillip of France had died a week before that battle,
and had been succeeded by his son John, Duke of Normandy. Upon the part
of both countries there was an indisposition to renew the war, for their
power had been vastly crippled by the devastations of the plague. This
was followed by great distress and scarcity owing to the want of labour
to till the fields. The truce was therefore continued from time to time;
the pope strove to convert the truce into a permanent peace, and on the
28th of August, 1354, a number of the prelates and barons of England,
with full power to arrange terms of peace, went to Avignon, where they
were met by the French representatives. The powers committed to the
English commissioners show that Edward was at this time really desirous
of making a permanent peace with France; but the French ambassadors
raised numerous and unexpected difficulties, and after lengthened
negotiations the conference was broken off.

The truce came to an end in June, 1355, and great preparations were made
on both sides for the war. The King of England strained every effort to
furnish and equip an army which was to proceed with the Black Prince to
Aquitaine, of which province his father had appointed him governor, and
in November the Prince sailed for Bordeaux, with the advance-guard of
his force. Sir Walter Somers accompanied him. During the years which had
passed since the plague he had resided principally upon his estates,
and had the satisfaction of seeing that his tenants escaped the distress
which was general through the country. He had been in the habit
of repairing to London to take part in the tournaments and other
festivities; but both he and Edith preferred the quiet country life to
a continued residence at court. Two sons had now been born to him, and
fond as he was of the excitement and adventure of war, it was with deep
regret that he obeyed the royal summons, and left his house with his
retainers, consisting of twenty men-at-arms and thirty archers, to join
the prince.

Upon the Black Prince's landing at Bordeaux he was joined by the Gascon
lords, the vassals of the English crown, and for three months marched
through and ravaged the districts adjoining, the French army, although
greatly superior in force, offering no effectual resistance. Many towns
were taken, and he returned at Christmas to Bordeaux after a campaign
attended by a series of unbroken successes.

The following spring the war recommenced, and a diversion was effected
by the Duke of Lancaster, who was in command of Brittany, joining his
forces with those of the King of Navarre, and many of the nobles of
