she had bought at the village, it was found she had selected the wrong
color of yarn, and Mrs. Griffith was so provoked that Trot's scolding
was almost as severe as that of Cap'n Bill. Tears came to the little
girl's eyes, and to comfort her the boy promised to take her to the
village next morning with his magic umbrella, so she could exchange the
yarn for the right color.

Trot quickly brightened at this promise, although Cap'n Bill looked
grave and shook his head solemnly. When supper was over and Trot had
helped with the dishes, she joined Button-Bright and the sailorman on
the little porch again. Dusk had fallen, and the moon was just rising.
They all sat in silence for a time and watched the silver trail that
topped the crests of the waves far out to sea.

"Oh, Button-Bright!" cried the little girl presently. "I'm so glad
you're going to let me fly with you way to town and back tomorrow.
Won't it be fine, Cap'n Bill?"

"Dunno, Trot," said he. "I can't figger how both of you can hold on to
the handle o' that umbrel."

Trot's face fell. "I'll hold on to the handle," said Button-Bright,
"and she can hold on to me. It doesn't pull hard at all. You've no idea
how easy it is to fly that way after you get used to it."

"But Trot ain't used to it," objected the sailor. "If she happened to
lose her hold and let go, it's goodbye Trot. I don't like to risk it,
for Trot's my chum, an' I can't afford to lose her."

"Can't you tie us together, then?" asked the boy.

"We'll see, we'll see," replied Cap'n Bill, and began to think very
deeply. He forgot that he didn't believe the umbrella could fly, and
after Button-Bright and Trot had both gone to bed, the old sailor went
out into the shed and worked a while before he, too, turned into his
"bunk." The sandman wasn't around, and Cap'n Bill lay awake for hours
thinking of the strange tale of the Magic Umbrella before he finally
sank into slumber. Then he dreamed about it, and waking or dreaming he
found the tale hard to believe.




A WONDERFUL EXPERIENCE

CHAPTER 3


They had early breakfasts at Trot's house, because they all went to bed
early, and it is possible to sleep only a certain number of hours if
one is healthy in body and mind. And right after breakfast Trot claimed
Button-Bright's promise to take her to town with the Magic Umbrella.

"Any time suits me," said the boy. He had taken his precious umbrella
to bed with him and even carried it to the breakfast table, where he
stood it between his knees as he ate; so now he held it close to him
and said he was ready to fly at a moment's notice. This confidence
impressed Cap'n Bill, who said with a sigh:

"Well, if you MUST go, Trot, I've pervided a machine that'll carry you
both comf'table. I'm summat of an inventor myself, though there ain't
any magic about me."

Then he brought from the shed the contrivance he had made the night
before. It was merely a swing seat. He had taken a wide board that was
just long enough for both the boy and girl to sit upon, and had bored
six holes in it, two holes at each end and two in the middle. Through
these holes he had run stout ropes in such a way that the seat could
not turn and the occupants could hold on to the ropes on either side of
them. The ropes were all knotted together at the top, where there was a
loop that could be hooked upon the crooked handle of the umbrella.

Button-Bright and Trot both thought Cap'n Bill's invention very clever.
The sailor placed the board upon the ground while they sat in their
places, Button-Bright at the right of Trot, and then the boy hooked the
rope loop to the handle of the umbrella, which he spread wide open. "I
want to go to the town over yonder," he said, pointing with his finger
to the roofs of the houses that showed around the bend in the cliff.

At once the umbrella rose into the air, slowly at first, but quickly
gathering speed. Trot and Button-Bright held fast to the ropes and were
carried along very easily and comfortably. It seemed scarcely a minute
before they were in the town, and when the umbrella set them down just
in front of the store--for it seemed to know just where they wanted to
go--a wondering crowd gathered around them. Trot ran in and changed the
yarn, while Button-Bright stayed outside and stared at the people who
stared at him. They asked questions, too, wanting to know what sort of
an aeroplane this was and where his power was stored and lots of other
things, but the boy answered not a sound. When the little girl came
back and took her seat, Button-Bright said, "I want to go to Trot's
house."

The simple villagers could not understand how the umbrella suddenly
lifted the two children into the air and carried them away. They had
read of airships, but here was something wholly beyond their
comprehension.

Cap'n Bill had stood in front of the house, watching with a feeling
akin to bewilderment the flight of the Magic Umbrella. He could follow
its course until it descended in the village, and he was so amazed and
absorbed that his pipe went out. He had not moved from his position
when the umbrella started back. The sailor's big blue eyes watched it
draw near and settle down with its passengers upon just the spot it had
started from.

Trot was joyous and greatly excited. "Oh, Cap'n, it's gal-lor-ious!"
she cried in ecstasy. "It beats ridin' in a boat or--or--in anything
else. You feel so light an' free an'--an'--glad! I'm sorry the trip
didn't last longer, though. Only trouble is, you go too fast."

Button-Bright was smiling contentedly. He had proved to both Trot and
Cap'n Bill that he had told the truth about the Magic Umbrella, however
marvelous his tale had seemed to them. "I'll take you on another trip,
if you like," said he. "I'm in no hurry to go home, and if you will let
me stay with you another day, we can make two or three little trips
with the family luck."

"You mus' stay a whole week," said Trot decidedly. "An' you mus' take
Cap'n Bill for an air-ride, too."

"Oh, Trot! I dunno as I'd like it," protested Cap'n Bill nervously.

"Yes you would. You're sure to like it."

"I guess I'm too heavy."

"I'm sure the umbrella could carry twenty people if they could be
fastened to the handle," said Button-Bright.

"Solid land's pretty good to hold on to," decided Cap'n Bill. "A rope
might break, you know."

"Oh, Cap'n Bill! You're scared stiff," said Trot.

"I ain't, mate. It ain't that at all. But I don't see that human
critters has any call to fly in the air, anyhow. The air were made for
the birds, an'--an' muskeeters, an'--"

"An' flyin'-fishes," added Trot. "I know all that, Cap'n, but why
wasn't it made for humans, too, if they can manage to fly in it? We
breathe the air, an' we can breathe it high up, just as well as down on
the earth."

"Seein' as you like it so much, Trot, it would be cruel for me to go
with Butt'n-Bright an' leave you at home," said the sailor. "When I
were younger--which is ancient history--an' afore I had a wooden leg, I
could climb a ship's ropes with the best of 'em, an' walk out on a boom
or stand atop a mast. So you know very well I ain't skeered about the
highupness."

"Why can't we all go together?" asked the boy. "Make another seat,
Cap'n, and swing it right under ours. Then we can all three ride
anywhere we want to go."

"Yes, do!" exclaimed Trot. "And see here, Cap'n, let's take a day off
and have a picnic. Mother is a little cross today, and she wants to
finish knitting your new stockin', so I guess she'll be glad to get rid
of us."

"Where'll we go?" he asked, shifting on his wooden leg uneasily.

"Anywhere. I don't care. There'll be the air-ride there an' the
air-ride back, an' that's the main thing with ME. If you say we'll go,
Cap'n, I'll run in an' pack a basket of lunch."

"How'll we carry it?"

"Swing it to the bottom of your seat."

The old sailor stood silent a moment. He really longed to take the
air-ride but was fearful of danger. However, Trot had gone safely to
town and back and had greatly enjoyed the experience. "All right," he
said. "I'll risk it, mate, although I guess I'm an old fool for
temptin' fate by tryin' to make a bird o' myself. Get the lunch, Trot,
if your mother'll let you have it, and I'll rig up the seat."

He went into the shed and Trot went to her mother. Mrs. Griffith, busy
with her work, knew nothing of what was going on in regard to the
flight of the Magic Umbrella. She never objected when Trot wanted to go
away with Cap'n Bill for a day's picnicking. She knew the child was
perfectly safe with the old sailor, who cared for Trot even better than
her mother would have done. If she had asked any questions today and
had found out they intended to fly in the air, she might have seriously
objected, but Mrs. Griffith had her mind on other things and merely
told the girl to take what she wanted from the cupboard and not bother
her. So Trot, remembering that Button-Bright would be with them and had
proved himself to be a hearty eater, loaded the basket with all the
good things she could find.

By the time she came out, lugging the basket with both hands, Cap'n
Bill appeared with the new seat he had made for his own use, which he
attached by means of ropes to the double seat of the boy and girl. "Now
then, where'll we go?" asked Trot.

"Anywhere suits me," replied Cap'n Bill. They had walked to the high
bluff overlooking the sea, where a gigantic acacia tree stood on the
very edge. A seat had been built around the trunk of the tree, for this
was a favorite spot for Trot and Cap'n Bill to sit and talk and watch
the fleet of fishing boats sail to and from the village. When they came
to this tree, Trot was still trying to think of the most pleasant place
to picnic. She and Cap'n Bill had been every place that was desirable
and nearby, but today they didn't want a nearby spot. They must decide
upon one far enough away to afford them a fine trip through the air.
Looking far out over the Pacific, the girl's eyes fell upon a dim
island lying on the horizon line just where the sky and water seemed to
meet, and the sight gave her an idea.

"Oh, Cap'n Bill!" she exclaimed. "Let's go to that island for our
picnic. We've never been there yet, you know."

The sailor shook his head. "It's a good many miles away, Trot," he
said, "further than it looks to be from here."

"That won't matter," remarked Button-Bright. "The umbrella will carry
us there in no time."

"Let's go!" repeated Trot. "We'll never have another such chance,
Cap'n. It's too far to sail or row, and I've always wanted to visit
that island."

"What's the name of it?" inquired Button-Bright while the sailor
hesitated to decide.

"Oh, it's got an awful hard name to pernounce," replied the girl, "so
Cap'n Bill and I jus' call it 'Sky Island' 'cause it looks as if it was
half in the sky. We've been told it's a very pretty island, and a few
people live there and keep cows and goats and fish for a living. There
are woods and pastures and springs of clear water, and I'm sure we
would find it a fine place for a picnic."

"If anything happened on the way," observed Cap'n Bill, "we'd drop in
the water."

"Of course," said Trot, "and if anything happened while we were flyin'
over the land, we'd drop there. But nothing's goin' to happen, Cap'n.
Didn't Button-Bright come safe all the way from Philydelfy?"

"I think I'd like to go to Sky Island," said the boy. "I've always
flown above the land so far, and it will be something new to fly over
the ocean."

"All right, I'm agree'ble," decided Cap'n Bill. "But afore we starts on
such a long journey, s'pose we make a little trial trip along the
coast. I want to see if the new seat fits me an' make certain the
umbrel will carry all three of us."

"Very well," said Button-Bright. "Where shall we go?"

"Let's go as far as Smuggler's Cove an' then turn 'round an' come back.
If all's right an' shipshape, then we can start for the island."

They put the broad double seat on the ground, and then the boy and girl
sat in their places and Button-Bright spread open the Magic Umbrella.
Cap'n Bill sat in his seat just in front of them, all being upon the
ground.

"Don't we look funny?" said Trot with a chuckle of glee. "But hold fast
the ropes, Cap'n, an' take care of your wooden leg."

Button-Bright addressed the umbrella, speaking to it very respectfully,
for it was a thing to inspire awe. "I want to go as far as Smuggler's
Cove and then turn around in the air and come back here," he said. At
once the umbrella rose into the air, lifting after it first the seat in
which the children sat, and then Cap'n Bill's seat.

"Don't kick your heels, Trot!" cried the sailor in a voice that proved
he was excited by his novel experience. "You might bump me in the nose."

"All right," she called back. "I'll be careful."

It was really a wonderful, exhilarating ride, and Cap'n Bill wasn't
long making up his mind he liked the sensation. When about fifty feet
above the ground the umbrella began moving along the coast toward
Smuggler's Cove, which it soon reached. Looking downward, Cap'n Bill
suddenly exclaimed, "Why, there' a boat cast loose, an' it's goin' to
smash on the rocks. Hold on a minute, Butt'n-Bright, till we can land
an' drag it ashore."

"Hold on a minute, Umbrella!" cried the boy. But the Magic Umbrella
kept steadily upon its way. It made a circle over the Cove and then
started straight back the way it had come. "It's no use, sir," said
Button-Bright to the sailor. "If I once tell it to go to a certain
place, the umbrella will go there, and nowhere else. I've found that
out before this. You simply CAN'T stop it."

"Won't let you change your mind, eh?" replied Cap'n Bill. "Well, that
has its advantidges, an' its disadvantiges. If your ol' umbrel hadn't
been so obstinate, we could have saved that boat."

"Never mind," said Trot briskly, "here we are safe back again. Wasn't
it jus' the--the fascinatingest ride you ever took, Cap'n?"

"It's pretty good fun," admitted Cap'n Bill. "Beats them aeroplanes an'
things all holler, 'cause it don't need any regulatin.'"

"If we're going to that island, we may as well start right away," said
Button-Bright when they had safely landed.

"All right. I'll tie on the lunch-basket," answered the sailor. He
fastened it so it would swing underneath his own seat, and they all
took their places again.

"Ready?" asked the boy.

"Let 'er go, my lad."

"I want to go to Sky Island," said Button-Bright to the umbrella, using
the name Trot had given him. The umbrella started promptly. It rose
higher than before, carrying the three voyagers with it, and then
started straight away over the ocean.




THE ISLAND IN THE SKY

CHAPTER 4


They clung tightly to the ropes, but the breeze was with them, so after
a few moments, when they became accustomed to the motion, they began to
enjoy the ride immensely.

Larger and larger grew the island, and although they were headed
directly toward it, the umbrella seemed to rise higher and higher into
the air the farther it traveled. They had not journeyed ten minutes
before they came directly over the island, and looking down they could
see the forests and meadows far below them. But the umbrella kept up
its rapid flight.

"Hold on, there!" cried Cap'n Bill. "If it ain't keerful, the ol' thing
will pass by the island."

"I--I'm sure it has passed it already," exclaimed Trot. "What's wrong,
Button-Bright? Why don't we stop?"

Button-Bright seemed astonished, too.

"Perhaps I didn't say it right," he replied after a moment's thought.
Then, looking up at the umbrella, he repeated distinctly, "I said I
wanted to go to Sky Island! Sky Island, don't you understand?"

The umbrella swept steadily along, getting farther and farther out to
sea and rising higher and higher toward the clouds.

"Mack'rel an' herrings!" roared Cap'n Bill, now really frightened.
"Ain't there any blamed way at all to stop her?"

"None that I know of," said Button-Bright anxiously.

"P'raps," said Trot after a pause during which she tried hard to think.
"P'raps 'Sky Island' isn't the name of that island at all."

"Why, we know very well it ain't the name of it," yelled Cap'n Bill
from below. "We jus' called it that 'cause its right name is too hard
