forty-five years and we've never had a quarrel . . . though we came rather
near it that time you flew at Mrs. Rachel for calling you homely and
redhaired. Do you remember, Anne?"

"I should think I do," said Anne ruefully. "People don't forget things
like that. How I hated poor Mrs. Rachel at that moment!"

"And then that 'apology' you made her. Well, you were a handful, in all
conscience, Anne. I did feel so puzzled and bewildered how to manage
you. Matthew understood you better."

"Matthew understood everything," said Anne softly, as she always spoke
of him.

"Well, I think it could be managed so that Rachel and I wouldn't clash
at all. It always seemed to me that the reason two women can't get along
in one house is that they try to share the same kitchen and get in each
other's way. Now, if Rachel came here, she could have the north gable
for her bedroom and the spare room for a kitchen as well as not, for we
don't really need a spare room at all. She could put her stove there
and what furniture she wanted to keep, and be real comfortable and
independent. She'll have enough to live on of course...her children'll
see to that...so all I'd be giving her would be house room. Yes, Anne,
far as I'm concerned I'd like it."

"Then ask her," said Anne promptly. "I'd be very sorry myself to see
Mrs. Rachel go away."

"And if she comes," continued Marilla, "You can go to college as well as
not. She'll be company for me and she'll do for the twins what I can't
do, so there's no reason in the world why you shouldn't go."

Anne had a long meditation at her window that night. Joy and regret
struggled together in her heart. She had come at last . . . suddenly and
unexpectedly . . . to the bend in the road; and college was around it,
with a hundred rainbow hopes and visions; but Anne realized as well that
when she rounded that curve she must leave many sweet things behind. . .
all the little simple duties and interests which had grown so dear to
her in the last two years and which she had glorified into beauty and
delight by the enthusiasm she had put into them. She must give up her
school . . .  and she loved every one of her pupils, even the stupid and
naughty ones. The mere thought of Paul Irving made her wonder if Redmond
were such a name to conjure with after all.

"I've put out a lot of little roots these two years," Anne told the
moon, "and when I'm pulled up they're going to hurt a great deal. But
it's best to go, I think, and, as Marilla says, there's no good reason
why I shouldn't. I must get out all my ambitions and dust them."

Anne sent in her resignation the next day; and Mrs. Rachel, after a
heart to heart talk with Marilla, gratefully accepted the offer of a
home at Green Gables. She elected to remain in her own house for the
summer, however; the farm was not to be sold until the fall and there
were many arrangements to be made.

"I certainly never thought of living as far off the road as Green
Gables," sighed Mrs. Rachel to herself. "But really, Green Gables
doesn't seem as out of the world as it used to do . . . Anne has lots of
company and the twins make it real lively. And anyhow, I'd rather live
at the bottom of a well than leave Avonlea."

These two decisions being noised abroad speedily ousted the arrival of
Mrs. Harrison in popular gossip. Sage heads were shaken over Marilla
Cuthbert's rash step in asking Mrs. Rachel to live with her. People
opined that they wouldn't get on together. They were both "too fond of
their own way," and many doleful predictions were made, none of which
disturbed the parties in question at all. They had come to a clear and
distinct understanding of the respective duties and rights of their new
arrangements and meant to abide by them.

"I won't meddle with you nor you with me," Mrs. Rachel had said
decidedly, "and as for the twins, I'll be glad to do all I can for them;
but I won't undertake to answer Davy's questions, that's what. I'm not
an encyclopedia, neither am I a Philadelphia lawyer. You'll miss Anne
for that."

"Sometimes Anne's answers were about as queer as Davy's questions," said
Marilla drily. "The twins will miss her and no mistake; but her future
can't be sacrificed to Davy's thirst for information. When he asks
questions I can't answer I'll just tell him children should be seen and
not heard. That was how I was brought up, and I don't know but what it
was just as good a way as all these new-fangled notions for training
children."

"Well, Anne's methods seem to have worked fairly well with Davy," said
Mrs. Lynde smilingly. "He is a reformed character, that's what."

"He isn't a bad little soul," conceded Marilla. "I never expected to
get as fond of those children as I have. Davy gets round you somehow
. . . and Dora is a lovely child, although she is . . . kind of . . .
well, kind of . . ."

"Monotonous? Exactly," supplied Mrs. Rachel. "Like a book where every
page is the same, that's what. Dora will make a good, reliable woman
but she'll never set the pond on fire. Well, that sort of folks are
comfortable to have round, even if they're not as interesting as the
other kind."

Gilbert Blythe was probably the only person to whom the news of Anne's
resignation brought unmixed pleasure. Her pupils looked upon it as
a sheer catastrophe. Annetta Bell had hysterics when she went home.
Anthony Pye fought two pitched and unprovoked battles with other boys by
way of relieving his feelings. Barbara Shaw cried all night. Paul Irving
defiantly told his grandmother that she needn't expect him to eat any
porridge for a week.

"I can't do it, Grandma," he said. "I don't really know if I can eat
ANYTHING. I feel as if there was a dreadful lump in my throat. I'd have
cried coming home from school if Jake Donnell hadn't been watching me.
I believe I will cry after I go to bed. It wouldn't show on my eyes
tomorrow, would it? And it would be such a relief. But anyway, I can't
eat porridge. I'm going to need all my strength of mind to bear up
against this, Grandma, and I won't have any left to grapple with
porridge. Oh Grandma, I don't know what I'll do when my beautiful
teacher goes away. Milty Boulter says he bets Jane Andrews will get
the school. I suppose Miss Andrews is very nice. But I know she won't
understand things like Miss Shirley."

Diana also took a very pessimistic view of affairs.

"It will be horribly lonesome here next winter," she mourned, one
twilight when the moonlight was raining "airy silver" through the cherry
boughs and filling the east gable with a soft, dream-like radiance
in which the two girls sat and talked, Anne on her low rocker by the
window, Diana sitting Turkfashion on the bed. "You and Gilbert will
be gone  . . . and the Allans too. They are going to call Mr. Allan to
Charlottetown and of course he'll accept. It's too mean. We'll be
vacant all winter, I suppose, and have to listen to a long string of
candidates . . . and half of them won't be any good."

"I hope they won't call Mr. Baxter from East Grafton here, anyhow,"
said Anne decidedly. "He wants the call but he does preach such gloomy
sermons. Mr. Bell says he's a minister of the old school, but Mrs. Lynde
says there's nothing whatever the matter with him but indigestion. His
wife isn't a very good cook, it seems, and Mrs. Lynde says that when a
man has to eat sour bread two weeks out of three his theology is bound
to get a kink in it somewhere. Mrs. Allan feels very badly about going
away. She says everybody has been so kind to her since she came here
as a bride that she feels as if she were leaving lifelong friends. And
then, there's the baby's grave, you know. She says she doesn't see how
she can go away and leave that . . . it was such a little mite of a thing
and only three months old, and she says she is afraid it will miss its
mother, although she knows better and wouldn't say so to Mr. Allan for
anything. She says she has slipped through the birch grove back of the
manse nearly every night to the graveyard and sung a little lullaby to
it. She told me all about it last evening when I was up putting some of
those early wild roses on Matthew's grave. I promised her that as long
as I was in Avonlea I would put flowers on the baby's grave and when I
was away I felt sure that . . ."

"That I would do it," supplied Diana heartily. "Of course I will. And
I'll put them on Matthew's grave too, for your sake, Anne."

"Oh, thank you. I meant to ask you to if you would. And on little Hester
Gray's too? Please don't forget hers. Do you know, I've thought and
dreamed so much about little Hester Gray that she has become strangely
real to me. I think of her, back there in her little garden in that
cool, still, green corner; and I have a fancy that if I could steal back
there some spring evening, just at the magic time 'twixt light and
dark, and tiptoe so softly up the beech hill that my footsteps could not
frighten her, I would find the garden just as it used to be, all sweet
with June lilies and early roses, with the tiny house beyond it all hung
with vines; and little Hester Gray would be there, with her soft eyes,
and the wind ruffling her dark hair, wandering about, putting her
fingertips under the chins of the lilies and whispering secrets with the
roses; and I would go forward, oh, so softly, and hold out my hands and
say to her, 'Little Hester Gray, won't you let me be your playmate, for
I love the roses too?' And we would sit down on the old bench and talk
a little and dream a little, or just be beautifully silent together. And
then the moon would rise and I would look around me  . . . and there would
be no Hester Gray and no little vine-hung house, and no roses . . . only
an old waste garden starred with June lilies amid the grasses, and the
wind sighing, oh, so sorrowfully in the cherry trees. And I would not
know whether it had been real or if I had just imagined it all." Diana
crawled up and got her back against the headboard of the bed. When your
companion of twilight hour said such spooky things it was just as well
not to be able to fancy there was anything behind you.

"I'm afraid the Improvement Society will go down when you and Gilbert
are both gone," she remarked dolefully.

"Not a bit of fear of it," said Anne briskly, coming back from dreamland
to the affairs of practical life. "It is too firmly established for
that, especially since the older people are becoming so enthusiastic
about it. Look what they are doing this summer for their lawns and
lanes. Besides, I'll be watching for hints at Redmond and I'll write a
paper for it next winter and send it over. Don't take such a gloomy view
of things, Diana. And don't grudge me my little hour of gladness and
jubilation now. Later on, when I have to go away, I'll feel anything but
glad."

"It's all right for you to be glad . . . you're going to college and
you'll have a jolly time and make heaps of lovely new friends."

"I hope I shall make new friends," said Anne thoughtfully. "The
possibilities of making new friends help to make life very fascinating.
But no matter how many friends I make they'll never be as dear to me as
the old ones . . . especially a certain girl with black eyes and dimples.
Can you guess who she is, Diana?"

"But there'll be so many clever girls at Redmond," sighed Diana, "and
I'm only a stupid little country girl who says 'I seen' sometimes. . .
though I really know better when I stop to think. Well, of course these
past two years have really been too pleasant to last. I know SOMEBODY
who is glad you are going to Redmond anyhow. Anne, I'm going to ask
you a question . . . a serious question. Don't be vexed and do answer
seriously. Do you care anything for Gilbert?"

"Ever so much as a friend and not a bit in the way you mean," said Anne
calmly and decidedly; she also thought she was speaking sincerely.

Diana sighed. She wished, somehow, that Anne had answered differently.

"Don't you mean EVER to be married, Anne?"

"Perhaps . . . some day . . . when I meet the right one," said Anne,
smiling dreamily up at the moonlight.

"But how can you be sure when you do meet the right one?" persisted
Diana.

"Oh, I should know him . . . SOMETHING would tell me. You know what my
ideal is, Diana."

"But people's ideals change sometimes."

"Mine won't. And I COULDN'T care for any man who didn't fulfill it."

"What if you never meet him?"

"Then I shall die an old maid," was the cheerful response. "I daresay it
isn't the hardest death by any means."

"Oh, I suppose the dying would be easy enough; it's the living an old
maid I shouldn't like," said Diana, with no intention of being humorous.
"Although I wouldn't mind being an old maid VERY much if I could be one
like Miss Lavendar. But I never could be. When I'm forty-five I'll be
horribly fat. And while there might be some romance about a thin old
maid there couldn't possibly be any about a fat one. Oh, mind you,
Nelson Atkins proposed to Ruby Gillis three weeks ago. Ruby told me all
about it. She says she never had any intention of taking him, because
any one who married him will have to go in with the old folks; but Ruby
says that he made such a perfectly beautiful and romantic proposal that
it simply swept her off her feet. But she didn't want to do anything
rash so she asked for a week to consider; and two days later she was
at a meeting of the Sewing Circle at his mother's and there was a book
called 'The Complete Guide to Etiquette,' lying on the parlor table.
Ruby said she simply couldn't describe her feelings when in a section
of it headed, 'The Deportment of Courtship and Marriage,' she found the
very proposal Nelson had made, word for word. She went home and wrote
him a perfectly scathing refusal; and she says his father and mother
have taken turns watching him ever since for fear he'll drown himself in
the river; but Ruby says they needn't be afraid; for in the Deportment
of Courtship and Marriage it told how a rejected lover should behave
and there's nothing about drowning in THAT. And she says Wilbur Blair
is literally pining away for her but she's perfectly helpless in the
matter."

Anne made an impatient movement.

"I hate to say it . . . it seems so disloyal . . . but, well, I don't
like Ruby Gillis now. I liked her when we went to school and Queen's
together . . . though not so well as you and Jane of course. But this last
year at Carmody she seems so different . . . so . . . so . . ."

"I know," nodded Diana. "It's the Gillis coming out in her . . .  she
can't help it. Mrs. Lynde says that if ever a Gillis girl thought about
anything but the boys she never showed it in her walk and conversation.
She talks about nothing but boys and what compliments they pay her, and
how crazy they all are about her at Carmody. And the strange thing is,
they ARE, too . . ." Diana admitted this somewhat resentfully. "Last
night when I saw her in Mr. Blair's store she whispered to me that she'd
just made a new 'mash.' I wouldn't ask her who it was, because I
knew she was dying to BE asked. Well, it's what Ruby always wanted, I
suppose. You remember even when she was little she always said she meant
to have dozens of beaus when she grew up and have the very gayest time
she could before she settled down. She's so different from Jane, isn't
she? Jane is such a nice, sensible, lady-like girl."

"Dear old Jane is a jewel," agreed Anne, "but," she added, leaning
forward to bestow a tender pat on the plump, dimpled little hand hanging
over her pillow, "there's nobody like my own Diana after all. Do
you remember that evening we first met, Diana, and 'swore' eternal
friendship in your garden? We've kept that 'oath,' I think . . . we've
never had a quarrel nor even a coolness. I shall never forget the thrill
that went over me the day you told me you loved me. I had had such a
lonely, starved heart all through my childhood. I'm just beginning to
realize how starved and lonely it really was. Nobody cared anything for
me or wanted to be bothered with me. I should have been miserable if
it hadn't been for that strange little dream-life of mine, wherein I
imagined all the friends and love I craved. But when I came to Green
Gables everything was changed. And then I met you. You don't know what
your friendship meant to me. I want to thank you here and now, dear, for
the warm and true affection you've always given me."

"And always, always will," sobbed Diana. "I shall NEVER love anybody
. . . any GIRL . . . half as well as I love you. And if I ever do marry
and have a little girl of my own I'm going to name her ANNE."




XXVII

An Afternoon at the Stone House


"Where are you going, all dressed up, Anne?" Davy wanted to know. "You
look bully in that dress."

Anne had come down to dinner in a new dress of pale green muslin . . .
the first color she had worn since Matthew's death. It became her
perfectly, bringing out all the delicate, flower-like tints of her face
and the gloss and burnish of her hair.

"Davy, how many times have I told you that you mustn't use that word,"
she rebuked. "I'm going to Echo Lodge."

"Take me with you," entreated Davy.

"I would if I were driving. But I'm going to walk and it's too far for
your eight-year-old legs. Besides, Paul is going with me and I fear you
don't enjoy yourself in his company."

"Oh, I like Paul lots better'n I did," said Davy, beginning to make
fearful inroads into his pudding. "Since I've got pretty good myself I
don't mind his being gooder so much. If I can keep on I'll catch up with
him some day, both in legs and goodness. 'Sides, Paul's real nice to
us second primer boys in school. He won't let the other big boys meddle
with us and he shows us lots of games."

"How came Paul to fall into the brook at noon hour yesterday?" asked
Anne. "I met him on the playground, such a dripping figure that I sent
him promptly home for clothes without waiting to find out what had
happened."
