A doctor was speedily sent for, and Maggie Oliphant was banished from
the room. She never saw Annabel Lee again. That night the sick girl
was removed to the hospital, which was in a building apart from the
halls, and two days afterward she was dead.

Typhus fever was raging at Kingsdene at this time, and Annabel Lee had
taken it in its most virulent form. The doctors (and two or three were
summoned) gave up all hope of saving her life from the first. Maggie
also gave up hope. She accused herself of having caused her friend's
death. She believed that the shock of her tidings had killed Annabel,
who, already suffering from fever, had not strength to bear the agony
of knowing that Hammond's love was given to Maggie.

On the night of Annabel's death Maggie wrote to Hammond refusing his
offer of marriage, but giving no reason for doing so. After posting
her letter she lay down on her own sick bed and nearly died of the
fever which had taken Annabel away.

All these things happened a year ago. The agitation caused by the
death of one so young, beautiful and beloved had subsided. People
could talk calmly of Annabel, and although for a long time her room
had remained vacant, it was now occupied by a girl in all respects her
opposite.

Nothing would induce Maggie to enter this room, and no words would
persuade her to speak of Annabel. She was merry and bright once more,
and few gave her credit for secret hours of misery, which were
seriously undermining her health and ruining what was best of her
character.

On this particular day, as she lay back in her carriage, wrapped in
costly furs, a great wave of misery and bitterness was sweeping over
her heart. In the first agony caused by Annabel's death Maggie had
vowed a vow to her own heart never, under any circumstances, to
consent to be Hammond's wife. In the first misery of regret and
compunction it had been easy to Maggie Oliphant to make such a vow;
but she knew well, as the days and months went by, that its weight was
crushing her life, was destroying her chance of ever becoming a really
strong and good woman. If she had loved Hammond a year ago her
sufferings made her love him fifty times better now. With all her
outward coldness and apparent indifference, his presence gave her the
keenest pain. Her heart beat fast when she caught sight of his face;
if he spoke to another, she was conscious of being overcome by a
spirit of jealousy. The thought of him mingled with her waking and
sleeping hours; but the sacrifice she owed to the memory of her dead
friend must be made at all hazards. Maggie consulted no one on this
subject. Annabel's unhappy story lay buried with her in her early
grave; Maggie would have died rather than reveal it. Now, as she lay
back in her carriage, the tears filled her eyes.

"I am too weak for this to go on any longer," she said to herself. "I
shall leave St. Benet's at the end of the present term. What is the
winning of a tripos to me? What do I want with honors and
distinctions? Everything is barren to me. My life has no flavor in it.
I loved Annabel, and she is gone. Without meaning it, I broke
Annabel's heart. Without meaning it, I caused my darling's death, and
now my own heart is broken, for I love Geoffrey-- I love him, and I
can never, under any circumstances, be his wife. He misunderstands
me-- he thinks me cold, wicked, heartless-- and I can never, never set
myself right with him. Soon he will grow tired of me and give his
heart to some one else, and perhaps marry some one else. When he does,
I too shall die. Yes, whatever happens, I must go away from St.
Benet's."

Maggie's tears always came slowly; she put up her handkerchief to wipe
them away. It was little wonder that when she returned from her drive
her head was no better.

"We must put off the rehearsal," said Nancy Banister, She came into
Maggie's room and spoke vehemently. "I saw you at lunch, Maggie: you
ate nothing-- you spoke with an effort. I know your head is worse. You
must lie down, and, unless you are better soon, I will ask Miss Heath
to send for a doctor."

"No doctor will cure me," said Maggie. "Give me a kiss, Nance; let me
rest my head against yours for a moment. Oh, how earnestly I wish I
was like you."

"Why so? What have I got? I have no beauty; I am not clever; I am
neither romantically poor, like Prissie, nor romantically rich, like
you. In short, the fairies were not invited to my christening."

"One of two fairies came, however," replied Maggie, "and they gave you
an honest soul, and a warm heart, and-- and happiness, Nancy. My dear,
I need only look into your eyes to know that you are happy."

Nancy's blue eyes glowed with pleasure. "Yes," she said, "I don't know
anything about dumps and low spirits."

"And you are unselfish, Nancy; you are never seeking your own
pleasure."

"I am not obliged to: I have all I want. And now to turn to a more
important subject. I will see the members of our Dramatic Society and
put off the rehearsal."

"You must not; the excitement will do me good."

"For the time, perhaps," replied Nancy, shaking her wise head, "but
you will be worse afterward."

"No. Now, Nancy, don't let us argue the point. If you are truly my
friend, you will sit by me for an hour and read aloud the dullest book
you can find, then perhaps I shall go to sleep."

  CHAPTER XXVIII

 "COME AND KILL THE BOGIE"

NOTWITHSTANDING Nancy's dismal prognostications, Maggie Oliphant
played her part brilliantly that night. Her low spirits were succeeded
by gay ones; the Princess had never looked more truly regal, nor had
the Prince ever more passionately wooed her. Girls who did not belong
to the society always flocked into the theater to see the rehearsals.
Maggie's mood scarcely puzzled them. She was so erratic that no one
expected anything from her but the unexpected: if she looked like a
drooping flower one moment, her head was erect the next, her eyes
sparkling, her voice gay. The flower no longer drooped, but blossomed
with renewed vigor. After reading for an hour Nancy had left her
friend asleep. She went downstairs, and, in reply to several anxious
inquiries, pronounced it as her opinion that Maggie, with all the good
will in the world, could scarcely take part in the rehearsals that
night.

"I know Maggie is going to be ill," said Nancy with tears in her eyes.
Miss Banister was so sensible and so little given to undue alarms that
her words had effect, and a little rumor spread in the college that
Miss Oliphant could not take her part in the important rehearsals
which were to take place that evening. Her appearance, therefore, in
more than her usual beauty, with more vigor in her voice, more energy
and brightness in her eyes, gave at once a pleasing sense of
satisfaction. She was cheered when she entered the little theater,
but, if there was a brief surprise, it was quickly succeeded by the
comment which generally followed all her doings: "This is just like
Maggie; no one can depend on how she will act for a moment."

At that rehearsal, however, people were taken by surprise. If the
Princess did well, the young Prince did better. Priscilla had
completely dropped her role of the awkward and gauche girl. From the
first there had been vigor and promise in her acting. To-night there
was not only vigor, but tenderness-- there was a passion in her voice
which arose now and then to power. She was so completely in sympathy
with her part that she ceased to be Priscilla: she was the Prince who
must win this wayward Princess or die.

Maggie came up to her when the rehearsals were over.

"I congratulate you," she said. "Prissie, you might do well on the
stage."

Priscilla smiled. "No," she said, "for I need inspiration to forget
myself."

"Well, genius would supply that."

"No, Maggie, no. The motive that seems to turn me into the Prince
himself cannot come again. Oh, Maggie, if I succeed! If I succeed!"

"What do you mean, you strange child?"

"I cannot tell you with my voice: don't you guess?"

"I cannot say. You move me strangely; you remind me of-- I quite
forget that you are Priscilla Peel."

Priscilla laughed joyously.

"How gay you look to-night, Prissie, and yet I am told you were
miserable this morning. Have you forgotten your woes?"

"Completely."

"Why is this?"

"I suppose because I am happy and hopeful."

"Nancy tells me that you were quite in despair to-day. She said that
some of those cruel girls insulted you."

"Yes, I was very silly; I got a shock."

"And you have got over it?"

"Yes; I know you don't believe badly of me. You know that I am honest
and-- and true."

"Yes, my dear," said Maggie with fervor, "I believe in you as I
believe in myself. Now, have you quite disrobed? Shall we go into the
library for a little?"

The moment they entered this cheerful room, which was bright with two
blazing fires and numerous electric lights, Miss Day and Miss Marsh
came up eagerly to Maggie.

"Well," they said, "have you made up your mind?"

"About what?" she asked, raising her eyes in a puzzled way.

"You will come with us to the Elliot-Smiths'? You know how anxious
Meta is to have you."

"Thank you, but am I anxious to go to Meta?"

"Oh! you are, you must be; you cannot be so cruel as to refuse."

After the emotion she had gone through in the morning, Maggie's heart
was in that softened, half-tired state when it could be most easily
influenced. She was in no mood for arguing or for defiance of any
sort. "Peace at all hazards" was her motto just now. She was also in
so reckless a mood as to be indifferent to what any one thought of
her. The Elliot-Smiths were not in her "set." She disliked them and
their ways, but she had met Meta at a friend's house a week ago. Meta
had been introduced to Miss Oliphant and had pressed her invitation
vigorously. It would be a triumph of triumphs to Meta Elliot-Smith to
introduce the beautiful heiress to her own set. Maggie's refusal was
not listened to. She was begged to reconsider the question; implored
to be merciful, to be kind; assured of undying gratitude if she would
consent to come even for one short hour.

Miss Day and Miss Marsh were commissioned by Meta to secure Maggie at
all costs.

"You will come?" said Miss Day; "you must come." Then coming up close
to Maggie, she whispered in an eager voice: "Would not you like to
find out who has taken your five-pound note? Miss Peel is your friend.
Would it not gratify you to clear her?"

"Why should I clear one who can never possibly be suspected?" replied
Miss Oliphant in a voice of anger. Her words were spoken aloud and so
vehemently that Annie Day drew back a step or two in alarm.

"Well, but you would like to know who really took your money?" she
reiterated, again speaking in a whisper.

Maggie was standing by one of the bookcases; she stretched up her hand
to take down a volume. As she did so her eyes rested for a moment on
Priscilla.

"I would as soon suspect myself as her," she thought, "and yet last
night, for a moment, even I was guilty of an unworthy thought of you,
Prissie, and if I could doubt, why should I blame others? If going to
the Elliot-Smiths' will establish your innocence, I will go."

"Well," said Miss Day, who was watching her face, "I am to see Meta
to-morrow morning; am I to tell her to expect you?"

"Yes," replied Maggie, "but I wish to say at once, with regard to that
five-pound note, that I am not interested in it. I am so careless
about my money matters, that it is quite possible l may have been
mistaken when I thought I put it into my purse."

"Oh! oh! but you spoke so confidently this morning."

"One of my impulses. I wish I had not done it."

"Having done it, however," retorted Miss Day, "it is your duty to take
any steps which may be necessary to clear the college of so unpleasant
and disgraceful a charge."

"You think I can do this by going to the Elliot-Smiths'?"

"Hush! you will spoil all by speaking so loud. Yes, I fully believe we
shall make a discovery on Friday night."

"You don't suppose I would go to act the spy?"

"No, no, nothing of the sort; only come-- only come!"

Maggie opened her book and glanced at some of its contents before
replying.

"Only come," repeated Annie in an imploring voice.

"I said I would come," answered Maggie. "Must I reiterate my
assurance? Tell Miss Elliot-Smith to expect me."

Maggie read for a little in the library; then, feeling tired, she rose
from her seat and crossed the large room, intending to go up at once
to her own chamber. In the hall, however, she was attracted by seeing
Miss Heath's door slightly open. Her heart was full of compunction for
having, even for a moment, suspected Priscilla of theft. She thought
she would go and speak to Miss Heath about her.

She knocked at the vice-principal's door.

"Come in," answered the kind voice, and Maggie found herself a moment
later seated by the fire: the door of Miss Heath's room shut, and Miss
Heath herself standing over her, using words of commiseration.

"My dear," she said, "you look very ill."

Maggie raised her eyes. Miss Heath had seen many moods on that
charming face; now the expression in the wide-open, brown eyes caused
her own to fill with sudden tears.

"I would do anything to help you, my love," she said tenderly, and,
stooping down, she kissed Maggie on her forehead.

"Perhaps, another time," answered Miss Oliphant.

"You are all that is good, Miss Heath, and I may as well own frankly
that I am neither well nor happy, but I have not come to speak of
myself just now. I want to say something about Priscilla Peel."

"Yes, what about her?"

"She came to you last night. I know what she came about."

"She told me she had confided in you," answered the vice-principal
gravely.

"Yes. Well, I have come to say that she must not be allowed to give up
her Greek and Latin."
