felt, I did NOT give in to the Methodists. When Mrs. Deacon Baxter said,
as we came out, 'What a disgraceful exhibition!' _I_ said, looking her
fairly in the eye, 'They are all beautiful singers, and none of YOUR
choir, Mrs. Baxter, ever bother themselves coming out to your prayer
meeting, it seems. Their voices appear to be in tune only on Sundays!'
She was quite meek and I felt that I had snubbed her properly. But I
could have done it much more thoroughly, Mrs. Dr. dear, if only they
had left out _Polly Wolly Doodle_. It is truly terrible to think of that
being sung in a graveyard."

"Some of those dead folks sang _Polly Wolly Doodle_ when they were
living, Susan. Perhaps they like to hear it yet," suggested Gilbert.

Miss Cornelia looked at him reproachfully and made up her mind that, on
some future occasion, she would hint to Anne that the doctor should
be admonished not to say such things. They might injure his practice.
People might get it into their heads that he wasn't orthodox. To be
sure, Marshall said even worse things habitually, but then HE was not a
public man.

"I understand that their father was in his study all the time, with his
windows open, but never noticed them at all. Of course, he was lost in a
book as usual. But I spoke to him about it yesterday, when he called."

"How could you dare, Mrs. Marshall Elliott?" asked Susan rebukingly.

"Dare! It's time somebody dared something. Why, they say he knows
nothing about that letter of Faith's to the JOURNAL because nobody
liked to mention it to him. He never looks at a JOURNAL of course. But
I thought he ought to know of this to prevent any such performances
in future. He said he would 'discuss it with them.' But of course he'd
never think of it again after he got out of our gate. That man has no
sense of humour, Anne, believe ME. He preached last Sunday on 'How to
Bring up Children.' A beautiful sermon it was, too--and everybody in
church thinking 'what a pity you can't practise what you preach.'"

Miss Cornelia did Mr. Meredith an injustice in thinking he would soon
forget what she had told him. He went home much disturbed and when the
children came from Rainbow Valley that night, at a much later hour than
they should have been prowling in it, he called them into his study.

They went in, somewhat awed. It was such an unusual thing for their
father to do. What could he be going to say to them? They racked their
memories for any recent transgression of sufficient importance, but
could not recall any. Carl had spilled a saucerful of jam on Mrs.
Peter Flagg's silk dress two evenings before, when, at Aunt Martha's
invitation, she had stayed to supper. But Mr. Meredith had not noticed
it, and Mrs. Flagg, who was a kindly soul, had made no fuss. Besides,
Carl had been punished by having to wear Una's dress all the rest of the
evening.

Una suddenly thought that perhaps her father meant to tell them that he
was going to marry Miss West. Her heart began to beat violently and
her legs trembled. Then she saw that Mr. Meredith looked very stern and
sorrowful. No, it could not be that.

"Children," said Mr. Meredith, "I have heard something that has pained
me very much. Is it true that you sat out in the graveyard all last
Thursday evening and sang ribald songs while a prayer meeting was being
held in the Methodist church?"

"Great Caesar, Dad, we forgot all about it being their prayer meeting
night," exclaimed Jerry in dismay.

"Then it is true--you did do this thing?"

"Why, Dad, I don't know what you mean by ribald songs. We sang hymns--it
was a sacred concert, you know. What harm was that? I tell you we never
thought about it's being Methodist prayer meeting night. They used to
have their meeting Tuesday nights and since they've changed to Thursdays
it's hard to remember."

"Did you sing nothing but hymns?"

"Why," said Jerry, turning red, "we DID sing _Polly Wolly Doodle_ at the
last. Faith said, 'Let's have something cheerful to wind up with.' But
we didn't mean any harm, Father--truly we didn't."

"The concert was my idea, Father," said Faith, afraid that Mr. Meredith
might blame Jerry too much. "You know the Methodists themselves had a
sacred concert in their church three Sunday nights ago. I thought
it would be good fun to get one up in imitation of it. Only they had
prayers at theirs, and we left that part out, because we heard that
people thought it awful for us to pray in a graveyard. YOU were sitting
in here all the time," she added, "and never said a word to us."

"I did not notice what you were doing. That is no excuse for me, of
course. I am more to blame than you--I realize that. But why did you
sing that foolish song at the end?"

"We didn't think," muttered Jerry, feeling that it was a very
lame excuse, seeing that he had lectured Faith so strongly in the
Good-Conduct Club sessions for her lack of thought. "We're sorry,
Father--truly, we are. Pitch into us hard--we deserve a regular combing
down."

But Mr. Meredith did no combing down or pitching into. He sat down and
gathered his small culprits close to him and talked a little to them,
tenderly and wisely. They were overcome with remorse and shame, and felt
that they could never be so silly and thoughtless again.

"We've just got to punish ourselves good and hard for this," whispered
Jerry as they crept upstairs. "We'll have a session of the Club first
thing tomorrow and decide how we'll do it. I never saw father so cut up.
But I wish to goodness the Methodists would stick to one night for their
prayer meeting and not wander all over the week."

"Anyhow, I'm glad it wasn't what I was afraid it was," murmured Una to
herself.

Behind them, in the study, Mr. Meredith had sat down at his desk and
buried his face in his arms.

"God help me!" he said. "I'm a poor sort of father. Oh, Rosemary! If you
had only cared!"



CHAPTER XXVIII. A FAST DAY

The Good-Conduct Club had a special session the next morning before
school. After various suggestions, it was decided that a fast day would
be an appropriate punishment.

"We won't eat a single thing for a whole day," said Jerry. "I'm kind of
curious to see what fasting is like, anyhow. This will be a good chance
to find out."

"What day will we choose for it?" asked Una, who thought it would be
quite an easy punishment and rather wondered that Jerry and Faith had
not devised something harder.

"Let's pick Monday," said Faith. "We mostly have a pretty FILLING dinner
on Sundays, and Mondays meals never amount to much anyhow."

"But that's just the point," exclaimed Jerry. "We mustn't take the
easiest day to fast, but the hardest--and that's Sunday, because, as
you say, we mostly have roast beef that day instead of cold ditto. It
wouldn't be much punishment to fast from ditto. Let's take next Sunday.
It will be a good day, for father is going to exchange for the morning
service with the Upper Lowbridge minister. Father will be away till
evening. If Aunt Martha wonders what's got into us, we'll tell her right
up that we're fasting for the good of our souls, and it is in the Bible
and she is not to interfere, and I guess she won't."

Aunt Martha did not. She merely said in her fretful mumbling way, "What
foolishness are you young rips up to now?" and thought no more about it.
Mr. Meredith had gone away early in the morning before any one was up.
He went without his breakfast, too, but that was, of course, of common
occurrence. Half of the time he forgot it and there was no one to remind
him of it. Breakfast--Aunt Martha's breakfast--was not a hard meal to
miss. Even the hungry "young rips" did not feel it any great deprivation
to abstain from the "lumpy porridge and blue milk" which had aroused
the scorn of Mary Vance. But it was different at dinner time. They were
furiously hungry then, and the odor of roast beef which pervaded the
manse, and which was wholly delightful in spite of the fact that the
roast beef was badly underdone, was almost more than they could stand.
In desperation they rushed to the graveyard where they couldn't smell
it. But Una could not keep her eyes from the dining room window, through
which the Upper Lowbridge minister could be seen, placidly eating.

"If I could only have just a weeny, teeny piece," she sighed.

"Now, you stop that," commanded Jerry. "Of course it's hard--but that's
the punishment of it. I could eat a graven image this very minute, but
am I complaining? Let's think of something else. We've just got to rise
above our stomachs."

At supper time they did not feel the pangs of hunger which they had
suffered earlier in the day.

"I suppose we're getting used to it," said Faith. "I feel an awfully
queer all-gone sort of feeling, but I can't say I'm hungry."

"My head is funny," said Una. "It goes round and round sometimes."

But she went gamely to church with the others. If Mr. Meredith had not
been so wholly wrapped up in and carried away with his subject he might
have noticed the pale little face and hollow eyes in the manse pew
beneath. But he noticed nothing and his sermon was something longer
than usual. Then, just before he gave out the final hymn, Una Meredith
tumbled off the seat of the manse pew and lay in a dead faint on the
floor.

Mrs. Elder Clow was the first to reach her. She caught the thin little
body from the arms of white-faced, terrified Faith and carried it into
the vestry. Mr. Meredith forgot the hymn and everything else and rushed
madly after her. The congregation dismissed itself as best it could.

"Oh, Mrs. Clow," gasped Faith, "is Una dead? Have we killed her?"

"What is the matter with my child?" demanded the pale father.

"She has just fainted, I think," said Mrs. Clow. "Oh, here's the doctor,
thank goodness."

Gilbert did not find it a very easy thing to bring Una back to
consciousness. He worked over her for a long time before her eyes
opened. Then he carried her over to the manse, followed by Faith,
sobbing hysterically in her relief.

"She is just hungry, you know--she didn't eat a thing to-day--none of us
did--we were all fasting."

"Fasting!" said Mr. Meredith, and "Fasting?" said the doctor.

"Yes--to punish ourselves for singing _Polly Wolly_ in the graveyard,"
said Faith.

"My child, I don't want you to punish yourselves for that," said Mr.
Meredith in distress. "I gave you your little scolding--and you were all
penitent--and I forgave you."

"Yes, but we had to be punished," explained Faith. "It's our rule--in
our Good-Conduct Club, you know--if we do anything wrong, or anything
that is likely to hurt father in the congregation, we HAVE to punish
ourselves. We are bringing ourselves up, you know, because there is
nobody to do it."

Mr. Meredith groaned, but the doctor got up from Una's side with an air
of relief.

"Then this child simply fainted from lack of food and all she needs is
a good square meal," he said. "Mrs. Clow, will you be kind enough to see
she gets it? And I think from Faith's story that they all would be the
better for something to eat, or we shall have more faintings."

"I suppose we shouldn't have made Una fast," said Faith remorsefully.
"When I think of it, only Jerry and I should have been punished. WE got
up the concert and we were the oldest."

"I sang _Polly Wolly_ just the same as the rest of you," said Una's weak
little voice, "so I had to be punished, too."

Mrs. Clow came with a glass of milk, Faith and Jerry and Carl sneaked
off to the pantry, and John Meredith went into his study, where he sat
in the darkness for a long time, alone with his bitter thoughts. So his
children were bringing themselves up because there was "nobody to do
it"--struggling along amid their little perplexities without a hand to
guide or a voice to counsel. Faith's innocently uttered phrase rankled
in her father's mind like a barbed shaft. There was "nobody" to look
after them--to comfort their little souls and care for their little
bodies. How frail Una had looked, lying there on the vestry sofa in that
long faint! How thin were her tiny hands, how pallid her little face!
She looked as if she might slip away from him in a breath--sweet little
Una, of whom Cecilia had begged him to take such special care. Since his
wife's death he had not felt such an agony of dread as when he had hung
over his little girl in her unconsciousness. He must do something--but
what? Should he ask Elizabeth Kirk to marry him? She was a good
woman--she would be kind to his children. He might bring himself to
do it if it were not for his love for Rosemary West. But until he had
crushed that out he could not seek another woman in marriage. And he
could not crush it out--he had tried and he could not. Rosemary had
been in church that evening, for the first time since her return from
Kingsport. He had caught a glimpse of her face in the back of the
crowded church, just as he had finished his sermon. His heart had given
a fierce throb. He sat while the choir sang the "collection piece," with
his bent head and tingling pulses. He had not seen her since the evening
upon which he had asked her to marry him. When he had risen to give out
the hymn his hands were trembling and his pale face was flushed. Then
Una's fainting spell had banished everything from his mind for a time.
Now, in the darkness and solitude of the study it rushed back. Rosemary
was the only woman in the world for him. It was of no use for him to
think of marrying any other. He could not commit such a sacrilege even
for his children's sake. He must take up his burden alone--he must try
to be a better, a more watchful father--he must tell his children not to
be afraid to come to him with all their little problems. Then he lighted
his lamp and took up a bulky new book which was setting the theological
world by the ears. He would read just one chapter to compose his mind.
Five minutes later he was lost to the world and the troubles of the
world.



CHAPTER XXIX. A WEIRD TALE

On an early June evening Rainbow Valley was an entirely delightful place
and the children felt it to be so, as they sat in the open glade where
the bells rang elfishly on the Tree Lovers, and the White Lady shook
her green tresses. The wind was laughing and whistling about them like
a leal, glad-hearted comrade. The young ferns were spicy in the hollow.
The wild cherry trees scattered over the valley, among the dark firs,
were mistily white. The robins were whistling over in the maples behind
Ingleside. Beyond, on the slopes of the Glen, were blossoming orchards,
sweet and mystic and wonderful, veiled in dusk. It was spring, and young
things MUST be glad in spring. Everybody was glad in Rainbow Valley
that evening--until Mary Vance froze their blood with the story of Henry
Warren's ghost.

Jem was not there. Jem spent his evenings now studying for his entrance
examination in the Ingleside garret. Jerry was down near the pond,
trouting. Walter had been reading Longfellow's sea poems to the others
and they were steeped in the beauty and mystery of the ships. Then they
talked of what they would do when they were grown up--where they would
travel--the far, fair shores they would see. Nan and Di meant to go to
Europe. Walter longed for the Nile moaning past its Egyptian sands, and
a glimpse of the sphinx. Faith opined rather dismally that she supposed
she would have to be a missionary--old Mrs. Taylor told her she ought
to be--and then she would at least see India or China, those mysterious
lands of the Orient. Carl's heart was set on African jungles. Una
said nothing. She thought she would just like to stay at home. It was
prettier here than anywhere else. It would be dreadful when they were
all grown up and had to scatter over the world. The very idea made Una
feel lonesome and homesick. But the others dreamed on delightedly until
Mary Vance arrived and vanished poesy and dreams at one fell swoop.

"Laws, but I'm out of puff," she exclaimed. "I've run down that hill
like sixty. I got an awful scare up there at the old Bailey place."
