That was a wonderful day in the little house of dreams.

"The best dream of all has come true," said Anne, pale and rapturous.
"Oh, Marilla, I hardly dare believe it, after that horrible day last
summer.  I have had a heartache ever since then--but it is gone now."

"This baby will take Joy's place," said Marilla.

"Oh, no, no, NO, Marilla.  He can't--nothing can ever do that.  He has
his own place, my dear, wee man-child.  But little Joy has hers, and
always will have it.  If she had lived she would have been over a year
old.  She would have been toddling around on her tiny feet and lisping
a few words.  I can see her so plainly, Marilla.  Oh, I know now that
Captain Jim was right when he said God would manage better than that my
baby would seem a stranger to me when I found her Beyond.  I've learned
THAT this past year.  I've followed her development day by day and week
by week--I always shall.  I shall know just how she grows from year to
year--and when I meet her again I'll know her--she won't be a stranger.
Oh, Marilla, LOOK at his dear, darling toes!  Isn't it strange they
should be so perfect?"

"It would be stranger if they weren't," said Marilla crisply.  Now that
all was safely over, Marilla was herself again.

"Oh, I know--but it seems as if they couldn't be quite FINISHED, you
know--and they are, even to the tiny nails.  And his hands--JUST look
at his hands, Marilla."

"They appear to be a good deal like hands," Marilla conceded.

"See how he clings to my finger.  I'm sure he knows me already.  He
cries when the nurse takes him away.  Oh, Marilla, do you think--you
don't think, do you--that his hair is going to be red?"

"I don't see much hair of any color," said Marilla.  "I wouldn't worry
about it, if I were you, until it becomes visible."

"Marilla, he HAS hair--look at that fine little down all over his head.
Anyway, nurse says his eyes will be hazel and his forehead is exactly
like Gilbert's."

"And he has the nicest little ears, Mrs. Doctor, dear," said Susan.
"The first thing I did was to look at his ears.  Hair is deceitful and
noses and eyes change, and you cannot tell what is going to come of
them, but ears is ears from start to finish, and you always know where
you are with them.  Just look at their shape--and they are set right
back against his precious head.  You will never need to be ashamed of
his ears, Mrs. Doctor, dear."

Anne's convalescence was rapid and happy.  Folks came and worshipped
the baby, as people have bowed before the kingship of the new-born
since long before the Wise Men of the East knelt in homage to the Royal
Babe of the Bethlehem manger.  Leslie, slowly finding herself amid the
new conditions of her life, hovered over it, like a beautiful,
golden-crowned Madonna.  Miss Cornelia nursed it as knackily as could
any mother in Israel.  Captain Jim held the small creature in his big
brown hands and gazed tenderly at it, with eyes that saw the children
who had never been born to him.

"What are you going to call him?" asked Miss Cornelia.

"Anne has settled his name," answered Gilbert.

"James Matthew--after the two finest gentlemen I've ever known--not
even saving your presence," said Anne with a saucy glance at Gilbert.

Gilbert smiled.

"I never knew Matthew very well; he was so shy we boys couldn't get
acquainted with him--but I quite agree with you that Captain Jim is one
of the rarest and finest souls God ever clothed in clay.  He is so
delighted over the fact that we have given his name to our small lad.
It seems he has no other namesake."

"Well, James Matthew is a name that will wear well and not fade in the
washing," said Miss Cornelia.  "I'm glad you didn't load him down with
some highfalutin, romantic name that he'd be ashamed of when he gets to
be a grandfather.  Mrs. William Drew at the Glen has called her baby
Bertie Shakespeare.  Quite a combination, isn't it?  And I'm glad you
haven't had much trouble picking on a name.  Some folks have an awful
time.  When the Stanley Flaggs' first boy was born there was so much
rivalry as to who the child should be named for that the poor little
soul had to go for two years without a name.  Then a brother came along
and there it was--'Big Baby' and 'Little Baby.' Finally they called Big
Baby Peter and Little Baby Isaac, after the two grandfathers, and had
them both christened together.  And each tried to see if it couldn't
howl the other down.  You know that Highland Scotch family of MacNabs
back of the Glen?  They've got twelve boys and the oldest and the
youngest are both called Neil--Big Neil and Little Neil in the same
family.  Well, I s'pose they ran out of names."

"I have read somewhere," laughed Anne, "that the first child is a poem
but the tenth is very prosy prose.  Perhaps Mrs. MacNab thought that
the twelfth was merely an old tale re-told."

"Well, there's something to be said for large families," said Miss
Cornelia, with a sigh.  "I was an only child for eight years and I did
long for a brother and sister.  Mother told me to pray for one--and
pray I did, believe ME.  Well, one day Aunt Nellie came to me and said,
'Cornelia, there is a little brother for you upstairs in your ma's
room.  You can go up and see him.'  I was so excited and delighted I
just flew upstairs.  And old Mrs. Flagg lifted up the baby for me to
see.  Lord, Anne, dearie, I never was so disappointed in my life.  You
see, I'd been praying for A BROTHER TWO YEARS OLDER THAN MYSELF."

"How long did it take you to get over your disappointment?" asked Anne,
amid her laughter.

"Well, I had a spite at Providence for a good spell, and for weeks I
wouldn't even look at the baby.  Nobody knew why, for I never told.
Then he began to get real cute, and held out his wee hands to me and I
began to get fond of him.  But I didn't get really reconciled to him
until one day a school chum came to see him and said she thought he was
awful small for his age.  I just got boiling mad, and I sailed right
into her, and told her she didn't know a nice baby when she saw one,
and ours was the nicest baby in the world.  And after that I just
worshipped him.  Mother died before he was three years old and I was
sister and mother to him both.  Poor little lad, he was never strong,
and he died when he wasn't much over twenty.  Seems to me I'd have
given anything on earth, Anne, dearie, if he'd only lived."

Miss Cornelia sighed.  Gilbert had gone down and Leslie, who had been
crooning over the small James Matthew in the dormer window, laid him
asleep in his basket and went her way.  As soon as she was safely out
of earshot, Miss Cornelia bent forward and said in a conspirator's
whisper:

"Anne, dearie, I'd a letter from Owen Ford yesterday.  He's in
Vancouver just now, but he wants to know if I can board him for a month
later on.  YOU know what that means.  Well, I hope we're doing right."

"We've nothing to do with it--we couldn't prevent him from coming to
Four Winds if he wanted to," said Anne quickly.  She did not like the
feeling of match-making Miss Cornelia's whispers gave her; and then she
weakly succumbed herself.

"Don't let Leslie know he is coming until he is here," she said.  "If
she found out I feel sure she would go away at once.  She intends to go
in the fall anyhow--she told me so the other day.  She is going to
Montreal to take up nursing and make what she can of her life."

"Oh, well, Anne, dearie," said Miss Cornelia, nodding sagely "that is
all as it may be.  You and I have done our part and we must leave the
rest to Higher Hands."



CHAPTER 35

POLITICS AT FOUR WINDS

When Anne came downstairs again, the Island, as well as all Canada, was
in the throes of a campaign preceding a general election.  Gilbert, who
was an ardent Conservative, found himself caught in the vortex, being
much in demand for speech-making at the various county rallies.  Miss
Cornelia did not approve of his mixing up in politics and told Anne so.

"Dr. Dave never did it.  Dr. Blythe will find he is making a mistake,
believe ME.  Politics is something no decent man should meddle with."

"Is the government of the country to be left solely to the rogues
then?" asked Anne.

"Yes--so long as it's Conservative rogues," said Miss Cornelia,
marching off with the honors of war.  "Men and politicians are all
tarred with the same brush.  The Grits have it laid on thicker than the
Conservatives, that's all--CONSIDERABLY thicker.  But Grit or Tory, my
advice to Dr. Blythe is to steer clear of politics.  First thing you
know, he'll be running an election himself, and going off to Ottawa for
half the year and leaving his practice to go to the dogs."

"Ah, well, let's not borrow trouble," said Anne.  "The rate of interest
is too high.  Instead, let's look at Little Jem.  It should be spelled
with a G.  Isn't he perfectly beautiful?  Just see the dimples in his
elbows.  We'll bring him up to be a good Conservative, you and I, Miss
Cornelia."

"Bring him up to be a good man," said Miss Cornelia.  "They're scarce
and valuable; though, mind you, I wouldn't like to see him a Grit.  As
for the election, you and I may be thankful we don't live over harbor.
The air there is blue these days.  Every Elliott and Crawford and
MacAllister is on the warpath, loaded for bear.  This side is peaceful
and calm, seeing there's so few men.  Captain Jim's a Grit, but it's my
opinion he's ashamed of it, for he never talks politics.  There isn't
any earthly doubt that the Conservatives will be returned with a big
majority again."

Miss Cornelia was mistaken.  On the morning after the election Captain
Jim dropped in at the little house to tell the news.  So virulent is
the microbe of party politics, even in a peaceable old man, that
Captain Jim's cheeks were flushed and his eyes were flashing with all
his old-time fire.

"Mistress Blythe, the Liberals are in with a sweeping majority.  After
eighteen years of Tory mismanagement this down-trodden country is going
to have a chance at last."

"I never heard you make such a bitter partisan speech before, Captain
Jim.  I didn't think you had so much political venom in you," laughed
Anne, who was not much excited over the tidings.  Little Jem had said
"Wow-ga" that morning.  What were principalities and powers, the rise
and fall of dynasties, the overthrow of Grit or Tory, compared with
that miraculous occurrence?

"It's been accumulating for a long while," said Captain Jim, with a
deprecating smile.  "I thought I was only a moderate Grit, but when the
news came that we were in I found out how Gritty I really was."

"You know the doctor and I are Conservatives."

"Ah, well, it's the only bad thing I know of either of you, Mistress
Blythe.  Cornelia is a Tory, too.  I called in on my way from the Glen
to tell her the news."

"Didn't you know you took your life in your hands?"

"Yes, but I couldn't resist the temptation."

"How did she take it?"

"Comparatively calm, Mistress Blythe, comparatively calm.  She says,
says she, 'Well, Providence sends seasons of humiliation to a country,
same as to individuals.  You Grits have been cold and hungry for many a
year.  Make haste to get warmed and fed, for you won't be in long.'
'Well, now Cornelia,' I says, 'mebbe Providence thinks Canada needs a
real long spell of humiliation.'  Ah, Susan, have YOU heard the news?
The Liberals are in."

Susan had just come in from the kitchen, attended by the odor of
delectable dishes which always seemed to hover around her.

"Now, are they?" she said, with beautiful unconcern.  "Well, I never
could see but that my bread rose just as light when Grits were in as
when they were not.  And if any party, Mrs. Doctor, dear, will make it
rain before the week is out, and save our kitchen garden from entire
ruination, that is the party Susan will vote for.  In the meantime,
will you just step out and give me your opinion on the meat for dinner?
I am fearing that it is very tough, and I think that we had better
change our butcher as well as our government."

One evening, a week later, Anne walked down to the Point, to see if she
could get some fresh fish from Captain Jim, leaving Little Jem for the
first time.  It was quite a tragedy.  Suppose he cried?  Suppose Susan
did not know just exactly what to do for him?  Susan was calm and
serene.

"I have had as much experience with him as you, Mrs. Doctor, dear, have
I not?"

"Yes, with him--but not with other babies.  Why, I looked after three
pairs of twins, when I was a child, Susan.  When they cried, I gave
them peppermint or castor oil quite coolly.  It's quite curious now to
recall how lightly I took all those babies and their woes."

"Oh, well, if Little Jem cries, I will just clap a hot water bag on his
little stomach," said Susan.

"Not too hot, you know," said Anne anxiously.  Oh, was it really wise
to go?

"Do not you fret, Mrs. Doctor, dear.  Susan is not the woman to burn a
wee man.  Bless him, he has no notion of crying."

Anne tore herself away finally and enjoyed her walk to the Point after
all, through the long shadows of the sun-setting.  Captain Jim was not
in the living room of the lighthouse, but another man was--a handsome,
middle-aged man, with a strong, clean-shaven chin, who was unknown to
Anne.  Nevertheless, when she sat down, he began to talk to her with
all the assurance of an old acquaintance.  There was nothing amiss in
what he said or the way he said it, but Anne rather resented such a
cool taking-for-granted in a complete stranger.  Her replies were
frosty, and as few as decency required.  Nothing daunted, her companion
talked on for several minutes, then excused himself and went away.
Anne could have sworn there was a twinkle in his eye and it annoyed
her.  Who was the creature?  There was something vaguely familiar about
him but she was certain she had never seen him before.

"Captain Jim, who was that who just went out?" she asked, as Captain
Jim came in.

"Marshall Elliott," answered the captain.

"Marshall Elliott!" cried Anne.  "Oh, Captain Jim--it wasn't--yes, it
WAS his voice--oh, Captain Jim, I didn't know him--and I was quite
insulting to him!  WHY didn't he tell me?  He must have seen I didn't
know him."

"He wouldn't say a word about it--he'd just enjoy the joke.  Don't
worry over snubbing him--he'll think it fun.  Yes, Marshall's shaved
off his beard at last and cut his hair.  His party is in, you know.  I
didn't know him myself first time I saw him.  He was up in Carter
Flagg's store at the Glen the night after election day, along with a
crowd of others, waiting for the news.  About twelve the 'phone came
through--the Liberals were in.  Marshall just got up and walked out--he
didn't cheer or shout--he left the others to do that, and they nearly
lifted the roof off Carter's store, I reckon.  Of course, all the
Tories were over in Raymond Russell's store.  Not much cheering THERE.
Marshall went straight down the street to the side door of Augustus
Palmer's barber shop.  Augustus was in bed asleep, but Marhall hammered
on the door until he got up and come down, wanting to know what all the
racket was about.

"Come into your shop and do the best job you ever did in your life,
Gus,' said Marshall.  'The Liberals are in and you're going to barber a
good Grit before the sun rises.'

"Gus was mad as hops--partly because he'd been dragged out of bed, but
more because he's a Tory.  He vowed he wouldn't shave any man after
twelve at night.
