
The Merry Little Breezes are Lightfoot's best friends.  They
always bring to him all the different scents they find as they
wander through the Green Forest.  And Lightfoot's delicate nose
is so wonderful that he can take these scents, even though they
be very faint, and tell just who or what has made them.  So,
though he makes the best possible use of his big ears and his
beautiful eyes, he trusts more to his nose to warn him of danger.
For this reason, during the hunting season when he moves about,
he moves in the direction from which the Merry Little Breezes may
be blowing.  He knows that they will bring to him warning of any
danger which may lie in that direction.

Now the hunter with the terrible gun who was looking for
Lightfoot knew all this, for he was wise in the ways of Lightfoot
and of the other little people of the Green Forest.  When he had
entered the Green Forest that morning he had first of all made
sure of the direction from which the Merry Little Breezes were
coming.  Then he had begun to hunt in that direction, knowing
that thus his scent would be carried behind him.  It is more than
likely that he would have reached the hiding-place of Lightfoot
the Deer before the latter would have known that he was in the
Green Forest, had it not been for Sammy Jay's warning.

When he reached the tangle of fallen trees behind which Lightfoot
had been hiding, he worked around it slowly and with the greatest
care, holding his terrible gun ready to use instantly should
Lightfoot leap out.  Presently he found Lightfoot's footprints in
the soft ground and studying them he knew that Lightfoot had
known of his coming.

"It was that confounded Jay," muttered the hunter.  "Lightfoot
heard him and knew what it meant.  I know what he has done; he has
circled round so as to get behind me and get my scent.  It is a
clever trick, a very clever trick, but two can play at that
game.  I'll just try that little trick myself."

So the hunter in his turn made a wide circle back, and presently
there was none of the dreaded man-smell among the scents which
the Merry Little Breezes brought to Lightfoot.  Lightfoot had lost
track of the hunter.




CHAPTER VIII: Wit Against Wit


It was a dreadful game the hunter with the terrible gun and
Lightfoot the Deer were playing in the Green Forest.  It was a
matching of wit against wit, the hunter seeking to take
Lightfoot's life, and Lightfoot seeking to save it.
The experience of other years had taught Lightfoot much of the
ways of hunters and not one of the things he had learned about
them was forgotten.  But the hunter in his turn knew much of
the ways of Deer.  So it was that each was trying his best to
outguess the other.

When the hunter found the hiding-place Lightfoot had left at the
warning of Sammy Jay he followed Lightfoot's tracks for a short
distance.  It was slow work, and only one whose eyes had been
trained to notice little things could have done it.  You see,
there was no snow, and only now and then, when he had stepped on
a bit of soft ground, had Lightfoot left a footprint.  But there
were other signs which the hunter knew how to read,--a freshly
upturned leaf here, and here, a bit of moss lightly crushed.
These things told the hunter which way Lightfoot had gone.

Slowly, patiently, watchfully, the hunter followed.  After a while
he stopped with a satisfied grin.  "I thought as much," he
muttered.  "He heard that pesky Jay and circled around so as to
get my scent.  I'll just cut across to my old trail and unless I
am greatly mistaken, I'll find his tracks there."

So, swiftly but silently, the hunter cut across to his old trail,
and in a few moments he found just what he expected,--one of
Lightfoot's footprints.  Once more he grinned.

"Well, old fellow, I've outguessed you this time," said he to
himself.  "I am behind you and the wind is from you to me, so that
you cannot get my scent.  I wouldn't be a bit surprised if you're
back right where you started from, behind that old windfall."
He at once began to move forward silently and cautiously, with
eyes and ears alert and his terrible gun ready for instant use.

Now when Lightfoot, following behind the hunter, had lost the
scent of the latter, he guessed right away that the latter had
found his tracks and had started to follow them.  Lightfoot stood
still and listened with all his might for some little sound to
tell him where the hunter was.  But there was no sound and after a
little Lightfoot began to move on.  He didn't dare remain still,
lest the hunter should creep up within shooting distance.  There
was only one direction in which it was safe for Lightfoot to
move, and that was the direction from which the Merry Little
Breezes were blowing. So long as they brought him none of the
dreaded man-smell, he knew that he was safe.  The hunter might be
behind him--probably he was--but ahead of him, so long as the
Merry Little Breezes were blowing in his face and brought no
man-smell, was safety.




CHAPTER IX: Lightfoot Becomes Uncertain


Lightfoot the Deer traveled on through the Green Forest, straight
ahead in the direction from which the Merry Little Breezes were
blowing.  Every few steps he would raise his delicate nose and
test all the scents that the Merry Little Breezes were bringing.
So long as he kept the Merry Little Breezes blowing in his face,
he could be sure whether or not there was danger ahead of him.

Lightfoot uses his nose very much as you and I use our eyes.  It
tells him the things he wants to know.  He knew that Reddy Fox had
been along ahead of him, although he didn't get so much as a
glimpse of Reddy's red coat.  Once he caught just the faintest of
scents which caused him to stop abruptly and test the air more
carefully than ever.  It was the scent of Buster Bear.  But it
was so very faint that Lightfoot knew Buster was not near, so he
went ahead again, but even more carefully than before.  After a
little he couldn't smell Buster at all, so he knew then that
Buster had merely passed that way when he was going to some other
part of the Green Forest.

Lightfoot knew that he had nothing to fear in that direction so
long as the Merry Little Breezes brought him none of the dreaded
man-scent, and he knew that he could trust the Merry Little
Breezes to bring him that scent if there should be a man
anywhere in front of him.  You know the Merry Little Breezes are
Lightfoot's best friends.  But Lightfoot didn't want to keep
going in that direction all day.

It would take him far away from that part of the Green Forest
with which he was familiar and which he called home.  It might in
time take him out of the Green Forest and that wouldn't do at
all.  So after a while Lightfoot became uncertain.  He didn't know
just what to do.  You see, he couldn't tell whether or not that
hunter with the terrible gun was still following him.

Every once in a while he would stop in a thicket of young trees
or behind a tangle of fallen trees uprooted by the wind.  There
he would stand, facing the direction from which he had come, and
watch and listen for some sign that the hunter was still
following.  But after a few minutes of this he would grow uneasy
and then bound away in the direction from which the Merry Little
Breezes were blowing, so as to be sure of not running into danger.

"If only I could know if that hunter is still following, I would
know better what to do," thought Lightfoot.  "I've got to find out."




CHAPTER X: Lightfoot's Clever Trick


Lightfoot the Deer is smart.  Yes, Sir, Lightfoot the Deer is
smart.  He has to be, especially in the hunting season, to save
his life.  If he were not smart he would have been killed long
ago.  He never makes the foolish mistake of thinking that other
people are not smart.  He knew that the hunter who had started out
to follow him early that morning was not one to be easily
discouraged or to be fooled by simple tricks.  He had a very great
respect for the smartness of that hunter.  He knew that he
couldn't afford to be careless for one little minute.

The certainty of danger is sometimes easier to bear than the
uncertainty of not knowing whether or not there really is any
danger.  Lightfoot felt that if he could know just where the
hunter was, he himself would know better what to do.  The
hunter might have become discouraged and given up following him.
In that case he could rest and stop worrying.  It would be better
to know that he was being followed than not to know.  But how was
he to find out?  Lightfoot kept turning this over and over in his
mind as he traveled through the Green Forest.  Then an idea came
to him.

"I know what I'll do.  I know just what I'll do," said Lightfoot
to himself.  "I'll find out whether or not that hunter is still
following me and I'll get a little rest.  Goodness knows, I need
a rest."

Lightfoot bounded away swiftly and ran for some distance, then he
turned and quickly, but very, very quietly, returned in the
direction from which he had just come but a little to one side of
his old trail.  After a while he saw what he was looking for, a
pile of branches which woodchoppers had left when they had
trimmed the trees they had cut down.  This was near the top of a
little hill.  Lightfoot went up the hill and stopped behind the
pile of brush.  For a few moments he stood there perfectly still,
looking and listening.  Then, with a little sigh of relief, he lay
down, where, without being in any danger of being seen himself,
he could watch his old trail through the hollow at the bottom of
the hill.  If the hunter were still following him, he would pass
through that hollow in plain sight.

For a long tune Lightfoot rested comfortably behind the pile of
brush.  There was not a suspicious movement or a suspicious sound
to show that danger was abroad in the Green Forest.  He saw
Mr. and Mrs. Grouse fly down across the hollow and disappear
among the trees on the other side.  He saw Unc' Billy Possum
looking over a hollow tree and guessed that Unc' Billy was
getting ready to go into winter quarters.  He saw Jumper the Hare
squat down under a low-hanging branch of a hemlock-tree and
prepare to take a nap.  He heard Drummer the Woodpecker at work
drilling after worms in a tree not far away.  Little by little
Lightfoot grew easy in his mind.  It must be that that hunter had
become discouraged and was no longer following him.




CHAPTER XI: The Hunted Watches The Hunter


It was so quiet and peaceful and altogether lovely there in the
Green Forest, where Lightfoot the Deer lay resting behind a pile
of brush near the top of a little hill, that it didn't seem
possible such a thing as sudden death could be anywhere near.
It didn't seem possible that there could be any need for
watchfulness.  But Lightfoot long ago had learned that often
danger is nearest when it seems least to be expected.  So,
though he would have liked very much to have taken a nap,
Lightfoot was too wise to do anything so foolish.  He kept his
beautiful, great, soft eyes fixed in the direction from which
the hunter with the terrible gun would come if he were still
following that trail.  He kept his great ears gently moving to
catch every little sound.

Lightfoot had about decided that the hunter had given up hunting
for that day, but he didn't let this keep him from being any the
less watchful.  It was better to be overwatchful than the least
bit careless.  By and by, Lightfoot's keen ears caught the sound
of the snapping of a little stick in the distance.  It was so
faint a sound that you or I would have missed it altogether.
But Lightfoot heard it and instantly he was doubly alert,
watching in the direction from which that faint sound had come.
After what seemed a long, long time he saw something moving, and
a moment later a man came into view.  It was the hunter and across
one arm he carried the terrible gun.

Lightfoot knew now that this hunter had patience and perseverance
and had not yet given up hope of getting near enough to shoot
Lightfoot.  He moved forward slowly, setting each foot down with
the greatest care, so as not to snap a stick or rustle the
leaves.  He was watching sharply ahead, ready to shoot should he
catch a glimpse of Lightfoot within range.

Right along through the hollow at the foot of the little hill
below Lightfoot the hunter passed.  He was no longer studying the
ground for Lightfoot's tracks, because the ground was so hard and
dry down there that Lightfoot had left no tracks.  He was simply
hunting in the direction from which the Merry Little Breezes were
blowing because he knew that Lightfoot had gone in that direction,
and he also knew that if Lightfoot were still ahead of him,
his scent could not be carried to Lightfoot.  He was doing
what is called "hunting up-wind."

Lightfoot kept perfectly still and watched the hunter disappear
among the trees.  Then he silently got to his feet, shook himself
lightly, and noiselessly stole away over the hilltop towards
another part of the Green Forest.  He felt sure that that hunter
would not find him again that day.




CHAPTER XII: Lightfoot Visits Paddy The Beaver


Deep in the Green Forest is the pond where lives Paddy the
Beaver.  It is Paddy's own pond, for he made it himself.  He made
it by building a dam across the Laughing Brook.  When Lightfoot
bounded away through the Green Forest, after watching the hunter
pass through the hollow below him, he remembered Paddy's pond.
"That's where I'll go," thought Lightfoot.  "It is such a
lonesome part of the Green Forest that I do not believe that
hunter will come there.  I'll just run over and make Paddy a
friendly call."

