had escaped in disguise, after having been cut off from falling back
after the successful sortie, Dick Warrener hurried off to the house
where he heard that his friends were quartered.

It was outside the bounds of the old Residency, for the ground held
had, since the arrival of Havelock's force, been considerably extended,
and the ladies had had two rooms assigned to them in a large building.
Dick knocked at the door of the room, and the ayah opened it--looked at
him--gave a scream, and ran back into the room, leaving the door open.
Dick, seeing that it was a sitting-room, followed her in. Mrs.
Hargreaves, alarmed at the cry, had just risen from her chair, and
Nelly and Edith ran in from the inner room as Dick entered. A general
cry of astonishment broke from them.

"Dick Warrener!" Mrs. Hargreaves exclaimed. "Is it possible? My clear
boy, thank God I see you again. And your brother?"

"He escaped too," Dick said.

Mrs. Hargreaves took him in her arms and kissed him as a dear relative
would have done; for during the month they had been together the boys
had become very dear to her, from their unvarying readiness to aid all
who required it, from their self-devotion and their bravery. Nor were
the girls less pleased, and they warmly embraced the young sailor, whom
they had come to look upon as if he had been a member of the family,
and whom they had wept as dead.

For a time all were too much moved to speak more than a few disjointed
words, for the sad changes which had occurred since they had last met
were present in all their thoughts. Nelly, the youngest, was the first
to recover, and wiping away her tears, she said, half-laughing,
half-crying:

"I hate you, Dick, frightening us into believing that you were killed,
when you were alive and well all the time. But I never quite believed
it after all. I said all along that you couldn't have been killed;
didn't I, mamma? and that monkeys always got out of scrapes somehow."

Mrs. Hargreaves smiled.

"I don't think you put it in that way exactly, Nelly; but I will grant
that between your fits of crying you used to assert over and over again
that you did not believe that they were killed. And now, my dear boy,
tell us how this seeming miracle has come about."

Then they sat down quietly, and Dick told the whole story; and Mrs.
Hargreaves warmly congratulated him on the manner in which they had
escaped, and upon the presence of mind they had shown. Then she in turn
told him what they had gone through and suffered. Edith burst into
tears, and left the room, and her mother presently went after her.

"Well, Nelly, I have seen a lot since I saw you, have I not?"

"Yes, you are a dear, brave boy, Dick," the girl said.

"Even though I am a monkey, eh?" Dick answered. "And did you really cry
when you thought I was dead?"

"Yes," the girl said demurely; "I always cry when I lose my pets. There
was the dearest puppy I ever had--"

Dick laughed quietly. "Who is the monkey now?" he asked.

"I am," she said frankly; "but you know I can't help teasing you, Dick."

"Don't balk yourself, Nelly, I like it. I should like to be teased by
you all my life," he said in lower tones.

The girl flushed up rosy red. "If you could always remain as you are
now," she said after a little pause, "just an impudent midshipman, I
should not mind it. Do you know, Dick, they give terriers gin to
prevent their growing; don't you think you might stop yourself? It is
quite sad," she went on pathetically, "to think that you may grow up
into a great lumbering man."

"I am quite in earnest, Nelly," Dick said, looking preternaturally
stern.

"Yes," Nelly said, "I have always understood midshipmen were quite in
earnest when they talked nonsense."

"I am quite in earnest," Dick said solemnly and fixedly again.

"No, really, Dick, we are too old for that game," Nelly said, with a
great affectation of gravity. "I think we could enjoy hide-and-seek
together, or even blindman's buff; but you know children never play at
being little lovers after they are quite small. I remember a dear
little boy, he used to wear pinafores----"

Here Mrs. Hargreaves again entered the room, and Dick, jumping up
suddenly, said that it was quite time for him to be off. "I shall only
just have time to be back by the time I promised."

"Good-by, Dick. I hope to see you again tomorrow."

Edith came in, and there was a hearty shake of the hand all round,
except that Dick only touched the tips of Nelly's fingers, in a manner
which he imagined betokened a dignified resentment, although as he
looked up and saw the girl's eyes dancing with amusement, he could
scarcely flatter himself that it had produced any very serious effect.
Dick returned in an indignant mood to the naval brigade, which was
quartered in the Shah Nujeeff's mosque and gardens.

"You are out of sorts to-night, Dick," one of his brother midshipmen
said, as they leaned together upon the parapet of the mosque, looking
down on the city; "is anything the matter?"

"Were you ever in love, Harry?"

"Lots of times," Harry said confidently.

"And could you always persuade them that you were in earnest?" Dick
asked.

Harry meditated. "Well, I am not quite sure about that, Dick; but then,
you see, I was never quite sure myself that I was in earnest, and
that's rather a drawback, you know."

"But what would you do, Harry, supposing you were really quite in
earnest, and she laughed in your face and told you you were a boy?"
Dick asked.

"I expect," the midshipman said, laughing, "I should kiss her straight
off, and say that as I was a boy she couldn't object."

"Oh, nonsense," Dick said testily; "I want advice, and you talk bosh!"

The midshipman winked confidentially at the moon, there being no one
else to wink at, and then said gravely:

"I think, Dick, the right thing to do would be to put your right hand
on your heart, and hold your left hand up, with the forefinger pointing
to the ceiling, and to say, 'Madam, I leave you now. When years have
rolled over our heads I will return, and prove to you at once my
affection and my constancy.'"

Dick's eyes opened to their widest, and it was not until his friend
went off in a shout of laughter that he was certain that he was being
chaffed; then, with an exclamation of "Confound you, Harry!" he made a
rush at his comrade, who dodged his attack, and darted off, closely
pursued by Dick. And as they dashed round the cupola and down the
stairs their light-hearted laughter--for Dick soon joined in the laugh
against himself--rose on the evening air; and the tars, smoking their
pipes round the bivouac fires below, smiled as the sound came faintly
down to them, and remarked, "Them there midshipmites are larking, just
as if they were up in the maintop."




CHAPTER XXI.

A SAD PARTING.


Sir Colin Campbell had considered it possible that the enemy would,
upon finding that the Residency was relieved, and the prey, of whose
destruction they had felt so sure, slipped from between their fingers,
leave the city and take to the open, in which case he would, after
restoring order, have left a strong body of troops in the city, and
have set off in pursuit of the rebels.

It soon became apparent, however, that the enemy had no intention of
deserting their stronghold. Lucknow abounded with palaces and mosques,
each of which had been turned into a fortress, while every street was
barricaded, every wall loopholed. As from forty thousand to fifty
thousand men, including many thousands of drilled soldiers, stood ready
to defend the town, foot by foot, it was clear that the fighting force
at Sir Colin Campbell's command was utterly inadequate to attempt so
serious an operation as the reduction of the whole city. To leave a
portion of the force would only have submitted them to another siege,
with the necessity for another advance to their relief. The
commander-in-chief therefore determined to evacuate the Residency and
city altogether, to carry off the entire garrison, and to leave Lucknow
to itself until the reinforcements from England should arrive, and he
should be able to undertake the subjugation of the city with a force
adequate for the purpose.

His intention was kept a secret until the last moment, lest the news
might reach the enemy, who, from the batteries in their possession,
could have kept up a terrible fire upon the road along which the women
and children would have to pass, and who would have attacked with such
fury along the whole line to be traversed, that it would have been next
to impossible to draw off the troops.

In order to deceive the enemy, guns were placed in position to play
upon the town, and a heavy fire was opened against the Kaiserbagh, or
King's Palace, a fortress of great strength. In the meantime
preparations for retreat were quietly carried on. Bullock hackeries
were prepared for the carriage of the ladies and children; and on the
morning of the 23d of November the occupants of the Residency were
informed that they must prepare to leave that afternoon, and that no
luggage beyond a few personal necessaries could be carried.

The order awakened mingled emotions--there was gladness at the thought
of leaving a place where all had suffered so much, and round which so
many sad memories were centered; there was regret in surrendering to
the foe a post which had been so nobly defended for so many months.
Among many, too, there was some dismay at the thought of giving up all
their movable possessions to the enemy. One small trunk was all that
was allowed to each, and as each tried to put together the most
valuable of his or her belongings, the whole of the buildings occupied
were littered, from end to end, with handsome dresses, silver plate,
mirrors, clocks, furniture, and effects of all kinds. A short time
since every one would have gladly resigned all that they possessed for
life and liberty; but now that both were assured, it was felt to be
hard to give up everything.

Dick went in to Mrs. Hargreaves' to see if he could be of any service,
but there was comparatively little to do, for that lady had lost all
her portable property in the destruction of the bungalow on the estate
owned by her husband, and had come into Lucknow shortly before the
outbreak, when the cloud began to lower heavily, with but a small
amount of baggage. Dick had not been able to see them since his first
visit, being incessantly on duty.

"I was so sorry I could not come up before," he explained; "but each of
the officers has been up to have a look at the Residency; and as we may
be attacked at any moment, Captain Peel expects them all to be on the
spot with their men."

"Shall we get away without being fired at?" Nelly asked.

"I am afraid you will have to run the gantlet in one or two places,"
Dick said. "The enemy keep up an almost incessant fire; and although,
we must hope, they will not have an idea that any number of people are
passing along the road, and their fire will therefore be only a random
one, it may be a little unpleasant; but you are all accustomed to that
now. I must be off again, Mrs. Hargreaves; I really only came to
explain why I did not come yesterday, and only got leave for an hour,
so I have come at a trot all the way."

And so Dick made off again; and as he shook hands with them, he could
feel that Nelly had not yet forgiven the coldness of his last good-by.

Upon the previous day all the sick and wounded had been moved to the
Dil Koosha; that done, the very large amount of money, amounting to
nearly a quarter of a million, in the government treasury, was removed,
together with such stores as were required. Then the guns were silently
withdrawn from the batteries, and at half-past four in the afternoon
the emigration of the women and children commenced. All had to walk to
the Secunderbagh, along a road strewn with _debris_, and ankle deep in
sand, and in some places exposed to a heavy fire. At one of these
points a strong party of seamen were stationed, among whom Dick was on
duty. As each party of women arrived at the spot they were advised to
stoop low, and to run across at full speed, as the road being a little
sunk, they thus escaped observation by the enemy, whose battery was at
some little distance, but the grape whistled thickly overhead, and
several were wounded as they passed.

Dick had been on the lookout for the Hargreaves party, and came forward
and had a talk with them before they started across the open spot. He
had quite recovered from Nelly's attack upon his dignity as a man and a
naval officer, and the pair as usual had a wordy spar. Dick was,
however, rather serious at the prospect of the danger they were about
to run.

"Will you let me cross with you one at a time?" he asked.

"Certainly not, Dick," Mrs. Hargreaves said. "You could do us no good,
and would run a silly risk yourself. Now, girls, are you ready?"

"Stoop low, for heaven's sake!" Dick urged.

Mrs. Hargreaves started at a run, accompanied by Alice. Nelly was a
little behind. Dick took her hand and ran across, keeping between her
and the enemy.

"Down low!" he cried, as, when they were half across, a heavy gun
fired. As he spoke, he threw his arms round Nelly, and pulled her to
the ground. As he did so a storm of grape swept just above them,
striking the wall, and sending a shower of earth over them. Another
half-minute and they were across on the other side.

"Good-by," he said to them all; "you are over the worst now."

"Good-by, my dear boy. Mind how you cross again. God bless you." And
Mrs. Hargreaves and Alice shook his hand, and turned to go. Nelly held
hers out to him. He took it and clasped it warmly; he was loosening his
hold when the girl said: "You have saved my life, Dick."

"Oh, nonsense," he said.

"You did, sir, and--yes, I am coming, mamma"--in answer to a word from
her mother. "Oh, how stupid you are, Dick!" she cried, with a little
stamp of her foot; "don't you want to kiss me?"

"Of course I do," Dick said.

"Then why on earth don't you do it, sir?--There, that is enough. God
bless you, dear Dick;" and Nelly darted off to join her mother.

Then he returned to his post, and the ladies went on to the
Secunderbagh. Here a long halt was entailed, until all were gathered
there, in order that they might be escorted by a strong guard on to the
Dil Koosha. Then came an anxious journey--some in bullock-carts, some
in doolies, some on foot. The Hargreaves walked, for the anxiety was
less when moving on foot than if shut up in a conveyance. Several times
there were long halts in expectation of attack; and a report that a
great movement could be heard among the enemy at one time delayed them
until reinforcements could be sent for and arrived. But about midnight
all reached the Dil Koosha, where a number of tents had been erected,
and refreshments prepared for the many fugitives.

Later on the troops came tramping in, having gradually, and in regular
order, evacuated their posts, leaving their fires burning and moving in
absolute silence, so that it was not until next morning that the enemy
awoke to the knowledge that the Residency was deserted, and that their
expected prey had safely escaped them.

The next day was spent quietly, all enjoying intensely the open air,
the relief from the long pressure, and the good food, wine, and other
comforts now at their disposal. Dick brought Colonel Warrener to make
the acquaintance of his friends, and a pleasant afternoon was spent
together. On the 25th a heavy gloom fell upon all, for on that day the
gallant General Havelock, worn out by his labors and anxieties, was
seized with dysentery, and in a few hours breathed his last. He was a
good man as well as a gallant soldier, and his death just at the moment
when the safety of those for whom he had done so much was assured cast
a gloom not only over his comrades and those who had fought under him,
but on the whole British nation. All that day the great convoy had been
on the move between the Dil Koosha and the Alumbagh. Half the fighting
force served as an escort, the other half stood in battle order between
them and Lucknow, in case the enemy should come out to the attack. The
whole road between the two stations was throughout the day covered by a
continuous stream of bullock carts, palanquins, carts, camels,
elephants, guns, ammunition carts, and store wagons.

Mrs. Hargreaves and her daughters were on an elephant, with their ayah;
and as the Warreners had placed in the howdah a basket of refreshments,
the long weary march was borne, not only without inconvenience, but
with some pleasure at the novelty of the scene and the delight of air
and freedom.

Sir Colin Campbell had intended to allow a halt of seven days at the
Alumbagh, but on the 27th of May a continuous firing was heard in the
direction of Cawnpore. Fearful for the safety of that all-important
post, the commander determined to push forward his convoy at once. On
the morning of the 28th they started. Dick had come soon after daybreak
to the tents where the Hargreaves were, with many others, sleeping.

"There is bad news from Cawnpore," he said, "and you will have to push
on. I expect that it will be a terrible two days' march with all this
convoy. Pray take enough provisions with you for the two days in the
howdah, and some blankets and things to make a cover at night. I am
sure that the tents will not be got up, and the confusion at the
halting-place will be fearful; but if you have everything with you, you
will be able to manage."

It was well that they were so prepared, for the first march, owing to
the immense length of the convoy, lasted until long past dark; then
there was a halt for a few hours, and then a thirty miles' journey to
the bridge of boats on the Ganges.

The naval brigade accompanied the convoy, but Dick had seen nothing of
his friends. Colonel Warrener, however, who with his troop had moved
along the line at intervals, spoke to them, and was able at the
halting-place to assist them to make a temporary shelter, where they
snatched a few hours' sleep.

The news that had caused this movement was bad indeed. General Wyndham,
in command at Cawnpore, had been defeated by the Gwalior rebel
contingent, aided by the troops of Nana Sahib and those of Koer Sing, a
great Oude chief, and part of the town had been taken. Sir Colin
himself pushed forward at all speed with a small body of troops and
some heavy guns, so as to secure the safety of the bridge of boats; for
had this fallen into the hands of the enemy the situation of the great
convoy would have been bad indeed. However, the rebels had neglected to
take measures until it was too late, and the approaches to the bridge
on either side were guarded by our guns. The passage of the convoy then
began, and for thirty-nine hours a continuous stream passed across the
river.

The whole force which had accomplished the relief of Lucknow had not
returned, as it was considered necessary to keep some troops to command
the town, and prevent the great body of mutineers gathered there from
undertaking expeditions. The Alumbagh was accordingly held by the
Fifth, Seventy-eighth, Eighty-fourth, and Ninetieth Foot, the Madras
Fusiliers, the Ferozepore Sikhs, and a strong artillery force, the
whole under the command of Sir James Outram.

As the long day went on, and the thunder of the guns at Cawnpore grew
louder and louder, Sir Colin Campbell took the naval brigade and the
greater portion of the fighting troops, and pushed forward. The
