and Dame Margaret. The archers had not, like the men-at-arms, been drawn
from the Summerley estate, but the devotion of their leader to Guy, and
the tales he had told them of what had taken place in Paris rendered them
equally satisfied at his choice as their leader. As for the French men-at-arms, bred up in absolute obedience to the will of their lord, they
accepted his orders in this as they would have done on any other point.
Sir Eustace left Guy instructions that he might make any further addition
to the defences that he thought fit, pointing out to him several that he
had himself intended to carry out.

"I should have set about these at once," he had said, "but it is only now
that the vassals have completed the work of rebuilding their houses, and I
would not call upon them for any service until that was completed. I have
told them now that such works must be taken in hand, and that, as they saw
upon the occasion of the last siege, their safety depends upon the power
of the castle to defend itself, I shall expect their services to be
readily and loyally rendered, especially as they have been remitted for
over six months. It would be well also to employ the garrison on the
works--in the first place, because they have long been idle, and idleness
is bad for them; and in the second place because the vassals will all work
more readily seeing that the garrison are also employed. While so engaged
an extra measure of wine can be served to each man, and a small addition
of pay. Here are the plans that I have roughly prepared. Beyond the moat I
would erect at the centre of each of the three sides a strong work,
similar to that across the drawbridge, and the latter I would also have
strengthened.

"These works, you see, are open on the side of the moat, so that if
carried they would offer the assailants no shelter from arrows from the
walls, while being triangular in shape they would be flanked by our fire.
Each of these three forts should have a light drawbridge running across
the moat to the foot of the wall, thence a ladder should lead to an
entrance to be pierced through the wall, some fifteen feet above the level
of the moat; by this means the garrison could, if assailed by an
overwhelming force, withdraw into the castle. These outposts would render
it--so long as they were held--impossible for storming-parties to cross
the moat and place ladders, as they did on the last occasion. The first
task will, of course, be to quarry stones. As soon as sufficient are
prepared for one of these outworks you should proceed to erect it, as it
would render one side at least unassailable and diminish the circuit to be
defended. As soon as one is finished, with its drawbridge, ladder, and
entrance, proceed with the next. I would build the one at the rear first.
As you see from this plan, the two walls are to be twenty feet high and
each ten yards long, so that they could be defended by some twenty men.
After they are built I would further strengthen them by leading ditches
from the moat, six feet deep and ten feet wide, round them. The earth from
these ditches should be thrown inside the walls, so as to strengthen these
and form a platform for the defenders to stand on. If the earth is
insufficient for that purpose the moat can be widened somewhat."

"I will see that your wishes are carried out, Sir Eustace; assuredly these
little outworks will add greatly to the strength of the castle. Are the
bridges to be made to draw up?"

"No; that will hardly be necessary. Let them consist of two beams with
planks laid crosswise. They need not be more than four feet wide, and the
planks can therefore be easily pulled up as the garrison falls back. I
have told the tenants that during the winter, when there is but little for
their men to do, they can keep them employed on this work, and that I will
pay regular wages to them and for the carts used in bringing in the
stones."

Guy was very glad that there was something specific to be done that would
give him occupation and keep the men employed. Sir Eustace had informed
the garrison of the work that would be required of them, and of the ration
of wine and extra pay that would be given, and all were well satisfied
with the prospect. For the English especially, having no friends outside,
found the time hang very heavy on their hands, and their experience during
the last siege had taught them that the additional fortifications, of the
nature of which they were ignorant, however, would add to their safety.

As soon, therefore, as Sir Eustace had left, Guy commenced operations. A
few men only were kept on guard, and the rest went out daily to prepare
the stones under the direction of a master mason, who had been brought
from Arras by Sir Eustace. Some fifty of the tenants were also employed on
the work, and as the winter closed in this number was doubled.

The quarry lay at a distance of half a mile from the castle, and as fast
as the stones were squared and roughly dressed they were taken in carts to
the spot where they were to be used. Guy had the foundations for the walls
dug in the first place, to a depth below that of the bottom of the moats,
and filled up with cement and rubble. The trenches were then dug at a
distance of five feet from the foot of the walls. With so many hands the
work proceeded briskly, and before springtime the three works were all
completed, with their bridges and ladders, passages pierced through the
castle wall, and stone steps built inside by which those who passed
through could either descend into the court yard or mount to the
battlements. At the end of September fifteen archers and men-at-arms
arrived from England to take the place of those who had desired to return
home, and who on their coming marched away to Calais.

From time to time reports were received of the events happening in Paris.
Paris had been strongly occupied by the Orleanists, and a proclamation had
at once been issued in the name of the king condemning all that had been
done in the city, and denouncing by name all the ringleaders of the late
tumults, and such of these as were found in Paris were arrested. Another
proclamation was then issued enjoining all parties to keep the peace, to
refrain from gathering in armed bodies, and to abstain from the use of
expressions against each other that might lead to a breach of the peace.

On the 13th of November, the year being 1413, fresh and more stringent
orders were issued by the king against any assemblies of men-in-arms, and
at the end of this month the Duke of Burgundy sent to the king a letter of
complaint and accusation against his enemies. Those surrounding Charles
persuaded him to send no answer whatever to what they considered his
insolent letter. Some of the Burgundian knights had still remained in
Paris, and on the advice of the Dukes of Berri and Orleans and other
princes, the queen caused four knights of the suite of the Duke of
Aquitaine to be carried away from the Louvre. This so much enraged the
duke that he at first intended to sally out and call upon the populace of
Paris to aid him to rescue the prisoners. The princes of the blood,
however, restrained him from doing this; but although he pretended to be
appeased he sent secret letters to the Duke of Burgundy begging him to
come to his assistance.

This served as an excuse for Burgundy to gather all his adherents and to
march towards Paris, and as he collected the force he sent letters to all
the principal towns saying that at the invitation of his son-in-law, the
Duke of Aquitaine, and in consequence of the breach of the peace committed
by his enemies, he was forced to take up arms to rescue his beloved
daughter and the duke from the hands of those who constrained them. Upon
the other hand, letters were written in the king's name to the various
towns on the line by which Burgundy would advance from Artois, begging
them not to open their gates to him.

The Burgundian army advanced and occupied St. Denis, thence the duke sent
detachments to the various gates of Paris in hopes that the populace would
rise in his favour. However, the citizens remained quiet, and the duke,
being unprovided with the engines and machines necessary for a siege, fell
back again, placing strong garrisons in Compiegne and Soissons. Then the
Orleanists took the offensive, besieged and captured town after town, and
revenged the murder of their friends in Paris by wholesale massacres and
atrocities of the worst description. The Burgundians in vain attempted to
raise an army of sufficient strength to meet that of the king, who himself
accompanied the Orleanist forces in the field. The fact that he was
present with them had a powerful influence in preventing many lords who
would otherwise have done so from joining Burgundy, for although all knew
that the king was but a puppet who could be swayed by those who happened
to be round him, even the shadow of the royal authority had great weight,
and both parties carried on their operations in the king's name,
protesting that any decrees hostile to themselves were not the true
expression of his opinion, but the work of ambitious and traitorous
persons who surrounded him. After occupying Laon, Peronne, and other
places, the king's army entered Artois, captured Bapaume, and advanced
against Arras, where Sir John of Luxemburg, who commanded a Burgundian
garrison, prepared for the siege by sending away the greater part of the
women and children, and destroying all the buildings and suburbs outside
the walls.

As soon as it was evident that the Orleanist army was marching against
Artois, Guy despatched one of the English soldiers to Summerley to inform
his lord that if, as it seemed, the Orleanists intended to subdue all the
Burgundian towns and fortresses in the province, it was probable that
Villeroy would be besieged. The messenger returned with twenty more
archers, and brought a letter from Sir Eustace to Guy saying that Dame
Margaret had been ill ever since her return from France, and that she was
at present in so dangerous a state that he could not leave her.

"I trust," he said, "that as the negotiations for the marriage of the king
with the French princess are still going on, you will not be disturbed.
The main body of the French army will likely be engaged on more important
enterprises, and if you are attacked it will probably be only by strong
plundering detachments; these you need not fear. Should you be besieged
strongly, hold out as long as you can. I shall be sure to receive news of
it from Calais, and will go at once to the king and pray for his
protection, and beg him to write to the King of France declaring that, to
his knowledge, I have ever been as loyal a vassal of France as of England.
Should you find that the pressure upon you is too great, and that the
castle is like to be taken, I authorize you to make surrender on condition
that all within the castle are permitted to march away free and unmolested
whithersoever they will."




CHAPTER XVIII -- KATARINA


As soon as the king's army approached Arras, Guy repeated all the
precautions that had before been taken, but as this time there had been
long warning, these were carried out more effectually. A considerable
number of the cattle and sheep of the tenants were driven to Calais and
there sold, the rest, with the horses, were taken into the castle. The
crops were hastily got in, for it was near July, and these were thrashed
and the grain brought in, with the household furniture and all belongings.
A great store of arrows had been long before prepared, and Guy felt
confident that he could hold out for a long time. The women and children
took up their abode in the castle, and the former were all set to work to
make a great number of sacks. A hundred cart-loads of earth were brought
in, and this was stored in a corner of the court-yard. The earth was to be
employed in filling the sacks, which were to be lowered from the walls so
as to form a protection against heavy missiles, should an attempt be made
to effect a breach.

[Illustration: GUY WELCOMES THE COUNT OF MONTEPONE AND HIS DAUGHTER TO
VILLEROY.]

A few days after the king's army sat down before Arras, the look-out
informed Guy that a horseman, together with a lady and two attendants,
were riding towards the castle. Wondering who these visitors could be, Guy
crossed the drawbridge to the outwork, where a small party were now
stationed. As they rode up, he saw, to his surprise and pleasure, that
they were the Count of Montepone and his daughter. He ran out to meet
them.

"I am delighted to see you, Count, and you also Mistress Katarina. I
regret that Sir Eustace and Dame Margaret are not here to receive you
properly."

"We were aware that she was absent," the count said as he dismounted,
while Guy assisted Katarina from her saddle. "I received a letter three
months since; it came by way of Flanders from Sir Eustace, expressing his
thanks for what slight services I had rendered to his wife. He told me
that they had crossed over to England, and that you were his castellan
here. But I thought that ere this he might have returned."

"I heard from him but a few days ago," Guy said. "He is detained in
England by the illness of Dame Margaret, or he would have hastened hither
on hearing that the French army was moving north. I need scarcely ask how
you are, Mistress Katarina, for you have changed much, and if I may say it
without offence, for the better."

The girl flushed a little and laughed, and her father said: "It is nigh
three months since we left Paris; the country air has done her good. Since
we left she has till now been in disguise again, and has ridden as my
page, for I could not leave her behind, nor could I in an army, with so
many wild and reckless spirits, take her in the dress of a girl."

By this time they had crossed the drawbridge, the servants leading their
horses after them.

"My stay must be a short one," the count said as they entered the
banqueting-hall, and Guy gave orders for a repast to be served.

"I hoped that you were come to stay for a time, Count; I would do all in
my power to make your visit a pleasant one."

The Italian shook his head. "No, I must ride back tonight. I have come
here for a double purpose. In the first place I must send Katarina to
England; she is almost a woman now, and can no longer wander about with me
in times like these. In the second place, I have come to tell you that I
think you need have no fear of an attack upon the castle. That news you
gave me, which enabled me to save those three Orleanist nobles, has, added
to what I had before done in that way, helped me vastly. One of them is a
great favourite with Aquitaine, and the latter took me under his special
protection; and he and many other great lords, and I may tell you even the
queen herself, consult me frequently. Shortly after you left I moved to a
larger house, and as there was no longer any need for me to assume the
character of a vendor of medicines I abandoned that altogether, and took
handsome apartments, with my negro from the booth to open the door, and
two other lackeys.

"My knowledge of the stars has enabled me with some success to predict the
events that have taken place, and Aquitaine and the queen have both
implicit confidence in me and undertake nothing without my advice. The
Duke of Orleans, too, has frequently consulted me. I have used my
influence to protect this castle. I have told them that success will
attend all their efforts, which it was easy enough to foresee, as Burgundy
has no army in the field that can oppose them. But I said that I had
described a certain point of danger. It was some time before I revealed
what this was, and then said that it appeared to me that the evil in some
way started from the west of Arras. I would go no further than this for
many days, and then said that it arose from a castle held by one who was
not altogether French, and that were an attack made upon it evil would
arise. I saw that it would lead to a disturbance, I said, in the
negotiations for the marriage, and perhaps the arrival of an English army.
More than this I said the stars did not tell me.

"Aquitaine made inquiries and soon found that my description applied to
Villeroy, and he and the queen have issued strict orders that no
plundering party is to come in this direction, and that on no account is
the castle to be interfered with, and I shall take care that their
intentions in this matter are not changed. I had the royal orders to
accompany the army. This I should have done in any case, but of course I
professed a certain reluctance, by saying that I had many clients in
Paris. However, I received various rich presents, and was therefore
prevailed upon to travel with them."

"I thank you most heartily, Count, for, as you saw on crossing the court-yard, I have already called all the vassals in and made preparations to
stand a siege. As to your daughter, I will, if you wish it, appoint two of
the tenants' daughters as her attendants, and send an elderly woman as her
companion, with an escort under Robert Picard,--one of those who were with
me in Paris,--and four other men-at-arms to accompany her to Summerley and
hand her over to the charge of Dame Margaret, who will, I trust, be in
better health than when Sir Eustace wrote to me. It will be a great relief
to our lord and lady to know that their presence is not urgently required
here. The escort can start to-morrow at daybreak if you wish that they
should do so."

The count hesitated, and Guy went on: "I will appoint the woman and the
two maids at once. Mistress Katarina can occupy Dame Margaret's chamber,
and the woman and the maids can sleep in those adjoining it."

"That will do well," the count said cordially. "We have ridden twenty
miles already, and she could hardly go on to-day, while if she starts at
daybreak they may reach Calais to-morrow."

"I will give Picard a letter to the governor, asking him in my lord's name
to give honourable entertainment to the young lady, who is under Dame
Margaret's protection, and to forward her upon her journey to join them by
the first vessel sailing to Southampton, or if there be none sailing
thither, to send her at once by ship to Dover, whence they can travel by
land. One of the four men-at-arms shall be an Englishman, and he can act
as her spokesman by the way."

"That will do most excellently," the count said, "and I thank you
heartily. As soon as I have finished my meal I must ride for the camp
again. I started early this morning in order not to be observed; in the
first place because I did not wish my daughter to be seen in her female
dress, and in the second because I would not that any should notice my
coming in this direction, and indeed we rode for the first mile backwards
along the road to Bapaume, and I shall return by the same way."

"What will the end of these troubles be, Count?"

"As I read the stars there will be peace shortly, and indeed it is clear
to me that the Duke of Burgundy must by this time see that if the war goes
on he will lose all Artois and perhaps Flanders, and that therefore he
must make peace, and perhaps keep it until the royal army has marched away
and dispersed; after that we may be sure that the crafty duke will not
long remain quiet. I have a trusty emissary in Burgundy's household, and
as soon as the duke comes to the conclusion that he must beg for peace I
shall have intelligence of it, and shall give early news to the queen and
to Aquitaine, who would hail it with gladness; for, seeing that the
latter's wife is Burgundy's daughter, he does not wish to press him hard,
and would gladly see peace concluded."

An hour later the count rode off with his two followers, after taking an
affectionate leave of his daughter, and telling her that it would not be
long before he joined her--if only for a time--in England. Before he went
Guy had chosen the woman who, with her two daughters, was to accompany
Katarina, and had installed them in the private apartments.

"What shall we do with ourselves for the day?" he asked the girl, who was,
he saw, shy and ill at ease, now that her father had left. "If you are not
tired we might take a ride. We have some hawks here, and now that the
harvest has been gathered we shall doubtless find sport with the game-birds."

"I am not at all tired," she said eagerly, "and should like it much."

Calling upon Long Tom and another to accompany them, horses were brought
up, and they started and remained out until supper-time, bringing home
with them some seven or eight partridges that had been killed by the
hawks. Guy suggested that perhaps she would prefer to have the meal served
in her own apartments and to retire to bed early. She accepted the offer,
and at once went to her room, which she did not leave again that evening.
Guy, as he ate alone, wondered to himself at the change that some nine or
ten months had made in her.

"I suppose she feels strange and lonely," he said to himself. "She was
merry enough when we were out hawking; but directly we got back again she
seemed quite unlike herself. I suppose it is because I always used to
treat her as if she were a boy, and now that she has grown up into a woman
she wants to forget that time."

The town of Arras resisted sturdily. The garrison made frequent sorties,
took a good many prisoners, and inflicted heavy loss upon the besiegers
before these could gather in sufficient numbers to drive them in again,
and all assaults were repulsed with loss. The Castle of Belle Moote, near
Arras, also repulsed all the efforts of the king's army to take it.
Foraging parties of Orleanists committed terrible devastations in the
country round, but gained no advantage in their attacks on any fortified
place.

On the 29th of August the Duke of Brabant arrived with some deputies from
Flanders to negotiate a peace between Burgundy and the king. They were
well received, and an armistice was at once arranged. The French troops
were suffering severely from disease, and the failure of all their
attempts to capture Arras made them ready to agree willingly upon a peace.
This was accordingly concluded on the 4th of September, and the next day
the royal army marched away.

Three weeks after Katarina had gone to England, Sir Eustace himself, to
Guy's great joy, arrived at the castle, bringing with him his esquire and
eight men-at-arms, as well as the three serving-women and their escort. As
soon as his pennon was seen Guy leapt on a horse that was standing saddled
in the court-yard, and rode to meet them. As he came up he checked his
horse in surprise, for his father was riding by the side of Sir Eustace.
Recovering himself, however, he doffed his cap to his lord.

"Welcome back, my lord!" he said. "I trust that our dear lady is better."

"Much better, Guy. You see I have brought your father over with me."

Guy bent low to his father.

"I am right glad to see you," the latter said, "and to hear such good
accounts of you. Dame Margaret and Mistress Agnes were never tired of
