quarrel. An English fencing master, armed with sword and buckler,
was in an open place in the city, challenging any one to encounter
him. Several Scots tried their fortune and were defeated, and then
seeing Wallace towering above the crowd he challenged him. Wallace
at once accepted, and after guarding himself for some time, with
a mighty sweep of his sword cleft through buckler, arm, headpiece,
and skull.  The English soldiers around at once attacked him; his
friends rallied round him, and after hard fighting they made their
way to the spot where they had left their horses and rode to Lag
Lane Wood.

When Earl Percy heard that Wallace had been the leader in this
fray, and found on inquiry that he had slain the sword player in
fair fight after having been challenged by him, he refused to regard
him as having broken the truce, for he said the soldiers had done
wrong in attacking him. Earl Percy was himself a most gallant
soldier, and the extraordinary personal prowess of Wallace excited
in him the warmest admiration, and he would fain, if it had been
possible, have attached him to the service of England.

As soon as the truce was over Wallace again attacked the English.
For a time he abode with the Earl of Lennox, who was one of the
few who had refused to take the oath of allegiance, and having
recruited his force, he stormed the stronghold called the Peel
of Gargunnock, near Stirling. Then he entered Perth, leaving his
followers in Methven Wood, and hearing that an English reinforcement
was upon the march, formed an ambush, fell upon them, and defeated
them; and pressing hotly upon them entered so close on their heels
into Kincleven Castle, that the garrison had no time to close the
gate, and the place was captured. Great stores and booty were found
here; these were carried to the woods, and the castle was burned
to the ground, as that of Gargunnock had been, as Wallace's force
was too small to enable him to hold these strongholds. Indignant
at this enterprise so close to their walls the English moved out
the whole garrison, 1000 strong, against Wallace, who had with him
but fifty men in all. After a desperate defence, in which Sir John
Butler and Sir William de Loraine, the two officers in command,
were killed by Wallace himself, the latter succeeded in drawing off
his men; 120 of the English were killed in the struggle, of whom
more than twenty are said to have fallen at the hands of Wallace
alone. Many other similar deeds did Wallace perform; his fame grew
more and more, as did the feeling among the Scotch peasantry that
in him they had found their champion and leader.

Archie eagerly drank in the tale of Wallace's exploits, and his soul
was fired by the desire to follow so valiant a leader. He was now
sixteen, his frame was set and vigorous, and exercise and constant
practice with arms had hardened his muscles. He became restless
with his life of inactivity; and his mother, seeing that her quiet
and secluded existence was no longer suitable for him, resolved
to send him to her sister's husband, Sir Robert Gordon, who dwelt
near Lanark.  Upon the night before he started she had a long talk
with him.

"I have long observed, my boy," she said, "the eagerness with
which you constantly practise at arms; and Sandy tells me that he
can no longer defend himself against you. Sandy, indeed is not a
young man, but he is still hale and stout, and has lost but little
of his strength. Therefore it seems that, though but a boy, you may
be considered to have a man's strength, for your father regarded
Sandy as one of the stoutest and most skilful of his men-at-arms.
I know what is in your thoughts; that you long to follow in
your father's footsteps, and to win back the possessions of which
you have been despoiled by the Kerrs. But beware, my boy; you are
yet but young; you have no friends or protectors, save Sir Robert
Gordon, who is a peaceable man, and goes with the times; while
the Kerrs are a powerful family, able to put a strong body in the
field, and having many powerful friends and connections throughout
the country. It is our obscurity which has so far saved you, for
Sir John Kerr would crush you without mercy did he dream that you
could ever become formidable; and he is surrounded by ruthless
retainers, who would at a word from him take your life; therefore
think not for years to come to match yourself against the Kerrs.
You must gain a name and a following and powerful friends before
you move a step in that direction; but I firmly believe that the
time will come when you will become lord of Glencairn and the hills
around it. Next, my boy, I see that your thoughts are ever running
upon the state of servitude to which Scotland is reduced, and have
marked how eagerly you listen to the deeds of that gallant young
champion, Sir William Wallace. When the time comes I would hold
you back from no enterprise in the cause of our country; but at
present this is hopeless.  Valiant as may be the deeds which Wallace
and his band perform, they are as vain as the strokes of reeds upon
armour against the power of England."

"But, mother, his following may swell to an army."

"Even so, Archie; but even as an army it would be but as chaff before
the wind against an English array.  What can a crowd of peasants,
however valiant, do against the trained and disciplined battle of
England.  You saw how at Dunbar the Earl of Surrey scattered them
like sheep, and then many of the Scotch nobles were present. So
far there is no sign of any of the Scottish nobles giving aid or
countenance to Wallace, and even should he gather an army, fear
for the loss of their estates, a jealousy of this young leader,
and the Norman blood in their veins, will bind them to England,
and the Scotch would have to face not only the army of the invader,
but the feudal forces of our own nobles. I say not that enterprises
like those of Wallace do not aid the cause, for they do so greatly
by exciting the spirit and enthusiasm of the people at large, as
they have done in your case. They show them that the English are
not invincible, and that even when in greatly superior numbers
they may be defeated by Scotchmen who love their country. They keep
alive the spirit of resistance and of hope, and prepare the time
when the country shall make a general effort. Until that time
comes, my son, resistance against the English power is vain. Even
were it not so, you are too young to take part in such strife, but
when you attain the age of manhood, if you should still wish to
join the bands of Wallace--that is, if he be still able to make
head against the English--I will not say nay.  Here, my son,
is your father's sword. Sandy picked it up as he lay slain on the
hearthstone, and hid it away; but now I can trust it with you. May
it be drawn some day in the cause of Scotland! And now, my boy,
the hour is late, and you had best to bed, for it were well that
you made an early start for Lanark."

The next morning Archie started soon after daybreak.  On his back
he carried a wallet, in which was a new suit of clothes suitable
for one of the rank of a gentleman, which his mother had with great
stint and difficulty procured for him.  He strode briskly along,
proud of the possession of a sword for the first time. It was in
itself a badge of manhood, for at that time all men went armed.

As he neared the gates of Lanark he saw a party issue out and ride
towards him, and recognized in their leader Sir John Kerr. Pulling
his cap down over his eyes, he strode forward, keeping by the side
of the road that the horsemen might pass freely, but paying no heed
to them otherwise.

"Hallo, sirrah!" Sir John exclaimed, reining in his horse, "who
are you who pass a knight and a gentleman on the highway without
vailing his bonnet in respect?"

"I am a gentleman and the son of a knight," Archie said, looking
fearlessly up into the face of his questioner. "I am Archie Forbes,
and I vail my bonnet to no man living save those whom I respect
and honour."

So saying, without another word he strode forward to the town. Sir
John looked darkly after him.

"Red Roy," he said sternly, turning to one who rode behind him,
"you have failed in your trust. I told you to watch the boy, and
from time to time you brought me news that he was growing up but
a village churl. He is no churl, and unless I mistake me, he will
some day be dangerous. Let me know when he next returns to the
village; we must then take speedy steps for preventing him from
becoming troublesome."




Chapter III

Sir William Wallace


Archie's coming had been expected by Sir Robert Gordon, and he was
warmly welcomed. He had once or twice a year paid short visits to
the house, but his mother could not bring herself to part with him
for more than a few days at a time; and so long as he needed only
such rudiments of learning as were deemed useful at the time, she
herself was fully able to teach them; but now that the time had come
when it was needful that he should be perfected in the exercises
of arms, she felt it necessary to relinquish him.

Sir Robert Gordon had no children of his own, and regarded his
nephew as his heir, and had readily undertaken to provide him with
the best instruction which could be obtained in Lanark. There was
resident in the town a man who had served for many years in the
army of the King of France, and had been master of arms in his
regiment. His skill with his sword was considered marvellous by
his countrymen at Lanark, for the scientific use of weapons was as
yet but little known in Scotland, and he had also in several trials
of skill easily worsted the best swordsmen in the English garrison.

Sir Robert Gordon at once engaged this man as instructor to Archie.
As his residence was three miles from the town, and the lad urged
that two or three hours a day of practice would by no means satisfy
him, a room was provided, and his instructor took up his abode in
the castle. Here, from early morning until night, Archie practised,
with only such intervals for rest as were demanded by his master
himself. The latter, pleased with so eager a pupil, astonished at
first at the skill and strength which he already possessed, and
seeing in him one who would do more than justice to all pains that
he could bestow upon him, grudged no labour in bringing him forward
and in teaching him all he knew.

"He is already an excellent swordsman," he said at the end of
the first week's work to Sir Robert Gordon; "he is well nigh as
strong as a man, with all the quickness and activity of a boy. In
straightforward fighting he needs but little teaching. Of the finer
strokes he as yet knows nothing; but such a pupil will learn as
much in a week as the ordinary slow blooded learner will acquire
in a year. In three months I warrant I will teach him all I know,
and will engage that he shall be a match for any Englishman north
of the Tweed, save in the matter of downright strength; that he will
get in time, for he promises to grow out into a tall and stalwart
man, and it will need a goodly champion to hold his own against
him when he comes to his full growth."

In the intervals of pike and sword play Sir Robert Gordon himself
instructed him in equitation; but the lad did not take to this so
kindly as he did to his other exercises, saying that he hoped he
should always have to fight on foot. Still, as his uncle pointed
out that assuredly this would not be the case, since in battle
knights and squires always fought on horseback, he strove hard to
acquire a firm and steady seat.  Of an evening Archie sat with his
uncle and aunt, the latter reading, the former relating stories of
Scotch history and of the goings and genealogies of great families.
Sometimes there were friends staying in the castle; for Sir Robert
Gordon, although by no means a wealthy knight, was greatly liked,
and, being of an hospitable nature, was glad to have guests in the
house.

Their nearest neighbour was Mistress Marion Bradfute of Lamington,
near Ellerslie. She was a young lady of great beauty. Her father had
been for some time dead, and she had but lately lost her mother,
who had been a great friend of Lady Gordon. With her lived as
companion and guardian an aunt, the sister of her mother.

Mistress Bradfute, besides her estate of Lamington, possessed
a house in Lanark; and she was frequently at Sir Robert's castle,
he having been named one of her guardians under her father's will.
Often in the evening the conversation turned upon the situation
of Scotland, the cruelty and oppression of the English, and the
chances of Scotland some day ridding herself of the domination.

Sir Robert ever spoke guardedly, for he was one who loved not strife,
and the enthusiasm of Archie caused him much anxiety; he often,
therefore, pointed out to him the madness of efforts of isolated
parties like those of Wallace, which, he maintained, advanced in
no way the freedom of the country, while they enraged the English
and caused them to redouble the harshness and oppression of their
rule.  Wallace's name was frequently mentioned, and Archie always
spoke with enthusiasm of his hero; and he could see that, although
Mistress Bradfute said but little, she fully shared his views. It
was but natural that Wallace's name should come so often forward,
for his deeds, his hairbreadth escapes, his marvellous personal
strength and courage, were the theme of talk in every Scotch home;
but at Lanark at present it was specially prominent, for with his
band he had taken up his abode in a wild and broken country known
as Cart Lane Craigs, and more than once he had entered Lanark and
had had frays with the English soldiers there.

It was near a year since the defeat of Dunbar; and although the
feats of Wallace in storming small fortalices and cutting off English
convoys had excited at once hope amongst the Scotch and anger in the
English, the hold of the latter on the conquered country appeared
more settled than ever.  Wallace's adherents had indeed gained in
strength; but they were still regarded as a mere band of outlaws
who might be troublesome, but were in no degree formidable.

Every great town and hold throughout Scotland was garrisoned by
English in force deemed amply sufficient to repress any trouble
which might arise, while behind them was the whole power of England
ready to march north in case it should be needed. It seemed, indeed,
that Scotland was completely and for ever subjugated.

One afternoon, when Archie had escorted Mistress Bradfute to
Lamington, she said to him as he bade her farewell:

"I think you can keep a secret, Master Forbes."

"I trust so," Archie replied.

"I know how much you admire and reverence Sir William Wallace. If
you will come hither this evening, at eight o'clock, you shall see
him."

Archie uttered an exclamation of delight and surprise.

"Mind, Archie, I am telling you a secret which is known only to
Sir William himself and a few of his chosen followers; but I have
obtained his permission to divulge it to you, assuring him that
you can be fully trusted."

"I would lay down my life for him," the lad said.

"I think you would, Archie; and so would I, for Sir William Wallace
is my husband!"

Archie gave a gasp of astonishment and surprise.

"Yes," she repeated, "he is my husband. And now ride back to your
uncle's. I left the piece of embroidery upon which I was working on
your aunt's table. It will be a good excuse for you to ride over
with it this evening." So saying, she sprang lightly from the
pillion on which she had been riding behind Archie. The lad rode
back in wild excitement at the thought that before night he was
to see his hero whose deeds had, for the last three years, excited
his admiration and wonder.

At eight o'clock exactly he drew rein again at Lamington.  He was
at once admitted, and was conducted to a room where the mistress
of the house was sitting, and where beside her stood a very tall
and powerfully built young man, with a singularly handsome face
and a courteous and gentle manner which seemed altogether out of
character with the desperate adventures in which he was constantly
engaged.

In Scotland the laws of chivalry, as they were strictly observed
in the courts of England and France, did not prevail. Sir William
Wallace had not received the order of knighthood; but in Scotch
families the prefix of Sir descended from father to eldest son, as
it does in the present day with the title of Baronet. Thus William
Wallace, when his father and elder brother were killed, succeeded
to the title.  Knighthoods, or, as we should call them, baronetcies,
were bestowed in Scotland, as in England, for bravery in the field
and distinguished services. The English, with their stricter laws
of chivalry, did not recognize these hereditary titles; and Sir
William Wallace and many of his adherents who bear the prefix of
Sir in all Scotch histories, are spoken of without that title in
contemporary English documents. Archie himself had inherited the
title from his father; and the prefix was, indeed, applied to the
heads of almost all families of gentle blood in Scotland.

"This, Sir William," Marion said, "is Sir Archibald Forbes, of whom
I have often spoken to you as one of your most fervent admirers.
He is a true Scotsman, and he yearns for the time when he may draw
his sword in the cause of his country."

"He is over young yet," Sir William said smiling; "but time will
cure that defect. It is upon the young blood of Scotland that our
hopes rest. The elders are for the most part but half Scotchmen, and
do not feel shame for their country lying at the feet of England;
but from their sons I hope for better things. The example of my
dear friend, Sir John Grahame, is being followed; and I trust that
many young men of good family will soon join them."

"I would that the time had come when I too could do so, sir," Archie
said warmly. "I hope that it will not be long before you may think
me capable of being admitted to the honour of fighting beside you.
Do you not remember that you yourself were but eighteen when you
slew young Selbye?"

"I am a bad example to be followed," Sir William replied with a
smile; "besides, nature made an exception in my case and brought
me to my full strength and stature full four years before the time.
Mistress Marion tells me, however, that you too are strong beyond
your years."

"I have practised unceasingly, sir, with my weapons for the last
two years; and deem me not boastful when I say that my instructor,
Duncan Macleod of Lanark, who is a famous swordsman, says that
I could hold my own and more against any English soldier in the
garrison."

"I know Duncan by report," Sir William replied, "and that he is a
famous swordsman, having learned the art in France, where they are
more skilled by far than we are in Scotland. As for myself, I must
own that it is my strength rather than my skill which gives me an
advantage in a conflict; for I put my trust in a downright blow,
and find that the skill of an antagonist matters but little, seeing
that my blow will always cleave through sword as well as helm.
Nevertheless I do not decry skill, seeing that between two who
are in any ways equally matched in strength and courage the most
skilful swordsman must assuredly conquer.  Well, since that be the
report of you by Master Duncan, I should think you might even take
to arms at the age that I did myself and when that time comes,
should your intentions hold the same, and the English not have made
an end of me, I shall be right glad to have you by my side. Should
you, in any of your visits to Lanark--whither, Marion tells me, you
ride frequently with Sir Robert Gordon--hear ought of intended
movements of English troops, or gather any news which it may concern
me to know, I pray you to ride hither at once. Marion has always
messengers whom she may despatch to me, seeing that I need great
care in visiting her here, lest I might be surprised by the English,
who are ever upon the lookout for me. And now farewell! Remember
that you have always a friend in William Wallace."

Winter was now at hand, and a week or two later Mistress Marion
moved into her house in Lanark, where Archie, when he rode in,
often visited her. In one of her conversations she told him that
she had been married to Sir William nigh upon two years, and that
a daughter had been born to her who was at present kept by an old
nurse of her own in a cottage hard by Lamington. "I tell you this,
Archie," she said, "for there is no saying at what time calamity
may fall upon us. Sir William is so daring and careless that I
live in constant dread of his death or capture; and did it become
known that I am his wife, doubtless my estate would be forfeited
and myself taken prisoner; and in that case it were well that my
little daughter should find friends."

"I wonder that you do not stay at Lamington," Archie said; "for
Sir William's visits to you here may well be discovered, and both
he and you be put in peril."

"I would gladly do so," she said; "but as you may have heard, Young
Hazelrig, the governor's son, persecutes me with his attentions;
he is moved thereto methinks rather by a desire for my possessions
than any love for myself.  He frequently rode over to Lamington
to see me, and as there are necessarily many there who suspect, if
they do not know, my secret, my husband would be more likely to be
surprised in a lonely house there, than he would be in the city,
where he can always leave or enter our abode by the passage into
a back street unseen by any."

A few days later Archie had ridden into Lanark bearing a message
from his uncle; he had put up his horse, and was walking along the
principal street when he heard a tumult and the clashing of swords;
he naturally hurried up to see what was the cause of the fray, and
he saw Sir William Wallace and a young companion defending themselves
with difficulty against a number of English soldiers led by young
Hazelrig, the son of the governor, and Sir Robert Thorne, one of
his officers. Archie stood for a few moments irresolute; but as
the number of the assailants increased, as fresh soldiers hearing
the sound of the fray came running down the street, and Sir William
and his friend, although they had slain several, were greatly
overmatched, he hesitated no longer, but, drawing his sword, rushed
through the soldiers, and placing himself by the side of Wallace,
joined in the fray. Wallace recognized him with a nod.

"It is sooner than I bargained for, Sir Archie; but you are very
welcome. Ah! that was well smitten, and Duncan did not overpraise
