them the chance."

But Ned could not, and did not, but went on his way as before, living as
if Marsden had no existence for him, intent upon his work at the mill,
and unbending only when at home with his brother and sister.

His new friend, Cartwright, was, of course, one of the first to
congratulate him on the escape the mill had had of destruction.

"I was wondering what you would do if they came," he said, "and was
inclined to think you were a fool for not following my example and
having some of your hands to sleep at the mill. Your plan was best, I am
ready to allow; that is to say, it was best for any one who was ready to
carry out his threat if driven to it. I shouldn't be, I tell you fairly.
If the mill is attacked I shall fight and shall take my chance of being
shot, but I could not blow myself up in cold blood."

"I don't suppose I could have done so either in the old times," Ned said
with a faint smile. "My blood used to be hot enough, a good deal too
hot, but I don't think anything could get it up to boiling point now,
so you see if this thing had to be done at all it must have been in cold
blood."

"By the way, Sankey, I wish you would come over one day next week and
dine with me; there will be no one else there except my daughter."

Ned hastily muttered an excuse.

"Oh, that is all nonsense," Mr. Cartwright said good humoredly; "you are
not afraid of me, and you needn't be afraid of my daughter. She is
only a child of fifteen, and of course takes you at my estimate, and
is disposed to regard you as a remarkable mixture of the martyr and
the hero, and to admire you accordingly. Pooh, pooh, lad! you can't be
living like a hermit all your life; and at any rate if you make up
your mind to have but a few friends you must be all the closer and more
intimate with them. I know you dine with Porson and Green, and I am not
going to let you keep me at arm's length; you must come, or else I shall
be seriously offended."

So Ned had no resource left him, and had to consent to dine at
Liversedge. Once there he often repeated the visit. With the kind and
hearty manufacturer he was perfectly at home, and although at first he
was uncomfortable with his daughter he gradually became at his ease
with her, especially after she had driven over with her father to make
friends with Lucy, and, again, a short time afterward, to carry her
away for a week's visit at Liversedge. For this Ned was really grateful.
Lucy's life had been a very dull one. She had no friends of her own
age in Marsden, for naturally at the time of Mr. Mulready's death all
intimacy with the few acquaintances they had in the place had been
broken off, for few cared that their children should associate with a
family among whom such a terrible tragedy had taken place.

Charlie was better off, for he had his friends at school, and the boys
at Porson's believed in Ned's innocence as a point of honor. In the
first place, it would have been something like a reflection upon the
whole school to admit the possibility of its first boy being a murderer;
in the second, Ned had been generally popular among them, he was their
best cricketer, the life and soul of all their games, never bullying
himself and putting down all bullying among others with a strong hand.
Their championship showed itself in the shape of friendship for Charlie;
and at the midsummer following Mr. Mulready's death he had received
invitations from many of them to stay with them during the holidays, and
had indeed spent that time on a series of short visits among them.

He himself would, had he had his choice, have remained at home with
Ned, for he knew how lonely his brother's life was, and that his only
pleasure consisted in the quiet evenings; but Ned would not hear of it.

"You must go, Charlie, both for your sake and my own. The change will
do you good; and if you were to stop at home and refuse to go out people
would say that you were ashamed to be seen, and that you were crushed
down with the weight of my guilt. You have got to keep up the honor of
the family now, Charlie; I have proved a failure."

It was September now, and six months had elapsed since the death of Mr.
Mulready. The getting in of the harvest had made no difference in the
price of food, the general distress was as great as ever, and the people
shook their heads and said that there would be bad doings when the
winter with its long nights was at hand.

The mill was flourishing under its new management. The goods turned out
by the new machinery were of excellent quality and finish, and Ned had
more orders on hand than he could execute. The profits were large, the
hands well paid and contented. Ned had begged Dr. Green and the other
trustees of his mother's property to allow him to devote a considerable
part of the profits to assist, during the hard time of winter, the
numerous hands in Varley and other villages round Marsden who were out
of employment; but the trustees said they were unable to permit this.
Mrs. Mulready absolutely refused to hear anything about the mill or
to discuss any questions connected with money, therefore they had no
resource but to allow the profits, after deducting all expenses of
living, to accumulate until, at any rate, Lucy, the youngest of the
children, came of age.

Ned, however, was not to be easily thwarted, and he quietly reverted to
the old method of giving out a large quantity of work to the men to be
performed by the hand looms in their own cottages, while still keeping
his new machinery fully employed. There was, indeed, a clear loss upon
every yard of cloth so made, as it had, of course, to be sold at the
lower prices which machinery had brought about; still the profits
from the mill itself were large enough to bear the drain, and means
of support would be given to a large number of families throughout the
winter. Ned told Dr. Green what he had done.

"You see, doctor," he said, "this is altogether beyond your province.
You and Mr. Lovejoy appointed me, as the senior representative of the
family, to manage the mill. Of course I can manage it in my own way, and
as long as the profits are sufficient to keep us in the position we have
hitherto occupied I don't see that you have any reason to grumble."

"You are as obstinate as a mule, Ned," the doctor said, smiling; "but I
am glad enough to let you have your way so long as it is not clearly
my duty to thwart you; and indeed I don't know how those poor people at
Varley and at some of the other villages would get through the winter
without some such help."

"I am very glad I hit upon the plan. I got Luke Marner to draw up a list
of all the men who had families depending upon them; but indeed I
find that I have been able to set pretty nearly all the looms in the
neighborhood at work, and of course that will give employment to the
spinners and croppers. I have made a close calculation, and find that
with the profit the mill is making I shall just be able to clear our
household expenses this winter, after selling at a loss all the cloth
that can be made in the looms round."

"At any rate, Ned," the doctor said, "your plan will be a relief to
me in one way. Hitherto I have never gone to bed at night without an
expectation of being awakened with the news that you have been shot on
your way out to the mill at night. The fellows you frightened away last
month must have a strong grudge against you in addition to their enmity
against you as an employer. You will be safe enough in future, and can
leave the mill to take care of itself at night if you like. You will
have the blessings of all the poor fellows in the neighborhood, and may
henceforth go where you will by night or day without the slightest risk
of danger."

"You are right, no doubt," Ned said, "though that did not enter my mind.
When I took the step my only fear was that by helping them for a time
I might be injuring them in the future. Hand weaving, spinning, and
cropping are doomed. Nothing can save them, and the sooner the men learn
this and take to other means of gaining a livelihood the better. Still
the prices that I can give are of course very low, just enough to keep
them from starvation, and we must hope that ere long new mills will
be erected in which the present hand workers will gradually find
employment."

Hardly less warm than the satisfaction that the announcement that Sankey
was about to give out work to all the hand looms excited in the villages
round Marsden, was that which Abijah felt at the news.

Hitherto she had kept to herself the disapprobation which she felt
at Ned's using the new machinery. She had seen in her own village the
sufferings that had been caused by the change, and her sympathies were
wholly with the Luddites, except of course when they attempted anything
against the life and property of her boy. Strong in the prejudices of
the class among whom she had been born and reared, she looked upon
the new machinery as an invention of the evil one to ruin the working
classes, and had been deeply grieved at Ned's adoption of its use.
Nothing but the trouble in which he was could have compelled her to keep
her opinion on the subject to herself.

"I am main glad, Maister Ned. I b'lieve now as we may find out about
that other affair. I never had no hope before, it warn't likely as
things would come about as you wanted, when you was a-flying in the
face of providence by driving poor folks to starvation with them noisy
engines of yours; it warn't likely, and I felt as it was wrong to hope
for it. I said my prayers every night, but it wasn't reasonable to
expect a answer as long as that mill was a-grinding men to powder."

"I don't think it was as bad as all that, Abijah. In another ten years
there will be twice as many hands employed as ever there were, and there
is no saying how large the trade may not grow."

Abijah shook her head as if to imply her belief that an enlargement of
trade by means of these new machines would be clearly flying in the face
of providence, however, she was too pleased at the news that hand work
was to be resumed in the district to care about arguing the question.
Even the invalid upstairs took a feeble interest in the matter when
Abijah told her that Master Ned had arranged to give work to scores of
starving people through the winter.

As a rule Abijah never mentioned his name to her mistress, for it was
always the signal for a flood of tears, and caused an excitement and
agitation which did not calm down for hours; but lately she had noticed
that her mistress began to take a greater interest in the details she
gave her of what was passing outside. She spoke more cheerfully when
Lucy brought in her work and sat by her bedside, and she had even
exerted herself sufficiently to get up two or three times and lie upon
the sofa in her room. It was Charlie who, full of the news, had rushed
in to tell her about Ned's defense at the mill. She had made no comment
whatever, but her face had flushed and her lips trembled, and she had
been very silent and quiet all that day. Altogether Abijah thought that
she was mending, and Dr. Green was of the same opinion.

Although the setting to work of the hand looms and spindles relieved the
dire pressure of want immediately about Marsden, in other parts things
were worse than ever that winter, and the military were kept busy by
the many threatening letters which were received by the mill owners from
King Lud.

One day Mr. Cartwright entered Ned's office at the mill.

"Have you heard the news, Sankey?"

"No, I have heard no news in particular."

"Horsfall has been shot."

"You don't say so!" Ned exclaimed.

"Yes, he has been threatened again and again. He was over at
Huddersfield yesterday afternoon; he started from the 'George' on
his way back at half past five. It seems that his friend Eastwood, of
Slaithwaite, knowing how often his life had been threatened, offered to
ride back with him, and though Horsfall laughed at the offer and rode
off alone, Eastwood had his horse saddled and rode after him, but
unfortunately did not overtake him.

"About six o'clock Horsfall pulled up his horse at the Warren House Inn
at Crossland Moor. There he gave a glass of liquor to two of his old
work people who happened to be outside, drank a glass of rum and water
as he sat in the saddle, and then rode off. A farmer named Parr was
riding about a hundred and fifty yards behind him. As Horsfall came
abreast of a plantation Parr noticed four men stooping behind a wall,
and then saw two puffs of smoke shoot out. Horsfall's horse started
round at the flash, and he fell forward on his saddle.

"Parr galloped up, and jumping off caught him as he was falling.
Horsfall could just say who he was and ask to be taken to his brother's
house, which was near at hand. There were lots of people in the road,
for it was market day in Huddersfield, you know, and the folks were
on their way home, so he was soon put in a cart and taken back to the
Warren House. It was found that both balls had struck him, one in the
right side and one in the left thigh. I hear he is still alive this
morning, but cannot live out the day."

"That is a bad business, indeed," Ned said.

"It is, indeed. Horsfall was a fine, generous, high spirited fellow, but
he was specially obnoxious to the Luddites, whose doings he was always
denouncing in the most violent way. Whose turn will it be next, I
wonder? The success of this attempt is sure to encourage them, and we
may expect to hear of some more bad doings. Of course there will be a
reward offered for the apprehension of the murderers. A laborer saw them
as they were hurrying away from the plantation, and says he should know
them again if he saw them; but these fellows hang together so that I
doubt if we shall ever find them out."

After Mr. Cartwright had gone Ned told Luke what had happened.

"I hope, Luke, that none of the Varley people have had a hand in this
business?"

"Oi hoape not," Luke said slowly, "but ther bain't no saying; oi hears
little enough of what be going on. Oi was never much in the way of
hearing, but now as I am head of the room, and all the hands here are
known to be well contented, oi hears less nor ever. Still matters get
talked over at the 'Cow.' Oi hears it said as many of the lads in the
village has been wishing to leave King Lud since the work was put out,
but they have had messages as how any man turning traitor would be put
out of the way. It's been somewhat like that from the first, and more
nor half of them as has joined has done so because they was afeared to
stand out. They ain't tried to put the screw on us old hands, but most
of the young uns has been forced into joining.

"Bill has had a hard toime of it to stand out. He has partly managed
because of his saying as how he has been sich good friends with you that
he could not join to take part against the maisters; part, as oi hears,
because his two brothers, who been in the thick of it from the first,
has stuck up agin Bill being forced into it. Oi wish as we could get
that blacksmith out of t' village; he be at the bottom of it all, and
there's nowt would please me more than to hear as the constables had
laid their hands on him. Oi hear as how he is more violent than ever at
that meeting house. Of course he never mentions names or says anything
direct, but he holds forth agin traitors as falls away after putting
their hands to the plow, and as forsakes the cause of their starving
brethren because their own stomachs is full."

"I wish we could stop him," Ned said thoughtfully. "I might get a
constable sent up to be present at the meetings, but the constables here
are too well known, and if you were to get one from another place the
sight of a stranger there would be so unusual that it would put him on
his guard at once. Besides, as you say, it would be very difficult to
prove that his expressions applied to the Luddites, although every one
may understand what he means. One must have clear evidence in such a
case. However, I hope we shall catch him tripping one of these days.
These are the fellows who ought to be punished, not the poor ignorant
men who are led away by them."

The feeling of gratitude and respect with which Ned was regarded by
the workpeople of his district, owing to his action regarding the hand
frames, did something toward lightening the load caused by the suspicion
which still rested upon him. Although he still avoided all intercourse
with those of his own station, he no longer felt the pressure so
acutely. The hard, set expression of his face softened somewhat, and
though he was still strangely quiet and reserved in his manner toward
those with whom his business necessarily brought him in contact, he no
longer felt absolutely cut off from the rest of his kind.

Ned had continued his practice of occasionally walking up with Bill
Swinton to Varley on his way to the mill. There was now little fear of
an attempt upon his life by the hands in his neighborhood; but since the
failure on the mill he had incurred the special enmity of the men who
had come from a distance on that occasion, and he knew that any night he
might be waylaid and shot by them. It was therefore safer to go round
by Varley than by the direct road. One evening when he had been chatting
rather later than usual at Luke Marner's, Luke said:

"Oi think there's something i' t' wind. Oi heerd at t' Cow this evening
that there are some straangers i' the village. They're at t' Dog. Oi
thinks there's soom sort ov a council there. Oi heers as they be from
Huddersfield, which be the headquarters o' General Lud in this part.
However, maister, oi doan't think as there's any fear of another attack
on thy mill; they war too badly scaared t'other noight vor to try that
again."

When Ned got up to go Bill Swinton as usual put on his cap to accompany
him, as he always walked across the moor with him until they came to the
path leading down to the back of the mill, this being the road taken by
the hands from Varley coming and going from work. When they had started
a minute or two George, who had been sitting by the fire listening to
the talk, got up and stretched himself preparatory to going to bed, and
said in his usual slow way:

"Oi wonders what they be a-doing tonoight. Twice while ye ha' been
a-talking oi ha' seen a chap a-looking in at t' window."

"Thou hast!" Luke exclaimed, starting up. "Dang thee, thou young fool!
Why didn't say so afore? Oi will hoide thee when oi comes back rarely!
Polly, do thou run into Gardiner's, and Hoskings', and Burt's; tell 'em
to cotch up a stick and to roon for their loives across t' moor toward
t' mill. And do thou, Jarge, roon into Sykes' and Wilmot's and tell 'em
the same; and be quick if thou would save thy skin. Tell 'em t' maister
be loike to be attacked."

Catching up a heavy stick Luke hurried off, running into two cottages
near and bringing on two more of the mill hands with him. He was nearly
across the moor when they heard the sound of a shot. Luke, who was
running at the top of his speed, gave a hoarse cry as of one who had
received a mortal wound. Two shots followed in quick succession. A
minute later Luke was dashing down the hollow through which the path ran
down from the moor. Now he made out a group of moving figures and heard
the sounds of conflict. His breath was coming in short gasps, his teeth
were set; fast as he was running, he groaned that his limbs would carry
him no faster. It was scarce two minutes from the time when the first
shot was fired, but it seemed ages to him before he dashed into the
group of men, knocking down two by the impetus of his rush. He was but
just in time. A figure lay prostrate on the turf; another standing over
him had just been beaten to his knee. But he sprang up again at Luke's
onward rush. His assailants for a moment drew back.

"Thou'rt joist in toime, Luke," Bill panted out. "Oi war well nigh
done."

"Be t' maister shot?"

"No, nowt but a clip wi' a stick."

As the words passed between them the assailants again rushed forward
