   WR ATH' FUL, furious; raging.
   PAL' A CES, splendid mansions.
   SCORN' FUL, disdainful.
   DE CAY', ruin; destruction.
   BOOM' ING, roaring.
   FES' TAL, joyous; merry.
   RE CLAIM', claim again; recover.


THE TREASURES OF THE DEEP.

MRS. HERMANS.

1. What hid'st thou in thy treasure-caves and cells?
     Thou hollow-sounding and mysterious main!
   Pale, glistening pearls, and rainbow-colored shells,
     Bright things which gleam unrecked of, and in vain!
   Keep, keep thy riches, melancholy sea!
         We ask not such from thee.

2. Yet more, the depths have more! what wealth untold,
     Far down, and shining through their stillness lies!
   Thou hast the starry gems, the burning gold,
     Won from ten thousand royal argosies!
   Sweep o'er thy spoils, thou wild and wrathful main!
         Earth claims not _these_ again.

3. Yet more, the depths have more! thy waves have rolled
     Above the cities of a world gone by!
   Sand hath filled up the palaces of old,
     Sea-weed o'ergrown the halls of revelry.
   Dash o'er them, Ocean! in thy scornful play!
         Man yields them to decay.

4. Yet more, the billows and the depths have more!
     High hearts and brave are gathered to thy breast!
   They hear not now the booming waters roar;
     The battle-thunders will not break their rest.
   Keep thy red gold and gems, thou stormy grave!
       Give back the true and brave!

5. Give back the lost and lovely,--those for whom
     The place was kept at board and hearth so long,
   The prayer went up through midnight's breathless gloom,
     And the vain yearning woke 'midst festal song!
   Hold fast thy buried isles, thy towers o'erthrown;
         But all is not thine own.

6. To thee the love of woman hath gone down;
     Dark flow thy tides o'er manhood's noble head,
   O'er youth's bright locks, and beauty's flowery crown,
     Yet must thou hear a voice,--_Restore the dead!_
   Earth shall reclaim her precious things from thee!
         _Restore the dead, thou Sea!_

QUESTIONS.--1. What are some of the treasures of the deep? 2. What
treasures has the sea won from trading vessels? 3. Over what does the
sea roll? 4. What does the writer call on the sea to restore?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON XCVI.

   UN FOR' TU NATE, wretched person.
   CER E MENTS, grave-clothes.
   SCRU' TI NY, inquiry.
   MU' TI NY, resistance to rightful rule.
   WON' DER MENT, curiosity.
   PROV' I DENCE, care; protection.
   A MAZE' MENT, astonishment.
   DIS' SO LUTE, abandoned; licentious.
   SPUR' RED, pushed on; impelled.
   CON' TU ME LY, scorn; insult.
   IN HU MAN' I TY, cruel treatment.
   IN SAN' I TY, madness.


THE BRIDGE OF SIGHS.

THOMAS HOOD.

 1. One more Unfortunate,
      Weary of breath,
    Rashly importunate,
      Gone to her death!

 2. Take her up tenderly,
      Lift her with care,
    Fashioned so slenderly,
      Young, and so fair!

 3. Look at her garments
    Clinging like cerements;
    While the wave constantly
      Drips from her clothing;
    Take her up instantly,
      Loving, not loathing.

 4. Touch her not scornfully;
    Think of her mournfully,
      Gently and humanly;
    Not of the stains of her;
    All that remains of her
      Now, is pure womanly.

 5. Make no deep scrutiny
    Into her mutiny,
      Rash and undutiful;
    Past all dishonor,
    Death has left on her
      Only the beautiful.

 6. Loop up her tresses
      Escaped from the comb,--
    Her fair auburn tresses;
    While wonderment guesses
      Where was her home?

 7. Who was her father`?
      Who was her mother`?
    Had she a sister'?
      Had she a brother'?
    Or, was there a dearer one
    Still, and a nearer one
      Yet, than all other'?

 8. Alas! for the rarity
    Of Christian charity
      Under the sun!
    Oh! it was pitiful!
    Near a whole city full,
      Home she had none.

 9. Sisterly, brotherly,
    Fatherly, motherly,
      Feelings had changed:
    Love, by harsh evidence,
    Thrown from its eminence;
    Even God's providence
      Seeming estranged.

10. Where the lamps quiver
    So far in the river,
      With many a light
    From window and casement,
    From garret to basement,
    She stood with amazement,
      Houseless by night.

11. The bleak winds of March
      Made her tremble and shiver
    But not the dark arch,
      Or the black flowing river,
    Mad from life's history,
    Glad to death's mystery,
      Swift to be hurled--
    Anywhere, anywhere,
      Out of the world!

12. In she plunged boldly,
    No matter how coldly
      The rough river ran--
    Picture it--think of it,
      Dissolute Man!

13. Take her up tenderly,
      Lift her with care,
    Fashioned so slenderly,
      Young, and so fair!

14. Perishing gloomily,
    Spurred by contumely,
    Cold inhumanity,
    Burning insanity,
      Into her rest,
    Cross her hands humbly,
    As if praying dumbly,
      Over her breast!

15. Owning her weakness,
      Her evil behavior,
    And leaving, with meekness,
      Her sins to her Savior!

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON XCVII.

   RE' QUI EM, hymn in honor of the dead.
   WED, joined; united.
   HENCE' FORTH, hereafter.
   DROOP, languish; fail.
   AF FEC TION, love.
   DIM' MED, dull; obscured.


A REQUIEM.

1. Breathe low, thou gentle wind,
(pl)   Breathe soft and low;
   The beautiful lies dead!
   The joy of life is fled!
   And my lone heart is wed
       Henceforth to woe!

2. That thou should'st droop and die
       At early morn!
   While yet thy graceful dew
   A joyous fragrance drew
   From every flower that grew
       Life's path along!

3. The green earth mourns for thee,
       Thou dearest one;
   A plaintive tone is heard,
   And flower and leaflet stirred,
   And every fav'rite bird
       Sings sad and lone.

4. Pale is thy brow, and dimmed
       Thy sparkling eye!
   Affection's sweetest token
   Is lost fore'er and broken!
   The last kind word is spoken,--
       Why did'st thou die?

5. Breathe low, thou gentle wind,
       Breathe soft and low;
   The beautiful lies dead!
   The joy of life is fled!
   And my lone heart is wed
       Henceforth to woe!

QUESTIONS.--1. What rule for changing _y_ into _i_ in the word
_beautiful?_ See ANALYSIS, page 13, Rule XI. 2. Why are _r_ and _m_
doubled in the words _stirred, dimmed?_ See Rule IX. 3. What is the
meaning of the suffix _let_, in the word _leaflet?_ See page 240, Ex.
185.

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON XCVIII.

   LUX U' RI ANT, rich; plentiful.
   UN OS TEN TA' TIOUS, plain; not showy.
   RE VER EN' TIAL, deeply respectful.
   RE CEP' TA CLE, place of reception.
   SEM' I CIR CLE, half-circle.
   REC OG NI' TION, act of knowing.
   AG RI CUL' TUR AL, relating to farming.
   BEN E DIC' TION, blessing.
   DI' A RY, note-book; journal.
   SO JOURN' ED, resided for a while.
   AC CLA MA' TIONS, shouts.
   TRI UMPH' AL, relating to victory.
   GRAT U LA' TION, rejoicing.
   IN AUG U RA' TION, act of investing with office.
   EN FRAN' CHIS ED, freed; liberated.

[Headnote 1: SAR COPH' A GUS, (SARCO, _flesh_; and PHAGUS, _that which
eats or devours_,) is made up of two Greek words, signifying together
_flesh-eating_, and was applied by the ancients to a species of stone,
used for making coffins. Hence, sarcophagus came to signify a
_stone-coffin_. The form of the plural in Latin, is _sarcophagi_.]

[Headnote 2: BAS' TILE, (_bas' teel_,) an old state prison in Paris,
built in 1369, and destroyed by a mob in 1789.]


VISIT TO MOUNT VERNON.

A.C. RITCHIE.

1. At this moment, we drew near the rude wharf at Mount Vernon; the boat
stopped, and the crowd of passengers landed. By a narrow pathway we
ascended a majestic hill thickly draped with trees. The sun scarcely
found its way through the luxuriant foliage. We mounted slowly, but had
only spent a few minutes in ascending, when we came suddenly upon a
picturesque nook, where a cluster of unostentatious, white marble
shafts, shot from the greenly sodded earth, inclosed by iron railings.
Those unpretending monuments mark the localities where repose the mortal
remains of Washington's kindred.

2. Just beyond stands a square brick building. In the center you see an
iron gate. Here the crowd pauses in reverential silence. Men lift their
hats and women bow their heads. You behold within, two sarcophagi.
[Headnote 1] In those moldering tombs lie the ashes of the great
Washington and his wife. Not a word is uttered as the crowd stand
gazing on this lowly receptacle of the dust of America's mighty dead.

3. Are there any in that group who can say, "this was _our_ country's
father'?" If there be, can they stand pilgrims at that grave without
Washington's examples, his counsels, his words, heretofore, it may be,
half-forgotten, stealing back into their minds, until the sense of
reverence and gratitude is deepened almost to awe? Do they not feel that
Washington's spirit is abroad in the world, filling the souls of a
heaven-favored people with the love of freedom and of country, though
his ashes are gathered here'?

4. Some one moves to pass on; and, with that first step, the spell is
broken; others follow. Herman and Jessie linger last. After a period of
mute and moving reflection, they turn away and slowly approach the
mansion that, in simple, rural stateliness, stands upon a noble
promontory, belted with woods, and half-girdled by the sparkling waters
of the Potomac, which flow in a semicircle around a portion of the
mount.

5. The water and woodland view from the portico is highly imposing. But
it was not the mere recognition of the picturesque and beautiful in
nature, that moved Herman and Jessie. They would have felt that they
were on holy ground, had the landscape been devoid of natural charm.
Here the feet of the first of heroes had trod, and here, in boyhood, he
had sported with his beloved brother Lawrence.

6. In those forests, those deep-wooded glens, he had hunted, when a
stripling, by the side of old Lord Fairfax; here he took his first
lessons in the art of war; to this home he brought his bride; by this
old-fashioned, hospitable-looking fireside, he sat with that dear and
faithful wife; beneath yonder alley of lofty trees he has often wandered
by her side; here he indulged the agricultural tastes in which he
delighted; here resigned his Cincinnatus vocation, and bade adieu to his
cherished home at the summons of his country.

7. Here his wife received the letter which told her that he had been
appointed Commander-in-chief of the army; here, when the glorious
struggle closed at the trumpet notes of victory--when the British had
retired--when, with tears coursing down his benignant, manly
countenance, he had uttered a touching farewell--bestowed a paternal
benediction on the American army, and resigned all public service--
_here_ he returned, thinking to resume the rural pursuits that charmed
him, and to end his days in peace!

8. Here are the trees, the shrubbery he planted with his own hands, and
noted in his diary; here are the columns of the portico round which he
twined the coral honeysuckle; the ivy he transplanted still clings to
yonder garden wall; these vistas he opened through yon pine groves to
command far-off views! Here the valiant Lafayette sojourned with him;
there hangs the key of the Bastile [Headnote 2] which he presented.

9. Here flocked the illustrious men of all climes, and were received
with warm, unpretending, almost rustic hospitality. Here the French
Houdon modeled his statue, and the English Pine painted his portrait,
and caused that jocose remark, "I am so hackneyed to the touches of the
painters' pencil, that I am altogether at their beck, and sit like
'Patience on a monument!'"

10. Then came another summons from the land he had saved, and he was
chosen by unanimous voice its chief ruler. Thousands of men, women, and
children, sent up acclamations, and called down blessings on his head,
as he made his triumphal progress from Mount Vernon to New York, to take
the presidential oath. The roar of cannon rent the air. The streets
through which he passed, were illuminated and decked with flags and
wreaths. Bonfires blazed on the hills. From ships and boats floated
festive decorations. At Gray's Ferry, he passed under triumphal arches.

11. On the bridge across the Assumpink, at Trenton, (the very bridge
over which he had retreated in such blank despair, before the army of
Cornwallis, on the eve of the battle of Princeton,) thirteen pillars,
twined with laurel and evergreens, were reared by woman's hands. The
foremost of the arches those columns supported, bore the inscription,
_"The Defender of the Mothers will he the Protector of the Daughters."_
Mothers, with their white-robed daughters, were assembled beneath the
vernal arcade. Thirteen maidens scattered flowers beneath his feet, as
they sang an ode of gratulation. The people's hero ever after spoke of
this tribute, as the one that touched him most deeply.

13. When his first presidential term expired, and his heart yearned for
the peace of his domestic hearth, the entreaties of Jefferson, Randolph,
and Hamilton, forced him to forget that home for the one he held in the
hearts of patriots, and to allow his name to be used a second time. A
second time he was unanimously elected to preside over his country's
welfare. But, the period happily expired, he thankfully laid aside the
mantle of state, the scepter of power, and, five days after the
inauguration of Adams, returned here to his Mount Vernon home. And here
the good servant, whom his Lord, when He came, found watching and ready,
calmly yielded up his breath, exclaiming, "It is well!" and his spirit
was wafted to Heaven by the blessings of his enfranchised countrymen.

QUESTIONS.--1. Where is Mount Vernon? 2. What is said of Washington's
tomb? 3. Mention some of the things which he did here? 4. What
demonstrations were made by the people, as he went to New York to take
the oath of office? 5. Did he serve more than one term as President?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON XCIX.

   CHIV' AL ROUS, gallant; heroic.
   HAL' LOW, consecrate; keep sacred.
   MER' CE NA RY, mean; venal.
   AD VEN' TUR ER, fortune-seeker.
   VAN' QUISH ED, conquered.
   OUT' CAST, exile; castaway.
   TRAP' PINGS, ornaments; equipments.
   CRU SADE', battle zealously.
   CA REER' ED, moved rapidly.
   PHAL' ANX, compact body of men.
   TRANS PORT' ING, exulting.
   TRO PHIES, memorials of victory.
   PA' GEANT, pompous; showy.
   MIN' ION, favorite.


LA FAYETTE.

CHARLES SPRAGUE.

1. While we bring our offerings for the mighty of our _own_ land, shall
we not remember the chivalrous spirits of _other_ shores, who shared
with them the hour of weakness and woe'? Pile to the clouds the majestic
column of glory`; let the lips of those who can speak well, hallow each
spot where the bones of your bold repose`; but forget not those who,
with your bold, went out to battle.

2. Among those men of noble daring, there was _one_, a young and gallant
stranger, who left the blushing vine-hills of his delightful France. The
people whom he came to succor, were not _his_ people; he knew them only
in the melancholy story of their wrongs. He was no mercenary adventurer,
striving for the spoil of the vanquished; the palace acknowledged him
for its lord, and the valley yielded him its increase. He was no
nameless man, staking life for reputation; he ranked among nobles, and
looked unawed upon kings.

3. He was no friendless outcast, seeking for a grave to hide a broken
heart; he was girdled by the companions of his childhood; his kinsmen
were about him; his wife was before him. Yet from all these loved ones
he turned away. Like a lofty tree that shakes down its green glories, to
battle with the winter storm, he flung aside the trappings of place and
pride, to crusade for Freedom, in Freedom's holy land. He came`; but not
in the day of successful rebellion', not when the new-risen sun of
Independence had burst the cloud of time, and careered to its place in
the heavens'.

4. He came when darkness curtained the hills, and the tempest was abroad
in its anger`; when the plow stood still in the field of promise, and
briers cumbered the garden of beauty`; when fathers were dying, and
mothers were weeping over them`; when the wife was binding up the gashed
bosom of her husband, and the maiden was wiping the death-damp from the
brow of her lover`. He came when the brave began to fear the power of
man, and the pious to doubt the favor of God. It was _then_ that this
one joined the ranks of a revolted people.

5. Freedom's little phalanx bade him a grateful welcome. With them he
courted the battle's rage; with theirs, his arm was lifted; with theirs,
his blood was shed. Long and doubtful was the conflict. At length, kind
Heaven smiled on the good cause, and the beaten invaders fled. The
profane were driven from the temple of Liberty, and, at her pure shrine,
the pilgrim-warrior, with his adored commander, knelt and worshiped.
Leaving there his offering, the incense of an uncorrupted spirit, he at
length rose, and, crowned with benedictions, turned his happy feet
toward his long-deserted home.

6. After nearly fifty years, that _one_ has come again. Can mortal
tongue tell? can mortal heart feel, the sublimity of that coming?
Exulting millions rejoice in it; and their loud, long, transporting
shout, like the mingling of many winds, rolls on, undying, to Freedom's
farthest mountains. A congregated nation comes around him. Old men bless
him, and children reverence him. The lovely come out to look upon him;
the learned deck their halls to greet him; the rulers of the land rise
up to do him homage.

7. How his full heart labors! He views the rusting trophies of departed
days; he treads the high places where his brethren molder; he bends
before the tomb of his "father;" [Footnote: Washington] his words are
tears,--the speech of sad remembrance. But he looks round upon a
ransomed land and a joyous race; he beholds the blessings these trophies
secured, for which these brethren died, for which that "father" lived;
and again his words are tears,--the eloquence of gratitude and joy.

8. Spread forth creation like a map; bid earth's dead multitudes revive;
and of all the pageant splendors that ever glittered to the sun, when
looked his burning eye on a sight like this? Of all the myriads that
have come and gone, what cherished minion ever ruled an hour like this?
Many have struck the redeeming blow for their own freedom; but who, like
this man, has bared his bosom in the cause of strangers?

9. Others have lived in the love of their own people; but who, like this
man, has drank his sweetest cup of welcome with another? Matchless
chief! of glory's immortal tablets there is one for him, for _him_
alone! Oblivion shall never shroud its splendor; the everlasting flame
of Liberty shall guard it, that the generations of men may repeat the
name recorded there, the beloved name of LA FAYETTE.

QUESTIONS.--1. Of what country was La Fayette a native? 2. What was his
position at home? 3. In what condition was this country when he came to
join our army? 4. How many years after, before he revisited this
country? 5. What demonstrations were manifested by the people? 6. What
is said of his fame?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON C.

   PRO FU' SION, abundance; variety.
   CON FU' SION, intricacy; indistinct movement.
   COM MO TION, agitation; shaking.
   RE SULT', effect.
   DI MIN' ISH, lessen.
   MYS' TER Y, maze; secrecy.
   HIS' TO RY, plain matter of fact.
   PA' GES, boy-servants; attendants.
   SPAR' RING, boxing; disputing.
   PUP' PETS, dolls; small figures of persons.
   FIN ISH, completion.
   GLO' RI OUS, grand; splendid.
   RE JECT, refuse; deny.
   RE FLECT' ED, turned back; borrowed.


THE MYSTIC WEAVER.

REV. DR. HARBAUGH.

 1. Weaver at his loom is sitting,
      Throws his shuttle to and fro;
          Foot and treadle,
          Hand and pedal,
          Upward, downward,
          Hither, thither,
    How the weaver makes them go!
    As the weaver _wills_ they go.
    Up and down the web is plying,
    And across the woof is flying;
          What a rattling!
          What a battling!
          What a shuffling!
          What a scuffling!
    As the weaver makes his shuttle,
    Hither, thither, scud and scuttle.

 2.       Threads in single,
            Threads in double;
          How they mingle!
            What a trouble,
          Every color!
            What profusion!
          Every motion--
            What confusion!
    While the web and woof are mingling,
    Signal bells above are jingling,
    Telling how each figure ranges,
    Telling when the color changes,
    As the weaver makes his shuttle,
    Hither, thither, scud and scuttle.

 3. Weaver at his loom is sitting,
      Throws his shuttle to and fro;
    'Mid the noise and wild confusion,
      Well the weaver seems to know,
      As he makes his shuttle go,
          What each motion,
          And commotion,
          What each fusion,
          And confusion,
      In the _grand result_ will show:
