dream. At first it was a very pleasant dream, the pleasantest dream a
Fox can have. It was of a chicken dinner, all the chicken she could eat.
Granny certainly enjoyed that dream. It made her smack her lips quite as
if it were a real and not a dream dinner she was enjoying.

But presently the dream changed and became a bad dream. Yes, indeed,
it became a bad dream. It was as bad as at first it had been good. It
seemed to Granny that Bowser the Hound had become very smart, smarter
than she had ever known him to be before. Do what she would, she
couldn't fool him. Not one of all the tricks she knew, and she knew a
great many, fooled him at all. They didn't puzzle him long enough for
her to get her breath.

Bowser kept getting nearer and nearer and nearer, all in the dream, you
know, until it seemed as if his great voice sounded right at her very
heels. She was so tired that it seemed to her that she couldn't run
another step. It was a very, very real dream. You know dreams sometimes
do seem very real indeed. This was the way it was with the bad dream
of Old Granny Fox. It seemed to her that she could feel the breath of
Bowser the Hound and that his great jaws were just going to close on her
and shake her to death.

"Oh! Oh!" cried Granny and waked herself up. Her eyes flew open. Then
she gave a great sigh of relief as she realized that her terrible fright
was only a bad dream and that she was curled up right on the dear,
familiar, old, sunny knoll and not running for her life at all.

Old Granny Fox smiled to think what a fright she had had and
then,--well, she didn't know whether she was really awake or still
dreaming! No, Sir, she didn't. For a full minute she couldn't be sure
whether what she saw was real or part of that dreadful dream. You see,
she was staring into the face of Farmer Brown's boy and the muzzle of
his dreadful gun!

For just a few seconds she didn't move. She couldn't. She was too
frightened to move. Then she knew what she saw was real and not a dream
at all. There wasn't the least bit of doubt about it. That was Farmer
Brown's boy, and that was his dreadful gun! All in a flash she knew that
Farmer Brown's boy must have been hiding behind those pine boughs.

Poor Old Granny Fox! For once in her life she had been caught napping.
She hadn't the least hope in the world. Farmer Brown's boy had only to
fire that dreadful gun, and that would be the end of her. She knew it.



CHAPTER VIII: What Farmer Brown's Boy Did

   In time of danger heed this rule:
   Think hard and fast, but pray keep cool.
     --Old Granny Fox.

Poor Old Granny Fox! She had thought that she had been in tight places
before, but never, never had she been in such a tight place as this.
There stood Farmer Brown's boy looking along the barrel of his dreadful
gun straight at her, and only such a short distance, such a very short
distance away! It wasn't the least bit of use to run. Granny knew that.
That dreadful gun would go "bang!" and that would be the end of her.

For a few seconds she stared at Farmer Brown's boy, too frightened
to move or even think. Then she began to wonder why that dreadful gun
didn't go off. What was Farmer Brown's boy waiting for? She got to
her feet. She was sure that the first step would be her last, yet she
couldn't stay there.

How could Fanner Brown's boy do such a dreadful thing? Somehow, his
freckled face didn't look cruel. He was even beginning to grin. That
must be because he had caught her napping and knew that this time she
couldn't possibly get away from him as she had so many times before.
"Oh!" sobbed Old Granny Fox under her breath.

And right at that very instant Farmer Brown's boy did something. What do
you think it was? No, he didn't shoot her. He didn't fire his dreadful
gun. What do you think he did do? Why, he threw a snowball at Old Granny
Fox and shouted "Boo!" That is what he did and all he did, except to
laugh as Granny gave a great leap and then made those black legs of hers
fly as never before.

Every instant Granny expected to hear that dreadful gun, and it seemed
as if her heart would burst with fright as she ran, thinking each jump
would be the last one. But the dreadful gun didn't bang, and after a
little, when she felt she was safe, she turned to look back over her
shoulder. Farmer Brown's boy was standing right where she had last seen
him, and he was laughing harder than ever. Yes, Sir, he was laughing,
and though Old Granny Fox didn't think so at the time, his laugh was
good to hear, for it was good-natured and merry and all that an honest
laugh should be.

"Go it, Granny! Go it!" shouted Farmer Brown's boy. "And the next time
you are tempted to steal my chickens, just remember that I caught you
napping and let you off when I might have shot you. Just remember that
and leave my chickens alone."

Now it happened that Tommy Tit the Chickadee had seen all that
had happened, and he fairly bubbled over with joy. "Dee, dee, dee,
Chickadee! It is just as I have always said--Farmer Brown's boy isn't
bad. He'd be friends with every one if every one would let him," he
cried.

"Maybe, maybe," grumbled Sammy Jay, who also had seen all that had
happened. "But he's altogether too smart for me to trust. Oh, my! oh,
my! What news this will be to tell! Old Granny Fox will never hear the
end of it. If ever again she boasts of how smart she is, all we will
have to do will be to remind her of the time Farmer Brown's boy caught
her napping. Ho! ho! ho! I must hurry along and find my cousin, Blacky
the Crow. This will tickle him half to death."

As for Old Granny Fox, she feared Farmer Brown's boy more than ever, not
because of what he had done to her but because of what he had not done.
You see, nothing could make her believe that he wanted to be her friend.
She thought he had let her get away just to show her that he was smarter
than she. Instead of thankfulness, hate and fear filled Granny's heart.
You know--

   People who themselves do ill
   For others seldom have good will.



CHAPTER IX: Reddy Fox Hears About Granny Fox

   Though you may think another wrong
    And be quite positive you're right,
   Don't let your temper get away;
    And try at least to be polite.
     --Old Granny Fox.

Sammy Jay hurried through the Green Forest, chuckling as he flew. Sammy
was brimming over with the news he had to tell,--how Old Granny Fox had
been caught napping by Farmer Brown's boy. Sammy wouldn't have believed
it if any one had told him. No, Sir, he wouldn't. But he had seen it
with his own eyes, and it tickled him almost to pieces to think that Old
Granny Fox, whom everybody thought so sly and clever and smart, had been
caught actually asleep by the very one of whom she was most afraid, but
at whom she always had turned up her nose.

Presently Sammy spied Reddy Fox trotting along the Lone Little Path.
Reddy was forever boasting of how smart Granny Fox was. He had boasted
of it so much that everybody was sick of hearing him. When he saw Reddy
trotting along the Lone Little Path, Sammy chuckled harder than ever. He
hid in a thick hemlock-tree and as Reddy passed he shouted:

 "Had I such a stupid old Granny
    As some folks who think they are smart,
  I never would boast of my Granny,
    But live by myself quite apart!"

Reddy looked up angrily. He couldn't see Sammy Jay, but he knew Sammy's
voice. There is no mistaking that. Everybody knows the voice of Sammy
Jay. Of course it was foolish, very foolish of Reddy to be angry, and
still more foolish to show that he was angry. Had he stopped a minute to
think, he would have known that Sammy was saying such a mean, provoking
thing just to make him angry, and that the angrier he became the better
pleased Sammy Jay would be. But like a great many people, Reddy allowed
his temper to get the better of his common sense.

"Who says Granny Fox is stupid?" he snarled.

"I do," replied Sammy Jay promptly. "I say she is stupid."

"She is smarter than anybody else in all the Green Forest and on all the
Green Meadows. She is smarter than anybody else in all the Great World,"
boasted Reddy, and he really believed it.

"She isn't smart enough to fool Farmer Brown's boy," taunted Sammy.

"What's that? Who says so? Has anything happened to Granny Fox?" Reddy
forgot his anger in a sudden great fear. Could Granny have been shot by
Farmer Brown's boy?

"Nothing much, only Farmer Brown's boy caught her napping in broad
daylight," replied Sammy, and chuckled so that Reddy heard him.

"I don't believe it!" snapped Reddy. "I don't believe a word of it!
Nobody ever yet caught Old Granny Fox napping, and nobody ever will."

"I don't care whether you believe it or not; it's so, for I saw him,"
retorted Sammy Jay.

"You--you--you--" began Reddy Fox.

"Go ask Tommy Tit the Chickadee if it isn't true. He saw him too,"
interrupted Sammy Jay.

"Dee, dee, dee, Chickadee! It's so, and Farmer Brown's boy only threw a
snowball at her and let her run away without shooting at her," declared
a new voice. There sat Tommy Tit himself.

Reddy didn't know what to think or say. He just couldn't believe it,
yet he had never known Tommy Tit to tell an untruth. Sammy Jay alone
he wouldn't have believed. Then Tommy Tit and Sammy Jay told Reddy
all about what they had seen, how Farmer Brown's boy had surprised Old
Granny Fox and then allowed her to go unharmed. Reddy had to believe
it. If Tommy Tit said it was so, it must be so. Reddy Fox started off to
hunt up Old Granny Fox and ask her about it. But a sudden thought popped
into his red head, and he changed his mind.

"I won't say a thing about it until some time when Granny scolds me for
being careless," muttered Reddy, with a sly grin. "Then I'll see what
she has to say. I guess she won't scold me so much after this."

Reddy grinned more than ever, which wasn't a bit nice of him. Instead of
being sorry that Old Granny Fox had had such a fright, he was planning
how he would get even with her when she should scold him for his own
carelessness.



CHAPTER X: Reddy Fox Is Impudent

   A saucy tongue is dangerous to possess;
   Be sure some day 't will get you in a mess.
     --Old Granny Fox.

Reddy Fox is headstrong and, like most headstrong people, is given to
thinking that his way is the best way just because it is his way. He is
smart, is Reddy Fox. Yes, indeed, Reddy Fox is very, very smart. He has
to be in order to live. But a great deal of what he knows he learned
from Old Granny Fox. The very best tricks he knows she taught him. She
began teaching him when he was so little that he tumbled over his own
feet. It was she who taught him how to hunt, that it is better never to
steal chickens near home but to go a long way off for them, and how to
fool Bowser the Hound.

It was Granny who taught Reddy how to use his little black nose to
follow the tracks of careless young Rabbits, and how to catch Meadow
Mice under the snow. In fact, there is little Reddy knows which he
didn't learn from wise, shrewd Old Granny Fox.

But as he grew bigger and bigger, until he was quite as big as Granny
herself, he forgot what he owed to her. He grew to have a very good
opinion of himself and to feel that he knew just about all there was
to know. So sometimes when he had done foolish or careless things and
Granny had scolded him, telling him he was big enough and old enough to
know better, he would sulk and go off muttering to himself. But he never
quite dared to be openly disrespectful to Granny, and this, of course,
was quite as it should have been.

"If only I could catch Granny doing something foolish or careless," he
would say to himself. But he never could, and he had begun to think that
he never would. But now at last Granny, clever Old Granny Fox, had been
careless! She had allowed Farmer Brown's boy to catch her napping! Reddy
did wish he had been there to see it himself. But anyway, he had been
told about it, and he made up his mind that the next time Granny said
anything sharp to him about his carelessness he would have something to
say back. Yes, Sir, Reddy Fox was deliberately planning to answer back,
which, as you know, is always disrespectful to one's elders.

At last the chance came. Reddy did a thing no truly wise Fox ever will
do. He went two nights in succession to the same henhouse, and the
second time he barely escaped being shot. Old Granny Fox found out about
it. How she found out Reddy doesn't know to this day, but find out
she did, and she gave him such a scolding as even her sharp tongue had
seldom given him.

"You are the stupidest Fox I ever heard of," scolded Granny.

"I'm no more stupid than you are!" retorted Reddy in the most impudent
way.

"What's that?" demanded Granny. "What's that you said?"

"I said I'm no more stupid than you are, and what is more, I hope I'm
not so stupid. I know better than to take a nap in broad daylight right
under the very nose of Farmer Brown's boy." Reddy grinned in the most
impudent way as he said this.

Granny's eyes snapped. Then things happened. Reddy was cuffed this way
and cuffed that way and cuffed the other way until it seemed to him that
the air was full of black paws, every one of which landed on his head
or face with a sting that made him whimper and put his tail between his
legs, and finally howl.

"There!" cried Granny, when at last she had to stop because she was
quite out of breath. "Perhaps that will teach you to be respectful to
your elders. I was careless and stupid, and I am perfectly ready to
admit it, because it has taught me a lesson. Wisdom often is gained
through mistakes, but never when one is not willing to admit the
mistakes. No Fox lives long who makes the same mistake twice. And those
