"Hullo, you kids! where have you been?" inquired the captain.

Diggory launched out into a brief description of their many adventures;
Oaks laughed heartily.  "Well," he said, pulling out his watch, "you've
just got back in time; half a minute more, and you'd have been outside,
my boys."

The prefect locked the door, and continuing his conversation with
Allingford, started off down the passage.  On reaching what was the main
corridor on the ground floor, they paused for a moment, and stood
warming their hands at the hot-water pipe, and it was while thus engaged
that they were suddenly accosted by Mr. Grice, who bustled up to them in
a great state of excitement.

"Are you on duty, Oaks?"

"Yes, sir."

"Have any boys come in late?"

"No, sir."

"Well, three boys passed me in the town; I think one of them was young
Trevanock.  I called to them to stop, but they took no notice.  When
they come in, you send than to me."

"They weren't late, sir," answered Oaks; "they came in about a minute
ago."

"Oh, nonsense.  I looked at my watch when I saw them in the town, and
then it was five-and-twenty past; they couldn't have come up in five
minutes.  You must either have let them in, or not closed the door at
the proper time."

Prefects at Ronleigh were not in the habit of being lectured as though
they were lower-school boys.  Oaks bit his lip.

"I closed the door on the stroke of half-past," he answered.

"Well, you say those boys came in about two minutes ago.  By me it's now
twenty to six, so they must have been late."

"They were in before half-past, sir; your watch must be wrong."

"Don't keep contradicting me, sir," said the master.

"We are supposed to work by the school clock, sir," interposed the
captain.

"I'm not aware that I addressed any remark to you, Allingford," retorted
Mr. Grice, rapidly losing all control of his temper.  "You need make no
further attempt to teach me the rules of the school; I flatter myself
that I am sufficiently well versed in them already."

A crowd of idlers, attracted by the angry tones of the master's voice,
had begun to collect in the passage, and the captain flushed to the
roots of his hair at being thus taken to task in public.

"I merely said, sir, that we work by the school clock."

"And I say, hold your tongue, sir.--Oaks, remember you report those
three boys for being late."

"I can't do that, sir," answered Oaks stolidly, "for they were in time."

Mr. Grice boiled over.  "You are a very impertinent fellow," he cried.
"I shall report you both to the doctor."  And so saying, he turned on
his heel and walked away.

There was a buzz of astonishment among the bystanders.  The idea of a
captain of Ronleigh being reported to the doctor was something novel
indeed, and by the time the first bell rang for tea, a report of the
collision between Mr. Grice and the prefects had spread all over the
school.



CHAPTER XX.


SOWING THE WIND.

The passage of arms between Mr. Grice and the two prefects was eagerly
discussed by boys of all ages.  Exaggerated reports spread from mouth to
mouth, each teller of the story adding to it some details drawn from his
own imagination, until, away down in the Second Form, it was confidently
asserted that Oaks had called Mr. Grice a "little tin monkey," and that
Allingford had boxed the master's ears; which enormities would most
certainly result in the expulsion of the two offenders.

As a matter of fact, the expected storm never burst.  The first thing
the doctor did on receiving Mr. Grice's complaint was to compare that
gentleman's watch with his own. "Hum'" he said shortly, "I suppose
you're aware that you _are_ ten minutes fast?"

A few moments later Mr. Grice withdrew, looking rather crestfallen.
As may be imagined, the result of his interview with the head-master was
never made public, and in the meantime Ronleians old and young were
expressing their high approval of the conduct of their captain and his
lieutenant.  The gilt was beginning to wear off the Thurstonian
gingerbread, and sensible fellows, who could tell the difference
between jewel and paste, were less inclined than ever to be led by the
nose by such fellows as Gull and Hawley.  Here was an instance in which
the prefects had taken a stand against palpable injustice, and the
action had caused the whole body to rise several pegs in everybody's
estimation.

The near approach of the Wraxby football match caused a revival of good,
honest public spirit.  If only Ronleigh could beat the Grammar School
this year at footer as well as at cricket, every one felt that their cup
of joy would run over, and the champions who were to strive for the
wished-for victory were naturally regarded, for the time being, as
standing on more exalted ground than their fellows.  Ever since the
exposure of Fletcher senior as the author of "College _v._ Town," the
poem had become a weapon turned against the writer and his party.
Boys had gone to the bottom of the matter, and discovering the real
reason of Thurston's absence from the team, had declared that a fellow
who out of spite would refuse to give his services to uphold the honour
of the school had forfeited all claim on their consideration or
sympathy.  Such was the state of popular feeling when, with the clang of
the getting-up bell on Thursday morning, the twelfth of December, a day
commenced fraught with unexpected episodes and situations closely
affecting the interests of the Triple Alliance.

One might have thought that their adventures on the previous afternoon
had afforded them sufficient excitement for at least one week; but these
were destined to prove but the prelude to an event of still greater
importance.  The three friends went into school at nine o'clock, looking
forlorn and miserable.  Something, indeed, had happened to mar their
happiness, and the cause of their depression was as follows:--

Soon after breakfast, when the contents of the post-bag had been
distributed as usual, Mugford accosted his two chums, who were strolling
up and down the quadrangle.  A look of abject misery was on his face,
and in his hand he held an open letter.

"Hullo!" cried Jack Vance; "what's up?  You look as if you had lost a
sovereign and found sixpence!"

"Matter enough," murmured Mugford, whose heart was evidently in his
mouth: "I'm going to leave."

"Going to leave!" exclaimed Diggory; "what ever d'you mean?"

"Well, I don't mind telling you fellows," answered the other.  "You know
my guv'nor isn't well off, and he says he's lost money, and can't afford
to keep me at Ronleigh.  I know I'm no good, and you fellows'll get on
all right without me, and--"

The sentence not being completed, the two other boys glanced at the
speaker's face, and from previous indications in the tone of his voice
were not surprised to find that he was crying.  Two years appear a long
time when one is on the bright side of twenty, and the friendship seemed
to have lasted for ages.  At the near prospect of separation all
Mugford's little failings were forgotten, and both Diggory and Jack
Vance felt that life without him would be a blank.

"Oh, dash it all!" said the latter; "you mustn't go?  Isn't there
anything we can do?  Shall I write to your guv'nor?"

The idea of Jack Vance addressing a remonstrance to his respected parent
caused the ghost of a smile to appear on Mugford's doleful face.

"No, it's no good," he answered.  "There's nothing for it; I shall have
to leave."

During the interval which divided morning school and the free time
before dinner the three friends mooned about together, trying in vain to
regard the future in a more cheerful light, and to make plans for
keeping touch of each other by an interchange of letters and a possible
meeting in the holidays.

"It's all very well," said Jack Vance to Diggory, when late on in the
afternoon he happened to come across the latter flattening his nose
against the glass of the box-room window--"it's all very well talking
about writing and all that; but this is the end of the Triple Alliance."

"Yes," answered Diggory, after a moment's thought, "I suppose it is.
I wish we could do something more before it's broken up."

As he spoke, he passed his hand mechanically along the lower surface of
the window ledge; then with a sudden exclamation he went down on his
knees, and picked something out of the wall.

It was another note written in cipher!

The missive was certainly very brief, consisting of only seven
letters:--

                           "GLMRTSG."

"Hullo!" said Jack Vance; "they're at it again!"

His companion made no reply, but taking out a pencil, copied the cipher
on the back of an envelope, and then replaced the mysterious document in
the crack between the window-frame and the bricks.

"What are you doing that for?"

"Why, because they may miss it, and smell a rat.  Come on; let's get the
key and see what it means."

In this instance the translation of the cryptograph did not occupy much
time; Diggory produced his double alphabet, and soon spelt out the
word:--

"_To-night._"

The two chums gazed at each other for a few moments in silence.

"What does it mean?" queried Jack.

"I don't know, unless it is that they are going to have another meeting
after tea under the pavilion."

"Let's find Mug, and hear what he thinks."

In discussing their new find and attempting to solve its meaning, the
three friends forgot for the time being the melancholy tidings they had
received that morning, and gave themselves up to a full enjoyment of the
mystery.

"I can't see," said Mugford, "that it means anything else than that they
are going to have another meeting."

"Yes, that's it.  I shall go down to the pavilion again after tea, and
see what's up.  I shouldn't wonder if there is going to be another row.
Fletcher said he meant to do something before he left, and there isn't
much time now before the end of the term."

"Shan't Mug or I go this time?" asked Jack Vance; "it's rather a risky
business."

"No, I'll go; I know now just where to hide."

During the half-hour between tea and evening preparation Jack Vance and
Mugford lingered about in the dark and deserted quadrangle, anxiously
awaiting their comrade's return.  Once only was the silence broken, by
Maxton chasing young "Rats" from the gymnasium into the big school,
shouting, "I'll lick you, you little villain!" but with this exception,
our two friends had the place to themselves.

It was a raw, cold night; every one seemed, very naturally, to be
keeping indoors, and there were no signs of any members of the secret
society being abroad.  Jack Vance and his companion trotted softly up
and down, endeavouring to keep themselves warm.  At length, when their
patience was wellnigh exhausted, there was a sound of footsteps, and
Diggory was descried coming through the archway leading to the playing
fields.

"Well," cried his two chums, in low, eager tones, "what have you heard?"

The answer was certainly one they had least expected,--

"Nothing."

"Nothing! what d'you mean?"

"Why, they didn't come; there wasn't any meeting.  I waited and waited,
until I saw it was no use staying any longer; so then I gave it up as a
bad job."

"Did the note really say to-night?"

"Yes: I went down just before tea to see if it was still there, and I
brought it away with me.  Here, look for yourself."

As he spoke, Diggory produced the slip of paper from his waistcoat
pocket.  By the light of the archway lamp it was compared with a
hastily-constructed key, and the former translation was found to be
correct.

The Triple Alliance had certainly for once in a way "drawn blank," and
the preparation bell putting an end to their further deliberations, they
directed their steps toward the schoolroom, wondering more than ever
what could be the meaning of that significant word, "To-night."

Now, the real reason of the three friends being thus at fault in their
investigations was simply this: they were exactly twenty-four hours
behindhand in their attempt to unravel the mystery.  The conclusion
they had come to with regard to the meaning of the note was correct: a
tacit understanding had existed for some time among the inner circle of
the Thurstonian party that this should be the signal for a gathering of
the clan; but the note, when Diggory had found it, had been lying in the
impromptu post office for a day and a half, and the meeting to which
it was a summons had already taken place on the previous evening.

For the reader, who is a privileged person, we intend to put back the
clock, and leaving the Triple Alliance dividing their attention between
attempts to discover the meaning, first of their Latin author, and
secondly of the enigma formed by this perplexing single-worded epistle,
we will give a short account of the gathering to which it referred.

It was while the greater number of their school-fellows were gathered in
numerous little groups, whiling away the free time before preparation
discussing the various rumours that were current respecting Mr. Grice's
encounters with Oaks and Allingford, that the same five conspirators
assembled for another secret "confab" in the den beneath the pavilion.

In one way it was a fortunate thing for Diggory that he did not discover
the note sooner, for hardly had Thurston set the lighted candle in the
empty bottle than Noaks picked it up, and peered carefully into each of
