
"I shall wait till you clear your character; I'm not going to care for
a deceitful impostor. What made you think of this prank?"

"You did."

"I? How?"

"When in England I saw your picture, though you were many a mile away,
and fell in love with it. Your mother told me much about you, and I
saw she would not frown upon my suit. I begged her not to tell you I
had come, but let me find you and make myself known when I liked.
You were in Switzerland, and I went after you. At Coblentz I met
Sigismund, and told him my case; he is full of romance, and when we
overheard you in the balcony we were glad of the hint. Sigismund was
with me when you came, and admired Helen immensely, so he was wild to
have a part in the frolic. I let him begin, and followed you unseen to
Heidelberg, meaning to personate an artist. Meeting you at the castle,
I made a good beginning with the vaults and the ring, and meant to
follow it up by acting the baron, you were so bent on finding him, but
Sigismund forbade it. Turning over a trunk of things left there the
year before, I came upon my old Polish uniform, and decided to be a
Thaddeus."

"How well you did it! Wasn't it hard to act all the time?" asked Amy,
wonderingly.

"Very hard with Helen, she is so keen, but not a bit so with you, for
you are such a confiding soul any one could cheat you. I've betrayed
myself a dozen times, and you never saw it. Ah, it was capital fun to
play the forlorn exile, study English, and flirt with my cousin."

"It was very base. I should think you'd be devoured with remorse.
Aren't you sorry?"

"For one thing. I cropped my head lest you should know me. I was proud
of my curls, but I sacrificed them all to you."

"Peacock! Did you think that one glimpse of your black eyes and fine
hair would make such an impression that I should recognize you again?"

"I did, and for that reason disfigured my head, put on a mustache, and
assumed hideous spectacles. Did you never suspect my disguise, Amy?"

"No. Helen used to say that she felt something was wrong, but I never
did till the other night."

"Didn't I do that well? I give you my word it was all done on the spur
of the minute. I meant to speak soon, but had not decided how, when
you came out so sweetly with that confounded old cloak, of which I'd
no more need than an African has of a blanket. Then a scene I'd read
in a novel came into my head, and I just repeated it _con amore_. Was
I very pathetic and tragical. Amy?"

"I thought so then. It strikes me as ridiculous now, and I can't help
feeling sorry that I wasted so much pity on a man who--"

"Loves you with all his heart and soul. Did you cry and grieve over
me, dear little tender thing? and do you think now that I am a
heartless fellow, bent only on amusing myself at the expense of
others? It's not so; and you shall see how true and good and steady I
can be when I have any one to love and care for me. I've been alone so
long it's new and beautiful to be petted, confided in, and looked up
to by an angel like you."

He was in earnest now; she felt it, and her anger melted away like dew
before the sun.

"Poor boy! You will go home with us now, and let us take care of you
in quiet England. You'll play no more pranks, but go soberly to work
and do something that shall make me proud to be your cousin, won't
you?"

"If you'll change 'cousin' to 'wife' I'll be and do whatever you
please. Amy, when I was a poor, dying, Catholic foreigner you loved me
and would have married me in spite of everything. Now that I'm your
well, rich, Protestant cousin, who adores you as that Pole never
could, you turn cold and cruel. Is it because the romance is gone, or
because your love was only a girl's fancy, after all?"

"You deceived me and I can't forget it; but I'll try," was the soft
answer to his reproaches.

"Are you disappointed that I'm not a baron?"

"A little bit."

"Shall I be a count? They gave me a title in Poland, a barren honor,
but all they had to offer, poor souls, in return for a little blood.
Will you be Countess Zytomar and get laughed at for your pains, or
plain Mrs. Power, with a good old English name?"

"Neither, thank you; it's only a girlish fancy, which will soon be
forgotten. Does the baron love Helen?" asked Amy, abruptly.

"Desperately, and she?"

"I think he will be happy; she is not one to make confidantes, but I
know by her tenderness with me, her sadness lately, and something in
her way of brightening when he comes, that she thinks much of him and
loves Karl Hoffman. How it will be with the baron I cannot say."

"No fear of him; he wins his way everywhere. I wish I were as
fortunate;" and the gay young gentleman heaved an artful sigh and
coughed the cough that always brought such pity to the girl's soft
eyes.

She glanced at him as he leaned pensively on the low wall, looking
down into the lake, with the level rays of sunshine on his comely face
and figure. Something softer than pity stole into her eye, as she
said, anxiously,--

"You are not really ill, Sidney?"

"I have been, and still need care, else I may have a relapse," was the
reply of this treacherous youth, whose constitution was as sound as a
bell.

Amy clasped her hands, as if in a transport of gratitude, exclaiming,
fervently,--

"What a relief it is to know that you are not doomed to--"

She paused with a shiver, as if the word were too hard to utter, and
Sidney turned to her with a beaming face, which changed to one of
mingled pain and anger, as she added, with a wicked glance,--

"Wear spectacles."

"Amy, you've got no heart!" he cried, in a tone that banished her last
doubt of his love and made her whisper tenderly, as she clung to his
arm,--

"No, dear; I've given it all to you."

Punctual to the minute, Major Erskine marched into the _salon_, with
Mrs. Cumberland on his arm, exclaiming, as he eyed the four young
people together again,--

"Now, ladies, is it to be 'Paradise Lost' or 'Regained' for the
prisoners at the bar?"

At this point the astonished gentleman found himself taken possession
of by four excited individuals, for the girls embraced and kissed him,
the young men wrung his hand and thanked him, and all seemed bent
on assuring him that they were intensely happy, grateful and
affectionate.

From this assault he emerged flushed and breathless, but beaming with
satisfaction, and saying paternally,--

"Bless you, my children, bless you. I hoped and worked for this, and
to prove how well I practise what I preach, let me present to you--my
wife."

As he drew forward the plump widow with a face full of smiles
and tears, a second rush was made, and congratulations, salutes,
exclamations and embraces were indulged in to every one's
satisfaction.

As the excitement subsided the major said, simply,--

"We were married yesterday at Montreaux. Let me hope that you will
prove as faithful as I have been, as happy as I am, as blest as I
shall be. I loved this lady in my youth, have waited many years, and
am rewarded at last, for love never comes too late."

The falter in his cheery voice, the dimness of his eyes, the smile on
his lips, and the gesture with which he returned the pressure of the
hand upon his arm, told the little romance of the good major's life
more eloquently than pages of fine writing, and touched the hearts of
those who loved him.

"I have been faithful for eleven years. Give me my reward soon, won't
you, dear?" whispered Sidney.

"Don't marry me to-morrow, and if mamma is willing I'll think about it
by and by," answered Amy.

"It is beautiful! let us go and do likewise," said Sigismund to his
betrothed.

But Helen, anxious to turn the thoughts of all from emotions too deep
for words, drew from her pocket a small pearl-colored object, which
she gave to Amy with mock solemnity, as she said, turning to lay her
hand again in her lover's,--

"Amy, our search is over. _You_ may keep the gloves; _I_ have the
baron."




MY RED CAP

"He who serves well need not fear to ask his wages."


I


It was under a blue cap that I first saw the honest face of Joe
Collins. In the third year of the late war a Maine regiment was
passing through Boston, on its way to Washington. The Common was all
alive with troops and the spectators who clustered round them to say
God-speed, as the brave fellows marched away to meet danger and death
for our sakes.

Every one was eager to do something; and, as the men stood at ease,
the people mingled freely with them, offering gifts, hearty grips of
the hand, and hopeful prophecies of victory in the end. Irresistibly
attracted, my boy Tom and I drew near, and soon, becoming excited by
the scene, ravaged the fruit-stands in our neighborhood for tokens of
our regard, mingling candy and congratulations, peanuts and prayers,
apples and applause, in one enthusiastic jumble.

While Tom was off on his third raid, my attention was attracted by
a man who stood a little apart, looking as if his thoughts were far
away. All the men were fine, stalwart fellows, as Maine men usually
are; but this one over-topped his comrades, standing straight and
tall as a Norway pine, with a face full of the mingled shrewdness,
sobriety, and self-possession of the typical New Englander. I liked
the look of him; and, seeing that he seemed solitary, even in a crowd,
I offered him my last apple with a word of interest. The keen blue
eyes met mine gratefully, and the apple began to vanish in vigorous
bites as we talked; for no one thought of ceremony at such a time.

"Where are you from?"

"Woolidge, ma'am."

"Are you glad to go?"

"Wal, there's two sides to that question. I calk'late to do my duty,
and do it hearty: but it _is_ rough on a feller leavin' his folks, for
good, maybe."

There was a sudden huskiness in the man's voice that was not
apple-skins, though he tried to make believe that it was. I knew a
word about home would comfort him, so I went on with my questions.

"It is very hard. Do you leave a family?"

"My old mother, a sick brother,--and Lucindy."

The last word was uttered in a tone of intense regret, and his brown
cheek reddened as he added hastily, to hide some embarrassment.--

"You see, Jim went last year, and got pretty well used up; so I felt
as if I'd ought to take my turn now. Mother was a regular old hero
about it and I dropped everything, and come off. Lucindy didn't think
it was my duty; and that made it awful hard, I tell you."

"Wives are less patriotic than mothers," I began; but he would not
hear Lucindy blamed, and said quickly,--

"She ain't my wife yet, but we calk'lated to be married in a month
or so; and it was wus for her than for me, women lot so on not being
disappointed. I _couldn't_ shirk, and here I be. When I git to work, I
shall be all right: the first wrench is the tryin' part."

Here he straightened his broad shoulders, and turned his face toward
the flags fluttering far in front, as if no backward look should
betray the longing of his heart for mother, home, and wife. I liked
that little glimpse of character; and when Tom returned with empty
hands, reporting that every stall was exhausted, I told him to find
out what the man would like best, then run across the street and get
it.

"I know without asking. Give us your purse, and I'll make him as happy
as a king," said the boy, laughing, as he looked up admiringly at
our tall friend, who looked down on him with an elder-brotherly air
pleasant to see. While Tom was gone, I found out Joe's name and
business, promised to write and tell his mother how finely the
regiment went off, and was just expressing a hope that we might meet
again, for I too was going to the war as nurse, when the order to
"Fall in!" came rolling down the ranks, and the talk was over. Fearing
Tom would miss our man in the confusion, I kept my eye on him till the
boy came rushing up with a packet of tobacco in one hand and a good
supply of cigars in the other. Not a romantic offering, certainly, but
a very acceptable one, as Joe's face proved, as we scrambled these
treasures into his pockets, all laughing at the flurry, while less
fortunate comrades helped us, with an eye to a share of these fragrant
luxuries by and by. There was just time for this, a hearty shake of
the big hand, and a grateful "Good-by, ma'am;" then the word was
given, and they were off. Bent on seeing the last of them, Tom and I
took a short cut, and came out on the wide street down which so many
troops marched that year; and, mounting some high steps, we watched
for our man, as we already called him.

As the inspiring music, the grand tramp, drew near, the old thrill
went through the crowd, the old cheer broke out. But it was a
different scene now than in the first enthusiastic, hopeful days.
Young men and ardent boys filled the ranks then, brave by instinct,
burning with loyal zeal, and blissfully unconscious of all that lay
before them. Now the blue coats were worn by mature men, some gray,
all grave and resolute: husbands and fathers, with the memory of wives
and children tugging at their heart-strings; homes left desolate
behind them, and before them the grim certainty of danger, hardship,
and perhaps the lifelong helplessness worse than death. Little of the
glamour of romance about the war now: they saw it as it was, a long,
hard task; and here were the men to do it well. Even the lookers-on
were different now. Once all was wild enthusiasm and glad uproar; now
men's lips were set, and women's smileless as they cheered; fewer
handkerchiefs whitened the air, for wet eyes needed them; and sudden
lulls, almost solemn in their stillness, followed the acclamations
of the crowd. All watched with quickened breath and brave souls that
living wave, blue below, and bright with a steely glitter above, as
it flowed down the street and away to distant battle-fields already
stained with precious blood.

"There he is! The outside man, and tallest of the lot. Give him a
