
Harry felt that it must be essentially a struggle of patience, but when
he waited a few minutes longer, the idea to wait with ears close to the
earth, one of the oldest devices of primitive man, occurred to him. It
was fairly dry in the bushes, and he lay down, pressing his ear to the
soil.  Then he heard a faint sound, as if some one crawling through the
grass, like a wild animal stalking its prey.  It was Shepard, of
course, and then Harry planned his campaign.  Shepard had left his
horse, and was endeavoring to reach him by stealth.

Leaving his own horse, he crept a little to the right, and then rising
carefully in another thicket he picked out every dark spot in the
gloom. He made out presently the figure of a riderless horse, standing
partly behind the trunk of an oak, larger than most of those that grew
in the Wilderness.

Harry knew that it was Shepard's mount and that Shepard himself was
some distance in front of it creeping toward the thicket which he
supposed sheltered his foe.  There was barely enough light for Harry to
see the horse's head and regretfully he raised his heavy pistol.  But
it had to be done, and when his aim was true he pulled the trigger.

The report of the pistol was almost like the roar of a cannon in the
desolate Wilderness and made Harry himself jump.  Then he promptly
threw himself flat upon his face.  Shepard's answering fire came from a
point about thirty yards in front of the horse, and the bullet passed
very close over Harry's head.  It was a marvelous shot to be made
merely at the place from which a sound had come.  It all passed in a
flash, and the next moment Harry heard the sound of a horse falling and
kicking a little.  Then it too was still.

He remained only a half minute in the grass.  Then he began to creep
back, curving a little in his course, toward his own horse.  He did not
believe that Shepard's faculty of hearing was as keen as his own, and
he moved with the greatest deftness.  He relied upon the fact that
Shepard had not yet located the horse, and if Harry could reach it
quickly it would not be hard for him, a mounted man, to leave behind
Shepard, dismounted. It might be possible, too, that Shepard had gone
back to see about his own horse, not knowing that it was slain.

He saw the dusky outline of his horse, and, rising, made two or three
jumps.  Then he snatched the rein loose, sprang upon his back, and
lying down upon his neck to avoid bullets, crashed away, reckless of
bushes and briars.  He heard one bullet flying near him, but he laughed
in delight and relief as his horse sped on toward Longstreet.

He did not diminish his speed until he had gone two or three miles, and
then, knowing that Shepard had been left hopelessly behind, even if he
had attempted pursuit, he brought his horse down to a walk, and
laughed.  There was a bit of nervous excitement in the laugh.  He had
outwitted Shepard again.  He had never seen the man, but it did not
enter his mind that it was not he.  Each had scored largely over the
other from time to time, but Harry believed that he was at least even.

He steadied his nerves now and rode calmly toward Longstreet, coming
soon upon his scouts, who informed him that the heavy columns were not
far behind, marching with stalwart step to their appointed place in the
line. But it was Harry's business to see Longstreet himself, and he
continued his way toward the center of the division, where they told
him the general could be found.

He rode forward and in the moonlight recognized Longstreet at once, a
heavy-set, bearded man, mounted on a strong bay horse.  He had a very
small staff, and he was first to notice the young lieutenant advancing.
He knew Harry well, having seen him with Lee at Gettysburg and with
Jackson before.  He stopped and said abruptly:

"You come from the commander-in-chief, do you not?"

"Yes, sir," replied Harry, "and I've been coming as fast as I could."

He did not deem it necessary to say anything about his encounter with
Shepard.

"There has been heavy fighting.  What are his orders?"

Harry told him, also giving him a written message, which the general
read by the light of a torch an aide held.

"You can tell General Lee that all my men will be in position for
battle before dawn," said the Georgian crisply.

Even as he spoke, Harry heard the heavy, regular tread of the brigades
marching forward through the Wilderness.  He saluted General Longstreet.

"I shall return at once with your message," he said.

But Harry, having had one such experience, was resolved not to risk
another.  He would make a wider circuit in the rear of the army.
Shepard, on foot, and anxious to avenge his defeat, might be waiting
for him, but he would go around him.  So when he started back he made a
wide curve, and soon was in the darkness and silence again.

He had a good horse and his idea of direction being very clear he rode
swiftly in the direction he had chosen.  But his curve was so great
that when he reached the center of it he was so far in the rear of the
army that no sound came from it.  If the skirmishers were still firing
the reports of their rifles were lost in the distance.  Where he rode
the only noises were those made by the wild animals that inhabited the
Wilderness, creatures that had settled back into their usual haunts
after the armies had passed beyond.

Once a startled deer sprang from a clump of bushes and crashed away
through the thickets.  Rabbits darted from his path, and an owl,
wondering what all the disturbance was about, hooted mournfully from a
bough.

Long before dawn Harry reached the Southern sentinels in the center and
was then passed to General Lee, who remained at the same camp, sitting
on a log by some smothered coals.  Several other members of his staff
had returned already, and the general, looking up when Harry came
forward, merely said:

"Well!"

"I have seen General Longstreet, sir," said Harry, "and he bids me tell
you that he and his men will be in position before dawn.  He was nearly
up when I left, and he has also sent you this note."

He handed the note to General Lee, who, bending low over the coals,
read it.

"Everything goes well," he said with satisfaction.  "We shall be ready
for them.  What time is it, Peyton?"

"Five minutes past four o'clock, sir."

"Then I think the attack should come within an hour."

"Perhaps before daybreak, sir."

"Perhaps.  And even after the sun begins to rise it will be like
twilight in this gloomy place."

Grant, in truth, prompt and ready as always, had ordered the advance to
be begun at half-past four, but Meade, asking more time for
arrangements and requesting that it be delayed until six, he had
consented to a postponement until five o'clock and no more.

Harry had one more message to carry, a short distance only, and on his
return he found the Invincibles posted on the commander-in-chief's
right, and not more than two hundred yards away.

"You must be a body guard for the general," he said to Colonel Leonidas
Talbot.

"There could be no greater honor for the Invincibles, nor could General
Lee have a better guard."

"I'm sure of that, sir."

"What's happening, Harry?  Tell us what's been going on in the night!"

"Our line of battle has been formed.  General Longstreet and his men on
the right are soon to be in touch with General Hill.  I returned from
him a little while ago.  I can't yet smell the dawn, but I think the
battle will come before then."

Harry rode back and resumed his place beside Dalton.  The troops
everywhere were on their feet, cannon and rifles ready, because it was
a certainty that the two armies would meet very early.

In fact, the Army of Northern Virginia began to slide slowly forward.
It was not the habit of these troops to await attack.  Lee nearly
always had taken the offensive, and the motion of his men was
involuntary. They felt that the enemy was there and they must go to
meet him.

"What time is it now?" whispered Dalton.

Harry was barely able to discern the face of his watch.

"Ten minutes to five," he replied.

"And the dawn comes early.  It won't be long before Grant comes poking
his nose through the Wilderness."

Harry was silent.  A few minutes more, and there was a sudden crackle
of rifles in front of them.

"The dawn isn't here, but Grant is," said Harry.

The crackling fire doubled and tripled, and then the fire of the
Southern rifles replied in heavy volume.  The lighter field guns opened
with a crash, and the heavier batteries followed with rolling thunder.
Leaves and twigs fell in showers, and men fell with them.  The deep
Northern cheer swelled through the Wilderness and the fierce rebel yell
replied.

Gray dawn, rising as if with effort, over the sodden Wilderness found
two hundred thousand men locked fast in battle.  It might have been a
bright sun elsewhere, but not here among the gloomy shades and the pine
barrens. The firing was already so tremendous that the smoke hung low
and thick, directly over the tops of the bushes, and the men, as they
fought, breathed mixed and frightful vapors.

Both sides fought for a long time in a heavy, smoky dusk, that was
practically night.  Officers coming from far points, led, compass in
hand, having no other guide save the roar of battle.  As the Southern
leaders had foreseen, Grant was throwing in the full strength of his
powerful army, hoping with superior numbers and better equipment to
crush Lee utterly that day.

The great Northern artillery was raking the whole Southern front.
Hancock, the superb, was hurling the heavy Northern masses directly
upon the main position of the South.  He had half the Army of the
Potomac, and at other points Warren, Wadsworth, Sedgwick and Burnside
were advancing with equal energy and contempt of death.  Fiercer and
fiercer grew the conflict.  Hancock, remembering how he had held the
fatal hill at Gettysburg, and resolved to win a complete victory now,
poured in regiment after regiment.  But in all the fire and smoke and
excitement and danger he did not neglect to keep a cool head.  Hearing
that a portion of Longstreet's corps was near, he sent a division and
numerous heavy artillery to attack it, driving it back after a
sanguinary struggle of more than an hour.

Then he redoubled his attack upon the Southern center, compelling it to
give ground, though slowly.  Harry felt that gliding movement backward
and a chill ran through his blood.  The heavy masses of Grant and his
powerful artillery were prevailing.  The strongest portion of the
Southern army was being forced back, and a gap was cut between Hill and
Longstreet.  Had Hancock perceived the gap that he had made he might
have severed the Southern army, inflicting irretrievable retreat, but
the smoke and the dusk of the Wilderness hid it, and the moment passed
into one of the great "Ifs" of history.

Harry, on horseback, witnessed this conflict, all the more terrible
because of the theater in which it was fought.  The batteries and the
riflemen alike were frequently hidden by the thickets.  The great banks
of smoke hung low, only to be split apart incessantly by the flashes of
fire from the big guns.  But the bullets were more dangerous than the
cannon balls and shells.  They whistled and shrieked in thousands and
countless thousands.

Lee sat on his horse impassive, watching as well as he could the tide
of battle.  Messengers covered with smoke and sweat had informed him of
the gap between Hill and Longstreet, and he was dispatching fresh
troops to close it up.  Harry saw the Invincibles march by.  The two
colonels at their head beheld Lee on his white horse, and their swords
flew from their scabbards as they made a salute in perfect unison.
Close behind them rode St. Clair and Happy Tom, and they too saluted in
like manner. Lee took off his hat in reply and Harry choked.  "About to
die, we salute thee," he murmured under his breath.

Then with a shout the Invincibles, their officers at their head,
plunged into the fire and smoke, and were lost from Harry's view.  But
he could not stay there long and wonder at their fate.  In a few
minutes he was riding to Longstreet with a message for him to bear
steadily toward Hill, that the gap might be closed entirely, and as
soon as possible.

He galloped behind the lines, but bullets fell all around him, and
often a shell tore the earth.  The air had become more bitter and
poisonous. Fumes from swamps seemed to mingle with the smoke and odors
of burned gunpowder.  His lips and his tongue were scorched.  But he
kept on, without exhaustion or mishap, and reached Longstreet, who had
divined his message.

"The line will be solid in a few minutes," he said, and while the
battle was still at its height on the long front he touched hands with
Hill. Then both drove forward with all their might against Hancock,
rushing to the charge, with the Southern fire and recklessness of death
that had proved irresistible on so many fields.  The advance, despite
the most desperate efforts of Hancock and his generals, was stopped.
Then he was driven back.  All the ground gained at so much cost was
lost and the Southern troops, shouting in exultation, pushed on,
pouring in a terrible rifle fire.  Longstreet, in his eagerness, rode a
little ahead of his troops to see the result.  Turning back, he was
mistaken in the smoke by his own men for a Northern cavalryman, and
they fired upon him, just as Jackson had been shot down by his own
troops in the dusk at Chancellorsville.

The leader fell from his horse, wounded severely, and the troops
advancing to victory became confused.  The rumor spread that Longstreet
had been killed.  There was no one to give orders, and the charge
stopped.  Harry and a half-dozen others who had seen the accident or
heard of it, galloped to Lee, who at once rode into the very thick of
the command, giving personal orders and sending his aides right and
left with others.  The whole division was reformed under his eye, and
he sent it anew to the attack.

The battle now closed in with the full strength of both armies.
Hancock strove to keep his place.  The valiant Wadsworth had been
killed already. The dense thickets largely nullified Grant's superior
numbers.  Lee poured everything on Hancock, who was driven from every
position. Fighting furiously behind a breastwork built the night
before, he was driven from that too.

Often in the dense shades the soldiers met one another face to face and
furious struggles hand-to-hand ensued.  Bushes and trees, set on fire
by the shells, burned slowly like torches put there to light up the
ghastly scene of man's bravery and folly.  Jenkins, a Confederate
general, was killed and colonels and majors fell by the dozen.  But
neither side would yield, and Grant hurried help to his hard-pressed
troops.

Harry had been grazed on the shoulder by a bullet, but his horse was
unharmed, and he kept close to Lee, who continued to direct the battle
personally.  He knew that they were advancing.  Once more the genius of
the great Confederate leader was triumphing.  Grant, the redoubtable
and tenacious, despite his numbers, could set no trap for him!  Instead
he had been drawn into battle on a field of Lee's own choosing.

The conflict had now continued for a long time, and was terrible in all
its aspects.  It was far past noon, and for miles a dense cloud of
smoke hung over the Wilderness, which was filled with the roar of
cannon, the crash of rifles and the shouts of two hundred thousand men
in deadly conflict.  The first meeting of the two great protagonists of
the war, Lee and Grant, was sanguinary and terrible, beyond all
expectation.

Hundreds fell dead, their bodies lying hidden under the thickets. The
forest burned fiercely here and there, casting circles of lurid light
over the combatants, while the wind rained down charred leaves and
twigs. The fires spread and joined, and at points swept wide areas of
the forest, yet the fury of the battle was not diminished, the two
armies forgetting everything else in their desire to crush each other.

Harry's horse was killed, as he sat near Lee, but he quickly obtained
another, and not long afterward he was sent with a second message to
Ewell.  He rode on a long battle front, not far behind the lines, and
he shuddered with awe as he looked upon the titanic struggle.  The
smoke was often so heavy and the bushes so thick that he could not see
the combatants, except when the flame of the firing or the burning
trees lighted up a segment of the circle.

Halfway to Ewell and he stopped when he saw two familiar figures,
sitting on a log.  They were elderly men in uniforms riddled by
bullets.  The right arm of one and the left leg of the other were
tightly bandaged. Their faces were very white and it was obvious that
they were sitting there, because they were not strong enough to stand.

Harry stopped.  No message, no matter how important, could have kept
him from stopping.

"Colonel Talbot!  Colonel St. Hilaire!" he cried.

"Yes, here we are, Harry," replied Colonel Leonidas Talbot in a voice,
thin but full of courage.  "Hector has been shot through the leg and
has lost much blood, but I have bound up his wound, and he has done as
much for my arm, which has been bored through from side to side by a
bullet, which must have been as large as my fist."

"And so for a few minutes," said Lieutenant-Colonel St. Hilaire,
valiantly, "we must let General Lee conduct the victory alone."

"And the Invincibles!" exclaimed Harry, horrified.  "Are they all gone
but you?"

"Not at all," replied Colonel Talbot.  "There is so much smoke about
that you can't see much, but if it clears a little you will behold
Lieutenant St. Clair and the youth rightly called Happy Tom and some
three score others, lying among the bushes, not far ahead of you,
giving thorough attention to the enemy."

"And is that all that's left of the Invincibles?"

"It's a wonder that they're so many.  You were right about this man,
Grant, Harry.  He's a fighter, and their artillery is numerous and
wonderful.  John Carrington himself must be in front of us.  We have
not seen him, but the circumstantial evidence is conclusive.  Nobody
else in the world could have swept this portion of the Wilderness with
