word came to me that the outlaws in the forest were about to carry you
off, and that they would not hesitate even to desecrate the walls of the
convent. Assembling my men-at-arms, I at once rode to your rescue, and am
doubly happy to have saved you, first, as a gentleman, secondly, as being
the man to whom our gracious prince has assigned you as a wife. I am Sir
Rudolph, Earl of Evesham."

As from the first the girl had been convinced that she had fallen into
the power of her lawless suitor, this came upon her as no surprise.

"Whether your story is true, Sir Rudolph," she said, "or not, God knows,
and I, a poor weak girl, will not pretend to venture to say. It is
between you and your conscience. If, as you say, you have saved me from
the power of the outlaws, I demand that, as a knight and a gentleman, you
return with me at once to the convent from which I was taken by force."

"I cannot do that," Sir Rudolph said. "Fortune has placed you in my
hands, and has enabled me to carry out the commands of the prince.
Therefore, though I would fain yield to your wishes and so earn your
goodwill, which above all things I wish to obtain, yet my duty towards
the prince commands me to utilize the advantage which fate has thrown in
my hands."

"You must do as you will, Sir Rudolph," the girl said with dignity. "I
believe not your tale. You sought before, in person, to carry me off, but
failed, and you have now employed other means to do so. The tale of your
conduct to Dame Editha has reached my ears, and I hold you a foresworn
knight and a dishonoured man, and as such I would rather die than become
your wife, although as yet I am but a child, and have no need to talk of
weddings for years to come."

"We need not parley here," the knight said coldly. "We shall have plenty
of time when at my castle."

The litter was now lifted, placed between two horses, and proceeded
rapidly on its journey. Although the hope was but faint, yet until the
gates of the castle closed upon them the Lady Margaret still hoped that
rescue might reach her. But the secret had been too well kept, and it was
not until the following day that the man who had been placed in a cottage
near the convent arrived in all haste in the forest, to say that it was
only in the morning that he had learnt that the convent had been broken
open by men disguised as archers, and the Lady Margaret carried off.

Four days elapsed before Sir Rudolph presented himself before the girl
he had captured. So fearfully was his face bruised and disfigured by the
blow from the mailed hand of Cuthbert three weeks before, that he did not
wish to appear before her under such unfavourable circumstances, and the
captive passed the day gazing from her casement in one of the rooms in
the upper part of the keep, towards the forest whence she hoped rescue
would come.

Within the forest hot discussions were going on as to the best course
to pursue. An open attack was out of the question, especially as upon
the day following the arrival there of Lady Margaret, 300 more
mercenaries had marched in from Worcester, so that the garrison was now
raised to 500 men.

"Is there no way," Cnut exclaimed furiously, "by which we might creep
into this den, since we cannot burst into it openly?"

"There is a way from the castle," Cuthbert said, "for my dear lord told
me of it one day when we were riding together in the Holy Land. He said
then that it might be that he should never return, and that it were well
that I should know of the existence of this passage, which few beside the
earl himself knew of. It is approached by a very heavy slab of stone in
the great hall. This is bolted down, and as it stands under the great
table passes unnoticed, and appears part of the ordinary floor. He told
me the method in which, by touching a spring, the bolts were withdrawn
and the stone could be raised. Thence a passage a quarter of a mile long
leads to the little chapel standing in the hollow, and which, being
hidden among the trees, would be unobserved by any party besieging the
castle. This of course was contrived in order that the garrison, or any
messenger thereof, might make an exit in case of siege."

"But if we could escape," Cnut asked, "why not enter by this way?"

"The stone is of immense weight and strength," Cuthbert replied, "and
could not be loosed from below save with great labour and noise. There
are, moreover, several massive doors in the passage, all of which are
secured by heavy bolts within. It is therefore out of the question that
we could enter the castle by that way. But were we once in, we could
easily carry off the lady through this passage."

The large force which Sir Rudolph had collected was not intended merely
for the defence of the castle, for the knight considered that with his
own garrison he could hold it against a force tenfold that which his
rival could collect. But he was determined if possible to crush out the
outlaws of the forest, for he felt that so long as this formidable body
remained under an enterprising leader like Sir Cuthbert, he would never
be safe for a moment, and would be a prisoner in his own castle.

Cuthbert had foreseen that the attack was likely to be made and had
strengthened his band to the utmost. He felt, however, that against so
large a force of regularly armed men, although he might oppose a stout
resistance and kill many, yet that in the end he must be conquered. Cnut,
however, suggested to him a happy idea, which he eagerly grasped.

"It would be rare sport," Cnut said, "when this armed force comes out
to attack us, if we could turn the tables by slipping in, and taking
their castle."

"The very thing," Cuthbert exclaimed. "It is likely that he will use the
greater portion of his forces, and that he will not keep above fifty or
sixty men, at the outside, in the castle. When they sally out we will at
first oppose a stout resistance to them in the wood, gradually falling
back. Then, at a given signal, all save twenty men shall retire hastily,
and sweeping round, make for the castle. Their absence will not be
noticed, for in this thick wood it is difficult to tell whether twenty
men or two hundred are opposing you among the bushes; and the twenty who
remain must shoot thick and fast to make believe that their numbers are
great, retiring sometimes, and leading the enemy on into the heart of
the wood."

"But supposing, Sir Cuthbert, that they should have closed the gates and
lifted the drawbridge? We could not gain entrance by storming, even if
only twenty men held the walls, until long after the main body would have
returned."

Cuthbert thought for some time, and then said, "Cnut, you shall
undertake this enterprise. You shall fill a cart high with faggots, and
in it shall conceal a dozen of your best men. You, dressed as a serf,
shall drive the oxen, and when you reach the castle shall say, in answer
to the hail of the sentry, that you are bringing in the tribute of wood
of your master the franklin of Hopeburn. They will then lower the
drawbridge and open the gates; and when you have crossed the bridge and
are under the portcullis, spring out suddenly, cut loose the oxen so
that they will not draw the cart further in, cut the chains of the
drawbridge so that it cannot be drawn off, and hold the gate for a
minute or two until we arrive."

"The plan is capital," Cnut exclaimed. "We will do the proud Norman yet.
How he will storm when he finds us masters of his castle. What then will
you do, Sir Cuthbert?"

"We can hold the castle for weeks," Cuthbert said, "and every day is in
our favour. If we find ourselves forced to yield to superior numbers, we
can at last retire through the passage I have spoken of, and must then
scatter and each shift for himself until these bad days be past."




CHAPTER XXIV

THE SIEGE OF EVESHAM CASTLE.


Upon the day before starting out to head the expedition against the
outlaws, Sir Rudolph sent word to the Lady Margaret that she must prepare
to become his wife at the end of the week. He had provided two tiring
maids for her by ordering two of the franklins to send in their daughters
for that purpose, and these mingled their tears with Margaret's at the
situation in which they were placed. She replied firmly to the messenger
of the knight that no power on earth could oblige her to marry him. He
might drive her to the altar; but though he killed her there, her lips
should refuse to say the words which would unite them.

The following morning, early, the castle rang with the din of
preparation. The great portion of the mercenaries were encamped in tents
outside the walls, for, spacious as it was, Evesham could hardly contain
400 men in addition to its usual garrison. The men-at-arms were provided
with heavy axes to cut their way through the bushes. Some carried bundles
of straw, to fire the wood should it be found practicable to do so; and
as it was now summer and the wind was blowing high, Sir Rudolph hoped
that the dry grass and bushes would catch, and would do more even than
his men-at-arms in clearing the forest of those whom he designated the
villains infesting it. They had, too, with them several fierce dogs
trained to hunting the deer, and these, the knight hoped, would do good
service in tracking the outlaws. He and the knights and the men-at-arms
with him were all dismounted, for he felt that horses would in the
forest be an encumbrance, and he was determined himself to lead the way
to the men-at-arms.

When they reached the forest, they were saluted by a shower of arrows;
but as all were clad in mail, these at a distance effected but little
harm. As they came closer, however, the clothyard arrows began to pierce
the coarse and ill-made armour of the foot soldiers, although the finer
armour of the knight kept out the shafts which struck against it. Sir
Rudolph and his knights leading the way, they entered the forest, and
gradually pressed their invisible foe backwards through the trees. The
dogs did good service, going on ahead and attacking the archers; but, one
by one, they were soon shot, and the assailants left to their own
devices. Several attempts were made to fire the wood. But these failed,
the fire burning but a short time and then dying out of itself. In
addition to the fighting men, Sir Rudolph had impressed into the service
all the serfs of his domain, and these, armed with axes, were directed to
cut down the trees as the force proceeded, Sir Rudolph declaring that he
would not cease until he had levelled the whole forest, though it might
take him months to do so.

The assailants gained ground steadily, the resistance being less severe
than Sir Rudolph had anticipated. Several small huts and clearings in the
forest which had been used by the outlaws, and round which small crops
had been planted, were destroyed, and all seemed to promise well for the
success of the enterprise.

It was about two hours after they had left the castle, when a heavy cart
filled with faggots was seen approaching its gates. The garrison, who had
not the least fear of any attack, paid no attention to it until it
reached the edge of the moat. Then the warder, seeing that it contained
faggots, lowered the drawbridge without question, raised the portcullis,
and opened the gates.

"From whom do you bring this wood?" he asked, as the man driving the oxen
began to cross the bridge.

"From the franklin of Hopeburn."

"It is well," said the warder, "for he is in arrear now, and should have
sent in the firewood two months since. Take it to the wood-house at the
other end of the court."

The heavy-waggon crossed the drawbridge, but as it was entering the gate
it came suddenly to a stop. With a blow of his ox goad Cnut levelled the
warder to the ground, and cutting the cords of the bullocks, drove them
into the yard ahead. As he did so the pile of faggots fell asunder, and
twelve men armed with bow and pike leaped out. The men-at-arms standing
near, lounging in the courtyard, gave a shout of alarm, and the garrison,
surprised at this sudden cry, ran to their arms. At first they were
completely panic-stricken. But seeing after a time how small was the
number of their assailants, they took heart and advanced against them.
The passage was narrow, and the twelve men formed a wall across it. Six
of them with their pikes advanced, the other six with bent bows standing
behind them and delivering their arrows between their heads. The garrison
fought stoutly, and although losing many, were pressing the little band
backwards. In vain the assistant-warder tried to lower the portcullis, or
to close the gates. The former fell on to the top of the waggon, and was
there retained. The gates also were barred by the obstacle. The chains of
the drawbridge had at once been cut. Cnut encouraged his followers by his
shouts, and armed with a heavy axe, did good service upon the assailants.
But four of his party had fallen, and the rest were giving way, when a
shout was heard, and over the drawbridge poured Cuthbert and 150 of the
outlaws of the forest. Struck with terror at this attack, the garrison
drew back, and the foresters poured into the yard. For a few minutes
there was a fierce fight; but the defenders of the castle, disheartened
and taken by surprise, were either cut down or, throwing down their arms,
cried for quarter.

Ten minutes after the waggon had crossed the drawbridge, the castle was
safely in possession of Sir Cuthbert. The bridge was raised, the waggon
removed, the portcullis lowered, and to the external eye all remained
as before.

Cuthbert at once made his way to the chamber where the Lady Margaret was
confined, and her joy at her deliverance was great indeed. So unlimited
was her faith in Sir Cuthbert that she had never lost confidence; and
although it did not seem possible that in the face of such disparity of
numbers he could rescue her from the power of Sir Rudolph, yet she had
not given up hope. The joy of the farmers' daughters who had been
carried off to act as her attendants was little inferior to her own; for
once in the power of this reckless baron, the girls had small hopes of
ever being allowed to return again to their parents.

The flag of Sir Rudolph was thrown down from the keep, and that of the
late earl hoisted in its stead; for Cuthbert himself, although he had
assumed the cognizance which King Richard had granted him, had not yet
any flag or pennon emblazoned with it.

No words can portray the stupefaction and rage of Sir Rudolph when a man
who had managed to slip unobserved from the castle at the time of its
capture, bore the news to him in the forest. All opposition there had
ceased, and the whole of the troops were engaged in aiding the peasants
in cutting wide roads through the trees across the forest, so as to make
it penetrable by horsemen in every direction. It was supposed that the
outlaws had gradually stolen away through the thickets and taken to the
open country, intending to scatter to their homes, or other distant
hiding-places; and the news that they had by a ruse captured the castle,
came as a thunderclap.

Sir Rudolph's first impulse was to call his men together and to march
towards the castle. The drawbridge was up, and the walls bristled with
armed men. It was useless to attempt a parley; still more useless to
think of attacking the stronghold without the proper machines and
appliances. Foaming with rage, Sir Rudolph took possession of a cottage
near, camped his men around and prepared for a siege.

There were among the mercenaries many men accustomed to the use of
engines of war. Many, too, had aided in making them; and these were at
once set to work to construct the various machines in use at that time.
Before the invention of gunpowder, castles such as those of the English
barons were able to defy any attack by an armed force for a long period.
Their walls were so thick that even the balistas, casting huge stones,
were unable to breach them except after a very long time. The moats
which surrounded them were wide and deep, and any attempt at storming by
ladders was therefore extremely difficult; and these buildings were
consequently more often captured by famine than by other means. Of
provisions, as Sir Rudolph knew, there was a considerable supply at
present in the castle, for he had collected a large number of bullocks in
order to feed the strong body who had been added to the garrison. The
granaries, too, were well stored; and with a groan Sir Rudolph thought of
the rich stores of French wines which he had collected in his cellars.

After much deliberation with the knights with him and the captain of the
mercenaries, it was agreed in the first instance to attempt to attack the
place by filling up a portion of the moat and ascending by scaling
ladders. Huge screens of wood were made, and these were placed on
waggons; the waggons themselves were filled with bags of earth, and a
large number of men getting beneath them shoved the ponderous machines
forward to the edge of the moat. The bags of stones and earth were then
thrown in, and the waggons pushed backwards to obtain a fresh supply.
This operation was of course an exceedingly slow one, a whole day being
occupied with each trip of the waggons. They were not unmolested in their
advance, for, from the walls, mangonels and other machines hurled great
stones down upon the wooden screens, succeeding sometimes, in spite of
their thickness, in crashing through them, killing many of the men
beneath. The experiment was also tried of throwing balls of Greek fire
down upon the wood; but as this was green and freshly felled it would not
take fire, but the flames dropping through, with much boiling pitch and
other materials, did grievously burn and scald the soldiers working below
it. Upon both sides every device was tried. The cross-bow men among the
mercenaries kept up a fire upon the walls to hinder the defenders from
interfering with the operations, while the archers above shot steadily,
and killed many of those who ventured within range of their bows.

After ten days' labour, a portion of the moat some twenty yards in
length was filled with bags of earth, and all was ready for the assault.
The besiegers had prepared great numbers of strong ladders, and these
were brought up under shelter of the screens. Then, all being ready, the
trumpets sounded for the assault, and the troops moved forward in a close
body, covering themselves with their shields so that no man's head or
body was visible, each protecting the one before him with his shield held
over him. Thus the body presented the appearance of a great scale-covered
animal. In many respects, indeed, the warfare of those days was changed
in no way from that of the time of the Romans. In the 1200 years which
had elapsed between the siege of Jerusalem and the days of the crusades
there had been but little change in arms or armour, and the operations
which Titus undertook for the reduction of the Jewish stronghold differed
but little from those which a Norman baron employed in besieging his
neighbour's castle.

Within Evesham Castle all was contentment and merriment during these
days. The garrison had no fear whatever of being unable to repel the
