"Only three rifleshots now," he muttered, "and before long it will be
but two. But we have better weapons than theirs, and ours can speak
fast. Easy now, lads! We mustn't wear ourselves out!"

Robert made his strokes slower. The perspiration was standing on his
face, and his breath was growing painful, but he remembered in time the
excellence of Willet's advice. The gain of the long canoe increased more
rapidly, but the three were accumulating strength for a great spurt. The
pursuit and flight, hitherto, had been made in silence, but now the
Hurons, for such their paint proved them to be, uttered a long war
whoop, full of anticipation and triumph, a cry saying plainly that they
expected to have three good scalps soon. It made Robert's pulse leap
with anger.

"They haven't taken us yet," he said.

Willet laughed.

"Don't let 'em make you lose your temper," he said. "No, they haven't
taken us, and we've escaped before from such places just as tight. They
make faster time than we can, Robert, but our three rifles here will
have a word or two to say."

After the single war whoop the warriors relapsed into silence and plied
their paddles, sure now of their prey. They were experts themselves and
their paddles swept the water in perfect unison, while the long canoe
gradually cut down the distance between it and the little craft ahead.

"Two rifle shots," said the hunter, "and when it becomes one, as it
surely will, I'll have to give 'em a hint with a bullet."

"It's possible,"' said Robert, "that a third power will intervene."

"What do you mean?" asked Willet.

"The storm's coming back. Look up!"

It was true. The sky was darkening again, and the clouds were gathering
fast over the mountains on the west. Already lightning was quivering
along the slopes, and the forest was beginning to rock with the wind.
The air rapidly grew heavier and darker. Their own canoe was quivering,
and Robert saw that the long canoe was rising and falling with the
waves.

"Looks as if it might be a question of skill with the paddles rather
than with the rifles," said Willet tersely.

"But they are still gaining," said Tayoga, "even though the water is so
rough."

"Aye," said Willet, "and unless the storm bursts in full power they'll
soon be within rifle shot."

He watched with occasional keen backward looks, and in a few minutes he
snatched up his rifle, took a quick aim and fired. The foremost man in
the long canoe threw up his arms, and fell sideways into the water. The
canoe stopped entirely for a moment or two, but then the others,
uttering a long, fierce yell of rage, bent to their paddles with a
renewed effort. The three had made a considerable gain during their
temporary check, but it could not last long. Willet again looked for a
chance to land, but the cliffs rose above them sheer and impossible.

"We are in the hands of Manitou," said Tayoga, gravely. "He will save
us. Look, how the storm gathers! Perhaps it was sent back to help us."

The Onondaga spoke with the utmost earnestness. It was not often that a
storm returned so quickly, and accepting the belief that Manitou
intervened in the affairs of earth, he felt that the second convulsion
of nature was for their benefit. Owing to the great roughness of the
water their speed now decreased, but not more than that of the long
canoe, the rising wind compelling them to use their paddles mostly for
steadiness. The spray was driven like sleet in their faces, and they
were soon wet through and through, but they covered the rifles and
ammunition with their blankets, knowing that when the storm passed they
would be helpless unless they were kept dry.

The Hurons fired a few shots, all of which fell short or wide, and then
settled down with all their numbers to the management of their canoe,
which was tossing dangerously. Robert noticed their figures were growing
dim, and then, as the storm struck with full violence for the second
time, the darkness came down and hid them.

"Now," shouted Willet, as the wind whistled and screamed in their ears,
"we'll make for the middle of the lake!"

Relying upon their surpassing skill with the paddle, they chose a most
dangerous course, so far as the risk of wreck was concerned, but they
intended that the long canoe should pass them in the dusk, and then they
would land in the rear. The waves were higher as they went toward the
center of the lake, but they were in no danger of being dashed against
the cliffs, and superb work with the paddles kept them from being
swamped. Luckily the darkness endured, and, as they were able to catch
through it no glimpse of the long canoe, they had the certainty of being
invisible themselves.

"Why not go all the way across to the eastern shore?" shouted Robert.
"We may find anchorage there, and we'd be safe from both the Hurons and
the storm!"

"Dagaeoga is right," said Tayoga.

"Well spoken!" said Willet. "Do the best work you ever did with the
paddles, or we'll find the bottom of the lake instead of the eastern
shore!"

But skill, strength and quickness of eye carried them in safety across
the lake, and they found a shore of sufficient slope for them to land
and lift the canoe after them, carrying it back at least half a mile,
and not coming to rest until they reached the crest of a high hill,
wooded densely. They put the canoe there among the bushes and sank down
behind it, exhausted. The rifles and precious ammunition, wrapped
tightly in the folds of their blankets, had been kept dry, but they were
wet to the bone themselves and now, that their muscles were relaxed, the
cold struck in. The three, despite their weariness, began to exercise
again vigorously, and kept it up until the rain ceased.

Then the second storm stopped as suddenly as the first had departed, the
darkness went away, and the great lake stood out, blue and magnificent,
in the light. Far to the south moved the long canoe, a mere black dot
in the water. Tayoga laughed in his throat.

"They rage and seek us in vain," he said. "They will continue pursuing
us to the south. They do not know that Manitou sent the second storm
especially to cover us up with a darkness in which we might escape."

"It's a good belief, Tayoga," said Willet, "and as Manitou arranged that
we should elude them he is not likely to bring them back into our path.
That being the case I'm going to dry my clothes."

"So will I," said Robert, and the Onondaga nodded his own concurrence.
They took off their garments, wrung the water out of them and hung them
on the bushes to dry, a task soon to be accomplished by the sun that now
came out hot and bright. Meanwhile they debated their further course.

"The long canoe still goes south," said Tayoga. "It is now many miles
away, hunting for us. Perhaps since they cannot find us, the Hurons will
conclude that the storm sank us in the lake!"

"But they will hunt along the shore a long time," said Willet. "They're
nothing but a tiny speck now, and in a quarter of an hour they'll be out
of sight altogether. Suppose we cross the lake behind them--I think I
see a cove down there on the western side--take the canoe with us and
wait until they go back again."

"A wise plan," said Tayoga.

In another hour their deerskins were dry, and reclothing themselves they
returned the canoe to the lake, the Hurons still being invisible. Then
they crossed in haste, reached the cove that Willet had seen, and
plunged into the deep woods, taking the canoe with them, and hiding
their trail carefully. When they had gone a full three miles they came
to rest in a glade, and every one of the three felt that it was time.
Muscles and nerves alike were exhausted, and they remained there all the
rest of the day and the following night, except that after dark Tayoga
went back to the lake and saw the long canoe going northward.

"I don't think we'll be troubled by that band of Hurons any more," he
reported to his comrades. "They will surely think we have been drowned,
and tomorrow we can continue our own journey to the south."

"And on the whole, we've come out of it pretty well," said Willet.

"With the aid of Manitou, who so generously sent us the second storm,"
said Tayoga.

They brought the canoe back to the lake at dawn, and hugging the western
shore made leisurely speed to the south, until they came to the
neighborhood of the French works at Carillon, when they landed again
with their canoe, and after a long and exhausting portage launched
themselves anew on the smaller but more splendid lake, known to the
English as George and to the French as Saint Sacrement. Now, though,
they traveled by night and slept and rested by day. But Lake George in
the moonlight was grand and beautiful beyond compare. Its waters were
dusky silver as the beams poured in floods upon it, and the lofty
shores, in their covering of dark green, seemed to hold up the skies.

"It's a grand land," said Robert for the hundredth time.

"It is so," said Tayoga. "After Manitou had practiced on many other
countries he used all his wisdom and skill to make the country of the
Hodenosaunee."

The next morning when they lay on the shore they saw two French boats on
the lake, and Robert was confirmed in his opinion that the prevision of
the French leaders would enable them to strike the first blow. Already
their armed forces were far down in the debatable country, and they
controlled the ancient water route between the British colonies and
Canada.

On the second night they left the lake, hid the canoe among the bushes
at the edge of a creek, and began the journey by land to the vale of
Onondaga. It was likely that in ordinary times they would have made it
without event, but they felt now the great need of caution, since the
woods might be full of warriors of the hostile tribes. They were sure,
too, that Tandakora would find their trail and that he would not
relinquish the pursuit until they were near the villages of the
Hodenosaunee. The trail might be hidden from the Ojibway alone, but
since many war parties of their foes were in the woods he would learn of
it from some of them. So they followed the plan they had used on the
lake of traveling by night and of lying in the bush by day.

Another deer fell to Tayoga's deadly arrow, and on the third day as they
were concealed in dense forest they saw smoke on a high hill, rising in
rings, as if a blanket were passed rapidly over a fire and back again
in a steady alternation.

"Can you read what they say, Tayoga?" asked Willet.

"No," replied the Onondaga. "They are strange to me, and so it cannot be
any talk of the Hodenosaunee. Ah, look to the west! See, on another
hill, two miles away, rings of smoke also are rising!"

"Which means that two bands of French Indians are talking to each other,
Tayoga?"

"It is so, Great Bear, and here within the lands of the Hodenosaunee!
Perhaps Frenchmen are with them, Frenchmen from Carillon or some other
post that Onontio has pushed far to the south."

The young Onondaga spoke with deep resentment. The sight of the two
smokes made by the foes of the Hodenosaunee filled him with anger, and
Willet, who observed his face, easily read his mind from it.

"You would like to see more of the warriors who are making those
signals," he said. "Well, I don't blame you for your curiosity and
perhaps it would be wise for us to take a look. Suppose we stalk the
first fire."

Tayoga nodded, and the three, although hampered somewhat by their packs,
began a slow approach through the bushes. Half the distance, and Tayoga,
who was in advance, putting his finger upon his lips, sank almost flat.

"What is it, Tayoga?" whispered Willet.

"Someone else stalking them too. On the right. I heard a bush move."

Both Willet and Robert heard it also as they waited, and used as they
were to the forest they knew that it was made by a human being.

"What's your opinion, Tayoga?" asked the hunter.

"A warrior or warriors of the Hodenosaunee, seeking, as we are, to see
those who are sending up the rings of smoke," replied the Onondaga.

"If you're right they're likely to be Mohawks, the Keepers of the
Eastern Gate."

Tayoga nodded.

"Let us see," he said.

Putting his fingers to his lips, he blew between them a note soft and
low but penetrating. A half minute, and a note exactly similar came from
a point in the dense bush about a hundred yards away. Then Tayoga blew a
shorter note, and as before the reply came, precisely like it.

"It is the Ganeagaono," said Tayoga with certainty, "and we will await
them here."

The three remained motionless and silent, but in a few minutes the
bushes before them shook, and four tall figures, rising to their full
height, stood in plain view. They were Mohawk warriors, all young,
powerful and with fierce and lofty features. The youngest and tallest, a
man with the high bearing of a forest chieftain, said:

"We meet at a good time, O Tayoga, of the clan of the Bear, of the
nation Onondaga, of the great League of the Hodenosaunee."

"It is so, O Daganoweda, of the clan of the Turtle, of the nation
Ganeagaono, of the great League of the Hodenosaunee," replied Tayoga.
"I see that my brethren, the Keepers of the Eastern Gate, watch when the
savage tribes come within their territory."

The brows of the young Mohawk contracted into a frown.

"Most of our warriors are on the great trail to the vale of Onondaga,"
he said. "We are but four, and, though we are only four, we intended to
attack. The smoke nearer by is made by Hurons and Caughnawagas."

"You are more than four, you are seven," said Tayoga.

Daganoweda understood, and smiled fiercely and proudly.

"You have spoken well, Tayoga," he said, "but you have spoken as I
expected you to speak. Onundagaono and Ganeagaono be the first nations
of the Hodenosaunee and they never fail each other. We are seven and we
are enough."

He took it for granted that Tayoga spoke as truly for the two white men
as for himself, and Robert and the hunter felt themselves committed.
Moreover their debt to the Onondaga was so great that they could not
abandon him, and they knew he would go with the Mohawks. It would also
be good policy to share their enterprise and their danger.

"We'll support you to the end of it," said Willet quietly.

"The English have always been the friends of the Hodenosaunee," said
Daganoweda, as he led the way through the undergrowth toward the point
from which the smoke come. Neither Robert nor Willet felt any scruple
about attacking the warriors there, as they were clearly invaders with
hostile purpose of Mohawk territory, and it was also more than likely
that their immediate object was the destruction of the three. Yet the
two Americans held back a little, letting the Indians take the lead, not
wishing it to be said that they began the battle.

Daganoweda, whose name meant "Inexhaustible," was a most competent young
chief. He spread out his little force in a half circle, and the seven
rapidly approached the fire. But Robert was glad when a stick broke
under the foot of an incautious and eager warrior, and the Hurons and
Caughnawagas, turning in alarm, fired several bullets into the bushes.
He was glad, because it was the other side that began the combat, and if
there was a Frenchman with them he could not go to Montreal or Quebec,
saying the British and their Indians had fired the first shot.

All of the bullets flew wide, and Daganoweda's band took to cover at
once, waiting at least five minutes before they obtained a single shot
at a brown body. Then all the usual incidents of a forest struggle
followed, the slow creeping, the occasional shot, a shout of triumph or
the death yell, but the Hurons and Caughnawagas, who were about a dozen
in number, were routed and took to flight in the woods, leaving three of
their number fallen. Two of the Mohawks were wounded but not severely.
Tayoga, who was examining the trail, suddenly raised his head and said:

"Tandakora has been here. There is none other who wears so large a
moccasin. Here go his footsteps! and here! and here!"

"Doubtless they thought we were near, and were arranging with the other
band to trap us," said Willet. "Daganoweda, it seems that you and your
Mohawks came just in time. Are the smoke rings from the second fire
still rising? We were too far away for them to hear our rifles."

"Only one or two rings go up now," replied Tayoga. "Since they have
received no answer in a long time they wonder what has happened. See how
those two rings wander away and dissolve in the air, as if they were
useless, and now no more follow."

"But the warriors may come here to see what is the matter, and we ought
to be ready for them."

Daganoweda, to whom they readily gave the place of leader, since by
right it was his, saw at once the soundness of the hunter's advice, and
they made an ambush. The second band, which was about the size of the
first, approached cautiously, and after a short combat retired swiftly
with two wounded warriors, evidently thinking the enemy was in great
force, and leaving the young Mohawk chieftain in complete possession of
his victorious field.

"Tayoga, and you, Great Bear, I thank you," said Daganoweda. "Without
your aid we could never have overcome our enemies."

"We were glad to do what we could," said Willet sincerely, "since, as I
see it, your cause and ours are the same."

Tayoga was examining the fleeing trail of the second band as he had
examined that of the first, and he beckoned to his white comrades and to
Daganoweda.

"Frenchmen were here," he said. "See the trail. They wore moccasins, but
