
"If you make the signs, and they make them, of course you can," replied
Shuffles. "No member can speak to another about the business of the
Chain until both of them have proved that they belong, by giving the
required signals."

"Shuffles, do you suppose Captain Gordon knows the signs?"

"How should I know? I never tried him. I don't know why he shouldn't
make them as well as Tom Ellis."

"Tom Ellis is all right. I vouch for him, for I admitted him myself. Who
will vouch for the captain? Who took him in?"

"I don't know."

"I don't; but if anybody has admitted him, and not given him the signs,
he ought to be instructed in them. Of course he must have been admitted,
or he would not have voted," added Pelham, sarcastically.

"I have nothing more to say about this matter," replied Shuffles,
disgusted with the cavils of his first officer.

"Nor I; but I shall satisfy myself whether the captain is a member or
not," said Pelham, decidedly.

"Well, you must be very cautious what you do."

"Certainly I shall. I will give him the first sign; if he don't answer
it, I shall conclude he is not a member; or, if he is, that he has not
been properly instructed."

"Better not say anything to him," said Shuffles.

"Why not? He voted, and it must be all right."

"Don't you say a word to him, unless he proves that he is a member."

"I think he has proved that already by voting."

"You know our rule."

"I do; it requires me to satisfy myself that the person to whom I speak
is a member. I am entirely satisfied now that the captain and Paul
Kendall belong; they would not have voted if they had not belonged."

This was a "clincher," and even Shuffles had not wit enough to escape
the conclusion of the dogmatic reasoner. The captain elect of the League
knew very well that nine persons who were not members had voted--that he
had secured his election by a gross fraud. He was afraid that Pelham,
disappointed by his defeat, would do something to compromise the
enterprise; but his own treachery had placed him in such a position that
he could say nothing without exposing himself.

"Of course it's all right," added Pelham, "I find we have plenty of
friends in the after cabin. As soon as you have any orders to give,
Captain Shuffles, I am in a position to execute them to the best
advantage."

"When I am ready, I will give them to you."

"It will be an easy matter now to obtain possession of the ship; in
fact, all you have to do is to order Captain Gordon to turn the command
over to you. He has been 'toggled,' and must obey his superiors--of
course he has been toggled; he couldn't have voted if he hadn't been."

Shuffles was terribly exercised by the repeated flings of his
disconcerted rival. He was already satisfied that the enterprise had
come to an end, unless Pelham could be quieted; and he was about to
propose a new ballot, when he was ordered by the quartermaster on duty
to take his trick at the wheel.

"What does all this mean?" demanded Pelham of the receivers, when the
captain-elect had gone to his duty.

"I only know that the captain and all the officers of the first part of
the port watch voted, and other fellows who would no more join this
thing than they would jump overboard," replied McKeon.

"How could they vote--how could the captain vote--without understanding
the whole thing?" demanded Pelham, perplexed at the inconsistency of the
facts.

"I think I know something about it," added Grossbeck.

"What do you know?"

"Haven't you heard of the new game?"

"What new game?"

"'Don't know Beans.'"

"Shuffles said something about it, but I did not comprehend his
meaning."

Grossbeck explained the game, whose history had been circulated among
"our fellows."

"And this game was played while the voting was going on?" said Pelham,
who began to see the trick which his rival had put upon him.

"I didn't know anything about it till supper time," answered Grossbeck.

"I see it all," continued Pelham. "The receivers were the 'butts,' and
about a dozen fellows voted for Shuffles, including Gordon and Kendall,
supposing they were simply playing 'Don't know Beans.'"

It did not require a great deal of penetration on the part of the fourth
lieutenant to comprehend the trick of his rival. He was indignant and
angry, and all the more so because he had been outwitted, even while he
was attempting to outwit his unscrupulous competitor.

The next day, the quarter watches off duty played "Don't know Beans" to
their satisfaction. It was found, when everybody was watching the
"butts," that very few could deposit their beans without detection. A
few hours' trial of the new pastime convinced all except "our fellows"
that it was a senseless game, and it was speedily abandoned.

On the nineteenth day of the voyage, the Young America encountered
another gale, but it was not nearly so severe as the one through which
she had passed when off Cape Sable. The ship ran for twelve hours under
close-reefed topsails; but as the gale came from the south-west, she
laid her course during the whole of it, and behaved herself to the
entire satisfaction of all on board. On the following day, the wind had
hauled round to the north-west, and the sea subsided, so that the ship
went along very comfortably.

Notwithstanding his doubts of the good faith of Pelham, who, however,
nominally adhered to the terms of the compact, Shuffles arranged his
plans for the capture of the ship. He had decided to defer the grand
strike until the ship had come up with Cape Clear, so that the faculty,
and all the students who would not take a part in the enterprise, might
be put on shore immediately. In the course of three days, the land would
probably be sighted. The rising was to take place in Pelham's watch, the
officers of which were members of the League. All the details had been
carefully arranged, and trusty "links" appointed to perform the heavy
work. As soon as the "old folks" had been locked up in the cabin, and
the new captain had taken the command, the ship was to be headed for the
shore. The great event was to come off at six o'clock in the afternoon
of the twenty-third or twenty-fifth day. The ship would be near the
coast for at least a part of two days. If she was within six hours' sail
of the land on the twenty-third day out, when Pelham would have the
second part of the first dog watch, the rising was to take place then;
if not, it was to be deferred till the twenty-fifth day, when the
watches were again favorable.

Shuffles communicated with his discontented first officer as often as he
could, and unfolded his plans without reserve. Pelham listened, and,
still professing his willingness to obey his superior officer, promised
to do all that was required of him.

"In your watch, Pelham, you will see that the helm is in the hands of
some of our fellows," said Shuffles.

"Certainly," replied Pelham, with more indifference than suited the
enthusiastic chief of the enterprise "By the way, Captain Shuffles, have
you laid out any work for Captain Gordon to do?"

"What's the use of talking to me about him now that we are on the very
point of accomplishing our purpose?" demanded Shuffles, with deep
disgust.

"You can't deny that Gordon is an able fellow, and, as a good commander,
of course you intend to give him some important position," chuckled
Pelham. "Have you appointed the rest of your officers yet?"

"To be sure I have."

"Have you given Gordon anything?"

"No!" growled Shuffles.

"No? Why, do you think the present captain of the ship will be content
to go into the steerage under the new arrangement?"

"He may go into the steerage or go overboard," answered the chief,
angrily.

"Accidentally, you mean."

"Pelham, if you intend to be a traitor, say so."

"I! My dear fellow, I don't mean anything of the kind. I am as true as
the pole star."

"Have you spoken to the captain about our affairs?"

"Not a word."

"Have you tried him by the signs?"

"I have, and he made no sign," laughed Pelham, who was not much
enamoured of the cabalistic clap-trap of the Chain.

"Then, of course, he is not a member."

"He must be; he voted," replied Pelham, maliciously.

"How many more times will you say that?"

"Perhaps fifty; perhaps a hundred," answered the fourth lieutenant,
coolly. "I shall say it until you are willing to acknowledge the trick
you put upon me."

"What trick?"

"O, I know all about it! Didn't you tell Kendall, the captain, and seven
or eight others, how to play 'Don't know Beans'?"

"If I did, it was to cheat them when they wanted to know what the beans
meant."

"You saw that the fellows threw away the beans, instead of voting for
you with them, and you invented your game to make the thing come out
right. No matter, Shuffles; I am bound by the compact we made, but I
shall persist in regarding Gordon, Kendall Foster, and others as
members. As you made them vote, you are responsible for them. That's
all."

"Don't let us quarrel about it, my dear fellow," said Shuffles, in soft,
insinuating tones.

"By no means."

"We will have a new election," suggested the chief.

"If we should, I'm afraid all the fellows would want to play 'Don't know
Beans.'"

"You shall conduct it any way you please."

"If I did, you would say I cheated you. I agreed to abide by the
election, and I shall do so. The fact is, Shuffles, you and I are too
smart to play in the same game. I shall stick to the bond. When you
order me to do anything, I shall do it," replied Pelham as he turned on
his heel and walked off.

He retreated into the after cabin, where Shuffles could not follow him.
At the cabin table, studying his French lesson, sat Paul Kendall.




CHAPTER XIX.

MAN OVERBOARD!


"Do you know how to play 'Don't know Beans'?" asked Pelham, as he seated
himself by the side of the second lieutenant.

"Yes; I know how to play it, but it's a stupid game. Shuffles told me
how."

"Did he, indeed?"

"There was some fun in it the first time I tried it; but the second time
was enough to satisfy me. I don't think there is any sense in it."

"Of course there isn't, Kendall," laughed Pelham. "It was no game at
all."

"What are you laughing at?"

"You were sold on that game," added the conspirator indulging in more
laughter than the occasion seemed to require.

"How was I sold? I don't see anything so very funny about it."

"I do."

"Tell me about it; if there is any joke I think I shall enjoy it. You
say I was sold."

"You were; and so was I."

"Well, what was it?" asked Paul, impatiently.

"When you gave those fellows the beans that day, you were voting!"

"Voting! Voting for what, or whom?" exclaimed the second lieutenant.

"For Shuffles."

"Did my vote count?"

"To be sure it did; and he was elected to a certain position by your
vote and those of seven or eight others who did not understand the
trick," replied Pelham laughing all the time.

"What was the position? I don't understand what you are talking about,
and therefore I can't appreciate the joke."

"I'll tell you, Kendall; but you must keep still about it for the
present."

"It looks to me, on the face of it, like a dishonest trick. It seems
that Shuffles lied to us when he made us believe that we were playing a
game. I like a joke well enough, but I don't believe in a fellow's lying
for the sake of any fun."

"You are right, Kendall. It was not only a dishonest trick, but it was a
mean one."

"What was the position?" repeated Paul.

"Some of the fellows are going to make Mr. Lowington a present of a
silver pitcher as soon as we get to some port where we can obtain one."

"Why didn't you tell of it?" demanded Paul. "I should like to join in
the presentation, for I don't think there is a fellow on board who likes
Mr. Lowington better than I do."

"Yes; but, you see, there's something peculiar about this thing. The
contribution is to be confined to those fellows who have been
disciplined in one way or another. A good many of us, you know, were mad
when Mr. Lowington took our money away; we are satisfied now that he was
right. We made him feel rather uncomfortable by our looks and actions,
and some of us were positively impudent to him. We purpose to show that
our feelings are all right."

"Precisely so!" replied Paul, with enthusiasm. "That's splendid! Mr.
Lowington will appreciate the gift when he sees the names of the
subscribers."

"Certainly he will."

"But you have no money," laughed the second lieutenant.

"We have put our names down for ten shillings apiece--about thirty of
us. When we get into port, we shall tell Mr. Lowington that we wish to
present a silver pitcher to a gentleman on board, in token of our
appreciation of his kindness, &c., and ask him for half a sovereign each
from our funds."

"He will wish to know who the gentleman is."

"We can ask to be excused from telling him."

"I can manage that part of the business for you. Each of the fellows
shall give me an order on the principal for ten shillings, to be paid to
Dr. Winstock, who will buy the pitcher for you, if you like. He is
acquainted in Cork. I will give all the orders to the doctor, and he
will get the present without saying a word to Mr. Lowington until after
the presentation. Then he will have no chance to object, on the
suspicion that the gift is intended for him--don't you see?"

Paul Kendall entered into the project with a degree of enthusiasm which
was rather embarrassing to the conspirator.

"The fellows have been very secret about the thing," added Pelham.

"They must have been, or I should have heard something about it,"
replied Paul, innocently.

"No one but ourselves has known a thing about it till now. They have
formed a kind of secret society, and know each other by certain signs."

"But what was the voting for?"

"For orator of the day."

"For the fellow who is to present the pitcher and make the speech?"
added Paul.

"Yes."

"And Shuffles was chosen?"

"Yes, by a trick."
