"Now, Frank, the first question of all is--How is my mother? What
did she do when I was missing? It must have been awful for her."

"Of course, it was a terrible anxiety, Bertha, but she bore it
better than would be expected, especially as she had not been well
before."

"It troubled me more, Frank, than even my own affairs. As soon as I
had time to think at all, I could not imagine what she would do,
and the only comfort was that she had you to look after her."

"No doubt it was a comfort, dear, that she had someone to lean upon
a little.

"Halt!" he broke off suddenly, as there was the sound of a stick
breaking among the trees close by. "Stand to your arms, men, and
gather closely.

"Bertha, do you and Anna take your place in the centre, and please
lie down."

"I cannot do that, Frank," she said, positively. "Here you are all
risking your lives for us, and now you want me to put myself quite
safe while you are all in danger."

"I want to be able to fight, Bertha, free of anxiety, and to be
able to devote my whole attention to the work. This I can't do if I
know that you are exposed to bullets."

"Well, I can't lie down anyhow, Frank; but Anna and I will crouch
down if you say that we must when they begin to fire."

They were silent for two or three minutes, and no sounds were heard
in the wood.

"We shall be attacked sooner or later," Frank said quietly to the
men. "We will take to the trees on our right if we are attacked
from the left, and to those on the left if they come at us from the
right. If we are attacked on both sides at once, take to the right.

"George, do you and Harrison and Jones get behind trees, next to
the path. It will be your business to prevent anyone from passing
on that side. I, with the other two, will take post behind trees
facing the other way. The four boatmen with Dominique will shelter
themselves in the bushes between us, with Miss Greendale and her
maid in the middle. They will be the reserve, and if a rush is made
from either side, they will at once advance and beat it back.

"You understand, Dominique?"

"Me understand, sar. If those fellows come we charge at them. These
fellows no used to shoot, sar. Better give muskets to others. We do
best with our swords."

"That is the best plan.

"You take one of the muskets, George, and give one to Harrison. The
two men on my side had better have the others, as I can't use one.

"You understand, lads. These will be spare arms. Keep them in
reserve if possible, so as to check the fellows when they make a
rush. Now do you all understand?

"You explain it to your men, Dominique.

"Now we will go on again, and at the double. It will be as much as
those fellows can do to keep up with us in this thick wood."

Ten minutes passed. Then there was a loud shout and the blowing of
a deep horn on their left, followed by a yell from the wood on both
sides.

"To the right," Frank shouted, and the party ran in among the
trees.

"Get in among that undergrowth with Anna," he said to Bertha.

"Gather there, Dominique, with your men. We shall want you
directly. They are sure to make a rush at first.

"Now, lads, one of you take that tree; the other the one to the
right," and he placed himself behind one between them. On glancing
round he saw that George had already posted his two men, and had
taken up his station between them.

"All hands kneel down," he said. "These bushes will hide us from
their sight. If we stand up we may be hit by shots from behind."

A moment later there was a general discharge of firearms round
them, and then some forty negroes rushed at them.

"On your feet now, men," Frank shouted. "Take steady aim and bring
down a man with each shot."

A cheer broke from the sailors. Four shots were fired from Frank's
side, and five from George Lechmere's, and with them came the
cracks of Frank's revolver, followed almost directly afterwards by
those of the pistols carried by the men, and George Lechmere's
revolver.

Scarce a shot missed. Ten of the negroes fell, and those attacking
from the right turned and bolted among the trees. The negroes on
the left, however, inspired by the roaring of the horns and the
shrieking yells of the Obi man, came on with greater determination
and dashed across the path.

"Now, Dominique, at them!" Frank shouted, as with the two sailors
he rushed across.

The numbers now were not very uneven. Of the twenty negroes on that
side, five had fallen under the musketry and pistol fire, and two
others were wounded; and as Frank's party and the blacks fell upon
them they hesitated. The struggle was not doubtful for a moment.
Six of the negroes were cut down, and the rest fled.

"Don't pursue them, men," Frank shouted; and the sailors at once
drew off, but Dominique and his black boatmen still pursued hotly,
overtaking and cutting down three more of their assailants.

"All is over for the present," Frank said, going to the spot where
Bertha and Anna were crouching. "Not one of us is hurt as far as I
know, and we have accounted for sixteen or seventeen of these
rascals."

Bertha got up. She was a little pale, but perfectly calm and quiet.

"It is horrid, being hidden like that when you are all fighting,
Frank," she said, reproachfully.

"We were hidden, too, till they came at us," he said; "and very
lucky it was, for some of us would probably have been hit, bad
shots though they are."

"No, Frank, not before all these men," she remonstrated.

"What do I care for the men?" he laughed. "Do you think if they had
their sweethearts with them they would mind who was looking on?

"There, I must be content with that for the present. We must push
on again."

Dominique had returned now with his men, and the party started
again at a trot, as soon as the firearms had all been reloaded.

"We shan't have any more trouble, shall we?" Bertha asked.

"Not for the present," he said. "We have fairly routed the blacks
who came here with you, and the villagers, and they certainly won't
attack us again until they are largely reinforced; which they
cannot be until we get down towards the sea, for there are no
villages of any size in the hills."

After keeping up the pace for a mile, Frank ordered the men to drop
into a walk again.

"Now, Frank, about my mother?" Bertha asked again as soon as she
had got her breath; and Frank related all that had taken place up
to the time that the Osprey sailed.

"Then she is all alone in town? It must be terrible for her,
waiting there without any news of me. It is a pity that she did not
go home. It would not have mattered about me, and it would have
been so much better for her among her old friends. They would all
have sympathised with her so much."

"I quite agreed with her, Bertha, and think still that it was
better that she should stay in London. I am sure the sympathy would
do her harm rather than good. As it is, now she will be kept up by
the belief that she is doing all in her power for you, by saving
you from the hideous amount of talk and chatter there would be if
this affair were known."

"Of course, it would be horrid, Frank, and perhaps you are right,
but it must be an awful trial."

"I have done all I could to set her mind at rest," Frank said. "I
wrote to her directly I arrived at Gibraltar, and again as soon as
I got the letter from Madeira saying that the brigantine had
touched there. I wrote from Madeira again with what news I could
pick up, and again from Porto Rico, from the Virgin Islands, and
from San Domingo. Of course, from there I was able to say that the
scent was getting hot, and that I had no doubt I should not be long
before I fell in with the brigantine. Then I sent another letter
from Jaquemel. That seems to me a long time ago, for we have done
so much since; but it is not more than ten days back. We will post
another letter the first time that we touch anywhere, on the off
chance of its going home by a mail steamer, and getting there
before us."

"It was wonderful your finding out that I had been carried off in
the Phantom. That was what troubled me most, except about mother. I
did not see how you could guess that the brigantine we had both
noticed the day before was the Phantom. I felt sure that you would
suspect who it was, but I could not see how you would connect the
two together."

"You see, I did not guess it at first," he replied. "I felt sure
that it was Carthew from the first minute when I found that you had
not landed, and it was just the luck of finding out that the
Phantom's crew had returned, and that they had been paid off at
Ostend, that put me on the track. Of course, directly I heard that
she had been altered and turned into a brigantine, I felt sure that
she was the craft that we had noticed; and as soon as I learned
through Lloyd's that she had sailed south from the Lizard, I felt
certain that she must have gone up the Mediterranean, or to the
West Indies. I felt sure it was the latter. However, it was a great
relief when I got a letter from Lloyd's agent at Madeira, telling
me that the brigantine had touched there, and I felt certain that I
should hear of you either here or at one of the South American
ports."

They kept on until they reached the hut at the point where the path
forked. It was found to be empty.

"Open the basket," Frank said. "We must have a meal before we go
further. We have come about half the distance.

"Now, Bertha, there is the bay, you see, and it is all downhill,
which is a comfort. Do you feel tired, dear?"

"Not tired," she said, "but my feet are aching a bit. You see, I
had thin deck shoes on when we were hurried ashore, and they are
not good for walking long distances in."

"Well, we will have a quarter of an hour's rest," he said. "It is
getting dark fast, and by the time we go on it will be night, and
will be a great deal cooler than it has been."

"I can go on at once if you like," she said.

"No, dear; there is no use in hurrying. We may as well stop half an
hour as a quarter. Don't you hear that?"

The girl listened.

"It is a horn, is it not?" she asked, after a pause.

"Yes, I can hear it in half a dozen directions," he said. "That
scoundrel of an Obi man is down there ahead of us, and that
unearthly row he and his followers are making will rouse up all the
villagers within hearing. We will try to give him the slip. I
intend to take the path we came by for four or five miles, and then
to strike off by one to the right, and hit the main road to Port au
Prince, a good bit to the east of where we quitted it. The country
is all cultivated there, and we will strike down towards the bay
and make our way through the fields, and if we have luck we may be
able to get down to the place where the gig will be waiting for us
without meeting any of them."

"Oh, I do hope there will be no more fighting, Frank! You may not
all get off as well as you did last time."

"We must take our chance of that, dear. At any rate the country
will be open, and we shall be able to keep in a solid body, and I
have no doubt that we shall be able to beat them off."

"Could we not go down to the shore, and get a boat somewhere, and
row to the yacht?"

"Yes, we might manage that, perhaps. That is a capital idea,
Bertha. There is a place called Nipes, twelve or fourteen miles
east of our inlet. It won't be very much further to go, for we have
been bearing eastward all the way here. Making sure that we shall
go straight for the yacht, they will gather in that direction
first, and won't think of giving the alarm so far east. There was a
path, if I remember right, that came up from that direction a
quarter of a mile further on. We will turn off by it."

As soon as the meal was over they started again. They found the
path Frank had spoken of, and followed it down until they came
among trees. Then Dominique lighted his lantern again.

For a time the two women kept on travelling, but after five miles
Bertha was compelled to stop and take off her shoes altogether. For
two miles further she refused the offers to carry her, but at last
was forced to own that she could go no further.

The two litters were at once brought up, and the four sailors,
Dominique and the three uninjured boatmen, lifted them and went
along at a trot, George Lechmere leading the way with a lantern.
The weight of the girls, divided between four strong men, was a
mere trifle, and they now made much more rapid progress than they
had before, and in three quarters of an hour arrived at Nipes.

As they got to the little town, Bertha and Anna got out and walked,
so as to attract as little attention as possible among the negroes
in the streets. Dominique answered all questions, stating that they
were a party belonging to a ship in Marsouin Bay, that they had
been on a sporting expedition over the hills, and had lost their
way, and now wanted a boat to take them back.

As soon as they reached the strand half a dozen were offered to
them. Dominique chose the one that looked the fastest. He told the
boatman that the ladies were very tired, and they wanted to get
back as soon as possible, and he must, therefore, engage ten men to
row, as the wind was so slight as to be useless.

As he did not haggle about terms, the bargain was speedily
concluded, and in a few minutes they put off. The men, animated by
the handsome rate of pay they were to receive, rowed hard, and in a
little over two hours they entered the inlet at the end of which
the Osprey was lying. As they neared the end the boatmen were
surprised at seeing a large number of people with torches on the
rising ground, and something like panic seized them when they heard
the Obi horns sounding. They dropped their oars at once.

"Tell them to row on, Dominique," Frank said, "and to keep close
along the opposite side. Tell them that if they don't do so we will
shoot them. No; tell them that we will chuck them overboard and row
on ourselves."

"There is the place where we landed," Frank said presently to
Bertha (the men had resumed their rowing), "just under where you
see that clump of torches."

"Ah, there is our boat," he broke off suddenly, as it appeared in
the line of the reflection of the torches on the water.

It was half a mile away, lying a few hundred yards from shore. He
took out the dog whistle that he used when coming down to the
landing stage to summon the boat from the yacht, and blew it. There
was a stir in the boat, and a moment later it was speeding towards
them.

"Row on, Dominique. She will pick us up in no time."

And long before they reached the Osprey the gig was alongside.

"Thank God that you are back, sir," they cried as they came
abreast. "We have been in terrible anxiety about you. Have you
succeeded, sir?"

"Don't cheer. I want to get back to the yacht before they know that
we are here. Yes, thank God, I have succeeded. Miss Greendale and
her maid are on board."

A low cheer, which even his order could not entirely suppress, came
from the three men in the boat. The mate was himself rowing stroke.

"We did not dare bring any more hands, sir," he said. "There has
been such a hubbub on shore for the last hour and a half that we
thought it likely that they and the Phantom's people might be going
to attack us. We rowed to the landing at ten o'clock, as you
ordered us, but in a short time a party of men came along close to
the water, and as soon as they saw us they opened fire on us, and
we had to row off sharp. We have been lying off here since. We did
not see how you could get down through that lot, but we thought it
better to wait. I did think there was just a hope that you might
make your way down to the coast somewhere else and come on in a
shore boat.

"Well, here we are, sir."

As he spoke they came alongside the Osprey.

"Is it you, sir?" Hawkins asked eagerly.

"Look here, lads," Frank replied, standing up, "above all things I
don't want any cheering, or any noise whatever. I don't want them
to know that we have got on board. I know that you will all rejoice
with me, for I have brought off Miss Greendale, and none of our
party except one of the boatmen has been wounded in any way
seriously."

There was a murmur of deep satisfaction from the crew. As Bertha
stepped on deck the men crowded round with low exclamations of "God
bless you, miss! This is a good day indeed for us!"

Bertha, in reply to the greeting, shook hands all round.

"I see you have not put out the lights in the cabin yet, Hawkins. I
will just go down with Miss Greendale and see that she is
comfortable, and then I will come up again."

"Oh, Frank!" the girl exclaimed, bursting into tears as they
entered the saloon, "this is happiness indeed. I feel at home
already."

Frank remained with her for three or four minutes.

"Now, dear, take possession of your old cabin again. No doubt Anna
is there already. She had better share it with you.

"Now I must go up and finish with the Phantom at once. Do not be
afraid, I shall take them by surprise, and there will be very
little fighting."

And without waiting for remonstrance he hurried on deck.

"Are the men armed, Hawkins?"

"That they are, sir. We have been expecting an attack every minute.
There have been three or four shore boats going off to the
brigantine within the last quarter of an hour."

"I am going to be beforehand with them, Hawkins."

"They've got both those guns pointing this way, sir."

"I am not coming from this way to attack them, Hawkins. I am going
to put all hands in that native craft I came in, row off a little
distance from this side, then make a circuit, and come down on the
other side of them. I will leave George Lechmere here with four
men, with three muskets apiece, so that if they should start before
we get there they can keep them off until we arrive. If I can get a
few of the boatmen to enlist I will do so."

He spoke to Dominique, who went to the side and asked:

"If any of you are disposed to stop here to guard the craft for a
quarter of an hour, in case she is attacked, the gentleman here
will pay twenty dollars a man; but remember that you may have to
fight."

