
"That is so," Oswald said. "I thought that you were more likely to
recognize my squire than myself, seeing that I have grown several
inches since then, and have but lately assumed this knightly armour in
which you see me."

"Oh, sir," Jane said, going swiftly up to him and holding out her hand,
which he raised to his lips; as he did that of Margaret, as she
followed her sister; "we have thought of you so often, and have prayed
that you should both be rewarded for your kindness to us! How glad I am
to see you again, and have an opportunity of thanking you!

"You have heard, Isabel, of our adventure, and how we escaped, by the
kindness of two Englishmen on guard near the edge of the forest, from
being carried as prisoners to London; where, but for them, we should
now be lodged in some dungeon of the usurper; but till now, I have
never known the name of our preserver.

"Thanks also to you, good squire," she said, turning to Roger.

"I but carried out the orders of my master," Roger said, colouring like
a boy, as she held out her hand to him. "There is no credit due to me."

"But how came you here?" Lady Isabel asked Oswald.

"Your sisters have, although they know it not, more than repaid their
obligations to me; for while they may perhaps owe their liberty to me,
I owe my life to them.

"See, ladies," and he turned to Jane, "there is the chain you gave me.
I have worn it, always, on my wrist. I and my squire were beaten down
by, your father's followers; my squire grievously wounded and
insensible, while I had been left for dead, though but stunned from a
blow. I luckily recovered my senses, just as those employed in
despatching the wounded came up; and, happily remembering your
bracelet, I took it off and held it up, calling out your father's name.

"Struck, I suppose, by the action and words, an officer examined the
bracelet closely; and, making out the inscription on the clasp, had my
squire and myself taken to the house where your father lodged, so that
the manner of my being possessed of the trinket might be explained. On
your father's return he recognized it; and, having heard from you the
circumstances of our meeting, treated us with the greatest kindness and
hospitality; and freed us without ransom, save a nominal one in order
that, on my return, I could say that I had been put to ransom. On the
recovery of my squire from his wounds, he restored our armour to us,
presented us with horses, and sent us here under escort, deeming that
you might be glad to see us."

"There he was indeed right," Jane said. "We have oft regretted that you
would not accept a more valuable jewel than that little chain, which
was given to me by my father, when I was but a child. But 'tis well,
indeed, that you so withstood us; for had it been any other of our
jewels but this, it would not have been recognized."

"That is so, Lady and, since my capture, I often thought that it was
strange it so happened."

After staying a day there, Oswald continued his journey; to the regret
of the ladies, who were glad to hear that he would never again fight
against the Welsh. His escort accompanied him, as near the border as it
was safe for them to go. The next day they rode into Chester, and then,
by easy stages, up to Alnwick.

Oswald went to Hotspur's apartments, as soon as he entered the castle.

"I congratulate you heartily," Hotspur said, as he entered. "I see that
you have won your spurs. I said to myself, when I received your letter,
saying that you were starting to carry a letter to the king, that your
enterprise would bring you either death or a pair of gold spurs. I am
glad, indeed, to see that it was the latter.

"I hear that the king's army is falling back. A messenger brought me
news from my kinsman. He said that it was but a rumour that had reached
him; but that it seemed likely enough, for it was said that they had
suffered terribly, both from the weather and the attacks of the Welsh."

"That rumour is true, Sir Henry, and also that the army is retiring."

"And they have done no more than they did before?"

"No more, indeed, Sir Henry. They have burnt many villages, and slain
many Welshmen; but they have done nothing, whatever, towards subduing
Glendower."



Chapter 19: The Battle Of Homildon Hill.


"But how have you made your way back, ahead of the army?" Hotspur
asked, after Oswald had given him full information as to the military
operations.

"Roger and I were left for dead, in that fight I have told you of, near
Llanidloes; and we fell into the hands of the Welsh, and were taken
before Glendower, who treated us well, and put me to ransom, with the
engagement that I was not again to bear arms, in Wales."

"That was a strange leniency, on his part," Hotspur exclaimed; "for I
hear he puts to the sword all who fall into his hands, without any
regard for the rules of civilized war."

"He is a strange man, Sir Henry, and subject, I fancy, to changeable
moods. When I was brought before him he was in a happy one, over the
success he had gained; and it may be that he took a liking for me. At
any rate, he fixed my ransom at a very small sum."

"Which I will, of course, pay," Hotspur said, "since you were my
squire, and were at Ludlow on my service."

"I thank you much, Sir Henry, but 'tis so small a sum that I myself
discharged it, without difficulty."

"'Tis strange, most strange, that you should have gone into the lion's
den, and have come out unscathed. Strange, indeed, that Glendower, who,
as we know, is greatly in want of money, should have fixed your ransom
at a low sum. How much was it, Sir Oswald?"

"I will tell you the story, Sir Henry, though I would tell no one else;
for my freedom is due to something that happened, nigh two years ago,
when I was first with Sir Edmund Mortimer. I failed in what was my
strict duty, although I disobeyed no orders that I had received, and my
conscience altogether acquits me of wrong."

"You may be sure, Sir Oswald, that the matter will go no further; and
knowing you as I do, I feel sure that, whatever the matter was, it was
not to your discredit."

"So I trust, myself, my lord; but it might have cost me my head, had
the king come to know it. I will first tell you that my ransom was
fixed at a crown, and that of Roger at a penny."

Hotspur, who had been looking a little grave, laughed.

"Surely never before was so much bone and sinew appraised at so small a
sum."

"It was so put, simply that I might, with truth, avow that I was put to
ransom. However, I paid the crown and the penny, and have so discharged
my obligations.

"This was how the matter came about;" and he related the whole
circumstances to Sir Henry; and the manner in which the little chain,
given to him by Glendower's daughter, had been the means of saving his
life.

"I blame you in no way, Sir Oswald," Hotspur said cordially, when he
had heard the story; "though I say not that the king would have viewed
the matter in the same light. Still, you held to the letter of your
orders. You were placed there to give warning of the approach of any
hostile body, and naught was said to you as to letting any man, still
less any women, depart from the place. But indeed, how could I blame
you? Since heaven itself has assoiled you. For assuredly it was not
chance that placed on your arm the little trinket that, alone, could
have saved your life from the Welsh.

"Now to yourself, Sir Oswald. You will, I hope, continue my knight, as
you have been my squire."

"Assuredly, Sir Henry, I have never thought of anything else."

"Very well, then; I will, as soon as may be, appoint to you a double
knight's feu. I say a double feu, because I should like to have you as
one of the castle knights, and so have much larger service from you,
than that which a knight can be called upon to render, for an ordinary
feu. I will bid Father Ernulf look through the rolls, and see what feus
are vacant. One of these I will make an hereditary feu, to pass down
from you to your heirs, irrevocably; the other will be a service feu,
to support the expenses caused by your extra services, and revocable
under the usual conditions."

A week later there was a formal ceremonial at the castle, and in the
presence of the earl, Hotspur, and the knights and gentlemen of their
service, Oswald took the oath of allegiance to Sir Henry Percy; and
afterwards, as required by law, to the king; and received from Hotspur
deeds appointing him to two knight's feus, including the villages of
Stoubes and Rochester, in Reddesdale. There were, at the time, six
knight's feus vacant; and as Percy had left it to him to choose which
he liked, he had selected these, as they lay but a twelve miles' ride,
over the hills, from his father's place in Coquetdale.

The oath of allegiance to the king, as well as to the feudal lord, was
enacted by Henry the Second; with the intention of curbing, to some
extent, the power of the great vassals; but although taken by all
knights, on being presented with a feu, it was deemed of no effect in
the case of the immediate lord being at war with the king; and whenever
troubles arose, the lord's vassals always sided with him, it being
universally understood that the oath to him, from whom they had
received their land, was paramount over that to the king.

There having been several formalities to be observed, and matters to be
discussed, Oswald was unable to ride home until after this ceremony had
taken place; but upon the following morning he and Roger started early,
and arrived, that evening, at Yardhope. His welcome was a warm one, and
the satisfaction of his father, and the delight of his mother, at
seeing him in knightly armour was great, indeed; and it increased when
he told them that he had received knighthood at the hands of the king
himself, and that Hotspur had granted him the feus of Stoubes and
Rochester.

"Then we shall have you within a ride of us," his mother exclaimed.
"That will be pleasant, indeed."

"The feus have always gone together," John Forster said, "and Stoubes
castle, although small, is a strong one. How many tenants will you
have?"

"Twenty-three. That, at least, was the number of names set down in the
parchments."

"That is not bad, as a beginning. Of course, you will keep some ten or
twelve retainers in the castle; and with such men as will come in from
the villages, at the approach of danger, you will be able to muster
fifty or sixty in all for the defence."

"I shall live chiefly at Alnwick, Father. Rochester is given to me as
an hereditary feu, but I shall hold Stoubes for extra service at the
castle; and I have little doubt that Percy will, if I do him good
service, make it also hereditary. He as much as said so."

"It will make a good portion, lad. Yardhope is a knight's feu, though I
have never taken up the knighthood; and the Percys know that I should
fight just as stoutly, as John Forster, as if I wore knightly armour;
but though the lands are wide they are poor, while yours are fertile,
lying down by the river. Moreover, Coquetdale is more liable to Scotch
incursions than Reddesdale, as the road into Scotland runs along it. If
needs be we can lend a hand to each other; though, both together, we
could not hold either your place or mine against a strong invasion.

"Now, tell us how it was that you won your spurs; and how it was that
the king, himself, knighted you."

"After I have eaten and drank I will do so, Father; for indeed, Roger
and I are well-nigh famishing."

After the meal, he related the whole story of his adventures.

"Well, lad, you were in luck," his father said, when he had finished.
"The help you gave those maidens might have brought your head to the
block; but it turned out well, and was the saving of your life, so I
will say nought against the deed; especially as you owed no allegiance
either to Mortimer or to Talbot, and were, save for the orders that
Hotspur had given you, your own master."

Two days later, having sent over, on the morning after his arrival, a
message to the tenants to present themselves at Stoubes to take their
oaths to him, Oswald, accompanied by his father, rode into Reddesdale.
He found the castle a much stronger place than Yardhope, which was but
a fortified house; while this was a moated building, with strong walls
and flanking towers, and a keep that could be held successfully, even
if the walls were captured by a sudden assault.

At twelve o'clock the tenants assembled. Oswald read to them the two
parchments, and they then took the oaths to him. They were well
satisfied to have a young knight as their lord; for the feus had been
held by a minor, who had died two years before; and had not been at the
castle since he was taken away, as a child, to be brought up at the
town of Alnwick, where he had remained under the eye of the Percys. It
had long been understood, however, that the feu would not be granted to
him; for he was weakly from his birth, and wholly unfitted for the
charge of a castle, so near the Scottish border.

According to feudal usage, each tenant expected that he would be called
upon to pay a heavy sum, under the name of a relief, as was customary
in the case of a new lord taking possession; and they were greatly
relieved when Oswald told them that, as he already possessed armour and
horses, he would quit them for a fourth part of the usual amount;
although he should, of course, require their services to enable him to
repair such dilapidations as the castle had suffered, during the long
term that it had stood empty.

For the next three months, he stayed in Stoubes. Roger had been sent
off at once, with two men-at-arms, to bring the horses and armour that
had been left at Welshpool; bearing a letter to the governor from
Oswald, thanking him much for having taken care of them, and saying
briefly that he had been left on the field for dead, after the fight
near Llanidloes; but had recovered, and been well treated by Glendower,
who had put him to ransom. He took money with him, to pay the expenses
for the keep of the horses; and returned, with them and the armour,
after an absence of three weeks.

Passing through Worcester on his way back, he had, at Oswald's order,
purchased for himself clothes suitable for his position as an esquire.
As for armour, it had been arranged that he should have it made for him
at Alnwick, as it would be difficult to obtain a suit sufficiently
large for him.

At the end of the three months the necessary repairs to the castle were
finished. The gates had been greatly strengthened with thick bands of
iron, the moat cleared out, and at various points the defences had been
strengthened. The small amount of furniture then deemed necessary still
remained there and, where needful, had been repaired and put in good
order. Eight men-at-arms had been taken by Oswald into his service, and
a trusty man appointed as seneschal.

Then, after paying another visit to Yardhope, Oswald rode, with Roger
and two well-mounted men-at-arms, to Alnwick.

It was now April, and bad news had just arrived. Glendower had
commenced the campaign with great vigour, as the appearance of a comet
had been interpreted, by the bards, as an omen most favourable to him,
and his force had greatly increased during the winter. He had destroyed
the houses and strong places of all Welshmen who had not taken up arms
at his orders, and had closely blockaded Carnarvon. He marched to
Bangor, levelled the cathedral, and that of Saint Asaph, by fire, burnt
the episcopal palaces and canons' houses. So formidable did he become
that the king issued writs, to the lieutenants of no fewer than
thirty-four counties, to assemble their forces at Lichfield, to crush
Glendower.

The latter had now taken the offensive, and advanced towards Hereford,
and carried fire and sword through Mortimer's lands. Sir Edmund
gathered his own and his nephew's tenants and retainers, from
Herefordshire and Radnorshire, and advanced against Glendower. The
armies met on the 22nd of June, 1402, at a short distance from
Knighton. The battle was obstinately fought, but was decided by the
desertion of the Welsh tenants, and by the Welsh bowmen in Mortimer's
service turning their bows against his men-at-arms; and, finally, the
English were defeated, with the loss of eleven hundred men, Sir Edmund
himself being made a prisoner.

After the battle the Welsh behaved with the greatest savagery; killing
all the wounded, stripping the fallen, and horribly mutilating their
bodies. The news created great excitement at Alnwick and, had not the
situation in the north been critical, Percy would have gathered his
forces and marched, with all speed, to avenge the defeat and capture of
his brother-in-law.

The Earl of Dunbar, with many of the tenants of his former estates, and
numbers of the English borderers, had entered Scotland and carried out
considerable raids. In revenge for this, Douglas despatched Thomas
Halliburton and Patrick Hepburn, each with a considerable force, to
invade Northumberland. Halliburton ravaged the country as far as
Bamborough, collected great spoils, and returned with them. Hepburn,
who had a still larger force, penetrated farther into England, carried
his ravages to within a few miles of Alnwick; and then retired north,
with an enormous amount of booty.

When, however, he had crossed the border into the country known as the
Merse, north of Berwick, the Earl of Dunbar fell upon him at West
Nesbit, and completely defeated him. Hepburn himself, with a large
number of his men, fell in the battle; and many important prisoners
were captured. This battle was fought on the same day that Glendower
defeated Mortimer.

The victory caused great exultation on the border; but Alwyn said to
his nephew:

"Although this is good, as far as it goes, Oswald, you may be sure that
Douglas will not brook this disaster with patience, but will gather the
Scottish forces; and we may expect him, ere long, at the head of twenty
thousand men, and we shall have a fight as stiff as that of Otterburn.
We shall have Northumberland ablaze, and you will see that the earl and
Hotspur will soon be preparing to meet the storm.

"These last forays took them by surprise; and, as lords of the marches,
they have suffered serious humiliation, for this victory was not
theirs, but the work of Dunbar; and had he not intercepted the Scots,
on their own side of the border, they would have returned, scatheless,
with the spoils of our northern districts. This disgrace will spur them
on to make great efforts, and these will be needed, or we shall see
Northumberland, Cumberland, and Durham in flames."

Alwyn was not mistaken. Messengers were sent off to all those holding
knights' feus, throughout the county, bidding them to prepare to answer
to the Percy's call; and to hold themselves, and their tenants, in
readiness to march to any point fixed upon for a general rendezvous.
They were to warn all the countryside that, directly news arrived that
the Scots were in motion, they were to drive their cattle and horses to
the nearest fortified town, or to take them to hiding places among the
hills. Everything of value was to be taken away, or hidden, so that the
enemy should find but empty houses.

Oswald rode to Yardhope, with the message to his father.

"I know, Father," he said, "that it needed not to warn you; but as it
was but a short distance out of my way to come round here, I thought
that I would pay you a day's visit."

"No, lad; directly I heard of the victory of Dunbar, I said to myself,
this will bring the Scots upon us in force. Douglas will never put up
with the defeat, and will make every effort to turn the tables. I shall
send all there is worth taking away, to a shepherd's hut among the
fells; and shall, as soon as I hear that Douglas's preparations are
well-nigh complete, journey with your mother to Alnwick, and leave her
there. I shall return, and with my men will drive the cattle and horses
to places where there is little chance of the Scots finding them; and
will then, after leaving three or four men to look after them, come
back to Alnwick.

"What do you propose to do?"

"I shall do much the same, Father. Stoubes is strong enough to hold out
against any ordinary raid, but not against an army led by Douglas. I
shall remove the furnishing and tapestry, and shall send the most
valuable into Alnwick, and have the rest of them hidden in the woods.
These are the orders that have been sent, all along the border. Any
whose places are so strong that they may well defend themselves, for
some time, are to gather all their neighbours there. The rest are to
repair to Alnwick, to join Percy's force.

"You see, there is no knowing where the storm may break. The Scots may
cross the Cheviots anywhere between Berwick and Carlisle; and, until
their movements are known, the earl and Hotspur must keep their forces
at Alnwick, in readiness to march wheresoever required.

"Hotspur has sent messengers down to the Midlands, to engage as many
archers as he can get. Of course, we have many here; but the borderers
are spearmen rather than archers, and it were well to strengthen our
force. Still, however large a force he may raise, we cannot hope to
check their first incursion. The whole country is open to them and, if
they enter near Carlisle, they may be in the heart of Cumberland, or
Durham, before we are fairly in motion. We may count, however, on
meeting them as they retire, if not before."

Oswald then rode to his own place, bade all the tenants prepare to ride
with him to Alnwick, at an hour's notice; and either to send their
women and children on there, as soon as it was known that the Scotch
army was gathering strongly on the border; or else to gather stores of
provisions, up in the hills, and to send the women and children there,
the moment word came that the Scots were on the move.

The news of Mortimer's defeat and capture had been received, by the
time Oswald returned to Alnwick.

"'Tis bad news, indeed," Percy said to him, "and I know that, as you
have been staying so long at Ludlow, you will be deeply grieved at the
misfortune that has befallen Mortimer. However, I doubt not that he
will soon be ransomed. I know that the king appointed a commission of
knights, to treat at once with Glendower for Lord Grey's ransom, and
has given orders for the raising of the great sum demanded. It is to be
gathered from a tax on church properties, and in other ways; and
doubtless he will do the same for Mortimer, whose lands have been so
harried, by the Welsh, that it will be impossible to raise any large
sum from the tenants."

"I fear, Sir Henry," Oswald said, "that the king will be lukewarm on
the subject. During his three invasions, he has never once summoned Sir
Edmund to join him; nor has he passed through Ludlow, as he might well
have done, seeing that it is a central position, and the nearest way
for an army marching towards Plinlimmon. I remarked, too, that when I
mentioned Mortimer's name in my discourse with him, the king's brow
clouded, as if ill pleased at the name."

"Then he acts wrongly," Hotspur said angrily. "Mortimer has given no
cause for offence. He has never, in any way, upheld the cause of the
young Earl of March; and knows, well enough, that it would be madness
to set up his claim to the throne, when Henry has given no cause for
complaint, and that the boy's existence seems to be well-nigh forgotten
by the country.

"However, as soon as this business is over I will, myself, to London;
and will beg the king to exercise the same benevolence, in the case of
Mortimer, as he has shown on behalf of Lord Grey. Why, he might as well
suspect us, to whom he largely owes his kingdom, as Mortimer, seeing
that my wife is aunt to the young earl."

Early in August it became known that preparations were being made, upon
a great scale, by Douglas for the invasion of England; and that, as
Military Governor of Scotland, he had summoned all the great nobles to
join, with their forces; and it was even said that numbers of French
knights were, on account of the long friendship between France and
Scotland, crossing the seas, to fight under Douglas against their old
enemies.
