
       *       *       *       *       *


    _The Summum Pulchrum rests in heaven above;
      Do thou, as best thou may'st, thy duty do:
    Amid the things allow'd thee live and love,
      Some day thou shalt it view._

        ARTHUR HUGH CLOUGH.




LXXXIII. SONNET.

PRESIDENT WILSON.--1816-


    Great things were ne'er begotten in an hour;
    Ephemerons in birth, are such in life;
    And he who dareth, in the noble strife
    Of intellects, to cope for real power,--
    Such as God giveth as His rarest dower
    Of mastery, to the few with greatness rife,--
    Must, ere the morning mists have ceased to lower
    Till the long shadows of the night arrive,
    Stand in the arena. Laurels that are won,
    Pluck'd from green boughs, soon wither; those that last
    Are gather'd patiently, when sultry noon
    And summer's fiery glare in vain are past.
    Life is the hour of labor; on Earth's breast
    Serene and undisturb'd shall be thy rest.




LXXXIV. OUR IDEAL.

PRESIDENT WILSON.


    Did ever on painter's canvas live
      The power of his fancy's dream?
    Did ever poet's pen achieve
      Fruition of his theme?
    Did marble ever take the life
      That the sculptor's soul conceiv'd?
    Or ambition win in passion's strife
      What its glowing hopes believ'd?
    Did ever racer's eager feet
      Rest as he reach'd the goal,
    Finding the prize achiev'd was meet
      To satisfy his soul?




LXXXV. FROM THE APOLOGY OF SOCRATES.

BENJAMIN JOWETT.--1817-

_From_ THE DIALOGUES OF PLATO.


Not much time will be gained, O Athenians, in return for the evil name
which you will get from the detractors of the city, who will say that
you killed Socrates, a wise man; for they will call me wise, even
although I am not wise, when they want to reproach you. If you had
waited a little while, your desire would have been fulfilled in the
course of nature. For I am far advanced in years, as you may perceive,
and not far from death. I am speaking now only to those of you who have
condemned me to death. And I have another thing to say to them: You
think that I was convicted through deficiency of words--I mean, that if
I had thought fit to leave nothing undone, nothing unsaid, I might have
gained an acquittal. Not so; the deficiency which led to my conviction
was not of words--certainly not. But I had not the boldness or impudence
or inclination to address you as you would have liked me to address you,
weeping and wailing and lamenting, and saying and doing many things
which you have been accustomed to hear from others, and which, as I say,
are unworthy of me. But I thought that I ought not to do anything common
or mean in the hour of danger: nor do I now repent of the manner of my
defense, and I would rather die having spoken after my manner, than
speak in your manner and live. For neither in war nor yet at law ought
any man to use every way of escaping death. For often in battle there is
no doubt that if a man will throw away his arms, and fall on his knees
before his pursuers, he may escape death; and in other dangers there
are other ways of escaping death, if a man is willing to say and do
anything. The difficulty, my friends, is not in avoiding death, but in
avoiding unrighteousness; for that runs faster than death. I am old and
move slowly, and the slower runner has overtaken me, and my accusers are
keen and quick, and the faster runner, who is unrighteousness, has
overtaken them. And now I depart hence, condemned by you to suffer the
penalty of death, and they too go their ways, condemned by the truth to
suffer the penalty of villainy and wrong; and I must abide by my
award--let them abide by theirs. I suppose that these things may be
regarded as fated,--and I think that they are well.

And now, O men who have condemned me, I would fain prophesy to you; for
I am about to die, and that is the hour in which men are gifted with
prophetic power. And I prophesy to you who are my murderers, that
immediately after my death punishment far heavier than you have
inflicted on me will surely await you. Me you have killed because you
wanted to escape the accuser, and not to give an account of your lives.
But that will not be as you suppose: far otherwise. For I say that there
will be more accusers of you than there are now; accusers whom hitherto
I have restrained: and as they are younger they will be more severe with
you, and you will be more offended at them. For if you think that by
killing men you can avoid the accuser censuring your lives, you are
mistaken; that is not a way of escape which is either possible or
honorable; the easiest and the noblest way is not to be crushing others,
but to be improving yourselves. This is the prophecy which I utter
before my departure to the judges who have condemned me.

Friends, who would have acquitted me, I would like also to talk with you
about this thing which has happened, while the magistrates are busy, and
before I go to the place at which I must die. Stay then a while, for we
may as well talk with one another while there is time. You are my
friends, and I should like to show you the meaning of this event which
has happened to me. O my judges--for you I may truly call judges--I
should like to tell you of a wonderful circumstance. Hitherto the
familiar oracle within me has constantly been in the habit of opposing
me even about trifles, if I was going to make a slip or error about
anything; and now as you see there has come upon me that which may be
thought, and is generally believed to be, the last and worst evil. But
the oracle made no sign of opposition, either as I was leaving my house
and going out in the morning, or when I was going up into this court, or
while I was speaking, at anything which I was going to say; and yet I
have often been stopped in the middle of a speech, but now in nothing I
either said or did touching this matter has the oracle opposed me. What
do I take to be the explanation of this? I will tell you. I regard this
as a proof that what has happened to me is a good, and that those of us
who think that death is an evil are in error. This is a great proof to
me of what I am saying, for the customary sign would surely have opposed
me had I been going to evil and not to good.

Let us reflect in another way, and we shall see that there is great
reason to hope that death is a good, for one of two things: either death
is a state of nothingness and utter unconsciousness, or, as men say,
there is a change and migration of the soul from this world to another.
Now if you suppose that there is no consciousness, but a sleep like the
sleep of him who is undisturbed even by the sight of dreams, death will
be an unspeakable gain. For if a person were to select the night in
which his sleep was undisturbed even by dreams, and were to compare with
this the other days and nights of his life, and then were to tell us how
many days and nights he had passed in the course of his life better and
more pleasantly than this one, I think that any man, I will not say a
private man, but even the great king will not find many such days or
nights, when compared with the others. Now if death is like this, I say
that to die is gain; for eternity is then only a single night. But if
death is the journey to another place, and there, as men say, all the
dead are, what good, O my friends and judges, can be greater than this?
If indeed when the pilgrim arrives in the world below, he is delivered
from the professors of justice in this world, and finds the true judges
who are said to give judgment there, Minos and Rhadamanthus, and, AEacus,
and Triptolemus, and other sons of God who were righteous in their own
life, that pilgrimage will be worth making. What would not a man give if
he might converse with Orpheus and Musaeus and Hesiod and Homer? Nay, if
this be true, let me die again and again. I, too, shall have a wonderful
interest in a place where I can converse with Palamedes, and Ajax the
son of Telamon, and other heroes of old, who have suffered death through
an unjust judgment; and there will be no small pleasure, as I think, in
comparing my own sufferings with theirs. Above all, I shall be able to
continue my search into true and false knowledge; as in this world, so
also in that; I shall find out who is wise, and who pretends to be wise,
and is not. What would not a man give, O judges, to be able to examine
the leader of the great Trojan expedition; or Odysseus or Sisyphus, or
numberless others, men and women too? What infinite delight would there
be in conversing with them and asking them questions! For in that world
they do not put a man to death for this; certainly not. For besides
being happier in that world than in this, they will be immortal, if what
is said is true.

Wherefore, O judges, be of good cheer about death, and know this of a
truth--that no evil can happen to a good man, either in life or after
death. He and his are not neglected by the gods; nor has my own
approaching end happened by mere chance. But I see clearly that to die
and be released was better for me; and therefore the oracle gave no
sign. For which reason, also, I am not angry with my accusers or my
condemners; they have done me no harm, although neither of them meant to
do me any good; and for this I may gently blame them.

Still I have a favor to ask of them. When my sons are grown up, I would
ask you, O my friends, to punish them, and I would have you trouble
them, as I have troubled you, if they seem to care about riches, or
anything, more than about virtue; or if they pretend to be something
when they are really nothing,--then reprove them, as I have reproved
you, for not caring about that for which they ought to care, and
thinking that they are something when they are really nothing. And if
you do this, I and my sons will have received justice at your hands.

The hour of departure has arrived, and we go our ways--I to die, and you
to live. Which is better God only knows.

       *       *       *       *       *


    _Be of good cheer then, my dear Crito, and say that you
    are burying my body only._

        _Socrates, in the_ PHAEDO.--PLATO.




LXXXVI. THE EMPIRE OF THE CAESARS.

JAMES ANTHONY FROUDE.--1818-

_From_ CAESAR.


Of Caesar it may be said that he came into the world at a special time
and for a special object. The old religions were dead, from the Pillars
of Hercules to the Euphrates and the Nile, and the principles on which
human society had been constructed were dead also. There remained of
spiritual conviction only the common and human sense of justice and
morality; and out of this sense some ordered system of government had to
be constructed, under which quiet men could live, and labor, and eat the
fruit of their industry. Under a rule of this material kind there can be
no enthusiasm, no chivalry, no saintly aspirations, no patriotism of the
heroic type. It was not to last forever. A new life was about to dawn
for mankind. Poetry, and faith, and devotion were to spring again out of
the seeds which were sleeping in the heart of humanity. But the life
which is to endure grows slowly; and as the soil must be prepared before
the wheat can be sown, so before the Kingdom of Heaven could throw up
its shoots there was needed a kingdom of this world where the nations
were neither torn in pieces by violence nor were rushing after false
ideals and spurious ambitions. Such a kingdom was the Empire of the
Caesars--a kingdom where peaceful men could work, think, and speak as
they pleased, and travel freely among provinces ruled for the most part
by Gallios who protected life and property, and forbade fanatics to tear
each other in pieces for their religious opinions. "It is not lawful for
us to put any man to death," was the complaint of the Jewish priests to
the Roman governor. Had Europe and Asia been covered with independent
nations, each with a local religion represented in its ruling powers,
Christianity must have been stifled in its cradle. If St. Paul had
escaped the Sanhedrim at Jerusalem, he would have been torn to pieces by
the silversmiths at Ephesus. The appeal to Caesar's judgment-seat was the
shield of his mission, and alone made possible his success.




LXXXVII. OF THE MYSTERY OF LIFE.

JOHN RUSKIN--1819-

_From_ SESAME AND LILIES.


And now, returning to the broader question what these arts and labors of
life have to teach us of its mystery, this is the first of their
lessons--that the more beautiful the art, the more it is essentially the
work of people who _feel themselves wrong_;--who are striving for the
fulfilment of a law, and the grasp of a loveliness, which they have not
yet attained, which they feel even farther and farther from attaining,
the more they strive for it. And yet, in still deeper sense, it is the
work of people who know also that they are right. The very sense of
inevitable error from their purpose marks the perfectness of that
purpose, and the continued sense of failure arises from the continued
opening of the eyes more clearly to all the sacredest laws of truth.

This is one lesson. The second is a very plain, and greatly precious
one, namely:--that whenever the arts and labors of life are fulfilled
in this spirit of striving against misrule, and doing whatever we have
to do, honorably and perfectly, they invariably bring happiness, as much
as seems possible to the nature of man. In all other paths, by which
that happiness is pursued, there is disappointment, or destruction: for
ambition and for passion there is no rest--no fruition; the fairest
pleasures of youth perish in a darkness greater than their past light;
and the loftiest and purest love too often does but inflame the cloud of
life with endless fire of pain. But, ascending from lowest to highest,
through every scale of human industry, that industry worthily followed,
gives peace. Ask the laborer in the field, at the forge, or in the mine;
ask the patient, delicate-fingered artisan, or the strong-armed,
fiery-hearted worker in bronze, and in marble, and with the colors of
light; and none of these, who are true workmen, will ever tell you, that
they have found the law of heaven an unkind one--that in the sweat of
their face they should eat bread, till they return to the ground; nor
that they ever found it an unrewarded obedience, if, indeed, it was
rendered faithfully to the command--"Whatsoever thy hand findeth to
do--do it with thy might."

These are the two great and constant lessons which our laborers teach us
of the mystery of life. But there is another, and a sadder one, which
they cannot teach us, which we must read on their tombstones.

"Do it with thy might." There have been myriads upon myriads of
human creatures who have obeyed this law--who have put every breath
and nerve of their being into its toil--who have devoted every hour,
and exhausted every faculty--who have bequeathed their unaccomplished
thoughts at death--who being dead, have yet spoken, by majesty of
memory, and strength of example. And, at last, what has all this
"Might" of humanity accomplished, in six thousand years of labor and
sorrow? What has it _done_? Take the three chief occupations and arts
of men, one by one, and count their achievements. Begin with the
first--the lord of them all--agriculture. Six thousand years have
passed since we were set to till the ground, from which we were
taken. How much of it is tilled? How much of that which is, wisely or
well? In the very centre and chief garden of Europe--where the two
forms of parent Christianity have had their fortresses--where the
noble Catholics of the Forest Cantons, and the noble Protestants of
the Vaudois valleys, have maintained, for dateless ages, their faiths
and liberties--there the unchecked Alpine rivers yet run wild in
devastation: and the marshes, which a few hundred men could redeem
with a year's labor, still blast their helpless inhabitants into
fevered idiotism. That is so, in the centre of Europe! While, on the
near coast of Africa, once the Garden of the Hesperides, an Arab
woman, but a few sunsets since, ate her child, for famine. And, with
all the treasures of the East at our feet, we, in our own dominion,
could not find a few grains of rice, for a people that asked of us
no more; but stood by, and saw five hundred thousand of them perish
of hunger.

Then, after agriculture, the art of kings, take the next head of human
arts--weaving; the art of queens, honored of all noble Heathen women, in
the person of their virgin goddess--honored of all Hebrew women, by the
word of their wisest king--"She layeth her hands to the spindle, and her
hands hold the distaff; she stretcheth out her hand to the poor. She is
not afraid of the snow for her household, for all her household are
clothed with scarlet. She maketh herself covering of tapestry, her
clothing is silk and purple. She maketh fine linen, and selleth it, and
delivereth girdles to the merchant." What have we done in all these
thousands of years with this bright art of Greek maid and Christian
matron? Six thousand years of weaving, and have we learned to weave?
Might not every naked wall have been purple with tapestry, and every
feeble breast fenced with sweet colors from the cold? What have we done?
Our fingers are too few, it seems, to twist together some poor covering
for our bodies. We set our streams to work for us, and choke the air
with fire, to turn our spinning-wheels,--and--_are we yet clothed_? Are
not the streets of the capitals of Europe foul with the sale of cast
clouts and rotten rags? Is not the beauty of your sweet children left in
wretchedness of disgrace, while, with better honor, nature clothes the
brood of the bird in its nest, and the suckling of the wolf in her den?
And does not every winter's snow robe what you have not robed, and
shroud what you have not shrouded; and every winter's wind bear up to
heaven its wasted souls, to witness against you hereafter, by the voice
of their Christ,--"I was naked, and ye clothed me not"?

Lastly--take the Art of Building--the strongest-proudest--most
orderly--most enduring of the arts of man, that of which the produce is
in the surest manner accumulative, and need not perish, or be replaced;
but if once well done will stand more strongly than the unbalanced
rocks--more prevalently than the crumbling hills. The art which is
associated with all civic pride and sacred principle; with which men
record their power--satisfy their enthusiasm--make sure their
defence--define and make dear their habitation. And, in six thousand
years of building, what have we done? Of the greater part of all that
skill and strength, _no_ vestige is left, but fallen stones, that
encumber the fields and impede the streams. But from this waste of
disorder, and of time, and of rage, what _is_ left to us? Constructive
and progressive creatures, that we are, with ruling brains, and forming
hands; capable of fellowship, and thirsting for fame, can we not
contend, in comfort, with the insects of the forest, or, in achievement,
with the worm of the sea? The white surf rages in vain against the
ramparts built by poor atoms of scarcely nascent life; but only ridges
of formless ruin mark the places where once dwelt our noblest
multitudes. The ant and the moth have cells for each of their young, but
our little ones lie in festering heaps, in homes that consume them like
graves; and night by night, from the corners of our streets, rises up
the cry of the homeless--"I was a stranger, and ye took me not in."

Must it be always thus? Is our life forever to be without
profit--without possession? Shall the strength of its generations be as
barren as death; or cast away their labor, as the wild fig-tree casts
her untimely figs? Is it all a dream then--the desire of the eyes and
the pride of life--or, if it be, might we not live in nobler dream than
this? The poets and prophets, the wise men, and the scribes, though they
have told us nothing about a life to come, have told us much about the
life that is now. They have had--they also,--their dreams, and we have
laughed at them. They have dreamed of mercy, and of justice; they have
dreamed of peace and good-will; they have dreamed of labor
undisappointed, and of rest undisturbed; they have dreamed of fulness in
harvest, and overflowing in store; they have dreamed of wisdom in
council, and of providence in law; of gladness of parents, and strength
of children, and glory of gray hairs. And at these visions of theirs we
have mocked, and held them for idle and vain, unreal and
unaccomplishable. What have we accomplished with our realities? Is this
what has come of our worldly wisdom, tried against their folly? this our
mightiest possible, against their impotent ideal? or have we only
wandered among the spectra of a baser felicity, and chased phantoms of
the tombs, instead of visions of the Almighty; and walked after the
imaginations of our evil hearts, instead of after the counsels of
Eternity, until our lives--not in the likeness of the cloud of heaven,
but of the smoke of hell--have become "as a vapor, that appeareth for a
little time, and then vanisheth away"?

_Does_ it vanish then? Are you sure of that?--sure, that the nothingness
of the grave will be a rest from this troubled nothingness; and that the
coiling shadow, which disquiets itself in vain, cannot change into the
smoke of the torment that ascends forever? Will any answer that they
_are_ sure of it, and that there is no fear, nor hope, nor desire, nor
labor, whither they go? Be it so; will you not, then, make as sure of
the Life, that now is, as you are of the Death that is to come? Your
hearts are wholly in this world--will you not give them to it wisely,
as well as perfectly? And see, first of all, that you _have_ hearts,
and sound hearts, too, to give. Because you have no heaven to look
for, is that any reason that you should remain ignorant of this
wonderful and infinite earth, which is firmly and instantly given you
in possession? Although your days are numbered, and the following
darkness sure, is it necessary that you should share the degradation
of the brute, because you are condemned to its mortality; or live the
life of the moth, and of the worm, because you are to companion them
in the dust? Not so; we may have but a few thousands of days to
spend, perhaps hundreds only--perhaps tens; nay, the longest of our
time and best, looked back on, will be but as a moment, as the
twinkling of an eye; still, we are men, not insects; we are living
spirits, not passing clouds. "He maketh the winds His messengers; the
momentary fire, His minister;" and shall we do less than _these_? Let
us do the work of men while we bear the form of them; and, as we
snatch our narrow portion of time out of Eternity, snatch also our
narrow inheritance of passion out of Immortality--even though our
lives _be_ as a vapor, that appeareth for a little time, and then
vanisheth away.

But there are some of you who believe not this--who think this cloud of
life has no such close--that it is to float, revealed and illumined,
upon the floor of heaven, in the day when He cometh with clouds, and
every eye shall see Him. Some day, you believe, within these five, or
ten, or twenty years, for every one of us the judgment will be set, and
the books opened. If that be true, far more than that must be true. Is
there but one day of judgment? Why, for us every day is a day of
judgment--every day is a Dies Irae, and writes its irrevocable verdict in
the flame of its West. Think you that judgment waits till the doors of
the grave are opened? It waits at the doors of your houses--it waits at
the corners of your streets; we are in the midst of judgment--the
insects that we crush are our judges--the moments we fret away are our
judges--the elements that feed us, judge, as they minister--and the
pleasures that deceive us, judge as they indulge. Let us, for our lives,
do the work of Men while we bear the Form of them, if indeed those lives
are _Not_ as a vapor, and do _Not_ vanish away.




LXXXVIII. THE ROBIN.

JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL.--1819-

_From_ MY GARDEN ACQUAINTANCE.


The return of the robin is commonly announced by the newspapers, like
that of eminent or notorious people to a watering-place, as the first
authentic notification of spring. And such his appearance in the orchard
and garden undoubtedly is. But, in spite of his name of migratory
thrush, he stays with us all winter, and I have seen him when the
thermometer marked 15 degrees below zero of Fahrenheit, armed
impregnably within, like Emerson's Titmouse, and as cheerful as he. The
robin has a bad reputation among people who do not value themselves less
for being fond of cherries. There is, I admit, a spice of vulgarity in
him, and his song is rather of the Bloomfield sort, too largely
ballasted with prose. His ethics are of the Poor Richard school, and the
main chance which calls forth all his energy is altogether of the belly.
He never has those fine intervals of lunacy into which his cousins, the
catbird and the mavis, are apt to fall. But for a' that and twice as
muckle 's a' that, I would not exchange him for all the cherries that
ever came out of Asia Minor. With whatever faults, he has not wholly
forfeited that superiority which belongs to the children of nature. He
has a finer taste in fruit than could be distilled from many successive
committees of the Horticultural Society, and he eats with a relishing
gulp not inferior to Dr. Johnson's. He feels and freely exercises his
right of eminent domain. His is the earliest mess of green peas; his all
the mulberries I had fancied mine. But if he get also the lion's share
of the raspberries, he is a great planter, and sows those wild ones in
the woods, that solace the pedestrian and give a momentary calm even to
the jaded victims of the White Hills. He keeps a strict eye over one's
fruit, and knows to a shade of purple when your grapes have cooked long
enough in the sun. During a severe drought a few years ago, the robins
wholly vanished from my garden. I neither saw nor heard one for three
weeks. Meanwhile a small foreign grape-vine, rather shy of bearing,
seemed to find the dusty air congenial, and, dreaming perhaps of its
sweet Argos across the sea, decked itself, with a score or so of fair
bunches. I watched them from day to day till they should have secreted
sugar enough from the sunbeams, and at last made up my mind that I would
celebrate my vintage the next morning. But the robins too had somehow
kept note of them. They must have sent out spies, as did the Jews into
the promised land, before I was stirring. When I went with my basket, at
least a dozen of these winged vintagers bustled out from among the
leaves, and alighting on the nearest trees interchanged some shrill
remarks about me of a derogatory nature. They had fairly sacked the
vine. Not Wellington's veterans made cleaner work of a Spanish town; not
Federals or Confederates were ever more impartial in the confiscation of
neutral chickens. I was keeping my grapes a secret to surprise the fair
Fidele with, but the robins made them a profounder secret to her than I
had meant. The tattered remnant of a single bunch was all my
harvest-home. How paltry it looked at the bottom of my basket,--as if a
humming-bird had laid her egg in an eagle's nest! I could not help
laughing; and the robins seemed to join heartily in the merriment. There
was a native grape-vine close by, blue with its less refined abundance,
but my cunning thieves preferred the foreign flavor. Could I tax them
with want of taste?

The robins are not good solo singers, but their chorus, as, like
primitive fire-worshippers, they hail the return of light and warmth
to the world, is unrivalled. There are a hundred singing like one.
They are noisy enough then, and sing, as poets should, with no
afterthought. But when they come after cherries to the tree near my
window, they muffle their voices, and their faint _pip, pip, pop_!
sounds far away at the bottom of the garden, where they know I shall
not suspect them of robbing the great black-walnut of its
bitter-rinded store.[P] They are feathered Pecksniffs, to be sure,
but then how brightly their breasts, that look rather shabby in the
sunlight, shine in a rainy day against the dark green of the
fringe-tree! After they have pinched and shaken all the life out of
an earthworm, as Italian cooks pound all the spirit out of a steak,
and then gulped him, they stand up in honest self-confidence, expand
their red waistcoats with the virtuous air of a lobby member, and
outface you with an eye that calmly challenges inquiry. "Do _I_ look
like a bird that knows the flavor of raw vermin? I throw myself upon
a jury of my peers. Ask any robin if he ever ate anything less
ascetic than the frugal berry of the juniper, and he will answer that
his vow forbids him." Can such an open bosom cover such depravity?
Alas, yes! I have no doubt his breast was redder at that very moment
with the blood of my raspberries. On the whole, he is a doubtful
friend in the garden. He makes his dessert of all kinds of berries,
and is not averse from early pears. But when we remember how
omnivorous he is, eating his own weight in an incredibly short time,
and that Nature seems exhaustless in her invention of new insects
hostile to vegetation, perhaps we may reckon that he does more good
than harm. For my own part, I would rather have his cheerfulness and
kind neighborhood than many berries.

FOOTNOTES:

[P] The screech-owl, whose cry, despite his ill name, is one of the
sweetest sounds in nature, softens his voice in the same way with the
most beguiling mockery of distance.--AUTHOR'S NOTE.




LXXXIX. THE OLD CRADLE.

FREDERICK LOCKER.--1821-


    And this was your Cradle? Why, surely, my Jenny,
      Such cosy dimensions go clearly to show
    You were an exceedingly small pickaninny
      Some nineteen or twenty short summers ago.

    Your baby-days flow'd in a much-troubled channel;
      I see you, as then, in your impotent strife,
    A tight little bundle of wailing and flannel,
      Perplex'd with the newly-found fardel of Life.

    To hint at an infantile frailty's a scandal;
      Let bygones be bygones, for somebody knows
    It was bliss such a Baby to dance and to dandle,--
      Your cheeks were so dimpled, so rosy your toes.

    Ay, here is your Cradle; and Hope, a bright spirit,
