Emperor, riding now with the old regiment of Italy in the van, and now
with the grenadiers in the rear, approached Grenoble late in the
afternoon.  The short March day was drawing to a close when they came
in sight of the heavily garrisoned walls of the town.

Labedoyere had obeyed orders in some particulars.  The ramparts had
been manned, the cannon were loaded, torches were blazing on the walls,
and the town was awake and seething with excitement.  He had declared
for the Emperor, and after a sharp little conflict had disarmed the
royalist cavalry and himself held the gates.  Every regiment that had
come in had cast its lot in with Napoleon.  As the soldiers in the town
heard, in the twilight, the beating of the drums--"_La Grenadiere_" the
old march again!--the Colonel of the Seventh, having seized the few
royalists, opened the gates, marched out at the head of the troops to
receive the Emperor with arms, yes, but with open arms.  Amid the
shouts of the citizens and the delirious joy of the soldiery, the
Emperor entered the city; in his train, first fruits of the war, was
the body of the old servant of the unfortunate King.

It was Pierre who burst into the apartment of the little Countess with
the news.

"The Emperor is here, mademoiselle," he cried enthusiastically.  "The
soldiers are bringing him to the palace."

"And Marteau?"

"He will be free."

"Thank God!" cried the girl, and then she remembered her uncle.  "And
the Marquis?" she asked.

"My dearest Laure," said the kindly, sympathetic voice of Captain Frank
Yeovil, stepping out of the twilight of the hall into the bright light
of the little drawing-room where last night she had bade farewell to
Marteau, "prepare yourself for some dreadful----"

"Yes, yes, I know," she interrupted.  "The Emperor is here."

"The troops went over to him."

"And my uncle?"

"He----"

"Speak, monsieur.  What has happened?  Did the Emperor----"

"No one harmed him.  He could not survive the disgrace, mademoiselle.
Prepare yourself."

"Oh, for God's sake, delay not your tidings."

"He died like a soldier of France on the field, by his own hand rather
than survive what he wrongfully thought his shame."

It was the policy of the Emperor to be merciful; it was his wish to be
clement.  If possible, he wanted peace.  If mercy and gentleness could
get it he could have it.  He gave free permission to Sir Gervaise
Yeovil and his son to return to England.  He made no objection to their
taking with them the Countess Laure, now the last of the line.  He,
himself, was present at the funeral of the Marquis, who was buried with
all the military honors of his rank and station.  There were generous
hearts among those Frenchmen.  As the representative of the King they
had hated him, but when he had died so gallantly rather than survive
what his nice sensibility believed to be his dishonor, his failure at
any rate, they honored him.  If he had been a Marshal of France they
could have done no more.

Marteau, restored to his rank and position as aide to the Emperor, had
but a few moments with the grief-stricken woman.

"No," she said sadly, "it makes no difference.  You know my heart.  No
words that I can utter could add anything more to the testimony I have
given you.  But I had promised my uncle, and now that he is dead, the
promise is doubly sacred.  I must go.  Thank your Emperor for me for
all he has done for me, his enemy, and for my friends, and for what he
has done for you.  Tell him the story of the Eagle, and the little part
in it that I played and--you will not forget me as I will not forget
you."

"God grant," said the young soldier, "that I may die for France on some
battlefield, my last thought of you."

"Ah, if that should befall you, I should envy you your rest.  Would to
God I might look forward to such a quick and happy ending," said the
grief-stricken woman, turning away.

The next morning, with great ceremony and much rejoicing, the Eagle was
brought out, and the Emperor once more presented it to the regiment.
He did more than that.  He signalized the action of the
Fifth-of-the-Line, the news of which had been sent broadcast by
couriers and which struck a keynote for the army to follow, by
incorporating it as a supplementary Fifth regiment of Grenadiers of the
Guard.  He promised them a new flag and new bearskins.  He promoted
Lestoype to be a lieutenant-colonel, Labedoyere to be a general, and
promised every veteran officer his old rank or higher in the new army
to be formed.  The men were promised bounties and rewards, and, with
high hopes and glorious anticipations, the march for Paris was begun.

So by the wayside and in the fields around this little army in that
springtime, the violets bloomed again.




BOOK III

THE LAST TRY


CHAPTER XXVIII

AT THE STAMP OF THE EMPEROR'S FOOT

The wonderful genius of Napoleon, which had been so clearly manifested in
so many ways during his varied career, was never exhibited to better
advantage than in the three months after his return from Elba.  During
that period he reorganized the government, recreated and reequipped an
army.  The veterans flocked to his standards, and within the time
mentioned he had actually two hundred and fifty thousand men under arms.

With the better moiety of this force, the best armed, the best equipped,
the best officered contingent, he took the field early in the month of
June.  The Emperor did not want war any more than France did.  He began
his new reign with the most pacific of proclamations, which probably
reflected absolutely the whole desire of his heart.  But the patience of
Europe had been exhausted and the belief of rulers and peoples in the
honesty of his professions, declarations or intentions, had been
hopelessly shattered.

His arrival effected an immediate resurrection of the almost moribund
Congress of Vienna.  The squabbling, arguing, trifling plenipotentiaries
of the powers had burst into gigantic laughter--literally, actual
merriment, albeit of a somewhat grim character!--when they received the
news of Napoleon's return.  They were not laughing at Napoleon but at
themselves.  They had been dividing the lion's skin in high-flown
phrases, which meant nothing, endeavoring to incorporate the Decalogue
and the Sermon on the Mount in their protocols and treaties, when they
suddenly discovered that the Emperor was still to be reckoned with.

Differences were instantly laid aside and forgotten.  Russia, Prussia and
Austria immediately agreed to put in the field two hundred and fifty
thousand men each.  The smaller powers, Sweden, Spain, the Low Countries,
promised contingents.  England once more assumed the familiar role of
paymaster by immediately placing a vast subsidy at the disposal of the
allies.  She gave them also what was of more value than a subsidy, a
soldier of the first rank to command the armies in the field.

The Duke of Wellington had never crossed swords with the greatest captain
of his day and perhaps of all time.  But he had measured himself with the
ablest and most famous of Napoleon's Marshals.  With greatly inferior
forces, through four years of desperate fighting, he had defeated the
Marshals and armies of France.  The dashing and gallant Junot had been
routed at Vimiero, Victor had been overwhelmed at Talavera.  Wily old
Massena with all his ability could look back to the disaster of the
blood-stained hill of Busaco, Marmont, the dainty tactician, had been
smashed at Salamanca, stubborn Jourdan had been at last decisively
defeated at Victoria.  Finally, the brilliant Soult had been hurled out
of the Pyrenees and had met his master at Toulouse.  Still, great as were
these soldiers and highly trained as they had been in the best of
schools, not one of them was a Napoleon; all of them together were not,
for that matter.  Would the luster of Wellington's fame, which extended
from the Ganges to the Ebro, be tarnished when he met the Emperor?  It
was a foregone conclusion, of course, that Schwarzenberg would command
the Austrians; Bluecher, the "Hussar General," the hard-fighting,
downright old "Marshal Vorwaerts," the Prussians; and the Emperor
Alexander, with his veteran captains, the vast horde of Russians.

To assemble, arm, equip and move two hundred and fifty thousand men was a
great task in those days even for a rich and populous country flushed
with victory and in the enjoyment of an abundance of time and unlimited
means.  The organizing, it almost might be said the creative, ability of
Napoleon was not shared by his opponents.  Try as they would, June found
their preparations still woefully incomplete.  The Austrians had scarcely
moved at all.  The slower Russians, who were farther away and were to
constitute the reserve army, could be discounted from any present
calculation of the enemies of the Empire.  The English and their smaller
allies from the Low Countries, and the Prussians, whose hatred of France
and the Emperor was greater than that of any other nation, were quicker
to move.  Two hundred and fifteen thousand men, half of them Prussians, a
third of the other moiety English, the remaining two-thirds Belgians,
Hollanders, and other miscellaneous nationalities, had joined the colors
on the northwestern frontier of France.  One-half of this joint assembly
was commanded by Bluecher and the other half by Wellington.

Leaving the weaker half of his own great army to complete its equipment,
and placing strong detachments in fortress and at strategetic points to
oppose the Austrians should they advance, the Emperor, as has been said,
with about one hundred and twenty-five thousand men took the field.
Naturally, inevitably, Belgium, the immemorial battleground of the
nations, and the great English-Prussian army were his objectives.  He saw
clearly the dangers that encompassed him, the demands he must meet and
the conditions over which he must triumph.

It was by no means certain, even if he decisively defeated his enemies in
Belgium and occupied Brussels, that his trouble would be over.  There
would still be left a possible five hundred thousand trained and
disciplined men with whom he would have to deal, under rulers and
generals the inveteracy of whose hatreds he could well understand.  But
at least his position would be greatly improved by a successful
preliminary campaign, any success in short, to say nothing of so great a
one.  If he could show himself once more the inimitable Captain, the
thunderbolt of war, the organizer of victory, the Napoleon of other days,
the effect upon France, at least, would be electrical.  And the world
would again take notice.

The Emperor had to admit that, save in the army, there had not been much
response from tired-out, exhausted France, to the appeals of its once
irresistible and beloved leader.  But the spirit of the army was that of
devotion itself.  There was a kind of a blind madness in it of which men
spoke afterward as a phenomenon that could only be recognized, that could
never be explained or understood.  They could not account for it.  Yet it
was a powerful factor, the most powerful, indeed, that enabled the
Emperor to accomplish so much, and fall short of complete triumph by so
narrow a margin.

The spirit of this new army was not that burning love of liberty which
had animated the armies of the early republic and turned its
tatterdemalion legions into paladins.  It was not the heroic consecration
of the veterans of later years to their native land.  It was a strange,
mysterious obsession, a personal attachment to Napoleon, the
individual--an unlimited, unbounded tribute to his fascination, to his
own unique personality.  It has not died out, and seems destined to live.
Even in death Napoleon, after a century, exercises the same fascination
over all sorts and conditions of men!  Wise and foolish alike acknowledge
his spell.  Men hate, men loathe much of that for which the Corsican
adventurer and soldier of fortune stood; they see clearly and admit
freely the thorough and entire selfishness of the colossal man, but they
cannot resist his appeal, even after one hundred years!

Yet in the long run no personal attachment, however deep, however ardent,
however complete, can take the place as the inspiration for heroic deeds
of that deeper passion of love of country.  Nor can any personal devotion
to a mere man produce such a steadfastness of character as is brought
about by adherence to a great cause or a great land.  A great passion
like the love of a people for a great country and that for which it
stands is eternal.  Usually the feet of clay upon which the idol stands
have only to be recognized to dissipate the ardor and fervor of the
worshipers.  But Napoleon was then an exception to all rules.  Though he
slew men, wasted them, threw them away, they trusted him.  We look at him
through the vista of years and in some way understand his soldiers.
Reason to the contrary, we can experience in some degree, at least, even
in the cold-blooded humanitarian materialism of the present, the old
thrill and the old admiration.  Did his contemporaries love him because
they believed he thought in terms of France, we wonder?

So that this body of soldiery was probably the most formidable army in
the quality of its units that had ever been mustered on the globe.  There
was not a man in it who was not a veteran.  Some of them were veterans of
fifteen years of campaigning with Napoleon.  This that came was to be the
sixtieth pitched battle in which some of them had participated.  Even the
younger men had gone through more than one campaign and taken part in
much hard fighting.  Back from the prisons where they had been confined
and the great fortresses they had held until the Emperor's abdication had
come the veterans.  The Old Guard had been reconstituted.  As a reward
for its action at Grenoble, the Fifth-of-the-Line had been incorporated
in it as a supplementary regiment, a second Fifth regiment of Grenadiers.
The ranks of the Guard had been most carefully culled, the unserviceable
had been weeded out, their places taken by men well fitted by their
record, their physical prowess and their personal appearance to belong to
that famous corps.  Not the Immortals of Xerxes, the Spartan Band of
Leonidas, the Companion Cavalry of Alexander, the Carthaginians of
Hannibal, the Tenth Legion of Caesar, the Spanish Infantry of Parma, or
the Ironsides of Cromwell, had surpassed the record of these Pretorians
of Imperial France.

The same weeding-out process had been carried out in the rest of the
army.  The flower of French cavalry, the matchless French artillery and
the famous infantry which had trampled down the world were ranged under
the Eagles.  Other corps had been drained for equipment.  But in some
particulars the army differed from the Imperial armies of the past.  With
two exceptions, the great Marshals were not there.  Murat, king of
horsemen and swordsmen, was a prisoner in his ignoble Neapolitan realm
awaiting trial and execution.  Marmont and Mortier dared not present
themselves before the Emperor they had betrayed.  Wily Massena, the
wisest and ablest of them all, was old and in convenient retirement.
Macdonald, the incorruptible, was with the fat-bodied, fat-witted Bourbon
King in Ghent.  Berthier, with his marvelous mastery of detail and his
almost uncanny ability to translate the Emperor's thoughts even into
orders, had not rejoined the Eagles--a terrible loss, indeed.

There were but two of the Marshals of old with Napoleon.  Soult, in some
respects the acutest strategist and finest tactician, was Chief of Staff.
He tried his best to fill Berthier's position and did it acceptably, if
not with the success of that master.  The other Marshal was preeminently
the battle-leader, red-headed Michael Ney, the fighter of fighters, a man
whose personality was worth an army-corps, whose reputation and influence
with the soldiers was of the very highest.

The rest of the officers, while veterans, were younger and less-known
men.  Drouet d'Erlon commanded one of the corps; Reille another; Grouchy
another; Druot was the leader of the Guard; Kellerman, Milhaud, Gerard
and Maurice the cavalry.  It was an army of veterans, officered by young
men, commanded by the greatest of soldiers.

But the army had not yet "found itself."  It had no natural coherence and
there had been no time to acquire any.  It had not yet been welded
together.  Officers, men, regiments, brigades, divisions were, more or
less, new and strange to one another.  There was a vast deal of suspicion
in the ranks.  The discipline was rather because of past habit than
present practice.  That army needed a few victories, and badly needed
them.  A welding process was required.  Given time and success to shake
it together, and it might laugh at the world.

Would it get time and win victory?  That was the question.  And if it got
neither, what then?  How would it stand up under the strain?  Would the
tie that bound hold in defeat?  Could the rest of the army live up to the
Guard, for instance?  Yes, that was the grave, the all-important question.

There was an enormous disparity in numbers between the French army--or it
would better be called Napoleon's army--and that of the allies he
purposed to attack.  The allies were to the French in the ratio of about
two to one.  Whatever else was lacking, Napoleon had not lost his
audacity, nor when his intentions are disclosed by a study of his plans,
can it be argued that his strategic intention was lacking in brilliancy
or daring.

He determined with his smaller but compact and manageable army to thrust
himself between the two wings of the somewhat loosely coherent enemy
under its divided command; to hold off one while he smashed the other and
then to concentrate upon the surviving half and mete out to it the same
hard fortune.  In other words, trusting to his ability, he deliberately
placed his own army between two others, each of which practically equaled
his own.  He thrust himself within the jaws of a trap, to use a homely
simile, intending to hold one arm of the trap open while he broke up the
other.  He intended to burst through the allied line and smash up each
half in succession.

Of course there was always the danger that he could not burst through
that line; or that he could not hold back one half while he fought the
other, or that holding back one half he could not beat the other, or
having beaten one half he would be too weak to fall on the other.  There
was always the danger that the trap would be sprung, that he would be
caught in its jaws or, to change the metaphor, that he would be like the
wheat between the upper and the nether millstone.  Still he did not think
so, and he did not go into the undertaking blindly.  As he had said, in
his own case, "War was not a conjectural art," and he had most carefully
counted the cost, estimated the probabilities.  In short, he looked well
before he leaped--yet a man may look well and leap wrong after all.

On these considerations he based his grand strategy.  The army of the
Prussians had approached the French frontier from the east; the army of
the English and allies from the northwest.  Napoleon had a complete
knowledge of one of the Captains opposing him.  He knew and accurately
estimated Bluecher.  He did not know and he did not accurately estimate
Wellington.  He viewed the latter with contempt; the former with a
certain amount of disdainful approbation, for while Bluecher was no
strategist and less of a tactician, he was a fighter and a fighter is
always dangerous and to be dreaded.  Gneisenau, a much more accomplished
soldier, was Bluecher's second in command, but he was a negligible factor
in the Emperor's mind.  The fact that Wellington had beaten all of
Napoleon's Marshals with whom he had come in contact had intensified the
Emperor's hatred.  Instead of begetting caution in dealing with him,
