two of the most beautiful birds they had ever seen.  They were not
entirely white--although, in looking at them from below, they appeared
so; but as, in sailing round the circle, they sometimes held themselves
sideways in the air, their backs at intervals could be seen distinctly.
It was then noticed that the upper part of their bodies was of a rich
cream colour, while their wings above--both plumes and coverts--were of
a glossy brown.  Their tails were tipped with black; but the whole of
the under part of their bodies was of a pure milk-like white.  But the
most singular appearance about these birds was presented on their heads
and necks.  These were entirely naked of feathers as far down as the
shoulders--where the neck was encircled by a large ruff that looked like
a tippet--and the naked skin of both head and neck exhibited the most
brilliant colours of orange and red.  These colours were not mixed nor
mottled together; but each belonged to separate parts of the membrane,
forming distinct and regular figures--according to the manner in which
the cartilaginous covering is itself most singularly divided.  Their
beaks were orange-red; and over their bases grew crest-like
protuberances, like the comb of a cock.  Their eyes had dark pupils and
white irides, encircled by rings of a deep red colour; and, in short,
the whole appearance of these beautiful creatures was such that, like
the peacock, when once seen, they could never be forgotten.

"I have never seen one of them before," remarked Lucien, "but I have no
difficulty in telling what they are."

"What?" inquired Basil and Francois, impatiently.

"_King-vultures_."

As Lucien said this, the birds, that did not seem to regard the presence
of the party, swooped suddenly down towards the carrion.  The boys
followed them with their eyes--curious to witness what effect their
arrival would have upon the buzzards and black vultures.  To the
surprise of all, not one of the latter was now to be seen near the
carcass!  While the attention of the party had been directed to the
king-vultures, the others had been regarding them as well; and, knowing
from experience what these great birds were, both buzzards and black
vultures had scattered precipitately, and now sat upon the rocks at a
respectful distance!

The king-vultures, without seeming to heed their presence, hopped up to
the carrion, and commenced tearing it with their beaks.  In a few
minutes these creatures, that had appeared so clean and beautiful--for
the king-vultures are as proud of their plumage as peacocks, and usually
keep it in the best order--exhibited a picture of filth that was
disgusting to look upon.  The brilliant hue of their heads and necks was
changed into a dark blood colour; and their white breasts became dappled
with gore.  Their vulturous appetites rendered them regardless of all
else.

"Shall we fire, and kill one?" asked Francois.

"No," said Lucien, "it is not right to deprive the poor creatures of
life.  If you wish to get a nearer view of them, have patience, and your
wish may be gratified without the expenditure of powder and lead."

What Lucien said proved correct.  At the end of half an hour or so, the
birds appeared to have eaten as much as they could get into their
stomachs; and commenced stalking over the ground with a heavy sluggish
gait.  The boys, who had waited patiently, now ran forward; and, finding
that the vultures were unable to rise into the air, after a chase--in
which Marengo took a prominent part--secured them both.

But they did not hold them long; for the moment that Francois, who was
the most eager to seize them, laid his hands upon one, he let it go
again with an exclamation of disgust; and ran faster from the vulture,
than the latter could run from him!

The fetid odour of the creatures--which was quite as strong as that of
the carrion itself--was too much for the olfactory nerves of our heroes;
and they were all three glad enough to let the king-vultures off without
a second encounter.

As they returned to their horses, they observed that the buzzards and
black vultures were once more collecting about the remains of the
big-horn.  They had been joined by several prairie-wolves; and these
were snarling and snapping--now driving off the birds, and now receiving
a blow from the long wings of the latter, that caused them to growl more
fiercely than ever.  Our adventurers did not wait for the _finale_ of
this hideous scene; but remounting, once more headed their horses to the
prairie.



CHAPTER THIRTY TWO.

MORE TALK ABOUT THE VULTURES.

They conversed about the vultures, as they rode away from the butte.
The naturalist of the party had much to say of these picturesque birds;
and the curiosity of Basil and Francois had been excited by the
appearance of a species new to them--the king himself.

"With regard to the vultures," observed Lucien, "the study of their
natural history has been considerably impeded by the closet-naturalists,
and particularly by the Frenchmen--who are fonder than all others of
making a parade of science, by the absurd multiplication of genera and
species.  This, in the absence of any real knowledge of the habits of
the animals, gives them an opportunity of adding something to what has
been already said; and leaves the reader under the impression that these
learned anatomists know all about the thing; and that is what such
gentlemen desire, and nothing more.

"There are not over two dozen species of vultures in the world; and yet
the French naturalists make almost as many genera of them, multiplying
high-sounding names to such an extent, that the mind of the student is
quite bewildered with what would otherwise prove a most simple study.

"All the vultures are so similar in their _physiognomy_ and habits, that
they might be treated as one genus.  Indeed, it would not lead to great
confusion in ornithological science, if they were generically classed
with the eagles--as both kinds have many points of similitude.  The
vultures often kill their prey as eagles do; and it is certain that they
do _not_ prefer it in a putrid state.  The eagles do not always kill
their prey, and many of them eat carrion.  Some of the vultures--such as
the lammergeyer--have almost all the habits of the eagle.  The
lammergeyer always kills what he eats, unless when pressed by hunger;
and there is a singular fact in relation to the food of this bird,--he
prefers certain parts of the bones of animals to their flesh!"

It is somewhat strange that the boy hunter, Lucien, should have known
this "fact," as I believe it is not in possession of the naturalists.
I, myself, was made acquainted with it by one of the "feeders" of the
superb collection in Regent's Park--who had observed this propensity for
bone-eating in a young African lammergeyer.  He had observed also that
the bird was always healthier, and in better spirits, on the days when
he was indulged in his favourite osseous diet.  These men usually know
more of natural history than the catalogue-makers and teeth-measurers of
the museum and the closet.

"Perhaps," continued Lucien, "one of the most essential points of
difference between the vulture and eagle lies in the claws.  The claws
of the vultures are less developed, and their limbs want the muscular
power that those of eagles possess.  Hence the former are less able to
kill a living animal, or tear the carcass of a dead one.  They are
unable, also, to raise a large prey in their claws; and the stories of
vultures carrying off deer, and full-grown sheep, are mere fables.  Even
the condor--the largest of the species known--cannot lift into the air a
weight of more than ten pounds.  A deer of that weight would be rather a
small one, I fancy.  Most of the wonderful stories about the condor were
propagated by the discoverers and conquerors of Spanish America; who, if
they were great conquerors, were also the greatest braggarts the world
ever saw.  The books they have left behind them fully prove my
assertion; and I believe that their accounts of the Mexican and Peruvian
nations, whom they subdued, are not a whit less exaggerated than their
stories about the condor.  Three centuries could not have so completely
swept away the vestiges of such a civilisation as they describe--leaving
scarcely a trace of it to attest the truth of their assertions.  It is
true, that in these countries are to be found monuments of a high state
of civilisation; but these were in ruins long previous to the discovery
of the Spaniards; and the feeble races who submitted so easily to the
latter, knew no more about the builders of these monuments than we do.
The same vestiges of a civilised people are found in the deserts of
North America; and yet the Spanish writers can tell nothing of them,
farther than that they existed at the period of the discovery just as
they are now."

"How many kinds of vultures are there in America?" inquired Francois,
whose mind ran more upon the present than the past; and who, as we have
already hinted, was a great boy for birds.

"There are five species well-known," replied Lucien; "and these are so
different from each other that there is no difficulty in distinguishing
them.  These species form two genera--_Sarco ramphus_ and _Cathartes_.
The _Sarcoramphs_ have a fleshy protuberance over the beak--hence the
generic name, which is a compound of two Greek words, signifying
_flesh_, and _beak_ or _bill_.  The _Cathartes_, or `purging-vultures,'
derive their name from a singular habit--that of throwing up their food
again, not only when feeding their young, but also when providing for
one another during the period of incubation.

"The condor is a true _Sarcoramph_--in fact, one of the most marked
features of this bird is the fleshy cartilaginous crest that surmounts
his head and part of his beak.  This, however, is only found upon the
males, as the female birds are not crested in a similar manner.  The
condor, when in full plumage, might be called a black-and-white bird.
His body underneath, his tail, shoulders, and the butts as well as the
outer margins of his wings, are all of a dark, nearly black, colour; but
his wings, when closed, give him a large space of greyish white from the
back to the tail.  The downy ruff around the breast and neck is
milk-white, and the naked wrinkled skin of the neck and head is of a
blackish red or claret colour, while the legs are ashy blue.  It is only
when full-grown--nearly three years old--that the condor obtains these
colours; and up to that time he is without the white collar around his
neck.  The young birds, for many months after they are hatched, have no
feathers, but a soft thick down, like young goslings or cygnets; and
even at two years of age their colour is not black and white, but a
dirty, brownish black.

"The full-grown condor usually measures about eight feet from tip to tip
of his wings; but there can be no question that specimens exist, and
have been seen by truthful travellers, that measured fourteen feet and
some inches!

"The condor, like other vultures, feeds principally upon carrion; but,
when pressed with hunger, he will kill sheep, lambs, vicunas, young
lamas, deer, and other animals.  The larger kinds he can master, by
attacking their eyes with his powerful beak--which is his principal
weapon.  That he can kill boys of sixteen years old, as Garcilaso de la
Vega asserts, is, like many other statements of that celebrated author,
simply untrue; but that he frequently attacks, and, according to the
Indians, sometimes _puts to death_ little children, is probable enough.
If he can kill full-grown sheep or vicunas, there is nothing remarkable
about his doing the same for a child five or six years of age; and,
indeed, it is certain that such instances have occurred.

"Almost any eagles can do as much, and would, provided they were hungry,
and children were left exposed in the neighbourhood of their haunts.
The condor, however, is one of the most ravenous of his species.  One in
a state of captivity has been known to eat eighteen pounds of flesh in a
single day!  But that this bird can raise into the air with his claws,
and carry off large animals, such as deer and sheep, as asserted by
Acosta, Desmarchais, and other French and Spanish writers, is altogether
fabulous.

"The condor, unlike the vultures of most countries, is not under the
protection of the law.  His destructive habits among the lambs, and
young lamas and alpacas, render him an object to be persecuted rather
than protected.  He is, therefore, either killed or captured, whenever
an opportunity offers.  There can be but little use made either of his
flesh or his feathers; but as he is an object of curiosity, he is often
kept as a pet about the houses of the Chilians and Peruvians.  Live ones
are frequently to be seen in the markets of Valparaiso, and other South
American cities.

"The natives who hunt the condor have various ways of capturing him.
Sometimes they lie in wait near a carcass, and shoot the bird when it
alights; but it is very difficult to kill them in this way, on account
of their strong thick feathers, as well as the tenacity of life which
they possess: it can only be done when the shot takes effect in a vital
part.  This method, therefore, is not much practised.  A second plan is,
to wait until the condor has gorged himself to repletion, when, like
most other vultures, he is unable to fly for some time after.  The
hunters then gallop up, and lasso him from their horses; or impede his
flight by flinging the `bolas' around his legs.  The `bolas' are thongs
of leather, with leaden balls at each end; and these, when adroitly
thrown, twine themselves round the shanks of the condor, and prevent his
escape.  A third mode is still a surer one.  The hunters build a large
penn, in which they place a quantity of carrion.  The palisades that
inclose this penn are made so high, that, when the bird has gorged
himself, he is unable either to rise into the air or get out of the
enclosure in any way; and he is then overtaken and captured, or beaten
to death with clubs.

"The Indians kill the condor by stones, projected from slings to a great
distance--a species of weapon which these people use with much
dexterity.

"Condors are taken alive in traps and snares; but there is an excellent
and somewhat curious method of capturing them alive, sometimes employed
by the Indians of the Sierras.  It is this:--The hunter provides himself
with the skin of some animal, such as an ox or horse, freshly taken off,
and with a piece of the flesh adhering to it.  With this he proceeds to
some open place, where the condors, wheeling high in the air above, may
readily see him.  Having chosen a spot, he crouches down upon the
ground, and draws the skin over him, with the fleshy side turned upward.
In this situation he remains; but not long, until some one of the
condors, with his far-piercing glance, espies the ensanguined object,
and comes swooping downward.  The bird, having no suspicion, hops boldly
upon the hide; and commences tearing at the piece of flesh.  The hunter,
underneath, now cautiously feels for one of its legs; and having assured
himself of this, grasps it firmly, folding the foot of the bird in the
soft loose flaps of the hide.  Having already provided himself with a
long rope, he adroitly nooses it around the ankle; and, taking the other
end in his hand, he now appears from under the skin, and shows himself
to his astonished captive.  Of course, during the operation of
`tethering,' the condor flaps and struggles with all his might; and were
it not for the hide which protects the hunter, the latter would be very
apt to come off with the loss of an eye, or be otherwise dreadfully torn
by the powerful beak of the bird.  When the hunter has fairly secured
his prize, he passes a leathern thong through its nostrils, and knotting
it firmly, leads the condor off in triumph.  In this same manner the
bird is kept chained, so long as he is wanted.  With the string through
his nostrils, and fastened by the other end to a picket-pin in the
ground, the captive can walk about freely within the area of a circle.
Sometimes forgetting that he is chained, he attempts to fly off; but, on
reaching the end of his string, the sudden jerk brings him to the ground
again; and he invariably falls upon his head!"

"But how is it," inquired Francois, "since the condors are hunted in
this way, and so easily captured, that they are not long since
exterminated?  They are so large, that any one can see them at a great
distance; and they can be easily approached, I believe; yet there are
still great flocks of them--are there not?"

"You are quite right," answered Lucien; "they are still numerous, both
in the Andes of Chili and Peru.  I think I can explain this.  It is
because they have a safe place, not only to breed but to retire to,
whenever they feel inclined.  Numerous peaks of the Andes, where these
birds dwell, shoot up far above the line of perpetual snow.  Away up on
these summits the condor breeds, among naked rocks where there is no
vegetation.  No one ever thinks of ascending them; and, indeed, many of
these summits are inaccessible to the human foot.  Not even animals of
any species are found there, nor birds--except the condor himself.  He
is the sole lord of that region.  Therefore, unlike most other
creatures, these birds have a retreat where no enemy can come near them,
and where they may bring forth their young, and rear them in perfect
security.  Still more, they can go to rest at night without fear of
being disturbed, unless by the crash of the falling avalanche, or the
roar of the loud thunder that often reverberates through these Alpine
regions.  But the condor is not in the least afraid of these noises; and
he heeds them not, but sleeps securely, even while the red lightning is
playing around his eyrie.

"Now, it is very evident that birds, or any other wild animals,
possessing a secure place, both to bring forth their young or escape to
in time of danger, will not easily be extirpated.  It is because their
places of breeding and retreat are accessible--not only to man but to
hosts of other enemies--that such creatures as eagles and the like are
so scarce.  Not so with the condor.  His race can never become extinct
so long as the Andes exist; and that is likely to be for a good long
period, I fancy."

"What sort of nests do they build?" inquired Francois.

"They do not build nests," replied Lucien, "they choose a cavity in the
rocks, or in the soil around them, where they lay two large white oval
eggs, and hatch them just as other vultures do.  Strange to say, very
little is known of their mode of life in their elevated haunts; but this
is because the natives of the Sierras rarely venture up to the high
regions where the condors dwell.  All they know of them is what they
see, when these great birds descend upon the plateaux, or inhabited
mountain-valleys, in search of food--which they do only in the mornings
and evenings.  During mid-day the condor usually perches upon some high
rock, and there goes to sleep.  When pressed by hunger, they sometimes
extend their range down to the hot coast lands of the Pacific Ocean; but
they are evidently birds that can bear cold much better than heat.

