
It was time I interposed.  Hitherto, in sheer helplessness, I had stood
by and watched the invasion with silent despair.  Now, however, that my
uncle seemed to be in danger of rough handling, something must be done.

"If you fellows have any pretence to be called gentlemen," I shouted, in
tones choked with mingled shame and anger, "you will leave Jack's room
and mine."

"Jack's! who's Jack?  Is the old pawnbroker called Jack, then?  Oh, I
say, you fellows," cried Whipcord, dropping on a chair, and nearly
choking himself with a fit of laughter.  "Oh, you fellows, I've got it
at last.  I've got it.  Jack!  I know who it is."

"Who is it?" cried the others.

"Why, can't you guess?" yelled Whipcord.

"No!  Who?"

"Jack Ketch!"

This new idea was taken up with the utmost rapture, and my uncle was
forthwith dubbed with his fresh title.

"Three cheers for Uncle Ketch, you fellows!" shouted Whipcord.

The cheers were given with great hubbub.  Then my uncle was called upon
for a speech, and, as he declined, a proposal was made to compel him.

Up to this time, protest as well as resistance had seemed worse than
useless.  Jack and I were only two against seven, and our visitors were
hardly in a condition to give us fair play, even if we did come to
blows.  But our wrath had been gradually approaching boiling-point, and
now the time seemed to have come to brave all consequences and assert
ourselves.

Whipcord and Masham had each seized one of my uncle's arms, with a view
to carry out their threat, when by a mutual impulse Jack, and I assumed
the defensive and rushed into the fray.  Both our adversaries were, of
course, utterly unprepared for such a demonstration, and in consequence,
and before they could either of them take in the state of affairs, they
were sprawling at full length on the floor.  The whole action was so
rapidly executed that it was not for a moment or two that the rest of
the party took in the fact that the affair was something more than a
joke.  When, however, they did so, a general engagement ensued, in which
Jack and I, even with the unlooked-for and gallant aid of my uncle,
could do very little against superior numbers.

What the upshot might have been--whether we should have been eventually
ejected from our own lodgings, or whether the invaders would presently
have wearied of their sport and made off of their own accord--I cannot
say, but just as things were looking at their worst for us an opportune
diversion occurred which turned the tide of battle.

This was none other than the simultaneous arrival of Billy and Flanagan.
The latter, I recollected, had promised to look in during the evening,
to see how Jack had fared at the examination.

In the general confusion the new-comers entered the room almost
unnoticed.  The unexpected scene which met their eyes in our usually
quiet quarters naturally alarmed them, and it was a second or more
before, in the midst of all the riot, they could make out what was the
matter.

Billy was the first to recover himself.  The sight of Jack Smith being
attacked by Masham was quite enough for him, and, with a cry of, "Do you
hear, you let him be!" he sprang upon his patron's assailant like a
young tiger.

Poor, gallant Billy!  Masham, taken aback to find himself thus attacked
by a small boy who seemed to come from nowhere, recoiled for an instant
before his vigorous onslaught.  But it was only for an instant.
Stepping back, and leaving the others to engage Jack and me, he seized
the boy by the arm, and, dealing him a blow on the side of the head,
flung him savagely to the floor, adding a brutal kick as he lay there,
stunned and senseless at his feet.

The sight of this outrage was all that was wanted to rouse us to one
desperate effort to rid ourselves of our cowardly invaders.  Jack closed
in an instant with Masham, and by sheer force carried him to the door
and literally flung him from the room.  The others, one by one,
followed.  Some, half ashamed at the whole proceeding, slunk away of
their own accord; the others, seeing themselves worsted, lost spirit,
and made but a slight resistance to our united assault, now vigorously
reinforced by Flanagan.

The last to leave was Whipcord, who endeavoured to carry the thing off
with his usual swagger to the last.  "Well, ta, ta, Batch," he said; "we
just looked in to see how you were, that's all.  Thanks for the jolly
evening.  By-bye, old Jack Ketch, and--"

And here, in consequence of a sudden forward movement from Flanagan, he
hurriedly withdrew, and left us for the first time that evening with
leisure to look about us.

It was no time, however, for asking questions or giving explanations.
An exclamation from Jack turned all attention to Billy, who lay still
unconscious and as white as a sheet where he had fallen.  Jack gently
raised him and laid him on the bed.  "Open the window, somebody," said
he.

The air seemed to revive the boy somewhat, for he opened his eyes and
looked vacantly round.  But a fit of sickness followed this partial
recovery, and again he swooned.

Jack's face was nearly as pale as the boy's as he looked up and said,
"Fetch the doctor!  Quick!"

Flanagan darted off almost before the words were out of his lips.

There was nothing for us who were left behind to do but to watch with
painful anxiety the poor little sufferer, who lay mostly unconscious,
and still at intervals violently sick.

Masham's ruffianly blow and kick had evidently done far more damage than
he or any one supposed.  As we waited in silence for the doctor to come
our alarm increased, and it even seemed doubtful whether, as we stood
there, we were not destined to see a terrible end to that evening's
proceedings.

"Has the boy a father or mother?" whispered my uncle to me.

Jack who sat with the sufferer's head on his arm, heard the question,
and said hurriedly, "Yes.  You must fetch his mother, Fred!"

There was such a tone of alarm in his voice that had Billy's mother been
a wild beast I could hardly have disobeyed.

I darted off on my unenviable quest, meeting the doctor on the stairs.
I knew the house in the court by this time, and was myself well-known to
its inmates.

The woman was not at home; she had not been home since the morning, and
no one knew where she was.  I left a message apprising her of what had
happened, and telling her to come at once to the lodgings.  Then with
much foreboding I hastened back to Drury Lane.

The evening had been a strangely different one from what I had expected.
I was to have broken the news to Jack of his father's discovery,
instead of which, here was I rushing frantically about trying to find an
unhappy woman and summon her to what, for all I knew, might be the
death-bed of her son!

I found when I returned that Billy had somewhat revived.  He was lying
back, very white still, and apparently unconscious, but they told me the
doctor had given some hope of his recovery, and that the fits of
sickness had stopped and left him stronger.

My uncle, whose concern for the poor boy was scarcely less than ours,
had relieved Jack at the patient's bedside.  Jack, who, now that the
imminent anxiety was over, had given way to a natural reaction, was, I
could see, in a terrible state of misery and rage.

"If he dies," muttered he to me, "I'll--"

What he meant to say I do not know.  He stopped short and flung himself
in the empty seat by the window, trembling all over.  I had never known
before how fond he was of the poor boy.

"What about his mother?" he said presently, turning to me.

"I couldn't find her, or hear of her anywhere," I said.  "But I left a
message for her."

Just then my uncle beckoned with his hand.

Billy had opened his eyes, and was looking about him.  He had done so
once or twice before, but always in a vacant, stupid sort of way.  Now,
to our intense joy, there was a glimmer of something like the old life
in his pale face, especially when, catching sight of Jack, who sprang to
his side in a moment, his features broke into a faint smile.

My uncle came quietly to me across the room.

"I'll go now," said he--more kindly than I had ever heard him speak.  "I
shall stay in town to-night, and will look in in the morning;" and so
saying he went.

Mr Smith and I accompanied him to the door.  As we were returning up
the stairs some one called after us.  I turned, and saw that the new-
comer was Billy's mother.



CHAPTER THIRTY FOUR.

HOW I GOT RID OF THE PETTY-CASH, AND OF MR. SMITH'S SECRET.

Billy's mother was, for the first time in my experience, sober.  I
stayed behind for her on the stairs, while Mr Smith retired to his own
room, saying he would come up and see us all in the morning.  I wished
he would have stayed and countenanced me in my interview with the
unhappy woman.

"What's all this, mister?" she said, as she came up.

Once, possibly, Billy's mother might have been a handsome and even
attractive woman, but drink had defaced whatever beauty she once had,
and had degraded her terribly, as it always does, both in body and mind.

"Billy has been badly hurt," I said, "and we thought you ought to come."

"Who hurt him?" she demanded.

There was no sympathy or even concern in her tone.  She spoke like a
person to whom all the world is an enemy, in league to do her wrong.

"There was a struggle," I said.  "A man was hitting Mr Smith--"

"Mr Smith!" she exclaimed, fiercely; "who's he--who's Mr Smith?"

"Why, my friend who sometimes goes to see you in the court."

"Oh!" said she, with a contemptuous laugh, "that fool!"

"Some one was striking him, and Billy put himself between them, and was
badly hurt."

"Well, what's come to him?  Is he dead, or what?" demanded the woman.

"No, he's not, mercifully," said I.  "He's getting better, we hope."

"And you mean to say," said the woman, with her wrath rising, "you've
got that child among you, and you're not content with robbing him and
keeping him away from me, but here you've half-murdered him into the
bargain, you-- Where is he, mister?  I'll take him back along with me;
I've had enough of this tomfoolery, I tell you."

"Oh!"  I exclaimed, "it would kill him to move him!  You mustn't think
of it."

"Get out of the way!" she exclaimed, fiercely, trying to push past me.
"I'll take him out of this.  I'll teach you all whose child the boy is!
Get out of my way!  Let me go to him."

What could I do?  I had no right to keep a mother from her son; and yet,
were she to carry out her threat, no one could say what the result to
the boy might not be.

In my dilemma I thought of Mr Smith, and conducted my intractable
visitor to his room, in the hopes that he might be able to dissuade her
from carrying out her threat.

But nothing he could do or say could bring her to reason.  She appeared
to be persuaded in her own mind that the whole affair was a conspiracy
to do her some wrong, and that being so, entreaties, threats, and even
bribes would not put her off her idea of taking Billy away with her.

"Come now," said she, after this ineffectual parley had gone on for some
time, "I'm not going to be made a fool of by you two any more.  Where's
Billy? where are you hiding him?  It's no use you trying to impose on me
with your gammon!"

"He's upstairs," said I, feeling that further resistance was worse than
useless.  "I'll run up and tell Jack you're coming.  Billy may be
asleep."

But the woman caught me roughly by the arm.  "No, no!" said she, "I
don't want none of your schemes and plots; I can go up without your
help, mister."

So saying, she broke away from us and went up the stairs.

"Don't follow her," said Mr Smith; "the fewer up there the better.
Jack will manage."

So we spent an anxious half-hour, listening to the voices and sound of
feet above, and wondering how the interview was going on.  Evidently it
began with an altercation, and once Billy's shrill treble joined in in a
way which sounded very familiar.  Eventually the angry tones of the
woman ceased, and presently she returned to us, quiet in her manner,
though still hunted-looking and mistrustful.

To our relief she was alone.

"I'm coming for him in the morning," said she as she passed us.

We could never make out how Jack had subdued her and put her off.  When
we asked him, he said simply he begged her to wait a little, at any
rate, till the boy was better, and had then promised to bring him home
himself.

That night I shared Mr Smith's room--or rather I occupied it during his
absence, leaving Jack and Billy in possession upstairs.

My reflections during the night were not pleasant.  If it had not been
for my folly, my sin, in times past, the calamity of this evening would
never have happened.  These "friends" of former days were not to be
shaken off as easily as they had been picked up, and meanwhile it was
not I who was made to suffer, but Jack and Billy, who had never been
guilty of my follies and sins.  And, more than this, I felt the burden
of Mr Smith's secret still hanging unrelieved on my mind.  And how was
I to get rid of it and tell.  Jack all, while this anxiety about Billy
lasted?

In the early morning Mr Smith returned, and I confided to him all my
troubles.  He was very sympathetic, and agreed with me that the present
was hardly the time to tell Jack his secret.  And yet it was plain to
see he was in terrible suspense till it should be all over.

We did not sleep much that night, and in the morning hastened to the
room above.  To our relief, we found Billy much better.  He was even
grinning as usual as we entered, and greeted us both in very like his
old familiar way.

"What cheer!" said he, feebly but cheerily.  "I _are_ got a dose off
that there Mashing!  He do give yer toppers!"

"Come, hush, Billy!" said Jack, pleasantly; "didn't I tell you not to
talk?"

"Yaas," said the boy, relapsing abruptly into silence.

His mother, as we rather anticipated, did not put in an appearance.  My
uncle did, and, after ascertaining that all was going on well, went off,
leaving, greatly to my astonishment and not a little to my
gratification, a sovereign in my hand as he said good-bye.

There was something kindly about my uncle, after all!

Leaving Mr Smith in charge, Jack and I went down to the office that
morning with lighter hearts than we had expected to have.

Crow was waiting for us outside the office, with an anxious face.

"I say," said he, as he came up, and not heeding Jack's wrathful looks,
"is it true what I hear, that that boy was killed last night?"

"Who told you so?" demanded Jack.

"I heard it from Daly.  And Masham has bolted.  Is it true, then?"

"No!" said Jack, "and no thanks to you it isn't, you coward!"

Crow had evidently been too much frightened by the news he had heard to
resent this hard name.  He answered, meekly, "I'm glad it's not true.
I'm ashamed of that affair last night, and there's no harm in telling
you so."

This was a good deal to come from a fellow like Crow.  We did not reply,
but entered the office.

There, for a few hours at least, hard work drove away all other cares.
At dinner-time Jack rushed home, and brought back a further good report
of the patient, whom the doctor had seen, and pronounced to be making
satisfactory progress.

As for me, I stayed at the office and made up for the lost time of the
evening before.  Part of my work was a grand balancing up of the petty-
cash, which, as Hawkesbury was due back next morning, I would then have
to be prepared to hand over.  It was no small satisfaction to find that
my accounts were right to a penny, and to know that in the fair copy of
those accounts which I drew up no ingenuity or patience would be able to
discover an error.  Indeed, I was so particular, that, having made a
minute blot in my first fair copy, I went to the trouble of writing out
another, absolutely faultless, preserving the other in my desk, as an
occasional feast to my own eyes in my self-satisfied moments.

That evening I was strongly tempted to unburden my secret to Jack as we
walked home.  But I could not bring myself up to the point.  At least, I
could not do so till we got to the door of our lodgings, and then it was
too late, for Jack had rushed to Billy's bedside, and it was hopeless to
get him to think of anything else.  So I had to wait on, and once more
to endure the sight of Mr Smith's anxious, frightened face.

The following morning brought a letter from my uncle, addressed, not to
me, but to Jack Smith.  It contained a five-pound note, which he said
might be useful when Billy's doctor's bill had to be paid, and anything
that was over might go to buy the boy a suit of clothes!  My uncle was
certainly coming out in a new light!  It was like him writing to Jack
instead of me, and I thought nothing of that.  But for him to send a
five-pound note for the benefit of a little stranger was certainly a
novelty, which surprised as much as it encouraged me about my relative.

The money, as it happened, was very opportune, for neither of us was
very flush of cash at the time.

Billy, who was now steadily recovering from the shock of his blow,
pleaded very hard to be allowed to get up, and only Jack's express
command could keep him in bed.

"Ga on, governor," said he, "let's get up.  I ain't a-getting no coppers
for that there penny bang, no more I ain't; and I ain't a-larnin'
nothink, and she," (we knew only too well whom he meant), "may be up to
all manner of larks, and me not know nothink about it."

"You shall get up soon, when you're better," was Jack's reply.

"I are better, governor."

"Yes, but you won't be unless you lie still for a day or two more, and
do what you're told," said Jack, firmly.

Whereat the boy subsided.

Hawkesbury turned up at his place at the office in a benevolent frame of
mind, and received over my petty-cash and the beautiful copy of accounts
which accompanied it with the utmost condescension.

He was extremely obliged to me, he said, for taking charge of the
accounts during his absence, and had no doubt he would find everything
correct when he went through the figures.  He hoped it had not given me
much extra work, and that during his absence I had been in the enjoyment
of good health and spirits.

All which "gush" I accepted with due gratitude, wondering inwardly
whether he had been actually made a partner since I last saw him--he was
so very gracious.

"By the way," said I, when the ceremony was at an end, and feeling a
little mischievously inclined, as well as being anxious to vent my
feelings on the point--"by the way, your particular friend Masham came
to our lodging the other evening."

"Ah, did he?" said Hawkesbury, blandly; "I'm glad he called.  He wanted
to see you again.  He took rather a fancy to you that day, you know."

"Did he?" said I.  "I think he was rather sorry he called, though."

"Why?"

"Why, because Smith gave him the thrashing he deserved, and the
thrashing he's not likely to forget in a hurry either!"

"I don't understand," said Hawkesbury.  "What has Smith to do with my
friend Masham?"

"Just what he has to do with any other blackguard," retorted I, warming
up.

"Batchelor, you are forgetting yourself, I think," said Hawkesbury.  "I
hope what you are saying is not true."

"If you mean about Masham being a blackguard," said I, "it's as true as
that he is your friend."

"I really don't know what all this means," said Hawkesbury, haughtily.
"I must ask Masham himself."

"I'm afraid you won't find him," I said.  "He nearly murdered the boy
who was with us at the time.  And as the report went out that the child
was actually dead, he is prudently keeping out of the way for the
present.  I'm sure he will be--"

"Excuse me, Batchelor," said Hawkesbury, interrupting.  "I really
haven't time to talk now.  Kindly get on with your work, and I will do
the same."

I may not have derived much good by this edifying conversation, but I
had at least the satisfaction of feeling that Hawkesbury now knew what I
thought of his friend.

Jack said that evening he thought it was a pity I had said as much as I
had, and further reflection made me think the same.  However, it
couldn't be helped now, and anything that made clear the estimation in
which I held Masham was on the whole no bad thing.

That evening when we got back we found Mr Smith at home.  He had come,
he said, to insist on taking Jack's place with Billy for the night.
Jack protested in vain that he felt quite fresh, that he was not in the
least sleepy, and so on.  Mr Smith was inexorable for once, so we had
finally to retire together to the room downstairs, and leave him in
possession.

As we said good-night he gave me a look which I well understood.

"It's awful nonsense," said Jack, "making out I want sleep.  Why, I've
slept most of every night I've been up there.  I'm sure more than he
has."

"He thinks a good deal about you, Jack, I fancy," said I, anxious to
steer the talk round in the required direction.  Jack nodded and went
and opened the window.

"It's awfully close to-night," said he.

We stood leaning out of the window for some minutes, watching the few
passengers in the street below and saying nothing.  What Jack was
thinking about I could not tell.  What was passing through my mind I
knew well enough.

"How do you think he seems?" asked I, after a long pause.

"Who, Billy?  He's getting on wonderfully."

"I didn't mean Billy," said I.  "I meant Mr Smith."

"Oh, you ought to know better than I do.  I really have hardly seen him
the last few days.  I've not heard him cough so much, though."

"He's not been himself at all the last few days," I said.

"No wonder," said Jack.  "That night's work was enough to upset
anybody."

"Oh, I don't mean in that way," I said, feeling hopeless as to ever
getting out my secret.  "Though I am sure he was very much concerned
about Billy.  But he seems to have other things on his mind too."

"Has he?  He works too hard, that's what it is; and not content with
that," added he, "he insists on sitting up all night with Billy."

There was another pause.  I was no nearer than before, and for any hint
I had given Jack of what was coming he knew as little of it as he did of
the North Pole.

I must be more explicit, or I should never get out with it.

"Do you know, Jack," said I presently, "he's been telling me a good deal
of his history lately?"

"Oh," said Jack, "you two have got to be quite chummy.  By the way, we
ought to hear the result of the exam, on Tuesday, certainly."

"It is very strange and sad," said I, thinking more of what was in my
mind than of what he was saying.

"What _do_ you mean?  They oughtn't to take more than a week surely to
go through the papers."

"Oh, I wasn't talking about that," I said.  "I was thinking of Mr
Smith's story."

"Why, what's up with you, Fred?  You've gone daft about Mr Smith,
surely.  What's strange and sad?"

"The story of his life, Jack.  He was once--"

"Stop," said Jack, firmly.  "I dare say it's all you say, Fred, but I'd
rather you didn't tell it me."

"Why not?"  I said.

"He told it to you, but not to me.  If he wants me to know it, he will
tell me himself."

I could not but feel the rebuke.  Had I but been as careful of another
secret, half my troubles would never have come upon me.

"You are quite right, Jack," I said.  "I know by this time that I should
have no business to tell other people's secrets.  But, as it happens,
Mr Smith is anxious for me to tell you his story; and that is the
reason, I believe, why he has insisted on leaving us together to-night."

I had launched my ship now!

Jack looked at me in a puzzled way.

"Wants you to tell me his story?" he repeated.

"Yes."

"Why?"

"He has a reason.  I think you had better hear it, Jack."

Jack was no fool.  He had wits enough to tell him by this time that in
all this mysterious blundering talk of mine there was after all
something more serious than commonplace tittle-tattle.  My face and tone
must have proved it, if nothing else did.

He remained leaning out of the window by my side as I told him that
story in words as near those of Mr Smith himself as I could recall.

He interrupted me by no starts or exclamations, but remained silent,
with his head on his hands, till the very end.

Indeed, he was so still after it was all told that for a moment I felt
uneasy, lest he was taken ill.

But presently he looked up, with his face very pale, and said, "I can
scarcely believe it, Fred."

There was nothing in his tone or look to say whether the disclosure came
to him as good news or bad.  I longed to know, but I dared not ask.  A
long silence followed.  He sat down on a chair with his face turned from
me.  I felt that to say another word would be a rude disturbance.
