stop more than two or three days, here. Most of them are taking
livestock across for the use of the Spanish army and, though
Algeciras would be an awkward place for you to land at because, if
detected there, you would be more likely to be treated as a spy;
still, in a busy place like that, no one would notice a couple of
young sailors, and it would be no great distance for you to walk
over to Tarifa, or any of the villages on the Straits.

"But how do you propose to get in from there? That is what seems to
me the great difficulty."

"Well, I got in before," Bob said, "and do not think that there
ought to be much difficulty in getting hold of a boat. If I did, I
should sail round the Point and, keeping well outside the line of
cruisers, come down on the coast the other side of Gibraltar; and
so work along at night, just as I did before. If I found it
absolutely impossible to get a boat, of course, I could not--with
the girl with me--try to swim across from the head of the bay to
the Rock; which is what I should have done, had I been alone. So I
should then go to the authorities and give myself up; and say that,
being afraid that the Moors intend to massacre all the English at
Tangiers, I had come across with this young lady, who is the
daughter of an officer of the garrison, to put her into Spanish
hands; knowing that there she would receive honourable treatment,
till she could be passed in at the next exchange of prisoners."

"I think that would be your very best course to pursue, unless you
find everything turn out just as you would wish, Mr. Repton."

When Bob came down in the morning, he at once went into the office
below; and Mr. Parrot told him that one of the Spanish craft would
start for Algeciras, at noon.

"Then I must ask you to send one of the servants out, to buy some
clothes such as are worn by a Spanish sailor boy, Mr. Parrot. I
have my own suit upstairs, and will go off and arrange for a
passage across, directly after breakfast."

"I will see to it," Mr. Parrot said. "The ship's decks will be
crowded up with cattle. She is a small craft, and I hear she will
take as many as can be packed on her deck. She is alongside now,
taking them in. There is not much likelihood of any attention,
whatever, being paid to you and your companion."

Amy turned a little pale, when Bob told her that the attempt was to
be made at once; but she said bravely:

"I am glad there is to be no waiting. I do so long to be out of
this town. I daresay I shall be a little nervous at first, but I
shall try not to show it; and I sha'n't be really frightened, for I
know that you will take care of me."

As soon as breakfast was over, Bob changed his things and went down
to the quay. He stopped at the vessel taking cattle on board. She
was a polacre brig, of about a hundred and fifty tons. The captain
was smoking a cigar, aft; while the mate was seeing to the storing
of the cattle. Bob went on board, and told his story to the
captain.

"I was left behind in charge of a cabin boy from the Esmeralda, a
fortnight ago. The boy had fever, and the captain thought it might
be infectious, and put him ashore; but he soon got well. We want to
be taken across, as our friends live not many miles from Tarifa. We
will pay a dollar, apiece, for our passage."

The captain nodded.

"Be on board by noon; we shall not be a minute later."

Bob went ashore, and told Amy that everything was arranged, without
the slightest difficulty. He then went down to inspect the clothes.

"They will do very well," he said, "except that they are a great
deal cleaner than anything ever seen on a Spanish sailor. Those
canvas trousers will never do, as they are."

He accordingly took some ashes, and rubbed them well into the
canvas; got some grease from the kitchen, and poured two or three
large patches over the trousers.

"That is more like it," he said. "The shirt will do well enough,
but there must be a patch or two of grease upon the jacket, and
some smears of dirt, of some kind."

When he had done them to his satisfaction, he took them upstairs.

"What horrid, dirty looking things!" Amy exclaimed, in disgust.

"They are clean enough inside, child. They are quite new; but I
have been dirtying them, outside, to make them look natural.

"You must be dressed by half past eleven, and you can tuck your
hair up under that red nightcap; but you must manage to dirty your
face, neck, and hands. You really ought to have some brown stain,
but I don't suppose it is to be got. I will speak to Mr. Parrot."

"There is no stain, that I know of," Mr. Parrot said; "but I know
Mr. Logie paints a little. I think you will find a box of colours,
upstairs. If you mix some Vandyke brown in water, and paint her
with it, and let it dry on, I should think it would do very well;
though of course, it wouldn't stand washing."

Bob found the paintbox, and soon mixed some paint. At half past
eleven Amy came into the room, laughing a little shyly.

"That will do very well," Bob said, encouragingly, "except that you
are a great deal too fair and clean.

"Look here, I have been mixing some paint. I think a wash of that
will make all the difference. Now, sit down while I colour you.

"That will do capitally!" he said, when he finished. "I think, when
it dries, it will be just about the right shade for a Spanish
sailor boy.

"Have you got your bundle?

"That is right. Now here is my bag, and a couple of black Moorish
blankets. I will bring Mr. Parrot up, to say goodbye.

"Have you told your servant?"

"No, I said nothing to her about it. She would make such a terrible
fuss, there would be no getting away from her. We must ask Mr.
Parrot to tell her, after the vessel has set sail."

Mr. Parrot pronounced the disguise excellent, and said that he
should not have the slightest suspicion that she was anything but
what she seemed to be. Amy felt very shy, as she sallied out with
Bob; but she gained courage as she saw that no one noticed her.

When they arrived at the brig, the cattle were nearly all on board.
Bob led the way across the gangway, and went up on to the
fo'castle. There he laid one of the blankets down against a
stanchion; wrapped Amy in the other, so that her face was almost
hidden; and told her to sit down and close her eyes, as if weak or
asleep. Then he took up his post beside her.

In a quarter of an hour the last bullock was on board. The gangway
was at once hauled in, the hawsers thrown off, and the sails let
drop and, in another minute, the vessel was gliding away from the
wharf. The wind was nearly due west, and the sheets were hauled in
as she was headed across the Straits. It was half an hour before
the sailors' work was all done. Several of them came up on to the
fo'castle and began twisting cigarettes, and one at once entered
into conversation with Bob.

"Is the boy ill?" he said.

"Yes, he has been ill, but is better now. It would have been better
if he could have stopped a few days longer, but he was pining to
get home. He won't have far to go when we get to Algeciras and, no
doubt, I shall be able to get him a lift in some cart that will be
bringing provisions to the camp."

The talk at once turned on the siege, the sailors expressing their
certainty that the Rock would soon be taken. Bob had moved away
from Amy, as if to allow her to sleep, undisturbed by the
conversation.

"There is a brig running down the Straits, at a good speed," one of
the sailors said, when they were half way across. "It is a nice
breeze for her."

Bob looked at the craft. She was about a mile away, and by the
course they were steering--almost at right angles--would come very
near to them. There was something familiar in her appearance, and
he looked at her intently, examining every sail and shroud. Then
doubt became certainty, as his eye fell upon a small patch in one
of the cloths of the topgallant sail.

It was the Antelope. One of the Spanish shot had passed through the
topgallant sail and--as that was the only injury that sail had
received--the bit had been cut out, and a fresh one put in, before
she sailed again from Gibraltar. She was flying Spanish colours.

His heart beat fast. Would she overhaul them, or pass without
taking notice of them--seeing that the polacre was a small one, and
not likely to be a valuable prize?

The vessels approached each other quickly. The course the Antelope
was taking would carry her some length or two behind the Spaniard.
Bob hesitated whether to hail her, as she came along. If his hail
was not heard he would, of course, be detected, and his plans
entirely spoilt; and with the wind blowing straight across, and he
in the bow, it would be by no means certain that his hail would be
distinguished. Suddenly, to his delight, when the brig was within a
hundred yards of the polacre he saw her head come up, while the
crew began to haul upon the sheets.

An exclamation of surprise and alarm broke from the Spaniards as,
in another minute, the Antelope was running parallel with them, a
cable's length to windward. Then the portholes were opened, and
eight guns run out. The Spanish flag was run down and the British
hoisted to the peak; and a summons to strike their flag shouted to
the Spaniards. As the latter carried only four small guns,
resistance was out of the question. The Spanish flag was lowered
and, in obedience to the gesticulations, rather than the words, of
an officer on board the English brig, the halliards were thrown
off, and the sails came down with a run.

The Spanish sailors were frantic with rage, swearing by all the
saints in the calendar. Bob had moved, at once, across to Amy.

"Lie still, Amy. We are going to be captured by an English ship. It
is the same privateer that I was in before. Don't make any sign,
until they come on board. In the fury that these Spaniards are in,
they might stick their knives into us, if they knew we were
English."

The brig had been thrown up into the wind as soon as the polacre's
sails had been lowered and, in three minutes, a boat came
alongside. Then Joe Lockett, followed by half a dozen sailors armed
with pistol and cutlass, scrambled on board.

"Now, follow me, Amy," and, descending the ladder, Bob made his way
along the narrow gangway between the lines of cattle, and then
mounted to the poop.

"Well, Joe, how are you?"

The first mate of the Antelope started back, in astonishment.

"Why, Bob Repton!" he exclaimed. "What on earth are you doing here,
masquerading as a Spanish sailor?"

"I am trying to get across to Gibraltar," he said.

"Why, is this fellow bound for Gibraltar? In that case we have not
got a prize, as we fancied."

"She is a fair prize, Joe; she is bound for Algeciras. I was going
to make my way in from there, as best I could."

"That is all right then. What has she got on board?"

"Nothing beyond these cattle, and some vegetables, I expect; but
they are worth a lot of money, on the Rock."

"Well, you will be able to tell us all about things, Bob. I will
hail the captain to send Crofts on board, with a dozen men to take
charge, here; and then I will take you on board."

"I have a friend here," Bob said, turning to Amy, who was standing
timidly behind him, "so you must take him with me."

"All right!" Joe said, carelessly.

In five minutes, Bob stood again on the deck of the Antelope, and a
hearty greeting was exchanged between him and Captain Lockett.

"Before I tell you anything, Captain, which cabin am I to have? I
will tell you why, afterwards. I suppose it will be my old one?"

"Yes; that is our one spare cabin, Bob. But I don't know why you
are in such a hurry about it."

"I will tell you presently," Bob laughed, and led the way below.

"There, Amy," he said, "you can go in there, and put on your own
things again. I thought it would be more comfortable, for you, for
them not to know it until you are properly dressed, in your own
clothes. You have brought a frock, of course?"

"Yes; I thought I had better bring one, in case we should be made
prisoners."

"That is all right. When you are dressed, come upon deck. I will
explain all about it, before you appear."

Bob, as briefly as possible, told his story to Captain Lockett and
Joe; who were much amused to find that Bob's friend was a young
lady.

"You are coming out in quite a new light, Bob, as a squire of
dames. But I won't laugh at you, now; I want to hear the last news.
I overhauled that craft, not so much to capture her, as to get the
last news. There were reports, before I started, that the Moors
were joining the Spaniards, and that their ports were closed to us;
and what you say confirms that. That was one of the points I wanted
to know, as I could not tell whether I could run in there safely,
were I chased. Now, as to getting into the Rock, are their cruisers
active, at present?"

"Well, there are lots of them about. I think your best plan will be
to run in close to the Point, and hold on as if you were going into
Algeciras. In that way, they won't suspect you. Then, when you get
right up the bay, haul across to the town. The wind is in your
favour, because you will have to tack to work up the bay and, if
you make pretty long tacks, they won't suspect you, when you start
across, until you have got pretty well away and, with this breeze,
there will be no chance of their catching you before you are under
our guns."

"That seems hopeful enough. At any rate, we will try it. I will
send six more men on board the polacre. They will want to be handy
with her sails. I will go myself, and give Crofts orders. He had
better keep ahead of us for, if we are chased by their gunboats, we
can protect him."

Just as sail was again got up, and the two vessels were under way,
Amy Harcourt came on deck; and was soon laughing and chatting
merrily with the captain. At four in the afternoon they rounded the
Point, the polacre a few hundred yards ahead, and both flying
Spanish colours. There were several Spanish cruisers, and some
gunboats, outside them; but these paid no attention to their
movements, and both beat up the bay, keeping close into the Spanish
shore, but holding somewhat farther out, at each tack.

"Now," Captain Lockett, said when they were within half a mile of
Algeciras, "we will run out this tack. There are two gunboats in
our way, I see, but we must take our chance of them.

"Go and wave a handkerchief from the bow, Joe. Mr. Crofts will be
on the lookout for the signal."

The two vessels held away on the port tack. As the polacre
approached the gunboats, a sudden bustle was observed on board
them.

"They begin to smell a rat," Captain Lockett said.

"Hoist the topgallant sails," for the brig had been under easy
sail, to enable her to hold her place with the polacre.

The men were already at quarters, and the ports were opened and the
guns run out. Just as the gunboat nearest the polacre--finding the
hail, for her to bring to, unheeded--fired a shot into her, the
brig's head paid off, and she poured a broadside into the two
gunboats. One of them was struck amidships. For a minute there was
great confusion on board, and then she made for her companion,
evidently in a sinking condition.

Several shots were now fired from the forts but, though they fell
near, the brig was uninjured. The second gunboat did not venture to
attack so formidable an opponent and, half an hour later, the
Antelope and her prize dropped anchor off the Mole.

Bob had already run down and put on his usual clothes, and he and
Amy were at once rowed ashore, and made their way to Major
Harcourt's quarters. The delight of Amy's father and mother, as she
rushed into the room, was extreme. Bob did not enter with her, but
left her to tell her own story; and proceeded straight to the
governor's, to whom he reported the state of affairs at Tangier.

"It is bad news," the governor said. "However, I am extremely
obliged to you, for the valuable service that you have rendered
and, as I had the pleasure of before doing, when you brought in the
oranges, I shall place your name in the orders of the day for
having, as a volunteer, rendered signal service by carrying
despatches, at great risk, across to the Barbary coast."

Bob then returned home. Captain Lockett had already been to the
house, and informed the O'Hallorans of his arrival.

"There you see, Carrie," Bob said, after his sister's first
greetings were over; "there was nothing to have been so terribly
alarmed about."

"It isn't because you got through it safely, Bob, that there was no
danger," his sister replied. "It was a very foolish thing to do,
and nothing will change my opinion as to that.

"Captain Lockett tells me you brought Amy Harcourt back with you,
dressed up as a boy. I never heard of such a thing, Bob! The idea
of a boy like you--not eighteen yet--taking charge, in that way, of
a young girl!"

"Well, there was nothing else to do, Carrie, that I could see. I
went to Mrs. Hamber, who was Mrs. Colomb's most intimate friend,
and asked her opinion as to what I had better do; and she advised
me to get Amy away, if I possibly could do so. I can't see what
difference it makes, whether it is a boy or a girl. It seems to me
that people are always so stupid about that sort of thing."

Carrie laughed.

"Well, never mind, Bob. Amy Harcourt is a very nice girl. A little
too boyish, perhaps; but I suppose that is natural, being brought
up in the regiment. I am very glad that you have brought her back
again, and it will be an immense relief to her father and mother.
Her mother has been here three or four times, during these two days
you have been away; and I am in no way surprised at her anxiety.
They will be in here this evening, certainly, to thank you."

"Very well; then I shall be round smoking a cigar, with the
doctor," Bob said. "I am very glad to have been of use to them, and
to have got Amy back again; but I don't want to be thanked, and you
tell them so. I hate being made a fuss about."

And so, beyond a warm grasp of the hand, on the part of Major
Harcourt; and two or three words of hearty thanks, on that of his
wife, the next time they met; Bob escaped any expression of
gratitude. But the occurrence drew the two families together more
closely, and Amy often came round with her father and mother, in
the evening; and there were many little confidential talks between
Carrie and Mrs. Harcourt.

It was some time before the anxiety as to the fate of the English
inhabitants, at Tangier, was allayed. They were, at the beginning
of December, forced to remove to Marteen, a few miles from
Tetuan--abandoning their houses and all their property, which was
estimated at the value of sixty thousand pounds--and, three days
afterwards, were handed over as prisoners to the Spaniards. They
were then put on board a ship, and taken to Algeciras--where they
were kept, for nearly a month, prisoners on board ship--but were,
on the 11th of January, 1781, sent across to Gibraltar.

The next five months passed slowly and heavily. Occasionally,
privateers and other craft ran through the blockade of the Spanish
cruisers, and succeeded in getting into port. Some of these brought
wine and sugar--of both of which the garrison were extremely
short--and occasionally a few head of cattle and other provisions.
All of these were sold by public auction, the governor considering
that to be the fairest way of disposing of them.

On the 12th of April another great convoy, under Admiral Darby,
entered the port. It consisted of about a hundred merchantmen,
under the protection of a powerful fleet. The joy of the garrison
and inhabitants was intense although, among the latter, this was
mingled with a certain feeling of uneasiness. Deserters had at
various times brought in reports that, should Gibraltar be again
relieved, it was the purpose of the Spaniards to bombard the town.
Hopes were entertained that so wanton an act of cruelty would not
be carried out, for the entire destruction of the town would not
advance, in the smallest degree, the progress of the siege.

At a quarter to eleven, just as the van of the convoy came to an
anchor off the New Mole, Fort San Philip opened fire upon the town
and, at the signal, the whole of the batteries in the forts and
lines followed suit. A hundred and fourteen guns and mortars rained
their shot and shell upon the town, and the guns of the batteries
of the garrison at once responded.

Several of the officers of the 58th, and their wives, had come up
to Captain O'Halloran's to enjoy, from the terrace, the view of the
great convoy entering the port. All were in the highest spirits, at
the thought of the abundant supplies that would now be at their
disposal; and in the belief that the Spaniards, seeing that the
garrison was again amply provisioned, would abandon the siege,
which had now lasted for twenty-two months. Suddenly there came
upon the air the deep sound of the guns of San Philip, followed by
a prolonged roar as the whole of the Spanish batteries opened fire.
The hum of shot could be heard, followed by the explosion of
shells, the fall of masonry, and screams and cries.

"The bombardment has begun, at last!" Captain O'Halloran exclaimed.

The greatest consternation reigned among the ladies. Several of
them had left children in their quarters and, although the barracks
were so placed as to be, to a great extent, sheltered from the
enemy's fire from the land side, they were still terribly anxious
as to their safety. Two of them had, like the O'Hallorans, quarters
in the town itself; and the husbands of these ladies, accompanied
by Captain O'Halloran and Bob, at once set out to bring the
children up to the house, which was perfectly sheltered.

The scene in the town was a pitiful one. Men, women, and children
were flying, in the wildest alarm, towards the gate looking south;
and thence out to the huts that the more prudent ones had erected,
many months before, near Europa Point. Shot and shell were raining
down, while chimneys and portions of masonry fell clattering in the
streets. Sick people were being carried out, on doors or planks;
and most of the inhabitants were laden with what few articles of
value they could snatch up, at the first alarm. The children were
soon brought up to the O'Hallorans' and then, for a time, there was
nothing to do but to listen to the roar of artillery.

The officers and Bob ascended the Rock, to a point near one of the
batteries, whence they could command a view of the Spanish lines.
The flashes of smoke were bursting forth almost incessantly; but
were answered shot for shot from the English batteries, which had
already almost silenced the San Carlos Battery, which mounted a
large number of mortars, and against which the fire of the English
guns was concentrated.
