but no friendly glance of recognition did his old comrade vouchsafe him.
He continued, after the first look of surprise, to frown steadily on
the intruder.

"You've the advantage o' me, young man," said Bill, in a stern, though
subdued tone, for he feared to disturb the men on the stage; "moreover,
you've comed in where ye've got no right to be.  When a man goes where
he shouldn't ought to, an' things looks as if they wasn't all square, in
them circumstances, blow high or blow low, I always goes straight
for'ard an' shoves him out.  If he don't shove easy, why, put on more
steam--that's wot _I_ say."

"But sure ye don't forgit me, Bill!" pleaded Larry, in amazement.

"Well, p'r'aps I don't, an' p'r'aps I do.  W'en I last enjoyed the
dishonour o' yer acquaintance, ye wos a blackguard.  It ain't likely yer
improved, so be good enough to back yer top-sails, and clear out."

Bill Jones pointed, as he spoke, to the opening through which Larry had
entered, but, suddenly changing his mind, he said, "Hold on; there's a
back door, an' it'll be easier to kick you through that than through the
consart-room."

So saying, Bill seized Larry O'Neil by the collar, and led that
individual, in a state of helpless and wondering consternation, through
a back door, where, however, instead of kicking him out, he released
him, and suddenly changed his tone to an eager whisper.

"Oh!  Larry, lad, I'm glad to see ye.  Wherever did ye come from?  I've
no time to speak.  Uncle Ned's jist buried, and Jim Crow comes on in
three minutes.  I had to pretend, ye know, 'cause it wouldn't do to let
Jim see I know'd ye--that wos him on the stool--I know wot brought ye
here--an' I've fund out who _she_ is.  Where d'ye stop?"

Larry's surprise just permitted him to gasp out the words "City Hotel,"
when a roar of laughter and applause met their ears, followed by the
tinkle of a small bell.  Bill sprang through the doorway, and slammed
the door in his old comrade's face.

It would be difficult to say, looking at that face at that particular
time, whether the owner thereof was mad or drunk--or both--so strangely
did it wrinkle and contort as it gradually dawned upon its owner that
Bill Jones, true to his present profession, was acting a part; that he
knew about the mystery of Mademoiselle Nelina; was now acquainted with
his, (Larry's), place of abode; and would infallibly find him out after
the concert was over.  As these things crossed his mind, Larry smote his
thigh so often and so vigorously, that he ran the risk of being taken up
for unwarrantably discharging his revolver in the streets, and he
whistled once or twice so significantly, that at least five stray dogs
answered to the call.  At last he hitched up the band of his trousers,
and, hastening round to the front door, essayed to re-enter the
concert-room.

"Pay here, please," cried the money-taker, in an extremely nasal tone,
as he passed the little hole in the wall.

"I've paid already," answered Larry.

"Shew your check, then."

"Sure I don't know what that is."

The doorkeeper smiled contemptuously, and shut down with a bang the bar
that kept off the public.  Larry doubled his fist, and flushed crimson;
then he remembered the importance of the business he had on hand, and
quietly drew the requisite sum from his leather purse.

"Come along," said he to Ned Sinton, on re-entering the room.  "I've
see'd her; an' Bill Jones, too!"

"Bill Jones!" cried Ned and the captain simultaneously.

"Whist!" said Larry; "don't be makin' people obsarve us.  Come along
home; it's all right--I'll tell ye all about it when we're out."

In another minute the three friends were in the street, conversing
eagerly and earnestly as they hastened to their quarters through the
thronged and noisy streets of Sacramento.



CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

DEEP PLOTS AND PLANS--BILL JONES RELATES HIS MISADVENTURES--MADEMOISELLE
NELINA CONSENTS TO RUN OFF WITH LARRY O'NEIL--A YANKEE MUSICIAN
OUTWITTED--THE ESCAPE.

As Larry had rightly anticipated, Bill Jones made his appearance at the
City Hotel the moment the concert was over, and found his old comrades
waiting anxiously for him.

It did not take long to tell him how they had discovered the existence
of Nelly Morgan, as we shall now call her, but it took much longer to
drag from Bill the account of his career since they last met, and the
explanation of how he came to be placed in his present circumstances.

"Ye see, friends," said he, puffing at a pipe, from which, to look at
him, one would suppose he derived most of his information, "this is how
it happened.  When I set sail from the diggin's to come here for grub, I
had a pleasant trip at first.  But after a little things began to look
bad; the feller that steered us lost his reckoning, an' so we took two
or three wrong turns by way o' makin' short cuts.  That's always how it
Is.  There's a proverb somewhere--"

"In Milton, maybe, or Napier's book o' logarithms," suggested Captain
Bunting.

"P'r'aps it wos, and p'r'aps it wosn't," retorted Bill, stuffing the end
of his little finger, (if such a diminutive may be used in reference to
any of his fingers), into the bowl of his pipe.  "I raither think myself
it wos in _Bell's Life_ or the _Royal Almanac_; hows'ever, that's wot it
is.  When ye've got a short road to go, don't try to make it shorter,
say I--"

"An' when ye've got a long story to tell, don't try to make it longer,"
interrupted Larry, winking at his comrade through the smoke of his pipe.

"Well, as I wos sayin'," continued Bill, doggedly, "we didn't git on so
well after a bit; but somehow or other we got here at last, and cast
anchor in this very hotel.  Off I goes at once an' buys a cart an' a
mule, an' then I sets to work to lay in provisions.  Now, d'ye see,
lads, 'twould ha' bin better if I had bought the provisions first an'
the mule and the cart after, for I had to pay ever so many dollars a day
for their keep.  At last I got it all square; packed tight and tied up
in the cart--barrels o' flour, and kegs o' pork, an' beans, an' brandy,
an' what not; an' away I went alone; for, d'ye see, I carry a compass,
an' when I've once made a voyage, I never need to be told how to steer.

"But my troubles began soon.  There's a ford across the river here,
which I was told I'd ha' to cross; and sure enough, so I did--but it's
as bad as Niagara, if not worse--an' when I gits half way over, we wos
capsized, and went down the river keel up.  I dun know yet very well how
I got ashore, but I did somehow--"

"And did the cart go for it?" inquired Captain Bunting, aghast.

"No, the cart didn't.  She stranded half-a-mile further down, on a rock,
where she lies to this hour, with a wheel smashed and the bottom out,
and about three thousand tons o' water swashin' right through her every
hour; but all the provisions and the mule went slap down the Sacramento;
an', if they haven't bin' picked up on the way, they're cruisin' off the
port o' San Francisco by this time."

The unfortunate seaman stopped at this point to relight his pipe, while
his comrades laughingly commented on his misadventure.

"Ah! ye may laugh; but I can tell ye it warn't a thing to be laughed at;
an' at this hour I've scarce one dollar to rub 'gainst another."

"Never mind, my boy," said Ned, as he and the others laughed loud and
long at the lugubrious visage of their comrade; "we've got well-lined
pockets, I assure you; and, of course, we have _your_ share of the
profits of our joint concern to hand over whenever you wish it."

The expression of Bill Jones's face was visibly improved by this piece
of news, and he went on with much greater animation.

"Well, my story's short now.  I comed back here, an' by chance fell in
with this feller--this Yankee-nigger--who offered me five dollars a day
to haul up the curtain, an' do a lot o' dirty work, sich as bill
stickin', an' lightin' the candles, an' sweepin' the floor; but it's
hard work, I tell ye, to live on so little in sich a place as this,
where everything's so dear."

"You're not good at a bargain, I fear," remarked Sinton; "but what of
the little girl?"

"Well, I wos comin' to that.  Ye see, I felt sure, from some things I
overheerd, that she wasn't the man's daughter, so one day I axed her who
she wos, an' she said she didn't know, except that her name was Nelly
Morgan; so it comed across me that Morgan wos the name o' the Irish
family you wos so thick with up at the diggin's, Larry; an' I wos goin'
to ask if she know'd them, when Jolly--that's the name o' the gitter up
o' the concerts--catched me talkin', an' he took her away sharp, and
said he'd thank me to leave the girl alone.  I've been watchin' to have
another talk with her, but Jolly's too sharp for me, an' I haven't spoke
to her yet."

Larry manifested much disappointment at this termination, for he had
been fully prepared to hear that the girl had made Bill her confidant,
and would be ready to run away with him at a moment's notice.  However,
he consoled himself by saying that he would do the thing himself; and,
after arranging that Bill was to tell Nelly that a friend of his knew
where her sister was, and would like to speak with her, they all retired
to rest, at least to rest as well as they could in a house which, like
all the houses in California, swarmed with rats.

Next night Bill Jones made a bold effort, and succeeded in conveying
Larry's message to Nelly, very adroitly, as he thought, while she was
standing close to him waiting for Mr Jolly to lead her to the
foot-lights.  The consequence was that the poor child trembled like a
leaf when she attempted to sing, and, finally, fainted on the stage, to
the consternation of a crowded house.

The point was gained, however; Nelly soon found an opportunity of
talking in private with Bill Jones, and appointed to meet Larry in the
street next morning early, near the City Hotel.

It was with trembling eagerness, mixed with timidity, that she took the
Irishman's arm when they met, and asked if he really knew where her
sister was.

"Oh, how I've longed for her!  But are you _sure_ you know her?"

"Know her!" said Larry, with a smile.  "Do I know meself?"

This argument was unanswerable, so Nelly made no reply, and Larry went
on.  "Yes, avic, I know'd her, an' faix I hope to know her better.  But
here's her picture for ye."

Larry then gave the earnest listener at his side a graphic description
of her sister Kate's personal appearance, and described her brother
also, but he did not, at that time, acquaint her with the death of the
latter.  He also spoke of Black Jim, and described the circumstances of
her being carried off.  "So ye see, darlin'," said he, "I know all about
ye; an' now I want ye to tell me what happened to ye after that."

"It's a sad story," said the child, in a low tone, as if her mind were
recalling melancholy incidents in her career.  Then she told rapidly,
how she had been forsaken by those to whom she had been intrusted, and
left to perish in the mountain snow; and how, in her extremity, God had
sent help; how another party of emigrants found her and carried her on;
how, one by one, they all died, till she was left alone a second time;
and how a Mexican horseman found her, and carried her to his home, and
kept her there as his adopted daughter, till he was killed while taming
a wild horse.  After that, Nelly's story was a repetition of what Larry
had already overheard accidentally in the concert-room.

"Now, dear," said Larry, "we haven't time to waste, will ye go with me
to San Francisco?"

The tones of the rough man's voice, rather than his words, had
completely won the confidence of the poor child, so she said, "Yes,"
without hesitation.  "But how am I to escape from Mr Jolly?" she added;
"he has begun to suspect Mr Jones, I see quite well."

"Lave that to me, darlin', an' do you kape as much as ye can in the
house the nixt day or two, an' be lookin' out for what may turn up.
Good day to ye, mavourneen; we must part here, for fear we're seen by
any lynx-eyed blackguards.  Kape up yer heart."

Nelly walked quickly away, half laughing at, and half perplexed by, the
ambiguity of her new friend's parting advice.

The four friends now set themselves to work to outwit Mr Jolly, and rob
him of Mademoiselle Nelina.  At last they hit upon a device, which did
not, indeed, say much for the ingenuity of the party, but which, like
many other bold plans, succeeded admirably.

A steamer was to start in three days for San Francisco--one of those
splendid new vessels which, like floating palaces, had suddenly made
their appearance on these distant waters--having made the long and
dangerous voyage from the United States round the Horn.  Before the
steamer started, Larry contrived to obtain another interview with Nelly
Morgan, and explained their plan, which was as follows:--

On the day of the steamer sailing, a few hours before the time of
starting, Mr Jolly was to receive the following letter, dated from a
well-known ranche, thirty miles up the river:--

"Sir,--I trust that you will forgive a perfect stranger addressing you,
but the urgency of the case must be my excuse.  There is a letter lying
here for you, which, I have reason to know, contains information of the
utmost importance to yourself; but which--owing to circumstances that I
dare not explain in a letter that might chance to fall into wrong
hands--must be opened here by your own hands.  It will explain all when
you arrive; meanwhile, as I am a perfect stranger to the state of your
finances, I send you a sufficient quantity of gold-dust by the bearer to
enable you to hire a horse and come up.  Pray excuse the liberty I take,
and believe me to be,

"Your obedient servant,

"Edward Sinton."

At the appointed time Larry delivered this epistle, and the bag of gold
into Mr Jolly's hands, and, saying that no answer was required, hurried
away.

If Mr Jolly had been suddenly informed that he had been appointed
secretary of state to the king of Ashantee, he could not have looked
more astonished than when he perused this letter, and weighed the bag of
gold in his hand.  The letter itself; had it arrived alone, might, very
likely would, have raised his suspicions, but accompanied as it was by a
bag of gold of considerable value, it commended itself as a genuine
document; and the worthy musician was in the saddle half-an-hour later.
Before starting, he cautioned Nelly not to quit the house on any account
whatever, a caution which she heard but did not reply to.  Three hours
later Mr Jolly reached his destination, and had the following letter
put into his hands.

"Sir,--By the time you receive this, your late charge, Mademoiselle
Nelina, will be on her way to San Francisco, where you are welcome to
follow her, and claim her from her sister, if you feel so disposed.

"I am, Sir, etcetera,

"Edward Sinton."

We need not repeat what Mr Jolly said, or try to imagine what he felt,
on receipt of _this_ letter!  About the time it was put into his hands
the magnificent steamer at the _embarcadero_ gave a shrill whistle, then
it panted violently, the paddles revolved,--and our adventurers were
soon steaming swiftly down the noble river on their way to San
Francisco.



CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

SAN FRANCISCO AGAIN--A TERRIBLE MISFORTUNE--AN OLD FRIEND IN
SURPRISINGLY NEW CIRCUMSTANCES--SEVERAL REMARKABLE DISCOVERIES AND NEW
LIGHTS.

There is no time or place, perhaps, more suitable for indulging in
ruminations, cogitations, and reminiscences, than the quiet hours of a
calm night out upon the sea, when the watchful stars look down upon the
bosom of the deep, and twinkle at their reflections in placid
brilliancy.

Late at night, when all the noisy inmates of the steamer had ceased to
eat, and drink, and laugh, and had sought repose in their berths, Edward
Sinton walked the deck alone, meditating on the past, the present, and
the future.  When he looked up at the serene heavens, and down at the
tranquil sea, whose surface was unruffled, save by the long pure white
track of the vessel, he could scarcely bring himself to believe that the
whirl of incident and adventure in which he had been involved during the
last few and short months was real.  It seemed like a brilliant dream.
As long as he was on shore it all appeared real enough, and the constant
pressure of _something to be done_, either immediately, or in an hour,
or to-morrow, kept his mind perpetually chained down to the
consideration of visible, and tangible, and passing events; but now the
cord of connexion with land had been suddenly and completely severed.
The very land itself was out of sight.  Nothing around him tended to
recall recent events; and, as he had nothing in the world to do but wait
until the voyage should come to an end, his mind was left free to bound
over the recent-past into the region of the long-past, and revel there
at pleasure.

But Ned Sinton was not altogether without anxieties.  He felt a little
uneasy as to the high-handed manner, in which he had carried off Nelly
Morgan from her late guardian; and he was a good deal perplexed as to
what the important affairs could be, for which he had so hastily
overturned all the gold-digging plans of his whole party.  With these
thoughts mingled many philosophic inquiries as to the amount of
advantage that lay--if, indeed, there was any advantage at all--in
making one's fortune suddenly and at the imminent hazard of one's life.
Overpowering sleep at last put an end to Ned's wandering thoughts, and
he too bade the stars good-night, and sought his pillow.  In due course
the vessel cast anchor off the town of San Francisco.

"There is many a slip 'tween the cup and the lip."  It is an old proverb
that, but one which is proved, by frequent use, on the part of authors
in all ages, to be a salutary reminder to humanity.  Its truth was
unpleasantly exemplified on the arrival of the steamer.  As the tide was
out at the time, the captain ordered the boats to be lowered, in order
to land the passengers.  The moment they touched the water they were
filled by impatient miners, who struggled to be first ashore.  The boat
into which Ned and his friends got was soon overloaded with passengers,
and the captain ordered her to be shoved off.

"Hold on!" shouted a big coarse-looking fellow, in a rough blue jacket
and wide-awake, who was evidently drunk; "let me in first."

"There's no room!" cried several voices.  "Shove off."

"There's room enough!" cried the man, with an oath; at the same time
seizing the rope.

"If ye do come down," said a sailor, sternly, "I'll pitch ye overboard."

"Will ye!" growled the man; and the next instant he sprang upon the edge
of the boat, which upset, and left its freight struggling in the water.
The other boats immediately picked them all up; and, beyond a wetting,
they were physically none the worse.  But, alas! the bags of gold which
our adventurers were carrying ashore with them, sank to the bottom of
the sea!  They were landed on the wharf at San Francisco as penniless as
