sure it was white something."

With this very slender clue Charlie Brooke presented himself in due time
at Scotland Yard, at which fountain-head of London policedom he gave a
graphic account of the missing man and the circumstances attending his
disappearance.  Thence he went to the headquarters of the London City
Mission; introduced himself to a sympathetic secretary there, and was
soon put in communication with one of the most intelligent of those
valuable self-sacrificing and devoted men who may be styled the salt of
the London slums.  This good man's district embraced part of
Whitechapel.

"I will help you to the extent of my power, Mr Brooke," he said, "but
your quest will be a difficult one, perhaps dangerous.  How do you
propose to go about it?"

"By visiting all the low lodging-houses in Whitechapel first," said
Charlie.

"That will take a long time," said the City Missionary, smiling.  "Low
lodging-houses are somewhat numerous in these parts."

"I am aware of that, Mr Stansfield, and mean to take time," returned
our hero promptly.  "And what I want of you is to take me into one or
two of them, so that I may see something of them while under your
guidance.  After that I will get their streets and numbers from you, or
through you, and will then visit them by myself."

"But, excuse me, my friend," returned the missionary, "your appearance
in such places will attract more attention than you might wish, and
would interfere with your investigations, besides exposing you to
danger, for the very worst characters in London are sometimes to be
found in such places.  Only men of the police force and we city
missionaries can go among them with impunity."

"I have counted the cost, Mr Stansfield, and intend to run the risk;
but thank you, all the same, for your well-meant warning.  Can you go
round one or two this afternoon?"

"I can, with pleasure, and will provide you with as many lodging-house
addresses as I can procure.  Do you live far from this?"

"No, quite close.  A gentleman, who was in your Secretary's office when
I called, recommended a small lodging-house kept by a Mrs Butt in the
neighbourhood of Flower and Dean Street.  You know that region well, I
suppose?"

"Ay--intimately; and I know Mrs Butt too--a very respectable woman.
Come, then, let us start on our mission."

Accordingly Mr Stansfield introduced his inexperienced friend into two
of the principal lodging-houses in that neighbourhood.  They merely
passed through them, and the missionary, besides commenting on all that
they saw, told his new friend where and what to pay for a night's
lodging.  He also explained the few rules that were connected with those
sinks into which the dregs of the metropolitan human family ultimately
settle.  Then he accompanied Charlie to the door of his new lodging and
bade him good-night.

It was a dingy little room in which our hero found himself, having an
empty and rusty fire-grate on one side and a window on the other, from
which there was visible a landscape of paved court.  The foreground of
the landscape was a pump, the middle distance a wash-tub, and the
background a brick wall, about ten feet distant and fifteen feet high.
There was no sky to the landscape, by reason of the next house.  The
furniture was in keeping with the view.

Observing a small sofa of the last century on its last legs in a corner,
Charlie sat down on it and rose again instantly, owing apparently to
rheumatic complaints from its legs.

"La! sir," said the landlady, who had followed him into the room, "you
don't need to fear anythink.  That sofar, sir, 'as bin in my family for
three generations.  The frame was renoo'd before I was born, an' the
legs I 'ad taken off an' noo ones putt on about fifteen year ago last
Easter as ever was.  My last lodger 'ee went through the bottom of it,
w'ich obliged me to 'ave that renoo'd, so it's stronger than ever it
were.  If you only keep it well shoved up agin the wall, sir, it'll
stand a'most any weight--only it won't stand jumpin' on.  You mustn't
jump on it, sir, with your feet!"

Charlie promised solemnly that he would not jump on it either with his
feet or head, and then asked if he could have tea and a fire.  On being
informed that he could have both, he drew out his purse and said--

"Now, Mrs Butt, I expect to stay here for two or three weeks--perhaps
longer.  My name is Brooke.  I was advised to come here by a gentleman
in the offices of the City Mission.  I shall have no visitors--being
utterly unknown in this neighbourhood--except, perhaps, the missionary
who parted from me at the door--"

"Mr Stansfield, sir?" said the landlady.

"Yes.  You know him?"

"I've knowed 'im for years, sir.  I shall only be too pleased to 'ave
any friend of 'is in my 'ouse, I assure you."

"That's well.  Now, Mrs Butt, my motive in coming here is to discover a
runaway relation--"

"La! sir--a little boy?"

"No, Mrs Butt, a--"

"_Surely_ not a little _gurl_, sir," said the landlady, with a
sympathetic expression.

"It is of no consequence what or who the runaway relation is, Mrs Butt;
I merely mention the fact in order that you may understand the reason of
any little eccentricity you may notice in my conduct, and not perplex
your mind about it.  For instance, I shall have no regular hours--may be
out late or early--it may be even all night.  You will give me a
pass-key, and I will let myself in.  The only thing I will probably ask
for will be a cup of tea or coffee.  Pray let me have one about an hour
hence.  I'm going out at present.  Here is a week's rent in advance."

"Shall I put on a fire, sir?" asked Mrs Butt.

"Well, yes--you may."

"Toast, sir?"

"Yes, yes," said Charlie, opening the outer door.

"'Ot or cold, sir?"

"'Ot, and _buttered_," cried Charlie, with a laugh, as he shut the door
after him and rendered further communication impossible.

Wending his way through the poor streets in the midst of which his
lodging was situated, our hero at last found an old-clothes store, which
he entered.

"I want a suit of old clothes," he said to the owner, a Jew, who came
forward.

The Jew smiled, spread out his hands after the manner of a Frenchman,
and said, "My shop, sir, is at your disposal."

After careful inspection Charlie selected a fustian coat of extremely
ragged appearance, with trousers to match, also a sealskin vest of a
mangy complexion, likewise a soiled and battered billycock hat so
shockingly bad that it was difficult to imagine it to have ever had
better days at all.

"Are they clean?" he asked.

"Bin baked and fumigated, sir," answered the Jew solemnly.

As the look and smell of the garments gave some countenance to the truth
of this statement, Charlie paid the price demanded, had them wrapped up
in a green cotton handkerchief, and carried them off.

Arrived at his lodging he let himself in, entered his room, and threw
the bundle in a corner.  Then he rang for tea.

It was growing dark by that time, but a yellow-cotton blind shut out the
prospect, and a cheery fire in the grate lighted up the little room
brightly, casting a rich glow on the yellow-white table-cloth, which had
been already spread, and creating a feeling of coziness in powerful
contrast to the sensation of dreariness which had assailed him on his
first entrance.  When Mrs Butt had placed a paraffin lamp on the table,
with a dark-brown teapot, a thick glass sugar-bowl, a cream-jug to
match, and a plate of thick-buttered toast that scented the atmosphere
deliciously, our hero thought--not for the first time in his life--that
wealth was a delusion, besides being a snare.

"`One wants but little here below,'" he mused, as he glanced round the
apartment; "but he wants it longer than _that_," thought he, as his eyes
wandered to the ancient sofa, which was obviously eighteen inches too
short for him.

"I 'ope you've found 'im, sir," said Mrs Butt anxiously, as she was
about to retire.

"Found who?"

"Your relation, sir; the little boy--I mean gurl."

"No, I have found neither the boy nor the girl," returned the lodger
sharply.  "Haven't even begun to look for them yet."

"Oh! beg parding, sir, I didn't know there was _two_ of 'em."

"Neither are there.  There's only one.  Fetch me some hot water, Mrs
Butt, your tea is _too_ good.  I never take it strong."

The landlady retired, and, on returning with the water, found her lodger
so deep in a newspaper that she did not venture to interrupt him.

Tea over, Charlie locked his door and clothed himself in his late
purchase, which fitted him fairly well, considering that he had measured
it only by eye.  Putting on the billycock, and tying the green cotton
kerchief loosely round his neck to hide his shirt, he stepped in front
of the looking-glass above the mantelpiece.

At sight of himself he was prepared to be amused, but he had not
expected to be shocked!  Yet shocked he certainly was, for the
transformation was so complete that it suddenly revealed to him
something of the depth of degradation to which he _might_ fall--to which
many a man as good as himself, if not better, _had_ fallen.  Then
amusement rose within him, for he was the very beau-ideal of a typical
burglar, or a prize-fighter: big, square-shouldered, deep-chested,
large-chinned.  The only parts that did not quite correspond to the type
were his straight, well-formed nose and his clear blue eyes, but these
defects were put right by slightly drooping his eyelids, pushing his
billycock a little back on his head, and drawing a lock of hair in a
drunken fashion over his forehead.

Suddenly an idea occurred to him.  Slipping his latchkey into his pocket
he went out of the house and closed the door softly.  Then he rang the
bell.

"Is the gen'leman at 'ome?" he asked of Mrs Butt, in a gruff, hoarse
voice, as if still engaged in a struggle with a bad cold.

"What gentleman?" asked Mrs Butt eyeing him suspiciously.

"W'y, the gen'leman as sent for me to give 'im boxin' lessons--Buck or
Book, or some sitch name."

"Brooke, you mean," said Mrs Butt still suspicious, and interposing her
solid person in the doorway.

"Ay, that's the cove--the gen'leman I mean came here this arternoon to
lodge wi' a Missis Butt or Brute, or suthin' o' that sort--air you Mrs
Brute?"

"_Certainly_ not," answered the landlady, with indignation; "but I'm
Mrs Butt."

"Well, it's all the same.  I ax yer parding for the mistake, but there's
sitch a mixin' up o' Brutes an' Brookes, an' Butts an' Bucks, that it
comes hard o' a man o' no edication to speak of to take it all in.  This
gen'leman, Mr Brute, 'e said if 'e was hout w'en I called I was to
wait, an' say you was to make tea for two, an' 'ave it laid in the
bedroom as 'e'd require the parlour for the mill."

The man's evident knowledge of her lodger's affairs, and his gross
stupidity, disarmed Mrs Butt.  She would have laughed at his last
speech if it had not been for the astounding conclusion.  Tea in the
bedroom and a mill in the parlour the first night was a degree of
eccentricity she had not even conceived of.

"Come in, then, young man," she said, making way.  "You'll find Mr
Brooke in the parlour at his tea."

The prize-fighter stepped quickly along the dark passage into the
parlour, and while the somewhat sluggish Mrs Butt was closing the door
she overheard her lodger exclaim--

"Ha!  Jem Mace, this is good of you--very good of you--to come so
promptly.  Mrs Butt," shouting at the parlour door, "another cup and
plate for Mr Mace, and--and bring the _ham_!"

"The 'am!" repeated Mrs Butt softly to herself, as she gazed in
perplexity round her little kitchen, "_did_ 'e order a 'am?"

Unable to solve the riddle she gave it up and carried in the cup and
saucer and plate.

"I beg your parding, sir, you mentioned a 'am," she began, but stopped
abruptly on seeing no one there but the prize-fighter standing before
the fire in a free-and-easy manner with his hands in his breeches
pockets.

The light of the street-lamps had very imperfectly revealed the person
of Jem Mace.  Now that Mrs Butt saw him slouching in all his native
hideousness against her mantelpiece in the full blaze of a paraffin
lamp, she inwardly congratulated herself that Mr Brooke was such a big
strong man--almost a match, she thought, for Mace!

"I thought you said the gen'leman was in the parlour, Mrs Brute?" said
Mace inquiringly.

"So 'e--_was_," answered the perplexed lady, looking round the room;
"didn't I 'ear 'im a-shakin' 'ands wi' you, an' a-shoutin' for 'am?"

"Well, Mrs Brute, I dun know what you 'eard; all I know is that I've
not seed 'im yet."

"'E must be in the bedroom," said Mrs Butt, with a dazed look.

"No 'e ain't there," returned the prize-fighter; "I've bin all over it--
looked under the bed, into the cupboard, through the key'ole;--p'r'aps,"
he added, turning quickly, "'e may be up the chimbly!"

The expression on poor Mrs Butt's face now alarmed Charlie, who
instantly doffed his billycock and resumed his natural voice and manner.

"Forgive me, Mrs Butt, if I have been somewhat reckless," he said, "in
testing my disguise on you.  I really had no intention till a few
minutes ago of playing such a practical--"

"Well, well, Mr Brooke," broke in the amazed yet amiable creature at
this point, "I do assure you as I'd never 'ave know'd you from the worst
character in W'itechapel.  I wouldn't have trusted you--not with a
sixpence.  You was born to be a play-actor, sir!  I declare that Jem
Mace have given me a turn that--But why disguise yourself in this way,
Mr Brooke?"

"Because I am going to haunt the low lodging-houses, Mrs Butt and I
could not well do that, you know, in the character of a gentleman; and
as you have taken it so amiably I'm glad I tried my hand here first, for
it will make me feel much more at ease."

"And well it may, sir.  I only 'ope it won't get you into trouble, for
if the p'leece go lookin' for a burglar, or murderer, or desprit
ruffian, where you 'appen to be, they're sure to run you in.  The only
think I would point out, sir, if I may be so free, is that your 'ands
an' face is too clean."

"That is easily remedied," said Charlie, with a laugh, as he stooped and
rubbed his hands among the ashes; then, taking a piece of cinder, he
made sundry marks on his countenance therewith, which, when judiciously
touched in with a little water and some ashes, converted our hero into
as thorough a scoundrel as ever walked the streets of London at
unseasonable hours of night.



CHAPTER THIRTY ONE.

FAILURE AND A NEW SCENT.

Although our hero's plan of search may seem to some rather Quixotic,
there was nothing further from his thoughts than merely playing at the
game of amateur detective.  Being enthusiastic and sanguine, besides
being spurred on by an intense desire to rescue the father of May
Leather, Charlie Brooke was thoroughly in earnest in his plan.  He knew
that it would be useless to attempt such a search and rescue in any
other capacity than that of a genuine pauper, at least in appearance and
action.  He therefore resolved to conduct the search in character, and
to plunge at once into the deepest pools of the slums.

It is not our intention to carry the reader through the
Arabian-night-like adventures which he experienced in his quest.
Suffice it to say that he did not find the lost man in the pools in
which he fished for him, but he ultimately, after many weeks, found one
who led him to the goal he aimed at.

Meanwhile there were revealed to him numerous phases of life--or,
rather, of living death--in the slums of the great city which caused him
many a heartache at the time, and led him ever afterwards to consider
with anxious pity the condition of the poor, the so-called lost and
lapsed, the depraved, degraded, and unfortunate.  Of course he found--as
so many had found before him--that the demon Drink was at the bottom of
most of the misery he witnessed, but he also learned that whereas many
weak and vicious natures dated the commencement of their final descent
and fall from the time when they began to drink, many of the strong and
ferocious spirits had begun a life of wickedness in early youth, and
only added drink in after years as a little additional fuel to the
already roaring flame of sin.

It is well known that men of all stamps and creeds and classes are to be
found in the low lodging-houses of all great cities.  At first Charlie
did not take note of this, being too earnestly engaged in the search for
his friend, and anxious to avoid drawing attention on himself; but as he
grew familiar with these scenes of misery and destitution he gradually
began to be interested in the affairs of other people, and, as he was
eminently sympathetic, he became the confidant of several paupers, young
and old.  A few tried to draw him out, but he quietly checked their
curiosity without giving offence.

It may be remarked here that he at once dropped the style of talk which
he had adopted when representing Jem Mace, because he found so many in
the lodging-houses who had fallen from a good position in society that
grammatical language was by no means singular.  His size and strength
also saved him from much annoyance, for the roughs, who might otherwise
have bullied him, felt that it would be wise to leave him alone.

On one occasion, however, his pacific principles were severely tested as
well as his manhood, and as this led to important results we must
recount the incident.

There was a little lame, elderly man, who was a habitual visitor at one
of the houses which our hero frequented.  He was a humorous character,
who made light of his troubles, and was a general favourite.  Charlie
had felt interested in the man, and in ordinary circumstances would have
inquired into his history, but, as we have said, he laid some restraint
