"I have no better plan, but I have a slight addition to make to yours,
which is, that when we collect a few of our men, I shall send them out
to every point of the compass, to make tracks like the spokes of a
wheel, of which the village shall be the centre; and by that means we
shall be pretty certain to get information ere long as to the
whereabouts of our fugitives.  So now let us be up and doing; time is
precious to-night."

In accordance with this plan, we rapidly retraced our steps to the dell,
which had been appointed as our place of rendezvous.  Here we found the
greater part of our men assembled; and so well-timed had Jack's
movements been, that not one of them all had been able to overtake or
slay a single enemy.  Thus, by able generalship, had Jack gained a
complete and bloodless victory.

Having detached and sent off our scouts--who, besides being picked men,
travelled without any other encumbrance than their arms--we resumed our
journey homeward, and reached the village not long after sunrise, to the
immense surprise of Jambai, who could scarcely believe that we had
routed the enemy so completely, and whose scepticism was further
increased by the total, and to him unaccountable, absence of prisoners,
or of any other trophies of our success in the fight.  But Jack made a
public speech, of such an elaborate, deeply mysterious, and totally
incomprehensible character, that even Makarooroo, who translated,
listened and spoke with the deepest reverence and wonder; and when he
had concluded, there was evidently a firm impression on the minds of the
natives that this victory was--by some means or in some way or other
quite inexplicable but highly satisfactory--the greatest they had ever
achieved.

The king at once agreed to Jack's proposal that a grand pursuit should
take place, to commence the instant news should be brought in by the
scouts.  But the news, when it did come, had the effect of totally
altering our plans.

The first scout who returned told us that he had fallen in with a large
body of the enemy encamped on the margin of a small pond.  Creeping like
a snake through the grass, he succeeded in getting near enough to
overhear the conversation, from which he gathered two important pieces
of information--namely, that they meant to return to their own lands in
a north-easterly direction, and that their prisoners had escaped by
means of a canoe which they found on the banks of the river that flowed
past King Jambai's village.

The first piece of information decided the king to assemble his
followers, and go off in pursuit of them at once; the second piece of
news determined us to obtain a canoe and follow Mbango and his
companions to the sea-coast, whither, from all that we heard, we
concluded they must certainly have gone.  As this, however, was a
journey of many weeks, we had to take the matter into serious
consideration.

"It is quite evident," said Jack, as we sat over our supper on the night
after receiving the above news--"it is quite evident that they mean to
go to the coast, for Mbango had often expressed to Mak a wish to go
there; and the mere fact of their having been seen to escape and take
down stream, is in itself pretty strong evidence that they did not mean
to return to their now desolated village, seeing that the country behind
them is swarming with enemies; and of course they cannot know that we
have conquered the main body of these rascals.  I therefore propose that
we should procure a canoe and follow them: first, because we must at all
hazards get hold of poor Okandaga, and relieve the anxiety of our
faithful guide Makarooroo; and second, because it is just as well to go
in that direction as in any other, in order to meet with wild animals,
and see the wonders of this land."

"But what if King Jambai takes it into his black woolly head to decline
to let us go?" said Peterkin.

"In that case we must take French leave of him."

"In which case," said I, in some alarm, "all my specimens of natural
history will be lost."

Jack received this remark with a shake of his head and a look of great
perplexity; and Peterkin said, "Ah, Ralph, I fear there's no help for
it.  You must make up your mind to say good-bye to your mummies--big
puggies and all."

"But you do not know," said I energetically, "that Jambai will detain us
against our will."

"Certainly not," replied Jack; "and for your sake I hope that he will
not.  At any rate I will go to see him about this point after supper.
It's of no use presenting a petition either to king, lord, or common
while his stomach is empty.  But there is another thing that perplexes
me: that poor sick child, Njamie's son, must not be left behind.  The
poor distracted mother has no doubt given him up for lost.  It will be
like getting him back from the grave."

"True," said I; "we must take him with us.  Yet I fear he is too ill to
travel, and we cannot await his recovery."

"He is not so ill as he seemed," observed Peterkin.  "I went to see him
only half an hour ago, and the little chap was quite hearty, and glad to
see me.  The fact is, he has been ill-used and ill-fed.  The rest and
good treatment he has received have, even in the short time he has been
here, quite revived him."

"Good," said Jack; "then he shall go with us.  I'll engage to take him
on my back when he knocks up on the march--for we have a march before
us, as I shall presently explain--and when we get into a canoe he will
be able to rest."

"But what march do you refer to?"  I asked.

"Simply this.  Mak, with whom I have had a good deal of conversation on
the subject, tells me that the river makes a considerable bend below
this village, and that by taking a short cut of a day's journey or so
over land we can save time, and will reach a small hamlet where canoes
are to be had.  The way, to be sure, is through rather a wild country;
but that to us is an advantage, as we shall be the more likely to meet
with game.  I find, also, that the king has determined to follow the
same route with his warriors in pursuit of the enemy, so that thus far
we may travel together.  At the hamlet we will diverge to the
north-east, while we, if all goes well, embarking in our canoe, will
proceed toward the west coast, where, if we do not overtake them on the
way, we shall be certain to find them on our arrival.  Okandaga has
often longed to go to the mission station there, and as she knows it is
in vain to urge Mbango to return to his destroyed village, she will
doubtless advise him to go to the coast."

"What you say seems highly probable," said I; "and I think the best
thing you can do is to go to the king at once and talk him over."

"Trust Jack for that," added Peterkin, who was at that moment deeply
engaged with what he called the drumstick of a roast monkey.  "Jack
would talk over any creature with life, so persuasive is his eloquence.
I say, Ralph," he added, holding the half-picked drumstick at arm's
length, and regarding it with a critical gaze, "I wonder, now, how the
drumstick of an ostrich would taste.  Good, I have no doubt, though
rather large for one man's dinner."

"It would be almost equal to gorilla ham, I should fancy," said Jack, as
he left the hut on his errand to the king.

"O you cannibal, to think of such a thing!" cried Peterkin, throwing the
bone of his drumstick after our retreating comrade.--"But 'tis always
thus," he added, with a sigh: "man preys upon man, monkey upon monkey.
Yet I had hoped better things of Jack.  I had believed him to be at
least a refined species of gorilla.  I say, Ralph, what makes you look
so lugubrious?"

"The difficulties, I suppose, that beset our path," said I sadly; for,
to say truth, I did not feel in a jesting humour just then.  I was
forced, however, in spite of myself, to laugh at the expression of
mingled disgust and surprise that overspread the mobile countenance of
my friend on hearing my reply.

"`The difficulties,'" echoed he, "`that beset our path!'  Really, Ralph,
life will become insupportable to me if you and Jack go on in this
fashion.  A man of nerve and sanguine temperament might stand it, but to
one like me, of a naturally timid and leaning nature, with the addition
of low spirits, it is really crushing--quite crushing."

I laughed, and replied that he must just submit to be crushed, as it was
impossible for Jack and me to change our dispositions to suit his
convenience; whereupon he sighed, lighted his pipe, and began to smoke
vehemently.

In the course of little more than an hour Jack returned, accompanied by
Makarooroo, and from the satisfied expression of their faces I judged
that they had been successful.

"Ah!  I see; it's all right," said Peterkin, raising himself on one
elbow as they entered the hut and seated themselves beside the fire.
"Old Jambai has been `talked over.'"

"Right; but he needed a deal of talk--he was horribly obstinate," said
Jack.

"Ho, yis; ho! ho! horribubly obsterlate," added Makarooroo in
corroboration, rubbing his hands and holding his nose slyly over the
bowl of Peterkin's pipe, in order to enjoy, as it were, a second-hand
whiff.

"Here, there's a bit for yourself, old boy.  Sit down and enjoy yourself
while Jack tells us all about his interview with royalty," said
Peterkin, handing a lump of tobacco to our guide, whose eyes glistened
and white teeth gleamed as he received the much-prized gift.

Jack now explained to us that he had found the king in a happy state of
satiety, smoking in his very curious and uneasy-looking easy-chair; that
he had at first begged and entreated him (Jack) to stay and take command
of his warriors, and had followed up his entreaties with a hint that it
was just possible he might adopt stronger measures if entreaty failed.

To this Jack replied in a long speech, in which he pointed out the
impossibility of our complying with the king's request under present
circumstances, and the absolute necessity of our returning at some
period or other to our native land to tell our people of the wonders we
had seen in the great country of King Jambai.  Observing that his
arguments did not make much impression on the king, he brought up his
reserve force to the attack, and offered all the remainder of our goods
as a free gift to his majesty, stipulating only that he (the king)
should, in consideration thereof, carefully send our boxes of specimens
down to the coast, where the messengers, on arriving, should be
handsomely paid if everything should arrive safely and in good order.

These liberal offers had a visible influence on the sable monarch, whose
pipe indicated the state of his mind pretty clearly--thin wreaths of
smoke issuing therefrom when he did not sympathise with Jack's
reasoning, and thick voluminous clouds revolving about his woolly head,
and involving him, as it were, in a veil of gauze, when he became
pleasantly impressed.  When Jack made mention of the valuable gifts
above referred to, his head and shoulders were indistinctly visible amid
the white cloudlets; and when he further offered to supply him with a
few hundreds of the magical paper balls that had so effectually defeated
his enemies the day before, the upper part of his person was obliterated
altogether in smoke.

This last offer of Jack's we deemed a great stroke of politic wisdom,
for thereby he secured that the pending war should be marked by the
shedding of less blood than is normal in such cases.  He endeavoured
further to secure this end by assuring the king that the balls would be
useless for the purpose for which they were made if any other substance
should be put into the gun along with them, and that they would only
accomplish the great end of putting the enemy to flight if fired at them
in one tremendous volley at a time when the foe had no idea of the
presence of an enemy.

All things being thus amicably arranged, we retired to rest, and slept
soundly until daybreak, when we were awakened by the busy sounds of
preparation in the village for the intended pursuit.

We, too, made active arrangements for a start, and soon after were
trooping over the plains and through the jungle in the rear of King
Jambai's army, laden with such things as we required for our journey to
the coast, and Jack, besides his proportion of our food, bedding,
cooking utensils, etcetera, carrying Njamie's little sick boy on his
broad shoulders.



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

WE MEET WITH A LUDICROUSLY AWFUL ADVENTURE.

The day following that on which we set out from King Jambai's village,
as narrated in the last chapter, Jack, Peterkin, Makarooroo, Njamie's
little boy, and I embarked in a small canoe, and bidding adieu to our
hospitable friends, set out on our return journey to the coast.

We determined to proceed thither by another branch of the river which
would take us through a totally new, and in some respects different,
country from that in which we had already travelled, and which, in the
course of a few weeks, would carry us again into the neighbourhood of
the gorilla country.

One beautiful afternoon, about a week after parting from our friends, we
met with an adventure in which the serious and the comic were strangely
mingled.  Feeling somewhat fatigued after a long spell at our paddles,
and being anxious to procure a monkey or a deer, as we had run short of
food, we put ashore, and made our encampment on the banks of the river.
This done, we each sallied out in different directions, leaving
Makarooroo in charge of the camp.

For some time I wandered about the woods in quest of game, but although
I fired at many animals that were good for food, I missed them all, and
was unwillingly compelled to return empty-handed.  On my way back, and
while yet several miles distant from the camp, I met Jack, who had
several fat birds of the grouse species hanging at his girdle.

"I am glad to see that you have been more successful than I, Jack," said
I, as we met.

"Yet I have not much to boast of," he replied.  "It is to be hoped that
Peterkin has had better luck.  Have you seen him?"

"No; I have not even heard him fire a shot."

"Well, let us go on.  Doubtless he will make his appearance in good
time.  What say you to following the course of this brook?  I have no
doubt it will guide us to the vicinity of our camp, and the ground
immediately to the left of it seems pretty clear of jungle."

"Agreed," said I; and for the next ten minutes or so we walked beside
each other in silence.  Suddenly our footsteps were arrested by a low
peculiar noise.

"Hark! is that a human voice?" whispered Jack, as he cocked his rifle.

"It sounds like it," said I.

At the same moment we heard some branches in an opposite direction
crack, as if they had been broken by a heavy tread.  Immediately after,
the first sound became louder and more distinct.  Jack looked at me in
surprise, and gradually a peculiar smile overspread his face.

"It's Peterkin," said I, in a low whisper.

My companion nodded, and half-cocking our pieces, we advanced with slow
and cautious steps towards the spot whence the sound had come.  The
gurgling noise of the brook prevented us from hearing as well as usual,
so it was not until we were close upon the bushes that fringed the banks
of the streamlet that we clearly discerned the tones of Peterkin's voice
in conversation with some one, who, however, seemed to make no reply to
his remarks.  At first I thought he must be talking to himself, but in
this I was mistaken.

"Let's listen for a minute or two," whispered my companion, with a broad
grin.

I nodded assent, and advancing cautiously, we peeped over the bushes.
The sight that met our eyes was so irresistibly comic that we could
scarcely restrain our laughter.

On a soft grassy spot, close to the warbling stream, lay our friend
Peterkin, on his breast, resting on his elbows, and the forefinger of
his right hand raised.  Before him, not more than six inches from his
nose, sat the most gigantic frog I ever beheld, looking inordinately fat
and intensely stupid.  My memory instantly flew back to the scene on the
coral island where Jack and I had caught our friend holding a quiet
conversation with the old cat, and I laughed internally as I thought on
the proverb, "The boy is the father of the man."

"Frog," said Peterkin, in a low, earnest voice, at the same time shaking
his finger slowly and fixing his eyes on the plethoric creature before
him--"frog, you may believe it or not as you please, but I do solemnly
assure you that I never did behold such a great, big, fat monster as you
are in all--my--life!  What do you mean by it?"

As the frog made no reply to this question, but merely kept up an
incessant puffing motion in its throat, Peterkin continued--

"Now, frog, answer me this one question--and mind that you don't tell
lies--you may not be aware of it, but you can't plead ignorance, for I
now tell you that it is exceedingly wicked to tell lies, whether you be
a frog or only a boy.  Now, tell me, did you ever read `Aesop's
Fables?'"

The frog continued to puff, but otherwise took no notice of its
questioner.  I could not help fancying that it was beginning to look
sulky at being thus catechised.

"What, you won't speak!  Well, I'll answer for you: you have _not_ read
`Aesop's Fables;' if you had you would not go on blowing yourself up in
that way.  I'm only a little man, it's true--more's the pity--but if you
imagine that by blowing and puffing like that you can ever come to blow
up as big as me, you'll find yourself mistaken.  You can't do it, so you
needn't try.  You'll only give yourself rheumatism.  Now, _will_ you
stop?  If you won't stop you'll burst--there."

Peterkin paused here, and for some time continued to gaze intently in
the face of his new friend.  Presently he began again--

"Frog, what are you thinking of?  Do you ever think?  I don't believe
