European kingdoms.  In 1847 its gross receipts were only 793,701 pounds.
In 1868 they had risen to above eleven millions.

Each line connected with the Clearing-House has a representative on the
committee to look after its interests, and bears its proportion of the
expenses of the establishment.

Before showing the manner in which the work is performed for the railway
companies, it may be well to premise that one great good which the
Clearing-House system does to the public, is to enable them to travel
everywhere with as much facility as if there were only one railway and
one company in the kingdom.

To avoid going too much into detail, we may say, briefly, that in regard
to goods, statements of through-traffic _despatched_ are sent daily from
thousands of stations to the Clearing-House, also separate statements of
through-traffic _received_.  These are compared.  Of those that are
found to agree, each company is debited or credited, as the case may be,
with the proportion due to or by it.  Where discrepancies occur,
correspondence ensues until the thing is cleared up, and then the
distribution to the accounts of the several companies takes place.  As
discrepancies are numerous and constant, correspondence is necessarily
great.  So minutely correct and particular are they at the
Clearing-House, that a shilling is sometimes divided between four
companies.  Even a penny is deemed worthy of being debited to one
company and credited to another!

As it is with goods, so is it with passengers.  Through-tickets are sent
from all the stations to the Clearing-House, where they are examined and
compared with the returns of the tickets issued, and then sent back to
their respective companies.  As these tickets amount to many thousands a
day, some idea may be formed of the amount of labour bestowed on the
examination of them.  The proportions of each ticket due to each company
are then credited, and statements of the same made out and forwarded to
the several companies daily.  From the two sets of returns forwarded to
the Clearing-House, statements of the debit and credit balances are made
out weekly.

Parcels are treated much in the same way as the goods.

"Mileage" is a branch of the service which requires a separate staff of
men.  There are hundreds of thousands of waggons, loaded and empty,
constantly running to and fro, day and night, on various lines, to which
they do not belong.  Each individual waggon must be traced and accounted
for to the Clearing-House, from its start to its arrival and back again;
and not only waggons, but even the individual tarpaulins that cover them
are watched and noted in this way, in order that the various companies
over whose lines they pass may get their due, and that the companies
owning them may get their demurrage if they be improperly detained on
the way.  For this purpose, at every point where separate railways join,
there are stationed men in the pay of the Clearing-House, whose duty it
is to take the numbers of all passenger carriages and goods, waggons and
tarpaulins, and make a _daily_ statement of the same to the
Clearing-House.

As daily returns of all "foreign" carriages arriving and departing from
all Clearing-House stations are forwarded to the same office, they are
thus in a position to check the traffic, detect discrepancies, and
finally make the proper entries as to mileage and demurrage in the
accounts of the respective companies.  Frequently the charge of
one-tenth of a penny per mile for a tarpaulin is divided among several
companies in various proportions.  For a waggon or carriage from
Edinburgh to London, mileage and demurrage accounts are sent out by the
Clearing-House to four companies.  Formerly, before demurrage was
introduced, carriages were frequently detained on lines to which they
did not belong, for weeks, and even months, until sometimes they were
lost sight of altogether!

Once a month the balances are struck, and the various railways, instead
of having to pay enormous sums to each other, obtain settlement by means
of comparatively small balances.

For example, the London and North-Western railway sends its through
passengers over the Caledonian line.  The mileage charged for its
"foreign" carriages is three farthings per mile.  Small though that sum
is, it amounts at the end of a month perhaps to 5000 pounds.  This
little bill is sent to the Clearing-House by the Caledonian against the
London and North-Western.  But during the same period the latter company
has been running up a somewhat similar bill against the former company.
Both accounts are sent in to the Clearing-House.  They amount together
to perhaps some fifteen or twenty thousand pounds, yet when one is set
off against the other a ten or twenty pound note may be all that is
required to change hands in order to balance the accounts.

The total mileage of lines under the jurisdiction of the Clearing-House,
and over which it exercises complete surveillance on every train that
passes up or down night or day, as far as regulating the various
interests of the companies is concerned, amounts to more than 14,000.
The _Times_, at the conclusion of a very interesting article on this
subject, says,--"Our whole railway system would be as nothing without
the Clearing-House, which affords another illustration of the great
truth that the British railway public is the best served railway public
in the world, and, on the whole, the least grateful."  We hope and
incline to believe that in the latter remark, the great Thunderer is
wrong, and that it is only a small, narrow-minded, and ignorant section
of the public which is ungrateful.

Disputed claims between railways are referred to the arbitration of the
committee of the Clearing-House, from whose decision there is no appeal.

The trouble taken in connexion with the lost-luggage department is very
great; written communications being sent to almost innumerable stations
on various lines of rails for every inquiry that is made to the House
after lost-luggage.

It is a striking commentary at once on the vast extent of traffic in the
kingdom, and the great value in one important direction of this
establishment, the fact that, in one year, the number of articles
accounted for to the Clearing-House by stations as left by passengers,
either on the platforms or in carriages, amounted to 156,769 trunks,
bags and parcels, and of these nearly ninety-five in every hundred were
restored, through the Clearing-House, to their owners.  It is probable
that the property thus restored would amount to half a million of money.

This reminds us that we left Edwin Gurwood on his way to restore Mrs
Tipps her lost ring, and that, therefore, it is our duty to resume the
thread of our story, with, of course, a humble apology to the patient
reader for having again given way to our irresistible tendency to
digress!



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

MRS. TIPPS GOES ON A JOURNEY, AND MEETS A GENTLEMAN WHO, WITH MUCH
ASSURANCE, COMMENTS FREELY ON INSURANCE.

On a particular holiday, it was advertised that a great excursion train
would start from the Clatterby station at a certain hour.  At the
appointed time the long line of carriages was pushed up to the platform
by our friend John Marrot, who was appointed that day to drive the
train.

"Bill," remarked John to his mate, "it'll be a biggish train.  There's
an uncommon lot o' people on the platform."

"They're pretty thick," replied Will Garvie, wiping his countenance with
a piece of waste, which, while it removed the perspiration, left behind
a good deal of oil, and streaked his nose with coal-dust.  But Will was
not particular!

The excursionists were indeed unusually numerous.  It chanced to be a
fine day, and the platform was densely crowded with human beings, many
of whom moved, when movement was possible, in groups, showing that there
were various sections that had a common aim and interest, and meant to
keep together as much as possible.  There were men there who had
evidently made up their minds to a thoroughly enjoyable day, and women
whose aspect was careworn but cheerful, to whom a holiday was probably a
memorable event in the year.  Of young people there was of course a
considerable sprinkling, and amongst the crowd could be seen a number of
individuals whose amused expression of countenance and general aspect
bespoke them ordinary travellers, who meant to avail themselves of a
"cheap train."  All classes and conditions of men, women, and children
were hustling each other in a state of great excitement; but the
preponderating class was that which is familiarly though not very
respectfully styled "the masses."

Mrs Marrot was there too--much against her will--and little Gertie.  A
sister of the former, who lived about twenty miles from Clatterby, had,
a short time before, made her husband a present of a fine fat pugilistic
boy, and Mrs M felt constrained to pay her a visit.

John was on the look-out for his wife and child, so was Will Garvie.
The former waved a piece of cotton-waste to her when she arrived; she
caught sight of him and gave him a cheerful nod in reply; and an
unexpressed blessing on his weather-beaten face arose in her heart as
Garvie pushed through the crowd and conducted her and Gertie to a
carriage.

Timid little Mrs Tipps was also there.  It is probable that no power on
earth, save that of physical force, could have induced Mrs Tipps to
enter an excursion train, for which above all other sorts of trains she
entertained a species of solemn horror.  But the excitement consequent
on the unexpected recovery of the diamond ring, and the still more
unexpected accession of wealth consequent thereon, had induced her to
smother her dislike to railways for a time, and avail herself of their
services in order to run down to a town about twenty miles off for the
purpose of telling the good news to Netta, who chanced to be on a short
visit to a friend there at the time.  When Mrs Tipps reached the
station, her ignorance of railway matters, and the confused mental state
which was her normal condition, prevented her from observing that the
train was an excursion one.  She therefore took out a first-class ticket
and also an insurance ticket for 500 pounds, for which latter she paid
sixpence!  Her ignorance and perturbation also prevented her from
observing that this rate of insurance was considerably higher than she
was accustomed to pay, owing to the fact of the train being an excursion
one.  If she had been going by an ordinary train, she could have insured
1000 pounds, first-class, for 3 pence; half that sum, second-class, for
2 pence; and 200 pounds, third-class, for the ridiculously small sum of
one penny!

Good Mrs Tipps held the opinion so firmly that accident was the usual,
and all but inevitable, accompaniment of railway travelling, that she
invariably insured her life when compelled to undertake a journey.  It
was of no avail that her son Joseph pointed out to her that accidents
were in reality few and far between, and that they bore an excessively
small proportion to the numbers of journeys undertaken annually; Mrs
Tipps was not to be moved.  In regard to that subject she had, to use
one of her late husband's phrases, "nailed her colours to the mast," and
could not haul them down even though she would.  She therefore, when
about to undertake a journey, invariably took out an insurance ticket,
as we have said,--and this, solely with a views to Netta's future
benefit.

We would not have it supposed that we object, here, to the principle of
insuring against accident.  On the contrary, we consider that principle
to be a wise one, and, in some cases, one that becomes almost a duty.

When Mrs Tipps discovered that Mrs Marrot and Gertie were going by the
same train, she was so much delighted at the unlooked-for companionship
that she at once entered the third-class, where they sat, and began to
make herself comfortable beside them, but presently recollecting that
she had a first-class ticket she started up and insisted on Mrs Marrot
and Gertie going first-class along with her, saying that she would pay
the difference.  Mrs Marrot remonstrated, but Mrs Tipps, strong in her
natural liberality of spirit which had been rather wildly set free by
her recent good fortune, would not be denied.

"You must come with me, Mrs Marrot," she said.  "I'm so frightened in
railways, you have no idea what a relief it is to me to have any one
near me whom I know.  I will change your tickets; let me have them,
quick; we have no time to lose--there--now, wait till I return.  Oh!  I
forgot your insurance tickets."

"W'y, bless you, ma'am, we never insures."

"You never insure!" exclaimed Mrs Tipps in amazement; "and it only
costs you threepence for one thousand pounds."

"Well, I don't know nothink as to that--" said Mrs Marrot.

Before she could finish the sentence Mrs Tipps was gone.

She returned in breathless haste, beckoned Mrs Marrot and Gertie to
follow her, and was finally hurried with them into a first-class
carriage just as the train began to move.

Their only other companion in the carriage was a stout little old
gentleman with a bright complexion, speaking eyes, and a countenance in
which benevolence appeared to struggle with enthusiasm for the mastery.
He was obviously one of those men who delight in conversation, and he
quickly took an opportunity of engaging in it.  Observing that Mrs
Tipps presented an insurance ticket to each of her companions, he said--

"I am glad to see, madam, that you are so prudent as to insure the lives
of your friends."

"I always insure my own life," replied Mrs Tipps with a little smile,
"and feel it incumbent on me at least to advise my friends to do the
same."

"Quite right, quite right, madam," replied the enthusiastic little man,
applying his handkerchief to his bald pate with such energy that it
shone like a billiard ball, "quite right, madam.  I only wish that the
public at large were equally alive to the great value of insurance
against accident.  W'y, ma'am, it's a duty, a positive duty," (here he
addressed himself to Mrs Marrot) "to insure one's life against
accident."

"Oh la! sir, is it?" said Mrs Marrot, quite earnestly.

"Yes, it is.  Why, look here--this is your child?"

He laid his hand gently on Gertie's head.

"Yes, sir, she is."

"Well, my good woman, suppose that you are a widow and are killed,"
(Mrs Marrot looked as if she would rather not suppose anything of the
sort), "what I ask, what becomes of your child?--Left a beggar; an
absolute beggar!"

He looked quite triumphantly at Mrs Tipps and her companions, and
waited a few seconds as if to allow the idea to exert its full force on
them.

"But, sir," observed Mrs Marrot meekly, "supposin' that there do be an
accident," (she shivered a little), "that ticket won't prevent me bein'
killed, you know?"

"No, ma'am, no; but it will prevent your sweet daughter from being left
a beggar--that is, on the supposition that you are a widow."

"W'ich I ain't sir, I'm happy to say," remarked Mrs Marrot; "but, sir,
supposin' we was both of us killed--"

She paused abruptly as if she had committed a sin in merely giving
utterance to the idea.

"Why, then, your other children would get the 500 pounds--or your heirs,
whoever they may be.  It's a splendid system that, of insurance against
accident.  Just look at _me_, now."  He spread out his hands and
displayed himself, looking from one to the other as if he were holding
up to admiration something rare and beautiful.  "Just look at _me_.  I'm
off on a tour of three months through England, Scotland, and Ireland--
not for my health, madam, as you may see--but for scientific purposes.
Well, what do I do?  I go to the Railway Passengers Assurance Company's
Office, 64 Cornhill, London, (I like to be particular, you see, as
becomes one who professes to be an amateur student of the exact
sciences), and I take out what they call a Short Term Policy of
Insurance against accidents of all kinds for a thousand pounds--1000
pounds, observe--for which I pay the paltry sum of 30 shillings--1
pound, 10 shillings.  Well, what then?  Away I go, leaving behind me,
with perfect indifference, a wife and two little boys.  Remarkable
little boys, madam, I assure you.  Perfect marvels of health and
intelligence, both of 'em--two little boys, madam, which have not been
equalled since Cain and Abel were born.  Every one says so, with the
exception of a few of the cynical and jaundiced among men and women.
And, pray, why am I so indifferent?  Just because they are provided for.
They have a moderately good income secured to them as it is, and the
1000 pounds which I have insured on my life will render it a competence
in the event of my being killed.  It will add 50 pounds a year to their
income, which happens to be the turning-point of comfort.  And what of
myself?  Why, with a perfectly easy conscience, I may go and do what I
please.  If I get drowned in Loch Katrine--what matter?  If I break my
neck in the Gap of Dunloe--what matter?  If I get lost and frozen on the
steeps of Ben Nevis or Goatfell--what matter?  If I am crushed to death
in a railway accident, or get entangled in machinery and am torn to
atoms--still I say, what matter? 1000 pounds must _at_ _once_ be paid
down to my widow and children, and all because of the pitiful sum of 30
shillings.

"But suppose," continued the enthusiastic man, deepening his tone as he
became more earnest, "suppose that I am _not_ killed, but only severely
injured and mangled so as to be utterly unfit to attend to my worldly
affairs--what then?"

Mrs Tipps shuddered to think of "what then."

"Why," continued the enthusiastic gentleman, "I shall in that case be
