"Well, I can't exactly go for to say as I has," answered Gillie, with
another grin.

"Now, look 'ee here, youngster," said the Captain, suddenly seizing the
spider by his collar and trousers, and swinging him as though about to
hurl him through the window into the river, "if you go an' let your
tongue wag in regard to this matter, out you go, right through the
port-hole--d'ee see?"

He set the spider quietly on his legs again, who replied, with unruffled
coolness--

"Mum's the word, Cappen."

Gillie had been shorn of his blue tights and brass buttons, poor Mrs
Stoutley having found it absolutely necessary, on her return home, to
dismiss all her servants, dispose of all her belongings, and retire into
the privacy of a poor lodging in a back street.  Thus the spider had
come to be suddenly thrown on the world again, but Captain Wopper had
retained him, he said, as a mixture of errand-boy, cabin-boy, and
powder-monkey, in which capacity he dwelt with his mother during the
night and revolved like a satellite round the Captain during the day.  A
suit of much more appropriate pepper-and-salt had replaced the blue
tights and buttons.  Altogether, his _tout-ensemble_ was what the
Captain styled "more ship-shape."

We have said that Mrs Stoutley and her family had made a descent in
life.  As poor Lewis remarked, with a sad smile, they had quitted the
gay and glittering heights, and gone, like a magnificent avalanche, down
into the moraine.  Social, not less than physical, avalanches multiply
their parts and widen their course during descent.  The Stoutleys did
not fall alone.  A green-grocer, a shoemaker, and a baker, who had long
been trembling, like human boulders, on the precipice of bankruptcy,
went tumbling down along with them, and found rest in a lower part of
the moraine than they had previously occupied.

"It's a sad business," said Lewis to Dr Lawrence one morning; "and if
you continue to attend me, you must do so without the most distant
prospect of a fee."

"My dear fellow," returned Lawrence, "have you no such thing as
gratitude in your composition?"

"Not much, and, if I had ever so much, it would be poor pay."

"Poor, indeed, if regarded as one's only source of livelihood," rejoined
Lawrence, "but it is ample remuneration from a friend, whether rich or
poor, and, happily, capable of being mixed with pounds, shillings and
pence without deterioration.  In the present case, I shall be more than
rejoiced to take the fee unmixed, but, whether fee'd or not fee'd, I
insist on continuing attendance on a case which I have a right to
consider peculiarly my own."

"It would have been a bad case, indeed, but for you," returned Lewis, a
flush for a moment suffusing his pale cheek as he took his friend's hand
and squeezed it.  "I am thoroughly convinced, Lawrence, that God's
blessing on your skill and unwearied care of me at the time of the
accident is the cause of my being alive to thank you to-day.  But sit
down, my dear fellow, and pray postpone your professional inquiries for
a little, as I have something on my mind which I wish to ask you about."

Lawrence shook his head.  "Business first, pleasure afterwards," he
said; "professional duties must not be postponed."

"Now," said Lewis when he had finished, "are you satisfied?  Do you
admit that even an unprofessional man might have seen at a glance that I
am much better, and that your present draft on my gratitude is a mere
swindle?"

"I admit nothing," retorted the other; "but now, what have you got to
say to me?"

"I am going to make a confidant of you.  Are you to be trusted?"

"Perhaps; I dare not say yes unconditionally, because I'm rather
sociable and communicative, and apt to talk in my sleep."

"That will do.  Your answer is sufficiently modest.  I will venture.
You know Captain Wopper, I mean, you are well acquainted with his
character; well, that kind and eccentric man has made a proposal to my
dear mother, which we do not like to accept, and which at the same time
we do not quite see our way to refuse.  My mother, when in great
distress in Switzerland, was forced to borrow a small sum of money from
him, and thought it right to justify her doing so by letting him know--
what everybody, alas! may know now--that we were ruined.  With that
ready kindness which is his chief characteristic he at once complied.
Since our return home he has, with great delicacy but much
determination, insisted that we shall accept from him a regular weekly
allowance until we have had time to correspond with our uncle Stout in
California.  `You mustn't starve,' he said to my mother--I give you his
own words--`and you'd be sure to starve if you was to try to wegitate
for six months or so on atmospheric air.  It'll take that time before
you could get a letter from Willum, an' though your son Lewis could an'
would, work like a nigger to keep your pot bilin' if he was well an'
hearty, it's as plain as the nose on your own face, ma'am, that he can't
work while he's as thin as a fathom of pump-water an' as weak as a
babby.  Now, you know-at least I can tell 'ee--that my old chum Willum
is as rich as a East Injin nabob.  You wouldn't believe, madam, what
fortins some gold-diggers have made.  W'y, I've seed men light their
pipes with fi'-pun' notes for a mere brag out there.  I've made a
goodish lump o' money myself too,--a'most more than I know what to do
with, an' as to Willum, I may say he's actooally rollin' in gold.  He's
also chockfull of regard for you and yours, ma'am.  That bein' so, he's
sure to send you somethin' to tide you over yer difficulties, an' he's
also sure to send somethin' to Lewis to help him start fair when he gits
well, and he's surest of all to send somethin' to Miss Emma for all the
kind letters she's writ to him doorin' the last five or six years.
Well, then, I'm Willum's buzzum friend, and, knowin' exactly what he'll
say an' do in the circumstances, what more nat'ral an' proper than that
Willum's chum should anticipate Willum's wishes, and advance the money--
some of it at least--say three thousand pounds to start with.'  Now,
Lawrence," continued Lewis, "what should we do?  Should we accept this
offer?  The good fellow has evidently made a great deal of money at the
gold-fields, and no doubt speaks truly when he says he can afford to
advance that sum.  And we know our uncle William's character well
enough, though we have never seen him, to be quite sure that he will
assist my dear mother until I am able to support her.  What say you?"

"Accept the offer at once," said Lawrence.  "From what I have seen of
the Captain, I am convinced that he is a warm friend and a genuine man.
No doubt he can well afford to do what he proposes, and his opinion of
William Stout's character is just, for, from what I know of him through
Mrs Roby, who knew him when he was a lad, when his life was saved by my
father, he must have a kind heart."

"I have no doubt of it, Lawrence, and a grateful heart too, if I may
judge from a few words that fell from Captain Wopper about your father
and yourself."

"Indeed! what did he say about us?"

"I have no right to repeat observations dropped inadvertently," said
Lewis, with a laugh.

"Nor to raise curiosity which you don't mean to satisfy," retorted his
friend; "however, my advice is, that you accept the Captain's offer, and
trust to your uncle's generosity."



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

THE CAPTAIN SURPRISES HIS FRIENDS IN VARIOUS WAYS, AND IS HIMSELF
BAFFLED.

Time and Tide passed on--as they are proverbially said to do--without
waiting for any one.  Some people in the great city, aware of this
cavalier style of proceeding on the part of Time and Tide, took
advantage of both, and scaled the pinnacled heights of society.  Others,
neglecting their opportunities, or misusing them, produced a series of
avalanches more or less noteworthy, and added a few more boulders to the
vast accumulations in the great social moraine.

Several of the actors in this tale were among those who, having learnt a
few sharp lessons in the avalanche school, began to note and avail
themselves of Time and Tide--notably, Mrs Stoutley and her son and
niece.  A decided change had come over the spirit of Mrs Stoutley's
dream of life.  She had at last visited the great London moraine,
especially that part of it called Grubb's Court, and had already dug up
a few nuggets and diamonds, one of which latter she brought to her
humble home in the back street, with the design of polishing it into a
good servant-maid.  Its name was Netta White.  Mrs Stoutley had
formerly been a spendthrift; now she was become covetous.  She coveted
the male diamond belonging to the same part of the moraine--once named
the Spider, _alias_ the Imp--but Captain Wopper had dug up that one for
himself and would not part with it.  Gradually the good lady conceived
and carried out the idea of digging out and rescuing a number of
diamonds, considerably lower in the scale than the Netta type, training
them for service, and taking pains to get them into good situations.  It
was hard work no doubt, but Mrs Stoutley persevered, and was well
repaid--for the Master of such labourers esteems them "worthy of their
hire."  Emma assisted in the work most heartily.  It was by no means new
to her.  She might have directed if she had chosen, but she preferred to
follow.

Lewis recovered rapidly--so rapidly that he was soon able to resume his
medical studies and prosecute them with vigour.  No bad effects of the
accident remained, yet he was an altered man--not altered in appearance
or in character, but in spirit.  He was still off-hand in manner,
handsome in face and figure, hearty in society, but earnest and grave--
very grave--in private.  He pored over his books, and strove,
successfully too, to master the difficulties of the healing art; but do
what he would, and fight against it as he might, he was constantly
distracted by a pretty face with bright sparkling eyes and a strangely
sad expression coming between him and the page.  He made continual
inquiries after the owner of the sparkling eyes in every direction
without success, and at last got into the habit when walking, of looking
earnestly at people as if he expected to meet with some one.  "If I had
got into this state," he sometimes said to himself, "because of being
merely in love with a pretty face, I should consider myself a silly
nincompoop; but it is such a terrible thing for so sweet and young a
creature to be chained to a man who must in the nature of things, land
her in beggary and break her heart."  Thus he deceived himself as to his
main motive.  Poor Lewis!

One morning Captain Wopper got up a little earlier than usual, and began
a series of performances which Mrs Roby had long ago styled "rampadgin"
round his garret.

The reader may have discovered by this time that the Captain was no
ordinary man.  Whatever he did in connection with himself was done with
almost superhuman energy and noise.  Since the commencement of his
residence in the garret he had unwittingly subjected the nerves of poor
Mrs Roby to such a variety of shocks, that the mere fact of her reason
remaining on its throne was an unquestionable proof of a more than
usually powerful constitution.  It could not well be otherwise.  The
Captain's limbs resembled the limbs of oaks in regard to size and
toughness.  His spirits were far above "proof."  His organs were
cathedral organs compared with the mere barrel-organs of ordinary men.
On the other hand, the "cabin" in Grubb's Court was but a flimsy
tenement; its plank floorings were thin, and its beams and rafters slim
and somewhat loose owing to age, so that when the captain snored, which
he did regularly and continuously, it was as if a mastiff had got inside
a double-bass and were growling hideously.

But Mrs Roby had now got pretty well accustomed to her lodger's ways.
Her nerves had become strung to the ordeal, and she even came to like
the galvanic battery in which she dwelt, because of its being worked by
the intimate friend of her dear William; such is the power of love--we
might almost say, in this case, of reflected love!  The good old lady
had even become so acute in her perceptions, that, without seeing the
"rampadger," she knew precisely the part of his daily programme with
which he happened to be engaged.  Of course the snoring told its own
tale with brazen-tongued clamour, and the whole tenement trembled all
night long from top to bottom.  Nothing but the regardless nature of the
surrounding population prevented the Captain from being indicted as a
nuisance; but there were other sounds that were not so easily
recognised.

On the morning in question, Mrs Roby, lying placidly in her neat white
little bed, and gazing with a sweet contented face through one of her
cabin windows at the bright blue sky, heard a sound as though a compound
animal--hog and whale--had aroused itself and rolled over on its other
side.  A low whistling followed.  Mrs Roby knew that the Captain was
pleasantly engaged with his thoughts--planning out the proceedings of
the day.  Suddenly the whistling ceased and was followed by a sonorous
"how-ho!" terminating in a gasp worthy of an express locomotive.  The
Captain had stretched himself and Mrs Roby smiled at her own thoughts,
as well she might for they embraced the idea that a twentieth part of
the force employed in that stretch would have rent in twain every
tendon, muscle, sinew, and filament in her, Mrs Roby's, body.  Next,
there descended on the floor overhead a sixteen-stone cannon ball, which
caused--not the neighbours, but the boards and rafters to complain.  The
Captain was up! and succeeding sounds proved that he had had another
stretch, for there was a bump in the middle of it which showed that,
forgetting his stature, the careless man had hit the ceiling with his
head.  That was evidently a matter of no consequence.

From this point the boards and rafters continued to make unceasing
complaint, now creaking uneasily as if under great provocation, anon
groaning or yelling as though under insufferable torment.  From the
ceiling of Mrs Roby's room numerous small bits of plaster, unable to
stand it longer, fell and powdered Mrs Roby's floor.  The curtains of
her little bed saved her face.  There was a slushing and swishing and
gasping and blowing now, which might have done credit to a school of
porpoises.  The Captain was washing.  Something between the flapping of
a main top-sail in a shifting squall and the currying of a hippopotamus
indicated that the Captain was drying himself.  The process was
interrupted by an unusual, though not quite unknown, crash and a howl;
he had overturned the wash-hand basin, and a double thump, followed by
heavy dabs, told that the Captain was on his knees swabbing it up.

Next instant the Captain's head, with beard and hair in a tremendously
rubbed-up condition, appeared upside down at the hatchway.

"Hallo! old girl, has she sprung a leak anywhere?"

"Nowhere," replied Mrs Roby, with a quiet smile.  She felt the question
to be unnecessary.  "She," that is, the roof above her, never did leak
in such circumstances.  If the Thames had suddenly flooded the garret,
the Captain's energy was sufficient to have swabbed it up in time to
prevent a drop reaching "the lower deck."

Soon after this catastrophe there was a prolonged silence.  The Captain
was reading.  Mrs Roby shut her eyes and joined him in spirit.
Thereafter the Captain's feet appeared at the trap where his head had
been, and he descended with a final and tremendous crash to the floor.

"See here, mother," he cried, with a look of delight, holding up a very
soiled and crumpled letter, "that's from Willum."

"From William," exclaimed the old woman, eagerly; "why, when did you get
it? the postman can't have been here this morning."

"Of course he hasn't; I got it last night from the limb-o'-the-law that
looks after my little matters.  I came in late, and you were asleep, so
I kep' it to whet yer appetite for breakfast.  Now listen, you must take
it first; I'll get you breakfast afterwards."

The Captain had by this time got into the way of giving the old woman
her breakfast in bed every morning.

"Go on," said the old woman, nodding.

The Captain spread out the letter on his knee with great care, and read
aloud:--

  "My Dear Wopper, Got yer letter all right.

  "My blissin' to the poor widdy.  Help her? ov coorse I'll help her.
  You did right in advancin' the money, though you fell short, by a long
  way, when you advanced so little.  Hows'ever, no matter.  I gave you
  my last will an' testimony w'en we parted.  Here's a noo un.  Inside
  o' this, if I don't forget it before I've done, you'll find a cheque
  for thirteen thousand pounds sterling.  Give three to the widdy, with
  my respects; give four to dear Emma Gray, with my best love and
  blissin'; give two to Mister Lewis, with my compliments; an' give four
  to young Lawrence, with my benediction, for his father's sake.  As for
  the old 'ooman Roby, you don't need to give nothin' to her.  She and I
  understand each other.  _I'll_ look after her myself.  I'll make her
  my residooary legatee, an' wotever else is needful; but, in the
  meantime, you may as well see that she's got all that she wants.
  Build her a noo house too.  I'm told that Grubb's Court ain't exactly
  aristocratic or clean; see to that.  Wotever you advance out o' yer
  own pocket, I'll pay back with interest.  That's to begin with, tell
  'em.  There's more comin'.  There--I'm used up wi' writin' such a long
  screed.  I'd raither dig a twenty-futt hole in clay sile any day.--
  Yours to command, Willum.

  "P.S.--You ain't comin' back soon--are you?"

"Now, mother, what d'ee think o' that?" said the Captain, folding the
letter and putting it in his pocket.

"It's a good, kind letter--just like William," answered the old woman.

"Well, so I'm inclined to think," rejoined the Captain, busying himself
about breakfast while he spoke; "it provides for everybody in a sort o'
way, and encourages 'em to go on hopeful like--don't it strike you so?
Then, you see, that's four to Miss Emma, and four to Dr Lawrence, which
would be eight, equal to four hundred a year; and that, with the
practice he's gettin' into, would make it six, or thereabouts--not bad
to begin with, eh?"

The Captain followed his remark with a sigh.

"What's the matter?" asked Mrs Roby.

"Why, you remember, mother, before goin' abroad I set my heart on these
two gettin' spliced; but I fear it's no go.  Sometimes I think they
looks fond o' one another, at other times I don't.  It's a puzzler.
They're both young an' good-lookin' an' good.  What more would they
have?"

"Perhaps they want money," suggested the old woman.  "You say Dr
Lawrence's income just now is about two hundred; well, gentlefolks find
it summat difficult to keep house on that, though it's plenty for the
likes of you an' me."

"That's true.  P'r'aps the Doctor is sheerin' off for fear o' draggin' a
young creeter into poverty.  It never struck me in that light before."

Beaming under the influence of this hopeful view of the case, the
Captain proceeded to make another move in the complicated game which he
had resolved to play out and win; but this move, which he had considered
one of the easiest of all, proved to be the most unfortunate, or rather
unmanageable.

"Now, mother," said he, "I mean to make a proposal to 'ee, before going
