
The lodging which he had taken for a few days was retaken that night for
an indefinite period, and he resolved to lay siege to her heart in due
form.

But that uncertainty which is proverbial in human affairs stepped within
the circle of his life and overturned his plans.  On returning to his
rooms he found a telegram on the table.  His father, it informed him,
was dangerously ill.  By the next train he started for home, and arrived
to find that his father was dead.

A true narrative of any portion of this world's doings must of necessity
be as varied as the world itself, and equally abrupt in its transitions.
From the lively supper-table Stanley Hall passed to the deathbed of his
father.  In like manner we must ask the reader to turn with us from the
contemplation of Stanley's deep sorrow to the observation of Queeker's
poetic despair.

Maddened between the desire to tell all he knew regarding the secret
mission to Mr Durant, and the command laid on him by his employers to
be silent, the miserable youth rushed frantically to his lodgings,
without any definite intentions, but more than half inclined to sink on
his knees before his desk, and look up to the moon, or stars, or;
failing these, to the floating light for inspiration, and pen the
direful dirge of something dreadful and desperate!  He had even got the
length of the first line, and had burst like a thunderbolt into his room
muttering--

  "Great blazing wonder of illimitable spheres,"

when he became suddenly aware of the fact that his chair was occupied by
the conchological friend with whom he had spent the earlier part of that
day, who was no other than the man with the keen grey eyes.

"What! still in the poetic vein?" he said, with a grave smile.

"Why--I--thought you were off to London!" exclaimed Queeker, with a very
red face.

"I have seen cause to change my plan," said Mr Larks quietly.

"I'm _very_ glad of it," replied Queeker, running his fingers through
his hair and sitting down opposite his friend with a deep sigh, "because
I'm in the most horrible state of perplexity.  It is quite evident to me
that the boy is known to Miss Durant, for she went off into _such_ a
state when I mentioned him and described him exactly."

"Indeed," said Mr Larks; "h'm!  I know the boy too."

"Do you?  Why didn't you tell me that?"

"There was no occasion to," said the imperturbable Mr Larks, whose
visage never by any chance conveyed any expression whatever, except when
he pleased, and then it conveyed only and exactly the expression that he
intended.  "But come," he continued, "let's hear all about it, and don't
quote any poetry till you have done with the facts."

Thus exhorted Queeker described the scene at the supper-table with
faithful minuteness, and, on concluding, demanded what was to be done.

"H'm!" grunted Mr Larks.  "They've gone to visit Nora Jones, so you and
I shall go and keep them company.  Come along."

He put on his hat and went out, followed by his little friend.

In a lowly ill-furnished room in one of the poorest streets of the town,
where rats and dogs and cats seemed to divide the district with
poverty-stricken human beings, they found Nora sitting by the bedside of
her grandmother, who appeared to be dying.  A large Family Bible, from
which she had been reading, was open on her knee.

Mr Larks had opened the door and entered without knocking.  He and
Queeker stood in the passage and saw the bed, the invalid, and the
watcher through an inner door which stood ajar.  They could hear the
murmurings of the old woman's voice.  She appeared to wander in her
mind, for sometimes her words were coherent, at other times she merely
babbled.

"O Morley, Morley, give it up," she said, during one of her lucid
intervals; "it has been the curse of our family.  Your grandfather died
of it; your father--ah! he _was_ a man, tall and straight, and _so_
kind, till he took to it; oh me! how it changed him!  But the Lord saved
his soul, though he let the body fall to the dust.  Blessed be His holy
name for that.  Give it up, Morley, my darling boy; give it up, give it
up--oh, for God's sake give it up!"

She raised her voice at each entreaty until it almost reached a shriek,
and then her whole frame seemed to sink down into the bed from
exhaustion.

"Why don't 'ee speak to me, Morley?" she resumed after a short time,
endeavouring to turn her head round.

"Dearest granny," said Nora, gently stroking one of her withered hands,
which lay on the counterpane, "father is away just now.  No doubt he
will be back ere long."

"Ay, ay, he's always away; always away," she murmured in a querulous
tone; "always coming back too, but he never comes.  Oh, if he would give
it up--give it up--"

She repeated this several times, and gradually dwindled off into
unintelligible mutterings.

By this time Mr Larks had become aware of whispering voices in a part
of the room which he could not see.  Pushing the door a little farther
open he entered softly, and in a darkened corner of the apartment beheld
Mr Durant and Katie in close conversation with James Welton.  They all
rose, and Nora, seeing that the old woman had fallen into a slumber,
also rose and advanced towards the strangers.  Mr Durant at once
explained to her who Queeker was, and Queeker introduced Mr Larks as a
friend who had come to see them on important business.

"I think we know pretty well what the business is about," said Jim
Welton, advancing and addressing himself to Mr Larks, "but you see," he
added, glancing towards the bed, "that this is neither the time nor
place to prosecute your inquiries, sir."

Mr Larks, who was by no means an unfeeling man, though very stern, said
that he had no intention of intruding; he had not been aware that any
one was ill in the house, and he would take it as a favour if Mr Welton
would go outside and allow him the pleasure of a few words with him.  Of
course Jim agreed, but before going took Nora aside.

"I'll not be back to-night, dearest," he said in a low whisper.
"To-morrow, early, I'll return."

"You will leave no stone unturned?" said Nora.

"Not one.  I'll do my best to save him."

"And you have told me the worst--told me _all_?" asked Nora, with a look
of intense grief mingled with anxiety on her pale face.

"I have," said Jim, in a tone and with a look so earnest and truthful
that Nora required no further assurance.  She gave him a kindly but
inexpressibly sad smile, and returned to her stool beside the bed.  Her
lover and Mr Larks went out, followed by Queeker.

"We won't intrude on you longer to-night," said Katie, going up to Nora
and laying her hand quietly on her shoulder.

"Your visit is no intrusion," said Nora, looking up with a quiet smile.
"It was love that brought you here, I know.  May our dear Lord bless you
and your father for wishing to comfort the heart of one who needs it so
much--oh, so much."  She put her hands before her face and was silent.
Katie tried in vain to speak.  The tears coursed freely down her cheeks,
but never a word could she utter.  She put her arm round the neck of the
poor girl and kissed her.  This was a language which Nora understood;--
many words could not have expressed so much; no words could have
expressed more.



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

MR. JONES IS OUTWITTED, AND NORA IS LEFT DESOLATE.

When Morley Jones found himself suddenly deserted by his ally Billy
Towler, he retired to the privacy of a box in a low public-house in
Thames Street, and there, under the stimulus of a stiff glass of grog,
consulted with himself as to the best mode of procedure under the trying
circumstances in which he found himself placed.  He thought it probable,
after half an hour of severe meditation, that Billy would return to the
Grotto, but that, for his own sake, he would give a false account of his
absence, and say nothing about the loss of the Skylark.  Feeling
somewhat relieved in mind by his conclusions on this head, he drank off
his grog, called for another glass, and then set himself to the
consideration of how far the disappearance of the boy would interfere
with his obtaining payment of the various sums due by the Insurance
Offices.  This point was either more knotty and difficult to unravel
than the previous one, or the grog began to render his intellect less
capable of grappling with it.  At all events it cost him an hour to
determine his course of action, and required another glass of grog to
enable him to put the whole matter fairly before his mental vision in
one comprehensive view.  This, however, accomplished, he called for a
fourth glass of grog "for luck," and reeled out of the house to carry
out his deep-laid plans.

His first act was to proceed to Greenwich, where a branch of his
fish-curing business existed, or was supposed to exist.  Here he met a
friend who offered to treat him.  Unfortunately for the success of his
schemes he accepted this offer, and, in the course of a debauch,
revealed so much of his private affairs that the friend, after seeing
him safely to his lodging, and bidding him an affectionate farewell,
went up to London by the first boat on the following morning, and
presented himself to the managers of various Insurance Companies, to
whom he made revelations which were variously received by these
gentlemen; some of them opening their eyes in amazement, while others
opened their mouths in amusement, and gave him to understand that he was
very much in the position of a man who should carry coals to Newcastle--
they being then in possession of all the information given, and a great
deal more besides.

The manager of the Submarine Insurance Company was the most facetious
among these gentlemen on hearing the revelations of Mr Jones's
"friend."

"Can you tell me," said that gentleman, when he had pumped the "friend"
dry, "which of us is likely to receive the distinguished honour of the
first visit from Mr Jones?"

"He said summat about your own office, sir," replied the informer;
"leastwise I think he did, but I ain't quite sartin."

"H'm! not unlikely," observed the manager; "we have had the pleasure of
paying him something before to-day.  Come here, I will introduce you to
an acquaintance of Mr Jones, who takes a deep interest in him.  He has
just arrived from Ramsgate."

Opening a door, the manager ushered the informer into a small room where
a stout man with peculiarly keen grey eyes was warming himself at the
fire.

"Allow me to introduce you, Mr Larks, to a friend of Mr Jones, who may
be of some use.  I will leave you together for a little," said the
manager, with a laugh, as he retired and shut the door.

It is not necessary that we should enter into details as to how Mr
Jones went about the business of drawing his nets ashore--so to speak,--
and how those who took a special interest in Mr Jones carefully
assisted him, and, up to a certain point, furthered all his proceedings.
It is sufficient to say that, about a fortnight after his arrival in
London--all the preliminary steps having been taken--he presented
himself one fine forenoon at the office of the Submarine Insurance
Company.

He was received very graciously, and, much to his satisfaction, was told
that the claim could now be settled without further delay.  Former
experience had taught him that such a piece of business was not
unusually difficult of settlement, but he was quite charmed by the
unwonted facilities which seemed to be thrown in his way in regard to
the present affair.  He congratulated himself internally, and the
manager congratulated him externally, so to speak, by referring to his
good fortune in having insured the vessel and cargo to the full amount.

Even the clerks of the establishment appeared to manifest unwonted
interest in the case, which gratified while it somewhat surprised Mr
Jones.  Indeed, the interest deepened to such an extent, and was so
obtrusive, that it became almost alarming, so that feelings of
considerable relief were experienced by the adventurous man when he at
length received a cheque for 300 pounds and left the office with it in
his pocket.

In the outer lobby he felt a touch on his arm, and, looking round, met
the gaze of a gentleman with peculiarly keen grey eyes.  This gentleman
made some quiet remarks with reference to Mr Jones being "wanted," and
when Mr Jones, not relishing the tone or looks of this gentleman, made
a rush at the outer glass door of the office, an official stepped
promptly in front of it, put one hand on the handle, and held up the
other with the air of one who should say, "Excuse me, there is no
thoroughfare this way."  Turning abruptly to the left, Mr Jones found
himself confronted by another grave gentleman of powerful frame and
resolute aspect, who, by a species of magic or sleight of hand known
only to the initiated, slipped a pair of steel bracelets on Mr Jones's
wrists, and finally, almost before he knew where he was, Mr Jones found
himself seated in a cab with the strong gentleman by his side, and the
keen grey-eyed gentleman in front of him.

Soon afterwards he found himself standing alone in the midst of an
apartment, the chief characteristics of which were, that the furniture
was scanty, the size inconveniently little, and the window unusually
high up, besides being heavily barred, and ridiculously small.

Here let us leave him to his meditations.

One fine forenoon--many weeks after the capture of Morley Jones--Dick
Moy, Jack Shales, and Jerry MacGowl were engaged in painting and
repairing buoys in the Trinity store on the pier at Ramsgate.  The two
former were enjoying their month of service on shore, the latter was on
sick-leave, but convalescent.  Jack was painting squares of alternate
black and white on a buoy of a conical shape.  Dick was vigorously
scraping sea-weed and barnacles off a buoy of a round form.  The store,
or big shed, was full of buoys of all shapes; some new and fresh, others
old and rugged; all of them would have appeared surprisingly gigantic to
any one accustomed to see buoys only in their native element.  The
invalid sat on the shank of a mushroom anchor, and smoked his pipe while
he affected to superintend the work.

"Sure I pity the poor craturs as is always sick.  The mouth o' man can
niver tell the blessedness of bein' well, as the pote says," observed
Jerry, with a sigh, as he shook the ashes out of his pipe and proceeded
to refill it.  "Come now, Jack Shales," he added, after a short pause,
"ye don't call that square, do 'ee?"

"I'll paint yer nose black if you don't shut up," said Jack, drawing the
edge of a black square with intense caution, in order to avoid invading
the domain of a white one.

"Ah! you reminds me of the owld proverb that says somethin' about asses
gittin impudent an' becomin' free with their heels when lions grow
sick."

"Well, Jerry," retorted Jack, with a smile, as he leaned back and
regarded his work with his head very much on one side, and his eyes
partially closed, after the manner of knights of the brush, "I'm not
offended, because I'm just as much of an ass as you are of a lion."

"I say, mates," remarked Dick Moy, pausing in his work, and wiping his
brow, "are 'ee aweer that the cap'n has ordered us to be ready to start
wi' the first o' the tide at half after five to-morrow?"

"I knows it," replied Jack Shales, laying down the black brush and
taking up the white one.

"I knows it too," said Jerry MacGowl, "but it don't make no manner of
odds to me, 'cause I means to stop ashore and enjoy meself.  I mean to
amoose meself with the trial o' that black thief Morley Jones."

Dick Moy resumed his work with a grunt, and said that Jerry was a lucky
fellow to be so long on sick-leave, and Jack said he wished he had been
called up as a witness in Jones's case, for he would have cut a better
figure than Jim Welton did.

"Ay, boy," said Dick Moy, "but there wos a reason for that.  You know
the poor feller is in love wi' Jones's daughter, an' he didn't like for
to help to convict his own father-in-law _to be_, d'ye see?  That's
where it is.  The boy Billy Towler was a'most as bad.  He's got a
weakness for the gal too, an' no wonder, for she's bin as good as a
mother to 'im.  They say that Billy nigh broke the hearts o' the
lawyers, he wos so stoopid at sometimes, an' so oncommon cute at others.
But it warn't o' no use.  Jim's father was strong in his evidence agin
him, an' that Mr Larks, as comed aboard of the Gull, you remember, he
had been watching an' ferreting about the matter to that extent that he
turned Jones's former life inside out.  It seems he's bin up to dodges
o' that kind for a long time past."

"No! has he?" said Jack Shales.

"Arrah, didn't ye read of it?" exclaimed Jerry MacGowl.

"No," replied Jack drily; "not bein' on the sick-list I han't got time
to read the papers, d'ye see?"

"Well," resumed Dick Moy, "it seems he has more than once set fire to
his premises in Gravesend, and got the insurance money.  Hows'ever, he
has got fourteen years' transportation now, an' that'll take the shine
pretty well out of him before he comes back."

"How did the poor gal take it?" asked Jack.

Dick replied that she was very bad at first, but that she got somewhat
