beach had moderated when we reached it.

As we sighted the jetty we could see lights moving and hear a distant
shout, which was answered by a ringing cheer from our men, in which Jack
and I and the eighteen Germans and the two women joined.  What a cheer
it was!  At the jetty-head we could see a large crowd waiting to receive
us, and as we passed a stentorian voice shouted, "Ahoy!  Have you got
them two boys on board?"

"Ay, ay!" cried the coxswain; "safe and sound--the rascals!"

Rascals, indeed!  As we clambered up the ladder, scarcely believing that
we touched _terra firma_ once more, and found our poor old grandfather
almost beside himself with joy and excitement at the top, we considered
we deserved the title.

"Thank God you're safe!" he cried, when at last he had us before a
blazing fire and a hot breakfast in his dining-room.  "Thank God, you
rascals!"

We had done so long ago, and did it again and again, and thanked Him,
not only for ourselves, but for the brave old "Dreadnought" too, so true
to her name and the work she had done that night.

Before we went to bed Jack said, "Same to you, Tom."  I knew what he
meant.  I had wished him a "Merry Christmas" at five minutes past twelve
that morning, and this was his answer six hours after.  What a lot may
happen in six hours!



CHAPTER THIRTY SIX.

HANNIBAL TROTTER THE HERO--A CHAPTER OF AUTOBIOGRAPHY.

We know that it always is, or should be, embarrassing to a hero to
recite the history of his own exploits.  So if this simple narrative
strikes the reader as defective, he must excuse it for that reason.  For
I am in this painful position, that as no one else will recount my
adventures for me, I have nothing left but to do it myself.  It has
surprised me often that it should be so, for there have been times when
I have even pictured myself reading the twentieth edition of my own
memoirs, and the reviews of the Press on the same.  I am not offended,
however, but I am sorry, for it would have been good reading.

Without appearing immodest, may I say that the reader has really no idea
what a hero the world has possessed in the person of me, Hannibal
Trotter?  It has been my misfortune never to be anything else.  How
often have I sighed for an unheroic half-hour!

I was born a hero.  Glory marked me for her own from the first hour of
my career.  I wish she had let me alone.  Had I captured a city, or
rescued a ship's crew, I could not have been made more of than I was for
the simple exploit of being a baby.  Nobody else was thought of beside
me; everybody conspired to do me honour.  A fictitious glory settled
upon me then, from which I have never escaped.  They called me Hannibal.
I was not consulted, or I should have opposed the name.  It confirmed
me in a false position.  There was no chance of not being a hero with
such a name, and I was in for it literally before I knew where I was.

The day I first walked, General Havelock was a fool to me.  I must have
been eighteen months at the time, but when the word went forth,
"Hannibal walks!"  I was simply deafened by the applause which greeted
my feat.  It wasn't much better when, at the very unprecocious age of
two, I gave vent to an inarticulate utterance which, among those who
ought to have known better, passed for speech.  I assure you, reader,
for the next few months I had the whole family hanging on my lips.  How
would you like your whole family hanging on your lips?  But then you
weren't born a hero.

Well, it went on.  My infancy was one sickening round of glory.  Did I
build a house of bricks four courses high?  Archimedes wasn't in it with
me.  Did I sing a nursery rhyme to a tune all one note?  Apollo was a
dabbler in music beside me.  Did one of my first teeth drop out without
my knowing it?  Casabianca on the burning deck couldn't touch me for
fortitude.  Did I once and again chance to tell the truth?  Latimer,
Ridley, George Washington, and Euclid might retire into private life at
once, and never be heard of again!

It was a terrific _role_ to have to keep up, and as I gradually emerged
from frocks into trousers, and from an easy-going infancy into an
anxious boyhood, the true nature of my affliction began to dawn upon me.
Hannibal Trotter, through no choice of his own, and yet by the
undoubted ordering of Fate, was a hero, and he must act as such.  He
must, in fact, keep it up or give it up; and a fellow cannot lightly
give up the only _role_ he has.

In due time, after heroic efforts, I was, at about the age of ten, able
to read to myself, and my attention was at once directed to a class of
stories congenial to my reputation.  It would hardly be fair to inflict
upon the patient reader a digest of my studies, but the one impression
they left upon my mind was that a young man, if he is to be worth the
name, must on every possible occasion both be a hero and show it.

This conclusion rather distressed me; for while the first condition was
easy and natural enough, the second was no joke.  I knew I was a hero; I
could not doubt it, for I had been brought up to the business, and to
question it would be to question the veracity of every relative I had.
But try all I would I couldn't manage to show it.

After a considerable amount of patient study, my conceptions of a hero
had resolved themselves into several leading ideas, which it may be of
use to the reader if I repeat here:--

1.  He must save one life or more from drowning.

2.  He must stop runaway horses.

3.  He must rescue people from burning houses.

4.  He must pull some one from under the wheels of a train.

5.  He must encounter and slay a mad dog in single combat.

6.  He must capture a burglar; and 7.  He must interpose his body
between the pistol of the assassin and the person of some individual of
consequence.

In my researches I had collected a mass of information under each of
these heads, and was perfectly acquainted with what was becoming in a
hero in each emergency.

But, as I have said, try all I would the chance never came.

I was full of hopes when we went to the seaside that emergency number
one at least might make an opening for me.  I spent hours every morning
on the beach watching the bathers, and longing to hear the welcome shout
of distress.  I sat with my boots unlaced and my coat ready to fling off
at a moment's notice.  I tempted my sisters to go and bathe where the
shore shelved rapidly and the ebb washed back strongly.  They went, and
to my chagrin were delighted with the place, and learned to swim better
than I could.

There was a man who went out every morning to bathe from a boat.  I was
always at the pier-head watching him, but he went into the water and
scrambled out of it again over the stern of the boat with ruthless
regularity, and quite mistook my interest in him for admiration, which
was the very last sentiment I harboured.

Once I made sure my chance had come.  It was a warm day, and the shore
was crowded.  Most of the people had finished bathing, and were spread
about the sands drying their back hair and reading their papers.  One
adventurous bather, however, remained in the water.  I had anxiously
watched him swim round the pier-head and back, ready--longing--to see
him cast his hands above his head and hang out other signals of
distress.  But it seemed I was again to be disappointed.  He came in
swimming easily, and mightily pleased with himself and his performance.
He was about twenty yards off his machine and I was beginning to give
him up, when to my delight I saw his hands go up and his head go down,
and heard what I fondly hoped was a yell of despair.

In a moment--two moments, I should say, for one of my boots was not
quite enough unlaced--I was floundering in the water in my flannel shirt
and trousers, striking out wildly for the spot where he had disappeared.
I had gathered from the authorities I had consulted that heroes, under
these circumstances, got over distances in a shorter time than it takes
to record it.  This was not my experience.  It took me a long time to
get half the way, and by that time my clothes were very heavy and I was
very tired.  Moreover, my man was still invisible.

Of course I could not turn back.  Even if I did not succeed in fishing
him out, it was a "gallant attempt," which would be almost as good.
Partly to see how the crowd was taking it, and partly to rest myself, I
turned over on my back and floated.  This do doubt was a tactical error;
for as a rule a hero does not float out to save any one's life.  In my
case it did not much matter, for the first thing I perceived as I turned
was my drowning man's head bobbing up merrily between me and the shore,
having enjoyed his long dive and wholly unaware of the "gallant attempt"
which was being made to rescue him from a watery grave.

As he caught sight of me, however, floundering on my back, and scarcely
able to keep my head up for the weight of my clothes, his face became
alarmed.  "Hold up a second!" he shouted.  Half a dozen strong strokes
brought him to my side, and before I could explain or decline, he had
gripped me by the two shoulders and was punting me ignominiously towards
the shore.

It was a painful situation for me; the more so that I was quite done up
and scarcely able to stagger out of the water into the arms of my
affrighted relatives.

"Lay him on his back and work his arms up and down till you get all the
water out of him, and then put him between hot blankets," cried my
preserver, "and he'll be all serene.  They ought to make a shallow place
somewhere for these kids to bathe, where they won't get out of their
depths.  Bless you, ma'am," added he, in reply to my mother's thanks,
"it's not worth talking of.  It all comes in a day's work, and you're
very welcome."

I was rather glad to leave the seaside after that; and whenever in the
course of my future readings I came upon any further reference to
emergency number one, I discreetly passed it over.

But hope springs eternal in the human breast, and the resources of
heroism were by no means exhausted.

The drowning business had missed fire.  I would go into the runaway-
horse line, and try how that would stand me for glory.

So after a careful study of the theory of the art from my books, I took
to haunting Rotten Row in my leisure hours with a view to business.  I
must confess that it is far easier to stop a runaway horse on paper than
on a gravel drive.  I speculated, as one or two specially reckless
riders dashed past me, on what the chance would be of making a spring at
the bridle of a horse going half as fast again as theirs, and bringing
him gracefully on to his knees.  I didn't like the idea.  And yet had
not a fellow done it in one of Kingsley's novels, and another in one of
Lever's?

At last I screwed myself up to it.  I had worked the thing out
carefully, and arranged my spring and everything.  But I was unlucky
again when the time came.

I remember the occasion well--painfully well.  It was a bright May
afternoon.  I had given the carriages up as hopeless--they drove far too
soberly--and was taking a forlorn glance up and down the ride at the
equestrians, when I perceived a youth approach on a very dashing animal,
which, if it was not bolting, was sailing remarkably close to the wind
in that direction.  The ride was pretty clear, and the few seconds I had
in which to make up my mind were enough for me.  I heard some one say
close beside me, "He'll be chucked!"

Instantly I dived under the rail and dashed out into the road.  There
was a shout and a yell, and the young gentleman had to pull his mare up
on her haunches to avoid riding me down.  Before I could act under these
circumstances a mounted policeman dashed up, and collaring me by the
coat, swung me along beside him a yard or two, and then, with a box on
the ears, pitched me back in among the crowd.

I should have liked to explain, but he did not give me time.

"Young fool!" said one of the crowd; "you might have killed him.  Do you
know who that was?"

"Who?"  I gasped, for I was out of breath.  "That young man who--"

"Yes--that young man's the Prince of Wales."

It's twenty-six years ago since it happened, and probably the King has
forgotten the adventure.  I haven't.  I retired from the runaway-horse
business that very afternoon.

Another door was shut against me.  Still there were others left, and the
house-on-fire line had a good deal to recommend it.  It was a thing in
which one could not well make a mistake.  It had been possible, as I had
found out by painful experience, to mistake the pranks of a lively
swimmer for drowning, and the capers of a lively mare for bolting.  But
there was no mistaking a house on fire when you saw one.  People in a
burning house, moreover, would be likely to give every facility possible
for their own rescue, and the chances were one would not find many
competitors to deprive one of the glory.  On the whole, I warmed up to
this new opening considerably.

Of course one never has the good fortune to have a fire in one's own
house when it is wanted.  It would have been exceedingly convenient for
me to have to rescue my own family from the flames.  As it was, I had to
spend a good many dreary nights in the street in the neighbourhood of
the fire alarms before I so much as smelt fire.

It was a good one when it came.  A great warehouse in the City was
gutted, and those who saw the blaze are not likely to forget it in a
hurry.  I saw it.  I had scampered with all my might after one of the
engines, but only to find a dense crowd on the spot before me.  There
was a wide circle kept round the place, and never did circus-goers fight
for a front row in the gallery as did that crowd fight for a front place
at this grand show.

It was nearly an hour before, by dint of squeezing, sneaking, fighting,
and beseeching, I could get to the front.  By that time the fire had
done its worst.  Still I had noted with satisfaction that no fire-
escapes had yet been brought up, so that any unfortunate inmates were
sure to be still safe for me.  The firemen were playing on the flames
with their hoses, and every now and then an alarm of a tottering wall
sent them flying back to a safe distance.  It was a grand opportunity
for me to brave these poltroons on their own ground, and show them how a
hero behaves at a fire.

So I took advantage of a policeman turning another way, to break bounds
and run into the open space.

"Come back!" shouted the policeman.

"Come back!" yelled the mob.

"Mind the wall!" cried a fireman.

I was delighted, and already glowed with glory.

Alas! how soon our brightest hopes may be damped!

The fireman, seeing that I still advanced on the burning ruin, wheeled
round on me with his hose, and before I could count five had drenched me
through and through, and half-stunned me with the force of the water
into the bargain.

The crowd screamed with laughter; the police seized me by all fours; the
fireman executed a final solo on my retreating person, and the next
thing I was aware of was being delivered at my own door from a four-
wheeled cab, with my interest in conflagrations completely extinguished.

My faith in the history of heroism began to be a trifle shaken after
this adventure.  However, I was committed to a course of gallant action;
and it were cowardice to lose heart after a rebuff or two.  I must at
any rate try my hand at a railway rescue before giving in.

In my studies I had only met with one successful case of extracting
individuals from between the wheels of locomotives in motion, and
therefore entered upon this branch of my experiments with considerable
doubt.  Nor did anything occur to remove that doubt.  I watched the
trains carefully for a month; and whenever I saw any one place himself
near the edge of the platform as a train came up, I made a point of
placing myself hard by.  But we never got beyond the platform; and,
indeed, the whole course of my experiments in this department resulted
in nothing beyond my one day being knocked down by the unexpected
opening of a carriage door; and on another occasion being nearly placed
under arrest for clutching a man's arm as the train came up, he said
with intent "to chuck him on the line," but as I told him, and
unsuccessfully tried to explain to him, because he seemed to me to be
about to be swept over by the engine.

It was on the whole a relief to me, when, in order to extricate myself
from the serious consequences of this last adventure, I was obliged to
promise never to do such a thing again.  That settled the locomotive
business.  As a man of honour I was forced to quit it, and cast about me
for a new road to glory.

Now, I think it argues considerably for my heroism that after the
unfortunate result of so many adventures I should still persist in
keeping up my struggle after Fame.  I might fairly have given her up
after the honest endeavours I had made to win her.  But, whatever others
might do, as long as a chance remained everything combined to keep
Hannibal Trotter at his post.

So, with not a little searching of heart, I turned my attention to mad
dogs.  I must confess that my heart did not go out towards them, and I
could have wished that that mark of heroism had been omitted by the
authorities.  But, on the contrary, it was insisted upon vehemently, and
there was no getting out of it.  So, like another Perseus, I choked down
my emotion and girded myself for the new fray.

I knew the authorities, as a rule, were silent as to any precautions
which their heroes may have taken for this particular service.  Still,
as they said nothing against it, I did the best I could by means of my
unaided genius.

I contrived a pair of secret zinc leggings to wear under my trousers.
They hurt me, it is true, and impeded my movements; still, I felt pretty
safe in them.  I also adopted the habit of wearing stout leather
driving-gloves on every occasion, besides concealing an effective life-
preserver about my person.  Nothing, in short, was wanted to complete my
equipment but the mad dog; and he never turned up.

One day I saw by the paper that there was one at large in Hackney, and
thither I repaired, in greaves and gauntlets, with my life-preserver in
my bosom.  But though I met many dogs, they were all of them sane.  Not
one of them foamed at the mouth or looked out of the corner of his eyes.

There was one collie certainly who appeared to me more excited than the
rest, and who by his proceedings seemed to menace the safety of a small
group of children who were taking their walks abroad with their nurse.
Not to be precipitate, I watched him for some time, to make quite sure I
was right.  Then, when one of the children uttered a scream, I felt my
hour was come.  So I drew my life-preserver and advanced boldly to the
rescue.  At the sight of me in this threatening attitude the children
and nurse all set up a scream together, and the dog, showing his teeth
and uttering a low growl, caught me by the fleshy part of my leg above
the zinc and held me there until his little masters and mistresses,
having recovered their wits and heard my scarcely articulate
explanations, called him off, and allowed me to go in peace--I might
almost say in pieces.

I was a good deal discouraged after this unfortunate affair, and might
have postponed indefinitely my further experiments, had not fortune
unexpectedly placed in my way what appeared to be an opportunity of
dealing with a burglar after the most approved fashion of heroism.  I
was on a visit to an uncle who lived in rather a grand house at
Bayswater, and kept up what people are wont to call a good deal of
style.  This "style" always rather depressed me, for it left me no
opening for distinguishing myself on the heroic side of my character,
and after a week I was beginning to get home-sick, when a curious
incident occurred to break the monotony of my visit.

I was put to sleep in a sort of dressing-room immediately over the
drawing-room, and here one night--or rather one dark winter morning--I
was suddenly awakened by the sound of voices in the room below.  I lay,
as people are apt to lie under such circumstances, stiff and still for
five minutes, listening with all my ears.  There came into my mind while
thus occupied all that the authorities had said in reference to
burglars; and when, after a lapse of five minutes, the voices again
became audible, I knew exactly what was expected of me.

I looked at my watch.  Five o'clock.  I was certain it could not be the
servants; besides, even through the floor I could tell the voices were
male.  I glided from my couch, and pulled on my nether garments, and
