half-wild, but good and true and noble."

"I like women of that sort," said little Agnes, in a fervor of
enthusiasm.

"And that is what your own Irene will be, provided that you do not give
her up."

"I give her up?" said little Agnes. "But I never will."

"You gave her up to-night when you refused to sleep in the room with
her. She is in my room now, trembling all over, terrified, grieved,
amazed. Oh, Aggie, why did you do it?"

"I was frightened," whispered Agnes. "I suppose I am a coward."

"You certainly are a very great coward, and I am surprised at you, for
Irene would no more hurt you than a mother would her own little child.
You have got to come back to her in my arms, and you have got to tell
her that you love her more than ever, and that you trust her more than
ever. Now, will you or will you not? If you will not, I believe that all
our efforts will be fruitless, and Irene will become just as bad as
ever. But if you do, you will have done a brave and noble act. You are
not a coward, Agnes; you are a girl with a good deal of character, when
all is said and done, and you ought to exercise it now for your friend.
Just think what she has done for you. Think what she has done for your
sister, and"----

"It was to Emmie that she gave the awful wood-lice," said Agnes.

"She did it as an ignorant girl, not in the least knowing the danger and
the naughtiness of her own trick. I do not pretend to defend her; but
she would not do such a thing now to anybody, and certainly not to you.
And yet, because you hear a few bad stories about her, you give up the
girl who has sheltered and loved and petted you; who has influenced Lady
Jane to make your brother a gentleman, not a shopman; who will help you
all through your life, as you, darling, are helping her. Oh! I know you
are a little girl, and cannot understand perhaps all that I say; but if
you give Irene up to-night I shall be in despair."

Tears came to Rosamund's bright eyes. She sat quite still, looking at
the child.

"I won't give her up! I won't be frightened at all. I will run back to
her now."

"There's a darling! Go this very second. Where are your slippers? Here
is your little blue dressing-gown. You will find her in my room. I won't
go back for a minute or two, for I will explain to Frosty. Now, off with
you, and remember that I am close to you; but you needn't even think of
that, for Irene herself would fight the fiercest and most savage
creature to shield and protect you, little Agnes."

It seemed to little Agnes as Rosamund spoke that the terrors that Lucy's
words had inspired rolled away as though they had never existed. The
brightness came back to her pretty dark eyes. She put her small feet
into her little felt slippers, wrapped herself round with her little
blue dressing-gown, and ran down the corridor. It was too late for any
of the girls to be up, and the corridor was deserted. Lucy had gone to
bed, to wrestle and cry and wonder by what possible means she could
revenge herself on Rosamund Cunliffe.

Irene was sitting in Rosamund's room, feeling more and more that wild
living thing inside her--that wild thing that would not be subdued, that
would rise up and urge her to desperate actions. Then all of a sudden
there came the patter of small feet, and those feet stopped, not at
Rosamund's door, but at her own. It was opened and a little face peeped
in. Irene, in Rosamund's room, could not see the face, but she heard the
sound, and her heart seemed to stand still. She rose softly, opened the
door of communication between the two rooms, and peeped in.

With a cry, Agnes flew to her side.

"Oh, Irene! I have come back. I couldn't sleep in Frosty's bed. I
thought--I did think--oh, don't ask me any questions! Just let me sleep
with you to-night. And oh, Irene, don't be angry with me!"

"I angry with you?" said Irene, melted on the spot. "No, I won't ask a
single question, you sweet, you dear, you treasure! Yes, we will sleep
together. Yes, little Agnes, I love you with all my heart for ever and
for ever."




CHAPTER XXV.

REVENGE.


After this incident there was peace in the school for some time; Lucy
was defeated. Agnes was more Irene's chosen chum and adored little
friend than ever. The child seemed to have completely lost her terrors,
and she gave Miss Frost rather less than more of her society. Rosamund
watched in silent trepidation. If only Lucy would not interfere! But she
did not trust Lucy, nor did she trust another girl in the school,
Phyllis Flower, who--small, thin, plain, but clever--had suddenly become
Lucy's right-hand. At first Phyllis had rather shrunk away from Lucy,
but now she was invariably with her. They talked a good deal, and in low
tones, as though they had a great many secrets which they shared each
with the other. On one occasion, towards mid-term, when all the girls
had settled comfortably to their tasks and life seemed smooth and
harmonious once more, even Irene being no longer regarded with dislike
and terror by the rest of the girls, Lucy Merriman and Phyllis Flower
took a walk together.

"I am very glad we have this chance of being alone," said Lucy, "for I
want to speak to you."

"What do you want to say?" asked Phyllis. She was flattered by Lucy's
confidence, for some of the girls admired this prim though rather
handsome girl very much. Besides, was she not the daughter of their own
master and mistress? Had she not a sort of position in the school which
the rest of them would have envied a good deal? Lucy was beginning to
exercise her power in more than one direction, and she and Rosamund
between them really headed two parties in the small school. Of course,
Phyllis Flower belonged altogether to Lucy's party.

"Well, what is it?" she said. "What do you want to say to me?"

"It is this," said Lucy. "I am quite determined to have my revenge on
that horrid Rosamund and that odious Irene."

"I wish you wouldn't think so much about them. They are quite happy now,
and don't do anybody any special harm."

"But that is just it. Rosamund ought never to have been readmitted to
the school, and Irene is not the sort of girl who should have come
here."

"Well, she seems a very nice sort--not that I know much about her."

"You had better not say that again in my presence, Phyllis--that is, if
you wish me to remain your friend."

"Then I won't, dear," said Phyllis, "for certainly I do wish you to be
my friend."

"I hate Irene," said Lucy, "and I hate Rosamund, and I hate that little
sneak Agnes Frost, who tries to worm herself into everybody's good
favor."

"Oh, no, she doesn't! She thinks of no one in all the world but Irene."

"I am surprised at that," said Lucy. "I imagined I had put a spoke in
that wheel. I was very much amazed when I saw them thicker than ever the
very next day. She is the sort of child who would tell tales out of
school. I know the sort--detestable! She is a little pitcher with long
ears. She is all that is vulgar and second-rate."

"Perhaps she is," said Phyllis, "although I never thought so. I thought
her a pretty, sweet little creature. I think she is really fond of
Irene, and Irene is sincerely devoted to her."

"Well, Phyllis, I will confide in you. A few weeks ago, when Rosamund
and Irene took themselves off to The Follies to spend the afternoon, I
took the opportunity of having a chat with little Miss Agnes Frost, and
there and then I enlightened her with regard to certain stories which I
knew for a fact to be true. I can tell you I frightened her a good bit.
She is rather timid--I never knew any one more so. Her face got as white
as death. Of course, I told her she was not to tell any one, but I
didn't greatly care. I know for a fact she was nervous for the rest of
the day, and that evening she asked poor old Frosty to let her sleep in
her bed."

"But she didn't sleep with her, all the same," said Phyllis, "for I
happened to see her running back to her own room quite late, after the
rest of us were supposed to be in bed. And the next day she was greater
friends than ever with Irene."

"What a nuisance things are!" said Lucy. "But now I am absolutely
determined to punish Irene and Rosamund in the only way in which I can
punish them. Rosamund is conceited enough to believe that she has made a
reformation in Irene's character. I know better. I know that Irene is a
perfectly horrid girl. If you could only have heard Miss Carter talk
about her when she first went to the Singletons'! And we had a servant
once from their house, and she told us some most ghastly tales. It is
impossible to suppose for a second that Irene is a nice girl; but
between Rosamund--who, I must own, is very plucky--and this mite Agnes,
who is devoted to her, she is quite quiet and amenable, and she is no
doubt passionately fond of that stupid, inane little Agnes. Now, I mean
to get Agnes from her. You must help me, Phyllis. How are we to manage
it?"

"It seems hardly worth while," said Phyllis.

"All right, Phyllis, you can please yourself. There are others who would
help me--Agnes Sparkes, for instance."

"Oh! if you must have some one, I am quite as good as another," said
Phyllis Flower.

"Well, you know that promise of mine that we should go to London
together. My dear aunt, Mrs. Brett, is going to town, and she says that
she will take me and any special friend I like as my companion, and she
will show me all over the place: the Tower, the Houses of Parliament,
and Westminster Abbey, and St. Paul's, and all the rest. And I mean to
go to a theatre. Were you ever at a really big theatre in the whole
course of your life, Phyllis?"

"Never," said Phyllis, "for you know I have lived all my life in the
country."

"Well, you can't possibly imagine what it is like: the dresses and the
lights, and the actors and the stage effects, as they call them, and the
way the people talk--it moves you so. I went once, and I cried two
handkerchiefs into wet mops, and I could have cried into a third, only I
didn't happen to have it. Oh, it was lovely!"

"It seems to be rather melancholy from your description," said Phyllis.

"Oh! it is the sort of melancholy that you can enjoy," said Lucy. "At
least I enjoyed it, and I am a very matter-of-fact girl. But there, we
can go to a laughing theatre. Some theatres make you laugh so much that
you can scarcely stop. You get almost into hysterics. Anyhow, I mean to
go, because Aunt Susan has promised to take me, either to a merry or a
sad play. And then you are fond of music. I dare say I could squeeze in
a concert. Think of a whole week, and not a penny to come out of your
pocket; for Aunt Susan has a little sum put by, and she means to give
me and whichever of my school-fellows I like best a real treat. So now
you understand."

"Yes, I understand," said Phyllis.

"But you must help me to effect my object. I mean to part those two
girls--that ridiculous little Agnes and that hated Irene. I mean to part
them thoroughly."

"But I don't see how you can do it."

"Oh, don't you? I have thought of several ways. You know what a passion
Irene has for all sorts of creatures--newts and toads and frogs. Well, I
can also have a similar passion for those creatures. Anyhow, I have
half-a-crown in my pocket, and I mean to----But there--the others are
following us. Do let us talk in whispers. We needn't do it quite yet,
but we will do it in about a week's time; and then there'll be a great
rumpus, and most likely Irene will be expelled. Agnes can stay or not as
she likes. She is quite a timid little thing, and I only want to
separate her from Irene, and I want to prove to that horrid Rosamund
that she is wrong and I am right. That's all. You can help me, and we
will go to London afterwards. But please yourself."

"Let me think it over," said Phyllis. "Of course, I'd just love to go to
London with you. It seems too interesting for anything; but"----

"There is generally something to be put up with when great pleasure is
to be obtained," said Lucy. "I never had such a chance as this before,
and I can give it to any one else. There is Annie Millar, or Agnes
Sparkes--either of them would jump at it; or one of the Singleton girls.
As to poor Jane Denton--but she is not at the school at present; and
Laura Everett has plenty of fun of her own. I offer it to you now,
provided you will help me."

"I suppose I must; but will you give me a day to think over it?"

"Yes, think it over; think what it means. You will have to be my
confederate in this matter. It is just a little game I mean to play, and
I think I shall play it so effectually that there will be no more
friendship between pretty Agnes Frost and Irene Ashleigh."




CHAPTER XXVI.

IN ROSAMUND'S BOWER.


The days flew by, and apparently all was harmonious in the little
school. Agnes clung more closely than ever to Irene. Irene had
considerably altered. She was no longer specially wild. She was so much
absorbed in watching Agnes, in seeing that no one else put in any claim
with regard to this small girl, that she had no time to think of being
mischievous. Besides, she had her lessons to attend to; and lessons
under Miss Archer, and Mademoiselle Omont, and, still more, under the
different masters who attended to the school, were of the most
stimulating character. The child seemed to imbibe knowledge with a
rapidity which astonished all those who watched her. She understood the
meaning of a thing at a glance, and it was soon perceived that, in
addition to her extraordinary and very remarkable beauty, she was also a
genius, or almost that, for she had a natural talent for all sorts of
things: for music, which she could already play impromptu, bringing out
wild melodies on the piano to which her hearers felt they could go on
listening for ever. Of course, the mistresses were supposed not to
approve of this sort of playing, and tried to tie Irene down to the
usual exercises and the different methods for bringing strength to the
fingers. Irene did attend to these lessons, but only in a sort of
half-hearted way; soon she broke again into those wild melodies which
seemed to pierce the heart and get more or less to the soul of the
little performer.

The Singleton girls were often now spending a day or half a day at the
Merrimans' school, and Irene and all her companions would also
frequently spend an afternoon at the Rectory. People had ceased to be
afraid of Irene. She was now like an ordinary child. It was quite true
that those who watched her narrowly still saw that wild glance in her
eyes, which could be easily excited; but then, Rosamund was near to
subdue if the moment came, and little Agnes's affectionate touch on her
arm had always the power to comfort and soothe her.

"Aggie," she said to the little girl one day, "I don't know how I lived
without you. I used to make pets of my poor leeches."

"Leeches!" said Agnes, with a shudder.

"Yes, darling. You know that dreadful story that was told you. Well, of
course it was true--quite true. But then I had no friends, and so I had
Fuzz and Buzz, and Thunder and Lightning, and the little Stars. Oh! it
used to be great fun to watch them, and to think how I could terrify
people by them."

"But," said little Agnes, "it was very cruel, wasn't it?"

"I suppose it was, Agnes. Only I wanted the magical influence of love
like yours to take the cruelty out of my heart, to smooth down all the
rough edges, and to make me feel like an ordinary girl. I feel like an
ordinary girl now in many ways, except that I could never give you up,
Agnes."

"And I couldn't give you up, Irene. I told dear Emily so the other day."

"She didn't want you to, did she?" said Irene, with sudden fierceness.

"Oh no; but she did ask me what I found in you to make you more precious
than any other girl in the school, and I said"----

"What did you say? Look me in the face, Agnes."

Agnes looked up with her melting, loving eyes.

"I said that somehow or other I loved you, and I did not love the
others."

"Ah! there you struck the nail on the head," said Irene. "Look here,
Agnes; if anything happened to divide us I'd get worse than ever;
because, you see, I am cleverer than I used to be."

"Nothing can come to divide us," said little Agnes. "What could?"

"I am only saving that if anything did I'd be worse than ever."

"I wish you wouldn't talk like that."

"I can't help it sometimes, for I am--yes, I am--much cleverer now."

This little conversation took place in a small arbor at the Rectory; and
just at this moment some one called Agnes, and Agnes, looking for
permission at Irene, who nodded in reply, ran off. A moment later Miss
Carter herself entered the bower, where Irene was still sitting.

"So you are not afraid of me now, Cartery dear," said Irene, speaking in
the sort of tone which she supposed Maud Singleton adopted.

"No, I am not afraid of you. You are much altered. I came to say how
much I admire you. In short, you are not the same girl you used to be."

"Well, it is owing to two influences," said Irene: "to Rosamund, who is
so strong and brave, and took me in hand, and showed me myself, and did
not express a scrap of fright, however much terror I tried to inspire
her with; and it is owing also to even a stronger influence."

"And what is that?" said Miss Carter.

"Well, you see, there is that little thing--that darling--I can scarcely
speak her name without trembling. I love her so much. She is like my own
little child."

"Do you mean little Agnes Frost?"

"Oh yes. She is nothing to the rest of you. I do not wish her to be.
She is all--all mine; and if anything happened to her, if she were taken
from me, if I had to do without her, I should become worse than ever."
