
"You haven't been using him well," said Mr. Raymond.

"I must say," returned Joseph, throwing an arm round his horse's neck,
"that the remark had better have been spared, sir. The horse is worth
three of the other now."

"I don't think so. I think they make a very nice pair. If the one's too
fat, the other's too lean--so that's all right. And if you won't buy my
Ruby, I must buy your Diamond."

"Thank you, sir," said Joseph, in a tone implying anything but thanks.

"You don't seem to like the proposal," said Mr. Raymond.

"I don't," returned Joseph. "I wouldn't part with my old Diamond for his
skin as full of nuggets as it is of bones."

"Who said anything about parting with him?"

"You did now, sir."

"No; I didn't. I only spoke of buying him to make a pair with Ruby. We
could pare Ruby and patch Diamond a bit. And for height, they are as
near a match as I care about. Of course you would be the coachman--if
only you would consent to be reconciled to Ruby."

Joseph stood bewildered, unable to answer.

"I've bought a small place in Kent," continued Mr. Raymond, "and I must
have a pair to my carriage, for the roads are hilly thereabouts. I don't
want to make a show with a pair of high-steppers. I think these will
just do. Suppose, for a week or two, you set yourself to take Ruby down
and bring Diamond up. If we could only lay a pipe from Ruby's sides into
Diamond's, it would be the work of a moment. But I fear that wouldn't
answer."

A strong inclination to laugh intruded upon Joseph's inclination to cry,
and made speech still harder than before.

"I beg your pardon, sir," he said at length. "I've been so miserable,
and for so long, that I never thought you was only a chaffing of me
when you said I hadn't used the horses well. I did grumble at you, sir,
many's the time in my trouble; but whenever I said anything, my little
Diamond would look at me with a smile, as much as to say: 'I know him
better than you, father;' and upon my word, I always thought the boy
must be right."

"Will you sell me old Diamond, then?"

"I will, sir, on one condition--that if ever you want to part with him
or me, you give me the option of buying him. I could not part with him,
sir. As to who calls him his, that's nothing; for, as Diamond says, it's
only loving a thing that can make it yours--and I do love old Diamond,
sir, dearly."

"Well, there's a cheque for twenty pounds, which I wrote to offer you
for him, in case I should find you had done the handsome thing by Ruby.
Will that be enough?"

"It's too much, sir. His body ain't worth it--shoes and all. It's only
his heart, sir--that's worth millions--but his heart'll be mine all the
same--so it's too much, sir."

"I don't think so. It won't be, at least, by the time we've got him
fed up again. You take it and welcome. Just go on with your cabbing for
another month, only take it out of Ruby and let Diamond rest; and by
that time I shall be ready for you to go down into the country."

"Thank you, sir, thank you. Diamond set you down for a friend, sir, the
moment he saw you. I do believe that child of mine knows more than other
people."

"I think so, too," said Mr. Raymond as he walked away.

He had meant to test Joseph when he made the bargain about Ruby, but had
no intention of so greatly prolonging the trial. He had been taken ill
in Switzerland, and had been quite unable to return sooner. He went away
now highly gratified at finding that he had stood the test, and was a
true man.

Joseph rushed in to his wife who had been standing at the window
anxiously waiting the result of the long colloquy. When she heard that
the horses were to go together in double harness, she burst forth into
an immoderate fit of laughter. Diamond came up with the baby in his arms
and made big anxious eyes at her, saying--

"What is the matter with you, mother dear? Do cry a little. It will do
you good. When father takes ever so small a drop of spirits, he puts
water to it."

"You silly darling!" said his mother; "how could I but laugh at the
notion of that great fat Ruby going side by side with our poor old
Diamond?"

"But why not, mother? With a month's oats, and nothing to do, Diamond'll
be nearer Ruby's size than you will father's. I think it's very good for
different sorts to go together. Now Ruby will have a chance of teaching
Diamond better manners."

"How dare you say such a thing, Diamond?" said his father, angrily.
"To compare the two for manners, there's no comparison possible. Our
Diamond's a gentleman."

"I don't mean to say he isn't, father; for I daresay some gentlemen
judge their neighbours unjustly. That's all I mean. Diamond shouldn't
have thought such bad things of Ruby. He didn't try to make the best of
him."

"How do you know that, pray?"

"I heard them talking about it one night."

"Who?"

"Why Diamond and Ruby. Ruby's an angel."

Joseph stared and said no more. For all his new gladness, he was very
gloomy as he re-harnessed the angel, for he thought his darling Diamond
was going out of his mind.

He could not help thinking rather differently, however, when he found
the change that had come over Ruby. Considering his fat, he exerted
himself amazingly, and got over the ground with incredible speed. So
willing, even anxious, was he to go now, that Joseph had to hold him
quite tight.

Then as he laughed at his own fancies, a new fear came upon him lest the
horse should break his wind, and Mr. Raymond have good cause to think
he had not been using him well. He might even suppose that he had taken
advantage of his new instructions, to let out upon the horse some of his
pent-up dislike; whereas in truth, it had so utterly vanished that he
felt as if Ruby, too, had been his friend all the time.




CHAPTER XXXIV. IN THE COUNTRY


BEFORE the end of the month, Ruby had got respectably thin, and Diamond
respectably stout. They really began to look fit for double harness.

Joseph and his wife got their affairs in order, and everything ready for
migrating at the shortest notice; and they felt so peaceful and happy
that they judged all the trouble they had gone through well worth
enduring. As for Nanny, she had been so happy ever since she left the
hospital, that she expected nothing better, and saw nothing attractive
in the notion of the country. At the same time, she had not the least
idea of what the word country meant, for she had never seen anything
about her but streets and gas-lamps. Besides, she was more attached to
Jim than to Diamond: Jim was a reasonable being, Diamond in her eyes at
best only an amiable, over-grown baby, whom no amount of expostulation
would ever bring to talk sense, not to say think it. Now that she
could manage the baby as well as he, she judged herself altogether his
superior. Towards his father and mother, she was all they could wish.

Diamond had taken a great deal of pains and trouble to find Jim, and had
at last succeeded through the help of the tall policeman, who was glad
to renew his acquaintance with the strange child. Jim had moved his
quarters, and had not heard of Nanny's illness till some time after she
was taken to the hospital, where he was too shy to go and inquire about
her. But when at length she went to live with Diamond's family, Jim was
willing enough to go and see her. It was after one of his visits, during
which they had been talking of her new prospects, that Nanny expressed
to Diamond her opinion of the country.

"There ain't nothing in it but the sun and moon, Diamond."

"There's trees and flowers," said Diamond.

"Well, they ain't no count," returned Nanny.

"Ain't they? They're so beautiful, they make you happy to look at them."

"That's because you're such a silly."

Diamond smiled with a far-away look, as if he were gazing through clouds
of green leaves and the vision contented him. But he was thinking with
himself what more he could do for Nanny; and that same evening he went
to find Mr. Raymond, for he had heard that he had returned to town.

"Ah! how do you do, Diamond?" said Mr. Raymond; "I am glad to see you."

And he was indeed, for he had grown very fond of him. His opinion of him
was very different from Nanny's.

"What do you want now, my child?" he asked.

"I'm always wanting something, sir," answered Diamond.

"Well, that's quite right, so long as what you want is right. Everybody
is always wanting something; only we don't mention it in the right place
often enough. What is it now?"

"There's a friend of Nanny's, a lame boy, called Jim."

"I've heard of him," said Mr. Raymond. "Well?"

"Nanny doesn't care much about going to the country, sir."

"Well, what has that to do with Jim?"

"You couldn't find a corner for Jim to work in--could you, sir?"

"I don't know that I couldn't. That is, if you can show good reason for
it."

"He's a good boy, sir."

"Well, so much the better for him."

"I know he can shine boots, sir."

"So much the better for us."

"You want your boots shined in the country--don't you, sir?"

"Yes, to be sure."

"It wouldn't be nice to walk over the flowers with dirty boots--would
it, sir?"

"No, indeed."

"They wouldn't like it--would they?"

"No, they wouldn't."

"Then Nanny would be better pleased to go, sir."

"If the flowers didn't like dirty boots to walk over them, Nanny
wouldn't mind going to the country? Is that it? I don't quite see it."

"No, sir; I didn't mean that. I meant, if you would take Jim with you to
clean your boots, and do odd jobs, you know, sir, then Nanny would like
it better. She's so fond of Jim!"

"Now you come to the point, Diamond. I see what you mean, exactly. I
will turn it over in my mind. Could you bring Jim to see me?"

"I'll try, sir. But they don't mind me much. They think I'm silly,"
added Diamond, with one of his sweetest smiles.

What Mr. Raymond thought, I dare hardly attempt to put down here. But
one part of it was, that the highest wisdom must ever appear folly to
those who do not possess it.

"I think he would come though--after dark, you know," Diamond continued.
"He does well at shining boots. People's kind to lame boys, you know,
sir. But after dark, there ain't so much doing."

Diamond succeeded in bringing Jim to Mr. Raymond, and the consequence
was that he resolved to give the boy a chance. He provided new clothes
for both him and Nanny; and upon a certain day, Joseph took his wife and
three children, and Nanny and Jim, by train to a certain station in the
county of Kent, where they found a cart waiting to carry them and their
luggage to The Mound, which was the name of Mr. Raymond's new residence.
I will not describe the varied feelings of the party as they went, or
when they arrived. All I will say is, that Diamond, who is my only care,
was full of quiet delight--a gladness too deep to talk about.

Joseph returned to town the same night, and the next morning drove Ruby
and Diamond down, with the carriage behind them, and Mr. Raymond and a
lady in the carriage. For Mr. Raymond was an old bachelor no longer: he
was bringing his wife with him to live at The Mound. The moment Nanny
saw her, she recognised her as the lady who had lent her the ruby-ring.
That ring had been given her by Mr. Raymond.

The weather was very hot, and the woods very shadowy. There were not a
great many wild flowers, for it was getting well towards autumn, and the
most of the wild flowers rise early to be before the leaves, because
if they did not, they would never get a glimpse of the sun for them. So
they have their fun over, and are ready to go to bed again by the time
the trees are dressed. But there was plenty of the loveliest grass and
daisies about the house, and Diamond's chief pleasure seemed to be to
lie amongst them, and breathe the pure air. But all the time, he was
dreaming of the country at the back of the north wind, and trying to
recall the songs the river used to sing. For this was more like being at
the back of the north wind than anything he had known since he left it.
Sometimes he would have his little brother, sometimes his little sister,
and sometimes both of them in the grass with him, and then he felt just
like a cat with her first kittens, he said, only he couldn't purr--all
he could do was to sing.

These were very different times from those when he used to drive the
cab, but you must not suppose that Diamond was idle. He did not do so
much for his mother now, because Nanny occupied his former place; but
he helped his father still, both in the stable and the harness-room, and
generally went with him on the box that he might learn to drive a pair,
and be ready to open the carriage-door. Mr. Raymond advised his father
to give him plenty of liberty.

"A boy like that," he said, "ought not to be pushed."

Joseph assented heartily, smiling to himself at the idea of pushing
Diamond. After doing everything that fell to his share, the boy had a
wealth of time at his disposal. And a happy, sometimes a merry time it
was. Only for two months or so, he neither saw nor heard anything of
North Wind.




CHAPTER XXXV. I MAKE DIAMOND'S ACQUAINTANCE


MR. RAYMOND'S house was called The Mound, because it stood upon a little
steep knoll, so smooth and symmetrical that it showed itself at once to
be artificial. It had, beyond doubt, been built for Queen Elizabeth as a
hunting tower--a place, namely, from the top of which you could see the
country for miles on all sides, and so be able to follow with your eyes
the flying deer and the pursuing hounds and horsemen. The mound had been
cast up to give a good basement-advantage over the neighbouring heights
and woods. There was a great quarry-hole not far off, brim-full of
water, from which, as the current legend stated, the materials forming
the heart of the mound--a kind of stone unfit for building--had been
dug. The house itself was of brick, and they said the foundations were
first laid in the natural level, and then the stones and earth of the
mound were heaped about and between them, so that its great height
should be well buttressed.

Joseph and his wife lived in a little cottage a short way from the
house. It was a real cottage, with a roof of thick thatch, which, in
June and July, the wind sprinkled with the red and white petals it shook
from the loose topmost sprays of the rose-trees climbing the walls. At
first Diamond had a nest under this thatch--a pretty little room with
white muslin curtains, but afterwards Mr. and Mrs. Raymond wanted to
have him for a page in the house, and his father and mother were quite
pleased to have him employed without his leaving them. So he was dressed
in a suit of blue, from which his pale face and fair hair came out like
the loveliest blossom, and took up his abode in the house.

"Would you be afraid to sleep alone, Diamond?" asked his mistress.

"I don't know what you mean, ma'am," said Diamond. "I never was afraid
of anything that I can recollect--not much, at least."

"There's a little room at the top of the house--all alone," she
returned; "perhaps you would not mind sleeping there?"

"I can sleep anywhere, and I like best to be high up. Should I be able
to see out?"

"I will show you the place," she answered; and taking him by the hand,
she led him up and up the oval-winding stair in one of the two towers.

Near the top they entered a tiny little room, with two windows from
which you could see over the whole country. Diamond clapped his hands
with delight.

"You would like this room, then, Diamond?" said his mistress.

"It's the grandest room in the house," he answered. "I shall be near the
stars, and yet not far from the tops of the trees. That's just what I
like."

I daresay he thought, also, that it would be a nice place for North
Wind to call at in passing; but he said nothing of that sort. Below him
