sailed her," added Mr. Montague.

"It is worth a good deal to me in a business point of view; for I get a
job to build another yacht by it. The firm of Ramsay & Son can't afford
to have their boats beaten," laughed Donald. "Here comes Robert."

"I suppose he will not be satisfied with the Skylark, now that she has
been so thoroughly whipped," added the commodore's father.

"Perfectly satisfied with her, father. She is as good a boat as she ever
was," answered Robert, as he gave his hand to Donald. "You have won the
race fairly and handsomely, Don John; and I congratulate you upon your
success."

"I thank you, Bob; but I would rather have beaten any other fellow than
you," replied Donald.

"I can stand it as well as anybody."

The ladies and gentlemen on board of the Penobscot congratulated the
hero of the occasion, and condoled with the commodore, till the last of
the fleet arrived. The judges filled out the schedule with the corrected
time.

"Captain Rodman, of the Maud," said the chairman; and the owner of the
winning yacht stepped forward. "It appears from the schedule that you
have made the shortest time, and I have the pleasure of presenting to
you the first prize."

"Thank you, sir," replied Rodman, accepting the envelope, which
contained the prize of one hundred dollars; "but as it appears that
Donald Ramsay sailed the Maud, as well as built her, I shall have the
pleasure of presenting it to him."

A round of hearty applause followed this little speech, which ended in
three cheers for the captain of the Maud, and three more for her
builder.

"I can't take that," said Donald, declining to receive the envelope.

"But you must take it. I will hand you over to Mr. Deputy Sheriff
Beardsley, who, I see, is coming up the bay in the Juno."

"It don't belong to me. I am not the owner of the Maud," protested
Donald.

"Take it! take it!" shouted one and another of the interested
spectators, until nearly all of them had expressed their opinion in this
way.

Thus overborne, the boat-builder took the envelope, though his pride
revolted.

"Commodore Montague, it appears that the Skylark made the next best
time, and I have the pleasure of presenting to you the second prize."

"Which I devote to the club for the building fund."

The members heartily applauded this disposal of the money.

"I will give the other prize to the club for the same purpose," added
Donald.

"Impossible!" exclaimed Commodore Montague. "The fund is completed, and
the donation cannot be accepted."

"No! No!" shouted the members.

"The fifty dollars I added to the fund just makes up the sum necessary
to pay for the club-house on Turtle Head, which is to be only a shanty;
so you can't play that game on us, Don John."

Donald was compelled to submit; and he transferred the hundred dollars
to his pocket-book.

"I am so glad you won the race, Don John!" said Nellie Patterdale.
"Everybody said you sailed the Maud splendidly."

"Thank you, Nellie; your praise is worth more to me than that of all the
others," replied Donald, blushing deeply; but I must do him the justice
to say that, if he had not been laboring under intense excitement, he
would not have made so palpable a speech to her.

Nellie blushed too; but she was not angry, though her father might have
been, if he had heard the remark.

"Is Captain Patterdale on board?" shouted Mr. Beardsley, as the Juno ran
under the stern of the Penobscot.

"Here," replied the captain.

"I want to see you and Don John," added the officer.

The business of the race was finished, and the Maud conveyed Captain
Patterdale, his daughter, and Donald to the shore. Laud Cavendish was in
the Juno, and so was Hasbrook; but none of the party knew what had
transpired at Saturday Cove during the forenoon.

"I will be at your house in half an hour, Captain Patterdale," said
Donald, as they landed. "I am wet to the skin, and I want to put on dry
clothes."

Mr. Beardsley had proposed the place of meeting; and the boat-builder
hastened home. In a few minutes he had put himself inside a dry suit of
clothes. Then he went to the shop, and wrote a brief note to Captain
Shivernock, in which he enclosed sixty dollars, explaining that as he
had been unable to "keep still with his tongue," he could not keep the
money. He also added, that he should send him the amount received for
the Juno when he obtained the bills from Captain Patterdale, who had a
part of them. Sealing this note in an envelope, he called at the house
of the strange man, on his way to the place of meeting. Mrs. Sykes said
that Captain Shivernock was in his library.

"Please to give him this; and if he wishes to see me, I shall be at
Captain Patterdale's house for an hour or two," continued Donald; and
without giving the housekeeper time to reply, he hastened off, confident
there would be a storm as soon as the eccentric opened the note.

In the library of the elegant mansion, he found the party who had been
in the Juno, with Captain Patterdale and Nellie. On the desk was the tin
box, the paint on the outside stained with yellow loam. Laud Cavendish
looked as though life was a burden to him, and Donald readily
comprehended the situation.

"We have found the tin box," said Mr. Beardsley, with a smile, as the
boat-builder was admitted.

"Where did you find it?"

"Laud had it in his hand down at Saturday Cove. While I was looking up
the Hasbrook affair, our friend here landed from the Juno, and was
walking towards the woods, when he walked into me. He owns up to
everything."

"Then I hope you are satisfied that I had nothing to do with the box."

"Of course we are," interposed Captain Patterdale. "It certainly looked
bad for you at one time, Don John."

"I know it did, sir," added Donald.

"But I could not really believe that you would do such a thing," said
the captain.

"I knew he wouldn't," exclaimed Nellie.

"Laud says he buried the box on Turtle Head, just where you said, and
only removed it yesterday, when he put the notes under the sill in your
shop," continued Mr. Beardsley.

"What did you do that for, Laud?" asked Donald, turning to the culprit.

"You promised not to tell where I got the money to pay for the Juno. You
went back on me," pleaded Laud.

"I told you I wouldn't tell if everything was all right. When it
appeared that the mended bill was not all right, I mentioned your name,
but not till then."

"That is so," added the nabob. "Now, Laud, did Captain Shivernock pay
you any money?"

"No, sir," replied Laud, who had concluded to tell the whole truth,
hoping it would go easier with him if he did so.

"Where did you get the mended bill you paid Don John?"

"From the tin trunk."

"Why did you say that Captain Shivernock gave you the money you paid for
the Juno?"

"I couldn't account for it in any other way. I knew the captain threw
his money around very loosely, and I didn't think any one would ask him
if he gave me the money. If any one did, he wouldn't answer."

"But he did answer, and said he gave you the money."

"He told me he would say so, when I went to see him a fortnight ago."

"Why did you go to see him?"

Laud glanced at Donald with a faint smile on his haggard face.

"Don John told me Captain Shivernock had a secret he wanted to keep."

"I told you so!" exclaimed Donald.

"You did; but you thought I knew the secret," answered Laud. "You told
me the captain had given me the money not to tell that I had seen him
near Saturday Cove on the morning after the Hasbrook affair."

"I remember now," said Donald. "Captain Shivernock gave me sixty
dollars, and then gave me the Juno, for which I understood that I was
not to say I had seen him that day. I refused to sell the boat to Laud
till he told me where he got the money. When he told me the captain had
given it to him, and would not say what for, I concluded his case was
just the same as my own. After I left the captain, he stood over to the
Northport shore, and Laud went over there soon after. I was sure that
they met."

"We didn't meet; and I did not see Captain Shivernock that day," Laud
explained.

"I supposed he had; I spoke to Laud just as though he had, and he didn't
deny that he had seen him."

"Of course I didn't. Don John made my story good, and I was willing to
stick to it."

"But you did not stick to it," added the nabob. "You said you had paid
no money to Don John."

"I will tell you how that was. When I got the secret out of Don John, I
went to the captain with it. He asked me if I wanted to black-mail him.
I told him no. Then I spoke to him about the tin trunk you had lost, and
said one of the bills had been traced to me. I made up a story to show
where I got the bill; but the man that gave it to me had gone, and I
didn't even know his name. He had some bills just like that mended one;
and when I told him what my trouble was, he promised to say that he had
given me the bill; and then he laughed as I never saw a man laugh
before."

"What was he laughing at?" asked the sheriff.

"He went off early the next morning, and I suppose he was laughing to
think what a joke he was playing upon me, for he was not to be in town
when wanted to get me out of trouble."

"He did say he let you have the use of the Juno for taking care of her,
and that he gave you the money, though he wouldn't indicate what it was
for," added the officer.

"I thought he was fooling me, and I didn't depend on him."

"That's Captain Shivernock," said the good nabob, as the party in the
library were startled by a violent ring at the door.

It was the strange man. He was admitted by Nellie. He stalked up to
Donald, his face red with wrath, and dashed the letter and bills into
his face, crumpled up into a ball.

"You canting little monkey! What have you been doing?" roared he.

"Since I could not do what you wished me to do, I have returned your
money," replied Donald, rising from his chair, for he feared the captain
intended to assault him.

"Have you disobeyed my orders, you whelp?"

"I have; for I told you I should tell no lies."

"I'll break every bone in your body for this!" howled Captain
Shivernock.

"Not yet, captain," interposed Mr. Beardsley. "You may have something
else to break before you do that job."

"Who are you?" demanded the wicked nabob, with what was intended as a
withering sneer; but no one wilted under it.

"A deputy sheriff of Waldo County, at your service; and I have a warrant
for your arrest."

"For my arrest!" gasped Captain Shivernock, dismounting from his high
horse, for he had a wholesome fear of the penalties of violated law.

"Here is the document," added the sheriff, producing a paper.

"For what?"

"For breaking and entering in the night time, in the first place, and
for an aggravated assault on Jacob Hasbrook in the second."

"What assault? You can't prove it."

"Yes, we can; we went a-fishing down in Saturday Cove this morning, and
we caught a bundle, containing a pair of boots, a blue frock, and other
articles, including the stick the assault was committed with. They were
sunk with half a pig of lead, the other half of which I found in the
Juno. I hope you are satisfied."

"No, I'm not. I didn't leave my house till four o'clock that morning;
and I can prove it."

"You will have an opportunity to do so in court."

The wicked nabob was silent.

"I was bound to follow this thing up to the bitter end," said Hasbrook,
rejoiced at the detection of the wretch.

"You got what you deserved, you miserable, canting villain!" roared the
captain. "You cheated me out of a thousand dollars, by giving me an
indorser you knew wasn't worth a dollar."

"But I meant to pay you. I pay my debts. I appeal to Captain Patterdale
to say whether I do or not."

"I think you do when it is for your interest to do so, or when you can't
help it," added the good nabob, candidly. "I suppose you know Mr. Laud
Cavendish, captain?"

"I do," growled the rich culprit. "He is the fellow that saved a man's
life down at Haddock Ledge; a man he hadn't been introduced to, who gave
