"Of course I won't if you have done your duty. What did you say?"

"Oh, just what I thought necessary! I think I made up quite a moving
story. Sir John listened attentively. Said he had the greatest possible
respect for Squire Lorrimer; that it gave him considerable pain to feel
that _parvenus_, like the Drummonds should reside at the Towers; but he
said, further, that he could not quite tell how he was to interfere."

"Oh, I dare say!" answered Antonia. "I know enough of him to be certain
that every step of the path to the rescue must be made clear by others.
Did he give you to understand, mother, that he would be willing to help
Squire Lorrimer if the occasion arose?"

"Well, my dear, I gathered that he would not be averse to doing so; but,
really, the matter is one of extreme delicacy, and one which it is quite
impossible for me to say much about."

"But I have not the least objection to talking about it," said Antonia.
"It is one of my failings not to feel delicacy except with regard to
art. I can talk to him if you like. I should recommend extreme
bluntness. These obtuse people never see things unless they are put
right up in front of their eyes."

"Really, Antonia, in addition to being eccentric, you are now becoming
positively vulgar. What have I done to be afflicted with a daughter like
you? I beg and beseech of you not to say a word to Sir John on the
subject."

"All right, mother, I won't, if you will promise without fail to return
to London to-morrow."

"Oh, dear, dear, it will be most inconvenient."

"But you'll come?"

"I--really----"

"I see Sir John in the distance; he is smoking a cigarette, which will
soothe him while I talk. If I talk to him, you needn't go to London so
soon. Which shall it be?"

"Oh, London, London--anything better than that you should worry poor Sir
John. Was there ever a woman so worried? You had better send Pinkerton
to me."

"That's a good mother," said Antonia, bestowing one of her rare and
wonderfully sweet smiles upon her parent. She rushed away to the house
in her headlong style; met Hester in one of the corridors; stopped her
to exclaim, "Cheer up, Hetty, the incubus is leaving by the first train
in the morning," and then finding Pinkerton, despatched her for orders
to Mrs. Bernard Temple.

A few moments later, Antonia had forced her way into Susy's presence.

"Mother and I leave to-morrow," she said. "I don't know if you feel
inclined to stay here much longer?"

"I? No, I'm sure I don't," answered Susy. "I am sick of the place; they
are all such a lot of slow coaches."

"County people, you know," said Antonia with a slight sneer, "are always
a little slow to us _parvenus_; we're so wonderfully fresh, you know;
not worn out like the poor county folk."

"You can call yourself a _parvenu_ if you like," said Susy in a rage,
"but I decline to allow the name to be applied to me; however, I think
I'll go back to father to-morrow, and I may as well take advantage of
your escort."

"That's what I thought. Get your maid to pack your things, for we shall
be off by the first train, remember. By the way, did you hear from your
father with regard to your letter?"

"Yes, I heard this morning."

"Well, what did he say?"

"He says he is sorry I don't like the Towers, but he doesn't see how he
is to get out of the purchase now. He is to take possession in a little
over a month."

"What a horrible future for you," said Antonia. "That musty old
place--the ghost in the tower--the family feud----"

"What do you mean by the family feud?"

"Oh, a little arrangement lately entered into by the younger Lorrimers
for your benefit. I'm not bound to repeat it, but I can truly say I
shouldn't like the little formula they have made up to be chanted
nightly about me. Frankly, Susy, I pity you. You must hate the idea of
going to the Towers."

"Yes, I loathe it," said Susy.

"The best thing you can do is to see your father, and have a very
serious talk. Its settled that you come back with us to-morrow. That's
right. Ta-ta for the present."

Antonia left the room.

She stood for a moment by herself in one of the passages.

"Who would have thought," she murmured to herself, "that I, Antonia
Bernard Temple, would devote myself to anything except the services of
high Art. Here am I absolutely wearing myself out and devising the most
horrible plots and stratagems, all for the sake of an ugly duckling.
Shall I succeed? Yes, I think so. Matters move in the right direction.
Susy hates going to the Towers; the Lorrimers hate leaving the Towers.
Sir John Thornton has more money than he knows what to do with. Surely
some scheme can be suggested to keep the old family in the old place.
When we are in town, we can soon get to know Squire Lorrimer. Hurrah! I
have an idea. Annie Forest and Nora shall both come up to town with us
to-morrow. Annie is a capital kind of girl, although she did behave with
want of fidelity as regards that ring. I must get it back for her
somehow before we leave. Annie we must have, for she's a perfect jewel
of tact, and so sweetly pretty, just like a red rose, while I'm a
fierce--very fierce--tiger lily. Nora must come, too, because, of
course, Squire Lorrimer will visit us for the sake of seeing his child.
Mother shall propose to Sir John Thornton, and he will further suggest
to Mrs. Lorrimer, that Nora would be the better for the best surgical
advice. Hey presto! the thing is delightfully managed. Antonia, my dear,
you begin to see daylight, don't you?"

Antonia skipped away in high good humour, and, wonderful to relate, her
different little schemes for collecting a party to accompany her mother
and herself to town were all carried out without hitch or difficulty.
Annie, of course, was only too delighted to spend her last few days of
holiday in London, and Nora, who had never been there, quite forgave
Mrs. Bernard Temple for becoming Hester's stepmother when she heard
that she was going to take her to the "Heart of the World," as she
termed the great metropolis.

On the evening of that same day Antonia, having concluded, as she
considered, an arduous campaign, stood for a moment in earnest
contemplation. "There's only the ring," she said to herself. "I must get
the ring for poor Annie before I go. Now, who will lend me thirty
shillings? I'll try Pinkerton first."

She swept into the room where the tired maid was completing her somewhat
laborious packing, for Mrs. Bernard Temple invariably carried nearly a
houseful of dresses about with her.

"Well, Miss Antonia, what now?" said the maid. "I wish you'd take off
that evening dress, miss, and let me lay it just over the others here in
in this box."

"I can stuff it into my Gladstone bag," said Antonia; "don't trouble
about it. Pinkerton, when were you paid your wages last?"

"Oh, wages, indeed!" said Pinkerton, with a sniff. "Don't talk of em,
Miss Antonia. It's months and months I'm owed, but I suppose it will be
all right when your ma is married to this rich gentleman."

"You haven't got about thirty-two shillings you could spare me?" said
Antonia.

"I couldn't oblige you with thirty-two pence, miss."

Antonia drummed with her fingers on a chest of drawers near which she
was leaning. "And it's such a paltry sum," she muttered--"not worth a
fuss. You ought to have your wages, Pinkerton--it's a shame! I must
speak to mother about them when my mind is a little less burdened. I
have a good deal to think of just now, so good-night!"

"What about that dress, miss?"

"I can't give it to you at present. I'll stow it away somewhere.
Good-night!"

Antonia closed the door behind her and ran downstairs. She must get the
thirty-two shillings from somewhere. To whom could she apply? She
suddenly found herself face to face with Sir John Thornton. An
inspiration seized her. She rushed up to him and took one of his hands.
He shuddered, but had the strength of mind to remain perfectly still.

"Can you lend me thirty-two shillings?" said Antonia. "You're as rich as
Croesus, so you won't mind. I'll pay it back to you a shilling a week
out of my dress allowance. Will you lend it? Say yes or no in a hurry,
please."

"Yes," said Sir John, "... with pleasure." He moved back a step or two.
"Here are two sovereigns," he said. "Pray don't mind the change. The
change doesn't matter, I assure you. Oh, any time, of course, as regards
repayment. I am happy to oblige you." He dropped the sovereigns into
Antonia's large palm and prepared to fly.

"You are happy to oblige me?" she said with a sort of gasp. "Oh, do stay
just a single moment. You have made me very happy. Thirty-two shillings
must go for a special purpose, but eight blessed shillings remain. Don't
you really want the change? May I really borrow the change?"

"Most certainly. I am rather in a hurry."

"I'd kiss you, but you wouldn't like it," said Antonia. "These eight
shillings mean--do you know what they mean?"

"If they make you happy, my dear young lady, that is enough for me."

"They do, they do! Cobalt ... Indian red ... rose madder ... burnt
sienna ... canvasses ... a new flat brush for the skies ... some drawing
pins--Oh, he's gone! Dear old man. What an affliction I was to him; but
how triumphant I feel!"




CHAPTER XXVII.

NELL IS IN TROUBLE.


All Antonia's plans were carried into effect. She paid Mrs. Martin
thirty-two shillings and gave the old woman her address in town, begging
of her to forward the ring there without an hour's delay. In due course
it arrived, and Annie had it once more in her possession. Poor Annie
turned pale when Antonia put the little box which contained it into her
hand.

"I could cry as well as laugh," she said, looking at Antonia with tears
springing to her eyes. "I have not behaved well about this ring, and I
ought not to have it back like this. I ought to be properly punished. It
does not seem fair that I should have the ring returned to me again in
this easy manner."

"Undoubtedly you have been deceitful," replied Antonia, "and your
conscience must feel ruffled. I can stand most things, but a ruffled
conscience, I confess, is too much for me. I suppose you will soothe it
in the only possible way?"

"What do you mean?" asked Annie.

"Confession is good for the soul," replied Antonia, in a sing-song
voice. She went to the window as she spoke and looked out into the
sunlit street.

The two girls were standing in the room which Antonia was pleased to
call her studio. It was an attic at the top of the house, and had a
dormer window with a north light. The dormer window had sides which were
curtained with green. In Annie's opinion this room was simply hideous.
Huge canvasses covered with great daubs of colour occupied the walls. A
skeleton stood in one corner, and one or two draped figures were in
others. Antonia had lured Annie up here for the purpose of taking her
likeness in a white kerchief. Antonia was fired with an idea that Annie
would look well as Marie Antoinette on her way to execution. She was not
quite sure whether to make her Charlotte Corday or Marie Antoinette;
but, on reflection, decided that the latter character would suit her
best, as she did not think that Annie could ever get sufficient tragedy
into her eyes for the former.

"I am going to paint myself some day for Charlotte," exclaimed Antonia.
"I'll study before the glass whenever I've an odd moment, and I believe
I shall do the fixity of purpose stare after another week of hard
practice. Now, do stand still Annie--the bother of the ring is at an
end, so you can forget it. Just turn your head a little to the left, I
want to get a peep at your ear--you have got a good ear, quite
shell-like. Now, for mercy's sake look tragical! Think of the
guillotine, and the crowd looking on, and La Belle France and the
Tuileries, and the horrid feeling when your head is separated from your
trunk. Now, then, realise it--get it into your eyes. Are you realising
it?"

"Frankly, I'm not," replied Annie. "I can't sit for Marie Antoinette any
longer to-day. I really can't, Antonia. This room is so stiflingly hot,
and I want to go out. I want to get into one of the parks. Are there any
near this?"

"Oh, yes! Hyde Park is quite close; but you'll find it as dry as chips.
Remember, it is September now. Hyde Park is not pretty in September."

"I wonder anyone can live in London," replied Annie.

"Do you? I don't. I hate this poky little house in the centre of
detestable fashion; but if I could have an atelier, or a studio, I ought
to say, in Gower Street, it would be nearly as good as Paris. Well, if
you won't sit any longer, I suppose you won't. Now let us come
downstairs."

The girls left the studio and entered the drawing-room. Here they found
Mrs. Bernard Temple and Nora. Nora was lying on a sofa looking tired and
pale, and Mrs. Bernard Temple was moving about the room in a bustling
sort of fashion arranging flowers. The drawing-room was small and
crowded with knick-knacks. Antonia seldom swept across this room without
knocking a table over or flicking a paper on to the floor.

"Now, my dear, be careful!" exclaimed her parent. "That papier-mache
table on which I have just arranged these lovely late roses, sent to me
by dear Sir John, will not stand one of your lunges. I cannot imagine
how you have got that peculiar walk, Antonia; its exactly as if you were
on board ship."

Antonia lounged towards a chair, into which she flung herself.

"Dear me, it is hot!" she exclaimed, pushing back her thick black hair
from her forehead. "Never mind about my walk, mother; let me hear the
news. What did Sir Henry Fraser say of Nora?"

Mrs. Bernard Temple sank into another chair.

"The dear child!" she exclaimed. "She had a trying morning."

"Pray don't talk of it!" exclaimed Nora from her sofa. "It was too
desperate."

"Why, did he hurt you?" exclaimed Antonia.

"Oh, no! he was kindness itself; but we had to wait so long before we
saw him."

"Pooh!" answered Antonia. "Was that the dreadful part? Tell me what he
said when you did see him? Are you likely soon to be quite well again?"

"With care," interrupted Mrs. Bernard Temple, "dear Nora will recover
perfectly. Her back is still very weak, but there is no injury. She may
walk a little daily, but must lie down a good deal."

"You're quite sure he wasn't anxious about you?" asked Antonia, fixing
her eyes on Nora.

Nora started.

"No; what do you mean?" she said. "You quite startle me. Why should he
be anxious?"

"Well, I almost wish he were. It would suit my purpose to have him
anxious for a day or two. However, if he isn't, he isn't, and there's an
end of it. Nora, don't you want to see your father very badly?"

"Oh, yes!" replied Nora. Her face grew pink and red. "Of course I'd like
to see him, but I have not an idea where he is."
