"The number of inhabitants is estimated at about 2,000,000, mostly
immigrants from China, with the original natives. The island is
exceedingly rich in its vegetation, and the plants are about the same as
those of the main land. Rice paper is made of the pith of a tree found
only in Formosa. In the south sugar and turmeric are the staples. The
latter is a plant whose root is bright yellow, used in dyeing silk.
Formosa tea has become well known at home as of excellent quality. Other
productions are about the same as in southern China.

"There are plenty of birds there, but no wild animals of any consequence
that are game for the Nimrods. A great deal more might be said about the
island, but you have more now than you are likely to remember. You can
see many junks now, and the trade with China is mostly carried on in
them; and some of them are pirates in these seas, even to the south of
Hainan, for a trading-junk turns into a pirate when her captain can make
some money by it."

After lunch the Blanche's people came on board, and all hands had the
usual frolic during the afternoon and evening. The next morning the
captain told his passengers that they had passed out of the China Sea
the day before, and that they were on the Tung-hai, or Eastern Sea,
outside of which was the broad Pacific Ocean. On the third morning from
Hong-Kong, when the company came on deck, they found the Guardian-Mother
at anchor, but just getting under way with an English pilot on board,
who had been taken late the evening before.

"Where are we now, Captain Ringgold?" asked Mr. Woolridge, when the
party had seated themselves on the promenade to see what was to be
seen.

"We are at the mouth of the great river Yang-tsze-Chiang; but we shall
soon pass into a branch of it called the Woo-Sung, and find Shang-hai,
for it is correctly written with a hyphen between the syllables,"
replied the commander. "But the tide is right; and we can go over the
bar without any delay, the pilot says. It is about twelve miles up the
river to the town; and, as you can see, the country is low and flat. The
city has 250,000 inhabitants, and is the principal central port of China
for foreign trade."

The channel of the river was crowded with junks, and there are sometimes
as many as three thousand of them between the town and the sea; but they
were careful to keep out of the track of steamers, even though they had
the right of way. The two steamers picked their way through the native
boats, and they were at anchor off the city in season for the late
breakfast ordered.

"Shang-hai stands on low ground; and cholera, dysentery, and fevers
prevail here in summer," said the commander when they were all seated at
the table. "The English, French, and American quarters are in the suburb
north of the native city, and they have broad and clean streets; but in
the city proper, they are narrow and filthy, not unlike those of Canton.
It is enclosed by a wall five miles in extent. What else there is here
you can see for yourselves."

The captain decided, after the pacha came on board in his barge with
the rest of his party, to lunch and dine at the Astor House, perhaps
because the name sounded like home; but he found that the hotel "was a
horse of another color." They went on shore in some of the native boats
that crowded around the ship; and their first care was to secure six
guides, all that offered their services on the quay. The next was to
procure a supply of the money current in the city, which was
accomplished with the aid of the principal guide, all of whom were
English, who could speak Chinese and pidgin.

The company were then divided into six parties, who had suggested this
plan when they found that this number of guides could be obtained. The
"Big Four" went together, and the rest of the company were in parties of
three. The conveyances were found to be small, low broughams, pony gigs,
palanquins, jinrickishas, and wheelbarrows, the last such as the party
had seen in Cholan. The boys decided to walk first, and try the vehicles
later. They went into a shop where Louis saw something in a window he
wanted, and the guide asked the price for him. The dealer refused to
show the article, or to name a price, unless Louis would agree to buy if
he did so.

They were not like the Hong-Kong salesmen; for there were several of
them, and they were impolite enough to make fun of the tourists. Scott
doubled his fists, and was inclined to pitch into the one who refused to
show any goods till they were practically sold; but Louis begged him to
desist. They next went into a tea saloon in the middle of a dirty pond
of water, which would have just suited the taste of a Dutchman at home.

The tea was given to them in the cups, and they poured in hot water. The
keeper swindled them in asking about five times the price, and the guide
remonstrated; but the fellow was saucy, and the charge was paid to avoid
trouble. The guide said the other fellow would have cheated them in the
same ratio, if Louis had agreed, as he required, to buy. Then they
looked into an opium joint, where the smokers were reclining on broad
benches. The pipe was a tube with the bowl on the top. The drug is
boiled till it is of the consistency of honey. Something like a
knitting-needle is then taken by the smoker, the end of which is dipped
in the jar; the needle is then turned till the opium becomes a ball as
big as a pea. It is then held in a flame till it is partially lighted,
when it is dropped into the bowl of a pipe. The amount used is counted
in pipes, some being satiated with two or three of them, while the hard
cases require twenty. In either case he goes to sleep, and has pleasant
dreams. The habit is very deleterious to those who practise it, and
death results from excessive use of the drug.

"There is a sedan with a Chinese magnate in it, with four bearers," said
the guide; "but it is not so common here as in Hong-Kong and Canton."

The barrow excited the attention of the boys more than the other
vehicles. At the door of the shop they saw a native reading a paper,
wearing a pair of spectacles whose eyes were almost as big as saucers.
After walking through the streets of Hong-Kong and Canton, the boys saw
very little that was new to them.

"Is there a cemetery in the town?" asked Louis, after they had become
somewhat tired, not to say disgusted, with the dirty streets, and the
crowd in them.

"Nothing that you Americans would call by that name," replied the guide.
"There are some small burial-grounds; but the Chinese generally bury
their dead in private grounds, outside of the cities. They have a
reverence for their dead which is not equalled by any people on the face
of the earth. The graves of the rich and noted are very carefully
selected, and are decorated with great care and taste. Some of the
finest gardens in the country are those enclosed in a private
burial-place.

"A rich Chinaman thinks more of his coffin than he does of his house. He
often buys it years before he has occasion to use it, and keeps it,
taking better care of it than he does of his female children. Wherever a
Chinaman dies, he must be sent home to be buried; and many of them come
here from America, taken up from the earth even a year or more after
death."

At this point the party came to an open place where there were all the
different vehicles used in the city waiting to be employed; and as it
was nearly time for the lunch, they decided to ride to the hotel. Louis
took a rickshaw, as it is called here; Scott and Morris preferred a
wheelbarrow, and Felix took another, balanced by the guide. They were
novel conveyances to the boys, and they enjoyed the ride very much. The
rest of the parties returned to the hotel about the same time. There
were Chinese dishes on the table; and those who had tried some of them
before ordered them, especially the bird's-nest soups. The hams were
very nice, and the captain hoped that Mr. Sage had procured some of them
for the ship.

The afternoon was spent as the forenoon had been, but the party found
little to interest them. The next day the tourists made an excursion up
the Yang-tsze-Chiang, and enjoyed it very much. They saw a little of the
farming operations, as a man ploughing with a buffalo, which looked more
like a deer than a bovine; others carrying bundles of grain, one at each
end of a pole on their shoulders; another threshing by beating a bunch
of the stalks on a frame like a ladder or clothes-horse; but what
pleased them most were the fishermen. One had a net several feet square,
suspended at the end of a pole. It was sunk in the water, and then
hauled up. Any fish that happened to be over it then was brought up with
it; but Scott declared that this device was an old story, and they were
used in the United States, though an iron hoop was the frame of the net.

They were more interested in the fishing with cormorants. A man with a
dip-net in his hand stood on a bamboo raft, on which was a basket like
those the snake-charmers use in India, to receive his fish. The birds
were about the size of geese. They dived into the water, and brought up
a fish every time. They have a ring or cord on their necks so that they
cannot swallow their prizes, and they drop them into the dip-net.

They went up as far as Taiping, where they took a returning steamer, and
that night slept on board the ships. On the following morning the
steamers went down the river; and then the question where they were to
go next came up, and the commander soon settled it by announcing that
the ship was bound to Tien-tsin, on the way to Pekin.




CHAPTER XXXVI

THE WALLS AND TEMPLES OF PEKIN


The company had hardly expected that Captain Ringgold would go to the
capital, for it was off the course to Japan, which was the next country
to be visited; but their curiosity had been greatly excited, and he was
disposed to gratify it.

"Pekin is not on navigable water, and we cannot go there in the ship,"
said he. "We go to Tien-tsin, which is the seaport of Pekin, about
eighty miles distant from it. It is a treaty port, and is said to have a
population of six hundred thousand; the number can doubtless be
considerably discounted. The next thing is to get to Pekin; though we
can go most of the way by boat to Tung-chow, thirteen miles from the
capital. Some go all the way on horseback or by cart. We will decide
that question when we get to Tien-tsin."

"How long will it take us to go there?" asked Uncle Moses.

"About two days; we are off Woo-Sung now. We have the pilot on board,
and we shall go to sea at once," replied the commander.

Nothing of especial interest occurred on the voyage; and before noon on
the second day out the two ships were off the mouth of the Pei-ho
River, and a Chinese pilot was taken. As they went up the river they saw
the Taku forts, where the Celestial soldiers won their only victory over
the English, but were badly beaten the following year. On the rising
tide the ships got up the river, and anchored off the town.

The place was like any other Chinese city, and was quite as dirty as the
dirtiest of them. Two of the guides from Shang-hai, who were couriers
for travellers, had been brought, one in each ship; and both of them
were intelligent men. The Blanchita had been put into the water as soon
as the anchors were buried in the mud; and the party went on shore in
her, to the great disgust of the boat-people.

The American consul came on board with the Chinese officials; and the
commander took him into the cabin for a conference in regard to getting
to Pekin, while the tourists were on shore with the guides. Mr. Smithers
had seen the steam-launch, and the question was whether the party could
go up Pekin River in her. The consul could see no difficulty in the way,
any more than there would be in the ships' barges. He thought he could
put them in the way of making the trip securely, and they went on shore
together in the barge.

Mr. Smithers knew a couple of high officials who were going to the
capital the next day, and the commander was introduced to them. They
were very polite, and both of them spoke English. One had been educated
at Yale College in New Haven. They were invited to go with the party to
Pekin in the Blanchita, and accepted. The arrangements were completed
for the trip. They went on board of the Guardian-Mother, and were
treated with the most distinguished consideration, shown over the ship,
and invited to lunch.

When the launch came off with the party at noon, all the ladies and
gentlemen were presented to them by the commander. The pacha, the rajah,
and the princess were clothed in their elegant robes; and they evidently
made a profound impression. The plan for the journey to the capital was
announced to the passengers, and they could not help being delighted
with it. Mr. Sage had been directed to spread himself on the lunch, and
he did so. Monsieur Odervie even prepared a few Chinese dishes, the art
of doing which he had learned from a native cook in Hong-Kong.

In the afternoon the party went on shore again, under the escort of Mr.
Psi-ning and Mr. Ying-chau, visiting the temple in which the treaties
had been signed, and several others, and then walked through the street
of "Everlasting Prosperity," as the Chinese gentlemen explained it. The
prosperity seemed to consist mainly in the sale of eel-pies with baked
potatoes, the former kept hot at a small charcoal fire. Live fish in
shallow bowls with a little water in them were common, and cook-shops
for more elaborate Chinese dishes were abundant.

Both the native gentlemen were mandarins of different orders, and they
were received with the most profound deference by the common people. The
tourists saw everything in the town that was worth seeing; and early in
the afternoon they returned to the Guardian-Mother, where the consul and
the native gentlemen were to dine. The latter were invited to sleep on
board in order to be in readiness for an early start the next day, and
they had ordered their baggage to be sent to the ship. Mr. Psi-ning said
he had telegraphed to an official at Tung-chow to have conveyances ready
for the party at that place, which was as far as the boat could go,
thirteen miles from Pekin.

Mr. Smithers was exceedingly kind, and did far more than could be
expected of a consul. The commander expressed his obligations to him in
the most earnest terms for all he had done, and especially for
introducing the distinguished Chinese gentlemen. The dinner was the most
elaborate the steward and the cook could provide, and it was one of
those hilarious affairs which have several times been described during
the voyage. In the evening there were Mrs. Belgrave's games, music, and
dancing with the assistance of the Italian band, and finally the singing
of the Gospel Hymns.

The Blanchita was prepared for her voyage as soon as she came off from
the shore, coaled for the round trip, supplied with cooked provisions,
though the galley was available, and with everything that could
possibly be needed. She was put in about the same trim as when she went
up the rivers of Borneo. Felipe was to be the engineer, Pitts the cook,
and four sailors were detailed for deck-hands. The excursion had been
arranged for five days; and the bags, valises, and other impedimenta of
the voyagers, were on deck at an early hour. Breakfast was ready at
half-past six; and at half-past seven the Blanchita got under way with a
native pilot for the river, who could speak pidgin English.

The party were in a frolicsome mood; and they went off singing a song,
to the great astonishment of the native boat-people. Mr. Psi-ning joined
with them; for he had learned the tunes in the United States, where he
had travelled extensively. Tien-tsin is the terminus of the Grand Canal
in the north, and they passed through a small portion of it into the
river. The trip was through a low country. The road to the capital was
in sight, and they saw various vehicles moving upon it. The first that
attracted their attention was one of the barrows, with a native between
the handles, supporting them with a band over his shoulders. On one side
of the large wheel was a passenger; and behind him was a lofty sail,
like those depending from the yards of a ship, but about three times as
high in proportion to its width. It had five ribs of wood in it below
the upper yard to keep it spread out. The boys thought the craft would
be inclined to heel over with all the cargo on the starboard side.

They saw a rickshaw rigged with a sail in this manner. A man on a farm
was working with an ordinary wheelbarrow sailing in this way. There were
no end of men riding ponies, or in the two-wheeled passenger-carts
having a cover over them which extended out over the horse. Farther up
they observed a couple of coolies irrigating the land with a machine
which had four paddles for moving the water, with four more each side of
the stream, under a frame to which two men were holding on, and working
treadmill fashion, with their feet on each of the four arms. They
noticed mixed teams of horses and bullocks, such as one sees in Naples.
The most curious was a mule-litter, which was simply a sedan between two
animals.

Felipe drove the launch at a nine-knot speed, and at half-past three in
the afternoon the boat arrived at Tung-chow. Contrary to their
expectation, the passengers had greatly enjoyed the trip; but it was out
of their own hilarity rather than their surroundings. Pitts had arranged
the lunch in a very tasty manner on the tables in what the boys had
called the fore and after cabins. They found all the variety of vehicles
they had seen on the road, and in three hours they came to the great
gate of Pekin. They were conveyed to the small German hotel, which they
more than filled; and other lodgings were provided for some of the
gentlemen, though the meals were to be taken at the public-house.

The Chinese gentlemen had to leave them to attend to their own affairs,
but after dinner the professor told them something about Pekin: "The
city is in about the same latitude as New York, and the climate is about
the same. It is situated on a sandy plain, and the suburbs are
comparatively few. The town consists of two cities, the Manchu and the
Chinese, separated by a wall; and the whole is surrounded by high walls,
with towers and pagodas on them, as you have already seen. The Manchu
wall is fifty feet high, sixty feet wide at the bottom, and forty at the
top. Without the cross-walls, there are twenty-one miles of outer wall,
enclosing twenty-six square miles of ground.

"There are sixteen gates, each with a tower a hundred feet high on it.
Your first impression must have been that Pekin is the greatest city in
the world. You came in by a street two hundred feet wide, with shops on
each side; but when you have seen more of it, you will find dilapidation
and decay, and about the same filth you have observed in other Chinese
cities. But it is one of the most ancient cities in the world, for this
or another city stood here twelve hundred years before Christ. Kublai, a
grandson of Genghis Khan, the great conqueror of the Moguls, made Pekin
the capital of all China. When the Manchus came into power the city was
all ready for them, and for a time they kept it in repair; but for more
than a hundred years it has been going to ruin.

"The Manchu, or inner city, is divided into three parts, the largest of
which is the real city. In the middle of it are two walled enclosures,
one within the other. The outer one seems to be the guardroom of the
inner, to which entrance is forbidden to all foreigners, and even to
Manchus and Chinese not connected with the court. This last is called
the Purple Forbidden City, two and a quarter miles around it, and is the
actual imperial residence. It includes the palaces of the emperor and
empress and other members of the family. It contains other palaces and
halls of reception.

"The 'Hall of Grand Harmony' is built on a terrace twenty feet high, and
is of marble, one hundred and ten feet high. Its chief apartment is two
hundred feet long by ninety wide, and contains a throne for the emperor,
who holds his receptions here on New Year's Day, his birthday, and on
other great occasions. The 'Palace of Heavenly Purity' is where the
monarch meets his cabinet at dawn for business; and you see that he must
be an early riser. Within these enclosures are temples, parks, an
artificial lake a mile long, a great temple in which the imperial family
worship their ancestors, and many other grand palaces, temples, and
statues, which I have not time to mention.

"The outer, or Chinese, city, is thinly populated, and a considerable
portion of it is under cultivation. The principal streets are over a
hundred feet wide; but those at the sides of them, like Canton and other
cities, are nothing but lanes. None of the streets are paved, and mud
and dust reign supreme. As with other Eastern cities, the population of
Pekin is exaggerated, being estimated by some as high as two millions;
but Dr. Legge thought it was less than one million.

"The charge of infanticide seems not to be applicable to Pekin or the
surrounding country, and is said to be almost unknown there. A dead-cart
