the dusk of evening, and that the captain and the robber who had
discovered the house were to go there first, to find out to whom it
belonged. When they arrived in the street, having a lantern with them,
they began to examine the doors, and found to their confusion and
astonishment that ten doors were marked exactly alike. The robber, who
was the captain's guide, could not say a word in explanation of this
mystery; and when the disappointed troop got back to the forest, his
enraged companions ordered him to be put to death.

Another now offered himself upon the same conditions as the former; and
having bribed Mustapha, and discovered the house, he made a mark with
the dark red chalk upon the door, in a part that was not in the least
conspicuous; and carefully examined the surrounding doors, to be certain
that no such marks were upon them. But nothing could escape the prying
eyes of Morgiana; scarcely had the robber departed, when she discovered
the red mark; and getting some red chalk, she marked seven doors on each
side, precisely in the same place and in the same manner. The robber,
valuing himself highly upon the precautions he had taken, triumphantly
conducted his captain to the spot; but great indeed was his confusion
and dismay when he found it impossible to say which, among fifteen
houses marked exactly alike, was the right one. The captain, furious
with his disappointment, returned again with the troop to the forest;
and the second robber was also condemned to death.

The captain having lost two of his troop, judged that their hands were
more active than their heads in such services; and he resolved to employ
no other of them, but to go himself upon the business. Accordingly he
repaired to the city and addressed himself to the cobbler Mustapha, who,
for six pieces of gold, readily performed the services for him he had
done for the other two strangers. The captain, much wiser than his men,
did not amuse himself with setting a mark upon the door, but attentively
considered the house, counted the number of windows, and passed by it
very often, to be certain that he should know it again.

He then returned to the forest, and ordered his troop to go into the
town, and buy nineteen mules and thirty-eight large jars, one full of
oil and the rest empty. In two or three days the jars were bought, and
all things in readiness; and the captain having put a man into each jar,
properly armed, the jars being rubbed on the outside with oil, and the
covers having holes bored in them for the men to breathe through, loaded
his mules, and in the habit of an oil-merchant entered the town in the
dusk of the evening. He proceeded to the street where Ali Baba dwelt,
and found him sitting in the porch of his house. "Sir," said he to Ali
Baba, "I have brought this oil a great way to sell, and am too late for
this day's market. As I am quite a stranger in this town, will you do me
the favor to let me put my mules into your court-yard, and direct me
where I may lodge to-night?"

Ali Baba, who was a very good-natured man, welcomed the pretended
oil-merchant very kindly, and offered him a bed in his own house; and
having ordered the mules to be unloaded in the yard, and properly fed,
he invited his guest in to supper. The captain, having seen the jars
placed ready in the yard, followed Ali Baba into the house, and after
supper was shown to the chamber where he was to sleep.

It happened that Morgiana was obliged to sit up later that night than
usual, to get ready her master's bathing linen for the following
morning; and while she was busy about the fire, her lamp went out, and
there was no more oil in the house. After considering what she could
possibly do for a light, she recollected the thirty-eight oil jars in
the yard and determined to take a little oil out of one of them for her
lamp. She took her oil pot in her hand and approached the first jar; the
robber within said, "Is it time, captain?"

Any other slave, on hearing a man in an oil jar, would have screamed
out; but the prudent Morgiana instantly recollected herself, and replied
softly, "No, not yet; lie still till I call you." She passed on to every
jar, receiving the same question and making the same answer, till she
came to the last, which was really filled with oil.

Morgiana was now convinced that this was a plot of the robbers to murder
her master, Ali Baba; so she ran back to the kitchen and brought out a
large kettle, which she filled with oil, and set it on a great wood
fire; and as soon as it boiled she went and poured into the jars
sufficient of the boiling oil to kill every man within them. Having done
this she put out her fire and her lamp, and crept softly to her chamber.

The captain of the robbers, finding everything quiet in the house, and
perceiving no light anywhere, arose and went down into the yard to
assemble his men. Coming to the first jar, he felt the steam of the
boiled oil; he ran hastily to the rest and found every one of his troop
put to death in the same manner. Full of rage and despair at having
failed in his design, he forced the lock of a door that led into the
garden and made his escape over the walls.

On the following morning Morgiana related to her master, Ali Baba, his
wonderful deliverance from the pretended oil-merchant and his gang of
robbers. Ali Baba at first could scarcely credit her tale; but when he
saw the robbers dead in the jars, he could not sufficiently praise her
courage and sagacity; and without letting any one else into the secret,
he and Morgiana the next night buried the thirty-seven thieves in a deep
trench at the bottom of the garden. The jars and mules, as he had no use
for them, were sent from time to time to the different markets and sold.

While Ali Baba took these measures to prevent his and Cassim's
adventures in the forest from being known, the captain returned to his
cave, and for some time abandoned himself to grief and despair. At
length, however, he determined to adopt a new scheme for the destruction
of Ali Baba. He removed by degrees all the valuable merchandise from the
cave to the city and took a shop exactly opposite to Ali Baba's house.
He furnished this shop with everything that was rare and costly, and
went by the name of the merchant Cogia Hassan. Many persons made
acquaintance with the stranger; among others, Ali Baba's son went every
day to the shop. The pretended Cogia Hassan soon appeared to be very
fond of Ali Baba's son, offered him many presents, and often detained
him at dinner, on which occasions he treated him in the handsomest
manner.

Ali Baba's son thought it was necessary to make some return to these
civilities, and pressed his father to invite Cogia Hassan to supper. Ali
Baba made no objection, and the invitation was accordingly given. The
artful Cogia Hassan would not too hastily accept this invitation, but
pretended he was not fond of going into company, and that he had
business which demanded his presence at home. These excuses only made
Ali Baba's son the more eager to take him to his father's house; and
after repeated solicitations, the merchant consented to sup at Ali
Baba's house the next evening.

A most excellent supper was provided, which Morgiana cooked in the best
manner, and as was her usual custom, she carried in the first dish
herself. The moment she looked at Cogia Hassan, she knew it was the
pretended oil-merchant. The prudent Morgiana did not say a word to any
one of this discovery, but sent the other slaves into the kitchen and
waited at table herself; and while Cogia Hassan was drinking, she
perceived he had a dagger hid under his coat.

When supper was ended, and the dessert and wine on the table, Morgiana
went away and dressed herself in the habit of a dancing-girl; she next
called Abdalla, a fellow slave, to play on his tabor while she danced.
As soon as she appeared at the parlor door, her master, who was very
fond of seeing her dance, ordered her to come in to entertain his guest
with some of her best dancing. Cogia Hassan was not very well satisfied
with this entertainment, yet was compelled, for fear of discovering
himself, to seem pleased with the dancing, while, in fact, he wished
Morgiana a great way off, and was quite alarmed lest he should lose his
opportunity of murdering Ali Baba and his son.

Morgiana danced several dances with the utmost grace and agility; and
then drawing a poniard from her girdle, she performed many surprising
things with it, sometimes presenting the point to one and sometimes to
another, and then seemed to strike it into her own bosom. Suddenly she
paused, and holding the poniard in the right hand, presented her left to
her master as if begging some money; upon which Ali Baba and his son
each gave her a small piece of money. She then turned to the pretended
Cogia Hassan, and while he was putting his hand into his purse, she
plunged the poniard into his heart.

"Wretch!" cried Ali Baba, "thou hast ruined me and my family."

"No, sir," replied Morgiana, "I have preserved, and not ruined you and
your son. Look well at this traitor, and you will find him to be the
pretended oil-merchant who came once before to rob and murder you."

Ali Baba pulled off the turban and the cloak which the false Cogia
Hassan wore and discovered that he was not only the pretended
oil-merchant, but the captain of the forty robbers who had slain his
brother Cassim; nor could he doubt that his perfidious aim had been to
destroy him, and probably his son, with the concealed dagger. Ali Baba,
who felt the new obligation he owed to Morgiana for thus saving his life
a second time, embraced her and said, "My dear Morgiana, I give you
your liberty; but my gratitude must not stop there: I will also marry
you to my son, who can esteem and admire you no less than does his
father." Then turning to his son, he added, "You, my son, will not
refuse the wife I offer; for, in marrying Morgiana, you take to wife the
preserver and benefactor of yourself and family." The son, far from
showing any dislike, readily and joyfully accepted his proposed bride,
having long entertained an affection for the good slave Morgiana.

Having rejoiced in their deliverance, they buried the captain that night
with great privacy, in the trench along with his troop of robbers; and a
few days afterwards, Ali Baba celebrated the marriage of his son and
Morgiana with a sumptuous entertainment. Every one who knew Morgiana
said she was worthy of her good fortune, and highly commended her
master's generosity toward her.

During a twelvemonth Ali Baba forbore to go near the forest, but at
length his curiosity incited him to make another journey.

When he came to the cave he saw no footsteps of either men or horses;
and having said, "Open Sesame," he went in, and judged by the state of
things deposited in the cavern that no one had been there since the
pretended Cogia Hassan had removed the merchandise to his shop in the
city. Ali Baba took as much gold home as his horse could carry.

Afterwards he carried his son to the cave and taught him the secret.
This secret they handed down to their posterity; and using their good
fortune with moderation, they lived in honor and splendor, and served
with dignity some of the chief offices in the city.

        A quaint and interesting cycle of animal
        stories was formed in the Middle Ages with the
        fox, called Reynard, as the hero or central
        character. Their origin was not different from
        that of the cycles that grew up concerning such
        popular heroes as King Arthur, Robin Hood,
        Charlemagne, and Siegfried; but one difference
        at least may be observed--Reynard is always
        represented as evil, though clever and
        successful. These stories of Reynard have
        furnished material for many workers in the
        field of literature and they have generally
        served as a vehicle for satire. Indeed, there
        was much satire in the original versions of the
        folk. Perhaps the greatest of these modern
        recensions is that of the German poet Goethe.
        The best version for use with children is that
        made by Sir Henry Cole ("Felix Summerley") and
        edited more recently by Joseph Jacobs in his
        usual masterly fashion. The introduction to
        this edition gives just the facts that the
        reader needs for understanding the significance
        of the Reynard cycle.



399

        It may be noted that King Lion, after hearing
        many complaints about Reynard's evil ways,
        decides to bring him to court for trial. The
        first special constable sent to summon Reynard
        was Bruin the Bear, and now we are to learn--


HOW BRUIN THE BEAR SPED WITH REYNARD THE FOX

The next morning away went _Bruin_ the bear in quest of the fox, armed
against all plots of deceit whatsoever. And as he came through a dark
forest, in which _Reynard_ had a bypath, which he used when he was
hunted, he saw a high mountain, over which he must pass to go to
_Malepardus_. For though _Reynard_ has many houses, yet _Malepardus_ is
his chiefest and most ancient castle, and in it he lay both for defense
and ease. Now at last when _Bruin_ was come to _Malepardus_, he found
the gates close shut, at which after he had knocked, sitting on his
tail, he called aloud, "Sir _Reynard_, are you at home? I am _Bruin_
your kinsman, whom the King hath sent to summon you to the court, to
answer many foul accusations exhibited against you, and hath taken a
great vow, that if you fail to appear to this summons, your life shall
answer your contempt, and your goods and honors shall lie confiscate at
his highness's mercy. Therefore, fair kinsman, be advised of your
friend, and go with me to the court to shun the danger that else will
fall upon you."

_Reynard_, lying close by the gate, as his custom was for the warm sun's
sake, hearing those words, departed into one of his holes, for
_Malepardus_ is full of many intricate and curious rooms, which
labyrinth-wise he could pass through, when either his danger or the
benefit of any prey required the same. There he meditated awhile with
himself how he might counterplot and bring the bear to disgrace (who he
knew loved him not) and himself to honor; at last he came forth, and
said, "Dear uncle _Bruin_, you are exceeding welcome. Pardon my slowness
in coming, for at your first speech I was saying my even song, and
devotion must not be neglected. Believe me, he hath done you no good
service, nor do I thank him which hath sent you this weary and long
journey, in which your much sweat and toil far exceeds the worth of the
labor. Certainly had you not come, I had to-morrow been at the court of
my own accord, yet at this time my sorrow is much lessened, inasmuch as
your counsel at this present may return me double benefit. Alas, cousin,
could his Majesty find no meaner a messenger than your noble self to
employ in these trivial affairs? Truly it appears strange to me,
especially since, next his royal self, you are of greatest renown both
in blood and riches. For my part, I would we were both at court, for I
fear our journey will be exceeding troublesome. To speak truth, since I
made mine abstinence from flesh, I have eaten such strange new meats,
that my body is very much distempered, and swelleth as if it would
break."

"Alas, dear cousin," said the bear, "what meat is that which maketh you
so ill?"

"Uncle," answered he, "what will it profit you to know? The meat was
simple and mean. We poor men are no lords, you know, but eat that for
necessity which others eat for wantonness; yet not to delay you, that
which I ate was honeycombs, great, full, and most pleasant, which,
compelled by hunger, I ate too unmeasurably and am thereby infinitely
distempered."

"Ha," quoth _Bruin_, "honeycombs? Do you make such slight respect of
them, nephew? Why it is meat for the greatest emperor in the world. Fair
nephew, help me but to some of that honey, and command me whilst I live;
for one little part thereof I will be your servant everlastingly."

"Sure," said the fox, "uncle, you but jest with me."

"But jest with you?" replied _Bruin_, "beshrew my heart then, for I am
in that serious earnest, that for one lick thereat you shall make me the
faithfullest of all your kindred."

"Nay," said the fox, "if you be in earnest, then know I will bring you
where so much is, that ten of you shall not be able to devour it at a
meal, only for your love's sake, which above all things I desire,
uncle."

"Not ten of us?" said the bear, "it is impossible; for had I all the
honey betwixt _Hybla_ and _Portugal_, yet I could in a short space eat
it all myself."

"Then know, uncle," quoth the fox, "that near at hand here dwelleth a
husbandman named _Lanfert_, who is master of so much honey that you
cannot consume it in seven years, which for your love and friendship's
sake I will put into your safe possession."

_Bruin_, mad upon the honey, swore, that to have one good meal thereof
he would not only be his faithful friend, but also stop the mouths of
all his adversaries.

_Reynard_, smiling at his easy belief, said, "If you will have seven
ton, uncle, you shall have it."

These words pleased the bear so well, and made him so pleasant, that he
could not stand for laughing.

Well, thought the fox, this is good fortune. Sure I will lead him where
he shall laugh more measurably; and then said, "Uncle, we must delay no
time, and I will spare no pains for your sake, which for none of my kin
I would perform."

The bear gave him many thanks, and so away they went, the fox promising
him as much honey as he could bear, but meant as many strokes as he
could undergo. In the end they came to _Lanfert's_ house, the sight
whereof made the bear rejoice. This _Lanfert_ was a stout and lusty
carpenter, who the other day had brought into his yard a great oak,
which, as their manner is, he began to cleave, and had struck into it
two wedges in such wise that the cleft stood a great way open, at which
the fox rejoiced much, for it was answerable to his wish. So with a
laughing countenance he said to the bear, "Behold now, dear uncle, and
be careful of yourself, for within this tree is so much honey that it is
unmeasurable. Try if you can get into it; yet, good uncle, eat
moderately, for albeit the combs are sweet and good, yet a surfeit is
dangerous, and may be troublesome to your body, which I would not for a
world, since no harm can come to you but must be my dishonor."

"Sorrow not for me, nephew _Reynard_," said the bear, "nor think me such
a fool that I cannot temper mine appetite."

"It is true, my best uncle, I was too bold. I pray you enter in at the
end, and you shall find your desire."

The bear with all haste entered the tree, with his two feet forward, and
thrust his head into the cleft, quite over the ears, which when the fox
perceived, he instantly ran and pulled the wedges out of the tree, so
that he locked the bear fast therein, and then neither flattery nor
anger availed the bear. For the nephew had by his deceit brought the
uncle into so false a prison that it was impossible by any art to free
himself of the same. Alas, what profited now his great strength and
valor? Why, they were both causes of more vexation; and finding himself
destitute of all relief, he began to howl and bray, and with scratching
and tumbling to make such a noise that _Lanfert_, amazed, came hastily
out of his house, having in his hand a sharp hook, whilst the bear lay
wallowing and roaring within the tree.

The fox from afar off said to the bear in scorn and mocking, "Is the
honey good, uncle, which you eat? How do you? Eat not too much, I
beseech you. Pleasant things are apt to surfeit, and you may hinder your
journey to the court. When _Lanfert_ cometh (if your belly be full) he
will give you drink to digest it, and wash it down your throat."

And having thus said, he went towards his castle. But by this time,
_Lanfert_, finding the bear fast taken in the tree, he ran to his
neighbors and desired them to come into his yard, for there was a bear
fast taken there. This was noised through all the town, so that there
was neither man, nor woman, nor child but ran thither, some with one
weapon, and some with another--as goads, rakes, broom-staves, or what
they could gather up. The priest had the handle of the cross, the clerk
the holy water sprinkler, and the priest's wife, Dame _Jullock_, with
her distaff, for she was then spinning; nay, the old beldames came that
had ne'er a tooth in their heads. This army put _Bruin_ into a great
fear, being none but himself to withstand them, and hearing the clamor
of the noise which came thundering upon him, he wrestled and pulled so
extremely that he got out his head, but he left behind him all the skin,
and his ears also; insomuch that never creature beheld a fouler or more
deformed beast. For the blood covering all his face, and his hands
leaving the claws and skin behind them, nothing remained but ugliness.
It was an ill market the bear came to, for he lost both motion and
sight--that is, feet and eyes. But notwithstanding this torment,
_Lanfert_, the priest, and the whole parish came upon him, and so
becudgeled him about his body part, that it might well be a warning to
all his misery, to know that ever the weakest shall still go most to the
wall. This the bear found by experience, for every one exercised the
height of their fury upon him. Even _Houghlin_ with the crooked leg, and
_Ludolf_ with the long broad nose, the one with a leaden mall, and the
other with an iron whip, all belashed poor sir _Bruin_; not so much but
sir _Bertolf_ with the long fingers, _Lanfert_ and _Ortam_ did him more
annoyance than all the rest, the one having a sharp Welsh hook, the
other a crooked staff well leaded at the end, which he used to play at
stab ball withal. There was _Birkin_ and _Armes Ablequack_, _Bane_ the
priest with his staff, and Dame _Jullock_ his wife; all these so
belabored the bear, that his life was in great danger. The poor bear in
this massacre sat and sighed extremely, groaning under the burden of
their strokes, of which _Lanfert's_ were the greatest and thundered most
dreadfully; for Dame _Podge_ of _Casport_ was his mother, and his father
was _Marob_ the steeple-maker, a passing stout man when he was alone.
_Bruin_ received of him many showers of stones till _Lanfert's_ brother,
rushing before the rest with a staff, struck the bear in the head such a
blow that he could neither hear nor see, so that awaking from his
astonishment the bear leaped into the river adjoining, through a cluster
of wives there standing together, of which he threw divers into the
water, which was large and deep, amongst whom the parson's wife was one;
which the parson seeing how she floated like a sea-mew, he left striking
the bear, and cried to the rest of the company, "Help! oh, help! Dame
_Jullock_ is in the water; help, both men and women, for whosoever saves
her, I give free pardon of all their sins and transgressions, and remit
all penance imposed whatsoever." This heard, every one left the bear to
help Dame _Jullock_, which as soon as the bear saw, he cut the stream
and swam away as fast as he could, but the priest with a great noise
pursued him, crying in his rage, "Turn, villain, that I may be revenged
of thee"; but the bear swam in the strength of the stream and suspected
not his calling, for he was proud that he was so escaped from them. Only
he bitterly cursed the honey tree and the fox, which had not only
betrayed him, but had made him lose his hood from his face, and his
gloves from his fingers. In this sort he swam some three miles down the
water, in which time he grew so weary that he went on land to get ease,
where blood trickled down his face; he groaned, sighed, and drew his
breath so short, as if his last hour had been expiring.

Now whilst these things were in doing, the fox in his way home stole a
fat hen, and threw her into his mail, and running through a bypath that
no man might perceive him, he came towards the river with infinite joy;
for he suspected that the bear was certainly slain: therefore he said to
himself, "My fortune is as I wished it, for the greatest enemy I had in
the court is now dead, nor can any man suspect me guilty thereof." But
as he spake these words, looking towards the river, he espied where
_Bruin_ the bear lay and rested, which struck his heart with grief, and
he railed against _Lanfert_ the carpenter, saying, "Silly fool that thou
art, what madman would have lost such good venison, especially being so
fat and wholesome, and for which he took no pains, for he was taken to
his hand; any man would have been proud of the fortune which thou
neglectest." Thus fretting and chiding, he came to the river, where he
found the bear all wounded and bloody, of which _Reynard_ was only
guilty; yet in scorn he said to the bear, "_Monsieur, Dieu vous garde_."

"O thou foul red villain," said the bear to himself, "what impudence is
like to this?"

But the fox went on with his speech, and said, "What, uncle? Have you
forgot anything at _Lanfert's_, or have you paid him for the honeycombs
you stole? If you have not, it will redound much to your disgrace, which
before you shall undergo, I will pay him for them myself. Sure the honey
was excellent good, and I know much more of the same price. Good uncle,
tell me before I go, into what order do you mean to enter, that you wear
this new-fashioned hood? Will you be a monk, an abbot, or a friar?
Surely he that shaved your crown hath cropped your ears; also your
foretop is lost, and your gloves are gone; fie, sloven, go not
bare-handed; they say you can sing _peccavi_ rarely."

These taunts made _Bruin_ mad with rage, but because he could not take
revenge, he was content to let him talk his pleasure. Then after a small
rest he plunged again into the river, and swam down the stream, and
landed on the other side, where he began with much grief to meditate how
he might get to the court, for he had lost his ears, his talons, and all
the skin off his feet, so that had a thousand deaths followed him, he
could not go. Yet of necessity he must move, that in the end compelled
by extremity, he set his tail on the ground, and tumbled his body over
and over; so by degrees, tumbling now half a mile, and then half a mile,
in the end he tumbled to the court, where divers beholding his strange
manner of approach, they thought some prodigy had come towards them;
but in the end the King knew him, and grew angry, saying, "It is sir
_Bruin_, my servant; what villains have wounded him thus, or where hath
he been that he brings his death thus along with him?"

"O my dread Sovereign Lord the King," cried out the bear, "I complain me
grievously unto you; behold how I am massacred, which I humbly beseech
you revenge on that false _Reynard_, who, for doing your royal pleasure,
hath brought me to this disgrace and slaughter."

Then said the King, "How durst he do this? Now by my crown I swear I
will take the revenge which shall make the traitors tremble!"

Whereupon the King sent for all his council, and consulted how and in
what sort to persecute against the fox, where it was generally concluded
that he should be again summoned to appear and answer his trespasses;
and the party to summon him they appointed to be _Tibert_ the cat, as
well for his gravity as wisdom; all which pleased the King well.



400

        After many ups and downs in fortune Reynard is
        finally on good terms with the king when
        Isegrim the Wolf appears with another
        accusation. Reynard's denial of the charges led
        the Wolf to challenge him to mortal combat, a
        well known medieval way of settling the truth
        of conflicting evidence. The result appears in
        the following:


THE BATTLE BETWEEN THE FOX AND THE WOLF

The fox answered not a word, but bowing himself down humbly to the
earth, both before the King and the Queen's Majesties, went forth into
the field; and at the same time the wolf was also ready, and stood
boasting, and giving out many proud and vainglorious speeches. The
marshals and rulers of the lists were the leopard and the loss. These
brought forth a book, on which the wolf swore and maintained his
assertion that the fox was a traitor and a murderer, which he would
prove on his body, or else be counted a recreant. Then _Reynard_ took
the book, and swore he lied as a false traitor and a thief, which he
would prove on his body, or be accounted a recreant.

When these ceremonies were done, the marshals of the field bade them do
their devoir. And then every creature avoided the lists, save Dame
_Rukenaw_, who stood by the fox, and bade him remember the words and
instructions she had given him, and call to mind how, when he was scarce
seven years old, he had then wisdom enough to pass the darkest night
without lantern or candle-light, or the help of the moon, when any
occasion required him; and that his experience was much greater, and his
reputation of wisdom more frequent with his companions; and therefore to
work so as he might win the day, which would be an eternal monument to
him and his family for ever.

To this the fox answered, "My best aunt, assure yourself I will do my
best, and not forget a tittle of your counsel. I doubt not but my
friends shall reap honor and my foes shame by my actions." To this the
ape said amen, and so departed.

When none but the combatants were in the lists, the wolf went toward the
fox with infinite rage and fury, and thinking to take the fox in his
forefeet, the fox leaped nimbly from him and the wolf pursued him, so
that there began a tedious chase between them, on which their friends
gazed. The wolf taking larger strides than the fox often overtook him,
and lifting up his feet to strike him, the fox avoided the blow and
smote him on the face with his tail, so that the wolf was stricken
almost blind, and he was forced to rest while he cleared his eyes; which
advantage when _Reynard_ saw, he scratched up the dust with his feet,
and threw it in the eyes of the wolf.

This grieved him worse than the former, so that he durst follow him no
longer, for the dust and sand sticking in his eyes smarted so sore, that
of force he must rub and wash it away, which _Reynard_ seeing, with all
the fury he had he ran upon him, and with his teeth gave him three sore
wounds on his head, and scoffing said, "Have I hit you, Mr. Wolf? I will
yet hit you better; you have killed many a lamb and many an innocent
beast, and would impose the fault upon me, but you shall find the price
of your knavery. I am marked to punish thy sins, and I will give thee
thy absolution bravely. It is good for thee that thou use patience, for
thy evil life is at my mercy. Yet, notwithstanding, if thou wilt kneel
down and ask my forgiveness, and confess thyself vanquished, though thou
be the worst thing living, yet I will spare thy life, for my pity makes
me loath to kill thee."

These words made _Isegrim_ both mad and desperate, so that he knew not
how to express his fury; his wounds bled, his eyes smarted, and his
whole body was oppressed. So that in the height of his fury he lifted up
his foot and struck the fox so great a blow that he felled him to the
ground. But _Reynard_, being nimble, quickly rose up again and
encountered the wolf, that between them began a dreadful and doubtful
combat.

The wolf was exceeding furious, and ten times he leaped to catch
_Reynard_ fast, but his skin was so slippery and oily he could not hold
him. Nay, so wondrous nimble was he in the fight, that when the wolf
thought to have him surest, he would shift himself between his legs and
under his belly, and every time gave the wolf a bite with his teeth, or
a slap on the face with his tail, that the poor wolf found nothing but
despair in the conflict, albeit his strength was much the greater.

Thus many wounds and bitings passing on either side, the one expressing
cunning, and the other strength; the one fury, the other temperance. In
the end the wolf being enraged that the battle had continued so long,
for had his feet been sound it had been much shorter, he said to
himself, "I will make an end of this combat, for I know my very weight
is able to crush him to pieces; and I lose much of my reputation, to
suffer him thus long to contend against me."

And this said, he struck the fox again so sore a blow on the head with
his foot, that he fell down to the ground, and ere he could recover
himself and arise, he caught him in his feet and threw him under him,
lying upon him in such wise, as if he would have pressed him to death.

Now began the fox to be grievously afraid, and all his friends also, and
all _Isegrim's_ friends began to shout for joy; but the fox defended
himself as well as he could with his claws, lying along, and the wolf
could not hurt him with his claws, his feet were so sore; only with his
teeth he snatched at him to bite him, which, when the fox saw, he smote
the wolf on the head with his fore-claws, so that he tore the skin
between his brows and his ears, and one of his eyes hung out of his
head, which put the wolf to infinite torment, and he howled out
extremely. Then _Isegrim_ wiping his face, the fox took advantage
thereof, and with his struggling got upon his feet.

At which the wolf was angry, and striking after him, caught the fox in
his arms, and held him fast; never was _Reynard_ in so great a strait as
then, for at that time great was their contention; but anger now made
the wolf forget his smart, and gripping the fox altogether under him, as
_Reynard_ was defending himself his hand lighted into _Isegrim's_ mouth,
so that he was in danger of losing it. Then said the wolf to the fox,
"Now either yield thyself as vanquished, or else certainly I will kill
thee; neither thy dust, thy mocks, nor any subtle invention shall now
save thee; thou art now left utterly desperate, and my wounds must have
their satisfaction."

When the fox heard this he thought it was a hard election, for both
brought his ruin; and suddenly concluding, he said, "Dear uncle, since
fortune commands me, I yield to be your servant, and at your
commandments will travel for you to the Holy Land, or any other
pilgrimage, or do any service which shall be beneficial to your soul or
the souls of your forefathers. I will do for the King or for our holy
father the Pope, I will hold of you my lands and revenues, and as I, so
shall all the rest of my kindred; so that you shall be a lord of many
lords, and none shall dare to move against you.

"Besides, whatsoever I get of pullets, geese, partridges, or clover,
flesh or fish, you, your wife, and children shall have the first choice,
ere any are eaten by me. I will ever stand by your side, and wheresoever
you go, no danger shall come near you; you are strong, and I am subtle;
we two joined together, what force can prevail against us? Again, we are
so near in blood that nature forbids there should be any enmity between
us; I would not have fought against you had I been sure of victory, but
that you first appealed me, and then you know of necessity I must do my
uttermost. I have also in this battle been courteous to you, and not
shown my worst violence, as I would on a stranger, for I know it is the
duty of a nephew to spare his uncle; and this you might well perceive by
my running from you. I tell you, it was an action much contrary to my
nature, for I might often have hurt you when I refused, nor are you
worse for me by anything more than the blemish of your eye, for which I
am sorry, and wished it had not happened; yet thereby know that you
shall reap rather benefit than loss thereby, for when other beasts in
their sleep shut two windows, you shall shut but one.

"As for my wife, children, and lineage, they shall fall down at your
feet before you in any presence; therefore, I humbly desire you, that
you will suffer poor _Reynard_ to live. I know you will kill me, but
what will that avail you, when you shall never live in safety for fear
of revengement of my kindred? Therefore, temperance in any man's wrath
is excellent, whereas rashness is ever the mother of repentance. But,
uncle, I know you to be valiant, wise, and discreet, and you rather seek
honor, peace, and good fame than blood and revenge."

_Isegrim_ the wolf said, "Infinite dissembler, how fain wouldst thou be
freed of my servitude? Too well I understand thee, and know that if
thou wert safe on thy feet thou wouldst forswear this submission; but
know all the wealth in the world shall not buy out thy ransom, for thee
and thy friends I esteem them not, nor believe anything thou hast
uttered. Too well I know thee, and am no bird for thy lime bush; chaff
cannot deceive me. Oh, how wouldst thou triumph if I should believe
thee, and say I wanted wit to understand thee; but thou shalt know I can
look both on this side and beyond thee. Thy many deceits used upon me
have now armed me against thee. Thou sayest thou hast spared me in the
battle; but look upon me, and my wounds will show how falsely thou
liest; thou never gavest me a time to breathe in, nor will I now give
thee a minute to repent in."

Now whilst _Isegrim_ was thus talking, the fox bethought himself how he
might best get free, and thrusting his other hand down he caught the
wolf fast by the neck, and he wrung him so extremely hard thereby, that
he made him shriek and howl out with the anguish; then the fox drew his
other hand out of his mouth, for the wolf was in such wondrous torment
that he had much ado to contain himself from swooning; for this torment
exceeded above the pain of his eye, and in the end he fell over and over
in a swoon; then presently _Reynard_ leaped upon him, and drew him about
the lists and dragged him by the legs, and struck, wounded, and bit him
in many places, so that all the whole field might take notice thereof.

At this, all _Isegrim's_ friends were full of sorrow, and with great
weeping and lamentation went to the King and prayed him to be pleased to
appease the combat and take it into his own hands; which suit the King
granted, and then the leopard and the loss, being marshals, entered the
lists and told the fox and the wolf that the King would speak with them,
and that the battle should there end, for he would take it into his own
hands and determine thereof; as for themselves they had done
sufficiently, neither would the King lose either of them. And to the fox
they said the whole field gave him the victory.

        The greatest and most inspiring cycle of
        medieval romances is that concerned with the
        adventures of King Arthur and his Knights of
        the Round Table. Developing largely as separate
        stories, these romances were brought together
        into an organic collection by Sir Thomas Malory
        in the third quarter of the fifteenth century.
        This work, called _Le Morte D'Arthur_, has
        remained the standard Arthuriad and is the
        source of most modern versions. It is one of
        the great monuments of English prose, and,
        while at first the strangeness of its style may
        repel, the wonderful dignity of the story and
        the sonorous quality of the language make a
        strong appeal to children as well as to older
        readers. Teachers should at least be acquainted
        with a portion of Malory, and the three
        selections following are taken from his text.
        No. 404 is added as a suggestion as to how this
        material may be worked up to tell to children.



401

        According to a tradition in _Le Morte
        D'Arthur_, Uther Pendragon, the father of
        Arthur, was a powerful king in England. To
        fulfill a promise made to Merlin, Uther
        Pendragon allowed Merlin to take Arthur on the
        day of his birth, that the child might not be
        known as the son of the king. Merlin took the
        child to Sir Ector, and the wife of Sir Ector
        reared Arthur as one of her own children. The
        following story is an account of how Arthur
        learned of his parentage.


HOW ARTHUR BECAME KING

SIR THOMAS MALORY

After the death of Uther Pendragon, stood the realm in great jeopardy
long while, for every lord that was mighty of men made him strong, and
many weened to have been king. Then Merlin went to the Archbishop of
Canterbury and counselled him to send for all the lords of the realm and
all the gentlemen of arms, that they should to London come by Christmas.

So the Archbishop, by the advice of Merlin, sent for all the lords and
gentlemen of arms that they should come by Christmas even unto London.
So in the greatest church of London, whether it were Paul's or not the
French book maketh no mention, all the estates were long or day in the
church for to pray. And when matins and the first mass were done, there
was seen in the churchyard, against the high altar, a great stone four
square, like unto a marble stone, and in midst thereof was like an anvil
of steel a foot on high, and therein stuck a fair sword, and letters
there were written in gold about the sword that said thus:

        "Whoso pulleth out this sword of this stone and
        anvil, is rightwise king born of all England."

Then the people marveled and told it to the Archbishop. "I command,"
said the Archbishop, "that you keep you within your church, and pray
unto God still; that no man touch the sword till the high mass be all
done."

So when all masses were done, all the lords went to behold the stone and
the sword. And when they saw the scripture, some assayed; such as would
have been king. But none might stir the sword nor move it. "He is not
here," said the Archbishop, "that shall achieve the sword, but doubt not
God will make him known. But this is my counsel," said the Archbishop,
"that we provide ten knights, men of good fame, and they to keep this
sword."

So it was ordained, and there was made a cry, that every man should
essay that would, for to win the sword. And upon New Year's Day the
barons let make a jousts and a tournament, that all knights that would
joust or tourney there might play, and all this was ordained for to keep
the lords and the commons together, for the Archbishop trusted that God
would make him known that should win the sword. So upon New Year's Day,
when the service was done, the barons rode unto the field, some to joust
and some to tourney, and so it happened that Sir Ector rode unto the
jousts, and with him rode Sir Kay his son, and young Arthur that was his
nourished brother; and Sir Kay had been made knight at All Hallowmass
afore.

So as they rode to the joustsward, Sir Kay had lost his sword, for he
had left it at his father's lodging, and so he prayed young Arthur for
to ride for his sword. "I will well," said Arthur, and rode fast after
the sword, and when he came home, the lady and all were out to see the
jousting. Then was Arthur wroth, and said to himself, "I will ride to
the churchyard and take the sword with me that sticketh in the stone,
for my brother Sir Kay shall not be without a sword this day." So when
he came to the churchyard, Sir Arthur alit and tied his horse to the
stile, and so he went to the tent and found no knights there, for they
were at jousting; and so he handled the sword by the handles, and
lightly and fiercely pulled it out of the stone, and took his horse and
rode his way until he came to his brother Sir Kay, and delivered him the
sword.

As soon as Sir Kay saw the sword, he wist well it was the sword of the
stone, and so he rode to his father, Sir Ector, and said, "Sir, lo here
is the sword of the stone, wherefore I must be king of this land."

When Sir Ector beheld the sword, he returned again and came to the
church, and there they alit, all three, and went into the church. And
anon he made Sir Kay to swear upon a book how he came to that sword.
"Sir," said Sir Kay, "by my brother Arthur, for he brought it to me."

"How gat ye this sword?" said Sir Ector to Arthur.

"Sir, I will tell you. When I came home for my brother's sword, I found
nobody at home to deliver me his sword, and so I thought my brother Sir
Kay should not be swordless, and so I came hither eagerly and pulled it
out of the stone without any pain."

"Found ye any knights about this sword?" said Sir Ector.

"Nay," said Arthur.

"Now," said Sir Ector to Arthur, "I understand ye must be king of this
land."

"Wherefore I," said Arthur, "and for what cause?"

"Sir," said Ector, "for God will have it so, for there should never man
have drawn out this sword, but he that shall be rightways king of this
land. Now let me see whether ye can put the sword there as it was and
pull it out again."

"That is no mastery," said Arthur, and so he put it in the stone;
therewithal Sir Ector essayed to pull out the sword and failed.

"Now essay," said Sir Ector unto Sir Kay. And anon he pulled at the
sword with all his might, but it would not be.

"Now shall ye essay," said Ector to Arthur.

"I will well," said Arthur, and pulled it out easily. And therewithal
Sir Ector knelt down to the earth, and Sir Kay. "Alas," said Arthur, "my
own dear father and brother, why kneel ye to me?"

"Nay, nay, my lord Arthur, it is not so. I was never your father nor of
your blood, but I wot well ye are of an higher blood than I weened ye
were." And then Sir Ector told him all, how he had taken him for to
nourish him, and by whose commandment, and by Merlin's deliverance. Then
Arthur made great doole when he understood that Sir Ector was not his
father.

"Sir," said Ector unto Arthur, "will ye be my good and gracious lord
when ye are king?"

"Else were I to blame," said Arthur, "for ye are the man in the world
that I am most beholden to, and my good lady and mother your wife, that
as well as her own hath fostered me and kept. And if ever it be God's
will that I be king as ye say, God forbid that I should fail you."

"Sir," said Sir Ector, "I will ask no more of you but that ye will make
my son, your foster brother, Sir Kay, seneschal of all your lands."

"That shall be done," said Arthur, "and more, by the faith of my body,
that never man shall have that office but he, while he and I live."

Therewithal they went unto the Archbishop and told him how the sword was
achieved, and by whom; and on the Twelfth-day all the barons came
thither, and to essay to take the sword, who that would essay. But there
afore them all, there might none take it out but Arthur; wherefore
there were many lords wroth, and said it was great shame unto them all
and the realm to be over-governed with a boy of no high blood born, and
so they fell out at that time that it was put off until Candlemas, and
then all the barons should meet there again; but always the ten knights
were ordained to watch the sword day and night, and so they set a
pavilion over the stone and the sword, and five always watched. So at
Candlemas many more great lords came thither for to have won the sword,
but there might none prevail. And right as Arthur did at Christmas, he
did at Candlemas, and pulled out the sword easily, whereof the barons
were sore agrieved and put it off in delay till the high feast of
Easter, yet there were some of the great lords had indignation that
Arthur should be king, and put it off in a delay till the feast of
Pentecost. And at the feast of Pentecost all manner of men essayed to
pull at the sword that would essay, but none might prevail but Arthur,
and he pulled it out afore all the lords and commons that were there,
wherefore all the commons cried at once, "We will have Arthur unto our
king. We will put him no more in delay, for we all see that it is God's
will that he shall be our king, and who that holdeth against it, we will
slay him." And therewith they all kneeled at once, both rich and poor,
and cried Arthur mercy because they had delayed him so long, and Arthur
forgave them, and took the sword between both his hands, and offered it
upon the altar where the Archbishop was, and so was he made knight of
the best man that was there. And so anon was the coronation made. And
there was he sworn unto his lords and the commons for to be a true king
and to stand with true justice from thenceforth the days of his life.



402

        After Arthur was made king, he spent several
        years in war with his lawless barons before he
        finally established a stable government in
        England. Malory's accounts of these wars are
        interspersed with stories of miraculous
        incidents, accounts of the adventures of
        knights, and descriptions of feasts,
        tournaments, and jousts. The following is a
        description of the jousting between the knights
        of King Arthur and those of two French kings,
        Ban and Bors, who had come to aid Arthur in his
        wars.


A TOURNEY WITH THE FRENCH

SIR THOMAS MALORY

Then the king let purvey for a great feast, and let cry a great jousts.
And by All Hallowmass the two kings were come over the sea with three
hundred knights well arrayed both for peace and for war. And King Arthur
met with them ten miles out of London, and there was great joy as could
be thought or made. And on All Hallowmass at the great feast, sat in the
hall the three kings, and Sir Kay seneschal served in the hall, and Sir
Lucas the butler, and Sir Griflet. These three knights had the rule of
all the service that served the kings. And anon, as they had washed and
risen, all knights that would joust made them ready. By when they were
ready on horseback there were seven hundred knights. And Arthur, Ban,
and Bors, with the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Sir Ector, Kay's
father, they were in a place covered with cloth of gold like an hall,
with ladies and gentlewomen, for to behold who did the best, and thereon
to give judgment.

And King Arthur and the two kings let depart the seven hundred knights
into two parties. And there were three hundred knights of the realm of
Benwick and of Gaul turned on the other side. Then they dressed their
shields, and began to couch their spears many good knights. So Griflet
was the first that met with a knight, one Ladinas, and they met so
eagerly that all men had wonder; and they so fought that their shields
fell to pieces, and horse and man fell to the earth; and both French
knight and English knight lay so long that all men weened they had been
dead. When Lucas the butler saw Griflet so lie, he horsed him again
anon, and they two did marvelous deeds of arms with many bachelors. Also
Sir Kay came out of an enbushment with five knights with him, and they
six smote other six down. But Sir Kay did that day marvelous deeds of
arms that there was none did so well as he that day. Then there come
Ladinas and Gracian, two knights of France, and did passing well, that
all men praised them. Then come there Sir Placidas, a good knight, and
met with Sir Kay, and smote him down horse and man, wherefore Sir
Griflet was wroth, and met with Sir Placidas so hard that horse and man
fell to the earth. But when the five knights wist that Sir Kay had a
fall, they were wroth out of wit, and therewith each of them five bare
down a knight. When King Arthur and the two kings saw them begin to wax
wroth on both parties, they leaped on small hackneys and let cry that
all men should depart unto their lodging. And so they went home and
unarmed them, and so to evensong and supper. And after, the three kings
went into a garden and gave the prize unto Sir Kay, and to Lucas the
butler, and unto Sir Griflet.



403

        One part of _Le Morte D'Arthur_ will illustrate
        almost as well as another the nature of the
        adventure stories that grew up in the Middle
        Ages regarding the traditional heroes of
        chivalry. The following selection is taken from
        the first part of the book.


ADVENTURES OF ARTHUR

SIR THOMAS MALORY

Then on a day there came in the court a squire on horseback, leading a
knight before him wounded to the death. He said, "There is a knight in
the forest who hath reared up a pavilion by a well, and hath slain my
master, a good knight whose name was Miles; wherefore I beseech you that
my master may be buried, and that some knight may revenge my master's
death."

Then the noise was great of that knight's death in the court, and every
man said his advice. Then came Griflet that was but a squire, and he was
but young, of the age of King Arthur; so he besought the king for all
his service that he had done him to give him the order of knighthood.

"Thou art full young and tender of age," said Arthur, "for to take so
high an order on thee."

"Sir," said Griflet, "I beseech you make me knight."

"Sir," said Merlin, "it were great pity to lose Griflet, for he will be
a passing good man when he is of age, abiding with you the term of his
life. And if he adventure his body with yonder knight at the fountain,
it is in great peril if ever he come again, for he is one of the best
knights in the world, and the strongest man of arms."

"Well," said Arthur. So at the desire of Griflet the king made him
knight. "Now," said Arthur unto Sir Griflet, "sith I have made you
knight thou must give me a gift."

"What ye will," said Griflet.

"Thou shalt promise me by the faith of thy body, when thou hast jousted
with the knight at the fountain, whether it fall ye to be on foot or on
horseback, that right so ye shall come again unto me without making any
more debate."

"I will promise you," said Griflet, "as you desire."

Then took Griflet his horse in great haste, and dressed his shield and
took a spear in his hand, and so he rode at a great wallop till he came
to the fountain, and thereby he saw a rich pavilion, and thereby under a
cloth stood a fair horse well saddled and bridled, and on a tree a
shield of divers colors and a great spear. Then Griflet smote on the
shield with the butt of his spear, that the shield fell down to the
ground. With that the knight came out of the pavilion and said, "Fair
knight, why smote ye down my shield?"

"For I will joust with you," said Griflet.

"It is better ye do not," said the knight, "for ye are but young, and
late made knight, and your might is nothing to mine."

"As for that," said Griflet, "I will joust with you."

"That is me loath," said the knight, "but sith I must needs, I will
dress me thereto. Of whence be ye?" said the knight.

"Sir, I am of Arthur's court."

So the two knights ran together that Griflet's spear all to-shivered;
and therewithal he smote Griflet through the shield and the left side,
and brake the spear that the truncheon stuck in his body, that horse and
knight fell down.

When the knight saw him lie so on the ground, he alit, and was passing
heavy, for he weened he had slain him, and then he unlaced his helm and
gat him wind, and so with the truncheon he set him on his horse and gat
him wind, and so betook him to God, and said he had a mighty heart, and
if he might live he would prove a passing good knight. And so Sir
Griflet rode to the court, where great dole was made for him. But
through good leeches he was healed and saved.

Right so came into the court twelve knights, who were aged men, and they
came from the Emperor of Rome, and they asked of Arthur truage for this
realm, other-else the emperor would destroy him and his land.

"Well," said King Arthur, "ye are messengers, therefore ye may say what
ye will, other-else ye should die therefore. But this is mine answer: I
owe the emperor no truage, nor none will I hold him, but on a fair field
I shall give him my truage that shall be with a sharp spear, or else
with a sharp sword, and that shall not be long."

And therewith the messengers departed passingly wroth, and King Arthur
as wroth, for in evil time came they then; for the king was passingly
wroth for the hurt of Sir Griflet. And so he commanded a privy man of
his chamber that or it be day his best horse and armor with all that
longeth unto his person, be without the city or to-morrow day. Right so
or to-morrow day he met with his man and his horse, and so mounted up
and dressed his shield and took his spear, and bade his chamberlain
tarry there till he came again. And so Arthur rode a soft pace till it
was day, and then was he ware of three churls chasing Merlin, and would
have slain him. Then the king rode unto them and bade them, "Flee,
churls!" Then were they afeard when they saw a knight, and fled.

"O Merlin," said Arthur, "here hadst thou been slain for all thy crafts
had I not been."

"Nay," said Merlin, "not so, for I could save myself an I would; and
thou art more near thy death than I am, for thou goest to the deathward,
an God be not thy friend."

So as they went thus talking they came to the fountain and the rich
pavilion there by it. Then King Arthur was ware where sat a knight armed
in a chair. "Sir knight," said Arthur, "for what cause abidest thou
here, that there may no knight ride this way but he joust with thee? I
rede thee leave that custom," said Arthur.

"This custom," said the knight, "have I used and will use maugre who
saith nay, and who is grieved with my custom let him amend it that
will."

"I will amend it," said Arthur.

"I shall defend thee," said the knight.

Anon he took his horse and dressed his shield and took a spear, and they
met so hard either on other's shield, that all to-shivered their spears.
Therewith anon Arthur pulled out his sword. "Nay, not so," said the
knight; "it is fairer that we twain run more together with sharp
spears."

"I will well," said Arthur, "an I had any more spears."

"I have enow," said the knight, so there came a squire and brought two
good spears, and Arthur chose one and he another; so they spurred their
horses and came together with all their mights, that either brake their
spears to their hands. Then Arthur set hand on his sword. "Nay," said
the knight, "ye shall do better. Ye are a passing good jouster as ever I
met withal, and once more for the love of the high order of knighthood
let us joust once again."

"I assent me," said Arthur.

Anon there were brought two great spears, and every knight gat a spear,
and therewith they ran together that Arthur's spear all to-shivered. But
the other knight hit him so hard in midst of the shield that horse and
man fell to the earth, and therewith Arthur was eager, and pulled out
his sword and said, "I will assay thee, sir knight, on foot, for I have
lost the honor on horseback."

"I will be on horseback," said the knight.

Then was Arthur wroth, and dressed his shield toward him with his sword
drawn. When the knight saw that, he alit, for him thought no worship to
have a knight at such avail, he to be on horseback and he on foot, and
so he alit and dressed his shield unto Arthur. And there began a strong
battle with many great strokes, and so hewed with their swords that the
cantels flew in the fields, and much blood they bled both, that all the
place there as they fought was overbled with blood, and thus they fought
long and rested them, and then they went to battle again, and so hurtled
together like two rams that either fell to the earth. So at the last
they smote together that both their swords met even together. But the
sword of the knight smote King Arthur's sword in two pieces, wherefore
he was heavy. Then said the knight unto Arthur, "Thou art in my daunger
whether me list to save thee or slay thee, and but thou yield thee as
overcome and recreant, thou shalt die."

"As for death," said King Arthur, "welcome be it when it cometh, but to
yield me unto thee as recreant I had liefer die than be so shamed."

And therewithal the king leaped unto Pellinore, and took him by the
middle and threw him down, and raised off his helm. When the knight felt
that, he was adread, for he was a passing big man of might, and anon he
brought Arthur under him, and raised off his helm and would have smitten
off his head.

Therewithal came Merlin and said, "Knight, hold thy hand, for an thou
slay that knight thou puttest this realm in the greatest damage that
ever was realm; for this knight is a man of more worship that thou
wotest of."

"Why, who is he?" said the knight.

"It is King Arthur."

Then would he have slain him for dread of his wrath, and heaved up his
sword, and therewith Merlin cast an enchantment to the knight, that he
fell to the earth in a great sleep. Then Merlin took up King Arthur, and
rode forth on the knight's horse.

"Alas!" said Arthur, "what hast thou done, Merlin? Hast thou slain this
good knight by thy crafts? There liveth not so worshipful a knight as he
was; I had liefer than the stint of my land a year that he were alive."

"Care ye not," said Merlin, "for he is wholer than ye; for he is but
asleep, and will awake within three hours. I told you," said Merlin,
"what a knight he was; here had ye been slain had I not been. Also there
liveth not a bigger knight than he is one, and he shall hereafter do you
right good service; and his name is Pellinore, and he shall have two
sons that shall be passing good men; save one they shall have no fellow
of prowess and of good living, and their names shall be Percivale of
Wales and Lamerake of Wales."

Right so the king and he departed and went unto an hermit that was a
good man and a great leech. So the hermit searched all his wounds and
gave him good salves; so the king was there three days, and then were
his wounds well amended that he might ride and go, and so departed.

And as they rode, Arthur said, "I have no sword."

"No force," said Merlin, "hereby is a sword that shall be yours, an I
may."

So they rode till they came to a lake, the which was a fair water and
broad, and in the midst of the lake Arthur was ware of an arm clothed in
white samite, that held a fair sword in that hand.

"Lo!" said Merlin, "yonder is that sword that I spake of."

With that they saw a damosel going upon the lake. "What damosel is
that?" said Arthur.

"That is the Lady of the Lake," said Merlin; "and within that lake is a
rock, and therein is as fair a place as any on earth, and richly beseen;
and this damosel will come to you anon, and then speak ye fair to her
that she will give you that sword."

Anon withal came the damosel unto Arthur and saluted him, and he her
again. "Damosel," said Arthur, "what sword is that, that yonder the arm
holdeth above the water? I would it were mine, for I have no sword."

"Sir Arthur, king," said the damosel, "that sword is mine, and if ye
will give me a gift when I ask it you, ye shall have it."

"By my faith," said Arthur, "I will give you what gift ye will ask."

"Well!" said the damosel. "Go ye into yonder barge, and row yourself to
the sword, and take it and the scabbard with you, and I will ask my gift
when I see my time."

So Sir Arthur and Merlin alit and tied their horses to two trees, and so
they went into the ship, and when they came to the sword that the hand
held, Sir Arthur took it up by the handles, and took it with him, and
the arm and the hand went under the water. And so they came unto the
land and rode forth, and then Sir Arthur saw a rich pavilion.

"What signifieth yonder pavilion?"

"It is the knight's pavilion," said Merlin, "that ye fought with last,
Sir Pellinore; but he is out; he is not there. He hath ado with a knight
of yours that hight Egglame, and they have foughten together, but at the
last Egglame fled, and else he had been dead, and he hath chased him
even to Carlion, and we shall meet with him anon in the highway."

"That is well said," said Arthur, "now have I a sword; now will I wage
battle with him, and be avenged on him."

"Sir, you shall not so," said Merlin, "for the knight is weary of
fighting and chasing, so that ye shall have no worship to have ado with
him; also he will not be lightly matched of one knight living, and
therefore it is my counsel, let him pass, for he shall do you good
service in short time, and his sons after his days. Also ye shall see
that day in short space, you shall be right glad to give him your sister
to wed."

"When I see him, I will do as ye advise me," said Arthur. Then Sir
Arthur looked on the sword, and liked it passing well.

"Whether liketh you the better," said Merlin, "the sword or the
scabbard?"

"Me liketh better the sword," said Arthur.

"Ye are more unwise," said Merlin, "for the scabbard is worth ten of the
swords, for whiles ye have the scabbard upon you, ye shall never lose no
blood be ye never so sore wounded, therefore keep well the scabbard
always with you."

So they rode unto Carlion, and by the way they met with Sir Pellinore;
but Merlin had done such a craft, that Pellinore saw not Arthur, and he
passed by without any words.

"I marvel," said Arthur, "that the knight would not speak."

"Sir," said Merlin, "he saw you not, for an he had seen you, ye had not
lightly departed."

So they came unto Carlion, whereof his knights were passing glad. And
when they heard of his adventures, they marveled that he would jeopard
his person so, alone. But all men of worship said it was merry to be
under such a chieftain, that would put his person in adventure as other
poor knights did.

This meanwhile came a messenger from King Rience of North Wales, and
king he was of all Ireland, and of many isles. And this was his message,
greeting well King Arthur in this manner wise, saying that King Rience
had discomfited and overcome eleven kings, and every each of them did
him homage, and that was this, they gave him their beards clean flayed
off, as much as there was; wherefore the messenger came for King
Arthur's beard. For King Rience had purfled a mantle with king's beards,
and there lacked one place of the mantle; wherefore he sent for his
beard, or else he would enter his lands, and burn and slay, and never
leave till he have the head and the beard.

"Well," said Arthur, "thou hast said thy message, the which is the most
villainous and lewdest message that ever man heard sent unto a king;
also thou mayest see my beard is full young yet to make a purfle of it.
But tell thou thy king this: I owe him none homage, nor none of mine
elders, but or it be long to, he shall do me homage on both his knees,
or else he shall lose his head, by the faith of my body, for this is the
most shamefulest message that ever I heard speak of. I have espied thy
king met never yet with worshipful man, but tell him I will have his
head without he do me homage." Then the messenger departed.

"Now is there any here," said Arthur, "that knoweth King Rience?"

Then answered a knight that hight Naram, "Sir, I know the king well. He
is a passing good man of his body, as few be living, and a passing proud
man, and Sir, doubt ye not he will make war on you with a mighty
puissance."

"Well," said Arthur, "I shall ordain for him in short time."



404

        The story of "Arthur and Sir Accalon" is taken
        from Maude Radford Warren's _King Arthur and
        His Knights_. (By permission of the publishers,
        Rand McNally & Co., Chicago.) The stories in
        Malory are retold in a simple and direct style
        that can be read easily by children in the
        fifth grade. Most teachers will probably find
        themselves obliged to use some such book for
        any of these great cycles which they desire to
        teach, owing to the amount of time and energy
        required for working it up from the original
        source.


ARTHUR AND SIR ACCALON

MAUDE RADFORD WARREN

There was a woman in Arthur's Court named Morgan le Fay, who had learned
a great deal about magic. She was a wicked woman, and hated the king
because he was more powerful than she, and because he was so good.

However, she pretended to be a true friend to him, and the king believed
in her. One day when they were talking together, she asked him if he
would not let her take charge of his wonderful sword Excalibur, and its
scabbard. She said that she would guard them so carefully that they
would never be stolen. As she was very eager, Arthur granted her
request.

One day in time of peace, King Arthur went out hunting with a certain
knight named Sir Accalon, who was the lover of Morgan le Fay. They rode
for a long time, and when they were tired, stopped to rest beside a
great lake. As they looked over its shining waters, they saw a beautiful
little ship, which sailed straight towards them, and ran up to the sands
at their feet. It was all covered with golden silks, which waved in the
gentle wind. King Arthur and Sir Accalon climbed into it and examined it
thoroughly, but they found no one on board.

They rested on two couches which were on the deck, until it grew dark.
Then they were about to return home, when all at once, a hundred torches
set on the sides of the ship were lighted, and suddenly there appeared
twelve beautiful damsels who told the two that they were welcome, and
that they should be served with a banquet.

Presently the maidens led the king and the knight into a room which had
a table covered with a white cloth embroidered in purple. It bore many
golden dishes, and each dish had a beautiful design carved upon it. Some
dishes had vine-leaves, others ivy-leaves; some had angels with long
robes sweeping back in graceful lines; and all these dishes held choice
food. The king and Sir Accalon ate to their hearts' content.

Then the damsels led them into two separate chambers. King Arthur was
tired and so sleepy that he gave but one glance at his bedroom. He saw
that it was hung in red silk embroidered with gold dragons and griffins.
Then he threw himself on his bed and slept very soundly.

When he awoke, he found himself not in the pretty bed-chamber, but in a
dark place. He could see nothing, but all about him he heard the sound
of complaining and weeping. He was much bewildered, but in a moment he
cried:

"What is this? Where am I?"

Then a voice answered:

"You are in prison, as we are."

"Who are you?" asked Arthur.

The voice replied:

"We are twenty knights, prisoners, and some of us have been here as long
as seven years. We are in the dungeons of a wicked lord named Sir Damas.
He has a younger brother, and the two brothers are enemies, quarreling
about their inheritance. Now the younger brother, Sir Ontzlake, is very
strong, but Sir Damas is not strong, and moreover, he is a coward. So he
tries to find a knight who will fight for him against Sir Ontzlake.

"But Sir Damas is so much hated that no one will fight for him. So he
goes about the country with a body of rough men, and whenever he sees a
knight, he captures him. Then he asks him to fight with Sir Ontzlake. So
far, all the knights have refused, and have been thrown into prison. We
do not have food enough, but we would rather die here than fight for Sir
Damas, who is so wicked."

At that moment a damsel entered the prison with a torch, which faintly
lighted the dismal place, and advanced to the king.

"Sir," she said, "will you fight for my lord, Sir Damas? If you will,
you shall be taken from this prison. If you will not, you shall die
here."

Arthur considered for some time, and then said:

"I would rather fight than die in prison. If I fight, will you deliver
also all these prisoners?"

The damsel promised, and Arthur consented to fight. While she went to
tell Sir Damas, Arthur said to the other prisoners:

"My friends, I do not know Sir Damas, and I do not know Sir Ontzlake. I
do not know whether they are bad or good. But I will fight, and then,
when I have conquered, I shall judge between them, and do justice to
both."

"That is a good plan," said the knights, "but why are you so sure that
you will conquer?"

"I am Arthur, the King," he replied.

At that the knights set up a great cry of joy, and the king continued:

"I shall send for my good sword Excalibur and the scabbard, and with
these I shall surely win."

So when Arthur and the knights were let out of prison, the king sent the
damsel who had visited them to Morgan le Fay for his sword and
scabbard.

Meantime, the knight who had accompanied Arthur on the little ship, Sir
Accalon, also awoke. He found himself in the palace of Morgan le Fay,
and he wondered very much where Arthur was. He went to the lady, who
said to him:

"My dear lord, the day has come when you can have great power if you
want it. Should you like to be king of this land, instead of Arthur?"

Now Sir Accalon was a traitor at heart. He wanted very much to be king,
even if the good Arthur was to be killed; so he said:

"Yes, truly."

Then she said:

"You shall be king, and I shall be your queen. All you need to do is to
fight a great battle, which you shall win. I have been using my magic.
It was I who sent the ship of silk to you and Arthur. I had him put into
prison, and I had you brought here."

Sir Accalon wondered very much. Then she told him of the fight King
Arthur was to make against Sir Ontzlake.

"But I have caused Sir Ontzlake to fall sick," she said, "and he cannot
fight. I shall go with you to his castle and you can offer to fight for
him."

"I to fight with the king!" cried Sir Accalon. "He would surely
overthrow me."

"He cannot," said Morgan le Fay, "because you are to fight with his
sword. A little while ago he sent to me for Excalibur and the scabbard,
but I returned him a false sword which looks like Excalibur, and a false
scabbard. You shall take the true ones, and then you will surely
overcome him and rule this land."

Then Sir Accalon was glad, and he hastened with the lady to the castle
of Sir Ontzlake. They found him groaning because he was ill and because
Sir Damas had sent him a challenge to fight with a knight, and he could
not accept it. He was much relieved when Morgan le Fay told him that Sir
Accalon would fight in his place.

Early in the afternoon, King Arthur and Sir Accalon rode into the field
where the combat was to be held. Arthur did not know who Sir Accalon
was, nor did any one else, except Morgan le Fay. Two sides of the field
were full of people, who came to watch, half of whom were friends of Sir
Damas, and the other half were friends of Sir Ontzlake.

Arthur and Sir Accalon rode at each other so furiously that at the shock
of the meeting both fell off their horses. Then they began to fight
fiercely with their swords. The king could make no headway with his
false steel, but whenever Sir Accalon struck at Arthur he drew blood.

The king was much amazed. He grew weaker and weaker, but still he kept
on his feet. Those who watched him were sorry for him; they thought they
had never seen a man fight so bravely. At last Arthur's sword broke, and
fell in two pieces on the ground. When Sir Accalon saw this, he cried:

"Now, yield to me."

"I will never yield," said the king, "and if you do not get me another
sword, you will be shamed before all men, for it is an unknightly thing
to fight with a defenseless man."

"I do not care," said Sir Accalon. "If you will not yield, defend
yourself with your shield as best you can."

He rushed at the king. Arthur was so weak that he could hardly stand,
but he guarded himself as well as he could with his shield. Soon he
could do no more, and fell to the ground.

At this moment the Lady of the Lake, who had given Arthur his sword,
came upon the field. She was invisible, but anyone who had listened
intently could have heard a sound like a ripple of water as she walked.
She caused Excalibur to fall out of the hand of Sir Accalon and drop
near Arthur.

When it fell, Arthur saw that it was his own Excalibur. He grasped its
handle and some of his strength came back. He struggled to his feet, and
rushing up to Sir Accalon, seized the scabbard of Excalibur and threw it
far over the field.

"Now," he said, "send for a second sword and fight with me."

Then Sir Accalon was afraid. Yet he thought that Arthur was so weak that
he could still be overcome. So he sent for a second sword, and they
began to fight again. Arthur's strength, however, had largely returned,
and in a short time he gave Sir Accalon a mortal stroke.

Sir Accalon fell to the ground, and the king, leaning over him, cried:

"Tell me who you are."

Then Sir Accalon was filled with remorse, and he said:

"Oh, my King, I have been a traitor to you, but now I am dying, and I am
sorry for what I have done. I deserve my death."

He told the king his name, and all about his treachery, and that of
Morgan le Fay.

King Arthur was sad.

"It is very hard to be deceived in a friend," he said, "but I forgive
you freely. I will try to cure your wound, and sometime I shall trust
you again."

"You cannot cure me," said Sir Accalon. "I am dying. Let them carry me
off the field."

So he was taken to a neighboring abbey, while the people crowded about
the king to congratulate him, but Arthur said:

"I am sad at heart. My victory is no comfort to me, for to-day I have
lost a friend whom I believed true."

Then he called the two brothers, Sir Damas and Sir Ontzlake, and judged
their cause. He decided that their property must be divided equally
between them, and that they must be friends. They promised never to
quarrel again. Arthur told them that they must be kind to other knights
and to all people. He said that if he heard that they were not, he could
come and punish them.

After this, Sir Damas gave back to the twenty knights all their money,
and they went on their way rejoicing. King Arthur mounted his horse and
rode over to the abbey, where he sat by the bed of Sir Accalon till the
poor knight died. Then the king went back alone to his Court at Camelot.


405-411

        Miguel de Cervantes, the greatest literary
        genius of Spain, was born in 1547 in a small
        town near Madrid, and he died in 1616, the year
        of the death of Shakespeare. He received a fair
        education, and by reading he gained a thorough
        knowledge of the romantic poetry of Spain and
        Italy and of the romances of chivalry. At the
        age of twenty-one he went to Italy. For several
        years he was a soldier in the Spanish army.
        When he was twenty-eight years old, he was
        captured by pirates of Algiers and was held a
        prisoner for five years. When he returned to
        Spain, he attempted to make a living by writing
        dramas and romances, and later he secured an
        unimportant governmental position as commissary
        and tax-collector in Seville. In 1606 he
        published the first part of _Don Quixote_. This
        book immediately became very popular, but it
        did not bring him much money nor did it win for
        him the recognition of literary men. All his
        life he was poor, and sometimes apparently he
        was actually in want of food. In 1615, one year
        before his death, he published the second part
        of _Don Quixote_, the greatest national book of
        Spain.

        _Don Quixote_ is a humorous satire upon the
        romances of chivalry, which at the time were so
        popular in Spain as to corrupt the national
        life by their loose morals and false ideals. So
        complete was the success of Cervantes that the
        whole nation began to laugh at the absurdities
        of the romances of chivalry, and it is said
        that not one new edition of any book of
        chivalry appeared in Spain after the
        publication of _Don Quixote_.

        Although the world no longer takes serious
        consideration of the ideals of the romances of
        chivalry, _Don Quixote_ will always be
        remembered as a great book, for it abounds in
        good-humored satire of human follies that are
        found in all ages and countries. Sancho Panza
        represents the type of person who does not have
        imagination or spiritual ideals. Not much less
        ridiculous, though much more deserving of
        sympathy, is Don Quixote, who represents the
        type of person who is controlled by imagination
        and fanciful ideals, unbalanced by practical
        judgment. The life of a person of either type
        must be filled with absurdities.

        The following selections are taken from
        _Stories of Don Quixote_ retold by H. L.
        Havell.


STORIES FROM DON QUIXOTE


I. DREAMS AND SHADOWS

The scene is laid in a village of La Mancha, a high and arid district of
Central Spain; and the time is towards the close of the sixteenth
century. On the outskirts of the village there stood at the time
mentioned a house of modest size, adjoining a little farm, the property
of a retired gentleman whose real name was Quisada or Quijada, but who
is now known to all mankind by the immortal title of Don Quixote. How he
came to alter his name we shall see presently.

On a hot summer afternoon this worthy gentleman was sitting in a small
upper room, which served him as a study, absorbed in the contents of a
huge folio volume, which lay open on the table before him. Other
volumes, of like bulky proportions, were piled up on chairs or strewn on
the floor around him. The reader was a man some fifty years of age, tall
and spare of figure, and with high, stern features of the severest
Spanish type. In his eyes, when from time to time he paused in his
reading and gazed absently before him, there was a look of wild
abstraction, as of one who lives in a world of dreams and shadows. One
hand, with bony, nervous fingers, rested on the open page; with the
other he grasped his sword, which lay sheathed on his lap.

No sound disturbs the sultry stillness of the chamber, save only the
droning of an imprisoned bee and the rustling of paper when the eager
student turned a leaf. Deeper and deeper grew his absorption; his eyes
seemed to devour the lines, and he clutched his hair with both hands, as
if he would tear it out by the roots. At last, overpowered by a frenzied
impulse, he leaped from his seat, and plucking his sword from the
scabbard, began cutting and thrusting at some invisible object, shouting
in a voice of thunder: "Unhand the maiden, foul caitiff! Give place, I
say, and let the princess go! What, wilt thou face me, vile robber?
Have at thee, then, and take the wages of thy villainy." As he uttered
the last words he aimed a tremendous thrust at his visionary opponent
and narrowly escaped transfixing the comely person of a young lady who
at this very moment entered the room, with signs of haste and alarm.
Behind her, in the dimly-lighted passage, appeared the portly figure of
an elderly dame, who was proclaimed, by the bunch of keys which hung at
her girdle, to be the gentleman's housekeeper.

"Dear uncle, what ails thee?" said the young lady, gazing with pity and
wonder at the poor distracted man, who stood arrested in his last
attitude, with rolling eyes and hair in wild disorder, while great beads
of sweat poured down his face. But he, whose mind was still soaring in
the regions of high romance, at once converted his niece into a rescued
princess, saved from violence by his prowess; and, lowering his blade
and dropping gracefully on one knee, he raised her hand to his lips and
said: "Fear nothing, gentle lady! There lies thine enemy in his gore";
and he pointed to a table which had been overset in one of his wild
rushes, carrying with it an inkstand, the contents of which were now
trickling in a black stream across the uncarpeted boards.

His niece was accustomed to the strange fits of her eccentric relative,
and, humoring his fancy, she answered: "Thou hast done well, and I thank
thee. But sit down now and rest awhile after thy toils; and I will bring
thee something to drink." With that she led him to a couch and left the
room, taking the housekeeper with her. In a few moments she returned,
bearing a great pitcher of cold water.

"'Tis a most rare elixir," said he, after taking a deep draught,
"prepared by the great enchanter Alquife, and of a magic potency." Then,
being exhausted by his violent exertions of body and mind he stretched
himself on the couch and soon sank into a quiet sleep.


II. PREPARING FOR THE QUEST

The extraordinary scene which has just been described was only one among
many which had occurred during several months, down to the time when our
story begins; and we must now go back a little and give some account of
our hero's habits and studies, which ended by bringing him to so
desperate a state. At that time by far the most popular form of light
literature was the Romances of Chivalry,--huge interminable fictions,
filled with the most extravagant visions that ever visited the slumbers
of a mad poet. Merely to unravel the story of one of these gigantic
romances is a task which would tax the strongest brain. They dealt with
the adventures of Knights-Errant, who wandered about the earth
redressing grievances and succoring the oppressed. Those who venture
into these vast jungles of romance are occasionally rewarded by passages
of great sweetness, nobility, and charm; but the modern reader soon
grows weary of enchanted forests, haunted by giants, dragons, and other
impossible monsters, of deserts where despairing lovers roam haggard and
forlorn, of dwarfs, goblins, wizards, and all the wild and grotesque
creations of the mediaeval fancy.

But in the times of which we are writing the passion for Books of
Chivalry rose to such a height that it became a serious public evil. In
Spain it reached its climax; and our humble gentleman of La Mancha is
only an extreme example of the effect which such studies produced on the
national mind. Being bitten by the craze for chivalrous fiction, he
gradually forsook all the healthy pursuits of a country life and gave
himself up entirely to reading such books as Amadis of Gaul, Palmerin of
England, and Belianis of Greece; and his infatuation reached such a
point that he sold several acres of good arable land to provide himself
with funds for the purchase of those ponderous folios with which we saw
him surrounded when he was first introduced to our notice. From dawn
till eve he pored over his darling books, and sometimes passed whole
nights in the same pursuit, until at last, having crammed his brain with
this perilous stuff, he began to imagine that these wild inventions were
sober reality. From this delusion there was but one step to the belief
that he himself was a principal actor in the adventures of which he
read; and when the fit was on him, he would take his sword and engage in
single combat with the creatures of his brain, stamping his feet and
alarming the household with his cries.

At first his frenzy was intermittent, and each attack was followed by a
lucid interval; but finally he lost his wits altogether and came to the
insane resolution of turning knight-errant and going out into the world
as the redresser of wrongs and the champion of the innocent. His
intention once formed, he at once took steps to carry it into effect.
From a dark corner of the house he brought out an old suit of armor,
which had been lying neglected for generations and was now covered with
mould and eaten with rust. He cleaned the pieces and repaired them as
well as he could; and observing that the helmet was a simple morion,
wanting a protection for the face, he made a vizor of pasteboard to
supply the defect. Then, wishing to prove the strength of his vizor, he
drew his sword and with one stroke destroyed what had cost him the labor
of a week. He was considerably shocked by the ease with which he had
demolished his handiwork; but having made a second vizor and
strengthened it with bars of iron, he did not choose to try any further
experiments, but accepted the helmet, thus fortified, as the finest
headpiece in the world.

