head high as you walk and often look upward. Never forget the storm."

So the King learned to love the storm and be one with it, knowing no
fear.

But perhaps--it might be because he had been laid on the scented moss
and had without knowing it saluted them on the first night of his life--
he felt nearest to, and loved most, his brothers the stars.

Every fair night through the King's earliest years the Ancient One
carried him to the battlements and let him fall asleep beneath the
shining myriads. But first he would walk about bearing him in his arms,
or sit with him in the splendid silence, sometimes relating wonders to
him in a low voice, sometimes uttering no word, only looking calmly into
the high vault above as if the stars spoke to him and told him of
perfect peace.

"When a man looks long at them," he said, "he grows calm and forgets
small things. They answer his questions and show him that his earth is
only one of the million worlds. Hold your soul still and look upward
often, and you will understand their speech. Never forget the stars."





Part Two

So, as the child King grew day by day, the world seemed to grow fuller
and fuller of wonders and beauties. There were the sun and the moon, the
storm and the stars, the straight falling lances of rain, the springing
of the growing things, the flight of the eagle, the songs and nests of
small bird creatures, the changing seasons, and the work of the great
brown earth giving its harvest and its fruits.

"All these wonders in one world and you a man upon it," said the Ancient
One. "Hold high your head when you walk, young King, and often look
upward. Never forget one marvel among them all."

He forgot nothing. He lived looking out on all things from great, clear,
joyous eyes. Upon his mountain crag he never heard a paltry or
unbeautiful word or knew of the existence of unfriendliness or baseness
in thought. As soon as he was old enough to go out alone he roamed about
the great mountain and feared neither storm nor wild beasts.
Shaggy-maned lions and their mates drew near and fawned on him as their
kind had fawned on young Adam in the Garden of Eden. There had never
passed through his mind the thought that they were not his friends.

He did not know that there were men who killed their wild brothers. In
the huge courtyard of the castle he learned to ride and to perform great
feats of strength. Because he had not learned to be afraid he never
feared that he could not do a thing. He grew so strong and beautiful
that when he was ten years old he was as tall as a youth of sixteen, and
when he was sixteen he was already like a young giant. This was because
he had been brother to the storm and had lived close to the strength and
splendor of the stars.

Only once, when he was a boy of twelve, a strange and painful thing
happened to him. From his kingdom in the plains below there had been
sent to him a beautiful young horse which had been bred for him. Never
had so magnificent an animal been born in the royal stable. When he was
brought into the courtyard the boy King's eyes shone with joy. He spent
the greater part of the morning in exercising and leaping him over
barriers. The Ancient One in his tower chamber heard his shouts of
exultation and encouragement.  At last the King went out to try him on
the winding mountain road.

When he returned he went at once to the tower chamber to the Ancient
One, who, when he raised his eyes from his great book, looked at him
gravely.

"Let us climb to the battlements," the boy said. "We must talk
together."

So they went, and when they stood looking out on the world below, the
curving turquoise sky above them, the eyes of the Ancient One were still
more grave.

"Tell me, young King."

"Something strange has happened," King Amor answered. "I have felt
something I have not felt before. I was riding my horse around the field
on the plateau and he saw something which he refused to pass. It was a
young leopard watching us from a tree. My horse reared and snorted. He
would not listen to me, but backed and wheeled around. I tried in vain
to persuade him, and suddenly, when I saw I could not make him obey me,
this strange new feeling rushed through all my body. I grew hot and knew
my face was scarlet, my heart beat faster and my blood seemed to boil in
my veins. I shouted out harsh, ugly sounds--I forgot that all things are
brothers--I lifted my hand and clenched it and struck my horse again and
again. I loved him no longer, I felt that he no longer loved me. I am
hot and wearied and heavy from it still. I feel no more joy. Was it pain
I felt? I have never felt pain and do not know. Was it pain?"

"It was a worse thing," answered the Ancient One. "It was anger. When a
man is overcome by anger he has a poisoned fever. He loses his strength,
he loses his power over himself and over others, he throws away time in
which he might have gained the end he most desires. THERE IS NO TIME FOR
ANGER IN THE WORLD."

So King Amor learned the uselessness of anger, for they sat long upon
the battlements while the Ancient One told him how its poison worked in
the veins and weakened the strongest man until he was made a fool. That
night Amor lay under the sky looking at his myriad brothers, the stars,
and drawing calm from them.

"If you lie through the night upon the battlements and think only of the
stillness and the stars you will forget your anger and its poison will
die away. If you put into your mind a beautiful thought it will take the
place of the evil one. There is no room for darkness in the mind of him
who thinks only of the stars." This had been said to him by the Ancient
One.

Upon the plateau at the foot of the crag on which the castle stood there
were marvelous walled gardens. The sad young Queen of the first King
Mordreth had planted them, and after her death they had been left to run
wild. Since the baby King Amor had been brought to the mountain top the
