"No, I wish you did, you brown thing. Your mother's face was as white as
a wood-lily, with only a faint dream of rose in her cheeks. She had the
eyes of one who always had a song in her heart--blue as a mist, those
eyes were. She had dark lashes, and a little red mouth that quivered
when she was very sad or very happy like a crimson rose too rudely
shaken by the wind. She was as slim and lithe as a young, white-stemmed
birch tree. How I loved her! How happy we were! But he who accepts human
love must bind it to his soul with pain, and she is not lost to me.
Nothing is ever really lost to us as long as we remember it."

Uncle Blair looked up at the evening star. We saw that he had forgotten
us, and we slipped away, hand in hand, leaving him alone in the
memory-haunted shadows of the old orchard.




CHAPTER XXVIII. THE PATH TO ARCADY


October that year gathered up all the spilled sunshine of the summer and
clad herself in it as in a garment. The Story Girl had asked us to
try to make the last month together beautiful, and Nature seconded our
efforts, giving us that most beautiful of beautiful things--a gracious
and perfect moon of falling leaves. There was not in all that vanished
October one day that did not come in with auroral splendour and go out
attended by a fair galaxy of evening stars--not a day when there were
not golden lights in the wide pastures and purple hazes in the ripened
distances. Never was anything so gorgeous as the maple trees that year.
Maples are trees that have primeval fire in their souls. It glows out a
little in their early youth, before the leaves open, in the redness and
rosy-yellowness of their blossoms, but in summer it is carefully hidden
under a demure, silver-lined greenness. Then when autumn comes, the
maples give up trying to be sober and flame out in all the barbaric
splendour and gorgeousness of their real nature, making of the hills
things out of an Arabian Nights dream in the golden prime of good Haroun
Alraschid.

You may never know what scarlet and crimson really are until you see
them in their perfection on an October hillside, under the unfathomable
blue of an autumn sky. All the glow and radiance and joy at earth's
heart seem to have broken loose in a splendid determination to express
itself for once before the frost of winter chills her beating pulses. It
is the year's carnival ere the dull Lenten days of leafless valleys and
penitential mists come.

The time of apple-picking had come around once more and we worked
joyously. Uncle Blair picked apples with us, and between him and the
Story Girl it was an October never to be forgotten.

"Will you go far afield for a walk with me to-day?" he said to her and
me, one idle afternoon of opal skies, pied meadows and misty hills.

It was Saturday and Peter had gone home; Felix and Dan were helping
Uncle Alec top turnips; Cecily and Felicity were making cookies for
Sunday, so the Story Girl and I were alone in Uncle Stephen's Walk.

We liked to be alone together that last month, to think the long, long
thoughts of youth and talk about our futures. There had grown up between
us that summer a bond of sympathy that did not exist between us and the
others. We were older than they--the Story Girl was fifteen and I was
nearly that; and all at once it seemed as if we were immeasurably older
than the rest, and possessed of dreams and visions and forward-reaching
hopes which they could not possibly share or understand. At times we
were still children, still interested in childish things. But there came
hours when we seemed to our two selves very grown up and old, and
in those hours we talked our dreams and visions and hopes, vague and
splendid, as all such are, over together, and so began to build up, out
of the rainbow fragments of our childhood's companionship, that rare
and beautiful friendship which was to last all our lives, enriching and
enstarring them. For there is no bond more lasting than that formed by
the mutual confidences of that magic time when youth is slipping from
the sheath of childhood and beginning to wonder what lies for it beyond
those misty hills that bound the golden road.

"Where are you going?" asked the Story Girl.

"To 'the woods that belt the gray hillside'--ay, and overflow beyond it
into many a valley purple-folded in immemorial peace," answered Uncle
Blair. "I have a fancy for one more ramble in Prince Edward Island woods
before I leave Canada again. But I would not go alone. So come, you two
gay youthful things to whom all life is yet fair and good, and we will
seek the path to Arcady. There will be many little things along our
way to make us glad. Joyful sounds will 'come ringing down the wind;' a
wealth of gypsy gold will be ours for the gathering; we will learn the
potent, unutterable charm of a dim spruce wood and the grace of flexile
mountain ashes fringing a lonely glen; we will tryst with the folk of
fur and feather; we'll hearken to the music of gray old firs. Come, and
you'll have a ramble and an afternoon that you will both remember all
your lives."

We did have it; never has its remembrance faded; that idyllic afternoon
of roving in the old Carlisle woods with the Story Girl and Uncle Blair
gleams in my book of years, a page of living beauty. Yet it was but
a few hours of simplest pleasure; we wandered pathlessly through the
sylvan calm of those dear places which seemed that day to be full of
a great friendliness; Uncle Blair sauntered along behind us, whistling
softly; sometimes he talked to himself; we delighted in those brief
reveries of his; Uncle Blair was the only man I have ever known who
could, when he so willed, "talk like a book," and do it without seeming
ridiculous; perhaps it was because he had the knack of choosing "fit
audience, though few," and the proper time to appeal to that audience.

We went across the fields, intending to skirt the woods at the back of
Uncle Alec's farm and find a lane that cut through Uncle Roger's woods;
but before we came to it we stumbled on a sly, winding little path quite
by accident--if, indeed, there can be such a thing as accident in the
woods, where I am tempted to think we are led by the Good People along
such of their fairy ways as they have a mind for us to walk in.

"Go to, let us explore this," said Uncle Blair. "It always drags
terribly at my heart to go past a wood lane if I can make any excuse at
all for traversing it: for it is the by-ways that lead to the heart of
the woods and we must follow them if we would know the forest and be
known of it. When we can really feel its wild heart beating against ours
its subtle life will steal into our veins and make us its own for ever,
so that no matter where we go or how wide we wander in the noisy ways of
cities or over the lone ways of the sea, we shall yet be drawn back to
the forest to find our most enduring kinship."

"I always feel so SATISFIED in the woods," said the Story Girl dreamily,
as we turned in under the low-swinging fir boughs. "Trees seem such
friendly things."

"They are the most friendly things in God's good creation," said Uncle
Blair emphatically. "And it is so easy to live with them. To hold
converse with pines, to whisper secrets with the poplars, to listen to
the tales of old romance that beeches have to tell, to walk in eloquent
silence with self-contained firs, is to learn what real companionship
is. Besides, trees are the same all over the world. A beech tree on the
slopes of the Pyrenees is just what a beech tree here in these Carlisle
woods is; and there used to be an old pine hereabouts whose twin brother
I was well acquainted with in a dell among the Apennines. Listen to
those squirrels, will you, chattering over yonder. Did you ever hear
such a fuss over nothing? Squirrels are the gossips and busybodies of
the woods; they haven't learned the fine reserve of its other denizens.
But after all, there is a certain shrill friendliness in their
greeting."

"They seem to be scolding us," I said, laughing.

"Oh, they are not half such scolds as they sound," answered Uncle Blair
gaily. "If they would but 'tak a thought and mend' their shrew-like ways
they would be dear, lovable creatures enough."

"If I had to be an animal I think I'd like to be a squirrel," said the
Story Girl. "It must be next best thing to flying."

"Just see what a spring that fellow gave," laughed Uncle Blair. "And now
listen to his song of triumph! I suppose that chasm he cleared seemed as
wide and deep to him as Niagara Gorge would to us if we leaped over
it. Well, the wood people are a happy folk and very well satisfied with
themselves."

Those who have followed a dim, winding, balsamic path to the unexpected
hollow where a wood-spring lies have found the rarest secret the forest
can reveal. Such was our good fortune that day. At the end of our path
we found it, under the pines, a crystal-clear thing with lips unkissed
by so much as a stray sunbeam.

"It is easy to dream that this is one of the haunted springs of old
romance," said Uncle Blair. "'Tis an enchanted spot this, I am very
sure, and we should go softly, speaking low, lest we disturb the rest
of a white, wet naiad, or break some spell that has cost long years of
mystic weaving."

"It's so easy to believe things in the woods," said the Story Girl,
shaping a cup from a bit of golden-brown birch bark and filling it at
the spring.

"Drink a toast in that water, Sara," said Uncle Blair. "There's not a
doubt that it has some potent quality of magic in it and the wish you
wish over it will come true."

The Story Girl lifted her golden-hued flagon to her red lips. Her hazel
eyes laughed at us over the brim.

"Here's to our futures," she cried, "I wish that every day of our lives
may be better than the one that went before."

"An extravagant wish--a very wish of youth," commented Uncle Blair, "and
yet in spite of its extravagance, a wish that will come true if you are
true to yourselves. In that case, every day WILL be better than all that
went before--but there will be many days, dear lad and lass, when you
will not believe it."

We did not understand him, but we knew Uncle Blair never explained his
meaning. When asked it he was wont to answer with a smile, "Some day
you'll grow to it. Wait for that." So we addressed ourselves to follow
the brook that stole away from the spring in its windings and doublings
and tricky surprises.

"A brook," quoth Uncle Blair, "is the most changeful, bewitching,
lovable thing in the world. It is never in the same mind or mood two
minutes. Here it is sighing and murmuring as if its heart were broken.
But listen--yonder by the birches it is laughing as if it were enjoying
some capital joke all by itself."

It was indeed a changeful brook; here it would make a pool, dark and
brooding and still, where we bent to look at our mirrored faces; then it
grew communicative and gossiped shallowly over a broken pebble bed where
there was a diamond dance of sunbeams and no troutling or minnow could
glide through without being seen. Sometimes its banks were high and
steep, hung with slender ashes and birches; again they were mere, low
margins, green with delicate mosses, shelving out of the wood. Once
it came to a little precipice and flung itself over undauntedly in an
indignation of foam, gathering itself up rather dizzily among the mossy
stones below. It was some time before it got over its vexation; it went
boiling and muttering along, fighting with the rotten logs that lie
across it, and making far more fuss than was necessary over every root
that interfered with it. We were getting tired of its ill-humour and
talked of leaving it, when it suddenly grew sweet-tempered again,
swooped around a curve--and presto, we were in fairyland.

It was a little dell far in the heart of the woods. A row of birches
fringed the brook, and each birch seemed more exquisitely graceful
and golden than her sisters. The woods receded from it on every hand,
leaving it lying in a pool of amber sunshine. The yellow trees were
mirrored in the placid stream, with now and then a leaf falling on the
water, mayhap to drift away and be used, as Uncle Blair suggested, by
some adventurous wood sprite who had it in mind to fare forth to some
far-off, legendary region where all the brooks ran into the sea.

"Oh, what a lovely place!" I exclaimed, looking around me with delight.

"A spell of eternity is woven over it, surely," murmured Uncle Blair.
"Winter may not touch it, or spring ever revisit it. It should be like
this for ever."

"Let us never come here again," said the Story Girl softly, "never,
no matter how often we may be in Carlisle. Then we will never see it
changed or different. We can always remember it just as we see it now,
and it will be like this for ever for us."

"I'm going to sketch it," said Uncle Blair.

While he sketched it the Story Girl and I sat on the banks of the brook
and she told me the story of the Sighing Reed. It was a very simple
little story, that of the slender brown reed which grew by the forest
pool and always was sad and sighing because it could not utter music
like the brook and the birds and the winds. All the bright, beautiful
things around it mocked it and laughed at it for its folly. Who would
ever look for music in it, a plain, brown, unbeautiful thing? But one
day a youth came through the wood; he was as beautiful as the spring; he
cut the brown reed and fashioned it according to his liking; and then he
put it to his lips and breathed on it; and, oh, the music that floated
through the forest! It was so entrancing that everything--brooks and
birds and winds--grew silent to listen to it. Never had anything so
lovely been heard; it was the music that had for so long been shut up in
the soul of the sighing reed and was set free at last through its pain
and suffering.

I had heard the Story Girl tell many a more dramatic tale; but that one
stands out for me in memory above them all, partly, perhaps, because of
the spot in which she told it, partly because it was the last one I was
to hear her tell for many years--the last one she was ever to tell me on
the golden road.

When Uncle Blair had finished his sketch the shafts of sunshine were
turning crimson and growing more and more remote; the early autumn
twilight was falling over the woods. We left our dell, saying good-bye
to it for ever, as the Story Girl had suggested, and we went slowly
homeward through the fir woods, where a haunting, indescribable odour
stole out to meet us.

"There is magic in the scent of dying fir," Uncle Blair was saying aloud
to himself, as if forgetting he was not quite alone. "It gets into
our blood like some rare, subtly-compounded wine, and thrills us with
unutterable sweetnesses, as of recollections from some other fairer
life, lived in some happier star. Compared to it, all other scents seem
heavy and earth-born, luring to the valleys instead of the heights. But
the tang of the fir summons onward and upward to some 'far-off, divine
event'--some spiritual peak of attainment whence we shall see with
unfaltering, unclouded vision the spires of some aerial City Beautiful,
or the fulfilment of some fair, fadeless land of promise."

He was silent for a moment, then added in a lower tone,

"Felicity, you loved the scent of dying fir. If you were here tonight
with me--Felicity--Felicity!"

Something in his voice made me suddenly sad. I was comforted when I felt
the Story Girl slip her hand into mine. So we walked out of the woods
into the autumn dusk.

We were in a little valley. Half-way up the opposite slope a brush fire
was burning clearly and steadily in a maple grove. There was something
indescribably alluring in that fire, glowing so redly against the dark
background of forest and twilit hill.

"Let us go to it," cried Uncle Blair, gaily, casting aside his sorrowful
mood and catching our hands. "A wood fire at night has a fascination not
to be resisted by those of mortal race. Hasten--we must not lose time."

"Oh, it will burn a long time yet," I gasped, for Uncle Blair was
whisking us up the hill at a merciless rate.

"You can't be sure. It may have been lighted by some good, honest
farmer-man, bent on tidying up his sugar orchard, but it may also, for
anything we know, have been kindled by no earthly woodman as a beacon or
summons to the tribes of fairyland, and may vanish away if we tarry."

It did not vanish and presently we found ourselves in the grove. It was
very beautiful; the fire burned with a clear, steady glow and a soft
crackle; the long arcades beneath the trees were illuminated with a
rosy radiance, beyond which lurked companies of gray and purple shadows.
Everything was very still and dreamy and remote.

"It is impossible that out there, just over the hill, lies a village of
men, where tame household lamps are shining," said Uncle Blair.

"I feel as if we must be thousands of miles away from everything we've
