novels is a sinful waste of time. I shall write and tell him my opinion
of this Japanese business, believe ME. Does he want Kenneth and Persis
to be converted into pagans?"

With which unanswerable conundrum Miss Cornelia took her departure.
Susan proceeded to put Rilla in bed and Anne sat on the veranda steps
under the early stars and dreamed her incorrigible dreams and learned
all over again for the hundredth happy time what a moonrise splendour
and sheen could be on Four Winds Harbour.



CHAPTER III. THE INGLESIDE CHILDREN

In daytime the Blythe children liked very well to play in the rich, soft
greens and glooms of the big maple grove between Ingleside and the Glen
St. Mary pond; but for evening revels there was no place like the little
valley behind the maple grove. It was a fairy realm of romance to them.
Once, looking from the attic windows of Ingleside, through the mist
and aftermath of a summer thunderstorm, they had seen the beloved spot
arched by a glorious rainbow, one end of which seemed to dip straight
down to where a corner of the pond ran up into the lower end of the
valley.

"Let us call it Rainbow Valley," said Walter delightedly, and Rainbow
Valley thenceforth it was.

Outside of Rainbow Valley the wind might be rollicking and boisterous.
Here it always went gently. Little, winding, fairy paths ran here and
there over spruce roots cushioned with moss. Wild cherry trees, that in
blossom time would be misty white, were scattered all over the valley,
mingling with the dark spruces. A little brook with amber waters
ran through it from the Glen village. The houses of the village were
comfortably far away; only at the upper end of the valley was a little
tumble-down, deserted cottage, referred to as "the old Bailey house." It
had not been occupied for many years, but a grass-grown dyke surrounded
it and inside was an ancient garden where the Ingleside children could
find violets and daisies and June lilies still blooming in season. For
the rest, the garden was overgrown with caraway that swayed and foamed
in the moonshine of summer eves like seas of silver.

To the sought lay the pond and beyond it the ripened distance lost
itself in purple woods, save where, on a high hill, a solitary old gray
homestead looked down on glen and harbour. There was a certain wild
woodsiness and solitude about Rainbow Valley, in spite of its nearness
to the village, which endeared it to the children of Ingleside.

The valley was full of dear, friendly hollows and the largest of these
was their favourite stamping ground. Here they were assembled on this
particular evening. There was a grove of young spruces in this hollow,
with a tiny, grassy glade in its heart, opening on the bank of the
brook. By the brook grew a silver birch-tree, a young, incredibly
straight thing which Walter had named the "White Lady." In this glade,
too, were the "Tree Lovers," as Walter called a spruce and maple
which grew so closely together that their boughs were inextricably
intertwined. Jem had hung an old string of sleigh-bells, given him
by the Glen blacksmith, on the Tree Lovers, and every visitant breeze
called out sudden fairy tinkles from it.

"How nice it is to be back!" said Nan. "After all, none of the Avonlea
places are quite as nice as Rainbow Valley."

But they were very fond of the Avonlea places for all that. A visit to
Green Gables was always considered a great treat. Aunt Marilla was very
good to them, and so was Mrs. Rachel Lynde, who was spending the leisure
of her old age in knitting cotton-warp quilts against the day when
Anne's daughters should need a "setting-out." There were jolly playmates
there, too--"Uncle" Davy's children and "Aunt" Diana's children. They
knew all the spots their mother had loved so well in her girlhood at old
Green Gables--the long Lover's Lane, that was pink-hedged in wild-rose
time, the always neat yard, with its willows and poplars, the Dryad's
Bubble, lucent and lovely as of yore, the Lake of Shining Waters, and
Willowmere. The twins had their mother's old porch-gable room, and Aunt
Marilla used to come in at night, when she thought they were asleep, to
gloat over them. But they all knew she loved Jem the best.

Jem was at present busily occupied in frying a mess of small trout which
he had just caught in the pond. His stove consisted of a circle of red
stones, with a fire kindled in it, and his culinary utensils were an
old tin can, hammered out flat, and a fork with only one tine left.
Nevertheless, ripping good meals had before now been thus prepared.

Jem was the child of the House of Dreams. All the others had been born
at Ingleside. He had curly red hair, like his mother's, and frank hazel
eyes, like his father's; he had his mother's fine nose and his father's
steady, humorous mouth. And he was the only one of the family who had
ears nice enough to please Susan. But he had a standing feud with Susan
because she would not give up calling him Little Jem. It was outrageous,
thought thirteen-year-old Jem. Mother had more sense.

"I'm NOT little any more, Mother," he had cried indignantly, on his
eighth birthday. "I'm AWFUL big."

Mother had sighed and laughed and sighed again; and she never called him
Little Jem again--in his hearing at least.

He was and always had been a sturdy, reliable little chap. He never
broke a promise. He was not a great talker. His teachers did not think
him brilliant, but he was a good, all-round student. He never took
things on faith; he always liked to investigate the truth of a statement
for himself. Once Susan had told him that if he touched his tongue to a
frosty latch all the skin would tear off it. Jem had promptly done it,
"just to see if it was so." He found it was "so," at the cost of a very
sore tongue for several days. But Jem did not grudge suffering in the
interests of science. By constant experiment and observation he
learned a great deal and his brothers and sisters thought his extensive
knowledge of their little world quite wonderful. Jem always knew where
the first and ripest berries grew, where the first pale violets shyly
wakened from their winter's sleep, and how many blue eggs were in a
given robin's nest in the maple grove. He could tell fortunes from daisy
petals and suck honey from red clovers, and grub up all sorts of edible
roots on the banks of the pond, while Susan went in daily fear that they
would all be poisoned. He knew where the finest spruce-gum was to be
found, in pale amber knots on the lichened bark, he knew where the nuts
grew thickest in the beechwoods around the Harbour Head, and where the
best trouting places up the brooks were. He could mimic the call of any
wild bird or beast in Four Winds and he knew the haunt of every wild
flower from spring to autumn.

Walter Blythe was sitting under the White Lady, with a volume of poems
lying beside him, but he was not reading. He was gazing now at the
emerald-misted willows by the pond, and now at a flock of clouds, like
little silver sheep, herded by the wind, that were drifting over Rainbow
Valley, with rapture in his wide splendid eyes. Walter's eyes were
very wonderful. All the joy and sorrow and laughter and loyalty and
aspiration of many generations lying under the sod looked out of their
dark gray depths.

Walter was a "hop out of kin," as far as looks went. He did not resemble
any known relative. He was quite the handsomest of the Ingleside
children, with straight black hair and finely modelled features. But he
had all his mother's vivid imagination and passionate love of beauty.
Frost of winter, invitation of spring, dream of summer and glamour of
autumn, all meant much to Walter.

In school, where Jem was a chieftain, Walter was not thought highly of.
He was supposed to be "girly" and milk-soppish, because he never fought
and seldom joined in the school sports, preferring to herd by himself in
out of the way corners and read books--especially "po'try books." Walter
loved the poets and pored over their pages from the time he could first
read. Their music was woven into his growing soul--the music of the
immortals. Walter cherished the ambition to be a poet himself some
day. The thing could be done. A certain Uncle Paul--so called out of
courtesy--who lived now in that mysterious realm called "the States,"
was Walter's model. Uncle Paul had once been a little school boy in
Avonlea and now his poetry was read everywhere. But the Glen schoolboys
did not know of Walter's dreams and would not have been greatly
impressed if they had. In spite of his lack of physical prowess,
however, he commanded a certain unwilling respect because of his power
of "talking book talk." Nobody in Glen St. Mary school could talk like
him. He "sounded like a preacher," one boy said; and for this reason he
was generally left alone and not persecuted, as most boys were who were
suspected of disliking or fearing fisticuffs.

The ten year old Ingleside twins violated twin tradition by not looking
in the least alike. Anne, who was always called Nan, was very pretty,
with velvety nut-brown eyes and silky nut-brown hair. She was a very
blithe and dainty little maiden--Blythe by name and blithe by nature,
one of her teachers had said. Her complexion was quite faultless, much
to her mother's satisfaction.

"I'm so glad I have one daughter who can wear pink," Mrs. Blythe was
wont to say jubilantly.

Diana Blythe, known as Di, was very like her mother, with gray-green
eyes that always shone with a peculiar lustre and brilliancy in the
dusk, and red hair. Perhaps this was why she was her father's favourite.
She and Walter were especial chums; Di was the only one to whom he would
ever read the verses he wrote himself--the only one who knew that he
was secretly hard at work on an epic, strikingly resembling "Marmion" in
some things, if not in others. She kept all his secrets, even from Nan,
and told him all hers.

"Won't you soon have those fish ready, Jem?" said Nan, sniffing with her
dainty nose. "The smell makes me awfully hungry."

"They're nearly ready," said Jem, giving one a dexterous turn. "Get out
the bread and the plates, girls. Walter, wake up."

"How the air shines to-night," said Walter dreamily. Not that he
despised fried trout either, by any means; but with Walter food for the
soul always took first place. "The flower angel has been walking over
the world to-day, calling to the flowers. I can see his blue wings on
that hill by the woods."

"Any angels' wings I ever saw were white," said Nan.

"The flower angel's aren't. They are a pale misty blue, just like the
haze in the valley. Oh, how I wish I could fly. It must be glorious."

"One does fly in dreams sometimes," said Di.

"I never dream that I'm flying exactly," said Walter. "But I often dream
that I just rise up from the ground and float over the fences and the
trees. It's delightful--and I always think, 'This ISN'T a dream like
it's always been before. THIS is real'--and then I wake up after all,
and it's heart-breaking."

"Hurry up, Nan," ordered Jem.

Nan had produced the banquet-board--a board literally as well as
figuratively--from which many a feast, seasoned as no viands were
elsewhere, had been eaten in Rainbow Valley. It was converted into a
table by propping it on two large, mossy stones. Newspapers served as
tablecloth, and broken plates and handleless cups from Susan's discard
furnished the dishes. From a tin box secreted at the root of a spruce
tree Nan brought forth bread and salt. The brook gave Adam's ale of
unsurpassed crystal. For the rest, there was a certain sauce, compounded
of fresh air and appetite of youth, which gave to everything a divine
flavour. To sit in Rainbow Valley, steeped in a twilight half gold, half
amethyst, rife with the odours of balsam-fir and woodsy growing things
in their springtime prime, with the pale stars of wild strawberry
blossoms all around you, and with the sough of the wind and tinkle of
bells in the shaking tree tops, and eat fried trout and dry bread, was
something which the mighty of earth might have envied them.

"Sit in," invited Nan, as Jem placed his sizzling tin platter of trout
on the table. "It's your turn to say grace, Jem."

"I've done my part frying the trout," protested Jem, who hated saying
grace. "Let Walter say it. He LIKES saying grace. And cut it short, too,
Walt. I'm starving."

But Walter said no grace, short or long, just then. An interruption
occurred.

"Who's coming down from the manse hill?" said Di.



CHAPTER IV. THE MANSE CHILDREN

Aunt Martha might be, and was, a very poor housekeeper; the Rev. John
Knox Meredith might be, and was, a very absent-minded, indulgent man.
But it could not be denied that there was something very homelike and
lovable about the Glen St. Mary manse in spite of its untidiness. Even
the critical housewives of the Glen felt it, and were unconsciously
mellowed in judgment because of it. Perhaps its charm was in part due to
accidental circumstances--the luxuriant vines clustering over its
gray, clap-boarded walls, the friendly acacias and balm-of-gileads that
crowded about it with the freedom of old acquaintance, and the beautiful
views of harbour and sand-dunes from its front windows. But these things
had been there in the reign of Mr. Meredith's predecessor, when the
manse had been the primmest, neatest, and dreariest house in the Glen.
So much of the credit must be given to the personality of its new
inmates. There was an atmosphere of laughter and comradeship about it;
the doors were always open; and inner and outer worlds joined hands.
Love was the only law in Glen St. Mary manse.

The people of his congregation said that Mr. Meredith spoiled his
children. Very likely he did. It is certain that he could not bear to
scold them. "They have no mother," he used to say to himself, with a
sigh, when some unusually glaring peccadillo forced itself upon his
notice. But he did not know the half of their goings-on. He belonged
to the sect of dreamers. The windows of his study looked out on the
graveyard but, as he paced up and down the room, reflecting deeply on
the immortality of the soul, he was quite unaware that Jerry and Carl
were playing leap-frog hilariously over the flat stones in that abode of
dead Methodists. Mr. Meredith had occasional acute realizations that his
children were not so well looked after, physically or morally, as they
had been before his wife died, and he had always a dim sub-consciousness
that house and meals were very different under Aunt Martha's management
from what they had been under Cecilia's. For the rest, he lived in a
world of books and abstractions; and, therefore, although his clothes
were seldom brushed, and although the Glen housewives concluded, from
the ivory-like pallor of his clear-cut features and slender hands, that
he never got enough to eat, he was not an unhappy man.

If ever a graveyard could be called a cheerful place, the old Methodist
graveyard at Glen St. Mary might be so called. The new graveyard, at the
other side of the Methodist church, was a neat and proper and doleful
spot; but the old one had been left so long to Nature's kindly and
gracious ministries that it had become very pleasant.

It was surrounded on three sides by a dyke of stones and sod, topped
by a gray and uncertain paling. Outside the dyke grew a row of tall fir
trees with thick, balsamic boughs. The dyke, which had been built by the
first settlers of the Glen, was old enough to be beautiful, with mosses
and green things growing out of its crevices, violets purpling at its
base in the early spring days, and asters and golden-rod making an
autumnal glory in its corners. Little ferns clustered companionably
between its stones, and here and there a big bracken grew.

On the eastern side there was neither fence nor dyke. The graveyard
there straggled off into a young fir plantation, ever pushing nearer to
the graves and deepening eastward into a thick wood. The air was always
full of the harp-like voices of the sea, and the music of gray old
trees, and in the spring mornings the choruses of birds in the elms
around the two churches sang of life and not of death. The Meredith
children loved the old graveyard.

Blue-eyed ivy, "garden-spruce," and mint ran riot over the sunken
graves. Blueberry bushes grew lavishly in the sandy corner next to the
fir wood. The varying fashions of tombstones for three generations were
to be found there, from the flat, oblong, red sandstone slabs of old
settlers, down through the days of weeping willows and clasped hands, to
the latest monstrosities of tall "monuments" and draped urns. One of
the latter, the biggest and ugliest in the graveyard, was sacred to the
memory of a certain Alec Davis who had been born a Methodist but had
taken to himself a Presbyterian bride of the Douglas clan. She had made
him turn Presbyterian and kept him toeing the Presbyterian mark all his
life. But when he died she did not dare to doom him to a lonely grave in
the Presbyterian graveyard over-harbour. His people were all buried in
the Methodist cemetery; so Alec Davis went back to his own in death and
his widow consoled herself by erecting a monument which cost more than
any of the Methodists could afford. The Meredith children hated it,
without just knowing why, but they loved the old, flat, bench-like
stones with the tall grasses growing rankly about them. They made jolly
