overruns all France we are not conquered. I am ashamed of myself for
this hour of despair. You won't see me slump again like that, I'm going
to ring up town at once and ask for particulars."

But town could not be got. The long-distance operator there was
submerged by similar calls from every part of the distracted country.
Rilla finally gave up and slipped away to Rainbow Valley. There she
knelt down on the withered grey grasses in the little nook where she
and Walter had had their last talk together, with her head bowed
against the mossy trunk of a fallen tree. The sun had broken through
the black clouds and drenched the valley with a pale golden splendour.
The bells on the Tree Lovers twinkled elfinly and fitfully in the gusty
March wind.

"Oh God, give me strength," Rilla whispered. "Just strength--and
courage." Then like a child she clasped her hands together and said, as
simply as Jims could have done, "Please send us better news tomorrow."

She knelt there a long time, and when she went back to Ingleside she
was calm and resolute. The doctor had arrived home, tired but
triumphant, little Douglas Haig Marwood having made a safe landing on
the shores of time. Gertrude was still pacing restlessly but Mrs.
Blythe and Susan had reacted from the shock, and Susan was already
planning a new line of defence for the channel ports.

"As long as we can hold them," she declared, "the situation is saved.
Paris has really no military significance."

"Don't," said Gertrude sharply, as if Susan had run something into her.
She thought the old worn phrase 'no military significance' nothing
short of ghastly mockery under the circumstances, and more terrible to
endure than the voice of despair would have been.

"I heard up at Marwood's of the line being broken," said the doctor,
"but this story of the Germans shelling Paris seems to be rather
incredible. Even if they broke through they were fifty miles from Paris
at the nearest point and how could they get their artillery close
enough to shell it in so short a time? Depend upon it, girls, that part
of the message can't be true. I'm going to try to try a long-distance
call to town myself."

The doctor was no more successful than Rilla had been, but his point of
view cheered them all a little, and helped them through the evening.
And at nine o'clock a long-distance message came through at last, that
helped them through the night.

"The line broke only in one place, before St. Quentin," said the
doctor, as he hung up the receiver, "and the British troops are
retreating in good order. That's not so bad. As for the shells that are
falling on Paris, they are coming from a distance of seventy
miles--from some amazing long-range gun the Germans have invented and
sprung with the opening offensive. That is all the news to date, and
Dr. Holland says it is reliable."

"It would have been dreadful news yesterday," said Gertrude, "but
compared to what we heard this morning it is almost like good news. But
still," she added, trying to smile, "I am afraid I will not sleep much
tonight."

"There is one thing to be thankful for at any rate, Miss Oliver, dear,"
said Susan, "and that is that Cousin Sophia did not come in today. I
really could not have endured her on top of all the rest."



CHAPTER XXIX

"WOUNDED AND MISSING"

"Battered but Not Broken" was the headline in Monday's paper, and Susan
repeated it over and over to herself as she went about her work. The
gap caused by the St. Quentin disaster had been patched up in time, but
the Allied line was being pushed relentlessly back from the territory
they had purchased in 1917 with half a million lives. On Wednesday the
headline was "British and French Check Germans"; but still the retreat
went on. Back--and back--and back! Where would it end? Would the line
break again--this time disastrously?

On Saturday the headline was "Even Berlin Admits Offensive Checked,"
and for the first time in that terrible week the Ingleside folk dared
to draw a long breath.

"Well, we have got one week over--now for the next," said Susan
staunchly.

"I feel like a prisoner on the rack when they stopped turning it," Miss
Oliver said to Rilla, as they went to church on Easter morning. "But I
am not off the rack. The torture may begin again at any time."

"I doubted God last Sunday," said Rilla, "but I don't doubt him today.
Evil cannot win. Spirit is on our side and it is bound to outlast
flesh."

Nevertheless her faith was often tried in the dark spring that
followed. Armageddon was not, as they had hoped, a matter of a few
days. It stretched out into weeks and months. Again and again
Hindenburg struck his savage, sudden blows, with alarming, though
futile success. Again and again the military critics declared the
situation extremely perilous. Again and again Cousin Sophia agreed with
the military critics.

"If the Allies go back three miles more the war is lost," she wailed.

"Is the British navy anchored in those three miles?" demanded Susan
scornfully.

"It is the opinion of a man who knows all about it," said Cousin Sophia
solemnly.

"There is no such person," retorted Susan. "As for the military
critics, they do not know one blessed thing about it, any more than you
or I. They have been mistaken times out of number. Why do you always
look on the dark side, Sophia Crawford?"

"Because there ain't any bright side, Susan Baker."

"Oh, is there not? It is the twentieth of April, and Hindy is not in
Paris yet, although he said he would be there by April first. Is that
not a bright spot at least?"

"It is my opinion that the Germans will be in Paris before very long
and more than that, Susan Baker, they will be in Canada."

"Not in this part of it. The Huns shall never set foot in Prince Edward
Island as long as I can handle a pitchfork," declared Susan, looking,
and feeling quite equal to routing the entire German army
single-handed. "No, Sophia Crawford, to tell you the plain truth I am
sick and tired of your gloomy predictions. I do not deny that some
mistakes have been made. The Germans would never have got back
Passchendaele if the Canadians had been left there; and it was bad
business trusting to those Portuguese at the Lys River. But that is no
reason why you or anyone should go about proclaiming the war is lost. I
do not want to quarrel with you, least of all at such a time as this,
but our morale must be kept up, and I am going to speak my mind out
plainly and tell you that if you cannot keep from such croaking your
room is better than your company."

Cousin Sophia marched home in high dudgeon to digest her affront, and
did not reappear in Susan's kitchen for many weeks. Perhaps it was just
as well, for they were hard weeks, when the Germans continued to
strike, now here, now there, and seemingly vital points fell to them at
every blow. And one day in early May, when wind and sunshine frolicked
in Rainbow Valley and the maple grove was golden-green and the harbour
all blue and dimpled and white-capped, the news came about Jem.

There had been a trench raid on the Canadian front--a little trench
raid so insignificant that it was never even mentioned in the
dispatches and when it was over Lieutenant James Blythe was reported
"wounded and missing."

"I think this is even worse than the news of his death would have
been," moaned Rilla through her white lips, that night.

"No--no--'missing' leaves a little hope, Rilla," urged Gertrude Oliver.

"Yes--torturing, agonized hope that keeps you from ever becoming quite
resigned to the worst," said Rilla. "Oh, Miss Oliver--must we go for
weeks and months--not knowing whether Jem is alive or dead? Perhaps we
will never know. I--I cannot bear it--I cannot. Walter--and now Jem.
This will kill mother--look at her face, Miss Oliver, and you will see
that. And Faith--poor Faith--how can she bear it?"

Gertrude shivered with pain. She looked up at the pictures hanging over
Rilla's desk and felt a sudden hatred of Mona Lisa's endless smile.

"Will not even this blot it off your face?" she thought savagely.

But she said gently, "No, it won't kill your mother. She's made of
finer mettle than that. Besides, she refuses to believe Jem is dead;
she will cling to hope and we must all do that. Faith, you may be sure,
will do it."

"I cannot," moaned Rilla, "Jem was wounded--what chance would he have?
Even if the Germans found him--we know how they have treated wounded
prisoners. I wish I could hope, Miss Oliver--it would help, I suppose.
But hope seems dead in me. I can't hope without some reason for it--and
there is no reason."

When Miss Oliver had gone to her own room and Rilla was lying on her
bed in the moonlight, praying desperately for a little strength, Susan
stepped in like a gaunt shadow and sat down beside her.

"Rilla, dear, do not you worry. Little Jem is not dead."

"Oh, how can you believe that, Susan?"

"Because I know. Listen you to me. When that word came this morning the
first thing I thought of was Dog Monday. And tonight, as soon as I got
the supper dishes washed and the bread set, I went down to the station.
There was Dog Monday, waiting for the train, just as patient as usual.
Now, Rilla, dear, that trench raid was four days ago--last Monday--and
I said to the station-agent, 'Can you tell me if that dog howled or
made any kind of a fuss last Monday night?' He thought it over a bit,
and then he said, 'No, he did not.' 'Are you sure?' I said. 'There's
more depends on it than you think!' 'Dead sure,' he said. 'I was up all
night last Monday night because my mare was sick, and there was never a
sound out of him. I would have heard if there had been, for the stable
door was open all the time and his kennel is right across from it!' Now
Rilla dear, those were the man's very words. And you know how that poor
little dog howled all night after the battle of Courcelette. Yet he did
not love Walter as much as he loved Jem. If he mourned for Walter like
that, do you suppose he would sleep sound in his kennel the night after
Jem had been killed? No, Rilla dear, little Jem is not dead, and that
you may tie to. If he were, Dog Monday would have known, just as he
knew before, and he would not be still waiting for the trains."

It was absurd--and irrational--and impossible. But Rilla believed it,
for all that; and Mrs. Blythe believed it; and the doctor, though he
smiled faintly in pretended derision, felt an odd confidence replace
his first despair; and foolish and absurd or not, they all plucked up
heart and courage to carry on, just because a faithful little dog at
the Glen station was still watching with unbroken faith for his master
to come home. Common sense might scorn--incredulity might mutter "Mere
superstition"--but in their hearts the folk of Ingleside stood by their
belief that Dog Monday knew.



CHAPTER XXX

THE TURNING OF THE TIDE

Susan was very sorrowful when she saw the beautiful old lawn of
Ingleside ploughed up that spring and planted with potatoes. Yet she
made no protest, even when her beloved peony bed was sacrificed. But
when the Government passed the Daylight Saving law Susan balked. There
was a Higher Power than the Union Government, to which Susan owed
allegiance.

"Do you think it right to meddle with the arrangements of the
Almighty?" she demanded indignantly of the doctor. The doctor, quite
unmoved, responded that the law must be observed, and the Ingleside
clocks were moved on accordingly. But the doctor had no power over
Susan's little alarm.

"I bought that with my own money, Mrs. Dr. dear," she said firmly, "and
it shall go on God's time and not Borden's time."

Susan got up and went to bed by "God's time," and regulated her own
goings and comings by it. She served the meals, under protest, by
Borden's time, and she had to go to church by it, which was the
crowning injury. But she said her prayers by her own clock, and fed the
hens by it; so that there was always a furtive triumph in her eye when
she looked at the doctor. She had got the better of him by so much at
least.

"Whiskers-on-the-moon is very much delighted with this daylight saving
business," she told him one evening. "Of course he naturally would be,
since I understand that the Germans invented it. I hear he came near
losing his entire wheat-crop lately. Warren Mead's cows broke into the
field one day last week--it was the very day the Germans captured the
Chemang-de-dam, which may have been a coincidence or may not--and were
making fine havoc of it when Mrs. Dick Clow happened to see them from
her attic window. At first she had no intention of letting Mr. Pryor
know. She told me she had just gloated over the sight of those cows
pasturing on his wheat. She felt it served him exactly right. But
presently she reflected that the wheat-crop was a matter of great
importance and that 'save and serve' meant that those cows must be
routed out as much as it meant anything. So she went down and phoned
over to Whiskers about the matter. All the thanks she got was that he
said something queer right out to her. She is not prepared to state
that it was actually swearing for you cannot be sure just what you hear
over the phone; but she has her own opinion, and so have I, but I will
not express it for here comes Mr. Meredith, and Whiskers is one of his
elders, so we must be discreet."

"Are you looking for the new star?" asked Mr. Meredith, joining Miss
Oliver and Rilla, who were standing among the blossoming potatoes
gazing skyward.

"Yes--we have found it--see, it is just above the tip of the tallest
old pine."

"It's wonderful to be looking at something that happened three thousand
years ago, isn't it?" said Rilla. "That is when astronomers think the
collision took place which produced this new star. It makes me feel
horribly insignificant," she added under her breath.

"Even this event cannot dwarf into what may be the proper perspective
in star systems the fact that the Germans are again only one leap from
Paris," said Gertrude restlessly.

"I think I would like to have been an astronomer," said Mr. Meredith
dreamily, gazing at the star.

"There must be a strange pleasure in it," agreed Miss Oliver, "an
unearthly pleasure, in more senses than one. I would like to have a few
astronomers for my friends."

"Fancy talking the gossip of the hosts of heaven," laughed Rilla.

"I wonder if astronomers feel a very deep interest in earthly affairs?"
said the doctor. "Perhaps students of the canals of Mars would not be
so keenly sensitive to the significance of a few yards of trenches lost
or won on the western front."

"I have read somewhere," said Mr. Meredith, "that Ernest Renan wrote
one of his books during the siege of Paris in 1870 and 'enjoyed the
writing of it very much.' I suppose one would call him a philosopher."

"I have read also," said Miss Oliver, "that shortly before his death he
said that his only regret in dying was that he must die before he had
seen what that 'extremely interesting young man, the German Emperor,'
would do in his life. If Ernest Renan 'walked' today and saw what that
interesting young man had done to his beloved France, not to speak of
the world, I wonder if his mental detachment would be as complete as it
was in 1870."

"I wonder where Jem is tonight," thought Rilla, in a sudden bitter
inrush of remembrance.

It was over a month since the news had come about Jem. Nothing had been
discovered concerning him, in spite of all efforts. Two or three
letters had come from him, written before the trench raid, and since
then there had been only unbroken silence. Now the Germans were again
at the Marne, pressing nearer and nearer Paris; now rumours were coming
of another Austrian offensive against the Piave line. Rilla turned away
from the new star, sick at heart. It was one of the moments when hope
and courage failed her utterly--when it seemed impossible to go on even
one more day. If only they knew what had happened to Jem--you can face
anything you know. But a beleaguerment of fear and doubt and suspense
is a hard thing for the morale. Surely, if Jem were alive, some word
would have come through. He must be dead. Only--they would never
know--they could never be quite sure; and Dog Monday would wait for the
train until he died of old age. Monday was only a poor, faithful,
rheumatic little dog, who knew nothing more of his master's fate than
they did.

Rilla had a "white night" and did not fall asleep until late. When she
wakened Gertrude Oliver was sitting at her window leaning out to meet
the silver mystery of the dawn. Her clever, striking profile, with the
masses of black hair behind it, came out clearly against the pallid
gold of the eastern sky. Rilla remembered Jem's admiration of the curve
of Miss Oliver's brow and chin, and she shuddered. Everything that
reminded her of Jem was beginning to give intolerable pain. Walter's
death had inflicted on her heart a terrible wound. But it had been a
clean wound and had healed slowly, as such wounds do, though the scar
must remain for ever. But the torture of Jem's disappearance was
another thing: there was a poison in it that kept it from healing. The
alternations of hope and despair, the endless watching each day for the
letter that never came--that might never come--the newspaper tales of
ill-usage of prisoners--the bitter wonder as to Jem's wound--all were
increasingly hard to bear.

Gertrude Oliver turned her head. There was an odd brilliancy in her
eyes.

"Rilla, I've had another dream."

"Oh, no--no," cried Rilla, shrinking. Miss Oliver's dreams had always
foretold coming disaster.

"Rilla, it was a good dream. Listen--I dreamed just as I did four years
ago, that I stood on the veranda steps and looked down the Glen. And it
was still covered by waves that lapped about my feet. But as I looked
the waves began to ebb--and they ebbed as swiftly as, four years ago,
they rolled in--ebbed out and out, to the gulf; and the Glen lay before
me, beautiful and green, with a rainbow spanning Rainbow Valley--a
rainbow of such splendid colour that it dazzled me--and I woke.
Rilla--Rilla Blythe--the tide has turned."

"I wish I could believe it," sighed Rilla.

  "Sooth was my prophecy of fear
   Believe it when it augurs cheer,"

quoted Gertrude, almost gaily. "I tell you I have no doubt."

Yet, in spite of the great Italian victory at the Piave that came a few
days later, she had doubt many a time in the hard month that followed;
and when in mid-July the Germans crossed the Marne again despair came
sickeningly. It was idle, they all felt, to hope that the miracle of
the Marne would be repeated. But it was: again, as in 1914, the tide
turned at the Marne. The French and the American troops struck their
sudden smashing blow on the exposed flank of the enemy and, with the
almost inconceivable rapidity of a dream, the whole aspect of the war
