"But, Luke, this money is yours."

"No, it is yours, for you are going to take care of the box."

It was, indeed, quite a windfall, and both mother and son retired
to rest in a cheerful frame of mind, in spite of Luke's failure in
the race.

"I have been thinking, Luke," said his mother, at the breakfast-table,
"that I should like to have you buy a Waterbury watch out of this
money. It will only cost three dollars and a half, and that is only
one-third."

"Thank you, mother, but I can get along without the watch. I
cared for it chiefly because it was to be a prize given to the
best skater. All the boys know that I would have won but for
the accident, and that satisfies me."

"I should like you to have a watch, Luke."

"There is another objection, mother. I don't want any one
to know about the box or the money. If it were known that we
had so much property in the house, some attempt might be made
to rob us."

"That is true, Luke. But I hope it won't be long before you
have a watch of your own."

When Luke was walking, after breakfast, he met Randolph
Duncan, with a chain attached to the prize watch ostentatiously
displayed on the outside of his vest. He smiled complacently,
and rather triumphantly, when he met Luke. But Luke looked
neither depressed nor angry.

"I hope your watch keeps good time, Randolph," he said.

"Yes; it hasn't varied a minute so far. I think it will keep
as good time as my silver watch."

"You are fortunate to have two watches."

"My father has promised me a gold watch when I am eighteen,"
said Randolph, pompously.

"I don't know if I shall have any watch at all when I am eighteen."

"Oh, well, you are a poor boy. It doesn't matter to you."

"I don't know about that, Randolph. Time is likely to be
of as much importance to a poor boy as to a rich boy."

"Oh, ah! yes, of course, but a poor boy isn't expected to wear
a watch."

Here the conversation ended. Luke walked on with an amused smile
on his face.

"I wonder how it would seem to be as complacent and self-satisfied
as Randolph?" he thought. "On the whole, I would rather be as I am."

"Good morning, Luke!"

It was a girl's voice that addressed him. Looking up, he met the
pleasant glance of Florence Grant, considered by many the prettiest
girl in Groveton. Her mother was a widow in easy circumstances,
who had removed from Chicago three years before, and occupied a
handsome cottage nearly opposite Mr. Duncan's residence. She was a
general favorite, not only for her good looks, but on account of
her pleasant manner and sweet disposition.

"Good morning, Florence," said Luke, with an answering smile.

"What a pity you lost the race yesterday!"

"Randolph doesn't think so."

"No; he is a very selfish boy, I am afraid."

"Did you see the race?" asked Luke.

"No, but I heard all about it. If it hadn't been for Tom Harper
you would have won, wouldn't you?"

"I think so."

"All the boys say so. What could have induced Tom to get in the way?"

"I don't know. It was very foolish, however. He got badly hurt."

"Tom is a friend of Randolph," said Florence significantly.

"Yes," answered Luke; "but I don't think Randolph would
stoop to such a trick as that."

"You wouldn't, Luke, but Randolph is a different boy.
Besides, I hear he was trying for something else."

"I know; his father offered him ten dollars besides."

"I don't see why it is that some fare so much better than
others," remarked Florence, thoughtfully. "The watch and the
money would have done you more good."

"So they would, Florence, but I don't complain. I may be
better off some day than I am now."

"I hope you will, Luke," said Florence, cordially.

"I am very much obliged to you for your good wishes," said
Luke, warmly.

"That reminds me, Luke, next week, Thursday, is my birthday,
and I am to have a little party in the evening. Will you come?"

Luke's face flushed with pleasure. Though he knew Florence
very well from their being schoolfellows, he had never visited
the house. He properly regarded the invitation as a compliment,
and as a mark of friendship from one whose good opinion he
highly valued.

"Thank you, Florence," he said. "You are very kind, and I shall
have great pleasure in being present. Shall you have many?"

"About twenty. Your friend Randolph will be there."

"I think there will be room for both of us," said Luke, with
a smile.

The young lady bade him good morning and went on her way.

Two days later Luke met Randolph at the dry-goods store in
the village.

"What are you buying?" asked Randolph, condescendingly.

"Only a spool of thread for my mother."

"I am buying a new necktie to wear to Florence Grant's birthday
party," said Randolph, pompously.

"I think I shall have to do the same," said Luke, enjoying
the surprise he saw expressed on Randolph's face.

"Are you going?" demanded Randolph, abruptly.

"Yes."

"Have you been invited?"

"That is a strange question," answered Luke, indignantly. "Do you
think I would go without an invitation?"

"Really, it will be quite a mixed affair," said Randolph, shrugging
his shoulders.

"If you think so, why do you go?"

"I don't want to disappoint Florence."

Luke smiled. He was privately of the opinion that the disappointment
wouldn't be intense.



CHAPTER VI

PREPARING FOR THE PARTY


The evening of the party arrived. It was quite a social event at
Groveton, and the young people looked forward to it with pleasant
anticipation. Randolph went so far as to order a new suit for the
occasion. He was very much afraid it would not be ready in time,
but he was not to be disappointed. At five o'clock on Thursday
afternoon it was delivered, and Randolph, when arrayed in it,
surveyed himself with great satisfaction. He had purchased a
handsome new necktie, and he reflected with pleasure that no boy
present--not even Linton--would be so handsomely dressed as himself.
He had a high idea of his personal consequence, but he was also of
the opinion that "fine feathers make fine birds," and his suit was
of fine cloth and stylish make.

"I wonder what the janitor will wear?" he said to himself, with a
curl of the lip. "A pair of overalls, perhaps. They would be very
appropriate, certainly."

This was just the question which was occupying Luke's mind. He
did not value clothes as Randolph did, but he liked to look neat.
Truth to tell, he was not very well off as to wardrobe. He had his
every-day suit, which he wore to school, and a better suit, which he
had worn for over a year. It was of mixed cloth, neat in appearance,
though showing signs of wear; but there was one trouble. During the
past year Luke had grown considerably, and his coat-sleeves were
nearly two inches too short, and the legs of his trousers deficient
quite as much. Nevertheless, he dressed himself, and he, too,
surveyed himself, not before a pier-glass, but before the small
mirror in the kitchen.

"Don't my clothes look bad, mother?" he asked anxiously.

"They are neat and clean, Luke," said his mother, hesitatingly.

"Yes, I know; but they are too small."

"You have been growing fast in the last year, Luke," said his
mother, looking a little disturbed. "I suppose you are not sorry
for that?"

"No," answered Luke, with a smile, "but I wish my coat and
trousers had grown, too."

"I wish, my dear boy, I could afford to buy you a new suit."

"Oh, never mind, mother," said Luke, recovering his cheerfulness.
"They will do for a little while yet. Florence didn't invite me
for my clothes."

"No; she is a sensible girl. She values you for other reasons."

"I hope so, mother. Still, when I consider how handsomely Randolph
will be dressed, I can't help thinking that there is considerable
difference in our luck."

"Would you be willing to exchange with him, Luke?"

"There is one thing I wouldn't like to exchange."

"And what is that?"

"I wouldn't exchange my mother for his," said Luke, kissing the
widow affectionately. "His mother is a cold, proud, disagreeable
woman, while I have the best mother in the world."

"Don't talk foolishly, Luke," said Mrs. Larkin; but her face
brightened, and there was a warm feeling in her heart, for it
was very pleasant to her to hear Luke speak of her in this way.

"I won't think any more about it, mother," said Luke. "I've got
a new necktie, at any rate, and I will make that do."

Just then there was a knock at the door, and Linton entered.

"I thought I would come round and go to the party with you,
Luke," he said.

Linton was handsomely dressed, though he had not bought a suit
expressly, like Randolph. He didn't appear to notice Luke's scant
suit. Even if he had, he would have been too much of a gentleman
to refer to it.

"I think we shall have a good time," he said. "We always do at
Mrs. Grant's. Florence is a nice girl, and they know how to make
it pleasant. I suppose we shall have dancing."

"I don't know how to dance," said Luke, regretfully. "I should like
to have taken lessons last winter when Professor Bent had a class,
but I couldn't afford it."

"You have seen dancing?"

"Oh, yes."

"It doesn't take much knowledge to dance a quadrille, particularly
if you get on a side set. Come, we have an hour before it is time
to go. Suppose I give you a lesson?"

"Do you think I could learn enough in that time to venture?"

"Yes, I do. If you make an occasional mistake it won't matter. So,
if your mother will give us the use of the sitting-room, I will
commence instructions."

Luke had looked at some dancers in the dining-room at the hotel, and
was not wholly a novice, therefore. Linton was an excellent dancer,
and was clear in his directions. It may also be said that Luke was
a ready learner. So it happened at the end of the hour that the
pupil had been initiated not only in the ordinary changes of the
quadrille, but also in one contra dance, the Virginia Reel, which
was a great favorite among the young people of Groveton.

"Now, I think you'll do, Luke," said Linton, when the lesson
was concluded. "You are very quick to learn."

"You think I won't be awkward, Linton?"

"No, if you keep cool and don't get flustered."

"I am generally pretty cool. But I shall be rather surprised
to see myself on the floor," laughed Luke.

"No doubt others will be, but you'll have a great deal more fun."

"So I shall. I don't like leaning against the wall while others
are having a good time."

"If you could dance as well as you can skate you would have no
trouble, Luke."

"No; that is where Randolph has the advantage of me."

"He is a very great dancer, though he can't come up to you in
skating. However, dancing isn't everything. Dance as well as he
may, he doesn't stand as high in the good graces of Florence Grant
as he would like to do."

"I always noticed that he seemed partial to Florence."

"Yes, but it isn't returned. How about yourself, Luke?"

Luke, being a modest boy, blushed.

"I certainly think Florence a very nice girl," he said.

"I was sure of that," said Linton, smiling.

"But I don't want to stand in your way, Linton," continued Luke,
with a smile.

"No danger, Luke. Florence is a year older than I am. Now, you are
nearly two years older than she, and are better matched. So you
needn't consider me in the matter."

Of course, this was all a joke. It was true, however, that of all
the girls in Groveton, Luke was more attracted by Florence Grant
than by any other, and they had always been excellent friends. It
was well known that Randolph also was partial to the young lady,
but he certainly had never received much encouragement.

Finally the boys got out, and were very soon at the door of Mrs.
Grant's handsome cottage. It was large upon the ground, with a
broad veranda, in the Southern style. In fact, Mrs. Grant was
Southern by birth, and, erecting the house herself, had it built
after the fashion of her Southern birthplace.

Most of the young visitors had arrived when Luke and Linton
put in an appearance. They had been detained longer than they
were aware by the dancing-lesson.

Randolph and Sam Noble were sitting side by side at one end
of the room, facing the entrance.

"Look," said Randolph, with a satirical smile, to his companion,
"there comes the young janitor in his dress suit. Just look
at his coat-sleeves and the legs of his trousers. They are at
least two inches too short. Any other boy would be ashamed to
come to a party in such ridiculous clothes."

Sam looked and tittered. Luke's face flushed, for, though he
did not hear the words, he guessed their tenor. But he was made
to forget them when Florence came forward and greeted Linton
and himself with unaffected cordiality.



CHAPTER VII

FLORENCE GRANT'S PARTY


Luke's uncomfortable consciousness of his deficiencies in dress soon
passed off. He noticed the sneer on Randolph's face and heard Sam's
laugh, but he cared very little for the opinion of either of them.
No other in the company appeared to observe his poor dress, and he
was cordially greeted by them all, with the two exceptions already
named.

"The janitor ought to know better than to intrude into the society
of his superiors," said Randolph to Sam.

"He seems to enjoy himself," said Sam.

This was half an hour after the party had commenced, when all were
engaged in one of the plays popular at a country party.

"I am going to have a party myself in a short time," continued
Randolph, "but I shall be more select than Florence in my invitations.
I shall not invite any working boys."

"Right you are, Randolph," said the subservient Sam. "I hope
you won't forget me."

"Oh, no; I shall invite you. Of course, you don't move exactly
in my circle, but, at any rate, you dress decently."

If Sam Noble had had proper pride he would have resented the
insolent assumption of superiority in this speech, but he was
content to play second fiddle to Randolph Duncan. His family,
like himself, were ambitious to be on good terms with the leading
families in the village, and did not mind an occasional snub.

"Shall you invite Tom Harper?" he asked.

He felt a little jealous of Tom, who had vied with him in flattering
attentions to Randolph.

"No, I don't think so. Tom isn't here, is he?"

"He received an invitation, but ever since his accident he has been
troubled with severe headaches, and I suppose that keeps him away."

"He isn't up to my standard," said Randolph, consequentially. "He
comes of a low family."

"You and he have been together a good deal."

"Oh, I have found him of some service, but I have paid for it."

Yet this was the boy who, at his own personal risk, had obtained
for Randolph the prize at the skating-match. Privately, Sam thought
Randolph ungrateful, but he was, nevertheless, pleased at having
distanced Tom in the favor of the young aristocrat.

After an hour, spent in various amusements, one of the company
took her place at the piano, and dancing began.

"Now is your time, Luke," said Linton. "Secure a partner. It is
only a quadrille."

"I feel a little nervous," said Luke. "Perhaps I had better wait
till the second dance."

"Oh, nonsense! Don't be afraid."

Meanwhile, Randolph, with a great flourish, had invited Florence
