full exercise of their religion and of all other rights they possessed.
The pasha had no real hope that the knights would obey the summons,
but he thought that he might excite a spirit of disaffection among the
townspeople that would, when the crisis came, greatly hamper the efforts
of the defenders.

The Rhodians, however, were well satisfied with the rule of the Order.
The knights, although belonging to the Catholic Church, had allowed the
natives of the Island, who were of the Greek faith, perfect freedom in
the exercise of their religion, and their rule, generally, had been
fair and just. The wealth and prosperity of the Island had increased
enormously since their establishment there, and the population had no
inclination whatever to change their rule for that of the Turks. The
summons to surrender being refused, the enemy made a reconnaissance
towards the walls.

D'Aubusson had no longer any reason for checking the ardour of the
knights, and a strong body of horsemen, under the command of De
Monteuil, sallied out and drove the Turks back to their camp.

Maitre Georges, who was acting as the military adviser of the pasha, saw
at once that the weakest point of the defence was Fort St. Nicholas, at
the extremity of the mole along the neck of land dividing the outer from
the inner port. At a short distance away, on the opposite side of the
port, stood the church of St. Anthony, and in the gardens of the church
a battery was at once erected. The garden was but three hundred yards
from St. Nicholas, and the danger that would arise from the construction
of the battery was at once perceived, and an incessant fire opened upon
it from the guns on the wall round the grand master's palace. Numbers of
the workmen were killed, but the erection of the battery was pushed on
night and day, and ere long three of the immense cannon that had been
brought from Constantinople,--where sixteen of them had been cast under
the direction of Maitre Georges--were placed in position. These cannon
were eighteen feet in length, and carried stone balls of some twenty-six
inches in diameter.

Before these were ready to open fire, Gervaise had entirely regained his
health and strength. The grand master, being unwilling to appoint him to
a separate command over the heads of knights many years his senior, had
attached him to his person in the capacity of what would now be called
an aide-de-camp.

"I know, Gervaise, that I can rely upon your coolness and discretion. I
cannot be everywhere myself, and I want you to act as my eyes in places
where I cannot be. I know that the knights, so far as bravery and
devotion are concerned, will each and every one do his best, and will
die at their posts before yielding a foot; but while fighting like
paladins they will think of naught else, and, however hardly pressed,
will omit to send to me for reinforcements. Nay, even did they think
of it, they probably would not send, deeming that to do so would be
derogatory, and might be taken as an act of cowardice. Now, it is
this service that I shall specially look for from you. When a post is
attacked, I shall, when my presence is required elsewhere, send you to
represent me. I do not, of course, wish you to interfere in any way in
the conduct of the defence, in which you will take such share as you
can; but you are specially to observe how matters go, and if you see
that the knights are pressed and in sore need of assistance to enable
them to hold the post, you will at once bring the news to me, and I will
hurry there with reinforcements."

No post could have been more in accordance with the desire of Gervaise,
for the portion of the wall defended by the English langue was far
removed from the point selected by the Turks for their first attack, the
sea front being defended half by the langue of Italy, and half by that
of Castile. Fort St. Nicholas was under the command of the Cavalier
Caretto, and as soon as the Turkish battery was completed, Gervaise
went down there with an order from the grand master that he was for the
present to consider himself as forming part of the garrison. This
was pleasant for both Caretto and himself, for the Italian knight had
conceived a strong friendship for the young Englishman, and had rejoiced
greatly at his return from captivity, but had been so much occupied with
his duty of placing the castle in all respects in a state of defence,
that he had had no opportunity for a private conversation with him since
his return to Rhodes.

Gervaise, on his part, was no less pleased. Caretto had shown so much
tact after his release from the Moors, and had so willingly aided him
in any capacity allotted to him, without in the slightest degree
interposing his council unasked, that Gervaise had come to like him
greatly, even before their arrival at Genoa. Circumstances there had
brought them closely together, and their friendship had been cemented
during their voyage to Rhodes. Caretto had gone back to Italy, where
he had a commandery, a few days after Gervaise had sailed on his last
voyage, and had only returned to Rhodes three months before Gervaise
escaped from captivity.

"This is turning the tables," Caretto said, with a laugh, when Gervaise
presented the grand master's order. "I was under your command last time,
and now it seems that you are to be under mine. I suppose you applied
to come here, in order to have a fresh opportunity of distinguishing
yourself. I heard that you had been placed on D'Aubusson's own staff."

"Yes, and am on it still; and it is by his orders and not by my own
solicitation that I am here. I will tell you what my duties are. The
grand master knows the commanders of posts have their hands so full
that they will have no time for sending complete reports to him, and he
considers, moreover, that they might, in some cases, however pressed,
hesitate to ask for aid until too late for reinforcements to be brought
up. My duty will be to let the grand master know how matters are going,
and to send to him at once if it seems to me that help is needed. I
should, of course, always send for reinforcements, at the request of a
commander; but it is only in the event of his being too busy in the heat
of the fray to think of aught but resisting an attack, that I should
exercise my own judgment in the matter."

Caretto nodded.

"It is a good thought of D'Aubusson's. When one is in the thick of a
fight in a breach, with the Moslems swarming round, it does not occur to
one to draw out of the fray to send off messages. For myself, I shall be
glad indeed to have that matter off my mind, though it is not every one
I should care to trust with such a responsibility. Some might send off
for aid when it was not needed, others might delay so long that help
might come too late; but with one so cool headed as yourself I should
not fear any contingency. And now, as I am not busy at present, let us
have a comfortable talk as to what has happened since we met last. I was
at the banquet at the grand master's on the night when you related your
adventures. You had certainly much to tell, but it seems to me for some
reason or other you cut short certain details, and I could not see why,
as there seemed no prospect of escape open to you, you did not accept
the offer of Suleiman Ali to ransom you."

"I saw no chance of escape at the moment, but I did not doubt that I
could get away from the town whenever I chose, although it was not
clear how I should proceed afterwards. It was for this opportunity I
was waiting, and I felt sure that, with my knowledge of the language, it
would come sooner or later. In the next place, my captors had fixed
an exorbitant sum for my ransom, and I did not wish to impose upon the
generosity of Suleiman. There was another reason--a private one."

"You don't mean to say that you had fallen in love with a Moorish
damsel, Sir Gervaise?" Caretto laughed.

"For shame, Cavalier! As if a Christian knight would care for a Moslem
maiden, even were she as fair as the houris of their creed!"

"Christian knights have done so before now," Caretto laughed, greatly
amused at the young knight's indignation, "and doubtless will do so
again. Well, I suppose I must not ask what the private matter was,
though it must have been something grave indeed to lead you, a slave,
to reject the offer of freedom. I know that when I was rowing in their
galleys, no matter of private business that I can conceive would have
stood in my way for a single moment, had a chance of freedom presented
itself."

"It was a matter of honour," Gervaise said gravely, "and one of which I
should speak to no one else; but as you were present at the time, there
can, I think, be no harm in doing so. At the time that I was captured, I
was stripped of everything that I had upon me, and, of course, with the
rest, of the gage which the Lady Claudia had given me, and which hung
round my neck where she had placed it. It was taken possession of by the
captain of the pirates, who, seeing that it bore no Christian emblem,
looked upon it as a sort of amulet. I understood what he was saying,
but, as I was desirous that my knowledge of Turkish should not be
suspected, I said nothing. I was very glad that he so regarded it, for
had he taken it to be an ordinary trinket, he might have parted with it,
and I should never have been able to obtain a clue as to the person to
whom he sold it. As it was, he put it round his neck, with the remark
that it might bring him better luck than had befallen me. He told me
jeeringly months afterwards that it had done so, and that he would never
part with it. Given me as it was, I felt that my honour was concerned in
its recovery, and that, should I ever meet Lady Claudia again, I should
feel disgraced indeed, if, when she asked whether I still bore her gage,
I had to confess that it was lost."

"But lost from no fault of your own," Caretto put in.

"The losing was not indeed from any fault of my own, and had the pirate
thrown it into the sea I should have held myself free from disgrace; but
as it was still in existence, and I knew its possessor, I was bound in
honour to recover it. At the time Suleiman Ali's messenger arrived the
corsair was away, and there was no saying when his ship would return;
therefore, I decided at once not to accept the offer of freedom. Had it
not been for that, I own that I should have done so, for I knew that
I could repay Suleiman from the revenues of my commandery, which would
have accumulated in my absence; but if I had had to wait ten years
longer to regain the gage, I felt that I was in honour bound to do so.
It was, in fact, some six months before the corsair put into that port
again. The moment he did so I carried out the plans I had long before
determined upon. I obtained a disguise from Ben Ibyn, and by a ruse
succeeded in inducing the pirate to meet me outside the town, believing
that I was an Arab chief who wished to dispose of some valuable slave
girls he had brought in. I had with me one of my old galley slaves, who
had been taken into Ben Ibyn's employment; and when the pirate came up
with two of his crew, and furiously attacked me as soon as I threw off
my disguise, it would have gone hard with me had he not stood by me, and
killed one of them who was about to attack me in the rear. I slew the
other and Hassan, and the gage is in its place again."



CHAPTER XXI THE FORT OF ST. NICHOLAS


"Well, you have proved indeed," Caretto said, when Gervaise finished his
story, "that you are worthy of the bestowal of a gage by a fair damsel.
I do not think that many knights, however true they might be to the
donor, would have suffered months of slavery in order to regain a token,
lost by no fault or carelessness of their own; and no lady could have
blamed or held them in any way dishonoured by the loss."

"I had a message by the Viscount De Monteuil from Lady Claudia the other
day, saying that she trusted I had kept her gage. I can assure you that
the six months of slavery were cheaply purchased by the pleasure I felt
that I still possessed it; and I was glad, too, to learn that I had not
been forgotten by her."

"Of that you may well assure yourself, Tresham; my commandery is not far
from Genoa, and I was frequently with her, but never without her drawing
me aside and asking me if I had heard any news of you, and talking over
with me the chances there might be of your escape. I can tell you that
there are not a few young nobles of Genoa who would give much to be
allowed as you are to carry her gage, or wear her colours. You should
see her now; you would scarce know her again, so altered and improved is
she; there is no fairer face in all Italy."

"I hope some day to meet her again," Gervaise replied; "although I own
to knowing it were better that I should not do so. Until she gave me her
gage I had scarcely noticed her. I have, as you know, no experience of
women, and had so much on my mind at the time, what with the fuss they
were making about us, and the question of getting the prizes here, that
in truth I paid but slight attention to the fair faces of the dames of
Genoa. But the gracious and earnest way in which, though scarce more
than a child, she gave me her gage, and vowed that no other knight
should possess one so long as I lived, struck me so greatly that I own
I gave the matter much more thought than was right or becoming in one
of our Order. The incident was much more gratifying to me than all
the honour paid me by the Republic, and during the long months of
my captivity it has recurred to me so frequently that I have in vain
endeavoured to chase it from my thoughts, as sinful thus to allow myself
constantly to think of any woman. Do not mistake me, Sir Fabricius. I
am speaking to you as to a confessor, and just as I have kept her amulet
hidden from all, so is the thought of her a secret I would not part with
for my life. I do not for a moment deceive myself with the thought that,
beyond the fact that her gift has made her feel an interest in me and my
fate, she has any sentiment in the matter: probably, indeed, she looks
back upon the gift as a foolish act of girlish enthusiasm that led her
into making a promise that she now cannot but find unpleasantly binding;
for it is but natural that among the young nobles of her own rank and
country there must be some whom she would see with pleasure wearing her
colours."

Caretto looked at him with some amusement.

"Were you not bound by your vows as a knight of the Order, how would you
feel in the matter?"

"I should feel worse," Gervaise said, without hesitation. "I have
oftentimes thought that over, and I see that it is good for me I am so
bound. It does not decrease my chances, for, as I know, there are no
chances; but it renders it more easy for me to know that it is so."

"But why should you say that you have no chances, Tresham?"

"Because it is easy to see that it is so. I am, save for my commandery
and prospects in the Order, a penniless young knight, without home or
estate, without even a place in my country, and that country not hers. I
know that it is not only sinful, but mad, for me to think so frequently
of her, but at least I am not mad enough to think that I can either win
the heart or aspire to the hand of one who is, you say, so beautiful,
and who is, moreover, as I know, the heiress to wide estates."

"'There was a squire of low degree, Loved the king's daughter of
Hungarie,'" Caretto sang, with a laugh. "You are not of low degree,
but of noble family, Gervaise. You are not a squire, but a knight, and
already a very distinguished one; nor is the young lady, though she be a
rich heiress, a king's daughter."

"At any rate, the squire was not vowed to celibacy. No, no, Sir
Fabricius, it is a dream, and a pleasant one; but I know perfectly well
that it is but a dream, and one that will do me no harm so long as I
ever bear in mind that it is so. Many a knight of the Order before me
has borne a lady's gage, and carried it valiantly in many a fight, and
has been no less true to his vows for doing so."

"Upon the contrary, he has been all the better a knight, Gervaise; it
is always good for a knight, whether he belongs to the Order or not, to
prize one woman above all others, and to try to make himself worthy of
his ideal. As to the vow of celibacy, you know that ere now knights have
been absolved from their vows, and methinks that, after the service
you have rendered to Italy by ridding the sea of those corsairs, his
Holiness would make no difficulty in granting any request that you might
make him in that or any other direction. I don't know whether you are
aware that, after you sailed from here, letters came from Rome as well
as from Pisa, Florence, and Naples, expressive of the gratitude felt
for the services that you had rendered, and of their admiration for the
splendid exploit that you had performed."

"No; the grand master has had his hands so full of other matters that
doubtless an affair so old escaped his memory. Indeed, he may have
forgotten that I sailed before the letters arrived."

"Do not forget to jog his memory on the subject, for I can tell you that
the letters did not come alone, but were each accompanied by presents
worthy of the service you rendered. But as to the vows?"

"As to the vows, I feel as I said just now, that I would not free myself
of them if I could, for, being bound by them, I can the more easily and
pleasantly enjoy my dream. Besides, what should I do if I left the Order
without home, country, or means, and with naught to do but to sell my
sword to some warlike monarch? Besides, Caretto, I love the Order,
and deem it the highest privilege to fight against the Moslems, and to
uphold the banner of the Cross."

"As to that, you could, like De Monteuil and many other knights here,
always come out to aid the Order in time of need. As to the vows, I am
not foolish enough to suppose that you would ask to be relieved from
them, until you had assured yourself that Claudia was also desirous that
you should be free."

"It is absurd," Gervaise said, almost impatiently. "Do not let us talk
any more about it, Caretto, or it will end by turning my head and making
me presumptuous enough to imagine that the Lady Claudia, who only saw
me for three or four days, and that while she was still but a girl, has
been thinking of me seriously since."

"I do not know Claudia's thoughts," Caretto remarked drily, "but I
do know that last year she refused to listen to at least a score of
excellent offers for her hand, including one from a son of the doge
himself, and that without any reasonable cause assigned by her, to the
great wonderment of all, seeing that she does not appear to have any
leaning whatever towards a life in a nunnery. At any rate, if at some
future time you should pluck up heart of grace to tell her you love her,
and she refuses you, you will at least have the consolation of knowing
that you are not the only one, by a long way, whose suit has been
rejected. And now as to our affairs here. Methinks that tomorrow that
battery will open fire upon us. It seems completed."

"Yes, I think they are nearly ready," Gervaise said, turning his mind
resolutely from the subject they had been discussing. "From the palace
wall I saw, before I came down here, large numbers of men rolling huge
stones down towards the church. Our guns were firing steadily; but could
they load them ten times as fast as they do, they would hardly be able
to stop the work, so numerous are those engaged upon it."

"Yes we shall soon learn something of the quality of their artillery.
The tower is strong enough to resist ordinary guns, but it will soon
crumble under the blows of such enormous missiles. Never have I seen or
heard in Europe of cannon of such size; but indeed, in this matter the
Turks are far ahead of us, and have, ever since cannon were first cast,
made them of much larger size than we in Europe have done. However,
there is one comfort; they may destroy this fort, but they have still
to cross the water, and this under the fire of the guns on the palace
walls; when they once land, their great battery must cease firing, and
we shall be able to meet them on equal terms in the breach. Fight
as hard as they may, I think we can hold our own, especially as
reinforcements can come down to us more quickly than they can be brought
across the water."

The next morning, at daybreak, the deep boom of a gun announced to the
city that the great battering cannon had begun their work. In the fort
the sleeping knights sprang to their feet at the concussion that seemed
to shake it to its centre. They would have rushed to the walls, but
Caretto at once issued orders that no one should show himself on the
battlements unless under special orders.

"There is nothing whatever to be done until the Turks have breached the
wall, and are ready to advance to attack us. Every sword will be needed
when that hour comes, and each man owes it to the Order to run no
useless risk, until the hour when he is required to do his share of the
fighting."

The time required to reload the great cannon was considerable, but at
regular intervals they hurled their heavy missiles against the wall,
the distance being so short that every ball struck it. After some twenty
shots had been fired, Caretto, accompanied by Gervaise, went out by a
small gate on the eastern side of the tower, and made their way round
by the foot of the wall to see what effect the shots had produced on the
solid masonry.

Caretto shook his head.

"It is as I feared," he said. "No stones ever quarried by man could long
resist such tremendous blows. In some places, you see, the stones are
starred and cracked, in others the shock seems to have pulverised the
spot where it struck; but, worse, still, the whole face of the wall
is shaken. There are cracks between the stones, and some of these are
partly bulged out and partly driven in. It may take some time before
a breach is effected, but sooner or later the wall will surely be
demolished."

"I will go up and make my report to the grand master."

"Do so, Gervaise. I almost wonder that he has not himself come down to
see how the wall is resisting."

Gervaise, on reaching the palace, heard that D'Aubusson was at present
engaged in examining no less a person than Maitre Georges, the right
hand of Paleologus, who had soon after daybreak presented himself before
the wall on the other side of the town, declaring that he had left the
Turkish service, and craving to be admitted. News had been sent at once
to D'Aubusson, who despatched two of the senior knights, with orders to
admit him and receive him with all honour. This had been done, and
the grand master, with some of his council, were now closeted with
the newcomer. Several of the knights were gathered in the courtyard,
discussing the event. There was no question that if the renegade came in
good faith, his defection would be a serious blow to the assailants,
and that his well known skill and experience would greatly benefit the
defenders.

"For my part," Sir John Boswell, who formed one of the detachment which
the English langue, as well as all the others, contributed to form the
garrison of the palace said, "I would have hung the fellow up by the
neck over the gateway, and he should never have set foot within the
walls. Think you that a man who has denied his faith and taken service
with his enemies is to be trusted, whatever oaths he may take?"

"You must remember, Boswell," another said, "that hitherto Georges has
not fought against Christians, but has served Mahomet in his wars with
other infidels. I am not saying a word in defence of his having become a
renegade; yet even a renegade may have some sort of heart, and now that
he has been called upon to fight against Christians he may well have
repented of his faults, and determined to sacrifice his position and
prospects rather than aid in the attack on the city."

"We shall see. As for me, I regard a renegade as the most contemptible
of wretches, and have no belief that they have either a heart or
conscience."

When Maitre Georges came out from the palace, laughing and talking with
the two knights who had entered with him, it was evident that he was
well pleased with his reception by the grand master, who had assigned
to him a suite of apartments in the guest house. In reality, however,
D'Aubusson had no doubt that his object was a treacherous one, and that,
like Demetrius, who had come under the pretence of bringing about a
truce, his object was to find out the weak points and to supply the
Turks with information. Georges had, in his conversation with him, laid
great stress on the strength of the Turkish army, the excellent quality
of the troops, and the enormous battering train that had been prepared.
But every word he spoke but added to the grand master's suspicions; for
if the man considered that the capture of the city was morally certain,
it would be simply throwing away his life to enter it as a deserter.

The grand master was, however, too politic to betray any doubt of
Georges' sincerity. Were he treated as a traitor, Paleologus might
find another agent to do the work. It was, therefore, better to feign
a belief in his story, to obtain all the information possible from him,
and at the same time to prevent his gaining any knowledge of affairs
that would be of the slightest use to the Turks. Instructions were
therefore given to the two knights that, while Georges was to be treated
with all courtesy, he was to be strictly watched, though in such a
manner that he should be in ignorance of it, and that, whenever he
turned his steps in the direction of those parts of the defences where
fresh works had been recently added and preparations made of which it
was desirable the Turks should be kept in ignorance, he was to be met,
as if by accident, by one of the knights told off for the purpose, and
his steps diverted in another direction.

Georges soon made himself popular among many of the knights, who had no
suspicions of his real character. He was a man of exceptional figure,
tall, strong, splendidly proportioned, with a handsome face and gallant
bearing. He was extremely well informed on all subjects, had travelled
widely, had seen many adventures, was full of anecdote, and among
the younger knights, therefore, he was soon regarded as a charming
companion. His very popularity among them aided D'Aubusson's plans, as
Georges was generally the centre of a group of listeners, and so had but
few opportunities of getting away quietly to obtain the information he
sought. Gervaise delivered his report to the grand master.

"I am free now," D'Aubusson said, "and will accompany you to St.
Nicholas. I have been detained by the coming of this man Georges. He
is a clever knave, and, I doubt not, has come as a spy. However, I have
taken measures that he shall learn nothing that can harm us. No lives
have been lost at the tower, I hope?"
