
"Why not?"

"Miss Heath, how can you say, why not'? Prissie is a genius; her
inclination lies in that direction. It is in her power to become one
of the most brilliant classical scholars of her day."

Miss Heath smiled. "Well, Maggie," she said slowly, "even suppose that
is the case-- and you must own that, clever as Priscilla is, you make
an extreme statement when you say such words-- she may do well, very
well, and yet turn her attention to other subjects for the present."

"It is cruel!" said Maggie, rising and stamping her foot impatiently.
"Priscilla has it in her to shed honor on our college. She will take a
first-class when she goes for her tripos, if her present studies are
not interfered with."

Miss Heath smiled at Maggie in a pitying sort of way. "I admit," she
said, "that first-class honors would be a very graceful crown of bay
to encircle that young head; and yet, Maggie, yet-- surely Priscilla
can do better?"

"What do you mean? How can she possibly do better?"

"She can wear a nobler crown. You know, Maggie, there are crowns to be
worn which cannot fade."

"Oh!" Maggie's lips trembled. She looked down.

After a pause, she said, "Priscilla told me something of her home and
her family. I suppose she has also confided in you, Miss Heath?"

"Yes, my dear."

"Well, I have come to-night to say that it is in my power to use some
of that money which I detest in helping Prissie-- in helping her
family. I mean to help them; I mean to put them all in such a position
that Priscilla shall not need to spend her youth in uncongenial
drudgery. I have come to say this to you, Miss Heath, and I beg of
you-- yes, I beg of you-- to induce my dear Prissie to go on with her
classical studies. It will now be in your power to assure her that the
necessity which made her obliged to give them up no longer exists."

"In short," said Miss Heath, "you will give Miss Peel of your charity
and take her independence away?"

"What do you mean?"

"Put yourself in her place, Maggie. Would you take money for yourself
and those dear to you from a comparative stranger?"

Maggie's face grew very red. "I think I would oblige my friend, my
dear friend," she said.

"Is Prissie really your dear friend?"

"Why do you doubt me? I love her very much. Since-- since Annabel
died, no one has come so close to me."

"I am glad of that," replied Miss Heath. She went up to Maggie and
kissed her.

"You will do what I wish?" asked the girl eagerly.

"No, my dear: that matter lies in your hands alone. It is a case in
which it is absolutely impossible for me to interfere. If you can
induce Priscilla to accept money from you, I shall not say a word;
and, for the sake of our college, I shall, perhaps, be glad, for there
is not the least doubt that Prissie has it in her to win distinction
for St. Benet's. But, on the other hand, if she comes to me for
advice, it will be impossible for me not to say to her: 'My dear,
character ranks higher than intellect. You may win the greatest prizes
and yet keep a poor and servile soul. You may never get this great
earthly distinction, and yet you may be crowned with honor-- the honor
which comes of uprightness, of independence, of integrity.' Prissie
may never consult me, of course, Maggie; but, if she does, I must say
words something like these. To tell the truth, my dear, I never
admired Priscilla more than I did last night. I encouraged her to give
up her classics for the present and to devote herself to modern
languages and to those accomplishments which are considered more
essentially feminine. As I did so I had a picture before me, in which
I saw Priscilla crowned with love, the support and blessing of her
three little sisters. The picture was a very bright one, Maggie, and
your crown of bay looks quite tawdry beside the other crown which I
hope to see on Prissie's brow."

Maggie rose from her chair. "Good night," she said.

"I am sorry to disappoint you, my love."

"I have no doubt you are right," said Maggie, "but," she added, "I
have not made up my mind, and I still long for Priscilla to wear the
crown of bay."

"You will win that crown yourself, my dear."

"Oh, no, it is not for me."

"I am very anxious about you, Maggie. Why do you speak in that
reckless tone? Your position and Prissie's are not the least alike: it
is your duty to do your very utmost with those talents which have been
bestowed upon you."

"Perhaps," answered Maggie, shrugging her shoulders, "but I am tired
of stretching out my hand like a baby to catch soap-bubbles. I cannot
speak of myself at all to-night, Miss Heath. Thank you for what you
have said, and again good night."

Maggie had scarcely left the room before Priscilla appeared.

"Are you too tired to see me to-night, Miss Heath?"

"No, my love; come in and sit down. I was sorry to miss you this
morning."

"But I am glad as it turned out," replied Priscilla.

"You were in great trouble, Prissie. The servant told me how terribly
upset you were."

"I was. I felt nearly mad."

"But you look very happy now."

"I am; my trouble has all vanished away. It was a great bogie. As soon
as I came boldly up to it, it vanished into smoke."

"Am I to hear the name of the bogie?"

"I think I would rather not tell you-- at least not now. If Maggie
thinks it right, she will speak to you about it; but, as far as I am
concerned, it cannot touch me again."

"Why have you come to see me then to-night, Priscilla?"

"I want to speak about Maggie."

"What about her? She has just been here to speak of you."

"Has she?"

"It is possible that she may make you a proposition which will affect
your whole future, but I am not at liberty to say any more. Have you a
proposition to make about her?"

"I have, and it will affect all Maggie's life. It will make her so
good-- so very, very happy. Oh, Miss Heath! you ought to do it: you
ought to make her marry Mr. Hammond at once."

"My dear Priscilla!" Miss Heath's face turned crimson. "Are you
alluding to Geoffrey Hammond? I know great friends of his; he is one
of the cleverest men at St. Hilda's."

"Yes, and one of the best," pursued Prissie, clasping her hands and
speaking in that excited way which she always did when quite carried
out of herself. "You don't know how good he is, Miss Heath. I think he
is one of the best of men. I would do anything in the world for him--
anything."

"Where have you met him, Priscilla?"

"At the Marshalls', and once at the Elliot-Smiths', and to-day, when I
was so miserable, when the bogie ran after me, you know, at St.
Hilda's, just outside the chapel. Mr. Hammond asked me to come to the
service, and I went, and afterward he chased the bogie away. Oh, he is
good, he is kind and he loves Maggie with all his heart. He has loved
her for a long time, I am sure, but she is never nice to him."

"Then, of course," said Miss Heath, "if Miss Oliphant does not care
for Mr. Hammond, there is an end of the matter. You are a very
innocent and very young girl, Priscilla; but this is a subject in
which you have no right to interfere. Far from me to say that I
disapprove of marriage for our students, but, while at St. Benet's, it
is certainly best for them to give their attention to other matters."

"For most of us," replied Prissie, "but not for Maggie. No one in the
college thinks Maggie happy."

"That is true," replied Miss Heath thoughtfully.

"And every one knows," pursued Prissie, "that Mr. Hammond loves her."

"Do they? I was not aware that such reports had got abroad."

"Oh, yes: all Maggie's friends know that, but they are so dreadfully
stupid they cannot guess the other thing."

"What other thing?"

"That dear Maggie is breaking her heart on account of Mr. Hammond."

"Then you think she loves him?"

"I do-- I know it. Oh, won't you do something to get them to marry
each other?"

"My dear child, these are subjects in which neither you nor I can
interefere."

"Oh!" Prissie's eyes filled with sudden tears. "If you won't do
anything, I must."

"I don't see what you can do, Priscilla; I don't know what you have a
right to do. We do not care that our students should think of love and
courtship while here, but we have never limited their freedom in the
matter. If Miss Oliphant cares for Mr. Hammond, and he cares for her,
they know perfectly that they can become engaged. Miss Oliphant will
be leaving St. Benet's at the end of the summer term. She is
completely, in every sense of the word, her own mistress."

"Oh, no, she is not her own mistress, she is oppressed by a bogie. I
don't know the name of the bogie, or anything about it; but it is
shadowing all Maggie's life; it is taking the sunshine away from her,
and it is making it impossible for her to marry Mr. Hammond. They are
both so fond of each other; they have both noble hearts, but the
dreadful bogie spoils everything-- it keeps them apart. Dear Miss
Heath, I want you to come and kill the bogie."

"I must find out its name first," said Miss Heath.

  CHAPTER XXIX

 AT THE ELLIOT-SMITHS PARTY

ROSALIND MERTON had been in the wildest spirits all day; she had
laughed with the gayest, joined in all the games, thrown herself heart
and soul into every project which promised fun, which gave a
possibility for enjoyment. Rosalind's mood might have been described
as reckless. This was not her invariable condition. She was a girl
who, with all her gay spirits, took life with coolness. She was not
given to over-excitement; her nerves were too well balanced for
anything of this kind.

To-day, however, something seemed wrong with these equable nerves of
hers: she could not keep still; her voice was never quiet; her laugh
was constant. Once or twice she saw Annie Day's eyes fixed upon her;
she turned from their glance; a more brilliant red than usual dyed her
cheeks; her laugh grew louder and more insolent.

On this evening the Elliot-Smiths would give their long-promised
party. The wish of Annie Day's heart was gratified; she had angled for
an invitation to this merry-making and obtained it. Lucy Marsh was
also going, and several other St. Benet's girls would be present.

Early in the evening Rosalind retired to her own room, locked her
door, and, taking out her new white dress, laid it across the bed. It
was a very pretty dress, made of soft silk, which did not rustle, but
lay in graceful puffs and folds on body and skirt. It was just the
dress to make this young, slight figure of Rosalind's look absolutely
charming. She stood over it now and regarded it lovingly. The dress
had been obtained, like most of Rosalind's possessions, by manoeuvres.
She had made up a piteous story, and her adoring mother had listened
and contrived to deny herself and some of Rosalind's younger sisters
to purchase the white robe on which the young girl's heart was set.

Deliberately and slowly Rosalind made her toilet, her golden, curling
hair was brushed out and then carefully coiled round her head.
Rosalind had no trouble with her hair: a touch or two, a pin stuck
here, a curl arranged there, and the arrangement became perfect-- the
glistening mass lay in natural waves over the small, graceful head.

Rosalind's hair arranged to her satisfaction, she put on her lovely
white dress. She stood before her long glass, a white-robed little
figure, smiles round her lips, a sweet, bright color in her cheeks, a
dewy look in her baby-blue eyes. Rosalind's toilet was all but
finished; she stood before her glass now and hesitated. Should she go
to the Elliot-Smiths' as she was or should she give the last finishing
touch to render herself perfect? Should she wear her beautiful coral
ornaments?

The coral was now her own, paid for to the uttermost farthing; Polly
Singleton could not come up to Rosalind now and disgrace her in public
by demanding her coral back again. The coral was no longer Polly's; it
was Rosalind's. The debt was cleared off; the exquisite ornaments were
her own. Unlocking a drawer in her bureau, she took out a case, which
contained her treasures; she touched the spring of the case, opened it
and looked at them lovingly. The necklace, the bracelets, the earings
and pins for the hair looked beautiful on their velvet pillow. For the
sake of the pink coral, Rosalind had manoeuvred for her white dress;
for its sake she had knowingly stinted her mother and sisters; for its
sake she had also stolen a five-pound note from Maggie Oliphant. She
dreamt many times of the triumphs which would be hers when she
appeared at the Elliot-Smiths' in her white silk dress, just tipped
with the slight color which the pink coral ornaments would bestow.
Rosalind had likened herself to all kinds of lovely things in this
beautiful yet simple toilet-- to a daisy in the field, to a briar
rose: in short, to every flower which denoted the perfection of baby
innocence.

Yet, as she held the coral necklace in her hand tonight, she hesitated
deeply whether it would be wise to appear at the Elliot-Smiths' in her
treasured ornaments.

Rose had not felt comfortable all day. She had banished thought with
the usual device of extra hilarity: she had crushed the little voice
in her heart which would persistently cry, "Shame! shame!" which would
go on telling her, "You are the meanest, the most wicked girl in St.
Benet's; you have done something for which you could be put in
prison." The voice had little opportunity of making itself heard that
day, and, as Maggie Oliphant evidently did not intend to investigate
the matter, Rosalind had every hope that her sin would never be found
out. Nevertheless, she could not help feeling uneasy; for why did
Annie Day, her own chosen and particular friend, so persistently avoid
her? Why had Lucy Marsh refused to walk with her yesterday? and why
did Annie so often look at her with meaning and inquiry in her eyes?
These glances of Annie's caused Rosalind's heart to beat too quickly;
they gave her an undefined sense of uneasiness.

She felt as she stood now before her glass that, after all, she was
doing a rash thing in wearing her coral. Annie Day knew of her money
difficulties; Annie knew how badly Rosalind had wanted four guineas to
pay the debt she still owed for the ornaments. If Rosalind wore them
to-night, Annie would ask numerous questions. Oh, yes, there was a
