
"I meant that the ability to write for the Press was a great
responsibility," said Aunt Jamesina severely, "and I hope Anne realizes,
it. My daughter used to write stories before she went to the foreign
field, but now she has turned her attention to higher things. She used
to say her motto was 'Never write a line you would be ashamed to read
at your own funeral.' You'd better take that for yours, Anne, if you are
going to embark in literature. Though, to be sure," added Aunt Jamesina
perplexedly, "Elizabeth always used to laugh when she said it. She
always laughed so much that I don't know how she ever came to decide
on being a missionary. I'm thankful she did--I prayed that she
might--but--I wish she hadn't."

Then Aunt Jamesina wondered why those giddy girls all laughed.

Anne's eyes shone all that day; literary ambitions sprouted and budded
in her brain; their exhilaration accompanied her to Jennie Cooper's
walking party, and not even the sight of Gilbert and Christine, walking
just ahead of her and Roy, could quite subdue the sparkle of her starry
hopes. Nevertheless, she was not so rapt from things of earth as to be
unable to notice that Christine's walk was decidedly ungraceful.

"But I suppose Gilbert looks only at her face. So like a man," thought
Anne scornfully.

"Shall you be home Saturday afternoon?" asked Roy.

"Yes."

"My mother and sisters are coming to call on you," said Roy quietly.

Something went over Anne which might be described as a thrill, but it
was hardly a pleasant one. She had never met any of Roy's family; she
realized the significance of his statement; and it had, somehow, an
irrevocableness about it that chilled her.

"I shall be glad to see them," she said flatly; and then wondered if she
really would be glad. She ought to be, of course. But would it not be
something of an ordeal? Gossip had filtered to Anne regarding the light
in which the Gardners viewed the "infatuation" of son and brother. Roy
must have brought pressure to bear in the matter of this call. Anne
knew she would be weighed in the balance. From the fact that they had
consented to call she understood that, willingly or unwillingly, they
regarded her as a possible member of their clan.

"I shall just be myself. I shall not TRY to make a good impression,"
thought Anne loftily. But she was wondering what dress she would better
wear Saturday afternoon, and if the new style of high hair-dressing
would suit her better than the old; and the walking party was rather
spoiled for her. By night she had decided that she would wear her brown
chiffon on Saturday, but would do her hair low.

Friday afternoon none of the girls had classes at Redmond. Stella took
the opportunity to write a paper for the Philomathic Society, and was
sitting at the table in the corner of the living-room with an untidy
litter of notes and manuscript on the floor around her. Stella always
vowed she never could write anything unless she threw each sheet down as
she completed it. Anne, in her flannel blouse and serge skirt, with her
hair rather blown from her windy walk home, was sitting squarely in the
middle of the floor, teasing the Sarah-cat with a wishbone. Joseph and
Rusty were both curled up in her lap. A warm plummy odor filled the
whole house, for Priscilla was cooking in the kitchen. Presently she
came in, enshrouded in a huge work-apron, with a smudge of flour on her
nose, to show Aunt Jamesina the chocolate cake she had just iced.

At this auspicious moment the knocker sounded. Nobody paid any attention
to it save Phil, who sprang up and opened it, expecting a boy with the
hat she had bought that morning. On the doorstep stood Mrs. Gardner and
her daughters.

Anne scrambled to her feet somehow, emptying two indignant cats out of
her lap as she did so, and mechanically shifting her wishbone from her
right hand to her left. Priscilla, who would have had to cross the room
to reach the kitchen door, lost her head, wildly plunged the chocolate
cake under a cushion on the inglenook sofa, and dashed upstairs. Stella
began feverishly gathering up her manuscript. Only Aunt Jamesina and
Phil remained normal. Thanks to them, everybody was soon sitting at
ease, even Anne. Priscilla came down, apronless and smudgeless, Stella
reduced her corner to decency, and Phil saved the situation by a stream
of ready small talk.

Mrs. Gardner was tall and thin and handsome, exquisitely gowned, cordial
with a cordiality that seemed a trifle forced. Aline Gardner was a
younger edition of her mother, lacking the cordiality. She endeavored
to be nice, but succeeded only in being haughty and patronizing. Dorothy
Gardner was slim and jolly and rather tomboyish. Anne knew she was Roy's
favorite sister and warmed to her. She would have looked very much
like Roy if she had had dreamy dark eyes instead of roguish hazel ones.
Thanks to her and Phil, the call really went off very well, except for
a slight sense of strain in the atmosphere and two rather untoward
incidents. Rusty and Joseph, left to themselves, began a game of chase,
and sprang madly into Mrs. Gardner's silken lap and out of it in their
wild career. Mrs. Gardner lifted her lorgnette and gazed after their
flying forms as if she had never seen cats before, and Anne, choking
back slightly nervous laughter, apologized as best she could.

"You are fond of cats?" said Mrs. Gardner, with a slight intonation of
tolerant wonder.

Anne, despite her affection for Rusty, was not especially fond of cats,
but Mrs. Gardner's tone annoyed her. Inconsequently she remembered
that Mrs. John Blythe was so fond of cats that she kept as many as her
husband would allow.

"They ARE adorable animals, aren't they?" she said wickedly.

"I have never liked cats," said Mrs. Gardner remotely.

"I love them," said Dorothy. "They are so nice and selfish. Dogs are
TOO good and unselfish. They make me feel uncomfortable. But cats are
gloriously human."

"You have two delightful old china dogs there. May I look at them
closely?" said Aline, crossing the room towards the fireplace and
thereby becoming the unconscious cause of the other accident. Picking up
Magog, she sat down on the cushion under which was secreted Priscilla's
chocolate cake. Priscilla and Anne exchanged agonized glances but
could do nothing. The stately Aline continued to sit on the cushion and
discuss china dogs until the time of departure.

Dorothy lingered behind a moment to squeeze Anne's hand and whisper
impulsively.

"I KNOW you and I are going to be chums. Oh, Roy has told me all about
you. I'm the only one of the family he tells things to, poor boy--nobody
COULD confide in mamma and Aline, you know. What glorious times you
girls must have here! Won't you let me come often and have a share in
them?"

"Come as often as you like," Anne responded heartily, thankful that one
of Roy's sisters was likable. She would never like Aline, so much was
certain; and Aline would never like her, though Mrs. Gardner might be
won. Altogether, Anne sighed with relief when the ordeal was over.

     "'Of all sad words of tongue or pen
     The saddest are it might have been,'"

quoted Priscilla tragically, lifting the cushion. "This cake is now what
you might call a flat failure. And the cushion is likewise ruined. Never
tell me that Friday isn't unlucky."

"People who send word they are coming on Saturday shouldn't come on
Friday," said Aunt Jamesina.

"I fancy it was Roy's mistake," said Phil. "That boy isn't really
responsible for what he says when he talks to Anne. Where IS Anne?"

Anne had gone upstairs. She felt oddly like crying. But she made herself
laugh instead. Rusty and Joseph had been TOO awful! And Dorothy WAS a
dear.




Chapter XXXVII

Full-fledged B.A.'s


"I wish I were dead, or that it were tomorrow night," groaned Phil.

"If you live long enough both wishes will come true," said Anne calmly.

"It's easy for you to be serene. You're at home in Philosophy. I'm
not--and when I think of that horrible paper tomorrow I quail. If I
should fail in it what would Jo say?"

"You won't fail. How did you get on in Greek today?"

"I don't know. Perhaps it was a good paper and perhaps it was bad enough
to make Homer turn over in his grave. I've studied and mulled over
notebooks until I'm incapable of forming an opinion of anything. How
thankful little Phil will be when all this examinating is over."

"Examinating? I never heard such a word."

"Well, haven't I as good a right to make a word as any one else?"
demanded Phil.

"Words aren't made--they grow," said Anne.

"Never mind--I begin faintly to discern clear water ahead where no
examination breakers loom. Girls, do you--can you realize that our
Redmond Life is almost over?"

"I can't," said Anne, sorrowfully. "It seems just yesterday that Pris
and I were alone in that crowd of Freshmen at Redmond. And now we are
Seniors in our final examinations."

"'Potent, wise, and reverend Seniors,'" quoted Phil. "Do you suppose we
really are any wiser than when we came to Redmond?"

"You don't act as if you were by times," said Aunt Jamesina severely.

"Oh, Aunt Jimsie, haven't we been pretty good girls, take us by and
large, these three winters you've mothered us?" pleaded Phil.

"You've been four of the dearest, sweetest, goodest girls that ever went
together through college," averred Aunt Jamesina, who never spoiled a
compliment by misplaced economy.

"But I mistrust you haven't any too much sense yet. It's not to be
expected, of course. Experience teaches sense. You can't learn it in a
college course. You've been to college four years and I never was, but I
know heaps more than you do, young ladies."

     "'There are lots of things that never go by rule,
     There's a powerful pile o' knowledge
     That you never get at college,
     There are heaps of things you never learn at school,'"

quoted Stella.

"Have you learned anything at Redmond except dead languages and geometry
and such trash?" queried Aunt Jamesina.

"Oh, yes. I think we have, Aunty," protested Anne.

"We've learned the truth of what Professor Woodleigh told us last
Philomathic," said Phil. "He said, 'Humor is the spiciest condiment in
the feast of existence. Laugh at your mistakes but learn from them, joke
over your troubles but gather strength from them, make a jest of
your difficulties but overcome them.' Isn't that worth learning, Aunt
Jimsie?"

"Yes, it is, dearie. When you've learned to laugh at the things that
should be laughed at, and not to laugh at those that shouldn't, you've
got wisdom and understanding."

"What have you got out of your Redmond course, Anne?" murmured Priscilla
aside.

"I think," said Anne slowly, "that I really have learned to look upon
each little hindrance as a jest and each great one as the foreshadowing
of victory. Summing up, I think that is what Redmond has given me."

"I shall have to fall back on another Professor Woodleigh quotation to
express what it has done for me," said Priscilla. "You remember that
he said in his address, 'There is so much in the world for us all if we
only have the eyes to see it, and the heart to love it, and the hand
to gather it to ourselves--so much in men and women, so much in art and
literature, so much everywhere in which to delight, and for which to be
thankful.' I think Redmond has taught me that in some measure, Anne."

"Judging from what you all, say" remarked Aunt Jamesina, "the sum
and substance is that you can learn--if you've got natural gumption
enough--in four years at college what it would take about twenty years
of living to teach you. Well, that justifies higher education in my
opinion. It's a matter I was always dubious about before."

"But what about people who haven't natural gumption, Aunt Jimsie?"

"People who haven't natural gumption never learn," retorted Aunt
Jamesina, "neither in college nor life. If they live to be a hundred
they really don't know anything more than when they were born. It's
their misfortune not their fault, poor souls. But those of us who have
some gumption should duly thank the Lord for it."

"Will you please define what gumption is, Aunt Jimsie?" asked Phil.

"No, I won't, young woman. Any one who has gumption knows what it is,
and any one who hasn't can never know what it is. So there is no need of
defining it."

The busy days flew by and examinations were over. Anne took High Honors
in English. Priscilla took Honors in Classics, and Phil in Mathematics.
Stella obtained a good all-round showing. Then came Convocation.

"This is what I would once have called an epoch in my life," said
Anne, as she took Roy's violets out of their box and gazed at them
thoughtfully. She meant to carry them, of course, but her eyes wandered
to another box on her table. It was filled with lilies-of-the-valley, as
fresh and fragrant as those which bloomed in the Green Gables yard when
June came to Avonlea. Gilbert Blythe's card lay beside it.

Anne wondered why Gilbert should have sent her flowers for Convocation.
She had seen very little of him during the past winter. He had come to
Patty's Place only one Friday evening since the Christmas holidays, and
they rarely met elsewhere. She knew he was studying very hard, aiming at
High Honors and the Cooper Prize, and he took little part in the social
doings of Redmond. Anne's own winter had been quite gay socially.
She had seen a good deal of the Gardners; she and Dorothy were very
intimate; college circles expected the announcement of her engagement to
Roy any day. Anne expected it herself. Yet just before she left Patty's
Place for Convocation she flung Roy's violets aside and put Gilbert's
lilies-of-the-valley in their place. She could not have told why she
did it. Somehow, old Avonlea days and dreams and friendships seemed very
close to her in this attainment of her long-cherished ambitions. She
and Gilbert had once picturedout merrily the day on which they should
be capped and gowned graduates in Arts. The wonderful day had come and
Roy's violets had no place in it. Only her old friend's flowers seemed
to belong to this fruition of old-blossoming hopes which he had once
shared.

For years this day had beckoned and allured to her; but when it came the
one single, keen, abiding memory it left with her was not that of the
breathless moment when the stately president of Redmond gave her cap and
diploma and hailed her B.A.; it was not of the flash in Gilbert's eyes
when he saw her lilies, nor the puzzled pained glance Roy gave her as he
passed her on the platform. It was not of Aline Gardner's condescending
congratulations, or Dorothy's ardent, impulsive good wishes. It was of
one strange, unaccountable pang that spoiled this long-expected day for
her and left in it a certain faint but enduring flavor of bitterness.

The Arts graduates gave a graduation dance that night. When Anne dressed
for it she tossed aside the pearl beads she usually wore and took from
her trunk the small box that had come to Green Gables on Christmas day.
In it was a thread-like gold chain with a tiny pink enamel heart as a
pendant. On the accompanying card was written, "With all good wishes
from your old chum, Gilbert." Anne, laughing over the memory the enamel
heart conjured up the fatal day when Gilbert had called her "Carrots"
