
"What frightened you?" asked Di.

"I dunno. I was poking about under them lilacs in the old garden, trying
to see if there was any lilies-of-the-valley out yet. It was dark as
a pocket there--and all at once I seen something stirring and rustling
round at the other side of the garden, in those cherry bushes. It was
WHITE. I tell you I didn't stop for a second look. I flew over the dyke
quicker than quick. I was sure it was Henry Warren's ghost."

"Who was Henry Warren?" asked Di.

"And why should he have a ghost?" asked Nan.

"Laws, did you never hear the story? And you brought up in the Glen.
Well, wait a minute till I get by breath all back and I'll tell you."

Walter shivered delightsomely. He loved ghost stories. Their mystery,
their dramatic climaxes, their eeriness gave him a fearful, exquisite
pleasure. Longfellow instantly grew tame and commonplace. He threw the
book aside and stretched himself out, propped upon his elbows to listen
whole-heartedly, fixing his great luminous eyes on Mary's face. Mary
wished he wouldn't look at her so. She felt she could make a better job
of the ghost story if Walter were not looking at her. She could put on
several frills and invent a few artistic details to enhance the horror.
As it was, she had to stick to the bare truth--or what had been told her
for the truth.

"Well," she began, "you know old Tom Bailey and his wife used to live in
that house up there thirty years ago. He was an awful old rip, they say,
and his wife wasn't much better. They'd no children of their own, but a
sister of old Tom's died and left a little boy--this Henry Warren--and
they took him. He was about twelve when he came to them, and kind of
undersized and delicate. They say Tom and his wife used him awful from
the start--whipped him and starved him. Folks said they wanted him to
die so's they could get the little bit of money his mother had left for
him. Henry didn't die right off, but he begun having fits--epileps, they
called 'em--and he grew up kind of simple, till he was about eighteen.
His uncle used to thrash him in that garden up there 'cause it was back
of the house where no one could see him. But folks could hear, and they
say it was awful sometimes hearing poor Henry plead with his uncle
not to kill him. But nobody dared interfere 'cause old Tom was such a
reprobate he'd have been sure to get square with 'em some way. He burned
the barns of a man at Harbour Head who offended him. At last Henry died
and his uncle and aunt give out he died in one of his fits and that was
all anybody ever knowed, but everybody said Tom had just up and killed
him for keeps at last. And it wasn't long till it got around that Henry
WALKED. That old garden was HA'NTED. He was heard there at nights,
moaning and crying. Old Tom and his wife got out--went out West and
never came back. The place got such a bad name nobody'd buy or rent it.
That's why it's all gone to ruin. That was thirty years ago, but Henry
Warren's ghost ha'nts it yet."

"Do you believe that?" asked Nan scornfully. "_I_ don't."

"Well, GOOD people have seen him--and heard him." retorted Mary. "They
say he appears and grovels on the ground and holds you by the legs and
gibbers and moans like he did when he was alive. I thought of that as
soon as I seen that white thing in the bushes and thought if it caught
me like that and moaned I'd drop down dead on the spot. So I cut and
run. It MIGHTN'T have been his ghost, but I wasn't going to take any
chances with a ha'nt."

"It was likely old Mrs. Stimson's white calf," laughed Di. "It pastures
in that garden--I've seen it."

"Maybe so. But I'M not going home through the Bailey garden any more.
Here's Jerry with a big string of trout and it's my turn to cook them.
Jem and Jerry both say I'm the best cook in the Glen. And Cornelia told
me I could bring up this batch of cookies. I all but dropped them when I
saw Henry's ghost."

Jerry hooted when he heard the ghost story--which Mary repeated as she
fried the fish, touching it up a trifle or so, since Walter had gone to
help Faith to set the table. It made no impression on Jerry, but Faith
and Una and Carl had been secretly much frightened, though they would
never have given in to it. It was all right as long as the others were
with them in the valley: but when the feast was over and the shadows
fell they quaked with remembrance. Jerry went up to Ingleside with the
Blythes to see Jem about something, and Mary Vance went around that way
home. So Faith and Una and Carl had to go back to the manse alone. They
walked very close together and gave the old Bailey garden a wide berth.
They did not believe that it was haunted, of course, but they would not
go near it for all that.



CHAPTER XXX. THE GHOST ON THE DYKE

Somehow, Faith and Carl and Una could not shake off the hold which the
story of Henry Warren's ghost had taken upon their imaginations. They
had never believed in ghosts. Ghost tales they had heard a-plenty--Mary
Vance had told some far more blood-curdling than this; but those tales
were all of places and people and spooks far away and unknown. After the
first half-awful, half-pleasant thrill of awe and terror they thought
of them no more. But this story came home to them. The old Bailey garden
was almost at their very door--almost in their beloved Rainbow Valley.
They had passed and repassed it constantly; they had hunted for flowers
in it; they had made short cuts through it when they wished to go
straight from the village to the valley. But never again! After the
night when Mary Vance told them its gruesome tale they would not have
gone through or near it on pain of death. Death! What was death compared
to the unearthly possibility of falling into the clutches of Henry
Warren's grovelling ghost?

One warm July evening the three of them were sitting under the Tree
Lovers, feeling a little lonely. Nobody else had come near the valley
that evening. Jem Blythe was away in Charlottetown, writing on his
entrance examinations. Jerry and Walter Blythe were off for a sail on
the harbour with old Captain Crawford. Nan and Di and Rilla and Shirley
had gone down the harbour road to visit Kenneth and Persis Ford, who had
come with their parents for a flying visit to the little old House of
Dreams. Nan had asked Faith to go with them, but Faith had declined. She
would never have admitted it, but she felt a little secret jealousy of
Persis Ford, concerning whose wonderful beauty and city glamour she
had heard a great deal. No, she wasn't going to go down there and play
second fiddle to anybody. She and Una took their story books to Rainbow
Valley and read, while Carl investigated bugs along the banks of the
brook, and all three were happy until they suddenly realized that it was
twilight and that the old Bailey garden was uncomfortably near by. Carl
came and sat down close to the girls. They all wished they had gone home
a little sooner, but nobody said anything.

Great, velvety, purple clouds heaped up in the west and spread over
the valley. There was no wind and everything was suddenly, strangely,
dreadfully still. The marsh was full of thousands of fire-flies. Surely
some fairy parliament was being convened that night. Altogether, Rainbow
Valley was not a canny place just then.

Faith looked fearfully up the valley to the old Bailey garden. Then,
if anybody's blood ever did freeze, Faith Meredith's certainly froze at
that moment. The eyes of Carl and Una followed her entranced gaze and
chills began gallopading up and down their spines also. For there, under
the big tamarack tree on the tumble-down, grass-grown dyke of the Bailey
garden, was something white--shapelessly white in the gathering gloom.
The three Merediths sat and gazed as if turned to stone.

"It's--it's the--calf," whispered Una at last.

"It's--too--big--for the calf," whispered Faith. Her mouth and lips were
so dry she could hardly articulate the words.

Suddenly Carl gasped,

"It's coming here."

The girls gave one last agonized glance. Yes, it was creeping down over
the dyke, as no calf ever did or could creep. Reason fled before sudden,
over-mastering panic. For the moment every one of the trio was firmly
convinced that what they saw was Henry Warren's ghost. Carl sprang
to his feet and bolted blindly. With a simultaneous shriek the girls
followed him. Like mad creatures they tore up the hill, across the road
and into the manse. They had left Aunt Martha sewing in the kitchen. She
was not there. They rushed to the study. It was dark and tenantless.
As with one impulse, they swung around and made for Ingleside--but not
across Rainbow Valley. Down the hill and through the Glen street they
flew on the wings of their wild terror, Carl in the lead, Una bringing
up the rear. Nobody tried to stop them, though everybody who saw them
wondered what fresh devilment those manse youngsters were up to now. But
at the gate of Ingleside they ran into Rosemary West, who had just been
in for a moment to return some borrowed books.

She saw their ghastly faces and staring eyes. She realized that their
poor little souls were wrung with some awful and real fear, whatever
its cause. She caught Carl with one arm and Faith with the other. Una
stumbled against her and held on desperately.

"Children, dear, what has happened?" she said. "What has frightened
you?"

"Henry Warren's ghost," answered Carl, through his chattering teeth.

"Henry--Warren's--ghost!" said amazed Rosemary, who had never heard the
story.

"Yes," sobbed Faith hysterically. "It's there--on the Bailey dyke--we
saw it--and it started to--chase us."

Rosemary herded the three distracted creatures to the Ingleside veranda.
Gilbert and Anne were both away, having also gone to the House of
Dreams, but Susan appeared in the doorway, gaunt and practical and
unghostlike.

"What is all this rumpus about?" she inquired.

Again the children gasped out their awful tale, while Rosemary held them
close to her and soothed them with wordless comfort.

"Likely it was an owl," said Susan, unstirred.

An owl! The Meredith children never had any opinion of Susan's
intelligence after that!

"It was bigger than a million owls," said Carl, sobbing--oh, how ashamed
Carl was of that sobbing in after days--"and it--it GROVELLED just as
Mary said--and it was crawling down over the dyke to get at us. Do owls
CRAWL?"

Rosemary looked at Susan.

"They must have seen something to frighten them so," she said.

"I will go and see," said Susan coolly. "Now, children, calm yourselves.
Whatever you have seen, it was not a ghost. As for poor Henry Warren,
I feel sure he would be only too glad to rest quietly in his peaceful
grave once he got there. No fear of HIM venturing back, and that you may
tie to. If you can make them see reason, Miss West, I will find out the
truth of the matter."

Susan departed for Rainbow Valley, valiantly grasping a pitchfork which
she found leaning against the back fence where the doctor had been
working in his little hay-field. A pitchfork might not be of much use
against "ha'nts," but it was a comforting sort of weapon. There was
nothing to be seen in Rainbow Valley when Susan reached it. No white
visitants appeared to be lurking in the shadowy, tangled old Bailey
garden. Susan marched boldly through it and beyond it, and rapped with
her pitchfork on the door of the little cottage on the other side, where
Mrs. Stimson lived with her two daughters.

Back at Ingleside Rosemary had succeeded in calming the children. They
still sobbed a little from shock, but they were beginning to feel a
lurking and salutary suspicion that they had made dreadful geese
of themselves. This suspicion became a certainty when Susan finally
returned.

"I have found out what your ghost was," she said, with a grim smile,
sitting down on a rocker and fanning herself. "Old Mrs. Stimson has had
a pair of factory cotton sheets bleaching in the Bailey garden for a
week. She spread them on the dyke under the tamarack tree because the
grass was clean and short there. This evening she went out to take them
in. She had her knitting in her hands so she hung the sheets over her
shoulders by way of carrying them. And then she must have dropped one of
her needles and find it she could not and has not yet. But she went down
on her knees and crept about to hunt for it, and she was at that when
she heard awful yells down in the valley and saw the three children
tearing up the hill past her. She thought they had been bit by something
and it gave her poor old heart such a turn that she could not move or
speak, but just crouched there till they disappeared. Then she staggered
back home and they have been applying stimulants to her ever since, and
her heart is in a terrible condition and she says she will not get over
this fright all summer."

The Merediths sat, crimson with a shame that even Rosemary's
understanding sympathy could not remove. They sneaked off home, met
Jerry at the manse gate and made remorseful confession. A session of the
Good-Conduct Club was arranged for next morning.

"Wasn't Miss West sweet to us to-night?" whispered Faith in bed.

"Yes," admitted Una. "It is such a pity it changes people so much to be
made stepmothers."

"I don't believe it does," said Faith loyally.



CHAPTER XXXI. CARL DOES PENANCE

"I don't see why we should be punished at all," said Faith, rather
sulkily. "We didn't do anything wrong. We couldn't help being
frightened. And it won't do father any harm. It was just an accident."

"You were cowards," said Jerry with judicial scorn, "and you gave way to
your cowardice. That is why you should be punished. Everybody will laugh
at you about this, and that is a disgrace to the family."

"If you knew how awful the whole thing was," said Faith with a shiver,
"you would think we had been punished enough already. I wouldn't go
through it again for anything in the whole world."

"I believe you'd have run yourself if you'd been there," muttered Carl.

"From an old woman in a cotton sheet," mocked Jerry. "Ho, ho, ho!"

"It didn't look a bit like an old woman," cried Faith. "It was just a
great, big, white thing crawling about in the grass just as Mary Vance
said Henry Warren did. It's all very fine for you to laugh, Jerry
Meredith, but you'd have laughed on the other side of your mouth if
you'd been there. And how are we to be punished? _I_ don't think it's
fair, but let's know what we have to do, Judge Meredith!"

"The way I look at it," said Jerry, frowning, "is that Carl was the most
to blame. He bolted first, as I understand it. Besides, he was a boy,
so he should have stood his ground to protect you girls, whatever the
danger was. You know that, Carl, don't you?"

"I s'pose so," growled Carl shamefacedly.

"Very well. This is to be your punishment. To-night you'll sit on
Mr. Hezekiah Pollock's tombstone in the graveyard alone, until twelve
o'clock."

Carl gave a little shudder. The graveyard was not so very far from the
old Bailey garden. It would be a trying ordeal, but Carl was anxious to
wipe out his disgrace and prove that he was not a coward after all.

"All right," he said sturdily. "But how'll I know when it is twelve?"

"The study windows are open and you'll hear the clock striking. And
mind you that you are not to budge out of that graveyard until the last
stroke. As for you girls, you've got to go without jam at supper for a
week."

Faith and Una looked rather blank. They were inclined to think that even
Carl's comparatively short though sharp agony was lighter punishment
than this long drawn-out ordeal. A whole week of soggy bread without
the saving grace of jam! But no shirking was permitted in the club. The
girls accepted their lot with such philosophy as they could summon up.
