
"'You'll do what I want you to do, sonny,' said Marshall, 'or I'll jest
turn you over my knee and give you one of those spankings your mother
forgot.'

"He'd have done it, too, and Gus knew it, for Marshall is as strong as
an ox and Gus is only a midget of a man.  So he gave in and towed
Marshall in to the shop and went to work.  'Now,' says he, 'I'll barber
you up, but if you say one word to me about the Grits getting in while
I'm doing it I'll cut your throat with this razor,' says he.  You
wouldn't have thought mild little Gus could be so bloodthirsty, would
you?  Shows what party politics will do for a man.  Marshall kept quiet
and got his hair and beard disposed of and went home.  When his old
housekeeper heard him come upstairs she peeked out of her bedroom door
to see whether 'twas him or the hired boy.  And when she saw a strange
man striding down the hall with a candle in his hand she screamed blue
murder and fainted dead away.  They had to send for the doctor before
they could bring her to, and it was several days before she could look
at Marshall without shaking all over."

Captain Jim had no fish.  He seldom went out in his boat that summer,
and his long tramping expeditions were over.  He spent a great deal of
his time sitting by his seaward window, looking out over the gulf, with
his swiftly-whitening head leaning on his hand.  He sat there tonight
for many silent minutes, keeping some tryst with the past which Anne
would not disturb.  Presently he pointed to the iris of the West:

"That's beautiful, isn't, it, Mistress Blythe?  But I wish you could
have seen the sunrise this morning.  It was a wonderful
thing--wonderful.  I've seen all kinds of sunrises come over that gulf.
I've been all over the world, Mistress Blythe, and take it all in all,
I've never seen a finer sight than a summer sunrise over the gulf.  A
man can't pick his time for dying, Mistress Blythe--jest got to go when
the Great Captain gives His sailing orders.  But if I could I'd go out
when the morning comes across that water.  I've watched it many a time
and thought what a thing it would be to pass out through that great
white glory to whatever was waiting beyant, on a sea that ain't mapped
out on any airthly chart.  I think, Mistress Blythe, that I'd find lost
Margaret there."

Captain Jim had often talked to Anne of lost Margaret since he had told
her the old story.  His love for her trembled in every tone--that love
that had never grown faint or forgetful.

"Anyway, I hope when my time comes I'll go quick and easy.  I don't
think I'm a coward, Mistress Blythe--I've looked an ugly death in the
face more than once without blenching.  But the thought of a lingering
death does give me a queer, sick feeling of horror."

"Don't talk about leaving us, dear, DEAR Captain, Jim," pleaded Anne,
in a choked voice, patting the old brown hand, once so strong, but now
grown very feeble.  "What would we do without you?"

Captain Jim smiled beautifully.

"Oh, you'd get along nicely--nicely--but you wouldn't forget the old
man altogether, Mistress Blythe--no, I don't think you'll ever quite
forget him.  The race of Joseph always remembers one another.  But
it'll be a memory that won't hurt--I like to think that my memory won't
hurt my friends--it'll always be kind of pleasant to them, I hope and
believe.  It won't be very long now before lost Margaret calls me, for
the last time.  I'll be all ready to answer.  I jest spoke of this
because there's a little favor I want to ask you.  Here's this poor old
Matey of mine"--Captain Jim reached out a hand and poked the big, warm,
velvety, golden ball on the sofa.  The First Mate uncoiled himself like
a spring with a nice, throaty, comfortable sound, half purr, half meow,
stretched his paws in air, turned over and coiled himself up again.
"HE'll miss me when I start on the V'yage.  I can't bear to think of
leaving the poor critter to starve, like he was left before.  If
anything happens to me will you give Matey a bite and a corner,
Mistress Blythe?"

"Indeed I will."

"Then that is all I had on my mind.  Your Little Jem is to have the few
curious things I picked up--I've seen to that.  And now I don't like to
see tears in those pretty eyes, Mistress Blythe.  I'll mebbe hang on
for quite a spell yet.  I heard you reading a piece of poetry one day
last winter--one of Tennyson's pieces.  I'd sorter like to hear it
again, if you could recite it for me."

Softly and clearly, while the seawind blew in on them, Anne repeated
the beautiful lines of Tennyson's wonderful swan song--"Crossing the
Bar."  The old captain kept time gently with his sinewy hand.

"Yes, yes, Mistress Blythe," he said, when she had finished, "that's
it, that's it.  He wasn't a sailor, you tell me--I dunno how he could
have put an old sailor's feelings into words like that, if he wasn't
one.  He didn't want any 'sadness o' farewells' and neither do I,
Mistress Blythe--for all will be well with me and mine beyant the bar."



CHAPTER 36

BEAUTY FOR ASHES

"Any news from Green Gables, Anne?"

"Nothing very especial," replied Anne, folding up Marilla's letter.
"Jake Donnell has been there shingling the roof.  He is a full-fledged
carpenter now, so it seems he has had his own way in regard to the
choice of a life-work.  You remember his mother wanted him to be a
college professor.  I shall never forget the day she came to the school
and rated me for failing to call him St. Clair."

"Does anyone ever call him that now?"

"Evidently not.  It seems that he has completely lived it down.  Even
his mother has succumbed.  I always thought that a boy with Jake's chin
and mouth would get his own way in the end.  Diana writes me that Dora
has a beau.  Just think of it--that child!"

"Dora is seventeen," said Gilbert.  "Charlie Sloane and I were both mad
about you when you were seventeen, Anne."

"Really, Gilbert, we must be getting on in years," said Anne, with a
half-rueful smile, "when children who were six when we thought
ourselves grown up are old enough now to have beaux.  Dora's is Ralph
Andrews--Jane's brother.  I remember him as a little, round, fat,
white-headed fellow who was always at the foot of his class.  But I
understand he is quite a fine-looking young man now."

"Dora will probably marry young.  She's of the same type as Charlotta
the Fourth--she'll never miss her first chance for fear she might not
get another."

"Well; if she marries Ralph I hope he will be a little more
up-and-coming than his brother Billy," mused Anne.

"For instance," said Gilbert, laughing, "let us hope he will be able to
propose on his own account.  Anne, would you have married Billy if he
had asked you himself, instead of getting Jane to do it for him?"

"I might have." Anne went off into a shriek of laughter over the
recollection of her first proposal.  "The shock of the whole thing
might have hypnotized me into some such rash and foolish act.  Let us
be thankful he did it by proxy."

"I had a letter from George Moore yesterday," said Leslie, from the
corner where she was reading.

"Oh, how is he?" asked Anne interestedly, yet with an unreal feeling
that she was inquiring about some one whom she did not know.

"He is well, but he finds it very hard to adapt himself to all the
changes in his old home and friends.  He is going to sea again in the
spring.  It's in his blood, he says, and he longs for it.  But he told
me something that made me glad for him, poor fellow.  Before he sailed
on the Four Sisters he was engaged to a girl at home.  He did not tell
me anything about her in Montreal, because he said he supposed she
would have forgotten him and married someone else long ago, and with
him, you see, his engagement and love was still a thing of the present.
It was pretty hard on him, but when he got home he found she had never
married and still cared for him.  They are to be married this fall.
I'm going to ask him to bring her over here for a little trip; he says
he wants to come and see the place where he lived so many years without
knowing it."

"What a nice little romance," said Anne, whose love for the romantic
was immortal.  "And to think," she added with a sigh of self-reproach,
"that if I had had my way George Moore would never have come up from
the grave in which his identity was buried.  How I did fight against
Gilbert's suggestion!  Well, I am punished:  I shall never be able to
have a different opinion from Gilbert's again!  If I try to have, he
will squelch me by casting George Moore's case up to me!"

"As if even that would squelch a woman!" mocked Gilbert.  "At least do
not become my echo, Anne.  A little opposition gives spice to life.  I
do not want a wife like John MacAllister's over the harbor.  No matter
what he says, she at once remarks in that drab, lifeless little voice
of hers, 'That is very true, John, dear me!'"

Anne and Leslie laughed.  Anne's laughter was silver and Leslie's
golden, and the combination of the two was as satisfactory as a perfect
chord in music.

Susan, coming in on the heels of the laughter, echoed it with a
resounding sigh.

"Why, Susan, what is the matter?" asked Gilbert.

"There's nothing wrong with little Jem, is there, Susan?" cried Anne,
starting up in alarm.

"No, no, calm yourself, Mrs. Doctor, dear.  Something has happened,
though.  Dear me, everything has gone catawampus with me this week.  I
spoiled the bread, as you know too well--and I scorched the doctor's
best shirt bosom--and I broke your big platter.  And now, on the top of
all this, comes word that my sister Matilda has broken her leg and
wants me to go and stay with her for a spell."

"Oh, I'm very sorry--sorry that your sister has met with such an
accident, I mean," exclaimed Anne.

"Ah, well, man was made to mourn, Mrs. Doctor, dear.  That sounds as if
it ought to be in the Bible, but they tell me a person named Burns
wrote it.  And there is no doubt that we are born to trouble as the
sparks fly upward.  As for Matilda, I do not know what to think of her.
None of our family ever broke their legs before.  But whatever she has
done she is still my sister, and I feel that it is my duty to go and
wait on her, if you can spare me for a few weeks, Mrs. Doctor, dear."

"Of course, Susan, of course.  I can get someone to help me while you
are gone."

"If you cannot I will not go, Mrs. Doctor, dear, Matilda's leg to the
contrary notwithstanding.  I will not have you worried, and that
blessed child upset in consequence, for any number of legs."

"Oh, you must go to your sister at once, Susan.  I can get a girl from
the cove, who will do for a time."

"Anne, will you let me come and stay with you while Susan is away?"
exclaimed Leslie.  "Do!  I'd love to--and it would be an act of charity
on your part.  I'm so horribly lonely over there in that big barn of a
house.  There's so little to do--and at night I'm worse than
lonely--I'm frightened and nervous in spite of locked doors.  There was
a tramp around two days ago."

Anne joyfully agreed, and next day Leslie was installed as an inmate of
the little house of dreams.  Miss Cornelia warmly approved of the
arrangement.

"It seems Providential," she told Anne in confidence.  "I'm sorry for
Matilda Clow, but since she had to break her leg it couldn't have
happened at a better time.  Leslie will be here while Owen Ford is in
Four Winds, and those old cats up at the Glen won't get the chance to
meow, as they would if she was living over there alone and Owen going
to see her.  They are doing enough of it as it is, because she doesn't
put on mourning.  I said to one of them, 'If you mean she should put on
mourning for George Moore, it seems to me more like his resurrection
than his funeral; and if it's Dick you mean, I confess _I_ can't see
the propriety of going into weeds for a man who died thirteen years ago
and good riddance then!'  And when old Louisa Baldwin remarked to me
that she thought it very strange that Leslie should never have
suspected it wasn't her own husband _I_ said, 'YOU never suspected it
wasn't Dick Moore, and you were next-door neighbor to him all his life,
and by nature you're ten times as suspicious as Leslie.'  But you can't
stop some people's tongues, Anne, dearie, and I'm real thankful Leslie
will be under your roof while Owen is courting her."

Owen Ford came to the little house one August evening when Leslie and
Anne were absorbed in worshipping the baby.  He paused at the open door
of the living room, unseen by the two within, gazing with greedy eyes
at the beautiful picture.  Leslie sat on the floor with the baby in her
lap, making ecstatic dabs at his fat little hands as he fluttered them
in the air.

"Oh, you dear, beautiful, beloved baby," she mumbled, catching one wee
hand and covering it with kisses.

"Isn't him ze darlingest itty sing," crooned Anne, hanging over the arm
of her chair adoringly.  "Dem itty wee pads are ze very tweetest
handies in ze whole big world, isn't dey, you darling itty man."

Anne, in the months before Little Jem's coming, had pored diligently
over several wise volumes, and pinned her faith to one in especial,
"Sir Oracle on the Care and Training of Children."  Sir Oracle implored
parents by all they held sacred never to talk "baby talk" to their
children.  Infants should invariably be addressed in classical language
from the moment of their birth.  So should they learn to speak English
undefiled from their earliest utterance.  "How," demanded Sir Oracle,
"can a mother reasonably expect her child to learn correct speech, when
she continually accustoms its impressionable gray matter to such absurd
expressions and distortions of our noble tongue as thoughtless mothers
inflict every day on the helpless creatures committed to their care?
Can a child who is constantly called 'tweet itty wee singie' ever
attain to any proper conception of his own being and possibilities and
destiny?"

Anne was vastly impressed with this, and informed Gilbert that she
meant to make it an inflexible rule never, under any circumstances, to
talk "baby talk" to her children.  Gilbert agreed with her, and they
made a solemn compact on the subject--a compact which Anne shamelessly
violated the very first moment Little Jem was laid in her arms.  "Oh,
the darling itty wee sing!" she had exclaimed.  And she had continued
to violate it ever since.  When Gilbert teased her she laughed Sir
Oracle to scorn.

"He never had any children of his own, Gilbert--I am positive he hadn't
or he would never have written such rubbish.  You just can't help
talking baby talk to a baby.  It comes natural--and it's RIGHT.  It
would be inhuman to talk to those tiny, soft, velvety little creatures
as we do to great big boys and girls.  Babies want love and cuddling
and all the sweet baby talk they can get, and Little Jem is going to
have it, bless his dear itty heartums."

"But you're the worst I ever heard, Anne," protested Gilbert, who, not
being a mother but only a father, was not wholly convinced yet that Sir
Oracle was wrong.  "I never heard anything like the way you talk to
that child."

"Very likely you never did.  Go away--go away.  Didn't I bring up three
pairs of Hammond twins before I was eleven?  You and Sir Oracle are
nothing but cold-blooded theorists.  Gilbert, JUST look at him!  He's
smiling at me--he knows what we're talking about.  And oo dest agwees
wif evy word muzzer says, don't oo, angel-lover?"

Gilbert put his arm about them.  "Oh you mothers!" he said.  "You
mothers!  God knew what He was about when He made you."

So Little Jem was talked to and loved and cuddled; and he throve as
became a child of the house of dreams.  Leslie was quite as foolish
over him as Anne was.  When their work was done and Gilbert was out of
the way, they gave themselves over to shameless orgies of love-making
and ecstasies of adoration, such as that in which Owen Ford had
surprised them.

