
"I don't know that I have any particular objection," said the major.

"How much wages may I offer, father?"

"The same that your Cousin Henry's servant gets."

"All right, sir," said Sam, with satisfaction. "I guess I'll go
round, and see him about it this afternoon. I suppose he can come
any time?"

"Yes, my son."

As Sam went out of the room his father thought, complacently:

"My son has all the pride and instincts of a gentleman. He will do
credit to the family."

Few persons in the village would have agreed with the major. Sam
Sturgis was decidedly unpopular. No boy who puts on airs is likely
to be a favorite with any class of persons, and Sam put on rather
more than he was entitled to. From time to time he received a
rebuff, but still money will tell. He had his followers and
sycophants, but we may be sure that Ben was not numbered among them.
It was quite useless for Sam to patronize him-he would not be
patronized, but persisted in treating the major's son with the most
exasperating familiarity. Of course this would be impossible if he
became Sam's servant, and this more than anything else was the
motive of the young aristocrat in wishing to engage him. As to
conferring a favor on Ben, that was the last thing in his thoughts.

Sam bent his steps toward the humble home of Job Stanton, but he did
not have to go the whole distance. He met Ben with a fishing-pole
over his shoulder.

"How are you, Sam?" was Ben's familiar greeting. "Want to go fishing
with me?"

"He's entirely too familiar," thought Sam. "I'll cure him of that
when he is under my orders."

At present Sam did not think it politic to express his feelings on
the subject. Ben was so independent that it might frustrate his
plan.

"I will walk along with you, Ben," said Sam condescendingly.

"All right. Haven't you got a fishing-pole at home?"

"Yes, I have a very handsome one; it cost five dollars."

"Then it's rather ahead of mine," said Ben.

"I should say so," remarked Sam, surveying Ben's pole with contempt.

"But I'll bet you can't catch as many fish with it," said Ben
promptly. "I don't think it makes much difference to the fish," he
added, with a laugh, "whther they are caught with a five-dollar pole
or a five-cent one."

"Very likely," said Sam briefly, "but I prefer to use a nice pole."

"Oh, there's no objection," said Ben, "if you fancy it. It doesn't
make any difference to me."

"When are you going to work?" asked Sam abruptly.

"I am working every day-that is, I am helping Uncle Job."

"But I suppose you mean to get regular work somewhere, don't you?"

"What's he after, I wonder?" thought Ben. "Maybe I do," he said
aloud.

"Perhaps I can throw something in your way," said Sam, in a
patronizing way.

"You are very kind," said Ben, who supposed Sam had heard of some
business position which he could fill. Our hero decided that perhaps
he had misjudged the major's son, and he was prepared to make
amends. "If you get me a position, I shall be much obliged."

"The fact is," said Sam, "I should find it convenient to have a boy
go about with me, and be at my orders. My Cousin Henry has one, and
father says I may engage you."

Ben faced round, and looked steadily at Sam. He felt that he would
far rather work for Deacon Pitkin, in spite of his meager table, or
toil twelve hours a day in his uncle's shoe-shop, than accept such a
place as was now offered him. He penetrated Sam's motive, and felt
incensed with him, though he did not choose to show it.

"What are you willing to pay?" asked Ben, in a businesslike tone.

"Five dollars a month and your board," said Sam. "You'll live better
than you ever did before in your life, and your duties will be
easy."

"What would you want me to do?" asked Ben.

"Why, I would take you with me whenever I went out rowing or
fishing. That would be easy enough. Then, in the morning you would
black my shoes and keep my clothes well brushed, and go of any
errands I had for you. Oh, well, I can't tell you all you would have
to do, but you'd have an easy time."

"Yes, I don't think it would tire me out," said Ben. "You'd want me
to black your boots?"

"Yes."

"Well, I might agree to that on one condition."

"What is that?"

"That you would black mine."

"What do you mean?" demanded Sam, his face flushing angrily.

"Just what I say."

"Do you mean to insult me?"

"Not a bit; any more than you mean to insult me,"

"Do you dare to propose that I, a gentleman, should black your
low-lived shoes?" exclaimed Sam furiously.

"I think you're rather hard on my shoes," said Ben, laughing. "I'll
come for four dollars a month, if you'll do that."

"I never heard such impudence," said Sam, in concentrated wrath. "I
never was so repaid for kindness before."

"Look here, Sam," said Ben, "I understand just how kind you are. You
want the satisfaction of ordering me round, and you can't have it. I
decline your offer. I'd rather beg for bread than accept it."

"You may starve, for all me," said Sam. "It's ridiculous for a poor
boy to put on such airs. You'll die in the poorhouse yet."

"I won't live there, if I can help it. What! are you going to leave
me?"

"I won't condescend to be seen with you."

"Good-by, Sam. I hope you won't have to black your own boots."

Sam did not deign a reply.

"He looks mad," thought Ben. "I'd live on one meal a day rather than
let him order me round."




CHAPTER IV.

A BRILLIANT CHANCE.


The week was over, and Ben persisted in his determination to leave
Hampton.

"I'm sorry you are going, Ben," said his Cousin Jennie. "I shall
miss you awfully."

As Jennie was the prettiest girl in the village, though she did not
inherit any good looks from her plain-looking father, Ben was
gratified.

"You'd forget me soon," he said.

"No, I won't."

"Especially when Sam Sturgis comes round to see you."

"I don't want to see him. He's a stuck-up boy, and thinks himself
too good to associate with common people."

"He wanted to have me black his boots," said Ben.

"He isn't fit to black yours," said Jennie energetically.

"Oh, yes, he is," said Ben, laughing. "That's where you and I
disagree."

"I guess we both mean about the same thing," said Jennie, who saw
the point.

Ben's resolve to go to California was modified by an advertisement
in a New York daily paper which he saw at the village tavern.

It ran thus:

"Wanted, six boys, from fifteen to eighteen years of age, to fill
positions of trust. Ten dollars per week will be paid; but a deposit
of fifty dollars is required as a guarantee of honesty. This sum
will be repaid at the close of term of service. Address Fitch &
Perguson, No.--Nassau Street."

This advertisement looked quite attractive to Ben. He copied it, and
showed it to Uncle Job.

"Isn't that a good chance, Uncle Job?" he said. "Just think! Ten
dollars a week!"

"You'd have to pay your board out of it," said his uncle.

"I know that, but my board wouldn't cost more than four dollars a
week. That would leave me six."

"So it would. I declare it does seem to be a good chance. Maybe
they've got all the boys they want."

"Why, you see, uncle, there's a good many boys that couldn't pay the
deposit money. That would limit the number of applicants. Now, I
have the money, and I guess I'd better write to New York at once
about it."

"Maybe you had, Ben."

Ben immediately procured a sheet of paper and wrote to the
advertisers, stating that he would like the position, and assuring
them of his ability to furnish the required sum. The letter went to
New York by the afternoon mail.

Naturally Ben was a little excited and suffered a little from
suspense. He feared that all the places would be filled, and such
another chance was hardly to be expected again very soon. However,
on Monday morning he was gratified by the receipt of the following
letter:

"No.--NASSAU STREET, NEW YORK.

"MR. BENJAMIN STANTON: Your letter of yesterday is at hand.
Fortunately we have one vacancy, the other places being already
filled. We have rejected three applicants for it on account of
unsatisfactory penmanship. Yours, however, is up to the mark, and we
will engage you on the strength of it. It will be necessary for you
to report as soon as possible at our office for duty. We require the
deposit on account of the sums of money which you will handle. We do
not doubt your honesty, but it seems desirable that you should
furnish a guarantee, particularly as we pay a much larger salary
than is usually given to young clerks.

"Yours respectfully,

"FITCH & FERGUSON.

"P. S. Your engagement will not commence until the fifty dollars are
in our hands."

Ben was quite elated by his success.

"I must start to-morrow morning," he said, "or I shall be in danger
of losing the place."

"It seems very sudden," said his aunt. "I am afraid I sha'n't have
time to get your clothes ready. Some are dirty, and others need
mending. If I'd had a little notice-"

"It won't make any difference, Aunt Sarah," said Ben. "I'll take a
few clothes in a carpetbag, and you can send the rest by express
when they are ready."

"Yes, Sarah, that will be the best way," said Uncle Job. "Ben don't
want to run the risk of losing the place by delay."

Mrs. Stanton acquiesced rather unwillingly, and for the remainder of
the day Ben was busy making preparations to leave his country home.




CHAPTER V.

IN SEARCH OF A PLACE.


Ben took the early train to New York on Tuesday morning, and in due
time arrived in the city. He carried with him seventy-five dollars
out of his small patrimony. Fifty were to be deposited with Messrs.
Fitch & Ferguson, as required, and the balance was to defray his
expenses till he began to receive a salary. Ben didn't expect to
need much of it, for at the end of a week he would be paid ten
dollars for his services, and until then he meant to be very
economical.

Ben had only been in New York twice before, but he happened to know
his way to Nassau Street, and went there at once, with his carpetbag
in his hand.

As he entered Nassau Street from Printing-House

Square, a bootblack accosted him.

"How are you, country?"

"Are you very anxious to know?" asked Ben, stopping short.

"Yes."

"I'm well enough and strong enough to give you a licking."

"Good for you, country! Have you come to stay long?"

Ben laughed. He concluded not to take offense, but to answer
seriously.

"That depends on whether I get the place I am after."

"What is that?" asked the bootblack, in a friendly tone.

Now, on the way to the city, Ben had overheard a conversation
between two gentlemen, relative to certain swindlers in New York,
which, for the first time, had aroused in him a suspicion that
possibly there might be something wrong about the firm whose
advertisement he had answered. He felt the need of an adviser, and
though his choice may be considered rather a strange one, he decided
to consult his new acquaintance, the bootblack. He briefly told him
of the advertisement, and what it offered.

The bootblack surveyed him with pitying curiosity.

"You don't mean to say you swallow all that?" he said.

"Don't you think it's all right?" asked Ben anxiously.

"Look here," said the street boy, "do you think anybody's going to
pay a boy ten dollars a week, when there's hundreds ready to work
for three or four? Why, a man in Pearl Street advertised last week
for a boy at three dollars, and there was a whole shoal of boys went
for it. I was one of 'em."

"Don't you earn more than that by your business?"

"Sometimes I do, but it ain't stiddy, and I'd rather have a place."

"Why do they advertise to give ten dollars, then?" asked our hero.

"They want to get hold of your fifty dollars," said the bootblack.
"Them fellers is beats, that's what they are."

"What had I better do?" asked Ben, in perplexity.

"Go and see 'em, and have a talk. If they're not after your fifty
dollars, you'll know what it means."

"It may be all right, after all," said Ben, who did not like to give
up hope.

"I may be General Grant," retorted the bootblack, "but if I know
myself I ain't."
