dying, and there was no way of saving him but doing it on the sly. Well,
I'm here, the girleen has managed it, and here I'll stay. Not all the
doctors in the land, nor all the fine English grooms, shall take me back
again. I'll walk back when I'm fit to walk, and I'll do my best to bear
all that awful furniture; but in future this is my bedroom, and now you
know the worst."

The Squire had a great color in his face as he spoke; his eyes were
shining as they had not shone since his accident, and his voice was
quite strong. Squire Murphy, who was standing near, clapped him on the
shoulder.

"Why, Patrick," he said, "it's proud of you I am; you're like your old
self again--blest if you're not."

Nora, who was kneeling by her father's bed, kept her face slightly
turned away from her mother; the tears were in her eyes, but there was
a well of thanksgiving in her heart. In spite of her mother's angry
reproaches, she knew she had done the right thing. Her father would get
well now. After all, his Irish daughter knew what he wanted, and she
must bear her English mother's anger.

In an incredibly short space of time two or three of the men-servants
appeared, accompanied by Dr. Talbot. They stood in the entrance to the
barn, prepared to carry out orders; but now there stole past them the
Irish groom, Angus, and Hannah Croneen. These two came and stood near
Nora at the head of the bed. Dr. Talbot examined the patient, looked
round the cheerless barn, and said, with a smile, glancing from Mrs.
O'Shanaghgan to O'Shanaghgan's own face:

"This will never do; you must get back to your own comfortable room, my
dear sir--that is, if I am to continue to attend you."

"Then, for God's sake, leave off attending me, Talbot," said the Squire.
"You must be a rare ignoramus not to see that your treatment is killing
me out and out. It's fresh air I want, and plenty of it, and no more
fal-lals. Is it in my grave you'd have me in a fortnight's time? You get
out of this, and leave me to Mother Nature and the nursing of my Irish
colleen."

This was the final straw. Mrs. O'Shanaghgan left the barn, looking more
erect and more stately even than when she had entered it. Mr. Hartrick
followed her, so did the enraged Dr. Talbot, and lastly the English
servants. Squire Murphy uttered the one word, "Routed!" and clapped his
hand on his thigh.

The Squire, however, spoke sadly.

"I am sorry to vex your lady mother, Nora," he said; "and upon my soul,
child, you must get me well as quick as possible. We must prove to her
that we are in the right--that we must."

"Have a dhrop of the crayther, your honor," said Hannah, now coming
forward. "It's truth I'm telling, but this is me very last bottle of
potheen, which I was keeping for me funeral; but there, his honor's
wilcome to every drain of it."

"Pour me out a little," said the Squire.

He drank off the spirit, which was absolutely pure and unadulterated,
and smacked his lips.

"It's fine I'll be to-night," he said; "it's you that have the 'cute
ways, Nora. You have saved me. But, indeed, I thank you all, my friends,
for coming to my deliverance."

That night, in her smoke-begrimed cabin, Hannah Croneen described with
much unction the way madam and the English doctor had been made to know
their place, as she expressed it.

"'Twas himself that put them down," said Hannah. "Ah, but he is a grand
man, is O'Shanaghgan."

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan spent a very unhappy night. No comfort could she
derive even from Mr. Hartrick's words. Nora was an out-and-out rebel,
and must be treated accordingly; and as to the Squire--well, when Nora
attended his funeral her eyes might be opened. The good lady was quite
certain that the Squire would have developed pneumonia by the morning;
but when the reports reached her that he looked heartier and better than
he had since his illness, she could scarcely believe her ears. This,
however, was a fact, for Mother Nature did step in to cure the Squire;
and the draughty barn, with its lack of every ordinary comfort, was so
soothing to his soul that it began to have an equally good effect upon
his body.

Notwithstanding that it poured rain outside, and that great eddies of
wind came from under the badly-fitting doors and in at the cracks of
the small windows, the Squire ate his food with appetite, and began once
again to enjoy life. In the first place, he was no longer lonely. It
was impossible for his old friends and retainers to visit him in the
solitude of his grand bedroom; but it was perfectly easy, not only for
Squire Murphy and Squire Fitzgerald, and half the other squireens of
the neighborhood, to slip into the barn and have a "collogue," as they
expressed it; but also the little gossoons in their ragged trousers
and bare feet, and the girleens, with their curly hair, and roguish
dark-blue eyes, to scuttle in also. For could they not dart under the
bed like so many rabbits if madam's step was heard, and didn't the
Squire, bless him! like to have them with him when madam was busy with
her English friends? Then Nora herself, the darling of his heart, was
scarcely ever away from him now. Didn't she sit perched like a bird
on the foot of the hard bed and cause him to roar with laughter as
she described the English and their ways? Molly, too, became a prime
favorite with the Squire. It is sad to relate that he encouraged her in
her naughty words, and she began to say "Jehoshaphat!" and "Elephants!"
and "Holy Moses!" more frequently than ever.

The grand fact of all, however, was this: the Squire was getting well
again.

About a week after his removal to the barn Nora was out rather late by
herself. She had been visiting her favorite haunts by the seashore, and
was returning laden with seaweeds and shells, when she was startled by
hearing her name spoken in a low tone just behind her. The sound issued
from a plantation of thick underwood. The girl paused, and her heart
beat a little faster.

"Yes. What is it?" she said.

The next moment a long and skinny hand and arm were protruded, Nora's
own arm was forcibly taken possession of, and she was dragged, against
her will, into the underwood. Her first impulse was to cry out; but
being as brave a girl as ever walked, she quickly suppressed this
inclination, and turned and faced the ragged and starved-looking man
whom she expected to meet.

"Yes, Andy, I knew it was you," said Nora. "What do you want with me
now? How dare you speak to me?"

"How dare I! What do you mane by that, Miss Nora?"

"You know what I mean," answered the girl. "Oh, I have been patient
and have not said a word; but do you think I did not know? When all the
country, Andy Neil, were looking for my father's would-be murderer, I
knew where I could put my hand on him. But I did not say a word. If my
father had died I must--I must have spoken; but if he recovered, I felt
that in me which I cannot describe as pity, but which yet prevented my
giving you up to the justice you deserve. But to meet me here, to dare
to waylay me--it is too much."

"Ah, when you speak like that you near madden me," replied Andy. "Look
at me, Miss Nora; look well; look hard. Here's the skin tight on me
arums, and stretched fit to burst over me cheek-bones; and it's empty
I am, Miss Nora, for not a bite nor sup have I tasted for twenty-four
hours. The neighbors, they 'as took agen me. It has got whispering
abroad that it's meself handled the gun that laid the Squire on what
might have been his deathbed, and they have turned agen me, and not even
a pitaty can I get from 'em, and I can't get work nowhere; and the roof
is took off the little bit of a cabin in which I was born, and two of
the childers have died from cowld and hunger. That's my portion, Miss
Nora; that's my bitter portion; and yet you ashk me, miss, why I spake
to ye."

"You know why I said it," answered Nora. "There was a time when I pitied
you, but not now. You have gone too far; you have done that which no
daughter can overlook. Let me go--let me go; don't attempt to touch
me, or I shall scream out. There are neighbors near who will come to my
help."

"No, there are not," said Andy. "I 'as took good care of that. You may
scream as loud as you please, but no one will hear; and if we go farther
into the underwood no one will see. Come, my purty miss; it's my turn
now. It's my turn at last. Come along."

Nora was strong and fearless, but she had not Andy's brute strength.
With a clutch, now so fierce and desperate that she wondered her arm was
not broken, the man, who was half a madman, dragged her deeper into the
shade of the underwood.

"There now," said Andy, with a chuckle of triumph; "you has got to
listen. You're the light o' his eyes and the darlin' o' his heart. But
what o' that? Didn't my childer die of the cowld and the hunger, and the
want of a roof over them, and didn't I love them? Ah! that I did. Do you
remember the night I said I'd drown ye in the Banshee's pool, and didn't
we make a compact that if I let ye go you'd get the Squire to lave me my
bit of a cabin, and not to evict me? And how did ye kape your word? Ah,
my purty, how did ye kape your word?"

"I did my best for you," said Nora.

"Yer bhest. A poor bhest when I've had to go. But now, Miss Nora, I aint
waylaid you for nothin'. The masther has escaped this time, and you
has escaped; but as shure as there is a God in heav'n, if you don't get
Squire to consint to let me go back, there'll be mischief. There now,
Miss Nora, I've spoken. You're purty, and you're swate, and 'tis you
has got a tinder heart; but that won't do you no good, for I'm mad with
misery. It's me bit of a cabin I want to die in, and nothing less will
contint me. You may go back now, for I've said what I come to say; but
it's to-morrow night I'll be here waiting for ye, and I warn ye to bring
me the consint that I crave, for if you don't come, be the powers! ye'll
find that you've played with fire when you neglected Andy Neil."

Having uttered these words, the miserable man dropped Nora's arm and
vanished into the depths of the plantation. Nora stood still for a
moment, then returned thoughtfully and slowly to the house.




CHAPTER XXXIII.


THE CABIN ON THE MOUNTAIN.

Nora slept little that night. She had a good deal to think of, and very
anxious were her thoughts. She knew the Irishman, Andy Neil, well, and
she also knew his ferocious and half-savage temperament. Added to his
natural fierceness of character, he now undoubtedly was possessed by
temporary insanity. This had been brought on by hunger, cold, and great
misery. The man was desperate, and would think little of desperate
deeds. After all, his life was of small value to him compared to his
revenge. Whenever did an Irishman, at moments like the present, consider
life? Revenge came first, and there was that in the man's gleaming dark
eyes, in his high cheek-bones, in his wild, unkempt, starved appearance,
which showed that he would, if something was not quickly done, once
again attempt the Squire's life. What was she to do? Nora wondered and
wondered. Her father was getting better; the open air treatment, the
simple food, and the company of his friends were effecting the cure
which the luxurious life in the heavily furnished chamber had failed to
do. The Squire would soon be well and strong again. If he were careful,
he would once again stand in health and strength on his ancestral acres.

He would get accustomed to the grandeur of the restored Castle
O'Shanaghgan; he would get accustomed to his English relatives and their
ways. He would have his barn to retire to and his friends to talk
to, and he would still be the darling, the best-loved of all, to his
daughter Nora; but at the present moment he was in danger. In the barn,
too, he was in much greater danger than he had been when in the safe
seclusion of the Castle. It would be possible for any one to creep up
to the barn at night, to push open the somewhat frail windows or
equally frail door, and to accomplish that deed which had already
been attempted. Nora knew well that she must act, she must do
something--what, was the puzzle. Squire O'Shanaghgan was one of the
most generous, open-hearted, and affectionate of men. His generosity was
proverbial; he was a prime favorite with his tenants; but he had,
like many another Irishman of his type, a certain hard phase in his
character--he could, on occasions, be almost cruel. He had taken a great
dislike to Andy Neil and to some other tenants of his class; he had been
roused to stronger feeling by their open resistance, and had declared
that not all the Land Leagues in Ireland, not all the Fenians, not all
the Whiteboys, were they banded together in one great insurrection,
should frighten him from his purpose.

Those tenants who defied him, who refused to pay the scanty rent which
he asked for their humble cabins, should go out; they should, in short,
be evicted. The other men had submitted to the Squire's iron dictation.
They had struggled to put their pence and shillings together, and with
some difficulty had met the question of the rent; but Andy Neil either
could not or would not pay; and the Squire had got the law, as he
expressed it, to evict the man. There had come a day when the wild
tenant of the little cabin on the side of the bare mountain had come
home to find his household goods exposed to the airs of heaven, the roof
off his cabin, the door removed from its hinges; the hearth, it is true,
still warm with the ashes of the sods of turf which were burning there
in the morning, but the whole home a ruin. The Squire had not himself
witnessed this scene of desolation, but had given his stern orders, and
they had been executed by his agent. When Andy saw the ruins of his home
he gave one wild howl and rushed down the side of the mountain. His
sick children--there were two of them in the cabin at the time--had been
taken pity on by some neighbors almost as poor as himself; but the shock
(or perhaps their own bad health) had caused the death of both boys, and
the man was now homeless and childless. No wonder his brain gave way. He
vowed vengeance. Vengeance was the one last thing left to him in life;
he would revenge his wrongs or die. So, waiting his opportunity, he had
crouched behind a hedge, and, with an old gun which he had stolen from
a neighbor, had fired at the Squire. In the crucial moment, however, his
hand shook, and the shot had lodged, not in the Squire's body, but in
his leg, causing a nasty but scarcely a dangerous wound. The only one in
all the world who suspected Andy was the Squire's daughter Nora; but it
was easy for her to put two and two together. The man's words to her in
the cave, when he threatened to drown her, returned to her memory. She
suspected him; but, with an Irish girl's sympathy, she would not speak
of her suspicions--that is, if her father's life was spared.

But now the man himself had come to her and threatened fresh mischief.
She hated to denounce the poor, starved creature to the police, and
yet she _must_ protect her father. The Squire was much better; but
his temper could be roused to great fury at times, and Nora dreaded to
mention the subject of Andy Neil. She guessed only too well that fear
would not influence the fierce old Squire to give the man back his
cabin. The one thing the wretched creature now craved was to die under
the shelter of the roof where he had first seen the light; but this
natural request, so dear to the heart of the Squire himself, under
altered circumstances, would not weigh with him under existing
conditions. The mere fact that Andy still threatened him would make him
more determined than ever to stick to his purpose. Nora did not dare to
give her father even a hint with regard to the hand which had fired that
shot; and yet, and yet--oh, God help her! she must do something, or the
consequences might be too fearful to contemplate.

As she was dressing on the following morning she thought hard, and the
idea came to her to take the matter into her own hands, and herself give
Andy leave to go back to his cabin; but, on reflection, she found that
this would be no easy matter, for the cabins from which the tenants were
evicted were often guarded by men whose business it was to prevent the
wretched creatures returning to them. No doubt Andy's cabin would be
now inaccessible; still, she might go and look at it, and, if all other
means failed, might venture to beg of her father's agent to let the man
return to it; but first of all she would see the place. Somewhat cheered
as this determination came to her, she ran downstairs. Mr. Hartrick was
returning to England by an early train, and the carriage, which was to
convey him to the station, was already at the door. Mrs. O'Shanaghgan
was almost tearful at the thought of parting with her beloved brother.
Molly, delighted at being allowed to stay on at the Castle, was also
present; but Nora's entrance on the scene caused Mrs. O'Shanaghgan to
speak fretfully.

"Late as usual, Nora," said that lady, turning and facing her daughter
as she appeared. "I am glad that you condescended to appear before your
uncle starts for England. I wonder that you have taken the trouble."

"Oh, do not scold her, Ellen," said Mr. Hartrick, kindly. "I begin to
understand something of the nature of my Irish niece. When the Squire
is well again she will, I am sure, return to England and resume her
studies; but at present we can scarcely expect her to do so."

"I will come back some time, Uncle George," said Nora; "and oh!" she
added, "I do thank you for all your great and real kindness. I may
appear ungrateful, but indeed, indeed I am not so in my heart, and it
is very good of you to allow Molly to stay; and I will promise to take
great care of her, and not to let her get too wild."

"Thank you. Any message for your aunt, Nora?" said Mr. Hartrick gravely.
"I should like you, my dear," he added, coming up to the girl, and
laying his hand on her shoulder and looking with his kind eyes into her
face, "to send your Aunt Grace a very special message; for you did try
her terribly, Nora, when you not only ran away yourself, but induced
Molly to accompany you."

Nora hesitated for a moment, the color flamed into her face, and her
eyes grew very bright.

"Tell her, Uncle George," she said, speaking slowly and with great
emphasis, "that I did what I did for _father_. Tell her that for no one
else but father would I hurt her, and ask her to forgive me just because
I am an Irish girl; and I love--oh! I love my father so dearly."

"I will take her your message, my dear," said Mr. Hartrick, and then he
stooped and kissed his niece.

A moment later he was about to step into the carriage, when Nora rushed
up to him.

"Good-by; God bless you!" she cried. "Oh, how kind you have been, and
how I love you! Please, please, do not misunderstand me; I have many
cares and anxieties at present or I would say more. You have done
splendidly, only----"

"Only what, Nora?" said her uncle.

"Only, Uncle George," answered the girl, "you have done what you have
done to please my mother, and you have done it all in the English way;
and oh! the English way is very fine, and very noble, and very generous;
but--but we _did_ want the old bare rooms and the lack of furniture, and
the place as it always has been; but we could not expect--I mean father
and I could not expect--you and mother to remember that."

"It was impossible, Nora," said her uncle. "What I did I did, as you
express it, my dear, in the English way. The retrograde movement, Nora,
could not be expected from an Englishman; and by-and-by you, at least,
will thank me for having brought civilization to O'Shanaghgan."

A moment later Mr. Hartrick went away, and Nora returned to the house.
Mrs. O'Shanaghgan had left the room, and Nora found herself alone with
her cousin Molly.

"What is it, Nora?" said Molly. "You look quite pale and anxious."

