all sail; but when within about eighteen miles of Barcelona one of
the French lookout ships sighted them, and made a signal to a consort
further along. She in turn passed on the news until it reached the
Count of Toulouse, who, without waiting to ascertain the strength of
the approaching squadron, at once signaled to his fleet to weigh anchor,
and, putting to sea, sailed for France.

The disappointment of the earl was great, as he had fully calculated
upon gaining a great naval battle in sight of the city he had come to
relieve. On the afternoon of the 8th of May the leading vessels anchored
off Barcelona, and preparations were at once made for the landing of the
troops. The first to set foot on shore were the earl's veteran troops,
who had according to his orders accompanied the fleet from Sitjes. The
succor was welcome, indeed; the breaches were no longer defensible, and
an assault was hourly expected. The king himself came down to receive
the earl and his army; the city went wild with joy.

For a few days the French made a show of carrying on the siege. They
were still enormously superior in force; but the energy and skill of
Peterborough counterbalanced the inequality. He worked day and night
in superintending the works of defense, and in placing the troops in
readiness for the expected assault. Philip and many of his officers
were still in favor of an attack upon the city; but Tesse as usual was
opposed to anything like vigorous measures, and his views were adopted
by a council of war.

At one o'clock on the morning of the 11th of May the besiegers broke
up their camp, and in great confusion made their way toward the French
frontier, for Tesse preferred even the ignominy of falling back into
France with his unsuccessful and dispirited army to retracing his steps
toward Saragossa, where his devastations and cruelty had caused the
whole population to rise in insurrection as soon as his army had passed
into Catalonia. Besides which, he had received news that Peterborough
had caused every pass and town on his way to the west to be fortified
and held by the Miquelets. Philip accompanied the retreating army to
Roussillon. The downfall of his hopes had been utter and complete. But
a few weeks before it had seemed that Spain was his, and that the forces
at his disposal were ample to crush out the insurrection in Barcelona,
and to sweep into the sea the handful of the invaders. But all his plans
had been baffled, all his hopes brought to naught by the genius and
energy of one man, in spite of that man being thwarted at every turn by
the imbecile German coterie who surrounded the king, and by the jealousy
and ill will of his fellow generals.

Bad news met the fugitive at Roussillon. There he heard that his
countrymen had suffered a disastrous defeat at Ramillies; that nearly
all the Netherlands had been wrested from France; that a heavy defeat
had been inflicted upon her at Turin, and that Italy was well nigh lost.
It needed, indeed, but the smallest amount of unanimity, enterprise, and
confidence on the part of the advisers and generals of King Charles to
have placed him securely and permanently upon the throne of Spain.

When the flight of the besieging army was discovered after daybreak by
the besieged, they poured out from Barcelona into the deserted camp. All
the ordnance and stores of the French had been abandoned. Two hundred
heavy brass guns, thirty mortars, and a vast quantity of shot, shells,
and intrenching tools, three thousand barrels of powder, ten thousand
sacks of corn, and a vast quantity of provisions and stores were found
left behind in the camp. Tesse had left, too, all his sick and wounded
with a letter to the Earl of Peterborough begging him to see that they
were well cared for.

The news of the hasty retreat of Marshal Tesse from before Barcelona
caused a shock of surprise throughout Europe. In France it had never
been doubted that Barcelona would fall, and as to the insurrection, it
was believed that it could be trampled out without difficulty by
the twenty-five thousand French veterans whom the marshal had at
his disposal. As to the handful of British troops whose exploits had
occasioned such astonishment, none had supposed for a moment that they
would be able to effect anything when opposed to so overwhelming a force
of the disciplined troops of France.

Peterborough himself had hardly hoped to save Barcelona, but, unlike
his enemies, he had not considered that the fall of that city would
necessarily entail the final defeat of the cause for which he fought.
While busying himself with the marches and achievements of the troops
under his command, he had never ceased to take measures to provide for
the future. His marches and counter marches had made him thoroughly
acquainted with the country, and he had won the entire confidence of the
people.

He had, therefore, taken measures that even if Barcelona fell Philip
should not march back again to his capital. From the day Tesse advanced
he had had thousands of the country people at work, under the direction
of a few of his own officers, rendering each of the three roads by which
the French army could march from Barcelona to Madrid impracticable.
Gorges were blocked with vast masses of rock rolled down from the
mountain side at spots where the road wound along on the face of
precipices; and where it had only been made by blasting, it was by
similar means entirely destroyed. Bridges were broken down, every castle
and town on the lines of retreat placed in a state of defense, and the
cattle and provisions driven off to places of safety.

Thus while the earl was himself engaged in the most perilous adventures,
he neglected nothing that the most prudent and cautious general could
have suggested to insure the success of his plans. Even when affairs
looked most unpromising in Barcelona the earl wrote cheerfully to the
Duke of Savoy, saying that the circumstances were much better than
were generally supposed; and that the French officers, ignorant of the
situation of the country, would be astonished at the difficulties that
would be opposed to them on advancing even after success; and that if
the siege were raised they would be forced to abandon Spain, while all
the western frontier would be clear for the progress of Lord Galway and
Das Minas to Madrid.

A few days after the retreat of Marshal Tesse, to Jack's great pleasure
Graham came into Barcelona. He had, in the confusion of the retreat, had
little difficulty in slipping away from his captors. His only danger had
been from the peasantry, at whose hands he had narrowly escaped death,
as they took him for a French officer; but, upon being convinced by his
assurances that he was an Englishman and an aide de camp of the Earl of
Peterborough, they had provided him with a horse to make his way back to
Barcelona.



CHAPTER XVI: INGRATITUDE


Barcelona rescued, Peterborough at once urged the king to march upon
Madrid and have himself proclaimed king in his capital. There was no
force which could oppose his advance, and Lord Galway and the Portuguese
could move unresisted from the west and meet him there. But it was a
long time before Charles and his counselors would listen to his advice;
and although at last they agreed to follow it, their resolution was
short. In the first place, they determined to leave so large a force
to garrison Catalonia that the army available for the advance on Madrid
would be very seriously weakened--fifteen hundred English and eleven
hundred Spaniards were to be left at Barcelona, sixteen hundred English
and Dutch and fifteen hundred Spanish at Gerona, eight hundred and fifty
Spanish and Dutch at Lerida, and five hundred Spanish at Tortosa.

This left but sixty-five hundred men available for service in the field,
and even this number was subsequently diminished by the vacillating
Charles to forty-five hundred.

As Peterborough wrote to Lord Halifax: "We have saved kingdoms in spite
of the king, who would abandon them, and we have waged more dangerous
war with ministers than with enemies. Lord Galway and the Portuguese
generals pass all understanding."

No wonder the earl was astounded by the incompetence of Lord Galway and
the Portuguese generals. They had twenty thousand men, while to oppose
them there were but five thousand under the Duke of Berwick; and yet
after entering Spain they fell back, without doing anything, into
Portugal--their retreat beginning on the 11th of May, the day on which
Philip retreated from Barcelona. So that on the opposite side of Spain
two large armies simultaneously retired before others vastly weaker than
themselves. When the news of Tesse's retreat to France reached Portugal
they again advanced. Berwick was too weak to oppose them, and on the
25th of June the advance guard of the allies occupied Madrid, and there
proclaimed Charles as king.

Had Galway and his colleagues now shown the slightest energy, and moved
against Berwick's little force, with which was Philip himself, they
could have driven them across the frontier without striking a blow,
and the French cause would have been lost in Spain; but, having reached
Madrid, they remained there doing absolutely nothing--leaving ample
time to Philip to repair his misfortunes, receive aid from France, and
recommence the campaign with vigor. As Peterborough wrote indignantly to
General Stanhope: "Their halt is as fatal as was Hannibal's at Capua."

As soon as the movement upon Madrid had been decided upon, Peterborough
sailed with the English and Dutch infantry to Valencia, where he was
received with enthusiasm by the inhabitants. He at once set to work to
raise a regiment of dragoons, and organized them in three weeks. The
very day they were mounted he marched them upon Castile. During this
time not only had Lord Galway made no movement, but he had joined in
the German intrigue by which Charles was induced to abandon the plan of
marching to his capital under the escort of Peterborough.

The allied generals at Madrid were indeed basely jealous of the
brilliant conqueror of Catalonia and Valencia. His deeds had thrown
theirs entirely into the shade. With utterly insufficient means he had
done everything; with ample means they had effected nothing, and had
only been enabled to enter Madrid by the fact that he had drawn off the
army which had successfully opposed them.

After incessant labor in organizing his force, the earl sent two
thousand men, under the command of Lieutenant General Wyndham, to
besiege the towns of Requena and Cuenca--two places of some strength
which blocked the road between Valencia and Madrid.

Wyndham easily accomplished the task; and the road being thus secured,
Peterborough wrote to Charles that "nothing remained to hinder him
from entering Madrid with even a small escort of horse." The earl had
everything prepared along the road for the passage of the king; but
although he wrote over and over again urging him not to delay, Charles
refused to stir, and told General Stanhope (who backed Peterborough's
entreaties) that he had "no becoming equipment with which to enter his
capital."

"Sire," the English general exclaimed in indignant astonishment, "our
William the Third entered London in a hackney, with a cloak bag behind
it, and was made king not many weeks after."

A month after the date originally settled Charles set out and proceeded
to Taragona, but then, to the astonishment of the English general and
envoy, they learned he had altered his mind and taken the route to
Saragossa. When he heard the news, Peterborough sent couriers day after
day with urgent letters to the king. He prevailed upon a deputation of
the Valencian nobility to follow with the same purpose, and transmitted
the opinion of a council of war, which was unanimous in entreating
the king to stay his steps. The king again hesitated, and was about to
follow Peterborough's advice, when a French officer in the Portuguese
service arrived from Galway and Das Minas, again urging him to move by
the route which they had suggested.

Charles again hesitated, the Count of Cifuentes (who was with him) gave
his advice in favor of the Saragossa route, and the king decided on that
line.

On the 26th of July the earl summoned a council of war, including the
Governor of Valencia, two Spanish generals, and his own officers. They
agreed unanimously that Peterborough should march his army to Madrid or
join the army in Portugal, as circumstances might require. Just before
they started letters came in from the king desiring that Peterborough
should send the forces under his command either to relieve the Duke of
Savoy or to capture the Balearic Isles.

The earl declined to follow this ungrateful suggestion, which was
manifestly intended by Charles and his advisers, English, Portuguese,
and German, to send away from his kingdom the man who had won it for
him. Being fortunately independent of orders, Peterborough marched for
Castile, as he and the council of war had previously determined.

Charles was not long in regretting that he had not followed Lord
Peterborough's advice. Instead of the triumphant procession from
Saragossa to Madrid, which he had been promised, he was met with the
most determined opposition.

Every town and village in the center and south of Spain rose against
him; Salamanca and Toledo declared for Philip, and Andalusia raised
eighteen thousand men. The troops of Las Torres from Valencia, and
those who had retreated under Tesse to Roussillon, had joined Berwick at
Xadraque, and Philip had placed himself at the head of this formidable
army. Charles was obliged to send in the utmost haste to ask the Earl of
Peterborough to extricate him from the position in which he had placed
himself by neglecting his advice.

The earl instantly complied with the request, and marching with all
speed overtook the king on the 4th of August at Pastrina, and thence
on the following day escorted him in safety to the army of Portugal at
Guadalaxara.

The total strength of the united allied army was eighteen thousand
men--a force inferior, indeed, to that with which Berwick confronted
them; and that portion brought by Lord Galway and the Portuguese General
Das Minas was not to be relied upon, having fallen into a state of great
indiscipline owing to the tedious delays, the frequent retreats, and the
long inactivity to which it had been subjected by the incompetence of
its leaders. That this was so was evident by the fact that the day after
the king's arrival the French made a partial attack, and many of the
allied battalions at once fell into complete confusion. But this was not
the greatest drawback to the efficiency of the allied army; they were
paralyzed by the dissensions of their commanders--Galway, Das Minas,
and the Dutch Count de Noyelles. Each and all declined to acknowledge
Peterborough as commander in chief. The earl then offered to waive his
own rights entirely and to fight as a simple volunteer, and that Das
Minas, Lord Galway, and the Dutch general should each command their own
forces, receiving their orders from the king.

This offer was, however, refused by the three generals. The partisans
of the various leaders shared their animosity. The English troops of
Peterborough claiming, and justly, that Catalonia and Valencia had been
gained and won by him, and that to him alone the king owed his crown,
were furious that those who had shown naught but incapacity from
the commencement of the campaign should now refuse to recognize his
authority. While the disputes continued Berwick had nearly succeeded in
surprising Galway, and a disastrous defeat had only been prevented
by the gallant defense made by Lord Tyrawley of an outpost which he
commanded, and which he held for two hours against all the efforts of
the French, and so gave time for the army to make a hasty retreat.

The army was, moreover, straitened by want of provisions; Lord Galway
and his colleagues had made no arrangements whatever for its supply.
Day and night the German favorites of the king, who had ruined their
master's cause by dissuading him from following the advice of Lord
Peterborough, now labored with the king still further to destroy his
confidence in Peterborough; and finding himself treated coldly by the
ungrateful monarch, who owed everything to him, opposed at every turn by
the other generals, and seeing that his presence was worse than useless,
Peterborough announced his intention of obeying the orders from Queen
Anne, dated the 12th of June, and repeated on the 17th, to proceed to
the assistance of the Duke of Savoy.

On the same evening a council of war was held. The king formally laid
Peterborough's announcement before the generals, who, delighted to get
rid of their rival, unanimously recommended that he should depart.

On the 11th of August, full of mortification and disgust at the
treatment that he had experienced and the base ingratitude of the king,
Peterborough rode from the camp at Guadalaxara. As if to humiliate him
as far as possible, he was given only an escort of eighty dragoons,
although there were serious difficulties to be encountered on the road
to Valencia. His two favorite aides de camp, Stilwell and Graham, were
the only officers who accompanied him. It is satisfactory to know that
from the moment of the earl's departure misfortune and disaster fell
upon the fortunes of King Charles, and that the crown which he had
received from the English earl was wrested from his unworthy grasp.
Peterborough had gone but a short distance when he heard that all his
baggage, consisting of eight wagon loads and of the value of eight
thousand pounds sterling, had fallen into the hands of the enemy. When
he left Valencia to extricate the king from his difficulties he had
ordered it to be sent after him to Guadalaxara. When it arrived at
Cuenca, General Wyndham, who commanded there, forwarded it with a small
escort; but it was attacked while passing through the town of Huete by a
party of the Duke of Berwick's troopers.

