and began to walk toward Waverley. Perhaps his object in making these
inquiries has been guessed. It happened that he needed a boy, and, for
more reasons than one, he thought he should like to have Herbert bound
to him. Herbert, as he had noticed, was a stout boy, and he probably
could get a good deal of work out of him. Then, again, it would be
gratifying to him to have our hero in subjection to him. He could pay
him off then, ten times over, for his insolence, as he chose to term it.

"I'll break his proud spirit," thought Abner Holden. "He'll find he's
got a master, if I get hold of him. He don't know me yet, but he will
some time."

Mr. Holden resolved to wait on Captain Ross at once, and conclude
arrangements with him to take Herbert before our hero had returned from
the mill village. He pictured, with a grim smile, Herbert's dismay when
he learned who was to be his future master.

With the help of a handkerchief dipped into a crystal stream at the
roadside, Abner Holden succeeded in effacing some of the muddy stains
upon his coat and pantaloons, and at length got himself into presentable
trim for calling upon a "selectman."

At length he came in sight of the house which had been described to him
as that of Captain Ross. There was a woman at the well-sweep engaged in
drawing water.

"Does Captain Ross live here?" he inquired.

"Yes, sir."

"Is he at home?"

"He's over in the three-acre lot. Was you wantin' to see him?"

"I should like to. Is the field far away?"

"No, it's just behind the house."

"Then I guess I'll go and find him. I want to see him on a little matter
of business."

Mr. Holden crossed a mowing-field, and then, climbing over a stone
wall, found himself at the edge of the three-acre lot. The captain was
superintending one or two hired men, and, as he had his coat off, had
probably been assisting them.

"Captain Ross?" said Abner Holden, interrogatively.

"That's my name."

"You are chairman of the selectmen, I believe?"

"Yes, sir."

"I understand that you have a boy that you want to bind out."

"I reckon you mean Herbert Mason."

"Yes, I believe that's the name I heard."

"Are you in want of a boy?"

"Yes, I am looking out for one."

"What is your business?"

"I keep a store, but I should want him to work on land part of the
time."

"Do you live hereabouts?"

"Over at Cranston."

"If you'll come to the house, we'll talk the matter over. The boy's
a good boy, and we want to get a good place for him. His mother was a
widder, and he's her only son. He's a smart, capable lad, and good to
work."

"I've no doubt he'll suit me. I'll take him on your recommendation."

"We should want him to go to school winters. He's a pretty good scholar
already. His father was a larned man, and used to teach him before he
died. If he had lived, I reckon Herbert would certainly have gone to
college."

"I'll agree to send him to school in the winter for the next two
years," said Holden, "and will give him board and clothes, and when he's
twenty-one a freedom suit, and a hundred dollars. Will that do?"

"I don't know but that's reasonable," said Captain Ross, slowly. "The
boy's a bit high-spirited, but if you manage him right, I guess you'll
like him."

"I'll manage him!" thought Abner Holden. "Can I take him with me
to-morrow?" he asked. "I don't come this way very often."

"Well, I guess that can be arranged. We'll go over to Dr. Kent's after
dinner, and see if they can get him ready."

"In the meantime," said Holden, afraid that the prize might slip through
his fingers, "suppose we make out the papers. I suppose you have full
authority in the matter."

Captain Ross had no objection, and thus poor Herbert was unconsciously
delivered over to the tender mercies of a man who had very little love
for him.




CHAPTER IV

A DISAGREEABLE SURPRISE


After his collision with the traveler, Herbert hurried on to the mill,
intent upon making up for lost time. He was satisfied with having
successfully maintained his rights; and, as he had no reason to suppose
he should ever again see his unreasonable opponent, dismissed him from
his thoughts.

On reaching the mill, he found he should have to remain an hour or two
before he could have his grain ground. He was not sorry for this, as it
would give him an opportunity to walk around the village.

"I wish," he thought, "I could get a place in one of the stores here.
There's more going on than there is in Waverley, and I could go over
Sundays to see Dr. Kent's family."

On the spur of the moment, he resolved to inquire if some of the
storekeepers did not require help. There was a large dry-goods
store--the largest in the village--kept by Beckford & Keyes. He entered
and inquired for the senior partner.

"Mr. Beckford is not in," said the clerk. "Mr. Keyes is standing at that
desk."

Herbert went up to the desk, and said inquiringly, "Mr. Keyes?"

"That is my name," said that gentleman, pleasantly. "Is there anything I
can do for you?"

"I am in search of a place," said our hero, "and I thought you might
have a vacancy here."

"We have none just at present," said Mr. Keyes, who was favorably
impressed by Herbert's appearance; "but it is possible we may have in a
few weeks. Where do you live? Not in the village, I suppose?"

"No, sir," said Herbert, and a shadow passed over his face, "My mother
died three weeks since, and I am now stopping at the house of Dr. Kent."

"Dr. Kent--ah, yes, I know the doctor. He is an excellent man."

"He is," said Herbert, warmly. "He has been very kind to me."

"What is your name?"

"Herbert Mason."

"Then, Herbert, I will promise to bear you in mind. I will note down
your name and address, and as soon as we have a vacancy I will write to
you. Come into the store whenever you come this way."

"Thank you," said Herbert.

He left the store feeling quite encouraged. Even if the chance never
amounted to anything, the kind words and manner of the storekeeper gave
him courage to hope that he would meet with equal kindness from others.
Kind words cost nothing, but they have a marvelous power in lightening
the burdens of the sorrowful and cheering the desponding.

Herbert left the store, feeling that he should consider himself truly
fortunate if he could obtain a place in such an establishment. But
there was a rough experience before him, of which at present he guessed
nothing.

After sauntering about the village a little longer, and buying a stick
of candy for little Mary Kent, the doctor's only daughter, who was quite
attached to Herbert, our hero got back to the mill in time to receive
his bags of meal, with which he was soon on his way homeward.

About the place where he met Mr. Holden he was hailed by a man at work
in the field--the same who had taken back that gentleman's horse to the
stable.

"Well, boy, you had a kind of scrimmage, didn't you, coming over?"

"Did you see it?" asked Herbert.

"Yes," said the other, grinning. "I seed the other feller in the mud
puddle. He was considerably riled about it."

"It was his own fault. I gave him half the road."

"I know it; but there's some folks that want more than their share."

"Was his buggy broken? I don't know but I ought to have stopped to help
him, but he had been so unreasonable that I didn't feel much like it."

"His wheel got broken. I drawed the buggy into the bushes. There 'tis
now. It'll cost him a matter of ten dollars to fix it."

"I'm sorry for that," said Herbert; "but I can't see that I was to blame
in the matter. If I had turned out as he wanted me to, I should have
tipped over, and, as the wagon didn't belong to me, I didn't think it
right to risk it."

"Of course not. You wasn't called on to give in to such
unreasonableness."

"Where did the man go?"

"He concluded to walk on to Waverley, and hired me to take the horse
back to the stable. He wanted to know who you were."

"Did he?"

"Maybe he's goin' to sue you for damages."

"I don't believe he'll get much if he does," laughed our hero. "My
property is where he can't get hold of it."

"Ho! ho!" laughed the other, understanding the joke.

After this conversation Herbert continued on his way, and, after
delivering the grain, took his way across the fields to his temporary
home. He entered by the back yard. Little Mary came running out to meet
him.

"Have oo come back, Herbert?" she said. "Where have oo been?"

"Been to buy Mary some candy," he said, lifting her up and kissing her.

"Whose horse is that at the gate?" asked Herbert, as the doctor's wife
entered the room.

"It belongs to Captain Ross," she said. "He has come on business
connected with you."

"Connected with me!" repeated Herbert, in surprise.

"Yes, my dear boy, I am afraid we must make up our minds to lose you."

"Has he found a place for me?" asked Herbert, in a tone of
disappointment.

"Yes, I believe he has bound you out to a man in Cranston."

"I am sorry," said Herbert.

"I shall be sorry to have you go, Herbert, but I thought you wanted to
go."

"So I do; but by waiting a few weeks I could probably get a place in
Beckford & Keyes' store, at the mill village."

"What makes you think so?"

Herbert detailed his interview of the morning with the junior partner.
Just at this moment the doctor entered the kitchen.

"Have you told him?" he inquired, looking at his wife.

"Yes, and he says that but for this he might probably have got a chance
to go into Beckford's store at the mill village."

"I am sorry for this. They are good men, and he would have been near us,
while Cranston is forty miles away."

"Who is the man that wants me?" asked Herbert.

"A Mr. Holden. He is in the other room with Captain Ross. It was
all arranged before they came. He wants you to go with him to-morrow
morning."

"So soon?" said Herbert, in dismay.

"Yes. At first he wished you to set off with him this afternoon; but I
told him decidedly you could not be ready."

"Quite impossible," said Mrs. Kent. "Some of Herbert's clothes are in
the wash, and I can't have them ready till evening."

"You had better come into the other room, Herbert," said the doctor. "I
will introduce you to your new employer."

Herbert followed the doctor into the sitting-room. His first glance
rested on Captain Ross, whom he knew. He went up and shook hands
with him. Next he turned to Mr. Holden, and to his inexpressible
astonishment, recognized his opponent of the morning.

"Mr. Holden, Herbert," introduced the doctor. "Mr. Holden, this is the
boy we have been speaking of."

"I have seen Mr. Holden before," said Herbert, coldly.

"Yes," said Mr. Holden, writhing his disagreeable features into an
unpleasant smile. "We have met before."

Dr. Kent looked from one to the other in surprise, as if seeking an
explanation.

"Our acquaintance doesn't date very far back," said Mr. Holden. "We met
this morning between here and the mill village."

"Indeed," said the doctor; "you passed each other, I suppose."

"Well, no; I can't say we did exactly," said Mr. Holden, with the same
unpleasant smile, "We tried to, but the road being narrow, there was a
collision, and I came off second-best."

"I hope there was no accident."

"Oh, nothing to speak of. I got tipped out, and my clothes, as you
may observe, suffered some. As for my young friend here, he rode on
uninjured."

"You must excuse my not stopping to inquire if I could help you," said
Herbert; "but my horse was frightened by the collision, and I could not
easily stop him."

"Oh, it's of no consequence," said Mr. Holden, in an off-hand manner. He
was determined not to show himself out in his true colors until he had
got Herbert absolutely under his control.

"But where is your horse, Mr. Holden?" asked Captain Ross. "I think you
were walking when you came to my house."

"I sent it back to the village by a man I met on the road, my buggy
being disabled."

"Your carriage wasn't much injured, I hope."

"Oh, no, not much."

"I don't see exactly how it could happen," said Captain Ross. "I thought
the road from here to the mill village was broad enough at any point for
carriages to pass each other."

"I didn't dream," said Mr. Holden, not noticing this remark, "that the
young man I had engaged was my young acquaintance of the morning."

Herbert looked at him, puzzled by his entire change of manner--a change
so sudden that he suspected its genuineness.

The more he thought of it, the more unwilling he felt to live with Mr.
Holden. But could it be avoided? He resolved to try. He accordingly told
the doctor and Captain Ross of the promise that Mr. Keyes had made him.

"It would be a good place," said the captain; "but it ain't certain.
Now, here's Mr. Holden, ready to take you at once."

"If I was in the mill village I could come over and see my friends here
now and then. Besides, I think I should like being in a store."

"Oh, I've got a store, too," said Mr. Holden, "and I should expect you
to tend there part of the time. I don't think I can let you off, my
young friend," he added, with a disagreeable smile. "I think we shall
get along very well together."

Herbert did not feel at all sure of this, but he saw that it would do
no good to remonstrate farther, and kept silence. Soon after, Mr. Holden
and Captain Ross rose to go.

"I'll call round for my young friend about nine to-morrow morning," said
Abner Holden, with an ingratiating smile.

"We will endeavor to have him ready," said the doctor.

After they went away Herbert wandered about in not the best of spirits.
He was convinced that he should not be happy with Mr. Holden, against
whom he had conceived an aversion, founded partly upon the occurrences
of the morning, and partly on the disagreeable impression made upon him
by Abner Holden's personal appearance.




CHAPTER V

THE ENVELOPE


Herbert woke up early the next morning, and a feeling of sadness came
over him as he reflected that it was his last morning in Waverley. He
was going out into the world, and, as he could not help thinking, under
very unfavorable auspices. New scenes and new experiences usually have a
charm for a boy, but Mr. Holden's disagreeable face and unpleasant smile
rose before him, and the prospect seemed far from tempting.

When he came downstairs, he found Mrs. Kent in the kitchen.

"You are up early, Mrs. Kent," said Herbert.

"Yes, Herbert; I want you to have a good breakfast before you go."

It certainly was a nice breakfast. Tender beefsteak, warm biscuit,
golden butter, potatoes fried crisp and brown, and excellent coffee,
might have tempted any appetite. Herbert, in spite of his sadness, did
full justice to the bountiful meal.

The family had hardly risen from breakfast when the sound of wheels was
heard outside, and directly there was a knock at the door.

"It's Mr. Holden," said the doctor, looking from the front window.

"Must we part from you so soon, Herbert?" said Mrs. Kent,
affectionately.

"Where oo goin', Herbert?" asked little Mary, clinging to his knee,

"Herbert's going away, Mary," said he, stooping and kissing his little
friend.

"Herbert mustn't go 'way," said the little girl, in discontent.

"Herbert come back soon, and bring candy for Mary," he said, wishing
that his words might come true.

By that time Mr. Holden had entered, and was surveying the scene with
his disagreeable smile.

"Little Mary is quite attached to Herbert," said the doctor.

"I am sorry," said Mr. Holden, "that I have no little girls, as Herbert
seems fond of them."

Herbert doubted if he could become attached to anyone related to Mr.
Holden.

"I'm a bachelor," said Mr. Holden, "though perhaps I ought to be ashamed
to say so. If I had had the good fortune early in life to encounter a
lady like your good wife here, it might have been different."

"It isn't too late yet, Mr. Holden," said the doctor.

"Well, perhaps not. If Mrs. Kent is ever a widow, I may try my luck."
