


The next Sunday Mrs. Clifton and her daughter appeared at church,
and Grant had the pleasure of greeting them. He was invited with his
sister to take supper with them on the next Monday afternoon, and
accepted the invitation. About sunset he met his new friends
walking, with the addition of the husband and father, who, coming
Saturday evening from New York, had felt too fatigued to attend
church. Mr. Clifton, to whom he was introduced, was a portly man in
middle life, who received Grant quite graciously, and made for
himself acknowledgment of the service which our hero had rendered
his daughter.

"If I ever have the opportunity of doing you a favor, Master
Thornton, you may call upon me with confidence," he said.

Grant thanked him, and was better pleased than if he had received an
immediate gift.

Meanwhile Deacon Gridley kept his promise, and advanced the minister
fifty dollars, deducting a month's interest. Even with this
deduction Mrs. Thornton was very glad to obtain the money. Part of
it was paid on account to Mr. Tudor, and silenced his importunities
for a time. As to his own plans, there was nothing for Grant to do
except to continue his studies, as he might enter college after all.

If any employment should offer of a remunerative character, he felt
that it would be his duty to accept it, in spite of his uncle's
objections; but such chances were not very likely to happen while he
remained in the country, for obvious reasons.

Three weeks passed, and again not only Mr. Tudor, but another
creditor, began to be troublesome.

"How soon is your father going to pay up his bill?" asked Tudor,
when Grant called at the store for a gallon of molasses.

"Very soon, I hope," faltered Grant.

"I hope so, too," answered the grocer, grimly.

"Only three weeks ago I paid you thirty-three dollars," said Grant.

"And you have been increasing the balance ever since," said Tudor,
frowning.

"If father could get his salary regularly--" commenced Grant.

"That's his affair, not mine," rejoined the grocer. "I have to pay
my bills regular, and I can't afford to wait months for my pay."

Grant looked uncomfortable, but did not know what to say.

"The short and the long of it is, that after this week your father
must either pay up his bill, or pay cash for what articles he gets
hereafter."

"Very well," said Grant, coldly. He was too proud to remonstrate.
Moreover, though he felt angry, he was constrained to admit that the
grocer had some reason for his course.

"Something must be done," he said to himself, but he was not wise
enough to decide what that something should be.

Though he regretted to pain his mother, he felt obliged to report to
her what the grocer had said.

"Don't be troubled, mother," he said, as he noticed the shade of
anxiety which came over her face. "Something will turn up."

Mrs. Thornton shook her head.

"It isn't safe to trust to that, Grant," she said; "we must help
ourselves."

"I wish I knew how," said Grant, perplexed.

"I am afraid I shall have to make a sacrifice," said Mrs. Thornton,
not addressing Grant, but rather in soliloquy.

Grant looked at his mother in surprise. What sacrifice could she
refer to? Did she mean that they must move into a smaller house, and
retrench generally? That was all that occurred to him.

"We might, perhaps, move into a smaller house, mother," said he,
"but we have none too much room here, and the difference in rent
wouldn't be much."

"I didn't mean that, Grant. Listen, and I will tell you what I do
mean. You know that I was named after a rich lady, the friend of my
mother?"

"I have heard you say so."

"When she died, she left me by will a pearl necklace and pearl
bracelets, both of very considerable value."

"I have never seen you wear them, mother."

"No; I have not thought they would be suitable for the wife of a
poor minister. My wearing them would excite unfavorable comment in
the parish."

"I don't see whose business it would be," said Grant, indignantly.

"At any rate, just or not, I knew what would be said," Mrs. Thornton
replied.

"How is it you have never shown the pearl ornaments to me, mother?"

"You were only five years old when they came to me, and I laid them
away at once, and have seldom thought of them since. I have been
thinking that, as they are of no use to me, I should be justified in
selling them for what I can get, and appropriating the proceeds
toward paying your father's debts."

"How much do you think they are worth, mother?"

"A lady to whom I showed them once said they must have cost five
hundred dollars or more."

Grant whistled.

"Do you mind showing them to me, mother?" he asked.

Mrs. Thornton went upstairs, and brought down the pearl necklace and
bracelets. They were very handsome and Grant gazed at them with
admiration.

"I wonder what the ladies would say if you should wear them to the
sewing circle," he said, humorously.

"They would think I was going over to the vanities of this world,"
responded his mother, smiling. "They can be of no possible use to me
now, or hereafter, and I believe it will be the best thing I can do
to sell them."

"Where can you sell them? No one here can afford to buy them."

"They must be sold in New York, and I must depend upon you to attend
to the business for me."

"Can you trust me, mother? Wouldn't father--"

"Your father has no head for business, Grant. He is a learned man,
and knows a great deal about books, but of practical matters he
knows very little. You are only a boy, but you are a very sensible
and trustworthy boy, and I shall have to depend upon you."

"I will do the best I can, mother. Only tell me what you want me to
do."

"I wish you to take these pearls, and go to New York. You can find a
purchaser there, if anywhere. I suppose it will be best to take them
to some jewelry store, and drive the best bargain you can."

"When do you wish me to go, mother?"

"There can be no advantage in delay. If tomorrow is pleasant, you
may as well go then."

"Shall you tell father your plan?"

"No, Grant, it might make him feel bad to think I was compelled to
make a sacrifice, which, after all, is very little of a sacrifice to
me. Years since I decided to trouble him as little as possible with
matters of business. It could do no good, and, by making him
anxious, unfitted him for his professional work."

Mrs. Thornton's course may not be considered wise by some, but she
knew her husband's peculiar mental constitution, and her object at
least was praiseworthy, to screen him from undue anxiety, though it
involved an extra share for herself.

The next morning Grant took an early breakfast, and walked briskly
toward the depot to take the first train for New York.

The fare would be a dollar and a quarter each way, for the distance
was fifty miles, and this both he and his mother felt to be a large
outlay. If, however, he succeeded in his errand it would be wisely
spent, and this was their hope.

At the depot Grant found Tom Calder, a youth of eighteen, who had
the reputation of being wild, and had been suspected of dishonesty.
He had been employed in the city, so that Grant was not surprised to
meet him at the depot.

"Hello, Grant! Where are you bound?" he asked.

"I am going to New York."

"What for?"

"A little business," Grant answered, evasively. Tom was the last
person he felt inclined to take into his confidence.

"Goin' to try to get a place?"

"If any good chance offers I shall accept it--that is, if father and
mother are willing."

"Let's take a seat together--that's what I'm going for myself."



CHAPTER VI -- GRANT GETS INTO UNEXPECTED TROUBLE



TOM CALDER was not the companion Grant would have chosen, but there
seemed no good excuse for declining his company. He belonged to a
rather disreputable family living in the borders of the village. If
this had been all, it would not have been fair to object to him, but
Tom himself bore not a very high reputation. He had been suspected
more than once of stealing from his school companions, and when
employed for a time by Mr. Tudor, in the village store, the latter
began to miss money from the till; but Tom was so sly that he had
been unable to bring the theft home to him. However, he thought it
best to dispense with his services.

"What kind of a situation are you goin' to try for?" asked Tom, when
they were fairly on their way.

"I don't know. They say that beggars mustn't be choosers."

"I want to get into a broker's office if I can," said Tom.

"Do you consider that a very good business?" asked Grant.

"I should say so," responded Tom, emphatically.

"Do they pay high wages?"

"Not extra, but a feller can get points, and make something out of
the market."

"What's that?" asked Grant, puzzled.

"Oh, I forgot. You ain't used to the city," responded Tom,
emphatically. "I mean, you find out when a stock is going up, and
you buy for a rise."

"But doesn't that take considerable money?" asked Grant, wondering
how Tom could raise money to buy stocks.

"Oh, you can go to the bucket shops," answered Tom.

"But what have bucket shops to do with stocks?" asked Grant, more
than ever puzzled.

Tom burst into a loud laugh.

"Ain't you jolly green, though?" he ejaculated.

Grant was rather nettled at this.

"I don't see how I could be expected to understand such talk," he
said, with some asperity.

"That's where it is--you can't," said Tom. "It's all like A, B, C to
me, and I forgot that you didn't know anything about Wall Street. A
bucket shop is where you can buy stock in small lots, putting down a
dollar a share as margin. If stocks go up, you sell out on the rise,
and get back your dollar minus commission."

"Suppose they go down?"

"Then you lose what you put up."

"Isn't it rather risky?"

"Of course there's some risk, but if you have a good point there
isn't much."

This was Tom Calder's view of the matter. As a matter of fact, the
great majority of those who visit the bucket shops lose all they put
in, and are likely sooner or later to get into difficulty; so that
many employers will at once discharge a clerk or boy known to
speculate in this way.

"If I had any money I'd buy some stock to-day; that is, as soon as I
get to the city," continued Tom. "You couldn't lend me five dollars,
could you?"

"No, I couldn't," answered Grant, shortly.

"I'd give you half the profits."

"I haven't got the money," Grant explained.

"That's a pity. The fact is, I'm rather short. However, I know
plenty of fellows in the city, and I guess I can raise a tenner or
so."

"Then your credit must be better in New York than in Colebrook,"
thought Grant, but he fore-bore to say so.

Grant was rather glad the little package of pearls was in the pocket
furthest away from Tom, for his opinion of his companion's honesty
was not the highest.

When half an hour had passed, Tom vacated his seat.

"I'm going into the smoking car," he said, "to have a smoke. Won't
you come with me?"

"No, thank you. I don't smoke."

"Then it's time you began. I've got a cigarette for you, if you'll
try it."

"Much obliged, but I am better off without it."

"You'll soon get over that little-boy feeling. Why, boys in the city
of half your age smoke."

"I am sorry to hear it."

"Well, ta-ta! I'll be back soon."

Grant was not sorry to have Tom leave him. He didn't enjoy his
company, and besides he foresaw that it would be rather embarrassing
if Tom should take a fancy to remain with him in the city. He didn't
care to have anyone, certainly not Tom, learn on what errand he had
come to the city.

Two minutes had scarcely elapsed after Tom vacated his seat, when a
pleasant-looking gentleman of middle age, who had been sitting just
behind them, rose and took the seat beside Grant.

"I will sit with you if you don't object," said he.

"I should be glad of your company," said Grant, politely.

"You live in the country, I infer?"

"Yes, sir."

"I overheard your conversation with the young man who has just left
you. I suspect you are not very much alike."

"I hope not, sir. Perhaps Tom would say the same, for he thinks me
green."

"There is such a thing as knowing too much--that isn't desirable to
know. So you don't smoke?"

"No, sir."

"I wish more boys of your age could say as much. Do I understand
that you are going to the city in search of employment?"

"That is not my chief errand," answered Grant, with some hesitation.
"Still, if I could hear of a good chance, I might induce my parents
to let me accept it."

"Where do you live, my young friend?"

"In Colebrook. My father is the minister there."

"That ought to be a recommendation, for it is to be supposed you
have been carefully trained. Some of our most successful business
men have been ministers' sons."

"Are you in business in New York, sir?" asked Grant, thinking he had
a right by this time to ask a question.

"Yes; here is my card."

Taking the card, Grant learned that his companion was Mr. Henry
Reynolds and was a broker, with an office in New Street.

"I see you are a broker, sir," said Grant. "Tom Calder wants to get
a place in a broker's office."

"I should prefer that he would try some other broker," said Mr.
Reynolds, smiling. "I don't want a boy who deals with the bucket
shops."

At this point Tom re-entered the car, having finished his cigarette.
Observing that his place had been taken, he sat down at a little
distance.

"When you get ready to take a place," said the broker, "call at my
office, and though I won't promise to give you a place, I shall feel
well disposed to if I can make room for you."

"Thank you, sir," said Grant, gratefully. "I hope if I ever do enter
your employment, I shall merit your confidence."

"I have good hopes of it. By the way, you may as well give me your
name."

"I am Grant Thornton, of Colebrook," said our hero.

Mr. Reynolds entered the name in a little pocket diary, and left the
seat, which Tom Calder immediately took.

"Who's that old codger?" he asked.

"The gentleman who has just left me is a New York business man."

"You got pretty thick with him, eh?"

"We talked a little."

Grant took care not to mention that Mr. Reynolds was a broker, as
he knew that Tom would press for an introduction in that case.

When they reached New York, Tom showed a disposition to remain with
