It often happens when we know      The troubles that our friends
pass through,      Our own seem very small indeed;      You'll
always find that this is true.

"My, you must have felt glad when you reached your winter home!"
exclaimed Peter Rabbit when Mrs. Quack finished the account of her
long, terrible journey from her summer home in the far Northland
to her winter home in the far Southland.

"I did," replied Mrs. Quack, "but all the time I couldn't forget
those to whom terrible things had happened on the way down, and
then, too, I kept dreading the long journey back."

"I don't see why you didn't stay right there. I would have," said
Peter, nodding his head with an air of great wisdom.

"Not if you were I," replied Mrs. Quack. "In the first place it
isn't a proper place in which to bring up young Ducks and make them
strong and healthy. In the second place there are more dangers down
there for young Ducks than up in the far Northland. In the third
place there isn't room for all the Ducks to nest properly. And
lastly there is a great longing for our real home, which Old Mother
Nature has put in our hearts and which just MAKES us go. We couldn't
be happy if we didn't."

"Is the journey back as bad as the journey down?" asked Peter.

"Worse, very much worse," replied Mrs. Quack sadly. "You can see
for yourself just how bad it is, for here I am all alone." Tears
filled Mrs. Quack's eyes.  "It is almost too terrible to talk about,"
she continued after a minute. "You see, for one thing, food isn't
as plentiful as it is in the fall, and we just have to go wherever
it is to be found. Those two-legged creatures know where those
feeding-grounds are just as well as we do, and they hide there with
their terrible guns just as they did when we were coming south.
But it is much worse now, very much worse. You see, when we were
going the other way, if we found them at one place we could go on
to another, but when we are going north we cannot always do that.
We cannot go any faster than Jack Frost does. Sometimes we are
driven out of a place by the bang, bang of the terrible guns and go
on, only to find that we have caught up with Jack Frost, and that
the ponds and the rivers are still covered with ice. Then there
is nothing to do but to turn back to where those terrible guns are
waiting for us. We just HAVE to do it."

Mrs. Quack stopped and shivered. "It seems to me I have heard nothing
but the noise of those terrible guns ever since we started," said
she. "I haven't had a good square meal for days and days, nor a
good rest. That is what makes me so dreadfully nervous. Sometimes,
when we had been driven from place to place until we had caught up
with Jack Frost, there would be nothing but ice excepting in small
places in a river where the water runs too swiftly to freeze. We
would just have to drop into one of these to rest a little, because
we had flown so far that our wings ached as if they would drop
off. Then just as we would think we were safe for a little while,
there would come the bang of a terrible gun.  Then we would have
to fly again as long as we could, and finally come back to the same
place because there was no other place where we could go. Then we
would have to do it all over again until night came. Sometimes I
think that those men with terrible guns must hate us and want to
kill every one of us. If they didn't, they would have a little bit
of pity. They simply haven't any hearts at all."

"It does seem so," agreed Peter. "But wait until you know Farmer
Brown's boy!  HE'S got a heart!" he added brightly.

"I don't want to know him," retorted Mrs. Quack. "If he comes near
here, you'll see me leave in a hurry. I wouldn't trust one of them,
not one minute. You don't think he will come, do you?"

Peter sat up and looked across the Green Meadows, and his heart
sank. "He's coming now, but I'm sure he won't hurt you, Mrs. Quack,"
said he.

But Mrs. Quack wouldn't wait to see. With a hasty promise to come
back when the way was clear, she jumped into the air and on swift
wings disappeared towards the Big River.




VI

FARMER BROWN'S BOY VISITS THE SMILING POOL


Farmer Brown's boy had heard Welcome Robin singing in the Old
Orchard quite as soon as Peter Rabbit had, and that song of "Cheer
up! Cheer up! Cheer up!  Cheer!" had awakened quite as much gladness
in his heart as it had in Peter's heart. It meant that Mistress
Spring really had arrived, and that over in the Green Forest and
down on the Green Meadows there would soon be shy blue, and just
as shy white violets to look for, and other flowers almost if not
quite as sweet and lovely. It meant that his feathered friends would
soon be busy house-hunting and building. It meant that his little
friends in fur would also be doing something very similar, if
they had not already done so. It meant that soon there would be a
million lovely things to see and a million joyous sounds to hear.

So the sound of Welcome Robin's voice made the heart of Farmer Brown's
boy even more happy than it was before, and as Welcome Robin just
HAD to sing, so Farmer Brown's boy just HAD to whistle. When his
work was finished, it seemed to Farmer Brown's boy that something
was calling him, calling him to get out on the Green Meadows or over
in the Green Forest and share in the happiness of all the little
people there. So presently he decided that he would go down to the
Smiling Pool to find out how Jerry Muskrat was, and if Grandfather
Frog was awake yet, and if the sweet singers of the Smiling Pool
had begun their wonderful spring chorus.

Down the Crooked Little Path cross the Green Meadows he tramped,
and as he drew near the Smiling Pool, he stopped whistling lest
the sound should frighten some of the little people there. He was
still some distance from the Smiling Pool when out of it sprang a
big bird and on swift, whistling wings flew away in the direction
of the Big River. Farmer Brown's boy stopped and watched until the
bird had disappeared, and on his face was a look of great surprise.

"As I live, that was a Duck!" he exclaimed. "That is the first time
I've ever known a wild Duck to be in the Smiling Pool. I wonder
what under the sun could have brought her over here."

Just then there was a distant bang in the direction of the Big River.
Farmer Brown's boy scowled, and it made his face very angry-looking.
"That's it," he muttered. "Hunters are shooting the Ducks on their
way north and have driven the poor things to look for any little
mudhole where they can get a little rest.  Probably that Duck has
been shot at so many times on the Big River that she felt safer
over here in the Smiling Pool, little as it is."

Farmer Brown's boy had guessed exactly right, as you and I know, and
as Peter Rabbit and Jerry Muskrat knew. "It's a shame, a downright
shame that any one should want to shoot birds on their way to their
nesting-grounds and that the law should let them if they do want
to. Some people haven't any hearts; they're all stomachs. I hope
that fellow who shot just now over there on the Big River didn't
hit anything, and I wish that gun of his might have kicked a little
sense of what is right and fair into his head, but of course it
didn't."

He grinned at the idea, and then he continued his way towards the
Smiling Pool.  He hoped he might find another Duck there, and he
approached the Smiling Pool very, very carefully.

But when he reached a point where he could see all over the Smiling
Pool, there was no one to be seen save Jerry Muskrat sitting on
the Big Rock and Peter Rabbit on the bank on the other side. Farmer
Brown's boy smiled when he saw them. "Hello, Jerry Muskrat!" said
he. "I wonder how a bite of carrot would taste to you." He felt
in his pocket and brought out a couple of carrots. One he put on
a little tussock in the water where he knew Jerry would find it.
The other he tossed across the Smiling Pool where he felt sure Peter
would find it.  Presently he noticed two or three feathers on the
water close to the edge of the bank. Mrs. Quack had left them there.
"I believe that was a Mallard Duck," said he, as he studied them.
"I know what I'll do. I'll go straight back home and get some wheat
and corn and put it here on the edge of the Smiling Pool. Perhaps
she will come back and find it."

And this is just what Farmer Brown's boy did.




VII

MRS. QUACK RETURNS


Peter Rabbit just couldn't go back to the dear Old Briar-patch.
He just HAD to know if Mrs. Quack would come back to the Smiling
Pool. He had seen Farmer Brown's boy come there a second time and
scatter wheat and corn among the brown stalks of last summer's
rushes, and he had guessed why Farmer Brown's boy had done this.
He had guessed that they had been put there especially for Mrs.
Quack, and if she should come back as she had promised to do, he
wanted to be on hand when she found those good things to eat and
hear what she would say.

So Peter stayed over near the Smiling Pool and hoped with all his
might that Reddy Fox or Old Man Coyote would not take it into his
head to come hunting over there. As luck would have it, neither of
them did, and Peter had a very pleasant time gossiping with Jerry
Muskrat, listening to the sweet voices of unseen singers in the
Smiling Pool,--the Hylas, which some people call peepers,--and
eating the carrot which Farmer Brown's boy had left for him.

Jolly, round, red Mr. Sun was just getting ready to go to bed
behind the Purple Hills when Mrs. Quack returned. The first Peter
knew of her coming was the whistle of her wings as she passed over
him. Several times she circled around, high over the Smiling Pool,
and Peter simply stared in open-mouthed admiration at the speed
with which she flew. It didn't seem possible that one so big could
move through the air so fast. Twice she set her wings and seemed
to just slide down almost to the surface of the Smiling Pool, only
to start her stout wings in motion once more and circle around again.
It was very clear that she was terribly nervous and suspicious. The
third time she landed in the water with a splash and sat perfectly
still with her head stretched up, looking and listening with all
her might.

"It's all right. There's nothing to be afraid of," said Jerry
Muskrat.

"Are you sure?" asked Mrs. Quack anxiously. "I've been fooled too
often by men with their terrible guns to ever feel absolutely sure
that one isn't hiding and waiting to shoot me." As she spoke she
swam about nervously. "Peter Rabbit and I have been here ever since
you left, and I guess we ought to know," replied Jerry Muskrat
rather shortly. "There hasn't been anybody near here excepting
Farmer Brown's boy, and we told you he wouldn't hurt you."

"He brought us each a carrot," Peter Rabbit broke in eagerly.

"Just the same, I wouldn't trust him," replied Mrs. Quack. "Where
is he now?"

"He left ever so long ago, and he won't be back to-night," declared
Peter confidently.

"I hope not," said Mrs. Quack, with a sigh. "Did you hear the bang
of that terrible gun just after I left here?"
