
"Yes. It is not an opinion formed from the signs yet seen, but it is drawn
from the characters of the Great Bear and Black Rifle. They would not have
taken so much care unless there was the certainty of conflict. Here the
Great Bear knelt again, and took a long look at his enemy or at least at
the place where his enemy was lying. They were coming to close quarters or
he would not have knelt and waited. Perhaps he held his fire because Black
Rifle was making the wider circuit, and they meant to use their rifles at
the same time."

The Onondaga was on his own knees now, examining the faint trail intently,
his eyes alight with interest.

"The event will not be delayed long," he said, "because the Great Bear
stopped continually, seeking an opportunity for a shot. Here he pulled the
trigger."

He picked up a minute piece of the burned wadding of the muzzle-loading
rifle.

"The warrior at whom he fired was bound to have been in the thicket beyond
the open space," he said, "and it was there that he fell. He fell because
at such a critical time the Great Bear would not have fired unless he was
sure of his aim. We will look into the thicket"

They found several spots of blood among the bushes and at another point
about twenty feet away they saw more.

"Here is where the warrior fell before Black Rifle's bullet," said Tayoga.
"He and the Great Bear must have fired almost at the same time. Undoubtedly
the warriors retreated at once, carrying their dead with them. Let us see
if they did not unite, and leave the thicket at the farthest point from our
two friends."

The trail was very clear at the place the Onondaga had indicated, and also
many more red spots were there leading away toward the east.

"We will not follow them." said Tayoga, "because they do not interest us
any more. They have retreated and they do not longer enter into your
campaign and mine, Dagaeoga. We will go back and see where the left wing of
our army, that was the Great Bear, reunited with the right wing, that was
Black Rifle."

They found the point of junction not far away, and then the deliberate
trail led once more toward Champlain, the two pursuing it several hours in
silence and both noticing that it was rapidly growing fresher. At length
Tayoga stopped on the crest of a ridge and said:

"We no longer need to seek their trail, Dagaeoga, because I will now talk
with the Great Bear and Black Rifle."

"Very good, Tayoga. I am anxious to hear what you will say and how you will
say it."

A bird sang at Robert's side. It was Tayoga trilling forth a melody,
wonderfully clear and penetrating, a melody that carried far up the still
valley beyond.

"You will remember, Dagaeoga," he said, "that we have often used this call
with the Great Bear. The reply will soon come."

The two listened and Robert's heart beat hard. He owed much to Willet.
Their relationship was almost that of son and father, and the two were
about to meet after a long parting. He never doubted for a moment that the
Onondaga had always read the trail aright, and that Willet was with Black
Rifle in the valley below them.

Full and clear rose the song of a bird out of the dense bushes that filled
the valley. When it was finished Tayoga sang again, and the reply came as
before. The two went rapidly down the slope and the stalwart figures of
the hunter and Black Rifle rose to meet them. The four did not say much,
but in every case the grasp of the hand was strong and long.

"I went west in search of you, Robert," said the hunter, "but I was
compelled to come back, because of the great events that are forward here.
I felt, however, that Tayoga was there looking for you and would do all any
number of human beings could do."

"He found me and rescued me," said Robert, "and what of yourself, Dave?"

"I'm attached, for the present, to the rangers under Rogers. He's on the
shores of Champlain, and he's trying to hold back a big Indian army that
means to march south and join Montcalm for an attack on Fort William Henry
or Fort Edward."

"And there's a great Indian war band behind you, too, Dave."

"We know it. We saw their smoke. We also had an encounter with some
scouting warriors."

"We know that, too, Dave. You ambushed 'em and divided your force, one of
you going to the right and the other to the left. Two of their warriors
fell before your bullets, and then they fled, carrying their slain with
them."

"Correct to every detail. I suppose Tayoga read the signs."

"He did, and he also told me when he rescued me that you had carried the
text of the letter we took from Garay to Colonel Johnson in time, and that
the force of St. Luc was turned back."

"Yes, the preparations for defense made an attack by him hopeless, and
when his vanguard was defeated in the forest he gave up the plan."

They did not stop long, as they knew the great war band behind them was
pressing forward, but they felt little fear of it, as they were able to
make high speed of their own, despite the weight of their packs, and for
several days and nights they traveled over peaks and ridges, stopping only
at short intervals for sleep. They had no sign from the band behind them,
but they knew it was always there, and that it would probably unite at the
lake with the force the rangers were facing.

It was about noon of a gleaming summer day when Robert, from the crest of a
ridge, saw once more the vast sheet of water extending a hundred and
twenty-five miles north and south, that the Indians called Oneadatote and
the white men Champlain, and around which and upon which an adventurous
part of his own life had passed. His heart beat high, he felt now that the
stage was set again for great events, and that his comrades and he would,
as before, have a part in the war that was shaking the Old World as well as
the New.

In the afternoon they met rangers and before night they were in the camp of
Rogers, which included about three hundred men, and which was pitched in a
strong position at the edge of the lake. The Mountain Wolf greeted them
with great warmth.

"You're a redoubtable four," he said, "and I could wish that instead of
only four I was receiving four hundred like you."

He showed intense anxiety, and soon confided his reasons to Willet.

"You've brought me news," he said, "that a big war band is coming from the
west, and my scouts had told me already that a heavy force is to the
northward, and what is worst of all, the northern force is commanded by St.
Luc. It seems that he did not go south with Montcalm, but drew off an army
of both French and Indians for our destruction. He remembers his naval and
land defeat by us and naturally he wants revenge. He is helped, too, by the
complete command of the lake, that the French now hold. Since we've been
pressed southward we've lost Champlain."

"And of course St. Luc is eager to strike," said Willet. "He can recover
his lost laurels and serve France at the same time. If we're swept away
here, both the French and the Indians will pour down in a flood from Canada
upon the Province of New York."

Robert did not hear this talk, as he was seeking in the ranger camp the
repose that he needed so badly. He had brought with him some remnants of
food and the great buffalo robe that Tayoga had secured for him with so
much danger from the Indian village. Now he put down the robe, heaved a
mighty sigh of relief and said to the Onondaga:

"I'm proud of myself as a carrier, Tayoga, but I think I've had enough. I'm
glad the trail has ended squarely against the deep waters of Lake
Champlain."

"And yet, Dagaeoga, it is a fine robe."

"So it is. I should be the last to deny it, but now that we're with the
rangers I mean to carry nothing but my arms and ammunition. To appreciate
what it is to be without burdens you must have borne them."

The hospitable rangers would not let the two youths do any work for the
present, and so they took a luxurious bath in the lake, which they
commanded as far as the bullets from their rifles could reach. They
rejoiced in the cool waters, after their long flight through the
wilderness.

"It's almost worth so many days and nights of danger to have this," said
Robert, swimming with strong strokes.

"Aye, Dagaeoga, it is splendid," said the Onondaga, "but see that you do
not swim too far. Remember that for the time Oneadatote belongs to Onontio.
We had it, but we have lost it."

"Then we'll get it back again," said Robert courageously. "Champlain is too
fine a lake to lose forever. Wait until I've had a big sleep. Then my brain
will be clear, and I'll tell how it ought to be done."

The two returned to land, dressed, and slept by the campfire.




CHAPTER XIV


ST. LUC'S REVENGE

When Robert awoke from a long and deep sleep he became aware, at once, that
the anxious feeling in the camp still prevailed. Rogers was in close
conference with Willet, Black Rifle and several of his own leaders beside a
small fire, and, at times, they looked apprehensively toward the north or
west, a fact indicating to the lad very clearly whence the danger was
expected. Most of the scouts had come in, and, although Robert did not know
it, they had reported that the force of St. Luc, advancing in a wide curve,
and now including the western band, was very near. It was the burden of
their testimony, too, that he now had at least a thousand men, of whom
one-third were French or Canadians.

Tayoga was sitting on a high point of the cliff, watching the lake, and
Robert joined him. The face of the young Onondaga was very grave.

"You look for an early battle, I suppose," said Robert.

"Yes, Dagaeoga," replied his comrade, "and it will be fought with the odds
heavily against us. I think the Mountain Wolf should not have awaited Sharp
Sword here, but who am I to give advice to a leader, so able and with so
much experience?"

"But we beat St. Luc once in a battle by a lake!"

"Then we had a fleet, and, for the time, at least, we won command of the
lake. Now the enemy is supreme on Oneadatote. If we have any canoes on its
hundred and twenty-five miles of length they are lone and scattered, and
they stay in hiding near its shores."

"Why are you watching its waters now so intently, Tayoga?"

"To see the sentinels of the foe, when they come down from the north. Sharp
Sword is too great a general not to use all of his advantages in battle. He
will advance by water as well as by land, but, first he will use his eyes,
before he permits his hand to strike. Do you see anything far up the lake,
Dagaeoga?"

"Only the sunlight on the waters."

"Yes, that is all. I believed, for a moment or two, that I saw a black dot
there, but it was only my fancy creating what I expected my sight to
behold. Let us look again all around the horizon, where it touches the
water, following it as we would a line. Ah, I think I see a dark speck,
just a black mote at this distance, and I am still unable to separate fancy
from fact, but it may be fact. What do you think, Dagaeoga?"

"My thought has not taken shape yet, Tayoga, but if 'tis fancy then 'tis
singularly persistent. I see the black mote too, to the left, toward the
western shore of the lake, is it not?"

"Aye, Dagaeoga, that is where it is. If we are both the victims of fancy
then our illusions are wonderfully alike. Think you that we would imagine
exactly the same thing at exactly the same place?"

"No, I don't! And as I live, Tayoga, the mote is growing larger! It takes
on the semblance of reality, and, although very far from us, it's my belief
that it's moving this way!"

"Again my fancy is the same as yours and it is not possible that they
should continue exactly alike through all changes. That which may have been
fancy in the beginning has most certainly turned into fact, and the black
mote that we see upon the waters is in all probability a hostile canoe
coming to spy upon us."

They watched the dark dot detach itself from the horizon and grow
continuously until their eyes told them, beyond the shadow of a doubt, that
it was a canoe containing two warriors. It was moving swiftly and presently
Rogers and Willet came to look at it. The two warriors brought their light
craft on steadily, but stopped well out of rifle shot, where they let their
paddles rest and gazed long at the shore.

"It is like being without a right arm to have no force upon the lake," said
Rogers.

"It cripples us sorely," said Willet. "Perhaps we'd better swallow our
pride, bitter though the medicine may be, and retreat at speed."

"I can't do it," said Rogers. "I'm here to hold back St. Luc, if I can, and
moreover, 'tis too late. We'd be surrounded in the forest and probably
annihilated."

"I suppose you're right. We'll meet him where we stand, and when the
battle is over, whatever may be its fortunes, he'll know that he had a real
fight."

They walked away from the lake, and began to arrange their forces to the
most advantage, but Robert and Tayoga remained on the cliff. They saw the
canoe go back toward the north, melt into the horizon line, and then
reappear, but with a whole brood of canoes. All of them advanced rapidly,
and they stretched into a line half way across the lake. Many were great
war canoes, containing eight or ten men apiece.

"Now the attack by land is at hand," said Tayoga. "Sharp Sword is sure to
see that his two forces move forward at the same time. Hark!"

They heard the report of a rifle shot in the forest, then another and
another. Willet joined them and said it was the wish of Rogers that they
remain where they were, as a small force was needed at that point to
prevent a landing by the Indians. A fire from the lake would undoubtedly be
opened upon their flank, but if the warriors could be kept in their canoes
it could not become very deadly. Black Rifle came also, and he, Willet,
Robert, Tayoga and ten of the rangers lying down behind some trees at the
edge of the cliff, watched the water.

The Indian fleet hovered a little while out of rifle shot. Meanwhile the
firing in the forest grew. Bullets from both sides pattered on leaves and
bark, and the shouts of besieged and besiegers mingled, but the members of
the force on the cliff kept their eyes resolutely on the water.

"The canoes are moving again," said Tayoga. "They are coming a little
nearer. I see Frenchmen in some of them and presently they will try to
sweep the bank with their rifles."

"Our bullets will carry as far as theirs," said the hunter.

"True, O, Great Bear, and perhaps with surer aim."

In another moment puffs of white smoke appeared in the fleet, which was
swinging forward in a crescent shape, and Robert heard the whine of lead
over his head. Then Willet pulled the trigger and a warrior fell from his
canoe. Black Rifle's bullet sped as true, and several of the rangers also
found their targets. Yet the fleet pressed the attack. Despite their
losses, the Indians did not give back, the canoes came closer and closer,
many of the warriors dropped into the water behind their vessels and fired
from hiding, bullets rained around the little band on the cliff, and
presently struck among them. Two of the rangers were slain and two more
were wounded. Robert saw the Frenchmen in the fleet encouraging the
Indians, and he knew that their enemies were firing at the smoke made by
the rifles of the defenders. Although he and his comrades were invisible to
