assault when it should be delivered. Huge stones had been collected in
numbers on the walls, cauldrons of pitch, beneath which fires kept
simmering, stood there in readiness. Long poles with hooks with which to
seize the ladders and cut them down were laid there; and all that
precaution and science could do was prepared.

Cuthbert passed much of the day, when not required upon the walls,
chatting with the Lady Margaret, who, attended by her maidens, sat
working in her bower. She had learnt to read from the good nuns of the
convent--an accomplishment which was by no means general, even among the
daughters of nobles; but books were rare, and Evesham boasted but few
manuscripts. Here Margaret learnt in full all the details of Cuthbert's
adventures since leaving England, and the fondness with which as a child
she had regarded the lad grew gradually into the affection of a woman.

The courage of the garrison was high, for although they believed that
sooner or later the castle might be carried by the besiegers, they had
already been told by Cnut that there was a means of egress unknown to the
besiegers, and that when the time came they would be able to escape
unharmed. This, while it in no way detracted from their determination to
defend the castle to the last, yet rendered their task a far lighter and
more agreeable one than it would have been had they seen the gallows
standing before them as the end of the siege. As the testudo, as it was
called in those days, advanced towards the castle, the machines upon the
walls--catapults, mangonels, and arbalasts--poured forth showers of
stones and darts upon it, breaking up the array of shields and killing
many; and as these openings were made, the archers, seizing their time,
poured in volleys of arrows. The mercenaries, however, accustomed to war,
advanced steadily, and made good their footing beneath the castle wall,
and proceeded to rear their ladders. Here, although free from the action
of the machines, they were exposed to the hand missiles, which were
scarcely less destructive. In good order, and with firmness, however,
they reared the ladders, and mounted to the assault, covering themselves
as well as they could with their shields. In vain, however, did they
mount. The defenders poured down showers of boiling pitch and oil, which
penetrated the crevices of their armour, and caused intolerable torment.
Great stones were toppled over from the battlements upon them; and
sometimes the ladders, seized by the poles with hooks, were cast
backwards, with all upon them, on the throng below. For half-an-hour,
encouraged by the shouts of Sir Rudolph and their leaders, the soldiers
strove gallantly; but were at last compelled to draw off, having lost
nigh 100 men, without one gaining a footing upon the walls.

That evening another council of war was held without. Already some large
machines for which Sir Rudolph had sent had arrived. In anticipation of
the possibility of failure, two castles upon wheels had been prepared,
and between these a huge beam with an iron head was hung. This was upon
the following day pushed forward on the newly-formed ground across the
moat. Upon the upper part of each tower were armed men who worked
machines casting sheaves of arrows and other missiles. Below were those
who worked the ram. To each side of the beam were attached numerous
cords, and with these it was swung backwards and forwards, giving heavy
blows each stroke upon the wall. The machines for casting stones, which
had arrived, were also brought in play, and day and night these
thundered against the walls; while the ram repeated its ceaseless blows
upon the same spot, until the stone crumbled before it.

Very valiantly did the garrison oppose themselves to these efforts. But
each day showed the progress made by the besiegers. Their forces had been
increased, Prince John having ordered his captain at Gloucester to send
another 100 men to the assistance of Sir Rudolph. Other towers had now
been prepared. These were larger than the first, and overtopped the
castle walls. From the upper story were drawbridges, so formed as to drop
from the structures upon the walls, and thus enable the besiegers to rush
upon them. The process was facilitated by the fact that the battlements
had been shot away by the great stones, and there was a clear space on
which the drawbridges could fall. The attack was made with great vigour;
but for a long time the besieged maintained their post, and drove back
the assailants as they poured out across the drawbridges on to the wall.
At last Cuthbert saw that the forces opposed to him were too numerous to
be resisted, and gave orders to his men to fall back upon the inner keep.

Making one rush, and clearing the wall of those who had gained a footing,
the garrison fell back hastily, and were safely within the massive keep
before the enemy had mustered in sufficient numbers upon the wall to
interfere with them. The drawbridge was now lowered, and the whole of the
assailants gained footing within the castle. They were still far from
having achieved a victory. The walls of the keep were massive and strong,
and its top far higher than the walls, so that from above a storm of
arrows poured down upon all who ventured to show themselves. The keep had
no windows low enough down for access to be gained; and those on the
floors above were so narrow, and protected by bars, that it seemed by
scaling the walls alone could an entry be effected. This was far too
desperate an enterprise to be attempted, for the keep rose eighty feet
above the courtyard. It was upon the door, solid and studded with iron,
that the attempt had to be made.

Several efforts were made by Sir Rudolph, who fought with a bravery
worthy of a better cause, to assault and batter down the door. Protected
by wooden shields from the rain of missiles from above, he and his
knights hacked at the door with their battle-axes. But in vain. It had
been strengthened by beams behind, and by stones piled up against it.
Then fire was tried. Faggots were collected in the forest, and brought;
and a huge pile having been heaped against the door, it was lighted. "We
could doubtless prolong the siege for some days, Lady Margaret," said
Cuthbert, "but the castle is ours; and we wish not, when the time comes
that we shall again be masters of it, that it should be a mere heap of
ruins. Methinks we have done enough. With but small losses on our side,
we have killed great numbers of the enemy, and have held them at bay for
a month. Therefore, I think that tonight it will be well for us to leave
the place."

Lady Margaret was rejoiced at the news that the time for escape had come,
for the perpetual clash of war, the rattling of arrows, the ponderous
thud of heavy stones, caused a din very alarming to a young girl; and
although the room in which she sat, looking into the inner court of the
castle, was not exposed to missiles, she trembled at the thought that
brave men were being killed, and that at any moment a shot might strike
Cuthbert, and so leave her without a friend or protector.

Content with having destroyed the door, the assailants made no further
effort that evening, but prepared in the morning to attack it, pull
down the stones filled behind it, and force their way into the keep.
There was, with the exception of the main entrance, but one means of
exit, a small postern door behind the castle, and throughout the siege
a strong body of troops had been posted here, to prevent the garrison
making a sortie.

Feeling secure therefore that upon the following day his enemies would
fall into his power, Sir Rudolph retired to rest.

An hour before midnight the garrison assembled in the hall. The table was
removed, and Cuthbert having pressed the spring, which was at a distance
from the stone and could not be discovered without a knowledge of its
existence, the stone turned aside by means of a counterpoise, and a
flight of steps was seen. Torches had been prepared. Cnut and a chosen
band went first; Cuthbert followed, with Lady Margaret and her
attendants; and the rest of the archers brought up the rear, a trusty man
being left in charge at last with orders to swing back the stone into its
place, having first hauled the table over the spot, so that their means
of escape should be unknown.

The passage was long and dreary, the walls were damp with wet, and the
massive doors so swollen by moisture that it was with the greatest
difficulty they could be opened. At last, however, they emerged into the
little friary in the wood. It was deserted, the priest who usually dwelt
there having fled when the siege began. The stone which there, as in the
castle, concealed the exit, was carefully closed, and the party then
emerged into the open air. Here Cuthbert bade adieu to his comrades. Cnut
had very anxiously begged to be allowed to accompany him and share his
fortunes, and Cuthbert had promised him that if at any time he should
again take up arms in England, he would summon him to his side, but that
at present as he knew not whither his steps would be turned, it would be
better that he should be unattended. The archers had all agreed to
scatter far and wide through the country, many of them proceeding to
Nottingham and joining the bands in the forest of Sherwood.

Cuthbert himself had determined to make his way to the castle of his
friend, Sir Baldwin, and to leave the Lady Margaret in his charge. Cnut
hurried on at full speed to the house of a franklin, some three miles
distant. Here horses were obtained and saddled, and dresses prepared; and
when Cuthbert with Lady Margaret arrived there, no time was lost. Dressed
as a yeoman, with the Lady Margaret as his sister, he mounted a horse,
with her behind him on a pillion. The other damsels also mounted, as it
would not have been safe for them to remain near Evesham. They therefore
purposed taking refuge in a convent near Gloucester for the present.
Bidding a hearty adieu to Cnut, and with thanks to the franklin who had
aided them, they set forward on their journey. By morning they had
reached the convent, and here the two girls were left, and Cuthbert
continued his journey. He left his charge at a convent a day's ride
distant from the castle of Sir Baldwin, as he wished to consult the
knight first as to the best way of her entering the castle without
exciting talk or suspicion.

Sir Baldwin received him with joy. He had heard something of his doings,
and the news of the siege of Evesham had been noised abroad. He told him
that he was in communication with many other barons, and that ere long
they hoped to rise against the tyranny of Prince John, but that at
present they were powerless, as many, hoping that King Richard would
return ere long, shrank from involving the country in a civil war. When
Cuthbert told him that the daughter of his old friend was at a convent
but a day's ride distant, and that he sought protection for her, Sir
Baldwin instantly offered her hospitality.

"I will," he said, "send my good wife to fetch her. Some here know your
presence, and it would be better therefore that she did not arrive for
some days, as her coming will then seem to be unconnected with yourself.
My wife and I will, a week hence, give out that we are going to fetch a
cousin of my wife's to stay here with her; and when we return no
suspicion will be excited that she is other than she seems. Should it be
otherwise, I need not say that Sir Baldwin of B,thune will defend his
castle against any of the minions of Prince John. But I have no fear that
her presence here will be discovered. What think you of doing in the
meantime?"

"I am thinking," Cuthbert said, "of going east. No news has been obtained
of our lord the king save that he is a prisoner in the hands of the
emperor; but where confined, or how, we know not. It is my intent to
travel to the Tyrol, and to trace his steps from the time that he was
captured. Then, when I obtain knowledge of the place where he is kept, I
will return, and consult upon the best steps to be taken. My presence in
England is now useless. Did the barons raise the standard of King Richard
against the prince, I should at once return and join them. But without
land or vassals, I can do nothing here, and shall be indeed like a hunted
hare, for I know that the false earl will move heaven and earth to
capture me."

Sir Baldwin approved of the resolution; but recommended Cuthbert to take
every precaution not to fall himself into the hands of the emperor;
"for," he said, "if we cannot discover the prison of King Richard, I fear
that it would be hopeless indeed ever to attempt to find that in which a
simple knight is confined."




CHAPTER XXV.

IN SEARCH OF THE KING.


The following day, with many thanks Cuthbert started from the castle, and
in the first place visited the convent, and told Lady Margaret that she
would be fetched in a few days by Sir Baldwin and his wife. He took a
tender adieu of her, not without many forebodings and tears upon her
part; but promising blithely that he would return and lead her back in
triumph to her castle, he bade adieu and rode for London.

He had attired himself as a merchant, and took up his abode at a hostelry
near Cheapside. Here he remained quietly for some days, and, mixing among
the people, learnt that in London as elsewhere the rapacity of Prince
John had rendered him hateful to the people, and that they would gladly
embrace any opportunity of freeing themselves from his yoke. He was
preparing to leave for France, when the news came to him that Prince John
had summoned all the barons faithful to him to meet him near London, and
had recalled all his mercenaries from different parts of the country, and
was gathering a large army; also, that the barons faithful to King
Richard, alarmed by the prospect, had raised the royal standard, and that
true men were hurrying to their support. This entirely destroyed the
plans that he had formed. Taking horse again, and avoiding the main road,
by which he might meet the hostile barons on their way to London, he
journeyed down to Nottingham. Thence riding boldly into the forest, he
sought the outlaws, and was not long ere he found them. At his request he
was at once taken before their leader, a man of great renown both for
courage and bowmanship, one Robin Hood. This bold outlaw had long held at
defiance the Sheriff of Nottingham, and had routed him and all bodies of
troops who had been sent against him. With him Cuthbert found many of his
own men; and upon hearing that the royal standard had been raised, Robin
Hood at once agreed to march with all his men to join the royal force.
Messengers were despatched to summon the rest of the forest band from
their hiding places, and a week later Cuthbert, accompanied by Robin Hood
and 300 archers, set out for the rendezvous. When they arrived there they
found that Sir Baldwin had already joined with his retainers, and was by
him most warmly received, and introduced to the other barons in the camp,
by whom Cuthbert was welcomed as a brother. The news that Prince John's
army was approaching was brought in, a fortnight after Cuthbert had
joined the camp, and the army in good order moved out to meet the enemy.

The forces were about equal. The battle began by a discharge of arrows;
but Robin Hood and his men shot so true and fast that they greatly
discomfited the enemy; and King John's mercenaries having but little
stomach for the fight, and knowing how unpopular they were in England,
and that if defeated small mercy was likely to be shown to them, refused
to advance against the ranks of the loyal barons, and falling back
declined to join in the fray. Seeing their numbers so weakened by this
defection, the barons on the prince's side hesitated, and surrounding the
prince advised him to make terms with the barons while there was yet
time. Prince John saw that the present was not a favourable time for him,
and concealing his fury under a mask of courtesy, he at once acceded to
the advice of his followers, and despatched a messenger to the barons
with an inquiry as to what they wanted of him. A council was held, and it
was determined to demand the dismissal of the mercenaries and their
despatch back to their own country; also that John would govern only as
his brother's representative; that the laws of the country should be
respected; that no taxes should be raised without the assent of the
barons; that all men who had taken up arms against his authority should
be held free; and that the barons on Prince John's side should return
peaceably home and disband their forces. Seeing, under the circumstances,
that there was no way before him but to yield to these demands, Prince
John accepted the terms. The mercenaries were ordered to march direct to
London, and orders were given that ships should be at once prepared to
take them across to Normandy, and the barons marched for their homes.

Satisfied, now that the mercenaries were gone, that they could
henceforth hold their ground against Prince John, the royal barons also
broke up their forces. Robin Hood with his foresters returned to
Sherwood; and Cuthbert, bidding adieu to Sir Baldwin, rode back to
London, determined to carry out the plan which he had formed. He was the
more strengthened in this resolution, inasmuch as in the royal camp he
had met a friend from whom he parted last in the Holy Land. This was
Blondel, the minstrel of King Richard, whose songs and joyous music had
often lightened the evening after days of fighting and toil in
Palestine. To him Cuthbert confided his intention, and the minstrel
instantly offered to accompany him.

"I shall," he said, "be of assistance to you. Minstrels are like heralds.
They are of no nationality, and can pass free where a man at arms would
be closely watched and hindered. Moreover, it may be that I might aid you
greatly in discovering the prison of the king. So great is the secrecy
with which this has been surrounded, that I question if any inquiries you
could make would enable you to trace him. My voice, however, can
penetrate into places where we cannot enter. I will take with me my lute,
and as we journey I will sing outside the walls of each prison we come to
one of the songs which I sang in Palestine. King Richard is himself a
singer and knows my songs as well as myself. If I sing a verse of some
song which I wrote there and which, therefore, would be known only to
him, if he hears it he may follow with the next verse, and so enable us
to know of his hiding place."

Cuthbert at once saw the advantages which such companionship would bring
him, and joyfully accepted the minstrel's offer, agreeing himself to go
as serving man to Blondel. The latter accompanied him to London. Here
their preparations were soon made, and taking ship in a merchantman bound
for the Netherlands, they started without delay upon their adventure.

The minstrels and troubadours were at that time a privileged race in
Europe, belonging generally to the south of France, although produced in
all lands. They travelled over Europe singing the lays which they
themselves had composed, and were treated with all honour at the
castles where they chose to alight. It would have been considered as
foul a deed to use discourtesy to a minstrel as to insult a herald. Their
persons were, indeed, regarded as sacred, and the knights and barons
strove to gain their good will by hospitality and presents, as a large
proportion of their ballads related to deeds of war; and while they
would write lays in honour of those who courteously entertained them,
they did not hesitate to heap obloquy upon those who received them
discourteously, holding them up to the gibes and scoffs of their
fellows. In no way, therefore, would success be so likely to attend the
mission of those who set out to discover the hiding place of King
Richard as under the guise of a minstrel and his attendant. No questions
would be asked them; they could halt where they would, in castle or
town, secure of hospitality and welcome. Blondel was himself a native of
the south of France, singing his songs in the soft language of
Languedoc. Cuthbert's Norman French would pass muster anywhere as being
that of a native of France; and although when dressed as a servitor
attention might be attracted by his bearing, his youth might render it
probable that he was of noble family, but that he had entered the
service of the minstrel in order to qualify himself some day for
following that career. He carried a long staff, a short sword, and at
his back the lute or small harp played upon by the troubadour. Blondel's
attire was rich, and suitable to a person of high rank.

