  I know the Great.  Observe me right,
  So shall you grow like man polite."
    He spoke and bowed.  With mutt'ring jaws
  The wond'ring circle grinned applause.
  Now, warmed with malice, envy, spite,
  Their most obliging friends they bite;
  And, fond to copy human ways,
  Practise new mischiefs all their days.
    Thus the dull lad, too tall for school.
  With travel finishes the fool:
  Studious of every coxcomb's airs,
  He gambles, dresses, drinks, and swears;
  O'er looks with scorn all virtuous arts,
  For vice is fitted to his parts.

      JOHN GAY



  The Shepherd's Dog and the Wolf

  A Wolf, with hunger fierce and bold,
    Ravag'd the plains, and thinn'd the fold:
  Deep in the wood secure he lay,
  The thefts of night regal'd the day.
  In vain the shepherd's wakeful care
  Had spread the toils, and watch'd the snare;
  In vain the Dog pursued his pace,
  The fleeter robber mock'd the chase.
  As Lightfoot rang'd the forest round,
  By chance his foe's retreat he found.
  "Let us a while the war suspend,
  And reason as from friend to friend."
    "A truce?" replies the Wolf.  "'Tis done."
  The Dog the parley thus begun.
    "How can that strong intrepid mind
  Attack a weak defenceless kind?
  Those jaws should prey on nobler food,
  And drink the boar's and lion's blood,
  Great souls with generous pity melt,
  Which coward tyrants never felt.
  How harmless is our fleecy care!
  Be brave, and let thy mercy spare."
    "Friend," says the Wolf, "the matter weigh;
  Nature designed us beasts of prey;
  As such, when hunger finds a treat,
  'Tis necessary Wolves should eat.
  If mindful of the bleating weal,
  Thy bosom burn with real zeal,
  Hence, and thy tyrant lord beseech;
  To him repeat the moving speech:
  A Wolf eats sheep but now and then;
  Ten thousands are devoured by men.
  An open foe may prove a curse,
  But a pretended friend is worse."

      JOHN GAY



  The Rat-catcher and Cats

  The rats by night such mischief did,
  Betty was ev'ry morning chid.
  They undermin'd whole sides of bacon,
  Her cheese was sapp'd, her tarts were taken.
  Her pasties, fenc'd with thickest paste,
  Were all demolish'd, and laid waste.
  She curs'd the cat for want of duty,
  Who left her foes a constant booty.
  An Engineer, of noted skill,
  Engag'd to stop the growing ill.
  From room to room he now surveys
  Their haunts, their works, their secret ways;
  Finds where they 'scape an ambuscade.
  And whence the nightly sally's made.
  An envious Cat from place to place,
  Unseen, attends his silent pace.
  She saw, that if his trade went on,
  The purring race must be undone;
  So, secretly removes his baits,
  And ev'ry stratagem defeats.
    Again he sets the poisoned toils,
  And Puss again the labour foils.
    "What foe, to frustrate my designs,
  My schemes thus nightly countermines?"
  Incens'd, he cries: "This very hour
  This wretch shall bleed beneath my power."
    So said, a ponderous trap he brought,
  And in the fact poor Puss was caught.
    "Smuggler," says he, "thou shalt be made
  A victim to our loss of trade."
    The captive Cat, with piteous mews,
  For pardon, life, and freedom sues.
  "A sister of the science spare;
  One int'rest is our common care."
    "What insolence!" the man replies;
  "Shall Cats with us the game divide?
  Were all your interloping band
  Extinguished, or expell'd the land,
  We Rat-catchers might raise our fees.
  Sole guardians of a nation's cheese!"
    A Cat, who saw the lifted knife,
  Thus spoke and sav'd her sister's life.
    "In ev'ry age and clime we see
  Two of a trade can ne'er agree.
  Each hates his neighbour for encroaching;
  'Squire stigmatizes 'squire for poaching;
  Beauties with beauties are in arms.
  And scandal pelts each other's charms;
  Kings too their neighbour kings dethrone,
  In hope to make the world their own.
  But let us limit our desires;
  Not war like beauties, kings, and 'squires!
  For though we both one prey pursue,
  There's game enough for us and you."

      JOHN GAY



  The Farmer's Wife and the Raven

  Between her swaggering pannier's load
  A Farmer's Wife to market rode,
  And jogging on, with thoughtful care,
  Summed up the profits of her ware;
  When, starting from her silver dream,
  Thus far and wide was heard her scream:
  "That Raven on yon left-hand oak
  (Curse on his ill-betiding croak)
  Bodes me no good."  No more she said,
  When poor blind Ball, with stumbling head,
  Fell prone; o'erturned the panniers lay,
  And her mashed eggs bestrewed the way.
  She, sprawling on the yellow road,
  Railed, cursed, and swore: "Thou croaking toad,
  A murrain take thy noisy throat!
  I knew misfortune in the note."
  "Dame," quoth the Raven, "spare your oaths,
  Unclench your fist and wipe your clothes.
  But why on me those curses thrown?
  Goody, the fault was all your own;
  For had you laid this brittle ware
  On Dun, the old sure-footed mare,
  Though all the Ravens of the hundred
  With croaking had your tongue out-thundered,
  Sure-footed Dun had kept her legs,
  And you, good woman, saved your eggs."

      JOHN GAY


  The Council of Horses

  Upon a time, a neighing steed,
  Who grazed among a numerous breed,
  With mutiny had fired the train,
  And spread dissension through the plain.
  On matters that concerned the state
  The Council met in grand debate.
  A Colt, whose eyeballs flamed with ire,
  Elate with strength and youthful fire,
  In haste stepped forth before the rest,
  And thus the listening throng addressed:

    "Good gods! how abject is our race,
  Condemned to slavery and disgrace!
  Shall we our servitude retain
  Because our sires have borne the chain?
  Consider, friends, your strength and might;
  'Tis conquest to assert your right.
  How cumb'rous is the gilded coach!
  The pride of man is our reproach.
  Were we designed for daily toil;
  To drag the ploughshare through the soil;
  To sweat in harness through the road;
  To groan beneath the carrier's load?
  How feeble are the two-legged kind!
  What force is in our nerves combined!
  Shall, then, our nobler jaws submit
  To foam, and champ the galling bit?
  Shall haughty man my back bestride?
  Shall the sharp spur provoke my side?
  Forbid it, heavens!  Reject the rein;
  Your shame, your infamy, disdain.
  Let him the lion first control,
  And still the tiger's famished growl;
  Let us, like them, our freedom claim,
  And make him tremble at our name."

    A general nod approved the cause,
  And all the circle neighed applause,
  When, lo! with grave and solemn face,
  A Steed advanced before the race,
  With age and long experience wise;
  Around he cast his thoughtful eyes,
  And to the murmurs of the train
  Thus spoke the Nestor of the plain:
    "When I had health and strength like you,
  The toils of servitude I knew;
  Now grateful man rewards my pains,
  And gives me all these wide domains.
  At will I crop the year's increase;
  My latter life is rest and peace.
  I grant, to man we lend our pains,
  And aid him to correct the plains;
  But doth he not divide the care
  Through all the labours of the year?
  How many thousand structures rise
  To fence us from inclement skies!
  For us he bears the sultry day,
  And stores up all our winter's hay:
  He sows, he reaps the harvest's gain,
  We share the toil and share the grain.
  Since every creature was decreed
  To aid each other's mutual need,
  Appease your discontented mind,
  And act the part by Heaven assigned."
    The tumult ceased.  The colt submitted,
  And, like his ancestors, was bitted.

      JOHN GAY



  The Hare and Many Friends

  Friendship, like love, is but a name,
  Unless to one you stint the flame;
  The child whom many fathers share
  Hath seldom known a father's care.
  'Tis thus in friendships; who depend
  On many, rarely find a friend.

    A Hare, who in a civil way
  Complied with everything, like Gay,
  Was known by all the bestial train
  Who haunt the wood or graze the plain;
  Her care was never to offend,
  And every creature was her friend.
    As forth she went at early dawn,
  To taste the dew-besprinkled lawn,
  Behind she hears the hunter's cries,
  And from the deep-mouthed thunder flies.
  She starts, she stops, she pants for breath;
  She hears the near advance of death;
  She doubles to mislead the Hound,
  And measures back her mazy round,
  Till, fainting in the public way,
    Half dead with fear she gasping lay.
    What transport in her bosom grew
  When first the Horse appeared in view!
    "Let me," says she, "your back ascend.
  And owe my safety to a friend.
  You know my feet betray my flight;
  To friendship every burden's light,"
  The Horse replied, "Poor honest Puss,
  It grieves my heart to see you thus:
  Be comforted, relief is near,
  For all your friends are in the rear."
    She next the stately Bull implored;
  And thus replied the mighty lord:
    "Since every beast alive can tell
  That I sincerely wish you well,
  I may without offence pretend
  To take the freedom of a friend.
  Love calls me hence; a fav'rite Cow
  Expects me near the barley-mow,
  And when a lady's in the case
  You know all other things give place.
  To leave you thus might seem unkind;
  But see, the Goat is just behind."
    The Goat remarked her pulse was high,
  Her languid head, her heavy eye.
    "My back," says she, "may do you harm.
  The Sheep's at hand, and wool is warm."
    The Sheep was feeble, and complained
  His sides a load of wool sustained:
  Said he was slow, confessed his fears;
  For Hounds eat Sheep as well as Hares.
    She now the trotting Calf addressed
  To save from death a friend distressed.
    "Shall I," says he, "of tender age,
  In this important care engage?
  Older and abler passed you by--
  How strong are those; how weak am I!
  Should I presume to bear you hence,
  Those friends of mine may take offence;
  Excuse me, then; you know my heart,
  But dearest friends, alas! must part.
  How shall we all lament!  Adieu!
  For see, the Hounds are just in view."

      JOHN GAY



  The Nightingale and the Glowworm

  A Nightingale, that all day long
  Had cheered the village with his song,
  Nor had at eve his note suspended,
  Nor yet when eventide was ended
  Began to feel, as well he might,
  The keen demands of appetite;
  When, looking eagerly around,
  He spied far off, upon the ground,
  A something shining in the dark,
  And knew the Glowworm by his spark;
  So stepping down from hawthorn top,
  He thought to put him in his crop.
  The Worm, aware of his intent,
  Harangued him thus, right eloquent:
    "Did you admire my lamp," quoth he,
  "As much as I your minstrelsy,
  You would abhor to do me wrong,
  As much as I to spoil your song;
  For, 'twas the self-same Power Divine
  Taught you to sing and me to shine;
  That you with music, I with light,
  Might beautify and cheer the night."
  The Songster heard his short oration,
  And warbling out his approbation.
  Released him, as my story tells,
  And found a supper somewhere else.
    Hence, jarring sectaries may learn
  Their real interest to discern,
  That brother should not war with brother,
  And worry and devour each other;
  But sing and shine by sweet consent,
  Until life's poor transient night is spent.
  Respecting in each other's case.
  The gifts of Nature and of Grace.

    Those Christians best deserve the name
  Who studiously make peace their aim;
  Peace both the duty and the prize
  Of him that creeps and him that flies.

      WILLIAM COWPER



  The Raven

  A Raven, while with glossy breast
