their toes turn out in the white man's fashion."

There was no mistaking the traces, and Robert felt intense satisfaction.
If hostile Indians, led by Frenchmen, were invading the territory of the
Hodenosaunee, then it would be very hard indeed for Duquesne and Bigot
to break up the ancient alliance of the great League with the English.
But he was quite sure that no one of the flying Frenchmen was St. Luc.
The chevalier was too wise to be caught in such a trap, nor would he
lend himself to the savage purposes of Tandakora.

"Behold, Daganoweda," he said, "the sort of friends the French would be
to the Hodenosaunee. When the great warriors of the Six Nations go to
the vale of Onondaga to hear what the fifty sachems will say at their
council, the treacherous Hurons and Caughnawagas, led by white men from
Montreal and Quebec, come into their land, seeking scalps."

The power of golden speech was upon him once more. He felt deeply what
he was saying, and he continued, calling attention to the ancient
friendship of the English, and their long and bitter wars with the
French. He summoned up again the memory of Frontenac, never dead in the
hearts of the Mohawks, and as he spoke the eyes of Daganoweda and his
comrades flashed with angry fire. But he did not continue long. He knew
that at such a time a speech protracted would lose its strength, and
when the feelings of the Mohawks were stirred to their utmost depths he
stopped abruptly and turned away.

"'Twas well done, lad! 'twas well done!" whispered Willet.

"Great Bear," said Daganoweda, "we go now to the vale of Onondaga for
the grand council. Perhaps Tayoga, a coming chief of the clan of the
Bear, of the great nation Onondaga, will go with us."

"So he will," said Willet, "and so will Robert and myself. We too wish
to reach the vale of Onondaga. An uncommonly clever Frenchman, one
Chevalier Raymond de St. Luc, has gone there. He is a fine talker and he
will talk for the French. Our young friend here, whom an old chief of
your nation has named Dagaeoga, is, as you have heard, a great orator,
and he will speak for the English. He will measure himself against the
Frenchman, St. Luc, and I think he will be equal to the test."

The young Mohawk chieftain gave Robert a look of admiration.

"Dagaeoga can talk against anybody," he said. "He need fear no
Frenchman. Have I not heard? And if he can use so many words here in the
forest before a few men what can he not do in the vale of Onondaga
before the gathered warriors of the Hodenosaunee? Truly the throat of
Dagaeoga can never tire. The words flow from his mouth like water over
stones, and like it, flow on forever. It is music like the wind singing
among the leaves. He can talk the anger from the heart of a raging
moose, or he can talk the otter up from the depths of the river. Great
is the speech of Dagaeoga."

Robert turned very red. Willet laughed and even Tayoga smiled, although
the compliment was thoroughly sincere.

"You praise me too much, Daganoweda," said young Lennox, "but in a great
cause one must make a great effort."

"Then come," said the Mohawk chieftain. "We will start at once for the
vale of Onondaga."

They struck the great trail, _waagwenneyu_, and traveled fast. The next
day six Mohawks from their upper castle, Ganegahaga on the Mohawk river
near the mouth of West Canada Creek, joined them and they continued to
press on with speed, entering the heart of the country of the
Hodenosaunee, Robert feeling anew what a really great land it was, with
its green forests, its blue lakes, its silver rivers and its myriad of
creeks and brooks. Nature had lavished everything upon it, and he did
not wonder that the Iroquois should guard it with such valor, and
cherish it with such tenderness. As he sped on with them he was
acquiring for the time at least an Indian soul under a white skin. Long
association and a flexible mind enabled him to penetrate the thoughts of
the Iroquois and to think as they did.

He knew how the word had been passed through the vast forest. He knew
that every warrior, woman and boy of the Hodenosaunee understood how the
two great powers beyond the sea and their children here, were about to
go into battle on the edge of their country. And what must the
Hodenosaunee do? And he knew, too, that as the Six Nations went so might
go the war in America. He had seen too much to underrate their valor and
strength, and on that long march his heart was very anxious within him.




CHAPTER XV

THE VALE OF ONONDAGA


The heavens favored their journey. They were troubled by no more storms
or rain, and as the soft winds blew, flowers opened before them. Game
was abundant and they had food for the taking. As they drew near the
vale they were joined by a small party of Oneidas, and a little later
were met by an Onondaga runner who spoke with great respect to Tayoga
and who gave them news.

The Frenchman, St. Luc, and the Canadian, Dubois, who had come with
them, were in the vale of Onondaga, where they had been received as
guests, and had been treated with hospitality. The fifty sachems, taking
their own time, had not yet met in council, and St. Luc had been
compelled to wait, but he had made great progress in the esteem of the
Hodenosaunee. Onontio could not have sent a better messenger.

"I knew that he would do it," said Willet. "That Frenchman, St. Luc, is
wonderful, and if anybody could convert the Hodenosaunee to the French
cause he's the man. Oh, he'll ply 'em with a thousand arguments, and
he'll dwell particularly on the fact that the French have moved first
and are ready to strike. We haven't come too soon, Robert."

But the runner informed them further that it would yet be some time
before the great council in the Long House, since the first festival of
the spring, the Maple Dance, was to be held in a few days, and the
chiefs had refused positively to meet until afterward. The sap was
already flowing and the guardians of the faith had chosen time and place
for this great and joyous ceremony of the Hodenosaunee, joyous despite
the fact that it was preceded by a most solemn event, the general
confession of sins.

The eyes of Tayoga and of the Mohawks and Oneidas glistened when they
heard.

"We must be there in time for all," said Tayoga.

"Truly we must, brother," said Daganoweda, the Mohawk.

And now they hastened their speed through the fertile and beautiful
country, where spring was attaining its full glory, and, as the sap
began to run in the maples, so the blood leaped fresh and sparkling even
in the veins of the old. A band of Senecas joined them, and when they
came to the edge of the vale of Onondaga they were a numerous party, all
eager, keen, and surcharged with a spirit which was religious, political
and military, the three being inseparably intertwined in the lives of
the Hodenosaunee.

They stood upon a high hill and looked over the great, beautiful valley
full of orchards and fields and far to the north they caught a slight
glimpse of the lake bearing the name of the Keepers of the Council Fire.
Smoke rose from the chimneys of the solid log houses built by this most
enlightened tribe, flecking the blue of the sky, and the whole scene
was one of peace and beauty. The eyes of Tayoga, the Onondaga, and of
Daganoweda, the Mohawk, glistened as they looked, and their hearts
throbbed with fervent admiration. It was more than a village of the
Onondagas that lay before them, it was the temple and shrine of the
great league, the Hodenosaunee. The Onondagas kept the council fire, and
ranked first in piety, but the Mohawks, the Keepers of the Eastern Gate,
were renowned even to the Great Plains for their valor, and they stood
with the Onondagas, their equals man for man, while the Senecas, known
to themselves and their brother nations as the Nundawaono, were more
numerous than either.

"We shall be in time for the great festival, the Maple Dance," said
Tayoga to the young Mohawk.

"Yes, my brother, we have come before the beginning," said Daganoweda,
"and I am glad that it is so. We may not have the Maple Dance again for
many seasons. The shadow of the mighty war creeps upon the Hodenosaunee,
and when the spring returns who knows where the warriors of the great
League will be? We are but little children and we know nothing of the
future, which Manitou alone holds in his keeping."

"You speak truth, Daganoweda. The Ganeagaono are both valiant and wise.
It is a time for the fifty sachems to use all the knowledge they have
gathered in their long lives, but we will hear what the Frenchman, St.
Luc, has to say, even though he belongs to the nation that sent
Frontenac against us."

"The Hodenosaunee can do no less," said the Mohawk, tersely.

Robert could not keep from hearing and he was glad of the little affair
with the two hostile bands, knitting as it did their friendship with the
Mohawks. But he too, since he had penetrated the Iroquois spirit and saw
as they did, felt the great and momentous nature of the crisis. While
the nations of the Hodenosaunee might decide whether English or French
were to win in the coming war they might, at the same time, decide the
fate of the great League which had endured for centuries.

They descended into the vale of Onondaga, but at its edge, in a great
forest, the entire group stopped, as it became necessary there for
Tayoga, Willet and Robert to say a temporary farewell to the others who
would not advance into the Onondaga town until the full power of the
Hodenosaunee was gathered. The council, as Robert surmised and as he now
learned definitely, had been called by the Onondagas, who had sent
heralds with belts eastward to the Oneidas, who in turn had sent them
yet farther eastward to the Mohawks, westward to the Cayugas whose duty
it was to pass them on to the Senecas yet more to the west. The Oneidas
also gave belts to the Dusgaowehono, or Tuscaroras, the valiant tribe
that had come up from the south forty years before, and that had been
admitted into the Hodenosaunee, turning the Five Nations into the Six,
and receiving lands within the territory of the Oneidas.

Already great numbers of warriors from the different nations, their
chiefs at their head, were scattered about the edges of the valley
awaiting the call of the Onondagas for participation in the Maple Dance,
and the great and fateful council afterward. And since they did not know
whether this council was for peace or for war, every sachem had brought
with him a bundle of white cedar fagots that typified peace, and also a
bundle of red cedar fagots that typified war.

"Farewell, my friends," said Daganoweda, the Mohawk, to Tayoga, Robert
and Willet. "We rest here until the great sachems of the Onondagas send
for us, and yet we are eager to come, because never before was there
such a Maple Dance and never before such a council as these will be."

"You speak true words, Daganoweda," said Robert, "and the Great Bear and
I rejoice that we are adopted sons of the Iroquois and can be here."

Robert spoke from his heart. Not even his arrival at Quebec, great as
had been his anticipations and their fulfillment, had stirred in him
more interest and enthusiasm. The feeling that for the time being he was
an Iroquois in everything except his white skin grew upon him. He saw as
they saw, his pulses beat as theirs beat, and he thought as they
thought. It was not too much for him to think that the fate of North
America might turn upon the events that were to transpire within the
vale of Onondaga within the next few days. Nor was he, despite his
heated brain, and the luminous glow through which he saw everything, far
from the facts.

Robert saw that Willet, despite his years and experience, was deeply
stirred also, and the dark eyes of Tayoga glittered, as well they might,
since the people who were the greatest in all the world to him were
about to deliberate on their fate and that of others.

The three, side by side, their hearts beating hard, advanced slowly and
with dignity through the groves. From many points came the sound of
singing and down the aisles of the trees they saw young girls in
festival attire. All the foliage was in deepest green and the sky was
the soft but brilliant blue of early spring. The air seemed to be
charged with electricity, because all had a tense and expectant feeling.

For Robert, so highly imaginative, the luminous glow deepened. He had
studied much in the classics, after the fashion of the time, in the
school at Albany, and his head was filled with the old Greek and Roman
learning. Now he saw the ancient symbolism reproduced in the great
forests of North America by the nations of the Hodenosaunee, who had
never heard of Greece or Rome, nor, to him, were the religion and poetry
of the Iroquois inferior in power and beauty, being much closer kin than
the gods of Greece and Rome to his own Christian beliefs.

"Manitou favors us," said Tayoga, looking up at the soft blue velvet of
the sky. "Gaoh, the spirit of the Winds, moves but gently in his home,
Dayodadogowah."

He looked toward the west, because it was there that Gaoh, who had the
bent figure and weazened face of an old man, always sat, Manitou having
imprisoned him with the elements, and having confined him to one place.
In the beautiful Iroquois mythology, Gaoh often struggled to release
himself, though never with success. Sometimes his efforts were but mild,
and then he produced gentle breezes, but when he fought fiercely for
freedom the great storms blew and tore down the forests.

"Gaoh is not very restless today," continued Tayoga. "He struggles but
lightly, and the wind from the west is soft upon our faces."

"And it brings the perfume of flowers and of tender young leaves with
it, Tayoga," said Willet. "It's a wonderful world and I'm just a boy
today, standing at its threshold."

"And even though war may come, perhaps Manitou will smile upon us," said
Tayoga. "The Three Sisters whom Hawenneu, who is the same to the white
man as Manitou, gave to us, the spirit of the Corn, the spirit of the
Squash and the spirit of the Bean will abide with us and give us plenty.
The spirits in the shape of beautiful young girls hover over us. We
cannot see them, but they are there."

He looked up and shadows passed over their heads. To the mystic soul of
the young Onondaga they were the spirits of the three sisters who
typified abundance, and Robert himself quivered. He still saw with the
eyes and felt with the heart of an Iroquois.

Both he and Tayoga were conscious that the spirits were everywhere about
them. All the elements and all the powers of nature were symbolized and
typified. The guardians of fire, earth, water, healing, war, the chase,
love, winter, summer and a multitude of others, floated in the air. The
trees themselves had spirits and identity and all the spirits who
together constituted the Honochenokeh were the servants and assistants
of Hawenneyu. To the eyes of Tayoga that saw not and yet saw, it was a
highly peopled world, and there was meaning in everything, even in the
fall of the leaf.

Tayoga presently put his fingers to his lips and uttered a long mellow
whistle. A whistle in reply came from a grove just ahead, and fourteen
men, all of middle years or beyond, emerged into view. Though elderly,
not one among them showed signs of weakness. They were mostly tall, they
held themselves very erect, and their eyes were of uncommon keenness and
penetration. They were the fourteen sachems of the Onondagas, and at
their head was the first in rank, Tododaho, a name that never ceased to
exist, being inherited from the great chief who founded the League
centuries before, and being passed on from successor to successor. Close
to him came Tonessaah, whose name also lasted forever and who was the
hereditary adviser of Tododaho, and near him walked Daatgadose and the
others.

Tayoga, Robert and Willet stopped, and the great chief, Tododaho, a man
of splendid presence, in the full glory of Iroquois state costume, gave
them welcome. The sight of Tayoga, of lofty birth, of the clan of the
Bear, of the nation Onondaga, was particularly pleasing to his eyes. It
was well that the young warriors, who some day would be chiefs to lead
in council and battle, should be present. And the coming of the white
man and the white lad, who were known to be trusted friends of the
Hodenosaunee, was welcome also.

The three, each in turn, made suitable replies, and Robert, his gift of
golden speech moving him, spoke a little longer than the others. He made
a free use of metaphor and allegory, telling how dear were the
prosperity and happiness of the Hodenosaunee to his soul, and he felt
every word he said. Charged with the thoughts and impressions of an
Iroquois, the fourteen chiefs were the quintessence of dignity and
importance to him, and when they smiled and nodded approval of his
youthful effort his heart was lifted up. Then he, Tayoga and Willet
bowed low to these men who in very truth were the keepers of the council
fire of the Hodenosaunee, and whose word might sway the destinies of
North America, and, bowing, passed on that they might rest in the Long
House, as became three great warriors who had valiantly done their duty
in the forest when confronted by their enemies, and who had come to do
another and sacred duty in the vale of Onondaga.

Young warriors were their escort into one of the great log houses, which
in their nature were much like the community houses found at a later day
in the far southwest. The building they entered was a full hundred and
twenty feet in length and about forty feet broad, and it had five fires,
each built in the center of its space. The walls and roof were of poles
thatched with bark, and there were no windows, but over each fire was a
circular opening in the roof where the air entered and the smoke went
out. If rain or storm came these orifices were covered with great
pieces of bark.

On the long sides of the walls extended platforms about six feet wide,
covered with furs and skins where the warriors slept. Overhead was a
bark canopy on top of which they placed their possessions. About a dozen
warriors were in the house, all lying down, but they rose and greeted
the three. Berths were assigned to them at once, food and water were
brought, and Robert, weary from the long march, decided that he would
sleep.

"I think I'll do the same," said Willet, "and then we'll be fresh for
what's coming. Tayoga, I suppose, will want to see his kin first."

Tayoga nodded, and presently disappeared. Then Robert and Willet took
their places upon the bark platforms and were soon asleep, not awakening
until the next morning when they went forth and found that the
excitement in the valley had increased. Tayoga came to them at once and
told them that Sanundathawata, the council of repentance, was about to
be held. The dawn was just appearing, and as the sun rose the sachems of
the Onondagas would proceed to the council grove and receive the sachems
of the allied nations.

"You will wish to see the ceremony," he said.

"Of course, of course!" said Robert, eagerly, who found that with the
coming of a new day he was as much an Iroquois in spirit as ever. Nor
could he see that Willet was less keen about it and the three proceeded
promptly to the council grove where a multitude was already hastening.
There was, too, a great buzz of talk, as the Iroquois here in the vale,
the very heart of their country, did not show the taciturnity in which
the red man so often takes refuge in the presence of the white.

The fourteen Onondaga chiefs, Tododaho at their head and Tonessaah at
