are out of danger. Dick Hawley will rob no more stages."

"Driver, you are a brave man--you have saved us," said one of the
passengers.

"It was not I; it was the horses."

"Then you did not start them up?"

"No; I should not have dared to do it. They were frightened by the
revolver and took the matter into their own hands."

"Dick Hawley was foolhardy. Had he ever stopped a stage at this point
before?"

"Yes, he did so last year."

"And succeeded?"

"Yes; he made a big haul. This time he has met his deserts."

There were no further incidents that deserve recording in Andy's
journey. It is needless to say that he enjoyed it. The scenes through
which he passed were new and strange to him. It was a country he had
never expected to see, and for this reason, perhaps, he enjoyed it the
more.

At last he reached Tacoma. It was irregularly built on a hillside. There
were no buildings of any pretensions. All its importance was to come.

He put up at the Tacoma House, a hotel of moderate size, and after
dinner he went out to see the town. He sought out the plot of lots owned
jointly by Mr. Crawford and himself, and found that they were located
not far from the center of the business portion of the town.

It took no sagacity to foresee that the land would rise in value
rapidly, especially after the Northern Pacific Railroad was completed.

In the afternoon, feeling tired, he sat in his room and read a book he
had picked up at a periodical store--a book treating of the great
Northwest. The partitions were thin, and noises in the adjoining room
were easily audible.

His attention was drawn to a sound of coughing, and a groan indicating
pain. It was evident that the next apartment was occupied by a sick man.

Andy's sympathies were excited. It seemed to be a forlorn position to be
sick and without attention in this remote quarter. After a moment's
hesitation he left his own room and knocked at the other door.

"Come in!" was the reply, in a hollow voice.

Andy opened the door and entered.

On the bed lay a man, advanced in years, with hollow cheeks and every
appearance of serious illness.

"I am afraid you are very sick," said Andy, gently.

"Yes; I have an attack of grip. I am afraid I will have to pass in my
checks."

"Oh, it isn't as bad as that," said Andy, in a reassuring tone. "Have
you no one to take care of you?"

"No; everybody here is occupied with schemes for money-making. I can't
get any one to look after me for love or money."

"Then you have no near friend or relative in Tacoma?"

"No; nor, I may say, anywhere else. I have a niece, however, in
Syracuse. She is at school. She is the only tie, the only one on whom I
have any claim."

"If you need money--" began Andy, feeling a little delicate about
offering pecuniary assistance.

"No, I have no need of that kind. I suppose I look poor, for I never
cared about my personal appearance, but I am one of the largest owners
of real estate in Tacoma, besides having some thousands of dollars in a
San Francisco bank. But what good will it all do me? Here I am, sick,
and perhaps near death."

"I will do what I can for you," said Andy. "I am myself a visitor in
Tacoma. I came on business for a New York gentleman. I am authorized to
buy lots in Tacoma. When you are better, I will make you an offer for
your land, if you care to sell."

"Help me to get well, and you shall have it on your own terms."

"You will need some one besides myself. Do you authorize me to hire an
attendant?"

"Yes, I shall be glad to have you do so. I begin to hope for recovery,
through your assistance. I had given myself up for lost."

"Then I will go out and see what I can do. Do you authorize me to pay
liberally for the service of a nurse?"

"Pay anything--fifty dollars a week, if necessary; I can afford it."

"I will go out at once. I will see if I can buy some oranges."

Andy left the hotel and walked toward the steamboat wharf. It was
deserted, except by two persons.

A young man of thirty, bronzed by exposure to the weather, who looked
like a farmer, stood beside a plain, cheap trunk, on which sat a woman
somewhat younger, who had a weary and anxious look.

The young man--her husband, doubtless--seemed troubled.

"Good-afternoon," said Andy, pleasantly. "Are you in any trouble? Is
there anything I can do for you?"

"Well, my boy, I'm in a tight place. I came here from Iowa, with my
wife, expecting to meet a cousin who had promised to get me employment.
I find he has left Tacoma. So here I am, with less than five dollars in
my pocket and no prospect of work. I'm not a coward, but I don't mind
saying I'm afraid to think of what will become of us."

An idea came to Andy.

Here was a chance to secure a nurse.

"Is your wife used to sickness?" he asked. "Could she take care of a
sick man?"

The woman brightened up.

"I took care of my father for a year," she answered. "I'm a middlin'
good nurse."

"She's the best nurse I know of," put in her husband.

"All right! Then I can find you employment. An acquaintance of mine, an
old man--as old, probably, as your father--is sick with grip at the
Tacoma House. He will pay you liberally. Can you come with me at once?"

"Yes, and be glad to."

"Come, then. You will be paid twenty-five dollars a week."

"Why that's a fortune!" said the woman, amazed.

"Come with me at once, and your husband can follow at his leisure."

"Maria, that's what I call a streak of good luck," said her husband,
overjoyed. "Go along with this young man, and I'll get a cheap room
somewhere in town. I'll take the trunk along with me."

He shouldered the small trunk, and his wife went off with Andy.

In a few minutes she was installed in the sick chamber, and soon showed
that she understood her business. A doctor was sent for, and Seth
Johnson, for this was the sick man's name, was soon made comfortable.

He ratified Andy's bargain, and paid, besides, for Mrs. Graham's board
at the hotel. He did not gain rapidly, for his strength was at a low
ebb, but he improved steadily.

The husband found employment in a couple of days, and their temporary
despondency gave place to hope and courage.

"You've done better for me than my cousin would have done, Andy," said
Graham, a few days later. "You've set me on my feet, and I'm not afraid
now but I'll get along."




CHAPTER XXXIV.

SETH JOHNSON'S GIFT.


It was four weeks before Seth Johnson became convalescent. His system
was run down, and he was in a very critical state when found by Andy.
Careful nursing saved him.

When able to get out, he accompanied Andy to show him his lots. The plot
was about as large as Mr. Crawford's, but was a little further from the
center of the town. It would make about twenty-five lots of the average
size.

"How much will you take for the entire plot?" asked Andy.

"I don't want to sell the whole," said Johnson.

"I thought you meant to leave Tacoma for good?"

"So I do, but I propose to give one-fifth of the land to a friend."

"Then let me know how much you will take for the remaining four-fifths."

"Will five thousand dollars be too much?"

"I will buy it at that figure," said Andy, promptly.

"You don't ask me to whom I intend to give the fifth which I reserve?"

"It is probably no one whom I know."

"On the contrary, it is one whom you know well--it is yourself."

Andy looked his amazement.

"But how have I deserved such a gift?" he asked.

"You have saved my life. If you had not found and befriended me, I
should not have been living at this moment. 'All that a man hath will he
give in exchange for his life,' the Bible says. I don't give all, but I
give merely one-fifth of my land. I have ten thousand dollars, besides,
in San Francisco."

"I am deeply grateful to you, Mr. Johnson. I am a poor boy, and this
unexpected gift will help me to carry out some plans for the benefit of
my father, who is in an embarrassed condition."

"I advise you not to sell the land till you can sell at an advanced
price."

"I shall not do so. When the Northern Pacific is completed I am sure
lots will be much higher."

"To be sure. You are young and can wait. I am old, and I have no
particular desire to make money. I have enough to see me through."

When Andy started for New York he had the company of Seth Johnson. It
was agreed that the final arrangements for the transfer of the lots
should take place in Mr. Crawford's office.

They reached the city without adventure, and Andy, with his new friend,
reported at his employer's.

"I hope you are satisfied with what I have done, Mr. Crawford," said
Andy.

"Thoroughly so. You have made a good purchase. I shall pay you five
hundred dollars as an acknowledgment of the service you have rendered
me."

"But, Mr. Crawford, Mr. Johnson has already given me five lots."

"True; but this is his gift, not mine. You must not be afraid of
becoming too rich. You will need all your money."

"Yes, sir, but not for myself. I can now relieve my father's anxiety."

"Do you intend to tell him the amount of your good fortune?"

"I will only tell him of your gift."

On the basis of the sum which Mr. Crawford paid for the other
four-fifths, Andy's share of Mr. Johnson's land amounted to twelve
hundred and fifty dollars. But when, three months later, active
operations for the extension and completion of the railroad commenced,
it could easily have been sold for double.

But Andy was too sagacious to sell. In a year his father's mortgage
would be payable, and he wanted to be prepared for that.

Meanwhile Andy devoted himself with energy to mastering the details of
the real estate business. Perhaps because he now himself owned real
estate, he became very much interested in it. He was not able often to
visit Arden, but he never let a week pass without writing a letter home.

It was usually addressed to his mother, as his father was more
accustomed to guiding the plow than the pen. He also heard occasionally
from his boy friends. No letters were more welcome than those of
Valentine Burns. About three months before the mortgage became due he
received the following from Valentine:

    "DEAR ANDY: I wish I could see you oftener, but I know you are busy,
    and getting on. That is a great satisfaction to me. Your last letter
    informing me that you had been raised to fifteen dollars a week gave
    me much pleasure. I wanted to tell Conrad, only you didn't wish to
    have me. He is getting prouder and more disagreeable every day. He
    really seems to have a great spite against you, though I cannot
    understand why.

    "I met him the other day, and he inquired after you. 'He hasn't been
    to Arden lately,' he said.

    "'No,' I answered, 'he is too busy.'

    "'Probably he can't afford the railway fare,' said Conrad.

    "'I think he is getting good pay,' I said.

    "'I know better. He isn't getting over six dollars at most,' said
    Conrad.

    "'Did he tell you so?' I asked.

    "'No, but I heard on good authority,' he replied.

    "'I wish I were getting that,' I said.

    "'You wouldn't want to live on it,' he rejoined.

    "'Well, perhaps not,' I admitted.

    "'He won't long have a home to come back to,' said Conrad, after a
    pause.

    "'Why not?' I inquired.

