tell you."

It suddenly occurred to Kathleen that Kate Rourke was rather a vulgar
girl. She drew a little nearer to her, however, and fixed her very
bright eyes on the girl's face."

"But we needn't go to the pit, need we?" she said. "I meant to pay for
forty. If there are only six, why shouldn't we have jolly seats
somewhere, and not waste our time outside the theater?"

"That would be nice," said Kate Rourke. "I always enjoy myself so much
more if I am in good company. I have been looking up the plays at the
theaters, and there is a very fine piece on at the Princess'. That is in
Oxford Street. It is a sort of melodrama; there's a deal of killing in
it, and the heroine has to do some desperate deeds."

"Oh, dear!" said Susy, with a sigh; "I don't feel, somehow, as if I much
cared where we went. It will be awful afterwards when the fun is over."

"But we will enjoy ourselves, Susy, while the fun lasts," said Kathleen.
She tried to believe that she was enjoying herself and was having a
right good time. She tried to forget the fact that Alice Tennant might
really have seen her off, and that Mrs. Hopkins had justice in her
remarks when she begged and implored of Kathleen not to go to the train.

"What can she have found out?" she thought.

She now turned to Susy.

"Has your mother learned anything, Susy?" she said.

"What do you mean?" said Susy, turning very pink.

"Well, you know, as I was running here--Oh, girls, I had such a lark!
What do you think happened? That horrid Alice--Alice Tennant--ran after
me as I was leaving the house. I raced her across the common, and then
to get rid of her I climbed up into an oak-tree. She never saw me, and
ran on down the passage. Of course, my only chance of getting to the
station was to go by the long way.--Half-way there I came across your
mother, Susy, and she tried to stop me, and said she must speak to me.
Dear, she did seem in a state! Evidently there's a great deal of
excitement and watching going on in that school."

"There will be a great deal of excitement to-morrow," said Susy. "It
strikes me it will be all up with us to-morrow--that is, if Ruth tells."

"If Ruth tells! What do you mean?"

"They are going to do their utmost to get her to tell; and if she does
tell they will call out our names and expel us, that's all. Oh! I can't
bear to think of it--I can't bear to think of it."

Susy's voice broke. Tears trembled in her bright black eyes, and she
turned her head to one side. Kathleen gave her a quick glance.

"It will be all right," she said. "Ruth won't tell. Ruth is the kind who
never tells. She told me to-day she wouldn't."

"She'll be a brick if she doesn't," said Kate Rourke. "But then, of
course, you know--"

"I know what?"

"Oh, nothing. What's the good of making ourselves melancholy on a night
like this?"

"If I were expelled," said Clara Sawyer, "I should leave Merrifield. I
could never lift up my head again. You can't think what impudent sort of
boys my brothers are, and they have always twitted me for my good
fortune in getting into the Great Shirley School. They say that if we
are to be expelled it will be done in public. The governors are
determined to read us a lesson. That's what they say."

"Who cares what they say?" said Kathleen. "Let them say."

"Well, that's what I think; and I dare say half of it is untrue," said
little Janey Ford.

"I am sure, Janey, wonders will never cease when we see you in this
thing," said Susy. "It was disgusting of the others to funk it. But I
suppose they were on the right side; only I do sometimes hate being on
the right side.--Don't you, Kathleen?"

"Yes," said Kathleen in a whisper, and she squeezed Susy's hand. It
seemed to her that her soul and Susy's had met at that moment, and had
saluted each other like comrades true.

"But how was it you came, Janey? Didn't your little heart funk it
altogether?" continued Kate.

"I was so mad to come," said Janey. "I am shaking and trembling now like
anything. But I had never been to a theater, and it was such a
tremendous temptation. I said about ten times to myself that I wouldn't
come, but eleven times I said that I would; and the eleventh time
conquered, and here I am. I do hope we'll have a right good time."

With this sort of chatter the girls got to London. Here Kate Rourke took
the lead. She marshaled the little party in two and two, and so conveyed
them out of the station. Outside the yard at Charing Cross they all
climbed on the top of an omnibus, and soon were wending their way in the
direction of the Princess' Theater, which Kate most strongly advocated.
There was no crowd at the theater this special evening. The piece which
was presented on the boards happened to be a fairly good one. The girls
got excellent seats, and found themselves in the front row of the family
circle. From there they could look down on dazzling scenes, and
Kathleen, who had never been to a theater in the whole course of her
life, was delighted. She at least had forgotten what might follow this
expedition. Oh, yes, they were having a glorious time; and it was quite
right to do what you liked sometimes, and quite right to defy your
elders. Oh, how many she was defying: Ruth Craven, who would almost
have given her life to keep her back from this; Miss Ravenscroft, the
head-mistress, to whom Kathleen's heart did not go out; her own father;
her own aunt; Alice Tennant--oh, bother Alice Tennant! And last, Mrs.
Hopkins.

"Quite an army of them," thought Kathleen. "I have dared to do what none
of them approved of, and I am not a bit the worse for it. Darling dad,
your own Kathleen will tell you everything, and you may give me what
punishment you think best when the fun is over. But now I am having a
jolly time."

So Kathleen did enjoy herself, and made so many saucy remarks between
the acts, and looked so radiant notwithstanding her very plain dress,
that several people looked at the beautiful girl and commented about her
and her companions.

"A school party, my dear," said a lady to her husband.

"But I don't see the chaperone," he remarked.

And then the lady, who looked again more carefully, could not help
observing that these seven girls were certainly not chaperoned by any
one. A little wonder and a little uneasiness came into her heart. She
was a very kind woman herself; she was a motherly woman, too, and she
thought of her own girls tucked up safely in bed at home, and wondered
what she would feel if they were alone at a London theater at this hour.
Presently something impelled her to bend forward and touch Kathleen on
her arm. Kathleen gave a little start and faced her.

"Forgive me," she said; "I see that you and your companions are
schoolgirls, are you not?"

To some people Kathleen might have answered, "That is our own affair,
not yours;" but to this lady with the courteous face and the gentle
voice she replied in quite a humble tone:

"Yes, madam, we are schoolgirls."

"And if you will forgive me, dear, have you no lady looking after you?"

"No," said Kate Rourke, bending forward at that moment; "we are out for
a spree all by our lone selves."

Kate gave a loud laugh as she spoke. The lady started back, and could
not help contrasting Kathleen's face with those of the other girls. She
bent towards her husband and whispered in his ear. The result of this
communication was that, the curtain having fallen for the last time, the
actors having left the stage, the play being completely over, and the
seven girls being about to get back to Charing Cross as best they could,
the lady touched Kathleen on her arm.

"You will forgive me, dear," she said; "I am a mother and have daughters
of my own. I should not like to see girls in the position you are in
without offering to help them."

"But what do you mean?" said Kathleen.

"I mean this, my dear, that my husband and I will see you seven back to
your home, wherever it is."

Kathleen burst out laughing; then she looked very grave, and her eyes
filled with tears as she said:

"But wouldn't mother approve of it?"

"If your mother is the least like me she would not approve of it; she
would be horrified."

"I don't think the lady can see us home," here remarked Clara Sawyer,
"for we live at Merrifield, a good long way from London."

Again the lady and her husband had a talk together, and then she
suggested that they should take the girls back with them to Charing
Cross and put them into their train.

"But we thought we'd have a bit of supper," said Kate Rourke.

"I can get you some things at the railway station; you ought not to wait
for supper in town," said the gentleman in a stern voice.

Then somehow all the girls felt ashamed of themselves, Kathleen slightly
more ashamed than the others. They left the theater very slowly, with
all the lightsomeness and gladness of heart gone.

Two cabs were secured for the little party, and with their kind
protectors they were taken back to Charing Cross. Eventually they got
seats in a comfortable carriage, and found themselves going back again
to Merrifield.

"Well, it has been a dull sort of thing altogether," said Clara Sawyer.
"What meddlesome people!"

"Don't!" said Kathleen.

"Don't what, Kathleen O'Hara? Why should you speak to me in that
reproving voice?"

"It isn't that; only they were like two angels. I know it; I am sure of
it. We did an awful thing coming to town; I know we did, and I feel--oh,
detestable!"

Kathleen bent her head forward, covered it with her hands, and sat
still. No tears shook her little frame, but there was a storm within. To
her dying day Kathleen never forgot that return journey. Truly the fun
was all over; the dregs of the cup of pleasure were in their mouths, and
there was a fear, great, certain, and very terrible, in their hearts.
But with all her fears--and they were many--Kathleen thought again and
again of the lady who had girls of her own, and of the gentleman who was
both stern and chivalrous, who had the manners of a prince and the look
of a gentleman. As long as she lived she remembered those two faces, and
the words of the lady, and the smile with which she said good-bye. She
never learned their names; perhaps she did not want to.




CHAPTER XXVI.

THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE LEDGER.


Ruth got up rather earlier than usual on that Saturday morning. She had
a dull, stunned kind of feeling round her heart. She was glad of that;
she was glad that she was not acutely sorry, or acutely glad, or acutely
anxious about anything.

"If I could always be like this, nothing would matter," she said to
herself.

She dressed with her usual scrupulous neatness, and after hesitating for
a moment, put on her best Sunday serge dress. It was a dark-blue serge,
very neatly made. She combed back her luxurious hair and tied it with a
ribbon to match the dress. She then ran downstairs.

"Why, Ruth?" said her grandmother, who was pouring some porridge into
bowls, "what are you wearing that frock for?"

"I thought I would like to, granny."

"Well, to be sure. I trust to goodness you are not getting extravagant.
It will be doomsday before we can get you another like it. You must
remember that I saved up for it sixpence by sixpence, and it took me all
my time and my best endeavors to get it."

"I know it, granny; and when I wear it I feel that you were very kind to
give it me. A girl who wears a dress like this ought to be very, very
good, oughtn't she, granny?"

"Well, to be sure, little woman; and so you are. There never was a
better child. Sit down now and sup your porridge. It is extra good this
morning, and there's a drop of cream in that jug which will give it a
flavor."

Ruth sat down to the table and drew her bowl of porridge towards her.
The warm, nourishing food seemed to choke her; but, all the same, she
ate it with resolution."

"That's right, dear," said her grandmother. "'It's putting a bit of
color into your cheeks. You are too white altogether, Ruth. I hope, my
dear, you are not working too hard."

"Oh, that's all right," said Ruth, keeping back a groan.

"It's a fine thing your getting into that school," continued Mrs.
Craven; "it gives you a chance. Do you know, now, when I look at you and
see the pretty little girl you are turning into, and observe your
lady-like ways, which every one remarks on, I think of the time when
your father was your age."

"Yes, granny," said Ruth, brightening up and looking earnestly at the
old lady; "you never care to talk about father, but I should greatly
like to hear about him this morning."

"Well, child, I don't talk of him because it hurts me too much. He was
the only child I ever had, and if I live to be a hundred I sha'n't get
over his death. But he was like you--very neat in his person, and very
particular, and always keen over his books. And do you know what he said
to his father? It was when he was fifteen years old, just for all the
world about the age you are now. I mind the time as well as if it was
yesterday. Her father and I were sitting by the hearth, and the boy came
and stood near us. Your grandfather looked up at him, and his blue eyes
seemed to melt with love and pride, and he said:

"'What will you be, my boy? Will you let me teach you the business, and
save up all the money I can for you to sell groceries on a bigger scale?
There's many a small business like mine which, when built up, means a
great big business and much wealth. If you have a turn that way I could
set you on your legs; I am certain of it. I'd like to do it. Would you
like that best, or would you rather have a profession and be made a
gentleman?'

"'The gentleman part doesn't matter,' said our boy in reply to that;
'but I think, father, if you can give me my choice, I'd like best to be
that which, if necessary, would oblige me to give my life,'

"'What do you mean?' asked his father, and the lad explained with his
eyes shining.

"'I have only got one life,' he said, 'and I'd like to give it if
necessary.'"

"To tell the truth, Ruth, I could not understand him."

"But I can," said Ruth. She hastily put down her porridge spoon and
jumped to her feet. "I can understand," she continued; "and I am proud
of him."

"So he went into the army. I wish you could have seen him in his
uniform; and his father paid for every scrap of the whole thing, and
educated him and all. Oh, dear! it was a proud moment. But we weren't
proud afterwards when we heard that he was killed. His father reminded
me of his words: 'I'd like to be that for which I could give my life if
necessary,'"

There was quite a pink color in each of Ruth's cheeks now, and her eyes
were very bright.

"I will go and see grandfather," she said, "and then I must be off to
school."

She left the kitchen and went into the tiny parlor where the old man
was seated. It was his fashion to get up early and go straight to the
parlor and read or talk softly to himself. For a couple of months now he
had never sat in the kitchen; he said it caused a buzzing in his head.
Mrs. Craven brought him his meals into the little parlor. He had
finished his breakfast when Ruth, in her neat Sunday dress, entered the
room. There was an exalted feeling in her heart, caused by the narrative
which her grandmother had told her of her father.

"Well, little woman," said the old man, "and you are off to school? Or
is it school? Perhaps it is Sunday morning and you are off to church."

"No, grandfather; it is Saturday morning--quite a different thing."

"Well, my love, I am as pleased as Punch about that school. I can't tell
you how I think about it, and love to feel that my own little lass is
doing so well there. And if you get the scholarship, why, we will be
made; we won't have another care nor anxiety; we won't have another
wrinkle of trouble as long as we remain in the world."

Ruth went straight over to the old man, knelt down by his side, and
looked into his face.

"Stroke my hair, granddad," she said.

He raised his trembling hand and placed it on her head.

"That is nice," she said, and caught his hand as it went backwards and
forwards over her silky black hair, and kissed it.

"Granddad," she said after a pause, "is it the best thing--quite the
best thing--always to come out on the right side of the ledger?"

"Eh? Listen to the little woman," said the old man, much pleased and
interested by her words. "Why, of course, Ruth; it is the only thing."

"But does it mean sometimes, grandfather--dishonor?"

"No, it never means that," said Mr. Craven gravely and thoughtfully.
"But I will tell you what, Ruthie. It does mean sometimes all you have
got."

"Yes," said Ruth, "I understand." She rose to her feet. Do you think my
father would have come out on the right side of the ledger?"

"Ah, child! when he lay dead on the field of battle he came very much
out on the right side, to my thinking. But why that melancholy note in
your voice, Ruth? And why are your cheeks so flushed? Is anything the
matter?"

"Kiss me," said Ruth. "I am glad you have said what you did about
father. I am more glad than sorry, on the whole, this morning. Good-bye,
grandfather."

She kissed him; then she raised her flower-like head and walked out of
the room with a gentle dignity all her own.

"What has come to the little woman?" thought the old man.

But in a minute or two he forgot her, and called to his wife to bring
him the account-books.

"Why do you bother yourself about them?" she asked.

"It has come over me," he replied, "that I have counted things wrong,
and that I'll come out on the right side if I am a bit more careful. Put
the books on this little table, and leave me for an hour or two. That's
right, old woman."

"Very well, old man," she replied, and she pushed the table towards him,
put the account-books thereon, and left the room.

Meanwhile Ruth went slowly to school. She was in good time. There was
no need to hurry. The morning was fresh and beautiful; there was a
gentle breeze which fanned her face. It seemed to her that if she let
