
"You mean that no one but subscribers ought to have voted?"

"Precisely so."

"It was a mean trick."

"It was a sort of practical joke upon me, I suppose"

"I don't believe in practical jokes which need a lie to carry them
through."

"Well, Shuffles has the position, unless some of you fellows will help
me out. I wanted to make the speech, and without the nine votes which
you and other outsiders put in, I should have been chosen."

"What can we do?"

"I have a right to consider all the fellows that voted as members of the
society. The fact of their voting makes them members."

"I don't know anything about that."

"It's clear enough to me, and in a talk I had with Shuffles just now, he
didn't pretend to deny the correctness of my position."

"If he agrees, it must be all right," laughed Paul.

"If you had understood the matter, for whom should you have voted?"

"I don't know? but after the trick Shuffles played off upon you, I
should not vote for him."

"Very well; then you can change your vote."

"How shall I change it?"

"Go to Shuffles; and the other eight fellows who voted in the dark must
do the same."

"What shall I say to him?"

"You must go to him as a member of the society, and salute him as such."

"I don't know how."

"I'll tell you. When you meet him, scratch the tip end of your nose with
the nail of your second finger on the right hand; in this manner,"
continued Pelham giving the first sign.

"That's it--is it?" said Paul, as he imitated the action of Pelham.

"Yes; that's right He will reply by taking the lower part of his left
ear between the thumb and first finger of the left hand--so," added
Pelham.

"I have it," answered Paul, as he made the motions.

"Then you will scratch your chin with the thumb nail of the left hand,
and he will reply by blowing his nose."

"Let's see if I can do all that," laughed Paul, very much amused at the
mystic indications of membership In the secret association.

He made the signs to Pelham, who replied to them, several times, until
he was perfect in his part.

"All right. I will remember them," said Paul.

"But you haven't got the whole of it yet. When you have made the signs,
and he has answered them, he will say, '_Is_ that so?' with strong
emphasis on the first word."

"_Is_ that so?" repeated Paul.

"Then you will reply, '_That_ is so,' with the stress on _that_."

"_That_ is so," added Paul.

"Then you must place yourself so as to look directly forward or aft. If
you look forward, he must look aft."

"I understand you."

"Now I want to know who the other fellows were that played 'Don't know
Beans' that day."

"Captain Gordon was one."

"Will you post him up in what I have told you?"

"I will, and the other fellows who voted for Shuffles, if you say so."

"Thank you. I wish you would. Let them all tell him they desire to
change their votes; but have them do it one at a time."

Paul Kendall promised to do what was required of him; and in the course
of the following forenoon he initiated "the outsiders who had voted for
Shuffles" in the secret machinery of the supposed society, but in fact
of the Chain League. Being off duty during the second part of the
afternoon watch, he encountered Shuffles in the lee side of the waist.

"Well, Shuffles, we are almost up with the coast of Ireland," said Paul,
as he scratched the tip of his nose with the second finger of his right
hand, agreeably to the instructions given him by Pelham.

"Yes; and I suppose by Saturday, if the wind holds fair, we shall be off
Cape Clear," replied the captain-elect, as he took the lower part of his
left ear between the thumb and forefinger of the left hand.

Shuffles did not suppose that the second lieutenant was a member of the
league, and pledged to assist in the capture of the ship; but as he had
made the sign, probably accidentally, he replied to it.

"There is a prospect of fair weather for some days to come," continued
Paul, as he scratched his chin with his left hand, which was the second
step towards a recognition in the "Chain."

Shuffles was duly and properly astonished at this exhibition of
intelligence on the part of the officer; and it was now quite certain
that Paul had joined the league, or that he had obtained its tremendous
secrets.

"I hope it will be good weather now during the rest of the passage,"
added the captain-elect, as he took his handkerchief from his breast
pocket and blew his nose, for he was determined to satisfy himself
whether or not the second lieutenant was a member of the League.

"_Is_ that so?" demanded Shuffles.

"_That_ is so," answered Paul.

Shuffles was almost overwhelmed with astonishment to find that one who
was a model of fidelity and propriety had actually joined the Chain.

"Shuffles, I voted for you the other day," added Paul.

"I know you did."

"I wish to change my vote."

"Change it!" exclaimed Shuffles.

"Yes? I voted in the dark. I wish now to vote for the other candidate."

"For whom?"

"For Pelham, of course."

"You are too late."

"I think, under the circumstances, that my vote ought to be counted on
the other side, even if it reverses the result," said Paul, earnestly.

"Why do you wish to vote for Pelham?" demanded Shuffles, rather because
he had nothing else to say than because he was interested in the
anticipated reply.

"I don't think it was quite fair for you to obtain my vote as you did."

"No matter for that. Do you think Pelham would make a better captain
than I should?"

"A better what?"

"Do you think he will command the ship any better than I shall."

"Command the ship!" repeated Paul, bewildered by this extraordinary
question. "I wasn't aware that either of you were to command the ship."

Shuffles, in his turn, was confounded when he found that the second
lieutenant was a member of the "Chain" without any knowledge of its
objects. Though he had used all the precautions required by the League,
a hint had unwittingly been given to Paul, whose simple integrity
rendered him the most dangerous person on board to the interests of such
an institution as the Chain.

"Mr. Kendall, may I ask what you now suppose you were voting for?" asked
Shuffles, with easy assurance.

"For the orator of the day, of course," replied Paul, who was too free
from wiles or arts to make any use of the advantage gained.

Indeed, he was so true himself that he was not suspicious of others; and
he did not even perceive that he had obtained an advantage.

"Exactly so," added Shuffles; "for orator of the day? but we don't speak
the idea out loud, or call it by its proper name."

"What did you mean by commanding the ship, Shuffles?" laughed Kendall.

"I meant orator of the day. We keep this thing to ourselves," added
Shuffles, who had no idea what was meant by his companion.

"Of course; I understand all about that," said Paul, knowingly. "I don't
think I had any right to vote; and in my opinion the trick you played on
Pelham was decidedly wrong."

"It was merely a joke," answered Shuffles.

"But do you intend to use the advantage you gained by this trick?"

"Certainly not."

"I'm very glad of that."

"It was only for the fun of the thing," added Shuffles at a venture.

"It may have been funny; but I don't think it was honest."

"I didn't intend to make any use of it," continued Shuffles. "What did
Mr. Pelham say to you, Mr. Kendall?"

"He told me all about it," replied Paul.

"Did he, indeed?"

"He said that you, by causing me to vote, had made me a member."

"Just so."

Shuffles did not dare to say much, though it was evident, from the words
and the manner of the second lieutenant, that Pelham had not yet
betrayed the real object of the Chain. If he had, the captain elect was
satisfied he would have been in irons, confined in the brig, before that
time.

"I told Mr. Pelham I fully approved the purpose, and would help him out
with it."

"What purpose?" asked Shuffles, anxious to know what Paul meant.

"Why, don't you know?"

"Of course I do; but I wish to know precisely what Mr. Pelham told you."

"He will tell you himself," laughed Paul, as he walked aft, in order to
afford the other "outsiders" who had voted an opportunity to communicate
with Shuffles, for he perceived that they were waiting their turns.

As the second lieutenant went aft, the captain went forward on the lee
side of the deck.

"Shuffles!" called Captain Gordon, as the chief conspirator was going
forward.

The captain elect turned and walked towards the commander, and touched
his cap with becoming respect.

"What do you think of the weather?" demanded Captain Gordon, scratching
the tip of his nose.

Paul had instructed the "outsiders" to talk about the weather while they
went through with the mystic routine of the signs.

"I think we shall have good weather," replied Shuffles, who, though he
was confounded and amazed to be saluted from this quarter with the
language of the "Chain," dared not refuse to give the signs, after he
had done so with the second lieutenant.

"I wish to change my vote? for I don't think it was fairly given
before," said the captain, when he had gone through all the forms of the
recognition.

"Certainly, Captain Gordon, if you desire to do so."

Fortunately for Shuffles, the captain did not prolong the conversation;
for others were waiting an opportunity to make themselves known to the
conspirator. One after another, they saluted Shuffles in the waist,
inquiring about the weather, and making the requisite signs. The captain
elect was filled with indignation and rage against Pelham, who had
played off this trick upon him; but he was compelled to meet all who
came, and go through the signs with them, while the "outsiders,"
scattered about the deck, stood watching the motions with intense
delight. He would fain have fled, but he could not leave the deck; and
he was afraid that any impatience, or a refusal to answer the signs,
would involve him in a worse difficulty.

At last the nine illegal voters had "made themselves known," and having
requested that their votes might be changed, Shuffles was released from
torture. He was both alarmed and indignant. He had not been able to
ascertain what was meant by "the orator of the day;" and he began to
fear that Pelham had exposed the whole, or a part, of the real purposes
of the League. He was enraged that he had revealed anything. Even the
captain and the second lieutenant had made all the signs, and they could
not have done so without the assistance of a traitor.

"It's all up with us, Wilton," said Shuffles, as they met near the
foremast.

"What is?"

"Pelham has blowed the whole thing."

"No!" exclaimed Wilton, almost paralyzed by the information.

"He has. The captain and several of the officers made all the signs to
me just now. We shall spend our time in the brig for the next month."

"Did Pelham do it?"

"Yes."

"That was mean," added Wilton, his face pale with terror.

"He will fall overboard accidentally some day," added Shuffles, shaking
his head.

"Don't do that, Shuffles," protested the frightened confederate.

"I will, if I get a chance."

"You will only make the matter ten times worse than it is."

Monroe joined them, and was informed of the desperate situation of the
League.

"It's all your fault, Shuffles," said Monroe, indignantly "I don't blame
Pelham."

"You don't! He has told a dozen outsiders how to make the signs, and let
them into the secrets of the Chain, for all I know."

"If he has, we may thank you for it, Shuffles. You cheated him, and
played a mean trick upon him," replied Monroe. "I wouldn't have stood it
if I had been he."

"Pelham is a traitor, and you are another."

"No matter what he is, or what I am. You got all those fellows to vote
for you, and cheated him out of the place that belonged to him."

"Did you think I was going to have him captain, after I had got up the
Chain, and done all the work?"

"You agreed to leave it out to the fellows who should be captain. They
voted, and you cheated," added Monroe. "I've had enough of the Chain;
and if any fellow makes the signs again, I shall not notice them."

"Humph! It's a pretty time to talk so, after the whole thing is let
out."

"Well, I will face the music, and get out of it the best way I can. I
was a fool to join the Chain."

"So was I," said Wilton.

There was no difficulty in arriving at such a conclusion after the
affair had been exposed; and the sentiments of Wilton and Monroe were,
or would soon be, the sentiments of all the members of the League.
Shuffles realized the truth of the old adage, that rats desert a sinking
ship, and he began to feel lonely in his guilt and his fear of exposure.
But he could not forgive Pelham for his perfidy, forgetting that each
had been treacherous to the other.

In the first dog watch on that day, while Shuffles' heart was still
rankling with hatred towards the alleged traitor, the rivals met in the
waist, which was common ground to officers off duty and seamen.

"I want to see you, Pelham," said Shuffles, in a low tone.

"Well, you do see me--don't you?" laughed Pelham who, feeling that he
was now even with his rival, was in excellent humor.

"Things are going wrong with us."

"O, no; I think not."

"Will you meet me on the top-gallant forecastle, where we shall not be
disturbed?" asked Shuffles.

