rests upon his "Commentaries on the Laws of England," published about
1769. He was a man of great ability, sound learning, unflagging industry,
and moral integrity. His great work is still a common text-book in the
study of law.
###


In the beginning of the world, we are informed by Holy Writ, the all-
bountiful Creator gave to man dominion over all the earth, and "over the
fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing
that moveth upon the earth." This is the only true and solid foundation of
man's dominion over external things, whatever airy, metaphysical notions
may have been started by fanciful writers upon this subject. The earth,
therefore, and all things therein, are the general property of all
mankind, exclusive of other beings, from the immediate gift of the
Creator. And while the earth continued bare of inhabitants, it is
reasonable to suppose that all was in common among them, and that everyone
took from the public stock, to his own use, such things as his immediate
necessities required.

These general notions of property were then sufficient to answer all the
purposes of human life; and might, perhaps, still have answered them, had
it been possible for mankind to have remained in a state of primeval
simplicity, in which "all things were common to him." Not that this
communion of goods seems ever to have been applicable, even in the
earliest ages, to aught but the substance of the thing; nor could it be
extended to the use of it. For, by the law of nature and reason, he who
first began to use it, acquired therein a kind of transient property, that
lasted so long as he was using it, and no longer. Or, to speak with
greater precision, the right of possession continued for the same time,
only, that the act of possession lasted.

Thus, the ground was in common, and no part of it was the permanent
property of any man in particular; yet, whoever was in the occupation of
any determined spot of it, for rest, for shade, or the like, acquired for
the time a sort of ownership, from which it would have been unjust and
contrary to the law of nature to have driven him by force; but, the
instant that he quitted the use or occupation of it, another might seize
it without injustice. Thus, also, a vine or other tree might be said to be
in common, as all men were equally entitled to its produce; and yet, any
private individual might gain the sole property of the fruit which he had
gathered for his own repast: a doctrine well illustrated by Cicero, who
compares the world to a great theater, which is common to the public, and
yet the place which any man has taken is, for the time, his own.

But when mankind increased in number, craft, and ambition, it became
necessary to entertain conceptions of a more permanent dominion; and to
appropriate to individuals not the immediate use only, but the very
substance of the thing to be used. Otherwise, innumerable tumults must
have arisen, and the good order of the world been continually broken and
disturbed, while a variety of persons were striving who should get the
first occupation of the same thing, or disputing which of them had
actually gained it. As human life also grew more and more refined,
abundance of conveniences were devised to render it more easy, commodious,
and agreeable; as habitations for shelter and safety, and raiment for
warmth and decency. But no man would be at the trouble to provide either,
so long as he had only a usufructuary property in them, which was to cease
the instant that he quitted possession; if, as soon as he walked out of
his tent or pulled off his garment, the next stranger who came by would
have a right to inhabit the one and to wear the other.

In the case of habitations, in particular, it was natural to observe that
even the brute creation, to whom everything else was in common, maintained
a kind of permanent property in their dwellings, especially for the
protection of their young; that the birds of the air had nests, and the
beasts of the fields had caverns, the invasion of which they esteemed a
very flagrant injustice, and would sacrifice their lives to preserve them.
Hence a property was soon established in every man's house and homestead;
which seem to have been originally mere temporary huts or movable cabins,
suited to the design of Providence for more speedily peopling the earth,
and suited to the wandering life of their owners, before any extensive
property in the soil or ground was established.

There can be no doubt but that movables of every kind became sooner
appropriated than the permanent, substantial soil; partly because they
were more susceptible of a long occupancy, which might be continue for
months together without any sensible interruption, and at length, by
usage, ripen into an established right; but, principally, because few of
them could be fit for use till improved and meliorated by the bodily labor
of the occupant; which bodily labor, bestowed upon any subject which
before lay in common to all men, is universally allowed to give the
fairest and most reasonable title to an exclusive property therein.

The article of food was a more immediate call, and therefore a more early
consideration. Such as were not contented with the spontaneous product of
the earth, sought for a more solid refreshment in the flesh of beasts,
which they obtained by hunting. But the frequent disappointments incident
to that method of provision, induced them to gather together such animals
as were of a more tame and sequacious nature and to establish themselves
in a less precarious manner, partly by the milk of the dams, and partly by
the flesh of the young.

The support of these their cattle made the article of water also a very
important point. And, therefore, the book of Genesis, (the most venerable
monument of antiquity, considered merely with a view to history,) will
furnish us with frequent instances of violent contentions concerning
wells; the exclusive property of which appears to have been established in
the first digger or occupant, even in places where the ground and herbage
remained yet in common. Thus, we find Abraham, who was but a sojourner,
asserting his right to a well in the country of Abimelech, and exacting an
oath for his security "because he had digged that well." And Isaac, about
ninety years afterwards, reclaimed this his father's property; and, after
much contention with the Philistines, was suffered to enjoy it in peace.

All this while, the soil and pasture of the earth remained still in common
as before, and open to every occupant; except, perhaps, in the
neighborhood of towns, where the necessity of a sale and exclusive
property in lands, (for the sake of agriculture,) was earlier felt, and
therefore more readily complied with. Otherwise, when the multitude of men
and cattle had consumed every convenience on one spot of ground, it was
deemed a natural right to seize upon and occupy such other lands as would
more easily supply their necessities.

We have a striking example of this in the history of Abraham and his
nephew Lot. When their joint substance became so great that pasture and
other conveniences grew scarce, the natural consequence was that a strife
arose between their servants; so that it was no longer practicable to
dwell together. This contention, Abraham thus endeavored to compose: "Let
there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee. Is not the whole
land before thee? Separate thyself, I pray thee, from me. If thou wilt
take the left hand, then I will go to the right; or if thou depart to the
right hand, then I will go to the left." This plainly implies an
acknowledged right in either to occupy whatever ground he pleased that was
not preoccupied by other tribes. "And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld
all the plain of Jordan, that it was well watered everywhere, even as the
garden of the Lord. Then Lot chose him all the plain of Jordan, and
journeyed east; and Abraham dwelt in the land of Canaan."

As the world by degrees grew more populous, it daily became more difficult
to find out new spots to inhabit, without encroaching upon former
occupants; and, by constantly occupying the same individual spot, the
fruits of the earth were consumed, and its spontaneous products destroyed
without any provision for future supply or succession. It, therefore,
became necessary to pursue some regular method of providing a constant
subsistence; and this necessity produced, or at least promoted and
encouraged the art of agriculture. And the art of agriculture, by a
regular connection and consequence, introduced and established the idea of
a more permanent property in the soil than had hitherto been received and
adopted.

It was clear that the earth would not produce her fruits in sufficient
quantities without the assistance of tillage; but who would be at the
pains of tilling it, if another might watch an opportunity to seize upon
and enjoy the product of his industry, art and labor? Had not, therefore,
a separate property in lands, as well as movables, been vested in some
individuals, the world must have continued a forest, and men have been
mere animals of prey. Whereas, now, (so graciously has Providence
interwoven our duty and our happiness together,) the result of this very
necessity has been the ennobling of the human species, by giving it
opportunities of improving its rational, as well as of exerting its
natural faculties.

Necessity begat property; and, in order to insure that property, recourse
was had to civil society, which brought along with it a long train of
inseparable concomitants: states, government, laws, punishments, and the
public exercise of religious duties. Thus connected together, it was found
that a part only of society was sufficient to provide, by their manual
labor, for the necessary subsistence of all; and leisure was given to
others to cultivate the human mind, to invent useful arts, and to lay the
foundations of science.

NOTE.--Cicero. See note on page 156.



CXIX. BATTLE OF WATERLOO. (415)

  There was a sound of revelry by night,
  And Belgium's capital had gathered then
  Her Beauty and her Chivalry, and bright
  The lamps shone o'er fair women and brave men.
  A thousand hearts beat happily; and when
  Music arose with its voluptuous swell,
  Soft eyes looked love to eyes which spake again,
  And all went merry as a marriage bell;
But hush! hark!--a deep sound strikes like a rising knell!

  Did ye not hear it?--No; 't was but the wind,
  Or the car rattling o'er the stony street;
  On with the dance! let joy be unconfined;
  No sleep till morn, when Youth and Pleasure meet
  To chase the glowing Hours with flying feet--
  But, hark!--that heavy sound breaks in once mere,
  As if the clouds its echo would repeat,
  And nearer, clearer, deadlier than before!
Arm! arm! it is--it is the cannon's opening roar!

  Ah! then and there was hurrying to and fro,
  And gathering tears, and tremblings of distress,
  And cheeks all pale, which, but an hour ago
  Blushed at the praise of their own loveliness;
  And there were sudden partings, such as press
  The life from out young hearts, and choking sighs
  Which ne'er might be repeated: who could guess
  If ever more should meet those mutual eyes,
Since upon night so sweet such awful morn could rise.

  And there was mounting in hot haste: the steed,
  The mustering squadron, and the clattering car
  Went pouring forward with impetuous speed,
  And swiftly forming in the ranks of war;
  And the deep thunder, peal on peal afar;
  And near, the beat of the alarming drum
  Roused up the soldier ere the morning star;
  While thronged the citizens with terror dumb,
  Or whispering with white lips--"The foe! They come!
They come!"

  And Ardennes waves above them her green leaves,
  Dewy with nature's tear-drops, as they pass,
  Grieving, if aught inanimate e'er grieves,
  Over the unreturning brave!--alas!
  Ere evening to be trodden like the grass,
  Which, now, beneath them, but above, shall grow,
  In its next verdure, when this fiery mass
  Of living valor, rolling on the foe,
And burning with high hope, shall molder, cold and low

  Last noon beheld them full of lusty life,
  Last eve in beauty's circle proudly gay,
  The midnight brought the signal sound of strife,
  The morn, the marshaling in arms,--the day,
  Battle's magnificently stern array!
  The thunderclouds close o'er it, which when rent,
  The earth is covered thick with other clay,
  Which her own clay shall cover, heaped and pent,
Rider and horse,--friend, foe,--in one red burial blent.
                                                        --Byron.


NOTES.--The Battle of Waterloo was fought on June 18th, 1815, between the
French army on one side, commanded by Napoleon Bonaparte, and the English
army and allies on the other side, commanded by the Duke of Wellington. At
the commencement of the battle, some of the officers were at a ball at
Brussels, a short distance from Waterloo, and being notified of the
approaching contest by the cannonade, left the ballroom for the field of
battle.

The wood of Soignies lay between the field of Waterloo and Brussels. It is
supposed to be a remnant of the forest of Ardennes.



CXX. "WITH BRAINS, SIR." (417)

John Brown, 1810-1882, was born in Lanarkshire, Scotland, and graduated at
the University of Edinburgh. His father was John Brown, an eminent
clergyman and the author of several books. Dr. Brown's literary reputation
rests largely upon a series of papers contributed to the "North British
Review." "Rab and his Friends," a collection of papers published in book
form, is the most widely known of all his writings.
###


"Pray, Mr. Opie, may I ask you what you mix your colors with?" said a
brisk dilettante student to the great painter. "With brains, sir," was the
gruff reply--and the right one. It did not give much of information; it
did not expound the principles and rules of the art; but, if the inquirer
had the commodity referred to, it would awaken him; it would set him
agoing, athinking, and a-painting to good purpose. If he had not the
wherewithal, as was likely enough, the less he had to do with colors and
their mixture the better.

Many other artists, when asked such a question, would have either set
about detailing the mechanical composition of such and such colors, in
such and such proportions, rubbed up so and so; or perhaps they would (and
so much the better, but not the best) have shown him how they laid them
on; but even this would leave him at the critical point. Opie preferred
going to the quick and the heart of the matter: "With brains, sir."

Sir Joshua Reynolds was taken by a friend to see a picture. He was
anxious to admire it, and he looked it over with a keen and careful but
favorable eye. "Capital composition; correct drawing; the color, tone,
chiaroscuro excellent; but--but--it wants--hang it, it wants--that!"
snapping his fingers; and, wanting "that," though it had everything else,
it was worth nothing.

Again, Etty was appointed teacher of the students of the Royal Academy,
having been preceded by a clever, talkative, scientific expounder of
aesthetics, who delighted to tell the young men how everything was done,
how to copy this, and how to express that. A student came up to the new
master, "How should I do this, sir?" "Suppose you try." Another, "What
does this mean, Mr. Etty?" "Suppose you look." "But I have looked."
"Suppose you look again."

And they did try, and they did look, and looked again; and they saw and
achieved what they never could have done had the how or the what
(supposing this possible, which it is not, in full and highest meaning)
been told them, or done for them; in the one case, sight and action were
immediate, exact, intense, and secure; in the other, mediate, feeble, and
lost as soon as gained.

NOTES.--Opie, John (b. 1761, d. 1807), was born in Wales, and was known as
the "Cornish wonder." He became celebrated as a portrait painter, but
afterwards devoted himself to historical subjects. He was professor of
painting at the Royal Academy.

Reynolds. See note on page 379.

Etty, William (b. 1787, d. 1849), is considered one of the principal
artists of the modern English school. His pictures are mainly historical.

The Royal Academy of Arts, in London, was founded in 1768. It is under the
direction of forty artists of the first rank in their several professions,
who have the title of "Royal Academicians." The admission to the Academy
is free to all properly qualified students.



CXXI. THE NEW ENGLAND PASTOR. (419)

Timothy Dwight, 1752-1817, was born at Northampton, Massachusetts. His
mother was a daughter of the celebrated Jonathan Edwards. It is said that
she taught her son the alphabet in one lesson, that he could read the
Bible at four years of age, and that he studied Latin by himself at six.
He graduated at Yale in 1769, returned as tutor in 1771, and continued six
years. He was chaplain in a brigade under General Putnam for a time. In
1778 his father died, and for five years he supported his mother and a
family of twelve children by farming, teaching and preaching. From 1783 to
1795 he was pastor at Greenfield, Connecticut. He was then chosen
President of Yale College, and remained in office till he died. Dr. Dwight
was a man of fine bodily presence, of extended learning, and untiring
industry. His presidency of the college was highly successful. His
patriotism was no less ardent and true than his piety. In his younger days
he wrote considerably in verse. His poetry is not all of a very high
order, but some pieces possess merit.
###


  The place, with east and western sides,
A wide and verdant street divides:
And here the houses faced the day,
And there the lawns in beauty lay.
There, turret-crowned, and central, stood
A neat and solemn house of God.
Across the way, beneath the shade
Two elms with sober silence spread,
The preacher lived. O'er all the place
His mansion cast a Sunday grace;
Dumb stillness sate the fields around;
His garden seemed a hallowed ground;
Swains ceased to laugh aloud, when near,
And schoolboys never sported there.

  In the same mild and temperate zone,
Twice twenty years, his course had run,
His locks of flowing silver spread
A crown of glory o'er his head;
His face, the image of his mind,
With grave and furrowed wisdom shined;
Not cold; but glowing still, and bright;
Yet glowing with October light:
As evening blends, with beauteous ray,
Approaching night with shining day.

  His Cure his thoughts engrossed alone:
For them his painful course was run:
To bless, to save, his only care;
To chill the guilty soul with fear;
To point the pathway to the skies,
And teach, and urge, and aid, to rise;
Where strait, and difficult to keep,
It climbs, and climbs, o'er Virtue's steep.



CXXII. DEATH OF ABSALOM. (420)

David numbered the people that were with him, and set captains of
thousands and captains of hundreds over them. And David sent forth a third
part of the people under the hand of Joab, and a third part under the hand
of Abishai, the son of Zeruiah, Joab's brother, and a third part under the
hand of Ittai, the Gittite.

And the king said unto the people, I will surely go forth with you myself
also. But the people answered, thou shalt not go forth; for if we flee
away, they will not care for us; neither if half of us die, will they care
for us; but now thou art worth ten thousand of us; therefore now it is
better that thou succor us out of the city. And the king said unto them,
What seemeth you best, I will do.

And the king stood by the gate side, and all the people came out by
hundreds and by thousands. And the king commanded Joab, and Abishai, and
Ittai, saying, Deal gently for my sake with the young man, even with
Absalom. And all the people heard when the king gave all the captains
charge concerning Absalom.

So the people went out into the field against Israel; and the battle was
in the wood of Ephraim; where the people of Israel were slain before the
servants of David, and there was there a great slaughter that day of
twenty thousand men. For the battle was there scattered over the face of
all the country: and the wood devoured more people that day than the sword
devoured.

And Absalom met the servants of David. And Absalom rode upon a mule, and
the mule went under the thick boughs of a great oak, and his head caught
hold of the oak, and he was taken up between the heaven and the earth; and
the mule that was under him went away.

And a certain man saw it, and told Joab, and said, Behold, I saw Absalom
hanged in an oak. And Joab said unto the man that told him, And, behold,
thou sawest him, and why didst thou not smite him there to the ground? and
I would have given thee ten shekels of silver and a girdle. And the man
said unto Joab, Though I should receive a thousand shekels of silver in my
hand, yet would I not put forth my hand against the king's son; for, in
our hearing, the king charged thee, and Abishai, and Ittai, saying, Beware
that none touch the young man Absalom. Otherwise, I should have wrought
falsehood against mine own life; for there is no matter hid from the king,
and thou thyself wouldst have set thyself against me.

Then said Joab, I may not tarry thus with thee. And he took three darts in
his hand, and thrust them through the heart of Absalom, while he was yet
alive in the midst of the oak. And ten young men that bare Joab's armor,
compassed about and smote Absalom, and slew him. And Joab blew the
trumpet, and the people returned from pursuing after Israel; for Joab held
back the people.

And they took Absalom, and cast him into a great pit in the wood, and laid
a very great heap of stones upon him; and all Israel fled, everyone to his
tent. Now Absalom, in his lifetime, had taken and reared up for himself a
pillar, which is in the king's dale; for he said, I have no son to keep my
name in remembrance; and he called the pillar after his own name; and it
is called unto this day, Absalom's Place.

Then said Ahimaaz, the son of Zadok, Let me now run, and bear the king
tidings, how that the Lord hath avenged him of his enemies. And Joab said
unto him, Thou shalt not bear tidings this day, but thou shalt bear
tidings another day: but this day thou shalt bear no tidings, because the
king's son is dead. Then said Joab to Cushi, Go, tell the king what thou
hast seen. And Cushi bowed himself unto Joab, and ran.

Then said Ahimaaz the son of Zadok yet again to Joab, But howsoever, let
me, I pray thee, also run after Cushi. And Joab said, Wherefore wilt thou
run, my son, seeing that thou hast no tidings ready? But howsoever, said
he, let me run. And he said unto him, run. Then Ahimaaz ran by the way of
the plain, and overran Cushi.

And David sat between the two gates; and the watchman went up to the roof
over the gate unto the wall, and lifted up his eyes, and looked, and
behold, a man running alone. And the watchman cried, and told the king.
And the king said, If he be alone, there is tidings in his mouth. And he
came apace, and drew near.

And the watchman saw another man running, and the watchman called unto the
porter, and said, Behold, another man running alone. And the king said, He
also bringeth tidings. And the watchman said, Methinketh the running of
the foremost is like the running of Ahimaaz the son of Zadok. And the king
said, He is a good man, and cometh with good tidings.

And Ahimaaz called, and said unto the king, All is well. And he fell down
to the earth upon his face before the king, and said, Blessed be the Lord
thy God, which hath delivered up the men that lifted up their hand against
my lord the king. And the king said, Is the young man Absalom safe? And
Ahimaaz answered, When Joab sent the king's servant, and me thy servant, I
saw a great tumult, but I knew not what it was. And the king said unto
him, Turn aside and stand here. And he turned aside, and stood still.

And behold, Cushi came; and Cushi said, Tidings my lord the king; for the
Lord hath avenged thee this day of all them that rose up against thee. And
the king said unto Cushi, Is the young man Absalom safe? And Cushi
answered, The enemies of my lord the king, and all that rise against thee
to do thee hurt, be as that young man is.

And the king was much moved, and went up to the chamber over the gate, and
wept; and as he went, thus he said, O my son Absalom! my son, my son
Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son!
                                                 --II Samuel, Chap. xviii.



CXXIII. ABRAHAM DAVENPORT. (424)

'T was on a May day of the far old year
Seventeen hundred eighty, that there fell
Over the bloom and sweet life of the Spring,
Over the fresh earth and the heaven of noon,
A horror of great darkness, like the night
In day of which the Norland sagas tell,
The Twilight of the Gods.

                          The low-hung sky
Was black with ominous clouds, save where its rim
Was fringed with a dull glow, like that which climbs
The crater's sides from the red hell below.
Birds ceased to sing, and all the barnyard fowls
Roosted; the cattle at the pasture bars
Lowed, and looked homeward; bats on leathern wings
Flitted abroad; the sounds of labor died;
Men prayed, and women wept; all ears grew sharp
To hear the doom blast of the trumpet shatter
The black sky, that the dreadful face of Christ
Might look from the rent clouds, not as he looked
A loving guest at Bethany, but stern
As Justice and inexorable Law.

Meanwhile in the old Statehouse, dim as ghosts,
Sat the lawgivers of Connecticut,
Trembling beneath their legislative robes.
"It is the Lord's Great Day! Let us adjourn,"
Some said; and then, as if with one accord,
All eyes were turned to Abraham Davenport.

He rose, slow-cleaving with his steady voice
The intolerable hush. "This well may be
The Day of Judgment which the world awaits;
But be it so or not, I only know
My present duty, and my Lord's command
To occupy till he come. So at the post
Where he hath set me in his providence,
I choose, for one, to meet him face to face,
No faithless servant frightened from my task,
But ready when the Lord of the harvest calls;
And therefore, with all reverence, I would say,
Let God do his work, we will see to ours.
Bring in the candles." And they brought them in.

Then by the flaring lights the Speaker read,
Albeit with husky voice and shaking hands,
An act to amend an act to regulate
The shad and alewive fisheries. Whereupon,
Wisely and well spake Abraham Davenport,
Straight to the question, with no figures of speech
Save the ten Arab signs, yet not without
The shrewd, dry humor natural to the man:
His awe-struck colleagues listening all the while,
Between the pauses of his argument,
To hear the thunder of the wrath of God
Break from the hollow trumpet of the cloud.

And there he stands in memory to this day,
Erect, self-poised, a rugged face, half seen
Against the background of unnatural dark,
A witness to the ages as they pass,
That simple duty hath no place for fear.
                                             --Whittier.


NOTE.--The "Dark Day," as it is known, occurred May 19th, 1780, and
extended over all New England. The darkness came on about ten o'clock in
the morning, and lasted with varying degrees of intensity until midnight
of the next day. The cause of the phenomenon is unknown.



CXXIV. THE FALLS OF THE YOSEMITE. (426)

Thomas Starr King, 1824-1863, was born in New York City. His father was a
Universalist minister; and, in 1834, he settled in Charlestown,
Massachusetts. The son was preparing to enter Harvard University, when the
death of his father devolved upon him the support of his mother, and his
collegiate course had to be given up. He spent several years as clerk and
teacher, improving meanwhile all possible opportunities for study. In 1846
he was settled over the church to which his father had preached in
Charlestown. Two years later, he was called to the Hollis Street Unitarian
Church in Boston. Here his eloquence and active public spirit soon made
him well known. He also gained much reputation as a public lecturer. In
1860 he left the East to take charge of the Unitarian church in San
Francisco. During the remaining years of his life, he exercised much
influence in the public affairs of California. He died suddenly, of
diphtheria, in the midst of his brilliant career.

Mr. King was a great lover of nature. His "White Hills," describing the
mountain scenery of New Hampshire, is the most complete book ever written
concerning that interesting region.
###

The Yosemite valley, in California, is a pass about ten miles long. At its
eastern extremity it leads into three narrower passes, each of which
extends several miles, winding by the wildest paths into the heart of the
Sierra Nevada chain of mountains. For seven miles of the main valley,
which varies in width from three quarters of a mile to a mile and a half,
the walls on either side are from two thousand to nearly five thousand
feet above the road, and are nearly perpendicular. From these walls, rocky
splinters a thousand feet in height start up, and every winter drop a few
hundred tons of granite, to adorn the base of the rampart with picturesque
ruin.

The valley is of such irregular width, and bends so much and often so
abruptly, that there is a great variety and frequent surprise in the forms
and combinations of the overhanging rocks as one rides along the bank of
the stream. The patches of luxuriant meadow, with their dazzling green,
and the grouping of the superb firs, two hundred feet high, that skirt
them, and that shoot above the stout and graceful oaks and sycamores
through which the horse path winds, are delightful rests of sweetness and
beauty amid the threatening awfulness.
