doubt he will begin to feel anxious by tomorrow night. I wish we could
have seen some way of getting the horses down. It will be awkward
doing without them."

"Yes. I hope we shall get a good start. Of course, we must put on our
peasant's dresses again. I am glad enough to be rid of that rope,
though I have had to put on two or three additional things, to fill me
out to the same size as before. Still, I don't feel so bound in as I
did, though it is horribly hot."

"I am sure I shall be glad to get rid of all this stuffing," Surajah
said. "I felt ready to faint today, when the room was full."

"Well, we have only one more day of it," Dick said. "I do hope Father
will be able to get out by ten o'clock. Then, before eleven we shall
be at the edge of the rock. Say we are two hours in getting down, and
walking round to join Ibrahim. That will take us till one, and we
shall have a good five hours before Father's escape will be
discovered. They will know that he can't have gone down the road, and
it will take them fully two hours to search the fort, and all over the
rock. It will be eight o'clock before they set out in pursuit, and by
that time we ought to be well on the road between Cenopatam and
Anicull.

"If we can manage to buy horses at Cenopatam, of course we will do so.
We shall be there by five o'clock, and ought to be able to get them in
a couple of hours. Once on horseback, we are safe. I don't think they
will pursue very far--perhaps not even so far as Cenopatam; for the
governor will see that he had better not make any fuss about a white
captive having escaped, when it was not known that he had one there at
all. I think it more likely that, when he finds Father has got fairly
away, he will take no steps at all. They have no cavalry here, and he
will know, well enough, that there will be no chance of our being
tracked and overtaken by footmen, if we had but a couple of hours'
start."

"I think that is so, Dick. He has done his duty in keeping your father
a prisoner, but I don't think he will be, at heart, at all sorry that
he has made his escape."

"I think, Surajah, I will write a letter to him, and leave it here, to
be found after we have got away, thanking him in Father's name for the
kindness that he has always shown him, saying who I am, why I came
here, and asking his pardon for the deception that I have been obliged
to play upon him. He is a good old fellow, and I should think it would
please him."

"I should think it would," Surajah agreed.

"I will do up my brace of pistols in a packet, and put them with the
note," Dick went on, "and will say, in it, that I hope he will accept
them as a token of our esteem and gratitude. They are well-finished
English pistols, and I have no doubt he will prize them. I will
mention, too, that we shall have made our escape at eleven o'clock,
and therefore, by the time he receives my letter, we shall be far
beyond the reach of pursuit. I daresay that will decide him upon
letting the matter pass quietly, and he will see himself that, by
making no fuss over it, no one outside the fortress will ever know
that a prisoner has escaped."

The next day passed comparatively quietly. A good many soldiers and
women came up from below, and before sunset their goods were
completely cleared out. The governor came over in the afternoon and
had a talk with them. They expressed their satisfaction at the result
of their trading, and said that they should be off before sunrise.

"I hope you will come again," he said; "but not for another six
months, for assuredly you will take away with you pretty nearly every
rupee in the fortress. My wife and the other ladies are all well
content with their purchases, and agree that they would not have got
them cheaper at Seringapatam, or Bangalore."

"We try to buy cheaply and sell cheaply," Surajah said modestly. "In
that way we turn over our money quickly. But it is seldom, indeed,
that we find so good a market as we have done here. When we left
Bangalore, we thought that it might be a month before we should have
to go back there to replenish our packs from our magazine; but we
shall only have been away five or six days."

"I am glad that you are content, for you are honest traders, and not
like some of the rascals that have come up to the forts I have
commanded, and fleeced the soldiers right and left."

Although not given to blushing, Dick felt that he coloured under his
dye at the praise; for although they had certainly sold cheaply, he
doubted whether the term honest could be fairly applied to the whole
transaction.

As ten o'clock approached, the two friends sat with open door,
listening intently for every sound. Conversation was still going on in
the houses, and occasionally they could make out a dark figure
crossing the yard.

It was not yet ten when a light footfall was heard, and a moment later
Captain Holland appeared at the door.

"It is all right so far," he said, "but wait five minutes, to give me
time to get the ladder fixed. You had better come one by one, and
stroll quietly across the yard. It is too dark for anyone to recognise
you, unless they run right against you; and even if they do so, they
will not think it strange you should be out, after having been cooped
up all the day."

In another moment he was gone. They had each, during the day, gone out
for a time, and had walked round through the narrow lane behind the
governor's house, to see that there were no obstructions that they
might fall over in the dark. They agreed, on comparing notes, that
Captain Holland had chosen the best possible place for scaling the
wall, for the lane was evidently quite unused, and the house, which
was higher than the wall, would completely screen them from
observation.

In five minutes Dick followed his father, leaving Surajah to come on
in a minute or two. They had secured about them the gold and silver
they had received for their purchases, but they left behind a large
heap of copper coins, on the top of which Dick had placed his letter
to the governor, and the parcel containing the brace of pistols. He
met no one on his way to the rendezvous, but almost ran against his
father in the dark.

"Steady, Dick, or you will run me down," Captain Holland said. "I have
got the ladder fixed, so you had better go up at once. Take these
three spears with you. I will bring the long ladder."

"We sha'n't want the spears, Father. We have a brace of
double-barrelled pistols, and two brace of single barrels."

"Never mind that, Dick. You will see that they will come in useful."

Dick took the spears, and mounted the ladder without further question.
His father then came up and placed the long rope, which, with the
pieces of wood, was a bulky bundle, on the wall and then descended
again. It was another five minutes before Surajah came up.

"I was stopped on the way," he said, "and had to talk with one of the
officers."

He and the captain were soon by Dick's side. The ladder was then
pulled up, and lowered on the other side of the wall. They were soon
standing at its foot.

"Shall I jerk the ladder down, Father?"

"I think not, Dick. It would only make a clatter, and it is no matter
to us whether they find it in the morning or not. You had better
follow me. I know every foot of the ground, and there are some nasty
places, I can tell you."

They had to make several detours, to avoid ravines running deep into
the plateau, and for a time Captain Holland walked very cautiously.
When he had passed these, he stepped out briskly, and in less than an
hour from starting they were near the edge of the precipice. Their
eyes had, by this time, become accustomed to the darkness.

"We are just there now," Captain Holland said. "But we must go very
cautiously, for the rock falls sheer away, without warning. Ah! There
is the edge, a few yards ahead of me.

"Now, do you stay where you are, while I feel about for that spear
head I put in to mark the place. It had about three feet of the staff
on it. If it were not for that, there would be small chance of finding
it. I know it is somewhere close here."

In a few minutes he returned to them.

"I have found it," he said. "Keep close behind me."

After walking for fifty yards, he stopped.

"Here it is, lads.

"Now give me those spears, Dick."

He thrust them firmly into the ground, a few inches apart.

"Throw your weight on them, too," he said. "That is right. Now they
will stand many times the strain we shall put on them.

"I have chosen this place, Dick, for two reasons. In the first place,
because it is the most perpendicular, and in the second, because the
soil and grass project slightly over the edge of the rock. There is a
cushion in that bundle, and four spear heads. I will peg it down close
to the edge, and the rope will run easily over it.

"Now, Surajah, we had better let you down first. You will be tied
quite securely, and there will be no risk whatever, as you know, of
the rope giving way. I should advise you to keep your eyes shut, till
you get to the bottom, for the rope will certainly twist round and
round; but keep your arms well in front of you, and whenever you feel
the rock, open your eyes, and send yourself off with your arms and
legs. I don't think you will touch, for at this point it seemed to me,
as I looked down, that the rock projects farther out than anywhere
else on the face of the precipice, and that a stone dropped straight
down would fall some fourteen or fifteen feet from its foot. Would you
like me to bandage your eyes?"

"No, thank you. I will keep my eyes closed."

"That is the best thing you can do," Captain Holland said, "though it
is so dark that you would not be able to see, if you did. When you get
to the bottom, untie the rope, pull it gently down, and call out to me
whether the lowest piece of stick touches the ground. If it does not,
I will pull it up again and fasten on some more. I have got a dozen
spare ones with me."

Captain Holland then told Surajah and Dick to take off their upper
garments. These he wound round and round the lower four feet of the
rope, increasing its diameter to over two inches.

"There," he said, as he fastened this round Surajah's body, under the
arms. "It won't hurt you, now. That silk rope would have cut in an
inch deep before you got to the bottom, if it had not been covered."

Then he took off his own garment, made it up into a roll, lashed one
end to the rope in the centre of Surajah's back, passed it between his
legs and fastened it to the knot at his chest.

"There," he said; "that will prevent any possibility of the thing
slipping up over your shoulders, and will take a lot of the strain off
your chest."

Then he lay down and crawled forward to the edge, pegged the cushion
down, and then, turning to Surajah, said:

"All is ready now."

Surajah had felt rather ashamed that all these precautions should be
taken for him, while the others would have to rely solely upon their
hands and feet, and, sternly repressing any sign of nervousness, he
stepped forward to the side of Captain Holland.

"That is right," the captain said approvingly. "Now, lie down by my
side, and work yourself backwards. Go over on one side of the cushion,
for you might otherwise displace it. I will hold your wrists and let
you over. Dick will hold the rope. I will put it fairly on the
cushion. Then I shall take it and stand close to the edge, and pay it
out gradually as you go down. If you should find any projecting piece
of rock, call out 'Stop!' I will hold on at once. We can then talk
over how we can best avoid the difficulty. When you are down, and I
tell you Dick is coming, take hold of one of the steps, and hold the
ladder as firmly as you can, so as to prevent it from swaying about.

"Now, are you ready?"

"Quite ready," Surajah said, in a firm voice.

Dick, who was standing five or six yards back, tightened the rope.
Gradually he saw Surajah's figure disappear over the edge.

"Slack out a little bit," his father said. "That is right. I have got
it over the cushion. Now hold it firmly until I am on my feet. That is
right. Now pay it out gradually."

It seemed an endless time, to Dick, before his father exclaimed:

"The strain is off! Thank God, he has got down all right!"

A minute later there was a slight pull on the rope, and the captain
paid it out until he heard a call from below.

"Have you got to the lowest stick?" he asked, leaning over.

"Yes; it is just touching the ground."

"Not such a bad guess," the captain said, as he turned to Dick. "There
are about twenty feet left."

He now fastened the rope round the spears in the ground.

"I will lower you down, if you like, Dick. You are half as heavy again
as that young native, but I have no doubt that I can manage it."

"Not at all, Father. I am not a bit nervous about it. If it was light,
I should not feel so sure of myself, for I might turn giddy; but there
is no fear of my doing so now."

"Well, lad, it is as well to be on the safe side, and I manufactured
this yesterday."

He put a loop, composed of a rope some four feet long, over Dick's
shoulders and under his arms. To each end was attached a strong double
hook, like two fingers.

"There, lad! Now, if you feel at all tired or shaky, all you have got
to do is to hook this on to one of the steps. Do you see? One hook on
each side of the cord. That way you can rest as long as you like, and
then go on again. You say you can go down a rope with your hands only.
I should advise you to do that, if you can, and not to use your legs
unless you want to sit down on one of the long steps; for, as you
know, if you use your feet the rope will go in till they are almost
level with your head; while, if you use your arms only, it will hang
straight down."

"I know, Father. And I don't suppose I shall have to rest at all, for
these cross sticks make it ten times as easy as having to grip the
rope only."

Dick laid himself down as Surajah had done, and crawled backwards
until he was lying half over the edge. Then he seized the rope and
began to descend, hand over hand. He counted the rungs as he went
down, and half way he sat down on one of the long pieces, hitched the
hooks on to the one above, and rested his arms. After a short pause,
he continued until he reached the bottom.

The captain, who was stooping with his hand on the rope, felt the
vibration cease, and as he leaned over he heard Dick call out:

"I am all right, Father. Those bits of wood make easy work of it."

Then the captain at once began to descend, and was soon standing
beside his son and Surajah.

"Thank God that job is finished! How do you both feel?"

"My arms feel as if they had done some work, Father. I have been four
or five months without practice, or I should hardly have felt it."

"And how are you, Surajah?"

"I feel ashamed at having been let down like a baby, Captain Holland,
and at being so nervous."

"There is nothing to be ashamed of," Captain Holland said. "Rope
climbing is a thing that only comes with practice; and as to
nervousness, most landsmen are afraid to trust themselves to a rope at
all. Did you open your eyes?"

"Not once, Sahib. I kept my arms out, as you told me, but I did not
touch anything. I could feel that I was spinning round and round, and
was horribly frightened just at first. But I went down so smoothly and
quietly that the feeling did not last long; for I knew that the rope
was very strong, and as I did not touch anything, it seemed to me that
there could be no fear of it being cut against the rock."

The clothes were soon unwound from the rope, and put on again. Captain
Holland cut off all the slack of the rope, and made it into a coil.

"The slope is all right, as far as I could see from the top," he said;
"but we may come across nasty bits again, and this will stand in
useful, if we do."

They went down cautiously, but at a fair rate of speed; until, without
meeting with any serious difficulty, they arrived on the plain. Four
miles' brisk walking brought them to the grove where Ibrahim had been
left, and they had scarce entered among the trees when he asked:

"Who is it that is coming?"

"It is us, Ibrahim. We have got my father!"

Ibrahim gave an exclamation of joy, and a minute later they joined
him.

"You were not asleep, then, Ibrahim?" Dick said.

"No, my lord. I have slept during the day, and watched at night; but I
did not sleep yesterday, for I was growing sorely anxious, and had
begun to fear that harm had befallen you."

"Well, let us be off at once. Of course, we have had to leave the
horses behind us, and I want to be at Cenopatam by daybreak. We will
buy horses there."

They struck across the country to the southwest, until they came on a
road between Magree and Cenopatam, and arrived within sight of the
latter town just at daybreak. As they walked, Dick and Surajah had,
with no small amount of pain, removed their beards and the patches of
hair.

"You ought both to have shaved before you put those things on,"
Captain Holland said, as they muttered exclamations of pain. "You see,
cobbler's wax, or whatever it is, sticks to what little down there is
on your cheeks and chin, and I don't wonder that it hurts horribly,
pulling it off. If you had shaved first, you would not have felt any
of that."

"I will remember that, Father, if I ever have to disguise myself
again," Dick said. "I feel as if I were pulling the whole skin off my
face."

The painful task was at last finished.

"I shall be glad to have a look at you in the morning, Dick," his
father said, "so as to see what you are really like; of which I have
not the least idea, at present. You must feel a deal more comfortable,
now that you have got rid of the rope."

"I am, indeed. I am sure Surajah must be quite as much pleased at
leaving his padding behind."

They stopped half a mile from the town, which was a place of
considerable size. Dick took, from the saddlebag of the horse Ibrahim
was leading, the bottle of liquid with which he was in the habit of
renewing his staining every few days, and darkened his father's face
and hands. Then they took off their costumes as merchants, and put on
their peasants' attire. Dick directed Ibrahim to make a detour, so as
to avoid the town and come down on the road half a mile beyond it, and
there wait until they rejoined them--for his father was to accompany
Ibrahim.

It was growing light as Dick and Surajah entered the town, and in half
an hour the streets became alive with people. After some search, they
found a man who had several horses to sell, and, after the proper
amount of bargaining, they purchased three fairly good animals.
Another half hour was occupied in procuring saddles and bridles, and,
after riding through quiet streets to avoid questioning, they left the
town, and soon rejoined their companions.

"Now, Surajah," Dick said, "we will be colonels again for a bit."

The saddlebags were again opened, and in a few minutes they were
transformed.

"Why, where on earth did you get those uniforms?" Captain Holland
asked, in surprise. "Those sashes are the signs that their wearers are
officers of the Palace, for I have seen them more than once at
Kistnagherry; and the badges are those of colonels. There is nothing
like impudence, Dick, but it seems to me it would have been safer if
you had been contented with sub-officers' uniforms."

Dick laughed.

"We are wearing them because we have a right to them," Dick laughed.
"We are both colonels in Tippoo's army, and officers of the
Palace--that is, we were so until a month ago, though I expect since
then our names have been struck off their army list. I will tell you
about it, as we ride."

"You had better tell me afterwards, Dick. I have never ridden a horse
in my life, except when they were taking me from the coast to Mysore,
and I shall have enough to do to keep my seat and attend to my
steering, without trying to listen to you."

They rode all day, passed through Anicull and Oussoor, and halted for
the night in a grove two or three miles farther on. They had not been
questioned as, at a walk, they went through the town. Captain Holland
had ridden behind with Ibrahim, and the latter had stopped and laid in
a stock of provisions at Anicull.

"Thank goodness that is over!" Captain Holland said, as they
dismounted. "I feel as if I had been beaten all over with sticks, and
am as hungry as a hunter."

"Ibrahim will have some food ready in half an hour, Father, and I
shall be glad of some myself. Though, you know, we all had some
chupatties he bought."

"They were better than nothing, Dick, but a pancake or two does not go
very far, with men who have been travelling since ten o'clock last
night. Well, lad, I am glad that you have got rid of your beard, and
that, except for that brown skin, I am able to have a look at you as
you are. You will be bigger than I am, Dick--bigger by a good bit, I
should say, and any father might be proud of you, much more so one who
has been fetched out from a captivity from which he had given up all
hope of escaping. As it is, lad, words can't tell how grateful I feel,
to God, for giving me such a son."

"My dear Father, it is Mother's doing. It has been her plan, ever
since she heard that you were wrecked, that we should come out here to
find you, and she has had me regularly trained for it. I had masters
for fencing and gymnastics, we always talked Hindustani when we were
together, and she has encouraged me to fight with other boys, so that
I should get strong and quick."

That evening by the fire, Dick told his father the whole story of his
life since he had been in India.

"Well, my lad, you have done wonders," his father said, when he had
finished; "and if I had as much enterprise and go as you have, I
should have been out of this place years ago. But in the first place,
I was very slow in picking up their lingo. You see, until within the
last three or four years, there have always been other Englishmen with
me. Of course we talked together, and as most of them were able to
speak a little of the lingo, there was no occasion for me to learn it.
Then I was always, from the first, when they saw that I was handy at
all sorts of things, kept at odd jobs, and so got less chance of
picking up the language than those who were employed in drilling, or
who had nothing to do but talk to their guards. But most of all, I did
not try to escape because I found that, if I did so, it would
certainly cost my companions their lives. That was the way that
scoundrel Tippoo kept us from making attempts to get off.

"Well, soon after the last of the other captives was murdered, we
moved away to Kistnagherry, which was a very difficult place to escape
from; and besides, very soon after we got there, I heard of the war
with our people, and hoped that they would take the place. It was, as
you may suppose, a terrible disappointment to me when they failed in
their attack on it. Still, I hoped that they would finally thrash
Tippoo, and that, somehow, I might get handed over to them. However,
as you know, when peace was made, and Kistnagherry had to be given
over, the governor got orders to evacuate it, without waiting for the
English to come up to take possession.

"Well, since I have been at Savandroog, I have thought often of trying
to get away. By the time I got there, I had learned to speak the
language fairly enough to make my way across the country, and I have
been living in hopes that, somehow or other, I might get possession of
a rope long enough to let myself down the rocks. But, as I told you, I
