
"My dear!" she said, "I am very unhappy. The little dog, the little
sunbeam of my life, is lost. I am convinced, Helen! yes, I am convinced,
that there is foul play in the matter. You, every one of you, took a
most unwarrantable dislike to the poor, faithful little animal. Yes,
every one of you, with the exception of David, detested my Scorpion, and
I am quite certain that you all know where he now is."

"But really, Aunt Maria," said Helen, her fair face flushing, "really,
now, you don't seriously suppose that I had anything to say to
Scorpion's leaving you."

"I don't know, my dear. I exonerate David. Yes, David is a good boy; he
was attached to the dog, and I quite exonerate him. But as to the rest
of you, I can only say that I wish to see your father on the subject."

"Oh! Aunt Maria! you are not going to trouble father, so ill as he is,
about that poor, miserable little dog?"

"Thank you, Helen! thank you! poor miserable little dog indeed. Ah! my
dear, you have let the cat out of the bag now. Yes, my dear, I insist on
seeing your father with regard to the _poor, miserable little dog_.
Poor, indeed, am I without him, my little treasure, my little faithful
Scorpion." Here Mrs. Cameron applied her handkerchief to her eyes, and
Helen walked to the window, feeling almost driven to despair.

"I think you are doing wrong!" she said, presently. "It is wrong to
disturb a man like father about any dog, however noble. I am sure I am
right in saying that we, none of us, know anything about Scorpion's
disappearance. However, if you like, and rather than that father should
be worried, I will send for all the children, and ask them the question
one by one before you. I am absolutely sure that they won't think
Scorpion worth a lie."




CHAPTER XVI.

FIREFLY.


Helen experienced some little difficulty in getting her scattered
brothers and sisters together. She could not get any of them to think
seriously of Scorpion's departure. They laughed and lingered over their
own pursuits, and told Helen to her face that she made a great fuss
about nothing; in short, the best part of an hour had gone by before the
Maybrights and the two Dalrymples assembled in Mrs. Cameron's presence
in the morning room.

"It is just this, children," said Helen. "Aunt Maria feels very low
about Scorpion; you see she loved him." Groans here came audibly from
the lips of Bob and Bunny. "Yes!" said Helen, looking severely at her
two little brothers, "Aunt Maria did love Scorpion. She feels very
lonely without him, and she has taken an idea into her head that one or
other of you had something to say to his disappearance. Of course I know
that none of you could be so cruel and heartless, but to satisfy Aunt
Maria, I have asked you all to come here just to tell her that you did
nothing to make Scorpion run away."

"Only we are very glad he did run away!" said Bob, "but as to touching
him, why, I wouldn't with a pair of tongs."

"I wish to say a word!" said Mrs. Cameron. She came forward, and stood
looking very flushed and angry before the assembled group. "I wish to
say that I am sure some of you in your malice deprived me of my dog. I
believe David Dalrymple to be innocent, but as to the rest of you, I may
as well say that I do not believe you, whatever you may tell me."

"Well, after that!" exclaimed all the children.

"I suppose, Helen, after that we may go away?" said Firefly, who was
looking very pale.

"No, Miss!" said Aunt Maria, "you must stay. Your sister Helen does not
wish me to do anything to disturb your father, but I assure you,
children, there are limits even to my patience, and I intend to visit
him this morning and tell him the whole story, unless before you leave
the room you tell me the truth."

Firefly's sallow little face grew whiter and whiter. She glanced
imploringly at David, who looked boldly and unconcernedly back at her;
then, throwing back his head, he marched up to Mrs. Cameron's side.

"You believe that _I_ am innocent, don't you?" he said.

"Certainly, my dear boy. I have said so."

"In that case, perhaps you would not mind my going out a little way on
the moor and having a good look round for the dog, he _may_ have
wandered there, you know, and broken his leg or something." Mrs. Cameron
shuddered. "In any case," continued David, with a certain air of modest
assurance, which became him very much, "it seems a pity that I should
waste time here."

"Certainly; go, my dear lad," answered Mrs. Cameron. "Bring my little
innocent suffering treasure back with you, and I will give you half a
crown."

David instantly left the room, unheeding a short, sharp cry which issued
from Firefly's lips as he passed her.

Most of the other children were laughing; it was impossible for them to
think of anything in connection with Scorpion except as a joke.

"Listen, Aunt Maria," said Helen. "I am afraid you must not treat my
brothers and sisters as you propose. Neither must you trouble father
without the doctor's permission. The fact is, Aunt Maria, we are
Maybrights, and every one who knows anything about us at all _must_ know
that we would scorn to tell a lie. Our father and our dear, dear
mother--your sister whom you loved, Aunt Maria, and for whose sake you
are interested in us--taught us to fear a lie more than anything,
_much_ more than punishment, _much_ more than discovery. Oh, yes, we
have heaps and heaps of faults; we can tease, we can be passionate, and
idle, and selfish; but being Maybrights, being the children of our own
father and mother, we can't lie. The fact is, we'd be afraid to."

Helen's blue eyes were full of tears.

"Bravo! Helen!" said Polly, going up to her sister and kissing her. "She
says just the simple truth, Aunt Maria," she continued, flashing round
in her bright way on the old lady. "We _are_ a naughty set--_you_ know
that, don't you?--but we can't tell lies; we draw the line there."

"Yes, we draw the line there," suddenly said Firefly, in a high-pitched
voice, which sounded as if it was going to crack.

"I admire bravery," said Mrs. Cameron, after a pause. "Ask your
questions, Helen. For my dead sister's sake I will accept the word of a
Maybright. 'Pon my word, you are extraordinary young people; but I
admire girls who are not afraid to speak out, and who uphold their
parents' teaching. Ask the children quickly, Helen, if they know
anything about the dog, for after David's hint about his having strayed
on that awful moor, and perhaps having broken one of his dear little
legs, I feel more uncomfortable than ever about him. For goodness' sake,
Helen! ask your question quickly, and let me get out on the moor to look
for my dog."

"Children," said Helen, coming forward at once, "do you know anything
about Scorpion's loss, _any_thing? Now, I am going to ask you each
singly; as you answer you can leave the room. Polly, I begin with you."

One by one the Maybrights and Flower answered very clear and emphatic
"No's" to Helen's question, and one by one they retired to wait for
their companions in the passage outside.

At last Helen put the question to Firefly. Two big, green-tinted hazel
eyes were raised to her face.

"Yes, Helen, I do know," replied Firefly.

Mrs. Cameron uttered a shriek, and almost fell upon the little girl, but
Helen very gently held her back.

"One minute," she said. "Firefly, what do you know?"

"I'm not going to tell you, Helen." The child's lips quivered, but her
eyes looked up bravely.

"Why so? Please, Aunt Maria, let me speak to her. Why won't you tell
what you know, dear Fly?"

"Because I promised. There, I won't say a word more about it. I do know,
and I won't tell; no, I won't ever, ever tell. You can punish me, of
course, Aunt Maria."

"So I will, Miss. Take that slap for your impertinence. Oh! if you were
my child, should not I give you a whipping. You know what has happened
to my poor _dear_ little dog, and you refuse to tell. But you shall
tell--you wicked cruel little thing--you shall, you must!"

"Shall I take Firefly away and question her?" asked Helen. "Please, Aunt
Maria, don't be too stern with her. She is a timid little thing; she is
not accustomed to people blaming her. She has some reason for this, but
she will explain everything to her sister Nell, won't you, darling?"

The child's lips were trembling, and her eyes filling with tears.

"There's no use in my going away with you, Helen," she replied,
steadily. "I am willing Aunt Maria should punish me, but I can't tell
because I'm a Maybright. It would be telling a lie to say what I know. I
don't mind your punishing me rather badly, Aunt Maria."

"Oh, you don't, don't you?" said Aunt Maria. "Listen; was not that the
sound of wheels?"

"The doctor to see father," explained Helen. "I ought to go."

"Excuse me, my dear, I particularly wish to see your father's medical
adviser this morning. I will not detain him long, but I have a question
I wish to put to him. You stay with your little sister, Helen. I shall
be back soon."

Mrs. Cameron trotted out of the room. In about ten minutes, with an
exultant look on her face, she returned. Firefly was now clasped tightly
in Helen's arms while she sobbed her heart out on her breast.

"Well, Helen, has this _most_ impertinent, naughty child confessed?"

"She has not," said Helen. "I don't understand her; she seems in sore
trouble. Dear little Fly!"

"'Dear little Fly,' indeed! Naughty, wicked little Fly, you mean.
However, my dear, I have come to tell you that I have just had an
interview with the excellent doctor who attends your father. He has gone
up to see him now. He says he does not want to see you at all to-day,
Helen. Well, I spoke to Dr. Strong, and he was _astonished_--absolutely
astonished, when he heard that I had not yet been permitted to see my
brother-in-law. I told him quite frankly that you girls were jealous of
my influence, and used his (Dr. Strong's) name to keep me out of my poor
brother's room. 'But my dear madam,' he said, 'the young ladies labor
under a mistake--a vast, a monstrous mistake. _Nothing_ could do my
poor patient more good than to see a sensible, practical lady like
yourself!' 'Then I may see him this afternoon?' I asked. 'Undoubtedly,
Mrs. Cameron,' he replied; 'it will be something for my patient to look
forward to.' I have arranged then, my dear Helen, to pay a visit to your
father at three o'clock to-day."

Helen could not repress a sigh.

Mrs. Cameron raised her eyebrows with a certain suggestive and
aggravating gesture.

"Ah, my dear," she said, "you must try to keep under that jealous
temperament. Jealousy fostered in the heart overshadows and overclouds
all life. Be warned in time."

"About this child," said Helen, drawing Firefly forward, "what is to be
done about her? You will be lenient, won't you, Aunt Maria, for she is
very young?"

"By the way," said Mrs. Cameron, with the manner of one who had not
heard a word of Helen's last speech, "is this naughty little girl
attached to her father?"

Firefly raised her tear-dimmed face.

"He is my darling----" she began.

"Ah, yes, my dear; I detest exaggerated expressions. If you love him,
you can now prove it. You would not, for instance, wish to give him
anxiety, or to injure him?"

"Oh, no, oh, no! I would rather die."

"Again that sentimental exaggeration; but you shall prove your words. If
you have not confessed to me before three o'clock to-day all you know
about the loss of my treasured dog Scorpion, I shall take you into your
father's sick room, and in his presence dare you to keep your wicked
secret to yourself any longer."

"Oh, you don't mean that," said Firefly. "You can't be so awfully cruel.
Nell, Nell, do say that Aunt Maria doesn't mean that."

The child was trembling violently; her little face was white as death,
her appealing eyes would have softened most hearts.

"Oh, Nell, what shall I do if I make father worse again? For I can't
tell what I know; it would be a lie to tell it, and you said yourself,
Nell, that no Maybright told lies."

Mrs. Cameron smiled grimly.

"I have said it," she remarked; "it all rests with yourself, Firefly. I
shall be ready either to hear your confession or to take you to your
father at three o'clock to-day."

With these words the good lady walked out of the room.




CHAPTER XVII.

TO THE RESCUE.


An hour later a wildly anxious and disconsolate little figure might have
been seen knocking at Polly's door. No answer from within. A moment of
suspense on the part of the little figure, followed by another and
louder knock; then the small, nervous fingers turned the handle of the
door, and Firefly pushed her head in and peered anxiously round.

Oh, dear! oh, dear! No Polly was in the room. And why did the great
eight-day clock in the hall strike twelve? Why, on this morning of all
mornings, should time go on wings? Firefly had great faith in Polly's
powers of helping her. But the moments were too precious to waste them
in trying to find her. She had another search to make, and she must set
out at once. No, not quite at once. She clasped her hands to her beating
little heart as an idea came to her on which she might act. A delicious
and yet most sorrowful idea, which would fill her with the keenest pain,
and yet give her the very sweetest consolation. She would go and get a
kiss from her father before she set out on the search, which might be a
failure. Very swiftly she turned, flew down the long gallery which led
to Dr. Maybright's room, and went in.

Dr. Strong had paid his visit and gone away. Firefly's heart gave a
bound of delight, for her father was alone. He was lying supported high
in bed with pillows. His almost sightless eyes were not bandaged, they
were simply closed; his hands, with their long, sensitive, purposeful
fingers lay on the white sheets in a restful attitude. Already the acute
hearing of the blind had come to him, and as Firefly glided up to the
bedside, he turned his head quickly. Her two small hands went with a
kind of bound into one of his. His fingers closed over them.

"This is my Fly," said the Doctor; "a very excited and feverish Fly,
too. How these small fingers flutter! What is it, my darling?"

"A kiss, father," said Fly, "a great _hug_ of a kiss! please, please. I
want it so awfully badly."

"Climb up on the bed, and put your arms round me. Is that all right? My
dear little one, you are not well."

"I'm quite well, now, while I'm loving you. Oh! aren't you just the
darlingest of all darling fathers? There, another kiss; and another! Now
I'm better."

She glided off the bed, pressed two long, last fervent embraces on the
Doctor's white hand, and rushed out of the room.

"I'm lots stronger now," she said to herself. "_Whatever_ happens, I'll
