"Can those boys you speak of write?"

"Not they, sir."

"There might be a difficulty about a verbal message."

"The guard will give it, all right, if he gets half a crown with
it. You need not trouble about that, sir. I will have a man to meet
each coach, as it comes in.

"And now we have arranged matters, sir, I will go with you to see
the house, and will send a sharp fellow down tomorrow, to make
inquiries about the people of the place."

When they returned, the friends sat for a long time, talking
together. The suggested plan looked so hopeful that they felt
confident of its success.

"I think, Charlie," Harry said, "it would be a good thing for us to
present ourselves to the Duke of Marlborough. Then we shall see if
he is disposed to take an interest in us, and help us. If he is, he
will tell us what had best be done towards getting Nicholson's
statement made in the presence of some sort of official who will
act on it. If he gives us the cold shoulder, we shall have to do as
best we can in some other direction, and it will be well to have
the matter settled, if possible, before we catch the fellow."

"I think that will be a very good plan, Harry. I know where he
lives. I inquired directly I came over. Tomorrow morning we can go
there and inquire, at the door, at what hour he receives callers."

The next day at eleven o'clock the young men, dressed in their best
attire, called at the duke's. They were informed that the great man
was at home, and would be as likely to see them then as at any
other hour. Accordingly they entered, and were shown into an
anteroom, and sent their names in by a footman. He returned with a
request that they would follow him, and were shown into a library,
where a singularly handsome man, in the prime of life, was sitting
at a desk. He looked at them in some surprise.

"Is there not some mistake, young gentlemen?" he asked. "My servant
gave the names as Captain Jervoise, and Captain Carstairs. I do not
recall the names as those of officers in her majesty's service."

"No, my lord, we have the honour to be captains in the service of
King Charles of Sweden, as this document, signed both by his
minister, Count Piper, and by the king himself, will testify."

The duke took the paper, and read it.

"The king of Sweden speaks very highly of you both, gentlemen," he
said cordially. "It is no mean credit to have gained such warm
praise from the greatest general of his time. What can I do for
you? Do you wish to be transferred from the service of Sweden to
that of her majesty? We have need of good officers, and I can
promise that you shall receive the same rank that you now hold, and
it is likely that, before long, you will have an opportunity of
seeing some service under your national flag."

"I thank you warmly for your kindness, my lord, but it is not with
that view that we have now come to you, though I am sure that we
both should prefer to fight under our own flag, rather than under
that of a foreign king, however kindly he may be disposed to us,
personally. We have called upon a private matter, and I am the
bearer of this letter from my father, who had once the honour of
your lordship's friendship."

"Jervoise," the duke repeated, as he took the letter. "Not Mat
Jervoise, surely?"

"That is my father's name, sir."

"Do I remember him? Why, he was one of my closest friends when I
was a lad, and I once stayed with him at his father's place, for a
fortnight, on a journey I took to the north. But I will read his
letter--

"What changes happen," he said, as he laid it down. "To think that
Mat Jervoise should be an exile, his old home in the hands of
strangers, and he a major in the Swedish service; and that I should
never have heard a word about it!

"Well, young sir," and he held out his hand to Harry, "I can
promise you my aid and protection, to the utmost, in whatever
matter you may be concerned. I seem to remember the name of your
companion, too."

"His father, Sir Marmaduke, was a neighbour of ours. There has
always been great friendship between the two families."

"Of course, I remember him now. He was some fifteen or twenty years
older than your father. I remember that I went over with your
father and grandfather, and dined at his place. He is still alive
and well, I hope?"

"He is both, sir," Charlie said; "but, like Major Jervoise, an
exile."

"You amaze me, but I will not ask you to tell me more, now. I have
to be at Saint James's at twelve.

"Let me see, this evening I shall be engaged. Come tomorrow
morning, at half past eight, and I shall then be able to give you
an hour, or maybe two, if necessary, and will then hear the whole
story fully."

The young men, on presenting themselves the next morning, at the
hour named, were at once ushered in.

"Now, let us lose no time," the duke said, after shaking hands
heartily. "Which of you will tell the story?"

"Carstairs will do so, my lord," Harry replied. "The mischief was
hatched in his house, and my father, and six other gentlemen, were
the victims of the treachery of a kinsman of his."

Charlie told the story of the events that had brought about the
ruin of his father and friends.

"It is monstrous!" the duke exclaimed indignantly, when he had
brought this part of his story to a conclusion. "That my old
friend, Mat Jervoise, should be concerned in a plot for
assassination, is, I would pledge my life, untrue; and Sir
Marmaduke Carstairs was, I know, an honourable gentleman, who would
be equally incapable of such an act. That they were both Jacobites,
I can well believe, for the Jacobites are strong everywhere in the
north, but, as half of us are or have been Jacobites, that can
scarcely be counted as an offence. At any rate, a Stuart is upon
the throne now, and, as long as she reigns, there is no fear that a
civil war will be set up by another of the race. The story, as you
have told it, sir, is, I doubt not for a moment, true, but at
present it is unsupported; and though, on my assurance of their
loyalty, I think I can promise that her majesty would extend a
pardon to the gentlemen who have been so unjustly accused, I fear
that she could not, by her own act, restore the estates that have
been confiscated, unless you can bring some proof that this fellow
you speak of was suborned to get up false evidence against them."

"That, sir, is what I shall have the honour to inform you now."

And Charlie then related the story of their quest for the man
Nicholson, and its result.

"Rarely devised and carried out," the duke said warmly. "Do you lay
the knave by the heels, and frighten him into confessing the truth,
and I will see to the rest of the matter. I do not know that I
ought to let the North coach be robbed, after the information you
have given me, but, as we will hunt down all the other fellows, and
shall probably recover the booty they carry off, the passengers
will have no reason to grumble.

"Well, young sirs, the king of Sweden has given you a testimonial
as to your bravery and conduct. If necessary, I will give you one
for your ingenuity in planning and carrying out a difficult scheme.

"So you have both been with the Swedes through their campaign
against the Russians and Poles. I envy you. King Charles' service
is a grand school for soldiers, and that victory of Narva is the
most extraordinary one ever seen. Had you the honour of any
personal intercourse with the king?"

"Only during three days, when our company formed part of his escort
at a hunting expedition," Harry, whom he addressed, replied. "But
Carstairs spoke to him more frequently. He has been a captain
nearly two years, while I only had my promotion two months ago. We
were in the same regiment, and of the same rank, but Carstairs was
promoted by the king, after the battle at the passage of the Dwina,
as a reward for the suggestion he made in conversation with him,
that the passage might be made under the screen of smoke caused by
the lighting of the forage stacks."

"I must have a long talk with you both. It is certain that, next
spring, the campaign with France will re-open, and your experience
in the field will be very useful to me. The Swedes are wonderful
soldiers. The Muscovites, at present, are little better than
barbarians carrying European arms, but the Saxons are good troops,
and the Swedes have twice beaten them heavily, and they evidently
retain the fighting qualities that, under Gustavus Adolphus, shook
the imperial power to its centre.

"The trouble is to find time. I am pestered with men desirous of
employment in the army, with persons who want favours at court,
with politicians of both parties, with people with schemes and
intrigues of all kinds. I have to be in attendance at the palace,
and to see into the whole details of the organization of the army.
I have no doubt that, at present, my antechamber is crowded with
people who want to see me."

He looked at his tablets.

"Next Wednesday evening I am free, except for a reception at Lord
Godolphin's, but I can look in there late. I will not ask you here,
because I want you to myself. I will have a private room at
Parker's coffee house in Covent Garden. We will sup at seven. When
you go there, ask for Mr. Church's room, and make yourself
comfortable there until I come, for I can never answer for my own
hours. In that way, we shall be free from all chance of
interruption, and I can pick your brains undisturbed. You will
remember the day and hour. Should there be any change in this
private matter of yours, do not hesitate to come to me here."

Tony Peters, their guide and adviser, reported favourably as to the
people with whom the highwayman was lodging.

"The house is kept by the widow of an usher at the palace. She
entertains gentlemen from the country, who come up on business at
the courts of justice, or with people of influence at court. I have
ascertained that our man passes as a well-to-do trader of
Salisbury, who comes up, two or three times a year, to transact
business, and to enjoy for a short time the pleasures of town. He
is liberal in his payments, and is held in high respect by the
woman, whose only objection to him, as a lodger, is the late hours
he keeps. He is a crafty fellow this, for by always going to the
same house, and comporting himself with moderation, he secures a
place of retirement, where, however close the quest after him,
there will be no suspicion whatever, as to his profession, on the
part of the people he is with.

"My man found out all these matters from the servant wench. We
shall have no difficulty in taking him quietly. The woman will be
so terrified, when I tell her what he is wanted for, that she will
do anything rather than have a scandal that would damage the
reputation of the house."

He assured Charlie that he need give the matter no further thought.
All the arrangements would be made, and, unless he heard farther
from him, he and Harry would only have to present themselves, at
the door of the house in question, at two o'clock on the morning of
Saturday.

The evening with the duke passed off pleasantly. The general's
questions turned, not so much upon the actual fighting, as upon the
organization of the Swedes, their methods of campaigning, of
victualling the army, of hutting themselves in winter, the
maintenance of discipline in camp, and other military points that
would be of service to him in his next campaign.

"Your king is very wise, in so strictly repressing all plundering
and violence," he said. "Only so can a general maintain an army in
an enemy's country. If the peasantry have confidence in him, and
know that they will get a fair price for their produce, they will
bring it into the market gladly, in spite of any orders their own
government may issue to the contrary. I am determined that, if I
again lead an English army in the field, I will follow King
Charles' example; though I shall find it more difficult to enforce
my orders than he does, for he is king as well as general, and his
Swedes are quiet, honest fellows, while my army will be composed of
ne'er-do-wells--of men who prefer to wear the queen's uniform to a
prison garment, of debtors who wish to escape their creditors, and
of men who find village life too quiet for them, and prefer to see
the world, even at the risk of being shot, to honest labour on the
farms. It requires a stern hand to make a disciplined army out of
such materials, but when the time of fighting comes, one need wish
for no better."

Before parting with them, the duke inquired farther into their
arrangements for the arrest of the highwayman, and said he should
expect to see them on Saturday, and that, if he heard that all had
gone well, he would at once take steps for bringing the matter
before a court that would deal with it.

The young men felt restless, as the day approached. They had seen
no more of Tony, but they felt complete confidence in him, and were
sure that they would hear if any difficulties arose; but though,
throughout Friday, they did not quit their lodging, no message
reached them.



Chapter 18: A Confession.


At the appointed hour, as the clock of the Abbey was striking, they
gave three gentle knocks at the door of the house. It was
immediately opened by Tony, who held a candle in his hand, closed
the door quietly behind them, and then led them into a parlour.

"Well, Tony, I suppose all has gone well, as we have not heard from
you."

"There was nothing to tell you, sir, and, indeed, I have been
mightily busy. In the first place, I got two days' leave from the
courts, and went down myself, in a light cart, with the boys and
two men. That way I made sure that there should be no mistake as to
the houses the boys were to watch. The two men I sent on, ten miles
beyond the farthest tavern there to watch the road, and if any
horseman goes by tonight, to track him down.

"This evening I came here. I brought with me one of my comrades
from the courts, and we told the good woman the character of the
lodger we had seen leave the house a quarter of an hour before. She
almost fainted when we showed her our badges, and said we must
arrest him, on his return, as a notorious highwayman and breaker of
the laws. She exclaimed that her house would be ruined, and it took
some time to pacify her, by saying that we would manage the job so
quietly that no one in the house need know of it, and that we
would, if possible, arrange it so that the place of his arrest
should not be made public.

"At that, she at once consented to do all that we wished her. We
searched his room carefully, and found some watches, rings, and
other matters, that answered to the description of those stolen
from a coach that was stopped near Dorking, three weeks ago. My
mate has taken them away. As she was afraid that a scuffle in the
bedroom might attract the attention of the four other gentlemen who
are lodging here, I arranged that it should be done at the door. In
that case, if there was any inquiry in the morning, she could say
that it was some drunken fellow, who had come to the house by
mistake, and had tried to force his way in.

"So she put this parlour at our disposal, and, as I have got the
shutters up and the curtains drawn, there is no fear of his
noticing the light, for, as we may have some hours to wait, it is
more pleasant to have a candle, than to sit in the dark."

"Does she come down to let him in?" Harry asked.

"No, sir, the door is left on the latch. She says he finds his way
up to his room, in the dark, and the candle and a tinderbox are
always placed handy for him there. We will take our shoes off
presently, and, when we hear footsteps come up to the door and
stop, we will blow out the candle and steal out into the passage,
so as to catch him directly he closes the door. I have got
handcuffs here, some rope, and a gag."

"Very well, then. I will undertake the actual seizing of him,"
Charlie said. "You slip on the handcuffs, and you, Harry, if you
can find his throat in the dark, grip it pretty tightly, till Tony
can slip the gag into his mouth. Then he can light the candle
again, and we can then disarm and search him, fasten his legs, and
get him ready to put in the cart."

The hours passed slowly, although Tony did his best to divert them,
by telling stories of various arrests and captures in which he had
been concerned. The clock had just struck five, when they heard a
step coming up the quiet street.

"That is likely to be the man," Tony said. "It is about the hour we
expected him."

He blew out the candle and opened the door quietly, and they went
out into the passage. A moment later the step stopped at the door,
the latch clicked, and it was opened. A man entered, and closed the
door behind him. As he did so Charlie, who had marked his exact
position, made a step forward and threw his arms round him.

The man gave an exclamation of surprise and alarm, and then
struggled fiercely, but he was in the hands of one far stronger
than himself. A moment later, he felt that his assailant was not
alone, for he was grasped by the throat, and at the same time he
felt something cold close round his wrists. There was a sharp
click, and he knew that he was handcuffed.

Then a low voice said, "I arrest you, in the name of the queen, for
being concerned in the robbery of the Portsmouth coach at Dorking."

Then a gag was forced between his teeth. Bewildered at the
suddenness of the attack, he ceased to struggle, and remained
quiet, in the grasp of his captors, till there was the sound of the
striking of flint and steel hard by. Then Tony came out of the
parlour with a lighted candle, the highwayman was lifted into the
room, and the door was shut.

He then saw that his captors were three in number. There were two
young gentlemen, and a smaller man, who, as he looked at him, held
out a badge, and showed that he was an officer of the law. His
pistols and sword were removed, then his pockets were searched, and
two watches and three purses, with some rings and bracelets, were
taken out and laid on the table.

"It came off, you see," Tony said to Charlie.

"Well, Master Nicholson, to use one of your aliases, of which you
have, no doubt, a score or more, you may consider yourself under
arrest, not only for the robbery of the Portsmouth coach three
weeks ago, but of the North coach last evening."

The prisoner started. It seemed impossible to him that that affair
should be known yet, still less his connection with it.

"You know what that means?" Tony went on grimly. "Tyburn. Now I am
going to make you a little safer still. You have been a hard bird
to catch, and we don't mean to let you slip through our fingers
again."

So saying, he bound his arms closely to his side with a rope, and
then, with a shorter piece, fastened his ankles securely together.

"Now I will fetch the cart."

He had been gone but five minutes, when they heard a vehicle stop
at the door. The others lifted the highwayman by his shoulders and
feet, carried him out, and laid him in the cart. Tony closed the
door quietly behind them, and then jumped up by the side of the
driver, who at once started the horse at a brisk trot. They crossed
Westminster Bridge, and, after another ten minutes' drive, stopped
at a small house standing back from the road, in a garden of its
own.

"We will carry him in, Tony," Charlie said, "if you will get the
door open."

They carried him in through the door, at which a woman was
standing, into a room, where they saw, to their satisfaction, a
blazing fire. The prisoner was laid down on the ground. Leaving him
to himself, Charlie and his friends sat down to the table, which
was laid in readiness. Two cold chickens, and ham, and bread had
been placed on it.

"Now, Tony, sit down. You must be as hungry as we are."

"Thank you, gentlemen. I am going to have my breakfast in the
kitchen, with my wife."

As he spoke, the woman came in with two large tankards full of
steaming liquid, whose odour at once proclaimed it to be spiced
ale.

"Well, wife, we have done a good night's work," Tony said.

"A good night's work for all of us," Charlie put in. "Your husband
has done us an immense service, Mrs. Peters, and, when our fathers
come to their own again, they will not forget the service he has
rendered us."

When they had made a hearty meal, Tony was called in again.

"Now, Tony, we will proceed to business. You have got pen and ink
and paper, I suppose?"

