    In lines of foam beneath yon trees.

    Dressed in robes of gorgeous hue,
      Brown and gold with crimson blent.
    The forest to the waters blue
      Its own enchanting tints has lent;--
    In their dark depths, lifelike glowing,
      We see a second forest growing,
    Each pictured leaf and branch bestowing
      A fairy grace to that twin wood,
      Mirrored within the crystal flood.

    'Tis pleasant now in forest shades;
      The Indian hunter strings his bow,
    To track through dark entangling glades
      The antlered deer and bounding doe,
    Or launch at night the birch canoe,
    To spear the finny tribes that dwell
    On sandy bank, in weedy cell,
    Or pool, the fisher knows right well--
      Seen by the red and vivid glow
      Of pine torch at his vessel's bow.

    This dreamy Indian summer-day,
      Attunes the soul to tender sadness;
    We love--but joy not in the ray--
      It is not summer's fervid gladness,
    But a melancholy glory,
      Hovering softly round decay,
    Like swan that sings her own sad story,
      Ere she floats in death away.
    The day declines; what splendid dyes,
      In fleckered waves of crimson driven,
    Float o'er the saffron sea that lies
      Glowing within the western heaven!
      Oh, it is a peerless even!

    See, the broad red sun has set,
    But his rays are quivering yet
    Through Nature's vale of violet
      Streaming bright o'er lake and hill,
      But earth and forest lie so still,
      It sendeth to the heart a chill;
    We start to check the rising tear--
    'Tis beauty sleeping on her bier.

Susanna Moodie




    So live, that when thy summons comes to join
    The innumerable caravan which moves
    To that mysterious realm, where each shall take
    His chamber in the silent halls of death,
    Thou go not, like the quarry-slave at night,
    Scourged to his dungeon, but sustained and soothed
    By an unfaltering trust, approach thy grave,
    Like one who wraps the drapery of his couch
    About him, and lies down to pleasant dreams.

Bryant




THE SKYLARK


          Bird of the wilderness,
          Blithesome and cumberless,
    Sweet be thy matin o'er moorland and lea!
          Emblem of happiness,
          Blest is thy dwelling-place--
    Oh, to abide in the desert with thee!

          Wild is thy lay and loud,
          Far in the downy cloud;
    Love gives it energy, love gave it birth.
          Where, on thy dewy wing,
          Where art thou journeying?
    Thy lay is in heaven, thy love is on earth.

          O'er fell and fountain sheen,
          O'er moor and mountain green,
    O'er the red streamer that heralds the day,
          Over the cloudlet dim,
          Over the rainbow's rim,
    Musical cherub, soar, singing away!

          Then, when the gloaming comes,
          Low in the heather blooms,
    Sweet will thy welcome, and bed of love be!
          Emblem of happiness,
          Blest is thy dwelling-place--
    Oh, to abide in the desert with thee!

James Hogg




WHAT IS WAR


What is war? I believe that half the people that talk about war have not
the slightest idea what it is. In a short sentence it may be summed up
to be the combination and concentration of all the horrors, atrocities,
crimes, and sufferings of which human nature on this globe is capable.

If you go into war now, you will have more banners to decorate your
cathedrals and churches. Englishmen will fight now as well as they ever
did; and there is ample power to back them, if the country can be but
sufficiently excited and deluded. You may raise up great generals. You
may have another Wellington, and another Nelson, too; for this country
can grow men capable of every enterprise. Then there may be titles, and
pensions, and marble monuments to eternize the men who have thus become
great;--but what becomes of you, and your country, and your children?

You profess to be a Christian nation. You make it your boast
even--though boasting is somewhat out of place in such questions--you
make it your boast that you are a Christian people, and that you draw
your rule of doctrine and practice, as from a well pure and undefiled,
from the lively oracles of God, and from the direct revelation of the
Omnipotent. You have even conceived the magnificent project of
illuminating the whole earth, even to its remotest and darkest recesses,
by the dissemination of the volume of the New Testament, in whose every
page are written for ever the words of peace. Within the limits of this
island alone, every Sabbath-day, twenty thousand, yes, far more than
twenty thousand temples are thrown open, in which devout men and women
assemble to worship Him who is the "Prince of Peace."

Is this a reality? or is your Christianity a romance, and your
profession a dream? No; I am sure that your Christianity is not a
romance, and I am equally sure that your profession is not a dream. It
is because I believe this that I appeal to you with confidence, and that
I have hope and faith in the future. I believe that we shall see, and at
no very distant time, sound economic principles spreading much more
widely amongst the people; a sense of justice growing up in a soil which
hitherto has been deemed unfruitful; and--which will be better than
all--the churches of the United Kingdom, the churches of Britain,
awaking as it were from their slumbers, and girding up their loins to
more glorious work, when they shall not only accept and believe in the
prophecy, but labour earnestly for its fulfilment, that there shall come
a time--a blessed time--a time which shall last for ever--when "nation
shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any
more."

John Bright




THE HOMES OF ENGLAND


    The stately homes of England!
      How beautiful they stand,
    Amidst their tall ancestral trees,
      O'er all the pleasant land!
    The deer across their greensward bound,
      Through shade and sunny gleam:
    And the swan glides past them with the sound
      Of some rejoicing stream.

    The merry homes of England!
      Around their hearths by night,
    What gladsome looks of household love
      Meet in the ruddy light!
    There woman's voice flows forth in song,
      Or childhood's tale is told,
    Or lips move tunefully along
      Some glorious page of old.

    The blessed homes of England!
      How softly on their bowers
    Is laid the holy quietness
      That breathes from Sabbath hours!
    Solemn, yet sweet, the church-bell's chime
      Floats through their woods at morn;
    All other sounds, in that still time,
      Of breeze and leaf are born.

    The cottage homes of England!
      By thousands on her plains,
    They are smiling o'er the silvery brooks,
      And round the hamlet fanes.
    Through glowing orchards forth they peep,
      Each from its nook of leaves;
    And fearless there the lowly sleep,
      As the bird beneath the eaves.

    The free, fair homes of England!
      Long, long, in hut and hall,
    May hearts of native proof be reared
      To guard each hallowed wall!
    And green for ever be the groves,
      And bright the flowery sod,
    Where first the child's glad spirit loves
      Its country and its God!

Felicia Hemans



TO A WATER-FOWL


            Whither, midst falling dew,
    While glow the heavens with the last steps of day
    Far, through their rosy depths, dost thou pursue
            Thy solitary way?

            Vainly the fowler's eye
    Might mark thy distant flight to do thee wrong,
    As, darkly seen against the crimson sky,
            Thy figure floats along.

            Seek'st thou the plashy brink
    Of weedy lake, or marge of river wide,
    Or where the rocking billows rise and sink
            On the chafed ocean side?

            There is a Power whose care
    Teaches thy way along that pathless coast,--
    The desert and illimitable air,--
            Lone wandering, but not lost.

            All day thy wings have fanned,
    At that far height, the cold, thin atmosphere,
    Yet stoop not, weary, to the welcome land,
            Though the dark night is near.

            And soon that toil shall end;
    Soon shalt thou find a summer home, and rest,
    And scream among thy fellows; reeds shall bend,
            Soon, o'er thy sheltered nest.

            Thou'rt gone; the abyss of heaven
    Hath swallowed up thy form; yet, on my heart
    Deeply hath sunk the lesson thou hast given,
            And shall not soon depart.

            He who, from zone to zone,
    Guides through the boundless sky thy certain flight,
    In the long way that I must tread alone,
            Will lead my steps aright.

Bryant




THE FASCINATION OF LIGHT


The strange fascination of light takes hold of all animated creatures,
and commands a subtle devotion that cannot be set forth in a confession
of faith. The delight of a boy in a bonfire is a breath of the heaven
that is about us in our infancy. Though it be but a heap of rubbish,
revealed by the removal of the mantle of snow, lighting up with
flickering, changing glow a rectangular door yard, the children stand
and gaze into the dancing flame, their vast, distorted, ghostlike
shadows lost in the night, their faces reflecting every evanescent
glare, and their spirits charmed by the same spell that took form in the
fire-worship of their ancestors. How they delight in stirring up the
embers and sending up a fountain spray of sparks! What joy in seeing the
big sticks break into glowing coals, darting out new tongues of flame to
lick up the escaping embers!

Fire is one of nature's universal fascinations. The wildest and most
wary animals approach and gaze at it in the night, and though it
sometimes warns them off, it always holds them by a spell. The night
migrating birds perish in scores against the plate-glass of coast
lighthouses, swerving from the control of the all-powerful migratory
instinct toward the fascinating glare that is their destruction. It is
not sportsmanlike to hang a lantern in the marsh and shoot the duck that
gather under it. But the night, the silent marsh, and the lantern have
charms that the sportsman, with his legal and mechanical paraphernalia,
can never understand. Fish are devoted fire-worshippers, and that boy
who has never speared by a jack-light is an object of compassion.

The earth and the waters under the earth have no more fascinating sight
than the gray, silent form of a pike, moving and motionless in the
shallow water, a shadow more tangible than himself thrown by a
jack-light on the mottled yellow rocks and sands of the bottom. A
passing breath of wind, even the slightest motion of the punt, breaks
every shadow and indentation into myriad fleeting ripples and waves of
light, transforming the slender, silent fish into a sheaf of wriggling
glimmers. With the stilling of the surface, the waiting pike and all the
shadows and lights of the bottom grow once more still and distinct.
There floats the greatest cannibal of the fishes, paying his devotion
to the flame, and above him stands the greatest cannibal of all created
beings, pointing his deadly spear.

There is no moon. The stars cannot penetrate the thickening clouds. The
bay is still and its shores invisible, the distant light of a farmhouse
only serving to intensify the lonely silence. The savage joy of that
moment repays the boy for all his laborious preparations. He brought two
boards down the river from the mill, and toiled at them with all the
tools in the woodshed till the ends and edges were made smooth. He
collected lumber from all available sources for the ends and bottom,
fastening them on with a miscellaneous collection of nails and springs.
Then he patiently picked an old piece of tarred rope into oakum, and
caulked it into the seams with a sharpened gate-hinge. He notched a pine
tree, gathered the gum and boiled it into pitch to make the joints
tight. That extraordinary pair of oars he sawed, chopped, and whittled
from an old plank. The spear is a family relic which he dug up and
fitted with a white-ash pole, and the anchor is a long stone, tied by
the slack of a clothes-line. The jack is a basket made of old
pail-hoops, and fastened to an upright stick to hold the burning pine
knot. Yet we wonder why it is always the country boy who succeeds in the
city!

Will he too, be lured by the seductive glimmer? Will he turn away from
the conquest of nature and embark in the conquest of his fellow-mortals?
Will he go to a resort for his fishing and a preserve for his shooting?
Will that bunch of hair protruding from under his hat be worn thin and
gray in scrambling after the delights of the vain and the covetous? Will
he devote his superb strength of body and mind to outstripping and
circumventing his fellows in the pursuit of that transient glimmer, that
all-alluring _ignis fatuus_ which the Babylon world calls success?

S. T. Wood




DAFFODILS


    I wandered lonely as a cloud
    That floats on high o'er vales and hills,
    When all at once I saw a crowd,
    A host of golden daffodils;
    Beside the lake, beneath the trees,
    Fluttering and dancing in the breeze.

    Continuous as the stars that shine
    And twinkle on the milky way,
    They stretched in never-ending line
    Along the margin of the bay;
    Ten thousand saw I at a glance,
    Tossing their heads in sprightly dance.

    The waves beside them danced; but they
    Outdid the sparkling waves in glee;
    A poet could not but be gay,
    In such a jocund company;
    I gazed--and gazed--but little thought
    What wealth the show to me had brought:

    For oft, when on my couch I lie
    In vacant or in pensive mood,
    They flash upon that inward eye
    Which is the bliss of solitude;
    And then my heart with pleasure fills,
    And dances with the daffodils.

Wordsworth
