of circulation. Lacy was furious and, when he and the Russians
marched in, his men behaved so badly that the Russians had, two or
three times, to fire upon them. Saxon and Austrian parties sacked
Potsdam and other palaces in the neighbourhood, but the Russians
behaved admirably; and so things went on until, on October 11th,
came the news that Frederick was coming.

Lacy at once marched off with all speed towards Torgau; while
Tottleben and the Russians made for Frankfort-on-Oder, the Cossacks
committing terrible depredations on the march.

The king halted when he heard that Berlin had been evacuated. He
was deeply grieved and mortified that his capital should have been
in the hands of the invaders, even for three days; and his own
loss, from the sacking of Potsdam and other palaces, was very
heavy. However, he paid the ransom from his own pocket, and
bitterly determined to get even with the enemy, before winter came
on.

While Hulsen was away, the Confederate army had captured all the
strongholds in Saxony. Daun had, as usual, advanced with his sixty
thousand men, and intended to winter in Saxony; but before he could
get there, Frederick had dashed south and recaptured Wittenberg and
Leipzig, crossed the Elbe, and driven the scattered corps of the
Confederate army before him. Prince Eugene had also hurried that
way, and defeated his brother, the reigning Duke of Wuertemberg.

Daun moved with the intention of aiding the Confederate army, but
before he could reach them Hulsen had driven them across the
mountain range into Bohemia, and fell back towards Torgau.

Long before this Fergus had received a reply, from his mother, to
his letter announcing the glad news of the restoration of the
estate:

"It will be doubly dear to me," she said, "as having been won back
by your own exertions and bravery. These four years have been an
anxious time, indeed, for me, Fergus; but the thought that you are
restored to your own, as the result of what you have done, makes up
for it all. I quite see that as long as the war continues you
cannot, with honour, leave the king; but I cannot think that this
war will go on very much longer, and I can wait patiently for the
end.

"And, Fergus, I am not quite sure that the end will be that you
will quietly settle down in the glens. A mother's eye is sharp, and
it seems to me that that young countess near Dresden is a very
conspicuous figure in your letters. During the four years that you
have been out, you have not mentioned the name of any lady but her
and her mother; and you always speak of going back there, as if it
were your German home. That is natural enough, after the service
that you have rendered them. Still, 'tis strange that you should
apparently have made the acquaintance of no other ladies. I don't
think that you have written a single letter, since you have been
away, in which you have not said something about this Saxon count
and his family.

"However, even if it should be so, Fergus, I should not be
discontented. It is only natural that you should sooner or later
marry; and although I would rather that it had been into a Scotch
family, it is for you to choose, not me. I am grateful already,
very grateful for the kindness the family have shown you; and am
quite inclined to love this pretty young countess, if she, on her
part, is inclined to love you. I don't think I could have said so
quite as heartily, before I received your last letter; for I had a
great fear that you might marry and settle down, altogether, in
Germany; but now that the estate is yours, and you are the head of
your clan, I feel sure that you will, at any rate, spend a part of
your time among your own people."

A second letter reached Fergus at the beginning of October; in
answer to his from the camp in front of Dresden, in the middle of
July, which had been delayed much on its way, owing to the rapid
marches of the army, until it had shaken itself free from its
pursuers after the battle of Liegnitz. It began:

"I congratulate you, my dear Fergus, congratulate you with all my
heart; and if there is just a shadow of regret that you should not
have married and settled here entirely, it is but a small regret,
in proportion to the pleasure I feel. It is not even reasonable,
for when I consented to your going abroad to take service in
Prussia, I knew that this would probably end in your settling down
there altogether; for it was hardly likely that you could win a
fortune that would admit of your coming back to live here.

"Of course, had your estate at that time been restored to you, you
would probably not have gone at all; or if you had done so, it
would have been but to stay for a few years, and see service under
your cousin Keith, and then return to live among your own people.
As it was, there was no reason why you should greatly wish to
return to Scotland, where you were landless, with no avenues open
to employment. However, what you tell me, that the count and
countess are willing that you should spend some months here, every
year, is far better than I could have expected or even hoped; and,
as you may imagine, quite reconciles me to the thought of your
marrying abroad.

"In all other respects, nothing could be more satisfactory than
what you tell me. Your promised wife must be a charming young lady,
and her father and mother the kindest of people. Of course, your
worldly prospects will be vastly beyond anything that even my
wildest dreams have ever pictured for you, and in this respect all
my cares for you are at an end.

"It will be delightful, indeed, to look forward to your homecoming
every year; and I consider myself in every way a fortunate woman. I
am sure that I shall come to love your Thirza very dearly.

"The only question is, when is the first visit to take place?
Everyone says that it does not seem that the war can go on very
much longer; and that, wonderful as the king's resistance to so
many enemies has been, it cannot continue. However, from what you
say of his determination, and the spirit of the people, I cannot
think that the end can be so near as people think. They have been
saying nearly the same thing for the last three years; and yet,
though everything seemed as dark as possible, he always extricated
himself somehow from his difficulties.

"Besides, his enemies must at last get tired of a war in which, so
far, they have had more defeats than victories, and have lavished
such enormous sums of money. France has already impoverished
herself, and Russia and Austria must feel the strain, too. In every
church here prayers are offered for the success of the champion of
Protestantism; and I am sure that if he had sent Scottish officers,
as Gustavus Adolphus did, to raise troops in Scotland, he could
have obtained forty or fifty thousand men in a very few weeks, so
excited is everyone over the struggle.

"You would be surprised what numbers of people have called upon me,
to congratulate me upon your rising to be a colonel in Frederick's
army--people I have never seen before; and I can assure you that I
never felt so important a person, even before the evil days of
Culloden. When you come back the whole countryside will flock to
give you welcome."

This letter was a great comfort to Fergus. That his mother would
rejoice at his good fortune, he knew; but he feared that his
marriage with a German lady, whatever her rank, would be a sore
disappointment to her, not so much perhaps for her own sake as for
that of the clansmen.

The English ambassador was no longer with the army. At the fierce
fight of Liegnitz he had been with Frederick, but had passed the
night in his carriage, which was jammed up among the baggage
wagons, and had been unable to extricate himself or to discover how
the battle was going on. Several times the Austrian cavalry had
fallen upon the baggage, and had with great difficulty been beaten
off by its guard; and the discomforts of the time, and the anxiety
through which he had gone, so unhinged him that he was unable to
follow Frederick's rapid movements throughout the rest of the
campaign.

Fergus had confided to Earl Marischal Keith, later, his engagement
to the Count Eulenfurst's daughter.

"You are a lucky young dog, Fergus," he said. "My brother and I
came abroad too late for any young countess to fall in love with
us. There is nothing like taking young to the business of
soldiering abroad. Bravery is excellent in its way; but youth and
bravery, combined with good looks, are irresistible to the female
mind. I am heartily glad that one of our kin should have won
something more than six feet of earth by his sword.

"Count Eulenfurst is one of the few men everyone speaks well of.
There is no man in Saxony who stands higher. In any other country
he would have been the leading statesman of his time, but the
wretched king, and his still more wretched minister, held in
disfavour all who opposed their wanton extravagance and their
dangerous plans.

"It is an honour indeed to be connected with such a family, putting
aside all question of money; but indeed, in this respect nothing
could be more satisfactory. His daughter is the sole heiress of his
wide estates, and as her husband you will have a splendid position.

"I am very glad, lad, that the count has no objection to your
passing a portion of your time in Scotland. They say, you know,
that much as Scotchmen boast of their love of their country, they
are always ready to leave it to better themselves; and that it is
very seldom they ever return to it. Such was, unhappily, the case
with my brother; such will probably be the case with myself; but I
am glad that you will be an exception, and that you will still keep
up your connection with your old home.

"I hope, lad, that you will have more than one son. The first, of
course, will make Saxony his home; but bring up the second as a
Scotchman, send him home to be educated, and let him succeed you in
the glens. If he has the family instinct for fighting, let him go
into the British army--he can go into no better--but let your
people have some one who will be their own laird, and whose
interests will be identified with their own."

Fergus smiled at the old man's earnestness.

"That is rather looking ahead, sir," he said. "However, it is
certainly what I should like to do, myself; and if, as you say, I
have more than one son, I will certainly give the second the
training you suggest, and make a Scotchman of him. Certainly, if he
has fighting instincts, he will see that he will have more
opportunities of active service, in the British army, than he could
have in that of Saxony; which has been proved unable to stand
alone, and can only act as a small ally to either Prussia or
Austria. Even putting aside my nationality, I would rather be
fighting under Clive, in India, than in any service in the
world--even in that of Prussia."

"You are right, lad. Since the days of Marlborough, people have
begun to think that the British were no longer a fighting people;
but the way in which they have wrested Canada from the French, and
achieved marvels in India, to say nothing of the conduct of their
infantry at Minden, shows that the qualities of the race are
unchanged; and some day they will astonish the world again, as they
have done several times in their history."

The king soon heard the news from the Earl, and one evening said to
Fergus:

"So, as the Earl Marischal tells me, you have found time, Colonel
Drummond, for love making. I thought, that day I went to express my
regrets for the outrage that had been committed at Count
Eulenfurst's, that it would make a pretty romance if the young lady
who received me should take a fancy to you; which was not
altogether unlikely, after the gallant manner in which you had
saved them all from those rascals of mine; and when you told me, at
Dresden, that they had been nursing you, the idea again occurred to
me. Well, I am glad you have done so well for yourself. As a king,
I rejoice that one who has fought so bravely should obtain a meet
reward; and as one who dabbles in poetry, the romance of the thing
is very pleasant to me.

"But I am not to lose your services, I hope?"

"No, sire. So long as the war goes on, I shall continue to serve
your majesty to the best of my powers."

The king nodded.

"It is what I should have expected, from one of Marshal Keith's
relations," he said; "but it is not everyone who would care to go
on leading this dog's life, when a pretty and well-endowed bride is
awaiting him.

"However, it cannot last much longer. The crisis must come, ere
long. If we can defeat Daun, it may be put off for a time. If we
are beaten, I do not see that I can struggle longer against fate.
With Berlin already in their hands, with the country denuded of men
and almost exhausted in means, with the Russian and Austrian armies
already planted on Prussian soil, I can do no more, if I lose
another great battle."

"We must hope that it will not be so, sire. The spirit of the
soldiers is as high as ever and, now that they will be fighting
nearly within sight of their homes, they can be trusted to achieve
almost impossibilities."

"The men are good men," the king said, "and if I had Keith and
Schwerin by my side, I should feel more hopeful; but they are gone,
and there are none to fill their places. My brother Henry is a good
soldier, but he is over cautious. Seidlitz has not recovered from
his wounds. Hulsen has done well of late, and has shown wonderful
energy, considering that he is an old man. But there are none of
them who are at once prudent when it behoved them to be prudent,
and quick to strike when they see an opening, like Schwerin and
Keith.

"Ziethen is a splendid cavalry officer, but he is fit to command
cavalry only; and the whole burden falls upon my shoulders, which
are getting too old to bear so heavy a weight."

"I trust, sire, that they will not have to bear the burden much
longer. Just at present Russia and Austria are doubtless encouraged
by success; but the strain must be heavy on them also, and another
defeat might well cause them to doubt whether it is worthwhile to
continue to make sacrifices that produce such small results."

"Heaven grant that it may be so!" the king said earnestly. "God
knows that I never wanted this war, and that from the day it began
I have eagerly grasped every chance that presented itself of making
peace, short of the dismemberment of my kingdom. I would at this
moment willingly accede to any terms, however onerous, in order to
secure peace for my country."



Chapter 20: Torgau.


After many marches and quick blows at the Confederate armies, and
driving them beyond the borders of Saxony, Frederick moved towards
Torgau, where Daun had established himself in a position that he
deemed impregnable. It had been Prince Henry's camp during the
previous autumn, and Daun had in vain beleaguered it. Hulsen had
made it his headquarters during the summer.

Torgau was an old-fashioned town, surrounded by tracts of pine
wood, with pleasant villages and much well-cultivated land. The
town rose above the Elbe, on the shoulder of a broad eminence
called the Siptitz. This height stands nearly a mile from the
river. On the western and southern side of the town are a series of
lakes and quagmires, the remains of an old course of the Elbe.

Set on Siptitz's heights was Daun's camp, girt about by
intrenchments. The hill was mostly covered with vineyards. Its
height was some two hundred feet above the general level of the
country, and its area some five or six square miles. Covered, as
its flanks were, by heights, woods, ponds, and morasses, the
position was an extremely strong one, so much so that Daun had not
ventured to attack Prince Henry, though in vastly superior force;
and still more difficult was it for Frederick to do so, when held
by an army greatly superior to his own, for the Austrian force
numbered sixty-five thousand, while the king, after being joined by
all his detachments, had but forty-four thousand. Nothing, indeed,
but the most urgent necessity could have driven the king to attempt
so difficult an enterprise.


[Map: Battle of Torgau]


His plan was to attack it simultaneously in front and rear; and to
do this he decided that half the force, under Ziethen, should
attack the Siptitz hill on the south side; while he himself, with
the other half, was to make a long detour and assault it, at the
same moment, on the north.

Frederick's march was some fifteen miles in length, while Ziethen
had but six to traverse; and as the route was through forests, the
difficulties in the way of the two columns arriving at their point
of attack, simultaneously, were great indeed; and were increased by
the fact that the weather was wet, the ground heavy, and the
streams swollen.

The king's force marched in three columns, by roads through the
forest. There were no villages here, no one to question as to the
turns and branchings of roads, thus adding to the chances that even
Frederick's force would not arrive together at the point of attack.
Frederick's own column contained eight thousand grenadiers and foot
guards, with a force of cavalry; and his line of march was by the
road nearest to Daun's position.

Two other columns--Hulsen's, composed principally of infantry; and
Holstein's, chiefly of cavalry--marched on parallel roads on a
wider circle; and the baggage, in a column by itself, outside all.

Daun had news of Frederick's approach, and had strong detachments
watching in the woods. The scouts of one of these parties brought
in news of the king's march. A signal cannon was fired immediately,
and Daun learned thereby of the movement to attack him from the
north.

Daun at once wheeled round a portion of his force to receive
Frederick's attack. Lacy, with twenty thousand men, had been placed
as an advanced guard; and now shifted his position westward, to
guard what had become Daun's rear; while two hundred fresh cannon
were added, to the two hundred already placed, to defend the face
threatened by Frederick.

For an hour before the king arrived at his point of attack, a heavy
artillery fire had been heard from Ziethen's side; and it was
supposed that he had already delivered his attack. Unfortunately,
he had not done so. He had calculated his pace accurately, but had
come upon a small Austrian force, like those Frederick had
encountered. It had for a time held its ground, and had replied to
his fire with cannon. Ziethen, not knowing how small the force was,
drew up in order of battle and drove it back on Lacy, far to the
east of his proper place of attack. Here he became engaged with
Lacy, and a cannonade was kept up for some hours--precious time
that should have been spent in ascending the hills, and giving aid
to the king.

When Frederick's column emerged from the woods, there was no sign
of either Hulsen or Holstein's divisions. The king sent out his
staff to hurry them up, and himself reconnoitred the ground and
questioned the peasants.

The ground proved so boggy as to be impassable, and Frederick
withdrew into the wood again, in order to attack the Austrian left.
This had, in Prince Henry's time, been defended by a strong
abattis; but since the cold weather set in, much of this had been
used by the Austrians as firewood, and it could therefore be
penetrated.

Frederick waited impatiently. He could hear the heavy cannonade on
Ziethen, and feared that that general would be crushed before he
could perform his part of the plan arranged. His staff were unable
to find Holstein's cavalry, which had taken the wrong turning at
some point, and were completely lost. Hulsen was still far away.

Nevertheless, in his desire to give support to Ziethen, the king
decided upon an attack with his own column, alone. The grenadiers
were placed in the front line, the rest of the infantry in the
centre. The cavalry, 800 strong, followed to do any service that
chance might afford them.

It took some time to bring the troops into their new position and,
while this was being done, Daun opened fire, with his four hundred
cannon, upon the forest through which they were marching, with a
din that Frederick declared exceeded anything that he ever heard
before. The small force of artillery took its place outside the
wood to cover the attack but, as soon as a few shots were fired,
the Austrian guns opened upon them and they were silenced.

Frederick's place was between the two lines of his grenadiers, and
they issued from the wood within eight hundred yards of Prince
Henry's abattis, and with marvellous bravery ran forward. Mowed
down in lines by the storm of cannon shot, they suffered terribly.
One regiment was almost entirely destroyed, the other pressed
forward as far as the abattis, fighting so desperately that Daun
was obliged to bring up large reinforcements before he could drive
the survivors back.

The Austrians, believing that victory was won, charged down in
pursuit; but the second line met them firmly, drove them back and,
following hotly, again reached the abattis; and only retreated
slowly before the overwhelming forces which the Austrian then
brought up. The battle had lasted only an hour, but half
Frederick's column were already killed or wounded.

Shortly after they had retired, Hulsen's column came up. The four
hundred guns had never ceased pouring their iron rain into the
forest, but the newcomers arrived in splendid order. The remnant of
Frederick's column joined them, furious at defeat and burning to
meet the enemy again.

So stern and resolute was the attack that, for a time, it carried
all before it. Daun's line of defence was broken, most of his
cannon silenced, and for a time the Prussians advanced, carrying
all before them. Had Ziethen been doing his part, instead of idly
cannonading Lacy, the battle would have been won; but his
inactivity enabled Daun to bring up all his forces against the
king. These he hurled at the Prussians and, foot by foot, drove
them back and pushed them down the hill again.

Frederick himself had been struck from his horse by a piece of case
shot, fortunately almost spent, and which failed to penetrate his
thick pelisse. He was badly contused, and for a short time
insensible; but he quickly sprung to his feet again, mounted his
horse, and maintained his place in the fight as if nothing had
happened. After this second repulse he again formed up his troops,
and at that moment he was joined by Holstein with his cavalry.

The sun had already set, and the darkness favoured the attack. Daun
had not yet recovered from the terrible confusion into which his
troops were thrown by the attack, and the Prussians again mounted
the hill, Holstein attacking Daun's right wing.

The main body of the cavalry found the morasses and obstacles so
impracticable that they were unable to attack as arranged, but two
regiments succeeded in gaining the plateau. One of these dashed
upon the Austrian infantry. They met, broke into fragments, and
took two whole regiments prisoners; and brought them and six guns
triumphantly off. The other regiment charged four Austrian
battalions, broke them, and brought the greater portion off,
prisoners.

Night fell upon a scene of general confusion. The two armies were
completely mixed up. In some places Austrians were in the rear of
the Prussians, in others Prussians in the rear of Austrians.

Nothing more could to be done. So far Frederick had gained a
success and, thanks to the extraordinary bravery and determination
of his soldiers, had broken up Daun's line and planted himself on
the plateau; but he had suffered terribly in doing so, and could
hardly hope, in the morning, to make head against the vastly
superior forces of the Austrians.

Daun himself had been wounded in the foot, and had gone down to the
town to have it dressed. Had he been able to remain on the field,
late as it was, he might have been able to restore order and to
continue the battle; as it was, gradually the firing ceased.
Exhausted by the long march and the desperate efforts they had
made, the Prussians wrapped themselves in their cloaks, and lay
down to sleep where they stood--if sleep they could, on so bitterly
cold a night.

On the hilltop there was no wood to be had, but in the forest great
fires were lighted. Round these Prussian and Austrian stragglers
alike gathered. In the morning they would be foes again, but for
tonight they were content to lay their quarrel aside, none knowing
who was victor and who vanquished; and which, in the morning, would
be prisoners to the others.
