"That is a very good excuse, Bullen; but I hope that, at any rate,
you will carry out your idea before the next wet season
begins--that is, if we are kept on here, as a punishment for our
sins."

At this moment one of the non-commissioned officers came in with a
letter, and Hallett opened it.

"Oh dear," he said, in a tone of deepest disgust, "we are off
again!"

"Thank goodness!" Lisle said. "You know we were just agreeing that
we have had enough of this place."

"I often say foolish things," Hallett said, "and must not be taken
too literally. Here is an end to our meat rations, and to all our
other little luxuries. Besides, I have been getting my tunic
washed, and it will certainly take three or four days to dry in
this steaming atmosphere."

"Well, my dear fellow, you can put it on wet, for it is certain to
be wet before we have gone a quarter of an hour. My tunic has gone,
too, but at any rate they will both look more respectable for the
washing.

"Well, I suppose we had better go across to headquarters and find
out what the route is, and who are going."

As they went out, they saw the return of the Central African
Regiment. They had been more fortunate than the other regiments,
having captured and razed Djarchi. They had taken the enemy by
surprise, and run them right through the town, with only a single
casualty. They had ascertained that the enemy had been commanded by
the brother of the Ashanti commander-in-chief, and that he had been
killed in the fight.

A very large amount of spoil had been captured, the first haul of
any importance that had been made during the campaign. Among the
loot were the king of the Kokofu's iron boxes, containing much
official correspondence; union jacks, elephant tails, and other
symbols of royalty, together with gold ornaments, gold dust, and
two hundred pounds of English money; numbers of brass-nailed,
vellum-backed chairs, part of the Ashanti chief's regalia; robes,
guns, ammunition, drums, and horns, and also sheep and poultry.

A company was at once despatched to the Sacred Lake, to join Major
Cramer's levies, which had been told off to act as locusts and eat
up the country. Colonel Wilson was ordered to go to Accra, to
reorganize and recruit the remnant of the Gold Coast Force; so
that, when the campaign was over, they could again take over the
military control of the colony. It was also decided that Bekwai
could no longer be occupied, and that all the stores there should
be removed to Esumeja, as the whole main road up to Coomassie would
shortly be open.

At last all was in readiness for the general and final advance. All
the Adansi country to the south, and Kokofu to the east had been
conquered, and the roads cleared. The next step was to clear
Northern Ashanti; neglecting altogether, for the present, the
parties of the enemy between the southern boundaries of Ashanti
territory and their capital.

It was therefore decided to move the whole of the headquarters
staff and the advance base to Coomassie, Esumeja being selected as
the point, between it and Kwisa, to be held in force. The general
plan was to send up all the stores, carriers, and troops via Pekki,
as had been done on both previous occasions. This would reduce the
chance of attack and loss to a minimum while, simultaneously, a
fighting column with the smallest possible transport would follow
the road through Kokofu and take Ejesu, which was the residence of
the queen mother, and the headquarters of the remnant of the
Ashanti army.

The general opinion was that it would be the last fight of the
year. Colonel Brake, who was the last arrival, having had no chance
of a fight hitherto, was selected for the command. The whole force
was to advance, and five thousand carriers were required to effect
the movement.

There was general joy when it was known that Bekwai was to be
evacuated. It was a dull, dirty place, surrounded by dense, dark
forests, and was in a terribly insanitary state. Europeans were
rapidly losing their strength, and an epidemic of smallpox was
raging among the natives, of whom a dozen or more died daily.

On the 28th of August Colonel Burroughs left Bekwai, with seven
hundred and fifty men, and three thousand carriers taking
ammunition and baggage. The column was fully two miles long. They
had an extremely heavy march, and did not arrive at their
destination till night. The carriers returned to Bekwai the next
day, so as to be ready to march out at daylight, on the 30th, with
the second column.

The troops at Pekki being in enforced idleness, half of them
marched out to attack the enemy's war camp, which had for so long
threatened Pekki. The place was found to be evacuated, and it and
the bush camps on the way were all burnt.

The second column had now well started. The downfall of rain
continued without intermission, and the roads became worse than
ever. The day after the first column left Pekki, Colonel Brake
started with eight hundred men and two guns.

The news came in that the king of Akim had been asked, by a number
of the Kokofu, to intercede on their behalf for peace; and a
messenger with a flag of truce came in from the Djarchi district.
The appearance of the messenger was singular. He was completely
clad in white, even his skin being painted that colour, and he
carried an enormous white flag. He was well received, but was sent
back with a message that the chiefs must come in themselves.

On the 30th Colonel Willcocks arrived and, the next day, the whole
force started in fighting formation for Coomassie, where they
arrived after twelve hours' march. The distance was only twelve
miles, so the condition of the roads may be well imagined by the
time the column took to traverse them.



Chapter 19: Lost In The Forest.


On the way up, Lisle met with a very unpleasant adventure. He and
Hallett had been sent out, with a small party of men, to enter the
bush and drive out any of the enemy who might be lurking, for the
purpose of attacking the carriers and rear guard. They went some
distance into the bush but, though they came upon tracks that had
recently been cut, they saw none of the enemy. Some men were
planted on each of these paths; and the two officers, who had
followed one a little distance farther into the bush, were on the
point of turning, when they heard men cutting their way through the
undergrowth behind them.

"Hide, Hallett!" Lisle exclaimed, "they must be enemies."

Illustration: They saw a strong party of the enemy crossing the
road.

As noiselessly as they could they took refuge in the thick bush
and, a minute later, saw a strong party of the enemy crossing the
road that they had just passed along. There were several hundred of
them. Some thirty or forty halted on the path. The others continued
to cut a track through and, in five minutes, a scattered fire was
opened, showing that they had come in contact with the troops. The
fire was kept up for some time, and then died away; whether because
the troops had retired, or because the natives had turned off and
taken some other line, they could not be sure. Later they heard
very heavy firing abreast of them, and guessed that the Ashantis
had followed some other path, and come down on the convoy.

Peering through the bushes, from time to time, they found that
those who had halted on the path were still there, probably in
waiting for some chief or other who was to take command of them.

"We are in a nice mess, Bullen," said Hallett. "By the sound the
convoy is still moving on, so how we are to rejoin them, I don't
know."

"Yes, we are certainly in a hole and, if these fellows stop here
till night, I see no chance of our being able to move. The
slightest rustle in the bushes would bring them down upon us, in no
time. The firing is getting more and more distant every moment and,
no doubt, a big body of the enemy have engaged our fellows.

"I have been in a good many tight places, but I think this is the
worst of them. Our only course, so far as I can see, is to wait
till nightfall; and then, if these fellows still stick here, get
into the path again, and follow it up till we come to some path
going the other way. Then it will be a pure question of luck
whether we hit upon the enemy, or not. If we do, of course we must
fight till the last, keeping the last shot in our revolvers for
ourselves. I have no intention of falling into their hands alive,
and going through terrible tortures before I am put to death."

"That really seems to be the only thing to be done, Bullen.
However, we must hope for the best."

When night fell, a fire was lit by the party on the path.

"The beggars evidently mean to stay here," Lisle said, "and even if
they moved away we should be no better off for, as the column will
be ten miles away by now, we should really have no chance of
regaining it."

When night fell they crept out of the bush, taking the greatest
care not to make any noise, for the natives were but thirty yards
away. They crawled along for forty or fifty yards and then, a turn
in the path hiding them from sight, they rose to their feet and
pushed on.

They found, however, that it was no easy matter to make headway. It
was pitch dark, owing to the canopy of leaves, and they had to feel
their way at every step. The path, moreover, was constantly turning
and twisting. After travelling for upwards of two hours, they came
to a point where two paths met and, without knowing, they took the
one that led off to the left. This they followed for some hours,
and then lay down to rest. They awoke at daybreak.

"I wonder where we have got to," Hallett said.

"I am afraid somehow we have gone wrong," Lisle exclaimed, after
looking round, "and the light seems to be coming from the wrong
quarter, altogether. We must have turned off from the main path
without knowing it, and tramped a long distance in the wrong
direction."

"I believe you are right, Bullen. What on earth are we to do now?
Retrace our steps, or push on and chance it?"

"We have the choice of two evils, Hallett, but I think it would be
better to go on than to turn back. In the first place, however, we
must search for something to eat. We crossed several little streams
on our way, so I don't think we are likely to be hard up for water;
but food we must have. The natives are always able to find food in
the forest and, if we cannot do that, we may come upon some
deserted village, and get some bananas. We might even steal some,
at night, from a village that is not deserted. At any rate, it is
useless to stay here."

They set out at once, moving cautiously, and stopping frequently to
listen for the soft trail of naked feet. They came at last to the
spot where they had left the other track. Here they held another
council, and decided that there was too much risk in turning on to
the main path again; as that was sure to be occupied by the enemy,
who would be burying their dead, or examining any loot that they
had captured from the carriers. After proceeding two or three
miles, they came upon another path on the right.

"This path," said Lisle, "will take us in the proper direction."

"I doubt if we shall ever get there," Hallett said. "I am feeling
as hungry as a rat, already; and we have seen nothing to put
between our lips since we started out, yesterday morning."

"It is a little rough," Lisle said cheerfully, "but we must hit
upon a village, presently."

"I should not mind, if the path went on straight," Hallett said,
"but it zigzags so much that we can never feel certain that we are
going in the right direction."

"Well, you see," said Lisle, "we have passed two tracks to the
left, since we struck into this road. I cannot help thinking that
these must lead to villages, and that the one we are following is a
sort of connecting link between them. I vote that we stop at the
next one we come to."

"All right, old man! It seems to me that it will make no great
difference which way we go. Indeed, so far as I can make out, by
the glimpses we get of the sun, the path has turned a great deal,
and is now going right back to that from which it started."

"I am afraid you are right, Hallett. However, there is one thing
certain. The Ashantis don't cut paths through their forests without
some reason, and I should not be surprised if we come to some large
village, not far ahead."

After walking for another half hour, they found the bush getting
thinner, and they could soon see light ahead. They went very
cautiously now and, at last, stood at the end of a large clearing,
in which stood an Ashanti village.

"Thank God there is something to eat ahead!" said Hallett. "There
are lots of bananas growing round the village and, when it gets
dark, we will get two big bunches. That should last us some time."

Utterly exhausted, they both lay down just inside the bush. Many
villagers were moving about and, twice, native runners came in. The
afternoon passed very slowly; but at length the sun set, and
darkness fell quickly. They waited a couple of hours, to allow the
village to get comparatively quiet; then they crept forward, and
cut two great bunches of bananas from the first tree they came to
and, returning to the forest, sat down and ate a hearty meal.

"I feel very much better," Hallett said, when he had finished.
"Now, let us talk over what we had better do next."

"I should say we had better keep along by the edge of the bush, and
see if we can strike some other path. It would be useless to go
back by this one, as it would simply take us to the place we
started from."

Hallett readily agreed to this suggestion, and the two officers
started and gradually worked round the village. Presently they
struck another path. Turning up this they again pushed forward,
each carrying his bunch of bananas. After walking two hours, they
lay down. The darkness was so dense that their rate of progress was
extremely slow.

In the morning they went on again but, after walking for some
hours, they came suddenly upon four of the enemy. As soon as these
saw them, they rushed on them with a yell, firing their guns as
they did so. Both were struck with slugs; and Lisle was knocked
down, but quickly jumped to his feet again, revolver in hand. The
Ashantis charged with their spears, but the revolver bullets were
too much for them and, one by one, they dropped, the last man being
shot just as he reached them. Two were only wounded, but Lisle shot
them both.

"It would never do," he said, "for any of them to get to a village,
and bring all its occupants upon us. We are neither of us fit to do
much running, and the beggars would be sure to overtake us."

"It is horrid," Hallett said, "though I admit that it is
necessary."

For four days they wandered on. The path never seemed to run
straight. Though they found a plentiful supply of bananas, their
strength was gradually failing.

On the fourth day they came upon a sheet, doubtless a portion of
some officer's baggage that had been looted. Hallett, who was
walking fast, passed it contemptuously. Lisle, however, picked it
up and wound it round his body.

"We can lay it over us, Hallett, at night. It will at least help to
keep the damp off us."

"We sha'n't want it long," Hallett said; "I think the game is
almost up."

"Not a bit of it," Lisle said, cheerfully. "In spite of the turns
and twistings we have made, I think we cannot be far from
Coomassie, now. I thought I heard the sound of guns this morning,
and it could have been from nowhere else."

Late that afternoon they came suddenly upon a great war camp and,
at once, sat down in the bushes.

"What is to be done now?" Hallett said. "We cannot go back again.
We are neither of us fit to walk a couple of miles."

Lisle sat for some minutes without answering him, and then said
suddenly:

"I have an idea. I will cut down a sapling, seven or eight feet
long; and fasten the sheet to it, so as to make a flag of truce.
Then we will walk boldly into the village, and summon it to
surrender. It is a bold stroke, but it may succeed. We know that
most of them are getting tired of the war. We can give out that we
have lost our way in the bush and, if the fellows take it kindly,
well and good; but if not, we shall have our revolvers, and shall,
of course, use them on ourselves."

"I am game to carry it out, Bullen. Your idea is a splendid one.
Anyhow, it is our last chance. I really don't think I could go a
mile farther. We know enough of their language to make ourselves
understood."

"Yes. What with our servants, the Hausas, and the carriers, we have
both picked up a good deal of the language."

With renewed spirits they cut down a sapling, stripped it of all
its leaves and branches and, fastening the sheet to it, walked
straight down towards the camp. There was an immediate stir in the
camp. Many of the Ashantis ran for their arms but, when they saw
that the two officers were alone, they calmed down. Presently two
chiefs advanced, followed by some twenty warriors.

"Now, Bullen, muster up your knowledge of the language, and address
them. Lay it on pretty thick."

"Chiefs," Lisle said, "we are come to you from the governor of
Coomassie. He says that it must be clear to you, now, that you
cannot stand against the white man; and that you will only bring
ruin upon yourselves, and your country, by further resistance. They
have therefore sent us to say that, if you will surrender, a small
fine only shall be imposed upon you; and that your soldiers may
retire to their villages, after having laid down their arms. While
you are talking about this, we shall be glad if you will give us
some provisions; for we have lost our way in the bush, coming here,
and need food."

"If you follow me into the village," one of the chiefs said,
"provisions shall be served to you, while we talk over what you
say. We shall be glad of peace; for we see that, however strongly
we make our stockades, your soldiers always take them. Our men are
beginning to long to return to their people, for they have fought
many times, and already have begun to complain. Do you guarantee
our safety, if we return with you to your fort?"

"I can promise that," Lisle said. "We respect brave men, and are
anxious that there should be an end to this fighting. When it is
over, you will again live under the protection of our government,
and the past will be forgotten. You attacked us without reason, and
have suffered heavily for it. This is the third time that we have
had to come up, and we hope that it will never be necessary to do
so, again. We recognize each other's valour; we have each made
sacrifices; and we hope that, when this war is over, we shall live
together in peace. Had we only been armed as you are, the fortunes
of war might have gone differently; but we have rifles and guns,
and these must always give us victory, in the long run."

"We will talk it over," the chief said. "While we do so, you shall
have food."

So saying, he turned and led the way to a house in the village,
where food and native spirit were set before them.

"Your dodge has succeeded admirably," Hallett said, as they were
waiting for the meal. "I think they will surrender."

"I hope they will," Lisle said; "but at any rate, I think they will
treat us as coming in under a flag of truce; and will perhaps send
an escort with us back to the camp. However, they are preparing a
meal for us and, if the worst comes to the worst, it is much better
to die full than fasting."

In a quarter of an hour two women entered; one carrying a bowl with
four chickens, and a quantity of rice; the other a large jug of
water, and a smaller one of native spirit. Not a word was spoken,
while the meal was being eaten. At the end, nothing but bones
remained of the four chickens.

"Thank God for a good dinner!" Hallett said, after the meal was
over. "I feel, at present, at peace with all men; and I can safely
recommend the chiefs, when they arrive at Coomassie, as being
first-rate fellows; while I am sure that the chief will be greatly
pleased that we have secured the submission of their tribe. It will
be a big feather in our caps. When I came in here, I thought I
could not go another mile to save my life; now I feel perfectly
game for a seven or eight mile march to Coomassie."

At this moment, they noticed that there was a great hubbub in the
camp. Half an hour later, the chiefs entered.

"We accept the terms you bring," one of them said, "and will go
with you on condition that, if the terms are not as you say, we
shall be allowed to return here, unmolested."

"That I can promise you," Lisle said. "We have not come here
without reason, and the terms we offer are those that you can
accept without dishonour. I can assure you of as good treatment as
you have given us; and permission to leave the fort, and return to
your people, if you are dissatisfied with the terms."

A quarter of an hour later the party--consisting of the two chiefs,
ten armed followers, and the two officers--set out. The camp was,
they learned, about six miles from Coomassie. After a march of
three hours, they emerged from the forest into the cleared space
round the fort. When they reached the outlying sentries they were
challenged, but a word from Lisle sufficed to pass them on.

As they approached the fort a number of soldiers gathered round
them and, when they neared the entrance, Colonel Willcocks himself
came out.

"You remain here with the chiefs, Bullen. I will go on, and explain
matters to the chief."

Lisle nodded, and Hallett hurried forward, while the others halted.

"Why, Mr. Hallett," Colonel Willcocks said, "we had given you up
for dead; you and Mr. Bullen, whom I see over there. Whatever have
