then warily set my door ajar.  I could see a light through the chink of
the door in the landing below, and heard a stealthy footstep.  So far,
so good.  I returned to my room, seized the poker and the water-bottle,
and then cautiously descended to the drawing-room door.

Here I once more listened carefully.  The keyhole was not eligible for
observation, but my sense of hearing was acute.  I heard--and this
rather surprised me--some one in the room whistle softly to himself,
then a gruff, typical burglar's voice said, "Now, then, with that there
sack!  Fetch 'im 'ere, or I'll warm yer!"

I heard the whistling cease, as something was dragged across the floor.
"Now, then," said the first voice, "wake up, Jemmy."  That was enough
for me.  I recognised in this last name a term inseparably connected
with burglary; and, not waiting longer, I flung open the door, and with
a shout, as much to keep up my own courage as to alarm the enemy, I
hurled first my poker, then my water-bottle, then myself in the
direction of the voices, and felt that at last I was a hero indeed.

I retain but a dim idea of what followed.  I recollect a sooty sack
being drawn over my head, just as a general rush of servants and male
members of the family, alarmed by the hideous noise of the water-bottle
and fire-irons, rushed into the room.  Then there was a pause, then a
babel of voice, and then, with a cuff on the outside of the sack next to
where my head was, the first burglar made a speech:--"I'm bust if I
sweeps yer chimbleys any more!  This 'ere lunertick was handy the death
of Jemmy with his missals.  Bust me!  I'll summons the lot of yer, see
if I don't."

I will not pursue this melancholy episode, and as a veil was drawn over
me at the time, I will also draw a veil over what immediately ensued.
My visit to my uncle's terminated that day, and a few weeks later I saw
in the paper that he had been fined L5--for an assault committed by one
of his household on two sweeps.

After this I had not the heart to proceed to the last desperate
expedient for acquiring immortal fame.  As long as my endeavours had
hurt only myself, it was not so bad, but when they recoiled on the heads
of my most important relatives I felt it time to draw the line.  The
bullet may not yet be cast which my heroic bosom is to receive in the
stead of royalty, but I shall be ready for it when it is.

Meanwhile I have been cultivating the quieter graces of life, where, if
I may not be a hero, I may at least do my duty without making a noise.
I am not sure, when all is said and done, whether the two things are not
sometimes pretty much the same after all.



CHAPTER THIRTY SEVEN.

THE HEROES OF NEW SWISHFORD.  A SCHOOL EPISODE IN FOUR CHAPTERS.



Chapter I.  Consultation.

The autumn term at Swishford School was more than half over, and boys
were waking up to the hope that after all the Christmas holidays, which
seemed such a way off six weeks ago, might yet arrive during their
lifetime.  It was already rumoured that Blunt, the captain, had been
invited to spend Christmas at Walkenshaw's, the mathematical Dux's, and
every one knew how well Miss Walkenshaw and Blunt had "hit it" the last
prize day, and prophecies were rife accordingly.  More than that,
Shanks, of the Fifth, had whispered in the ear of one or two bosom
friends, and thus into the ear of all Swishford, that he was going into
"swallows" this winter, and he had got down a book from town with
instructions for self-measurement, and was mysteriously closeted in his
own study every other evening with a tape.  Other boys were beginning to
"sit up" a little in the prospect of the coming examination, and
generally there was an air of expectation about the place which was
prophetic of the coming event.

On the afternoon, however, on which my story opens, two boys as they
walked arm-in-arm along the cliffs towards Raveling, appeared to be
engrossed in consultation, which, to judge by their serious faces, had
nothing to do with Christmas.  Let me introduce them to the reader.  The
taller of the two is a fine, sturdy, square-shouldered youth of fifteen
or thereabouts, whose name in a certain section of Swishford is a
household word.  He is Bowler, the cock of the Fourth, who in the
football match against Raveling a fortnight ago picked up the ball at
half-back and ran clean through the enemy's ranks and got a touch-down,
which Blunt himself acknowledged was as pretty a piece of running as he
had seen in his time.  Ever since then Bowler has been the idol of the
lower school.

His companion is a more delicate-looking boy, of about the same age,
with a cheery face, and by no means unpleasant to look at.  He is
Gayford, as great a favourite in his way as Bowler, a boy whom nobody
dislikes, and whom not a few, especially Bowler, like very much.

These are the two who walked that afternoon towards Raveling.

"Are you sure the fellow in the book doesn't make it all up?" said
Bowler dubiously.

"Not a bit of it," replied his companion.  "My uncle's a captain, you
know, and he says there are hundreds of islands like it, the jolliest
places you ever saw, any amount of food, no wild animals, splendid
weather all the year round, magnificent mountains and valleys and woods
and bays, gorgeous fishing and hunting, oceans of fruit trees,
everything a fellow could wish for, and not a soul on one of them."

"Rum," said Bowler reflectively; "seems rather a waste of jolly islands
that."

"Yes; but the thing is they're hundreds of miles away from inhabited
islands, so no one ever sees them."

"Except your uncle.  I wonder he wasn't tempted to get out and take
possession of one."

"That's just exactly what he said he was tempted to do," replied
Gayford, stopping short excitedly.  "He said very little would have
tempted him to do it, Bowler."

"Oh!" was Bowler's only reply.

"And I tell you another thing," continued Gayford, "he gave me an old
chart with the identical island he saw marked on it, and I've got it in
my box, my boy."

"Have you, though?" said Bowler.  "I'd like to have a look at it."

That evening the two boys held a solemn consultation in their study over
Captain Gayford's chart, and Gayford triumphantly pointed out the little
island to his friend.

"There he is," said he; "he doesn't look a big one there, but he's eight
or ten miles across, my uncle says."

"That seems a fair size--but, I say," said Bowler, "how about getting
there?  How could any one find it out?"

Gayford laughed.

"You're coming round, then," said he; "why, you old noodle, you couldn't
possibly miss it.  Do you see that town called Sinnamary (what a name,
eh?) on the coast of South Africa?  Well, don't you see the island's
dead north from there as straight as ever you can go?  All you want is a
compass and a southerly breeze--and there you are, my boy."

"But what about currents and all that?" queried Bowler, who knew a
little physical geography.  "Doesn't the Gulf Stream hang about
somewhere there?"

"Very likely," said Gayford; "all the better for us too; for I fancy the
island is on it, so if we once _get_ into it we're bound to turn up
right."

"Anyhow," said Bowler, who was not quite convinced, "I suppose one could
easily get all that sort of thing up."

"Oh, of course.  But, I say, old man, what do you say?"

"Well," said Bowler, digging his hands into his pockets and taking
another survey of the chart, "I'm rather game, do you know!"

"Hurrah!" said Gayford.  "I know we shall be all right if we get you."

"Who do you mean by we?" asked Bowler.

"Ah, that's another point.  I haven't mentioned it to any one yet; but
we should want about half a dozen fellows, you know."

"Don't have Burton," said Bowler.

"Rather not; nor Wragg--but what do you say to Wallas?"

"He's muffed quarter-back rather this term, but I daresay he might do
for one."

"Well then, what about Braintree?"

"Too big a swell," said Bowler.

"But he's got a rifle at home."

"Oh, ah! all serene.  Stick him down."

"What do you say to having them in, and talking it over before we ask
any one else?"

This prudent proposition was agreed to, an extra spoonful of tea was put
in the pot, and Gayford went out and conducted his guests in personally.

"The fact is," said Gayford, after having delicately disclosed the
scheme on hand, and roused his hearers to a pitch of uncomfortable
curiosity, "the fact is, Bowler and I thought you two fellows might like
to join us."

"You'll have to wait till the spring," said Wallas, a somewhat dismal-
looking specimen of humanity.  "I've got my Oxford local in January."

"Oh, of course, we shouldn't start till after that," said Gayford, ready
to smooth away all obstacles.

"Warthah hot, won't it be?" said Braintree, looking at the map.

"No, I believe not," said Gayford; "there's something about the Gulf
Stream, you know, keeps it fresh."

"Wum idea calling an island fwesh," said Braintree, giggling.  "It'll be
a fresh start for it when we take possession of it, anyhow," said
Bowler.  "Of course you'll bring your rifle, Braintree?"

"Warthah," replied Braintree, "in case of niggers or wobbers."

"Hope we shan't quarrel when we get out," said Wallas.  "That's the way
these things generally end."

"Bosh!" said Bowler; "there's no chance of that--just like you, throwing
cold water on everything.  Wallas."

"If you call what I say bosh," said Wallas warmly, "it's a pity you
asked me to join you."

It took some time to get over this little breeze and restore the party
to good humour.  This was, however, accomplished in time, and the
consultation continued.

"We ought to have three more fellows, at least," said Bowler.  "I tell
you what, each of you pick one.  Who do you say, Gav?"

"Well, I fancy young Wester might do," said Gayford.

"Warthah a pwig, isn't he?" suggested Braintree.

"He is a little," replied Gayford; "but he's very obliging, and fags
rather well."

"All serene.  Now then, Wallas, who's your man?" asked Bowler.

"Tubbs," said Wallas.  Tubbs was one of the most hopeless louts at
Swishford.

Gayford gave a low whistle; but he was too anxious to preserve the
harmony of the party to offer any objection.

"Now you, Braintree?"

"I say, Cwashford.  Jolly fellow, and knows French, too."

"Ah, but he is such a cad," said Bowler imploringly.

"Couldn't you think of somebody else, Braintree?" asked Gayford.

"Oh, have Cwashford.  He's a wewy decent fellah.  I like Cwashford, you
know."

"Well, there's this to be said," remarked Bowler, finding there was no
getting out of it, "it may be rather a good thing to have some one to
keep in order; it will give us something to do."

"Yes, I expect you'll want it," said Wallas.  "My opinion is it will be
jolly slow out there."

"Not a bit of it.  We shall have to go out every day and shoot our
game--"

"With my wifle," put in Braintree.

"And then there'll be a log hut to build and the whole place to explore,
and lots of bathing and boating."

"And no lessons to do at night."

"And we can get up concerts and penny readings, you know, for the winter
evenings."

"And needn't get up till half-past nine in the morning."

And so they went on, till gradually the prospect became so delightful
that even Wallas warmed up to it and expressed a wish that they could
start at once.

It was, however, decided that they could not manage it this term, as
they would have to spend Christmas at home and provide themselves with
necessaries for their journey.  As to the means of getting out as far as
Sinnamary, at any rate, they had no anxiety on that score, for Captain
Gayford, when he once heard the object of their expedition, would be
sure to take them on one of his ships, and possibly afford them much
valuable information as to their further route into the bargain.

Before the council broke up one solemn and momentous step was taken.

"What shall we call our island?" asked Bowler dramatically, placing his
finger on the map and looking round on his fellow-adventurers.

There was a pause, and for a moment the founders of the new empire were
wrapped in silent thought.  At last Gayford said--

"I know--just the thing."

"What?  What?  What?" inquired three voices.

"New Swishford."

It is hardly needful to add that the name was there and then duly
appended to the island on the chart in red ink, which done, the company
separated to sleep, and heard all night long in their dreams the crack
of Braintree's "wifle" echoing among the waving woods and fertile
valleys of New Swishford.



Chapter II.  Preparation.

The week following the important consultation described in the last
chapter was one of serious excitement to at least seven boys at
Swishford.

Other fellows could not make out what was the matter, and as long as
Bowler did not shirk the football match, and Gayford stuck up as usual
for his house, they did not particularly care.  It was certainly a
novelty to see Braintree diligently reading a book in his odd moments,
but when it transpired that the book was _Wobinson Cwusoe_, that wonder
ceased.  And even the surprise of seeing Crashford the lion lying down,
so to speak, with Tubbs the lamb, wore away in time, and the
conspirators were, on the whole, left undisturbed by Swishford to
develop their plans for the eventful emigration of the coming spring.

The three last elected members of the band had fallen in promptly with
the scheme, and were not a little elated at the honour conferred upon
them.  Crashford became quite mellow towards his old enemy Gayford, and
actually paid back Bowler a half-crown which he had borrowed three terms
ago.  Tubbs, though less demonstrative, was equally delighted, and upset
the inkpot over the chart, in his eagerness to exhibit to Wester their
new home.  [It was hardly worth noticing that Tubbs put his finger not
on New Swishford at all, but into the centre of Peru, which he said he
believed was one of the healthiest countries in all Asia.] Wester, who
always made a point of agreeing with the majority, found no difficulty
in rejoicing, wherever the place might be, and only wished they had not
to wait so long as next spring.

"Why should we wait till then?" asked Crashford.

"Oh, it's better weather," said Gayford; "besides, Wallas is in for his
Oxford local."

"Oh, that doesn't matter tremendously," said Wallas, who was beginning
to think the world might after all go on if he did not pass.

"We can give him an exam, on the ship going out," said Bowler, "a
Swishford local exam., you know, and offer a slice of the island if he
passes."

"It strikes me," said Braintree, "a square mile of tewwitowy is warthah
a wum pwize for a chap."

"But, I say," said Wester, "isn't our winter the same as their summer?
so if we start now, we shall just get out in the warm weather."

"Never thought about that," said Bowler; "what do you say, Gay?"

"I know my uncle generally likes those parts not in the warm weather,"
said Gayford.  "But then, he's been at sea all his life."

"By the way, when does his ship start?" inquired Wallas; "something
depends on that, doesn't it?"

"So it does," said Gayford.  "I forgot that.  He got home a fortnight
ago, and he gets six weeks at home.  That'll bring it to the end of
November."

"Just the very ticket; we must start then, I say."

"But how about my wifle if we don't go home at Cwistmas?" asked
Braintree.

"Oh, bother!  Couldn't you get it sent up somehow, or couldn't you fetch
it next Monday?--that's the term holiday, you know."

"Hold hard," said Bowler, "I've got another plan for Monday.  You know
we ought to get our hands in a bit before we start, and try and find out
what we really want and all that sort of thing.  Now, my idea is for us
to get the coastguard's boat for the day at Sound Bay (you know there's
never any one there to look after it), and sail across to Long Stork
Island, and knock about there for the day, just to see how we get on.
Of course, we shall have to come back before six; but we must make
believe we've landed there for good, and see how we manage.  And, of
course, if we get on there, we're bound to get on at New Swishford, for
it's a far jollier place than the Long Stork."

Bowler's proposition was hailed with acclamation.  His hearers were just
in the humour to put their enthusiasm to the test, and the notion of a
picnic on the Long Stork as a sort of full-dress rehearsal of the
capture of New Swishford suited them exactly.

They proceeded immediately to discuss ways and means, and found that by
putting their pocket-moneys together they could raise the very
respectable sum of forty-one shillings.  Reserving the odd shilling for
the possible contingency of having to "square" a coastguard for the use
of the boat, they had two pounds to devote to the purchase of stores,
