of feelings--interest, surprise, philosophical inquiry, eager
expectancy, and mild alarm--played hide-and-seek with each other in his
bosom, and kept him observant and still.

"Why," asked Okiok, after gazing in silent admiration for a few minutes
over the ledge, "why does he not swallow it, if he likes it, and keep it
down?"

"It's hard to say," answered Rooney.  "Perhaps he'd blow up or catch
fire if he were to try.  It might be dangerous!"

"See," exclaimed Okiok, in an eager whisper; "he is going to let Ippegoo
taste it."

Rooney looked on with increased interest, for at that moment Kajo,
having had enough, offered the pipe to his friend, who accepted it with
the air of a man who half expected it to bite and put the end in his
mouth with diffidence.  He was not successful with the first draw, for
instead of taking the smoke merely into his mouth he drew it straight
down his throat, and spent nearly five minutes thereafter in violent
coughing with tears running down his cheeks.

Kajo spent the same period in laughing, and then gravely and carefully
explained how the thing should be done.

Ippegoo was an apt scholar.  Almost immediately he learned to puff, and
in a very short time was rolling thick white clouds from him like a
turret-gun in action.  Evidently he was proud of his rapid attainments.

"Humph!  That won't last long," murmured Rooney to his companion.

"Isn't it good?" said Kajo to Ippegoo.

"Ye-es.  O yes.  It's good; a-at least, I suppose it is," replied the
youth, with modesty.

A peculiar tinge of pallor overspread his face at that moment.

"What's wrong, Ippegoo?"

"I--I--feel f-funny."

"Never mind that," said Kajo.  "It's always the way at first.  When I
first tried it I--"

He was cut short by Ippegoo suddenly rising, dropping the pipe, clapping
one hand on his breast, the other on his mouth, and rushing into the
bushes where he disappeared like one of his own puffs of smoke.  At the
same moment Rooney and Okiok appeared on the scene, laughing heartily.

"You rascal!" said Rooney to Kajo, on recovering his gravity; "you have
learned to drink, and you have learned to smoke, and, not satisfied with
that extent of depravity, you try to teach Ippegoo.  You pitiful
creature!  Are you not ashamed of yourself?"

Kajo looked sheepish, and admitted that he had some sensations of that
sort, but wasn't sure.

"Tell me," continued the seaman sternly, "before you tasted strong drink
or tobacco, did you want them?"

"No," replied Kajo.

"Are you in better health now that you've got them?"

"I--I _feel_ the better for them," replied Kajo.

"I did not ask what you _feel_," returned Rooney.  "_Are_ you better now
than you were before?  That's the question."

But Rooney never got a satisfactory answer to that question, and Kajo
continued to drink and smoke until, happily for himself, he had to quit
the settlements and proceed to the lands of thick-ribbed ice, where
nothing stronger than train oil and lamp-smoke were procurable.

As for poor Ippegoo, he did not show himself to his friends during the
remainder of that day.  Being half an idiot, no one could prevail on him
thereafter to touch another pipe.

Now, while the Eskimos and our friends were engaged in hunting, and
holding an unwonted amount both of religious and philosophical
intercourse, a band of desperadoes was descending the valleys of the
interior of Greenland, with a view to plunder the Eskimos of the coast.

Hitherto we have written about comparatively well-behaved and genial
natives, but it must not be supposed that there were no villains of an
out-and-out character among those denizens of the north.  It is true
there were not many--for the sparseness of the population, the
superabundance of game on land and sea, as well as the wealth of
unoccupied hunting-grounds, and the rigour of the climate, rendered
robbery and war quite unnecessary, as well as disagreeable.  Still,
there were a few spirits of evil even there, to whom a quiet life seemed
an abomination, and for whom the violent acquisition of other men's
goods possessed a charm far transcending the practice of the peaceful
industries of life.

The band referred to was not remarkably strong in numbers--about thirty
or so; but these were sturdy and daring villains, led by a chief who
must have had some of the old Norse blood in his veins, he was so tall,
fair of complexion, and strong.

Descending first on the little settlement of Godhaab at night, this
robber band found that a Dutch trading-vessel had just arrived, the crew
of which, added to the settlers attracted from their hunting-grounds to
the village, formed a force which they dared not venture to attack
openly.  Grimlek, the robber chief, therefore resolved to wait for a
better opportunity.  Meanwhile, passing himself and band off as hunters,
he purchased a few things from the traders and then proceeded along the
coast, intending to hunt, as well as to wait till the vessel should
depart.

While the robbers were thus engaged, they came unexpectedly on another
trading-ship--a Dutchman--part of the crew of which had landed for some
purpose or other in their boat.  On seeing the Eskimos, the Dutchmen got
quickly into their boat, and pushed off; but the robbers made signs of
peace to them, and, carrying their bows, arrows, and spears up to the
woods, left them there, returning to the shore as if unarmed, though in
reality they had retained their knives.  Again they made signs, as if
they wished to trade with the Dutchmen.

Deceived by appearances, the sailors once more drew in to the shore.
While they were approaching, Grimlek called his men round him and gave a
few hasty directions.  When the sailors had landed, the Eskimos mingled
with them, and began to offer sealskins for trade--each selecting a
particular man with whom to transact business.  At a given signal they
drew their knives from under their coats, and each robber stabbed his
man to the heart.  The men left in the ship, seeing what had occurred,
and that it was too late to attempt rescue, instantly filled her sails,
and went off to sea.

The villains having thus easily slain their victims, carried off the
booty found in the boat, and hid it in the bushes, to be taken away at a
convenient opportunity.

But this deed of darkness was not done unwitnessed.  Early in the
morning of that day, various hunting parties had dispersed in different
directions--some to the hills, others to the sea.  Among the latter was
an oomiak full of women who went along-shore to fish, and with whom were
old Kannoa, Nunaga, and others.  They went in a northerly direction.
Rooney, Angut, and Okiok proceeded along the coast to the southward.

The direction taken by these last brought them near to the spot where
the Dutch sailors had landed, at the critical moment when the robbers
were mingling with their unsuspecting victims.

Although only three to thirty, it is certain that our heroes would have
sprung to the aid of the sailors if they had suspected what was about to
happen, but the deed was done so promptly that there was no time for
action.  Fortunately Rooney and his companions had not shown themselves.
They were therefore able to draw back into the shelter of the bushes,
where they held a hasty council of war.

"We must run back to camp," said Rooney, "tell what we have seen, and
return with a band of men to punish the murderers."

"Agreed," said Okiok; "but how are we to do it?  The shore is open.  We
cannot take a step that way without being seen, and chased.  We might
outrun them, though I don't feel quite as supple as I used to; but we
should barely arrive before them in time to warn the camp, and should
then be almost unfit to fight."

To this Angut replied that they could go inland over the hills, and so
come down on the camp in rear.  It might not, he thought, add much to
the distance.  This plan was quickly adopted and put in practice.

But there are few things more deceptive than formation and distance in
mountain lands.  What seemed to the trio easy, proved to be tremendously
difficult; and the distance they had to travel in order to avoid
precipices and surmount ridges, gradually increased to many miles, so
that it was late, and twilight was deepening into night, before they
reached the camp.

Meanwhile the robbers were not idle.  Although ignorant of the fact that
their bloody work had been observed, they were not long ignorant of the
near neighbourhood of the Eskimo camp.  Early in the morning they had
sent two of their swiftest young men to spy out the land ahead.  These
had discovered the camp, entered it, professing to be wandering hunters,
and had then returned to their friends with the news that many of the
men had gone away hunting, and would probably remain out all night; also
that an oomiak full of women had gone off to the southward to fish.

The runners, happening to descend to the coast on the opposite side of a
ridge from Rooney and his companions, just missed meeting them, and
returned to their comrades shortly after the massacre.  Grimlek knew
that whatever course he should pursue must be prompt and decisive.  He
at once divided his men into two bands, one of which he sent to pursue
and capture the women who had gone to fish; with the other, which he led
in person, he resolved either to storm the camp or take it by surprise,
as circumstances might point out.

By the straight way of the shore the distance was not great.  In fact,
the camp might have been seen from the spot where the massacre had been
perpetrated, but for a high promontory which concealed it.  On rounding
this promontory, the party detailed to pursue the women glided into the
bushes and disappeared.  Grimlek, with the remaining men, advanced
straight and openly towards the camp.  He saw, however, on drawing near,
that the number of men in it were more than a match for his small party,
and therefore approached with friendly demonstrations.

They were hospitably received by Hans Egede.

"My friends," he said, "you have arrived just as we are assembling to
talk about the things that concern our souls, the future life, and the
Good Spirit.  Will you and your men sit down and listen?"

For a few moments Grimlek did not reply.  Then he said, "You are not an
Eskimo?"

"No, I am a Kablunet," replied Egede; "I have been sent to tell the
Eskimos about the true God."

Again the robber chief was silent.  Then he said that he would consult
with his men, and retired with them a short distance to do so.

"Nothing better could have happened," he said in a low tone.  "The
Kablunet is going to talk to them about his God.  All we have to do is
to mingle with them.  Let each of you choose his man and sit down beside
him.  When I give the signal, strike at once, and let no second blow be
needed."

A murmur of assent was all that the band returned to this speech, and
Grimlek, returning to the missionary, said that he and his men were
ready to hear.

In a few minutes each of the assassins was seated on the ground beside
his chosen victim.



CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

A STRANGE MEETING STRANGELY INTERRUPTED.

The meeting which had been thus strangely invaded was no ordinary prayer
or missionary meeting.  It had been assembled by Egede for the express
purpose of affording some unbelievers among the Eskimos an opportunity
of stating their difficulties and objections in regard to the new
religion.

Interesting though its proceedings were, as showing the similarity of
the workings of the civilised and savage minds, we cannot afford space
to enter much into detail, yet some account of the matter seems
necessary in order to show what it was that induced the robber chief to
delay, though not to alter, his fell purpose.

After prayer offered by the missionary, that the Holy Spirit might
descend on and bless the discussion, a hymn was sung.  It had been
translated into Eskimo, and taught to his converts by Egede.  Then the
missionary made a brief but complete statement of the leading facts of
the good news of salvation to sinful man in Jesus Christ,--this, not
only to clear the way for what was to come, but for the purpose of
teaching the newcomers, so as to render them somewhat intelligent
listeners.

Then an old grey-haired man arose.

"I do not object to the new religion," he said, "but I am puzzled.  You
tell me that God is everywhere and knows everything; why, then, did he
not go to our first mother, Eve, and warn her of her danger when the
Evil One tempted her in the form of a serpent?"

"My friend, the question you ask cannot be fully answered," said Egede.
"I can explain, however, that our first parents were put into the world
to be tried or tested in that way.  To have warned Eve would have
rendered the test useless.  Enough for us to know that she was told what
to do.  Her duty was to obey.  But let me ask _you_ a question: is not
sin--is not murder--hateful?"

Grimlek imagined that Egede looked him straight in the face as he asked
the question, and felt uneasy, but was by no means softened.

"Yes," answered the old man; "murder--sin--is hateful."

"Yet it certainly exists," continued Egede; "you cannot help believing
that?"

"Yes, I must admit that."

"Then why did God permit sin?"

Of course the old man could not reply, and the missionary pointed out
that some things were incomprehensible, and that that was one of them.

"But," he continued, "that is no reason why we should not talk of things
that _are_ comprehensible.  Let us turn to these."

At this point a middle-aged man with a burly frame and resolute
expression started up, and said in an excited yet somewhat reckless
manner--

"I don't believe a word that you say.  Everything exists as it was from
the beginning until now, and will continue the same to the end."

"Who told you that?" asked Egede, in a prompt yet quiet manner.

The man was silenced.  He resumed his seat without answering.

"You have talked of the `end,' my friend," continued the missionary, in
the same quiet tone.  "When is the end? and what will come after it?  I
wait for enlightenment."

Still the man remained dumb.  He had evidently exhausted himself in one
grand explosion, and was unable for more.  There was a disposition to
quiet laughter on the part of the audience, but the missionary checked
this by pointing to another man in the crowd and remarking--

"I think, friend, that you have something to say."

Thus invited, the man spoke at once, and with unexpected vigour.  He was
a stupid-looking, heavy-faced man, but when roused, as he then was, his
face lighted up amazingly.

"We do not understand you," he said sternly.  "Show us the God you
describe; then we will believe in Him and obey Him.  You make Him too
high and incomprehensible.  How can we know Him?  Will He trouble
Himself about the like of us?  Some of us have prayed to Him when we
were faint and hungry, but we got no answer.  What you say of Him cannot
be true, or, if you know Him better than we do, why don't you pray for
us and procure for us plenty of food, good health, and a dry house?
That is all we want.  As for our souls, they are healthy enough already.
You are of a different race from us.  People in your country may have
diseased souls.  Very likely they have.  From the specimens we have seen
of them we are quite ready to believe that.  For them a doctor of souls
may be necessary.  Your heaven and your spiritual joys may be good
enough for you, but they would be very dull for us.  We must have seals,
and fishes, and birds.  Our souls can no more live without these than
our bodies.  You say we shall not find any of these in your heaven; well
then, we do not want to go there; we will leave it to you and to the
worthless part of our own countrymen, but as for us, we prefer to go to
Torngarsuk, where we shall find more than we require of all things, and
enjoy them without trouble."

[See Note.]

With an energetic "humph!" or some such exclamation, this self-satisfied
philosopher sat down, and many of his countrymen expressed their
sympathy with his views by a decided "Huk!" but others remained silent
and puzzled.

And well they might, for in these few sentences the Eskimo had opened up
a number of the problems on which man, both civilised and savage, has
been exercising his brain unsuccessfully from the days of Adam and Eve
until now.  No wonder that poor Hans Egede paused thoughtfully--and no
doubt prayerfully--for a few minutes ere he ventured a reply.  He was
about to open his lips, when, to his astonishment, a tall strong man who
had been sitting near the outside circle of the audience close to the
robber chief Grimlek started to his feet, and, in a tone that had in it
more of a demand than a request, asked permission to speak.

It was our friend Angut.

Before listening to his remarks, however, it behoves us to account for
his sudden appearance.

Having been led, as we have said, far out of their way by the detour
they were compelled to take, Red Rooney and his friends did not reach
the camp till some time after the meeting above described had begun.  As
it was growing dusk at the time, they easily approached without being
observed--all the more that during the whole time of the meeting men and
women kept coming and going, according as they felt more or less
interested in the proceedings.

Great was the surprise of the three friends on arriving to find the band
of robbers sitting peacefully among the audience; but still greater
would have been their surprise had they known the murderous purpose
these had in view.  Rooney, however, having had knowledge of men in many
savage lands, half guessed the true state of matters, and, touching his
two friends on the shoulders, beckoned to them to withdraw.

"Things look peaceful," he whispered when beyond the circle, "but there
is no peace in the hearts of cold-blooded murderers.  What they have
done they will do again.  `Quick' is the word.  Let us gather a dozen
strong young men."

They had no difficulty in doing this.  From among the youths who were
indifferent to the proceedings at the meeting they soon gathered twelve
of the strongest.

"Now, lads," said Rooney, after having briefly told them of the recent
massacre, "fifteen of these murderers are seated in that meeting.  You
cannot fail to know them from our own people, for they are all
strangers.  Let each one here creep into the meeting with a short spear,
choose his man, sit down beside him, and be ready when the signal is
given by Angut or me.  But do not kill.  You are young and strong.
