"Here is the wagon; come along," said Bob, leading his mother out of the
station.

"The waggin, boy; I don't see no waggin."

"Why, there, with the pair of bay horses."

"You don't mean the carridge by the fence, do you?"

"Well, yes, only we call them wagons here."

"An' you calls the 'osses _bay_ 'osses, do you?"

"Well now, _I_ would call 'em beautiful 'osses, but I suppose bay means
the same thing here.  You've got strange ways in Canada."

"Yes, mother, and pleasant ways too, as I hope you shall find out ere
long.  Get in, now.  Take care!  Now then, Hetty--come, Matty.  How
difficult to believe that such a strapping young thing can be the
squalling Matty I left in London!"

Matty laughed as she got in, by way of reply, for she did not yet quite
believe in her big brother.

"Do you drive, Tim; I'll stay inside," said Bob.

In another moment the spanking bays were whirling the wagon over the
road to Brankly Farm at the rate of ten miles an hour.

Need it be said that the amiable Merryboys did not fail of their duty on
that occasion?  That Hetty and Matty took violently to brown-eyed Martha
at first sight, having heard all about her from Bob long ago--as she of
them; that Mrs Merryboy was, we may say, one glowing beam of
hospitality; that Mrs Frog was, so to speak, one blazing
personification of amazement, which threatened to become chronic--there
was so much that was contrary to previous experience and she was so slow
to take it in; that Mr Merryboy became noisier than ever, and that,
what between his stick and his legs, to say nothing of his voice, he
managed to create in one day hubbub enough to last ten families for a
fortnight; that the domestics and the dogs were sympathetically joyful;
that even the kitten gave unmistakeable evidences of unusual hilarity--
though some attributed the effect to surreptitiously-obtained cream;
and, finally, that old granny became something like a Chinese image in
the matter of nodding and gazing and smirking and wrinkling, so that
there seemed some danger of her terminating her career in a gush of
universal philanthropy--need all this be said, we ask?  We think not;
therefore we won't say it.

But it was not till Bob Frog got his mother all to himself, under the
trees, near the waterfall, down by the river that drove the still
unmended saw-mill, that they had real and satisfactory communion.  It
would have been interesting to have listened to these two--with memories
and sympathies and feelings towards the Saviour of sinners so closely
intertwined, yet with knowledge and intellectual powers in many respects
so far apart.  But we may not intrude too closely.

Towards the end of their walk, Bob touched on a subject which had been
uppermost in the minds of both all the time, but from which they had
shrunk equally, the one being afraid to ask, the other disinclined to
tell.

"Mother," said Bob, at last, "what about father?"

"Ah!  Bobby," replied Mrs Frog, beginning to weep, gently, "I know'd ye
would come to that--you was always so fond of 'im, an' he was so fond o'
you too, indeed--"

"I know it, mother," interrupted Bob, "but have you never heard of him?"

"Never.  I might 'ave, p'r'aps, if he'd bin took an' tried under his own
name, but you know he had so many aliases, an' the old 'ouse we used to
live in we was obliged to quit, so p'r'aps he tried to find us and
couldn't."

"May God help him--dear father!" said the son in a low sad voice.

"I'd never 'ave left 'im, Bobby, if he 'adn't left me.  You know that.
An' if I thought he was alive and know'd w'ere he was, I'd go back to
'im yet, but--"

The subject was dropped here, for the new mill came suddenly into view,
and Bob was glad to draw his mother's attention to it.

"See, we were mending that just before we got the news you were so near
us.  Come, I'll show it to you.  Tim Lumpy and I made it all by
ourselves, and I think you'll call it a first-class article.  By the
way, how came you to travel first-class?"

"Oh! that's all along of Sir Richard Brandon.  He's sitch a liberal
gentleman, an' said that as it was by his advice we were goin' to
Canada, he would pay our expenses; and he's so grand that he never
remembered there was any other class but first, when he took the
tickets, an' when he was show'd what he'd done he laughed an' said he
wouldn't alter it, an' we must go all the way first-class.  He's a
strange man, but a good 'un!"

By this time they had reached the platform of the damaged saw-mill, and
Bob pointed out, with elaborate care, the details of the mill in all its
minute particulars, commenting specially on the fact that most of the
telling improvements on it were due to the fertile brain and inventive
genius of Tim Lumpy.  He also explained the different kinds of saws--the
ripping saw, and the cross-cut saw, and the circular saw, and the
eccentric saw--just as if his mother were an embryo mill-wright, for he
_felt_ that she took a deep interest in it all, and Mrs Frog listened
with the profound attention of a civil engineer, and remarked on
everything with such comments as--oh! indeed! ah! well now! ain't it
wonderful? amazin'! an' you made it all too!  Oh!  Bobby!--and other
more or less appropriate phrases.

On quitting the mill to return to the house they saw a couple of figures
walking down another avenue, so absorbed in conversation that they did
not at first observe Bob and his mother, or take note of the fact that
Matty, being a bouncing girl, had gone after butterflies or some such
child-alluring insects.

It was Tim Lumpy and Hetty Frog.

And no wonder that they were absorbed, for was not their conversation on
subjects of the profoundest interest to both?--George Yard, Whitechapel,
Commercial Street, Spitalfields, and the Sailor's Home, and the Rests,
and all the other agencies for rescuing poor souls in monstrous London,
and the teachers and school companions whom they had known there and
never could forget!  No wonder, we say, that these two were absorbed
while comparing notes, and still less wonder that they were even more
deeply absorbed when they got upon the theme of Bobby Frog--so much
loved, nay, almost worshipped, by both.

At last they observed Mrs Frog's scarlet shawl--which was very
conspicuous--and her son, and tried to look unconscious, and wondered
with quite needless surprise where Matty could have gone to.

Bobby Frog, being a sharp youth, noted these things, but made no comment
to any one, for the air of Canada had, somehow, invested this waif with
wonderful delicacy of feeling.

Although Bob and his mother left off talking of Ned Frog somewhat
abruptly, as well as sorrowfully, it does not follow that we are bound
to do the same.  On the contrary, we now ask the reader to leave Brankly
Farm rather abruptly, and return to London for the purpose of paying Ned
a visit.



CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

A STRANGE VISIT AND ITS RESULTS.

Edward Frog, bird-fancier, pugilist, etcetera, (and the etcetera
represents an unknown quantity), has changed somewhat like the rest, for
a few years have thinned the short-cropped though once curly locks above
his knotted forehead, besides sprinkling them with grey.  But in other
respects he has not fallen off--nay he has rather improved, owing to the
peculiar system of diet and discipline and regularity of life to which,
during these years, he has been subjected.

When Ned returned from what we may style his outing, he went straight to
the old court with something like a feeling of anxiety in his heart, but
found the old home deserted and the old door, which still bore deep
marks of his knuckle, on the upper panels and his boots on the lower,
was padlocked.  He inquired for Mrs Frog, but was told she had left the
place long ago,--and no one knew where she had gone.

With a heavy heart Ned turned from the door and sauntered away,
friendless and homeless.  He thought of making further inquiries about
his family, but at the corner of the street smelt the old shop that had
swallowed up so much of his earnings.

"If I'd on'y put it all in the savin's bank," he said bitterly, stopping
in front of the gin-palace, "I'd 'ave bin well off to-day."

An old comrade turned the corner at that moment.

"What!  Ned Frog!" he cried, seizing his hand and shaking it with
genuine goodwill.  "Well, this _is_ good luck.  Come along, old boy!"

It was pleasant to the desolate man to be thus recognised.  He went
along like an ox to the slaughter, though, unlike the ox, he knew well
what he was going to.

He was "treated."  He drank beer.  Other old friends came in.  He drank
gin.  If good resolves had been coming up in his mind earlier in the day
he forgot them now.  If better feelings had been struggling for the
mastery, he crushed them now.  He got drunk.  He became disorderly.  He
went into High Street, Whitechapel, with a view to do damage to
somebody.  He succeeded.  He tumbled over a barrow, and damaged his own
shins.  He encountered Number 666 soon after, and, through his
influence, passed the night in a police cell.

After this Ned gave up all thought of searching for his wife and family.

"Better let 'em alone," he growled to himself on being discharged from
the police-office with a caution.

But, as we have said or hinted elsewhere, Ned was a man of iron will.
He resolved to avoid the public-house, to drink in moderation, and to do
his drinking at home.  Being as powerful and active as ever he had been,
he soon managed, in the capacity of a common labourer, to scrape enough
money together to enable him to retake his old garret, which chanced to
be vacant.  Indeed its situation was so airy, and it was so undesirable,
that it was almost always vacant.  He bought a few cages and birds;
found that the old manager of the low music-hall was still at work and
ready to employ him, and thus fell very much into his old line of life.

One night, as he was passing into his place of business--the
music-hall--a man saw him and recognised him.  This was a city
missionary of the John Seaward type, who chanced to be fishing for souls
that night in these troubled waters.  There are many such fishermen
about, thank God, doing their grand work unostentatiously, and not only
rescuing souls for eternity, but helping, more perhaps than even the
best informed are aware of, to save London from tremendous evil.

What it was in Ned Frog that attracted this man of God we know note but,
after casting his lines for some hours in other places, he returned to
the music-hall and loitered about the door.

At a late hour its audience came pouring out with discordant cries and
ribald laughter.  Soon Ned appeared and took his way homeward.  The
missionary followed at a safe distance till he saw Ned disappear through
the doorway that led to his garret.  Then, running forward, he entered
the dark passage and heard Ned's heavy foot clanking on the stone steps
as he mounted upwards.

The sound became fainter, and the missionary, fearing lest he should
fail to find the room in which his man dwelt--for there were many rooms
in the old tenement--ran hastily up-stairs and paused to listen.  The
footsteps were still sounding above him, but louder now, because Ned was
mounting a wooden stair.  A few seconds later a heavy door was banged,
and all was quiet.

The city missionary now groped his way upwards until he came to the
highest landing, where in the thick darkness he saw a light under a
door.  With a feeling of uncertainty and a silent prayer for help he
knocked gently.  The door was opened at once by a middle-aged woman,
whose outline only could be seen, her back being to the light.

"Is it here that the man lives who came up just now?" asked the
missionary.

"What man?" she replied, fiercely, "I know nothink about men, an' 'ave
nothink to do with 'em.  Ned Frog's the on'y man as ever comes 'ere, an'
_he_ lives up there."

She made a motion, as if pointing upwards somewhere, and banged the door
in her visitor's face.

"Up there!"  The missionary had reached the highest landing, and saw no
other gleam of light anywhere.  Groping about, however, his hand struck
against a ladder.  All doubt as to the use of this was immediately
banished, for a man's heavy tread was heard in the room above as he
crossed it.

Mounting the ladder, the missionary, instead of coming to a higher
landing as he had expected, thrust his hat against a trap-door in the
roof.  Immediately he heard a savage human growl.  Evidently the man was
in a bad humour, but the missionary knocked.

"Who's there?" demanded the man, fiercely, for his visitors were few,
and these generally connected with the police force.

"May I come in?" asked the missionary in a mild voice--not that he put
the mildness on for the occasion.  He was naturally mild--additionally
so by grace.

"Oh! yes--you may come in," cried the man, lifting the trap-door.

The visitor stepped into the room and was startled by Ned letting fall
the trap-door with a crash that shook the whole tenement.  Planting
himself upon it, he rendered retreat impossible.

It was a trying situation, for the man was in a savage humour, and
evidently the worse for drink.  But missionaries are bold men.

"Now," demanded Ned, "what may _you_ want?"

"I want your soul," replied his visitor, quietly.

"You needn't trouble yourself, then, for the devil's got it already."

"No--he has not got it _yet_, Ned."

"Oh! you know me then?"

"No.  I never saw you till to-night, but I learned your name
accidentally, and I'm anxious about your soul."

"You don't know me," Ned repeated, slowly, "you never saw me till
to-night, yet you're anxious about my soul!  What stuff are you talkin'!
'Ow can that be?"

"Now, you have puzzled _me_," said the missionary.  "I cannot tell how
that can be, but it is no `stuff' I assure you.  I think it probable,
however, that your own experience may help you.  Didn't you once see a
young girl whom you had never seen before, whom you didn't know, whom
you had never even heard of, yet you became desperately anxious to win
her?"

Ned instantly thought of a certain woman whom he had often abused and
beaten, and whose heart he had probably broken.

"Yes," he said, "I did; but then I had falled in love wi' her at first
sight, and you can't have falled in love wi' _me_, you know."

Ned grinned at this idea in spite of himself.

"Well, no," replied the missionary, "not exactly.  You're not a very
lovable object to look at just now.  Nevertheless, I _am_ anxious about
your soul _at first sight_.  I can't tell how it is, but so it is."

"Come, now," said Ned, becoming suddenly stern.  "I don't believe in
your religion, or your Bible, or your prayin' and psalm-singin'.  I tell
you plainly, I'm a infidel.  But if you can say anything in favour o'
your views, fire away; I'll listen, only don't let me have any o' your
sing-songin' or whinin', else I'll kick you down the trap-door and down
the stair an' up the court and out into the street--speak out, like a
man."

"I will speak as God the Holy Spirit shall enable me," returned the
missionary, without the slightest change in tone or manner.

"Well, then, sit down," said Ned, pointing to the only chair in the
room, while he seated himself on the rickety table, which threatened to
give way altogether, while the reckless man swung his right leg to and
fro quite regardless of its complainings.

"Have you ever studied the Bible?" asked the missionary, somewhat
abruptly.

"Well, no, of course not.  I'm not a parson, but I have read a bit here
and there, an' it's all rubbish.  I don't believe a word of it."

"There's a part of it," returned the visitor, "which says that God
maketh his rain to fall on the just and on the unjust.  Do you not
believe that?"

"Of course I do.  A man can't help believin' that, for he sees it--it
falls on houses, fields, birds and beasts as well."

"Then you _do_ believe a word of it?"

"Oh! come, you're a deal too sharp.  You know what I mean."

"No," said his visitor, quickly, "I don't quite know what you mean.  One
who professes to be an infidel professes more or less intelligent
disbelief in the Bible, yet you admit that you have never studied the
book which you profess to disbelieve--much less, I suppose, have you
studied the books which give us the evidences of its truth."

"Don't suppose, Mr parson, or missioner, or whatever you are," said
Ned, "that you're goin' to floor me wi' your larnin'.  I'm too old a
bird for that.  Do you suppose that I'm bound to study everything on the
face o' the earth like a lawyer before I'm entitled to say I don't
believe it.  If I see that a thing don't work well, that's enough for me
to condemn it."

"You're quite right there.  I quite go with that line of reasoning.  By
their fruits shall ye know them.  A man don't usually go to a thistle to
find grapes.  But let me ask you, Ned, do you usually find that
murderers, drunkards, burglars, thieves, and blackguards in general are
students of the Bible and given to prayer and psalm-singing?"

"Ha! ha!  I should rather think not," said Ned, much tickled by the
supposition.

"Then," continued the other, "tell me, honestly, Ned, do you find that
people who read God's Word and sing His praise and ask His blessing on
all they do, are generally bad fathers, and mothers, and masters, and
servants, and children, and that from their ranks come the worst people
in society?"

"Now, look here, Mr missioner," cried Ned, leaping suddenly from the
table, which overturned with a crash, "I'm one o' them fellers that's
not to be floored by a puff o' wind.  I can hold my own agin most men
wi' fist or tongue.  But I like fair-play in the ring or in argiment.  I
have _not_ studied this matter, as you say, an' so I won't speak on it.
But I'll look into it, an' if you come back here this day three weeks
I'll let you know what I think.  You may trust me, for when I say a
