as Pedro and the colonel galloped up.

"Thank you, Senhor Armstrong, thank you heartily," said the latter, as
he dismounted, and, sitting down on a mound, drew his child to his side.

"I'm not hurt, not a bit," sighed Manuela, with a slight attempt at a
smile.

"Thank God for that, but you are shaken a little," returned the old
soldier with an anxious look.  "Here Pedro, Quashy, fetch me the flask
from my saddle."

By the time a cup of the flask's contents was administered to Manuela,
Mariquita and Susan were kneeling beside her, and the rest were standing
round.

"A splendid leap!--aw--couldn't have been much better done if--aw--it
had been an English hunter," remarked the sportsman in an undertone to
his friend.  "But, I say, don't it strike you that the colonel is
uncommonly--aw--sweet on that little Indian girl."

"She's no more an Indian girl than you are," replied his friend, with a
laugh.

"Aw--you don't say so?" returned the sportsman, with a slight elevation
of his eyebrows.

"Let us go," said Manuela, rising; "I am much better, only a little
shaken by such a leap.  But--but I should like another--"

"Yes, to be sure, another horse," interrupted the colonel; "who will
exchange?--a quiet one, of course."

"Here you is, kurnel," said Quashy, with a beaming countenance, as he
led forward his horse.  "Quiet as a lamb, 'cept when you aggrawates him.
Nebber goes no faster dan you wants him to,--sometimes not so fast! an'
wouldn't run away even if you was to ax him on your knees."

"After such recommendation," said the colonel, turning to Manuela, "I
suppose you will accept of this steed."

The Inca princess accepted it with a beam of gratitude to Quashy, who
thereupon mounted the runaway horse, and in a few minutes the whole
cavalcade was sweeping over the plain as swiftly as ever.

Afternoon brought them to a solitary Gaucho hut.  They came first upon
the corral rather suddenly, for it was concealed in a hollow.  It was an
enclosure of strong rough posts stuck into the ground, on many of which
were perched a number of gorged vultures and hawks.

The ground around it was covered with bones, bullocks' horns, wool,
carcasses of horses, and other refuse, which induced the travellers to
keep carefully to windward of it.  On a slight rising ground, close at
hand, stood the mud hut of the family to which it belonged.

Although living in a state little short of savagery, this family, being
descended from one of the best old families of Spain--at least, so they
believed--maintained much of the dignity, good manners, and ceremony
that characterised the old Spaniards.  It comprised several generations,
of whom a great-great-grandfather, blind, deaf, and benignant, formed
the head, and a baby, fat, wide awake, and uproarious, formed the tail.
Between these there was a band of men, women, girls, and boys, whom we
will not even attempt to describe, further than to say that they were
all black-eyed, sunburnt, and more or less pretty and handsome.

The travellers rode up to the door of the mud mansion, and, according to
Pampas etiquette, awaited permission to dismount.  This was quickly
given with much urbanity by a handsome middle-aged man, who was the
active head of the household.

The intention of Colonel Marchbanks was to take a hasty meal here, and
push on as far as possible before night.  Finding that the Gauchos were
engaged at that time in breaking in some young horses, he ordered his
party to off-saddle, and went with Pedro, Lawrence, and some others
towards the corral while food was being prepared.

Quashy--ever mindful of the welfare of others, and ever thoughtful in
regard to what he esteemed the most important things of life--hung
behind to advise a daughter of the house to prepare a specially tender
fowl for Susan, Manuela, and Mariquita.  He even remained a few minutes
to receive from the damsel a lesson in cookery.

This daughter of the Pampas whispered something to a very small brother
beside her, who was remarkable chiefly for the size of his gorgeous eyes
and the scantiness of his costume.  With ready obedience the urchin
unhooked a miniature lasso from the wall, and lassoed a large hen.  How
the brother and sister executed that hen was not obvious.

It was, however, quickly and effectively done between them.  Then the
sister took the bird to a pot of water, which chanced to be boiling at
the time, and put it therein, feathers and all.  To civilised people
this might have seemed rather a savage process, but it was not so.  The
object was merely to simplify the plucking.  After scalding, the
feathers came off with wonderful facility, and also stuck to the girl's
wet hands with equally wonderful tenacity.  Washing her hands, she next
cut off the wings and legs of the fowl, and then separated the breast
from the back.  These portions she put into a small pot with some suet
and water, and threw the rest away.

"Das bery good," remarked Quashy, nodding his head in approval, after
which he advised the girl to treat another fowl or two in a similar
manner, and then followed his master to the corral.

Here a very animated scene was being enacted.  Half a dozen young horses
were about to be mounted for the first time and broken in.  What modern
horse-trainers of the tender school would have said to the process we
cannot tell.  Having had no experience in such matters, one way or
another, we hazard no opinion.  We merely state the facts of the case.

The father of the family, mounted on a strong and steady horse,
commenced the business by riding into the corral, and throwing his lasso
over the head of a young horse, which he dragged forcibly to the gate.
Every step of the process was forcible.  There was nothing equivalent to
solicitation or inducement from beginning to end.  Opposition, dogged
and dire, was assumed as a matter of course, and was met by compulsion
more dogged and more dire!

At the gate of the corral the end of the lasso was received by the
eldest son of the family, a tall, strapping, and exceedingly handsome
youth, of about twenty-three, who had been named Pizarro,--no doubt
after the conqueror of Peru.  He certainly resembled his namesake in
courage, vigour, and perseverance, if in nothing else.  The young horse
displayed great unwillingness at first to quit its companions,--shaking
its magnificent mane, and flourishing its voluminous tail in wild
disdain as it was dragged out.

But the moment it found itself outside the corral, its first idea was to
gallop away.  A jerk of the lasso checked him effectually.  Another
member of the household then deftly threw his lasso in such a manner
that the prancing steed put its feet in it, and was caught just above
the fetlocks.  With a powerful twitch of this second lasso its legs were
pulled from under it, and it fell with tremendous violence on its side.
Before it could rise the young Gaucho forced its head to the ground and
held it there, then drew his long knife, and therewith, in a few
seconds, cut off its mane.  Another Gaucho performed the same operation
on the hair of its tail--both acts being done, as they explained, to
indicate that the horse had been once mounted.

Meanwhile Pizarro quickly put a strong hide halter on the animal's head,
and a piece of hide in his mouth to serve as a bit.  He also girthed a
saddle on him, and, when all was ready, ordered the men who held him to
let go.  At the same moment he sprang into the saddle and held on.

Holding on was the point on which Pizarro had to concentrate all his
attention and power during the next few minutes, for the way in which
that outraged and intensely fierce creature strove to unseat him is
alike beyond the power of description and conception.  Jumping,
plunging, kicking, rearing, bounding, and pirouetting are all
sufficiently expressive terms in their way, but they are mild words with
which to describe the proceedings of that creature of the Pampas while
under the influence of temporary insanity.  With ears flat on its neck,
nostrils distended, and eyes emitting something almost like flames, the
young horse absolutely screamed in its fury; but all was in vain.  As
well might it have tried to shake off its own tail as Pizarro!

Suddenly it changed its plan, and stretched out its sinewy length to its
longest stride.  Pizarro fell in with the idea, encouraged it with his
long sharp spurs and heavy lash, and away they went over the mighty
plain like a streak of personified lightning.

It is useful sometimes to let wilful people not only have their way, but
compel them to continue it.  John Gilpin's spirit, when he said--

  "'Twas for your pleasure you came here;
  You shall go back for mine."

is not unknown on the Pampas and the prairie:

After sailing away over the plain, like a ship going out to sea, until
it was a mere speck on the horizon, Pizarro's horse thought it time to
reduce its pace; but here Pizarro did not agree with it.  He applied
whip and spur until his steed was quite exhausted.  Then he turned
homewards, and galloped back to the corral, into which he turned the
animal in a very broken and humble state of mind.  There it found
several young friends who had just been subdued in a similar manner, and
it is not altogether improbable that they spent the remainder of that
evening in comparing notes!

"A roughish method, but--aw--effective," remarked the sportsman to his
friend.

This was true.  Perhaps Quashy's remark to Lawrence was equally true:--

"Dat dood it pritty slick, massa; but I've seed it as well dood, p'r'aps
better, by kindness."

There is this, at all events, to be said in regard to the rough system,
that no man but an athlete could endure the fatigue of the process,
while any man--or even woman--has physical strength sufficient to
conquer by love, if only he, or she, possess the requisite patience and
milk of human kindness.



CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT.

TREATS OF A GAUCHO YOUTH.

From these Gauchos Colonel Marchbanks learned that his troops had been
seen searching for him by the eldest son, Pizarro, and that handsome
youth professed himself willing to guide the party to the place where
the soldiers were likely to be found.  Without delay, therefore, they
resumed their journey after supper, and that night encamped on the open
plain.

While the party was busy making arrangements for the night, Pedro
sauntered to the top of a neighbouring knoll to have what he styled a
look round.

It was a clear moonlight night, and Lawrence, recognising the figure of
the guide, followed him.

"Pedro," he said, on overtaking him, "how is it possible that Pizarro
can guide us to where the troops are, seeing that it is some time since
he saw them, and he did not know in what direction they meant to travel?
Besides, they may have changed their intentions and their route several
times."

"You forget, senhor, that troops leave a broad trail, and you do not
yet, I see, fully appreciate the wonderful powers of some Gauchos in
tracking out men.  This Pizarro, although so young, is already
celebrated in that way."

"You know him, then?  Why, you seem to know everybody!"

"I know every one of note," replied the guide, "for my travels have been
extensive, and my memory is pretty strong.  Let me give you one or two
instances of Pizarro's powers.  I was in this part of the country two
years ago.  Having occasion to pass this way, I fell in with Pizarro,
and we travelled together a short time.  One forenoon we were riding
over the plains, when he stopped suddenly, pointed to a footprint, and
said, `That is the little grey horse that was stolen from my father
three years ago!'  `Are you sure?' said I, almost laughing at him.
`Sure!' said he, `of course I am; moreover, I'm certain that the horse
passed here not more than half an hour ago.'  `Let's follow it up,
then,' said I, more in jest than earnest.  But we did follow it up, and
recovered the little grey horse that same evening."

"A wonderful power of observation indeed, as well as memory," said
Lawrence, looking with increased interest at the young Gaucho, who could
be seen, by the light of the neighbouring camp-fire, moving about in a
graceful, free and easy manner, assisting in the preparation of supper.

"It was pretty well in its way," returned Pedro, "but he did a sharper
thing than that last year.  A gold escort was attacked somewhere in the
west, and the robbers, after killing most of the men, escaped with the
bags of gold.  The authorities being very anxious to trace out and
punish the robbers, offered a high reward for any useful information as
to their whereabouts.  Now it chanced that Pizarro was moving about the
country at that time, and, hearing of the adventure and the reward, kept
his eyes open and his wits about him a little more sharply than usual--
though he does that pretty well at all times by nature.  One day he saw
a little child leading a mule laden with raw hides along a narrow path.
This is a common enough sight, in no way calculated to attract
particular attention; nevertheless it did attract the attention of
Pizarro.  I don't pretend to understand the workings of a Gaucho's mind.
Perhaps it was the extreme smallness of the child that struck him,
causing him to think that as no father or mother would risk such a
little thing with the charge of a loaded mule without a special reason,
it would be as well to find out what that special reason might be.
Perhaps it was something else.  Anyhow, suspicion being awakened, he
followed the mule for a short distance, and soon observed that it
stepped as if it carried a much heavier weight than a mere pack of
hides.  At once the stolen gold flashed into Pizarro's mind.  He stopped
the mule, cut the bandages off the hides, and there, concealed among
them, found the stolen bags!"

"After that," said Lawrence, "I have no doubt whatever that he will soon
find the troops."

"Neither have I," returned Pedro; "but Pizarro, and men like him, can do
much more than I have told you.  By a flight of birds they can tell of
an approaching band of men before they are in sight, and by the cloud of
dust they make when they appear they can form a close estimate of their
numbers.  When the Indian hordes are about to make a raid, Gauchos are
warned of it by the ostriches and llamas and other timid beasts of the
Pampas all travelling in one direction, and in many other ways that seem
little short of miraculous they act the part of wilderness-detectives."

While continuing their journey next day, Lawrence resolved to have a
chat with the Gaucho youth.  Riding up alongside, he saluted him, and
received a reply and a graceful bow that would have done credit to a
Spanish grandee.  He discovered ere long that the young man's mind, like
his body, had been cast in a noble mould, and that, although ignorant of
almost everything beyond his own wild plains, he was deeply imbued with
reverence for Truth and Justice in all the relations of life.  Indeed,
his sense of these attributes of God was so strong that the constant
violation of them by those around him roused in him occasional bursts of
hot indignation, as Lawrence very soon found when he touched on a recent
revolution which had taken place in the province of San Juan.

"Are the troops we search for sent out to aid the government of
Mendoza?" demanded Pizarro, turning an earnest and frowning glance on
his companion.

"I believe not," answered Lawrence; "at least I have not heard the
colonel talk of such an object; but I am not in his confidence, and know
nothing of his plans."

Pizarro made no rejoinder, and Lawrence, seeing by the continued frown
that the youth's spirit was somewhat stirred, sought for further
information by asking about Mendoza.

"Do you not know," said the Gaucho, with increased vehemence, and a good
deal of fine action, "that the people of San Juan have deposed their
governor, because he is a bad man?"

"I had not heard of it," said Lawrence, "but what has that to do with
Mendoza?"

"You shall hear, senhor.  The governor of San Juan is dishonest.  He is
bad in every way, and in league with the priests to rob the people.  His
insolence became so great lately that, as I have said, the people arose,
asserted their rights, and deposed him.  Then the government of Mendoza
sent troops to reinstate the governor of San Juan; but they have not yet
succeeded!  What right," continued the youth, with grand
indignation,--"What right has the government of Mendoza to interfere?
Is not the province of San Juan as free to elect its own governor as the
province of Mendoza?  Have its men not brains enough to work out their
own affairs?--ay, and they have arms strong enough to defend their
rights, as the troops shall find when they try to force on the people a
governor of whom they do not approve."

Lawrence felt at once that he was in the presence of one of those
strong, untameable spirits, of which the world has all too few, whose
love of truth and fair-play becomes, as it were, a master-passion, and
around whom cluster not only many of the world's good men, but--
unfortunately for the success of the good cause--also multitudes of the
lower dregs of the world's wickedness, not because these dregs
sympathise with truth and justice, but simply because truth-lovers are
sometimes unavoidably arrayed against "the powers that be."

"I don't know the merits of the case to which you refer," said Lawrence,
"but I have the strongest sympathy with those who fight or suffer in the
cause of fair-play--for those who wish to `do to others as they would
have others do to them.'  Do the people of San Luis sympathise with
those of San Juan?"

"I know not, senhor, I have never been to San Luis."

As the town referred to lay at a comparatively short distance from the
other, Lawrence was much surprised by this reply, but his surprise was
still further increased when he found that the handsome Gaucho had never
seen any of the towns in regard to which his sense of justice had been
so strongly stirred!

"Where were you born, Pizarro?" he asked.

"In the hut where you found me, senhor."

"And you have never been to Mendoza or San Juan?"

"No, senhor, I have never seen a town or a village--never gone beyond
the plains where we now ride."

"How old are you, Pizarro?"

"I do not know, senhor."

As the youth said this with a slightly confused look, Lawrence forbore
to put any more personal questions, and confined his conversation to
general topics; but he could not help wondering at this specimen of
grand and apparently noble manhood, who could neither read nor write,
who knew next to nothing of the great world beyond his own Pampas, and
who had not even seen a collection of huts sufficiently large to merit
the name of village.  He could, however, admirably discern the signs of
the wilderness around him, as he showed by suddenly pointing to the sky
and exclaiming--

"See! there is a lion!"

"Lions have not wings, Pizarro," said Lawrence, with a smile, as he
looked upward; "but I see, very high in the air, a flock of vultures."
