very prompt!"

"It does not take many hours to ask a girl to wed; and I like a prompt
man," returned the princess, looking pensively at the floor.

"But tell me, how came it all about?  How did he manage it in so short a
time?"

"Well, brother dear--but you'll never tell any one, will you?"

"Never--never!"

"Well, you must know, when we first met, we--we--"

"Fell in love.  Poor helpless things!"

"Just so, brother; we fell, somehow in--whatever it was; and he told me
with his eyes--and--and--I told him with mine.  Then he went off to find
you; and came back, having found you--for which I was very grateful.
Then he went to father and asked leave to speak to me.  Then he went to
mother.  What they said I do not know; but he came straight to me, took
my hand, fixed his piercing black eyes on me, and said, `Hafrydda, I
love you.'"

"Was that _all_?" asked Bladud.

"Yes; that was all he _said_; but--but that was not the end of the
interview!  It would probably have lasted till now, if you had not
interrupted us."

"I'm so very sorry, sister, but of course I did not know that--"

They were interrupted at that moment by the servitor, to whom the reader
has already been introduced.  He entered with a brightly intelligent
grin on his expressive face, but, on beholding Bladud, suddenly
elongated his countenance into blank stupidity.

"The old woman waits outside, princess."

"Oh, send her here at once."  (Then, when the servitor had left.) "This
is the person I mentioned who knows about Cormac."

Another moment and the little old woman in the grey shawl was ushered
in.  She started visibly on beholding Bladud.

"Come in, granny.  I did not expect you till to-morrow."

"I thought I was to see you alone," said the old woman, testily, in her
hard, metallic voice.

"That is true, granny, but I thought you might like to see my brother
Bladud, who has just returned home safe and well."

"No, I _don't_ want to see your brother.  What do I care for people's
brothers?  I want to see yourself, alone."

"Let me congratulate you, at all events," interposed the prince, kindly,
"on your having recovered your hearing, grannie.  This is not the first
time we have met, Hafrydda, but I grieve to see that my old friend's
nerves are not so strong as they used to be.  You tremble a good deal."

"Yes, I tremble more than I like," returned the old woman peevishly,
"and, perhaps, when you come to my age, young man, and have got the
palsy, you'll tremble more than I do."

"Nay, be not angry with me.  I meant not to hurt your feelings; and
since you wish to be alone with my sister, I will leave you."

When he was gone Branwen threw back the grey shawl and stood up with
flashing, tearful eyes.

"Was it kind--was it wise, Hafrydda, to cause me to run so great a risk
of being discovered?"

"Forgive me, dear Branwen, I did not mean to do it, but you arrived
unexpectedly, and I let you come in without thinking.  Besides, I knew
you could easily deceive him.  Nobody could guess it was you--not even
your own mother."

"There must be some truth in that," returned the maiden, quickly
changing her mood, and laughing, "for I deceived my own father
yesterday.  At the Swamp he found me out at once as Cormac, for I had to
speak in my natural voice, and my full face was exposed; but the grey
shawl and the metallic voice were too much for him.  Dear, good,
patient, old man, you have no notion what a fearful amount of abuse he
took from me, without losing temper--and I gave him some awful
home-thrusts too!  I felt almost tempted to kiss him and beg his pardon.
But now, Hafrydda, I am beginning to be afraid of what all this
deceiving and playing the double-face will come to.  And I'm ashamed of
it too--I really am.  What will Bladud think of me when he finds out?
Won't he despise and hate me?"

"Indeed he will not.  I know his nature well," returned the princess,
kissing, and trying to reassure her friend, whose timid look and tearful
eyes seemed to indicate that all her self-confidence and courage were
vanishing.  "He loves you already, and love is a preventive of hate as
well as a sovereign remedy for it."

"Ay, he is fond of Cormac, I know, but that is a very different thing
from loving Branwen!  However, to-morrow will tell.  If he cares only
for the boy and does not love the girl, I shall return with my father to
the far north, and you will never see Branwen more."

CHAPTER THIRTY FIVE.

THE PLOT THICKENS.

During the residence of Gadarn at the court of King Hudibras, that wily
northern chief had led the king to understand that one of his
lieutenants had at last discovered his daughter Branwen in the hands of
a band of robbers, from whom he had rescued her, and that he expected
her arrival daily.

"But what made the poor child run away?" asked the king at one of his
interviews with his friend.  "We were all very fond of her, and she of
us, I have good reason to believe."

"I have been told," replied the chief, "that it was the fear of Gunrig."

"Gunrig!  Why, the man was to wed my daughter.  She had no need to fear
him."

"That may be so, but I know--though it is not easy to remember how I
came to know it--that Gunrig had been insolent enough to make up to her,
after he was defeated by Bladud, and she was so afraid of him that she
ran away, and thus fell into the hands of robbers."

While the chief was speaking, Hudibras clenched his hands and glared
fiercely.

"Dared he to think of another girl when he was engaged to my daughter!"
he said between his teeth.  "It is well that Gunrig is dead, for
assuredly I would have killed him."

"It is well indeed," returned Gadarn, "for if your killing had not been
sufficient, I would have made it more effectual.  But he is out of the
way now, so we may dismiss him."

"True--and when may we expect Branwen back again, poor child?" asked the
king.

"In a day or two at latest.  From what was told me by the runner who was
sent on in advance, it is possible that she may be here to-morrow, in
time for the sports."

The wily chief had settled it in his own mind that Branwen should arrive
exactly at the time when there was to be a presentation of chiefs; which
ceremony was to take place just before the commencement of the sports.
This arrangement he had come to in concert with a little old woman in a
grey shawl, who paid him a private visit daily.

"Do you know, Gadarn, who this youth Cormac is, whom Bladud raves so
much about?"

The northern chief was seized at that moment with one of those violent
fits of sneezing to which of late he had become unpleasantly subject.

"Oh! ye--ye--y-ha! yes;--excuse me, king, but since I went to that Hot
Swamp, something seems to have gone wrong wi'--wi'--ha! my nose."

"Something will go worse wrong with it, chief, if you go on like that.
I thought the last one must have split it.  Well, what know you about
Cormac?"

"That he appears to be a very good fellow.  I can say nothing more about
him than that, except that your son seems to think he owes his life to
his good nursing at a critical point in his illness."

"I know that well enough," returned the king, "for Bladud has impressed
it on me at least a dozen times.  He seems to be very grateful.  Indeed
so am I, and it would please me much if I had an opportunity of showing
my gratitude to the lad.  Think you that there is any chance of finding
out where he has disappeared to?"

"Not the least chance in the world."

"Indeed!" exclaimed the king in surprise.  "That is strange, for Bladud,
who has just left me, says that he has the best of reasons for believing
that we shall have certain news of him tomorrow.  But go, Gadarn, and
consult my doctor about this complaint of yours, which interrupts
conversation so awkwardly.  We can resume our talk at some other time."

Gadarn obediently went, holding his sides as if in agony, and sneezing
in a manner that caused the roof-tree of the palace to vibrate.

Returning to his own room he found the little old woman in grey awaiting
him.

"You've been laughing again, father," she said.  "I see by the
purpleness of your face.  You'll burst yourself at last if you go on
so."

"Oh! you little old hag--oh!  Cormac--oh!  Branwen, I hope you won't be
the death of me," cried the chief, flinging his huge limbs on a couch
and giving way to unrestrained laughter, till the tears ran down his
cheeks.  "If they did not all look so grave when speaking about you, it
wouldn't be so hard to bear.  It's the gravity that kills me.  But come,
Branwen," he added, as he suddenly checked himself and took her hand,
"what makes you look so anxious, my child?"

"Because I feel frightened, and ashamed, and miserable," she answered,
with no symptom of her sire's hilarity.  "I doubt if I should have
followed Bladud--but if I had not he would have died--and I don't like
to think of all the deceptions I have been practising--though I couldn't
very well help it--could I?  Then I fear that Bladud will forget Cormac
when he learns to despise Branwen--"

"Despise Branwen!" shouted Gadarn, fiercely, as his hand involuntarily
grasped the hilt of his sword.  "If he did, I would cleave him from his
skull to his waist--"

"Quiet you, my sweet father," said Branwen, with a little smile, "you
know that two can play at that game, and that you have a skull and a
waist as well as Bladud--though your waist is a good deal thicker than
his.  I'm not so sure about the skull!"

"I accept your reproof, child, for boastfulness is hateful in a warrior.
But get up, my love.  What would happen if some one came into the room
and found a little old hag sitting on my knee with her arm around my
neck?"

"Ah, true, father.  I did not think of that.  I'm rather given to not
thinking of some things.  Perhaps that inquisitive servitor may be--no,
he's not there this time," said Branwen, reclosing the door and sitting
down on a stool beside the chief.  "Now come, father, and learn your
lesson."

Gadarn folded his hands and looked at his child with an air of meek
humility.

"Well?"

"Well, first of all, you must tell the king tomorrow, at the right time,
that I have just come back, and am very tired and shall not appear till
you take me to him while the other people are being presented.  Then you
will lead me forward and announce me with a loud voice, so that no one
shall fail to hear that I am Branwen, your daughter, you understand?
Now, mind you speak well out."

"I understand--with a shout, something like my battle-cry!"

"Not exactly so loud as that, but so as Bladud shall be sure to hear
you; and he will probably be near to his father at the time."

"Just so.  What next?"

"Oh, that's all you will have to do.  Just retire among the other
courtiers then, and leave the rest to me."

"That's a very short lesson, my little one; would you not like to be
introduced to Bladud too?  He does not know you, you know."

"Certainly not; that would ruin all--you dear old goose.  Just do
exactly what I tell you, and you will be sure to go right."

"How like your dear mother you are, my little one, in your modest
requirements!"

Having finished the lesson, the little old woman retired to a remote
part of the palace which, through Hafrydda's influence, had been
assigned to her, and the great northern chief, unbuckling his
sword-belt, called lustily for his mid-day meal.

Customs at that date, you see, were more free-and-easy than they are
now, and less ceremonious.  The visitors at the palace of King Hudibras
were expected only to appear at the royal board at the evening meal
after all the business or pleasure of each day was over.  At all other
times they were supposed to do as they pleased and shout for food as
they happened to require it.

It is perhaps unnecessary to comment on the exceeding convenience of
this custom, leaving, as it did, every one to follow the bent of
inclination, from earliest morn till dewy eve, with the prospect of an
enjoyable _reunion_ after dark--during which, of course, the adventures
of each were narrated, exaggerated, underrated, or commented on, as the
case might be, and the social enjoyments were enhanced by warlike and
sentimental song as well as by more or less--usually more than less--
thrilling story.

CHAPTER THIRTY SIX.

THE DENOUEMENT.

It was a sunny, frosty, glorious forenoon when King Hudibras awoke to
the consciousness of the important day that was before him, and the
importunate vacuum that was within him.

Springing out of bed with a right royal disregard of appearances he
summoned his servitor-in-waiting and ordered breakfast.

In the breakfast-room he met the queen, Hafrydda, Bladud, and Dromas--
the latter being now considered one of the family--and these five
proceeded to discuss and arrange the proceedings of the day during the
progress of the meal.

"You will join in the sports, of course, son Dromas," said the king,
"and show us how the Olympic victors carry themselves.  Ha!  I should
not wonder if a few of our lads will give you some trouble to beat
them."

"You may be right, father," returned the young man, modestly, "for one
of your lads has already beaten me at most things."

"You mean Bladud?" returned the king.

"Dromas is only so far right," interposed the prince.  "It is true that
where mere brute force is required I usually have the advantage, but
where grace and speed come into play I am lost."

Of course Dromas would not admit this, and of course Hafrydda's fair
cheeks were crimsoned when the youth, accidentally looking up, caught
the princess accidentally gazing at him; and, still more of course, the
king, who was sharp as a needle in such matters, observed their
confusion and went into a loud laugh, which he declared was only the
result of merry thoughts that were simmering in his brain.

The reception was to be held in the large hall of the palace.  No ladies
were to be presented, for it must be remembered that these were
barbarous times, and woman had not yet attained to her true position!
Indeed, there was to be no ceremony whatever--no throne, no crown, no
gold-sticks in waiting or other sticks of any kind.  It was to be a sort
of free-and-easy conversazione in the presence of the royal family,
where, just before the sports began, any one who was moved by that
ambition might hold personal intercourse with the king, and converse
with him either on the affairs of State, or on private matters, or
subjects of a more light and social kind--such as the weather.

At the appointed hour--which was indicated by that rough and ready but
most natural of sun-dials, the shadow of a tree falling on a certain
spot--the royal family adjourned to the large hall, and the
unceremonious ceremony began.

First of all, on the doors being thrown open a crowd of nobles--or
warriors--entered, and while one of them went to the king, and began an
earnest entreaty that war might be declared without delay against a
certain chief who was particularly obnoxious to him, another sauntered
up to the princess and began a mild flirtation in the primitive manner,
which was characteristic of the sons of Mars in that day--to the
unutterable jealousy of Dromas, who instantly marked him down as a fit
subject for overwhelming defeat at the approaching games.  At the same
time the family doctor paid his respects to the queen and began to
entertain her with graphic accounts of recent cases--for doctors had no
objection to talking "shop" in those days.

We have said that no ladies were admitted to places of public
importance, such as grand-stands or large halls, but we have also
pointed out that the ladies of the royal family and their female friends
formed an exception to the rule.  It was, as it were, the dawn of
women's freedom--the insertion of the small end of that wedge which
