comforted by the way her father behaved to her and listened to her
readin' o' the Bible after he was condemned.  It might be that the death
of his old mother had softened him a bit, for she died with his name on
her lips, her last words being, "Oh Morley, give it up, my darling boy,
give it up; it's your only chance to give it up, for you inherit it, my
poor boy; the passion and the poison are in your blood; oh, give it up,
Morley, give it up!"

"They do say," continued Dick, "that Jones broke down altogether w'en he
heard that, an' fell on his gal's neck an' cried like a babby.  But for
my part I don't much believe in them deathbed repentances--for it's much
the same thing wi' Jones now, he bein' as good as dead.  It's not wot a
man _says_, but how a man _lives_, as'll weigh for or against him in the
end."

"An' what more did he say?" asked Jerry MacGowl, stopping down the
tobacco in his pipe with one of his fire-proof fingers; "you see, havin'
bin on the sick-list so long, I haven't got up all the details o' this
business."

"He didn't say much more," replied Dick, scraping away at the sea-weed
and barnacles with renewed vigour, "only he made his darter promise that
she'd marry Jim Welton as soon after he was gone as possible.  She did
nothing but cry, poor thing, and wouldn't hear of it at first, but he
was so strong about it, saying that the thought of her being so well
married was the only thing as would comfort him w'en he was gone, that
she gave in at last."

"Sure then she'll have to make up her mind," said Jerry, "to live on
air, which is too light food intirely for any wan excep' hummin'-birds
and potes."

"She'll do better than that, mate," returned Dick, "for Jim 'as got
appointed to be assistant-keeper to a light'ouse, through that fust-rate
gen'leman Mr Durant, who is 'and an' glove, I'm told, wi' the Elder
Brethren up at the Trinity 'Ouse.  It's said that they are to be spliced
in a week or two, but, owin' to the circumstances, the weddin' is to be
kep' quite priwate."

"Good luck to em!" cried Jerry.  "Talkin' of the Durants, I s'pose ye've
heard that there's goin' to be a weddin' in that family soon?"

"Oh, yes, I've heard on it," cried Dick; "Miss Durant--Katie, they calls
her--she's agoin' to be spliced to the young doctor that was wrecked in
the Wellington.  A smart man that.  They say 'ee has stepped into 'is
father's shoes, an' is so much liked that 'ee's had to git an assistant
to help him to get through the work o' curin' people--or killin' of 'em.
I never feel rightly sure in my own mind which it is that the doctors
does for us."

"Och, don't ye know?" said Jerry, removing his pipe for a moment, "they
keeps curin' of us as long as we've got any tin, an' when that's done
they kills us off quietly.  If it warn't for the doctors we'd all live
to the age of Methoosamel, excep', of coorse, w'en we was cut off by
accident or drink."

"Well, I don't know as to that," said Jack Shales, in a hearty manner;
"but I'm right glad to hear that Miss Durant is gettin' a good husband,
for she's the sweetest gal in England, I think, always exceptin' one
whom I don't mean for to name just now.  Hasn't she been a perfect angel
to the poor--especially to poor old men--since she come to Ramsgate? and
didn't she, before goin' back to Yarmouth, where she b'longs to, make a
beautiful paintin' o' the lifeboat, and present it in a gold frame, with
tears in her sweet eyes, to the coxswain o' the boat, an' took his big
fist in her two soft little hands, an' shook an' squeezed it, an' begged
him to keep the pictur' as a very slight mark of the gratitude an'
esteem of Dr Hall an' herself--that was after they was engaged, you
know?  Ah! there ain't many gals like _her_," said Jack, with a sigh,
"always exceptin' _one_."

"Humph!" said Dick Moy, "I wouldn't give my old 'ooman for six dozen of
'er."

"Just so," observed Jerry, with a grin, "an' I've no manner of doubt
that Dr Hall wouldn't give _her_ for sixty dozen o' your old 'ooman.
It's human natur', lad,--that's where it is, mates.  But what has come
o' Billy Towler?  Has he gone back to the what's-'is-name--the Cavern,
eh?"

"The Grotto, you mean," said Jack Shales.

"Well, the Grotto--'tan't much differ."

"He's gone back for a time," said Dick; "but Mr Durant has prowided for
_him_ too.  He has given him a berth aboord one of his East-Indiamen; so
if Billy behaves hisself his fortin's as good as made.  Leastwise he has
got his futt on the first round, an' the ladder's all clear before him."

"By the way, what's that I've heard," said Jack Shales, "about Mr
Durant findin' out that he'd know'd Billy Towler some years ago?"

"I don't rightly know," replied Dick.  "I've 'eerd it said that the old
gentleman recognised him as a beggar boy 'e'd tuck a fancy to an' putt
to school long ago; but Billy didn't like the school, it seems, an'
runn'd away--w'ich I don't regard as wery surprisin'--an' Mr Durant
could never find out where 'e'd run to.  That's how I 'eerd the story,
but wot's true of it I dun know."

"There goes the dinner-bell!" exclaimed Jack Shales, rising with
alacrity on hearing a neighbouring clock strike noon.

Jerry rose with a sigh, and remarked, as he shook the ashes out of his
pipe, and put it into his waistcoat pocket, that his appetite had quite
left him; that he didn't believe he was fit for more than two chickens
at one meal, whereas he had seen the day when he would have thought
nothing of a whole leg of mutton to his own cheek.

"Ah," remarked Dick Moy, "Irish mutton, I s'pose.  Well, I don't know
'ow you feels, but I feels so hungry that I could snap at a ring-bolt;
and I know of a lot o' child'n, big an' small, as won't look sweet on
their daddy if he keeps 'em waitin' for dinner, so come along, mates."

Saying this, Dick and his friends left the buoy-store, and walked
smartly off to their several places of abode in the town.

In a darkened apartment of that same town sat Nora Jones, the very
personification of despair, on a low stool, with her head resting on the
side of a poor bed.  She was alone, and perfectly silent; for some
sorrows, like some thoughts, are too deep for utterance.  Everything
around her suggested absolute desolation.  The bed was that in which not
long ago she had been wont to smooth the pillow and soothe the heart of
her old grandmother.  It was empty now.  The fire in the rusty grate had
been allowed to die out, and its cold grey ashes strewed the hearth.
Among them lay the fragments of a black bottle.  It would be difficult
to say what it was in the peculiar aspect of these fragments that
rendered them so suggestive, but there was that about them which
conveyed irresistibly the idea that the bottle had been dashed down
there with the vehemence of uncontrollable passion.  The little table
which used to stand at the patient's bedside was covered with a few
crumbs and fragments of a meal that must, to judge from their state and
appearance, have been eaten a considerable time ago; and the confusion
of the furniture, as well as the dust that covered everything, was
strangely out of keeping with the character of the poor girl, who
reclined by the side of the bed, so pale and still that, but for the
slight twitching movement of her clasped hands, one might have supposed
she had already passed from the scene of her woe.  Even the
old-fashioned timepiece that hung upon a nail in the wall seemed to be
smitten with the pervading spell, for its pendulum was motionless, and
its feeble pulse had ceased to tick.

A soft tap at the door broke the deathlike silence.  Nora looked up but
did not answer, as it slowly opened, and a man entered.  On seeing who
it was, she uttered a low wail, and buried her face in the bed-clothes.
Without speaking, or moving from her position, she held out her hand to
Jim Welton, who advanced with a quick but quiet step, and, going down on
his knees beside her, took the little hand in both of his.  The attitude
and the silence were suggestive.  Without having intended it the young
sailor began to pray, and in a few short broken sentences poured out his
soul before God.

A flood of tears came to Nora's relief.  After a few minutes she looked
up.

"Oh! thank you, thank you, Jim.  I believe that in the selfishness of my
grief I had forgotten God; but oh!  I feel as if my heart was crushed
beyond the power of recovery.  _She_ is gone" (glancing at the empty
bed), "and _he_ is gone--gone--_for ever_."

Jim wished to comfort her, and tried to speak, but his voice was choked.
He could only draw her to him, and laying her head on his breast,
smooth her fair soft hair with his hard but gentle hand.

"Not gone for ever, dearest," he said at length with a great effort.
"It is indeed along long time, but--"

He could not go further, for it seemed to him like mockery to suggest by
way of comfort that fourteen years would come to an end.

For some minutes the silence was broken only by an occasional sob from
poor Nora.

"Oh! he was so different _once_," she said, raising herself and looking
at her lover with tearful, earnest eyes; "you have seen him at his
worst, Jim.  There was a time,--before he took to--"

She stopped abruptly, as if unable to find words, and pointed, with a
fierce expression, that seemed strange and awful on her gentle face, to
the fragments of the broken bottle on the hearth.  Jim nodded.  She saw
that he understood, and went on in her own calm voice:--

"There was a time when he was kind and gentle and loving; when he had no
drunken companions, and no mysterious goings to sea; when he was the joy
as well as the support of his mother, and _so_ fond of me--but he was
always that; even after he had--"

Again Nora paused, and, drooping her head, uttered the low wail of
desolation that went like cold steel to the young sailor's heart.

"Nora," he said earnestly, "he will get no drink where he is going.  At
all events he will be cured of _that_ before he returns home."

"Oh, I bless the Lord for that," said Nora, with fervour.  "I have
thought of that before now, and I have thought, too, that there are men
of God where he is going, who think of, and pray for, and strive to
recover, the souls of those who--that is; but oh, Jim, Jim, it is a
long, long, weary time.  I feel that I shall never see my father more in
this world--never, never more!"

"We cannot tell, Nora," said Jim, with a desperate effort to appear
hopeful.  "I know well enough that it may seem foolish to try to comfort
you with the hope of seein' him again in this life; and yet even this
may come to pass.  He may escape, or he may be forgiven, and let off
before the end of his time.  But come, cheer up, my darling.  You
remember what his last request was?"

"How can you talk of such a thing at such a time?" exclaimed Nora,
drawing away from him and rising.

"Be not angry, Nora," said Jim, also rising.  "I did but remind you of
it for the purpose of sayin' that as you agreed to what he wished, you
have given me a sort of right or privilege, dear Nora, at least to help
and look after you in your distress.  Your own unselfish heart has never
thought of telling me that you have neither money nor home; this poor
place being yours only till term-day, which is to-morrow; but I know all
this without requiring to be told, and I have come to say that there is
an old woman--a sort of relation of mine--who lives in this town, and
will give you board and lodging gladly till I can get arrangements made
at the lighthouse for our--that is to say--till you choose, in your own
good time, to let me be your rightful protector and supporter, as well
as your comforter."

"Thank you, Jim.  It is like yourself to be so thoughtful.  Forgive me;
I judged you hastily.  It is true I am poor--I have nothing in the
world, but, thanks be to God, I have health.  I can work; and there are
some kind friends," she added, with a sad smile, "who will throw work in
my way, I know."

"Well, we will talk about these things afterwards, Nora, but you won't
refuse to take advantage of my old friend's offer--at least for a night
or two?"

"No, I won't refuse that, Jim; see, I am prepared to go," she said,
pointing to a wooden sea-chest which stood in the middle of the room;
"my box is packed.  Everything I own is in it.  The furniture, clock,
and bedding belong to the landlord."

"Come then, my own poor lamb," said the young sailor tenderly, "let us
go."

Nora rose and glanced slowly round the room.  Few rooms in Ramsgate
could have looked more poverty-stricken and cheerless, nevertheless,
being associated in her mind with those whom she had lost, she was loath
to leave it.  Falling suddenly on her knees beside the bed, she kissed
the old counterpane that had covered the dead form she had loved so
well, and then went hastily out and leaned her head against the wall of
the narrow court before the door.

Jim lifted the chest, placed it on his broad shoulders and followed her.
Locking the door behind him and putting the key in his pocket, he gave
his disengaged arm to Nora, and led her slowly a way.



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

TELLS OF AN UNLOOKED-FOR RETURN, AND DESCRIBES A GREAT FEAST.

If, as we have elsewhere observed in this narrative, time and tide wait
for no man, it is not less true that time and tide work wonderful
changes in man and his affairs and fortunes.  Some of those changes we
will now glance at, premising that seven years have passed away since
the occurrence of the events recorded in our last chapter.

On the evening of a somewhat gloomy day in the month of sunny showers,
four men of rough aspect, and clad in coarse but not disreputable
garments, stopped in front of a public-house in one of the lowest
localities of London, and looked about them.  There was something quite
peculiar in their aspect.  They seemed to be filled with mingled
curiosity and surprise, and looked somewhat scared, as a bird does when
suddenly set free from its cage.

Two of the men were of an extremely low type of humanity--low-browed and
scowling--and their language betokened that their minds were in keeping
with their faces.  The other two were better-looking and better-spoken,
one of them having evidently been a handsome man in his day.  His hair
was blanched as white as snow although it still retained the curls of
youth.  His figure was much bent, and he appeared like one who had been
smitten with premature old age.

"Well, uncommon queer changes bin goin' on here," said one of the men,
gazing round him.

One of the others admitted that there certainly had been wonderful
changes, and expressed a fear that if the change in himself was as
great, his old pals wouldn't know him.

"Hows'ever," observed he who had spoken first, "they won't see such a
difference as they would have seen if we'd got the whole fourteen.  Good
luck to the ticket-of-leave system, say I."

The others laughed at this, and one of them suggested that they should
enter the public-house and have a glass of grog in memory of old times.
Three of the men at once agreed to this proposal, and said that as it
would not be long before they were in the stone jug again it behoved
them to make the most of their freedom while it lasted.  The man with
white hair, however, objected, and it was not until his companions had
chaffed and rallied him a good deal that he consented to enter the
house, observing, as he followed them slowly, that he had not tasted a
drop for seven years.

"Well, well," replied one of the others, "it don't matter; you'll relish
it all the more now, old feller.  It'll go down like oil, an' call up
the memory of old times--"

"The memory of old times!" cried the white-haired man, stopping short,
with a sudden blaze of ferocity which amazed his companions.

He stood glaring at them for a few moments, with his hands tightly
clenched; then, without uttering another word, he turned round and
rushed from the house.

"Mad!" exclaimed one of the other three, looking at his companions when
they had recovered from their surprise, "mad as a March hare.
Hows'ever, that don't consarn us.  Come along, my hearties.--Hallo!
landlord, fetch drink here--your best, and plenty of it.  Now, boys,
fill up and I'll give 'ee a toast."

Saying this the man filled his glass, the others followed his example--
the toast was given and drunk--more toasts were given and drunk--the
three men returned to their drink and their old ways, and haunts and
comrades, as the sow returns to her wallowing in the mire.

Meanwhile the white-haired man wandered away as if he had no settled
purpose.  Day after day he moved on through towns and villages and
fields, offering to work, but seldom being employed, begging his bread
from door to door, but carefully avoiding the taverns; sleeping where he
could, or where he was permitted--sometimes in the barn of a kindly
farmer, sometimes under a hay-stack, not unfrequently under a hedge--
until at last he found himself in the town of Ramsgate.

Here he made inquiries of various people, and immediately set forth
again on his travels through the land until he reached a remote part of
the coast of England, where he found his further progress checked by the
sea, but, by dint of begging a free passage from fishermen here and
there, he managed at last to reach one of our outlying reefs, where, on
a small islet, a magnificent lighthouse reared its white and stately
column, and looked abroad upon the ocean, with its glowing eye.  There
was a small village on the islet, in which dwelt a few families of
fishermen.  They were a hard-working community, and appeared to be
contented and happy.

The lighthouse occupied an elevated plateau above the cliffs at the
