swashin' round us and over us, hammerin' away wildly everyhow, or nohow,
or anyhow, just like a hexcited man fightin' in a hurry.  The
after-swell, _that's_ wot does it.  _That's_ wot comes on slow, and big,
and easy but powerful, like a great prize-fighter as knows what he can
do, and means to do it."

"A most uncomfortable sort of residence," said Ruby, as he turned to
quit the room.

"Not a bit, when ye git used to it," said the smith.  "At first we was
rather skeered, but we don't mind now.  Come, Joe, give us `Rule,
Britannia'--`pity she don't rule the waves straighter,' as somebody
writes somewhere."

So saying, Dove resumed his pipe, and Dumsby his fiddle, while Ruby
proceeded to the staircase that led to the rooms above.

Just as he was about to ascend, a furious gust of wind swept past,
accompanied by a wild roar of the sea; at the same moment a mass of
spray dashed against the small window at his side.  He knew that this
window was at least sixty feet above the rock, and he was suddenly
filled with a strong desire to have a nearer view of the waves that had
force to mount so high.  Instead, therefore, of ascending to the
lantern, he descended to the doorway, which was open, for, as the storm
blew from the eastward, the door was on the lee-side.

There were two doors--one of metal, with thick plate-glass panels at the
inner end of the passage; the other, at the outer end of it, was made of
thick solid wood bound with metal, and hung so as to open outwards.
When the two leaves of this heavy door were shut they were flush with
the tower, so that nothing was presented for the waves to act upon.  But
this door was never closed except in cases of storm from the southward.

The scene which presented itself to our hero when he stood in the
entrance passage was such as neither pen nor pencil can adequately
depict.  The tide was full, or nearly so, and had the night been calm
the water would have stood about twelve or fourteen feet on the sides of
the tower, leaving a space of about the same height between its surface
and the spot at the top of the copper ladder where Ruby stood; but such
was the wild commotion of the sea that this space was at one moment
reduced to a few feet, as the waves sprang up towards the doorway, or
nearly doubled, as they sank hissing down to the very rock.

Acres of white, leaping, seething foam covered the spot where the
terrible Bell Rock lay.  Never for a moment did that boiling cauldron
get time to show one spot of dark-coloured water.  Billow after billow
came careering on from the open sea in quick succession, breaking with
indescribable force and fury just a few yards to windward of the
foundations of the lighthouse, where the outer ledges of the rock,
although at the time deep down in the water, were sufficiently near the
surface to break their first full force, and save the tower from
destruction, though not from many a tremendous blow and overwhelming
deluge of water.

When the waves hit the rock they were so near that the lighthouse
appeared to receive the shock.  Rushing round it on either side, the
cleft billows met again to leeward, just opposite the door, where they
burst upwards in a magnificent cloud of spray to a height of full thirty
feet.  At one time, while Ruby held on by the man-ropes at the door and
looked over the edge, he could see a dark abyss with the foam shimmering
pale far below; another instant, and the solid building perceptibly
trembled, as a green sea hit it fair on the weather-side.  A continuous
roar and hiss followed as the billow swept round, filled up the dark
abyss, and sent the white water gleaming up almost into the doorway.  At
the same moment the sprays flew by on either side of the column, so high
that a few drops were thrown on the lantern.  To Ruby's eye these sprays
appeared to be clouds driving across the sky, so high were they above
his head.  A feeling of awe crept over him as his mind gradually began
to realise the world of water which, as it were, overwhelmed him--water
and foam roaring and flying everywhere--the heavy seas thundering on the
column at his back--the sprays from behind arching almost over the
lighthouse, and meeting those that burst up in front, while an eddy of
wind sent a cloud swirling in at the doorway, and drenched him to the
skin!  It was an exhibition of the might of God in the storm such as he
had never seen before, and a brief sudden exclamation of thanksgiving
burst from the youth's lips, as he thought of how hopeless his case
would have been had the French vessel passed the lighthouse an hour
later than it did.

The contrast between the scene outside and that inside the Bell Rock
Lighthouse at that time was indeed striking.  Outside there was madly
raging conflict; inside there were peace, comfort, security: Ruby, with
his arms folded, standing calmly in the doorway; Jamie Dove and Joe
Dumsby smoking and fiddling in the snug kitchen; George Forsyth reading
(the _Pilgrim's Progress_ mayhap, or _Robinson Crusoe_, for both works
were in the Bell Rock library) by the bright blaze of the crimson and
white lamps, high up in the crystal lantern.

If a magician had divided the tower in two from top to bottom while some
ship was staggering past before the gale, he would have presented to the
amazed mariners the most astonishing picture of "war without and peace
within" that the world ever saw!



CHAPTER THIRTY ONE.

MIDNIGHT CHAT IN A LANTERN.

"I'll have to borrow another shirt and pair of trousers from you, Dove,"
said Ruby with a laugh, as he returned to the kitchen.

"What! been having another swim?" exclaimed the smith.

"Not exactly, but you see I'm fond o' water.  Come along, lad."

In a few minutes the clothes were changed, and Ruby was seated beside
Forsyth, asking him earnestly about his friends on shore.

"Ah!  Ruby," said Forsyth, "I thought it would have killed your old
mother when she was told of your bein' caught by them sea-sharks, and
taken off to the wars.  You must know I came to see a good deal of your
friends, through--through--hoot! what's the name? the fair-haired lass
that lives with--"

"Minnie?" suggested Ruby, who could not but wonder that any man living
should forget _her_ name for a moment.

"Ay, Minnie it is.  She used to come to see my wife about some work they
wanted her to do, and I was now and again sent up with a message to the
cottage, and Captain Ogilvy always invited me in to take a glass out of
his old teapot.  Your mother used to ask me ever so many questions about
you, an' what you used to say and do on the rock when this lighthouse
was buildin'.  She looked so sad and pale, poor thing; I really thought
it would be all up with her, an' I believe it would, but for Minnie.  It
was quite wonderful the way that girl cheered your mother up, by readin'
bits o' the Bible to her, an' tellin' her that God would certainly send
you back again.  She looked and spoke always so brightly too."

"Did she do that?" exclaimed Ruby, with emotion.

Forsyth looked for a moment earnestly at his friend.

"I mean," continued Ruby, in some confusion, "did she look bright when
she spoke of my bein' away?"

"No lad, it was when she spoke of you comin' back; but I could see that
her good spirits was partly put on to keep up the old woman."

For a moment or two the friends remained silent.

Suddenly Forsyth laid his hand on the other's shoulder, and said
impressively: "Ruby Brand, it's my belief that that girl is rather fond
of you."

Ruby looked up with a bright smile, and said, "D'you think so?  Well,
d'ye know, I believe she is."

"Upon my word, youngster," exclaimed the other, with a look of evident
disgust, "your conceit is considerable.  I had thought to be somewhat
confidential with you in regard to this idea of mine, but you seem to
swallow it so easy, and to look upon it as so natural a thing, that--
that--Do you suppose you've nothin' to do but ask the girl to marry you
and she'll say `Yes' at once?"

"I do," said Ruby quietly; "nay, I am sure of it."

Forsyth's eyes opened very wide indeed at this.  "Young man," said he,
"the sea must have washed all the modesty you once had out of you--"

"I hope not," interrupted the other, "but the fact is that I put the
question you have supposed to Minnie long ago, and she _did_ say `Yes'
to it then, so it's not likely she's goin' to draw back now."

"Whew! that alters the case," cried Forsyth, seizing his friend's hand,
and wringing it heartily.

"Hallo! you two seem to be on good terms, anyhow," observed Jamie Dove,
whose head appeared at that moment through the hole in the floor by
which the lantern communicated with the room below.  "I came to see if
anything had gone wrong, for your time of watch is up."

"So it is," exclaimed Forsyth, rising and crossing to the other side of
the apartment, where he applied his lips to a small tube in the wall.

"What are you doing?" enquired Ruby.

"Whistling up Joe," said Forsyth.  "This pipe runs down to the sleepin'
berths, where there's a whistle close to Joe's ear.  He must be asleep.
I'll try again."

He blew down the tube a second time and listened for a reply, which came
up a moment or two after in a sharp whistle through a similar tube
reversed; that is, with the mouthpiece below and the whistle above.

Soon after, Joe Dumsby made his appearance at the trap-door, looking
very sleepy.

"I feels as 'eavy as a lump o' lead," said he.  "Wot an 'orrible thing
it is to be woke out o' a comf'r'able sleep."

Just as he spoke the lighthouse received a blow so tremendous that all
the men started and looked at each other for a moment in surprise.

"I say, is it warranted to stand _anything_?" enquired Ruby seriously.

"I hope it is," replied the smith, "else it'll be a blue lookout for
_us_.  But we don't often get such a rap as that.  D'ye mind the first
we ever felt o' that sort, Forsyth?  It happened last month.  I was on
watch at the time, Forsyth was smokin' his pipe in the kitchen, and
Dumsby was in bed, when a sea struck us with such force that I thought
we was done for.  In a moment Forsyth and Joe came tumblin' up the
ladder--Joe in his shirt.  `It must have been a ship sailed right
against us,' says Forsyth, and with that we all jumped on the rail that
runs round the lantern there and looked out, but no ship could be seen,
though it was a moonlight night.  You see there's plenty o' water at
high tide to let a ship of two hundred tons, drawin' twelve feet, run
slap into us, and we've sometimes feared this in foggy weather; but it
was just a blow of the sea.  We've had two or three like it since, and
are gettin' used to it now."

"Well, we can't get used to do without sleep," said Forsyth, stepping
down through the trap-door, "so I'll bid ye all good night."

"'Old on!  Tell Ruby about Junk before ye go," cried Dumsby.  "Ah! well,
I'll tell 'im myself.  You must know, Ruby, that we've got what they
calls an hoccasional light-keeper ashore, who larns the work out 'ere in
case any of us reg'lar keepers are took ill, so as 'e can supply our
place on short notice.  Well, 'e was out 'ere larnin' the dooties one
tremendous stormy night, an' the poor fellow was in a mortial fright for
fear the lantern would be blowed right hoff the top o' the stone column,
and 'imself along with it.  You see, the door that covers the manhole
there is usually shut when we're on watch, but Junk (we called 'im Junk
'cause 'e wos so like a lump o' fat pork), 'e kep the door open all the
time an' sat close beside it, so as to be ready for a dive.  Well, it
was my turn to watch, so I went up, an' just as I puts my fut on the
first step o' the lantern-ladder there comes a sea like wot we had a
minit ago; the wind at the same time roared in the wentilators like a
thousand fiends, and the spray dashed agin the glass.  Junk gave a yell,
and dived.  He thought it wos all over with 'im, and wos in sich a funk
that he came down 'ead foremost, and would sartinly 'ave broke 'is neck
if 'e 'adn't come slap into my buzzum!  I tell 'e it was no joke, for 'e
wos fourteen stone if 'e wos an ounce, an'--"

"Come along, Ruby," said Dove, interrupting; "the sooner we dive too the
better, for there's no end to that story when Dumsby get off in full
swing.  Good night!"

"Good night, lads, an' better manners t'ye!" said Joe, as he sat down
beside the little desk where the lightkeepers were wont during the
lonely watch-hours of the night to read, or write, or meditate.



CHAPTER THIRTY TWO.

EVERYDAY LIFE ON THE BELL ROCK, AND OLD MEMORIES RECALLED.

The sun shone brightly over the sea next morning; so brightly and
powerfully that it seemed to break up and disperse by force the great
storm-clouds which hung about the sky, like the fragments of an army of
black bullies who had done their worst and been baffled.

The storm was over; at least, the wind had moderated down to a fresh,
invigorating breeze.  The white crests of the billows were few and far
between, and the wild turmoil of waters had given place to a grand
procession of giant waves, that thundered on the Bell Rock Lighthouse,
at once with more dignity and more force than the raging seas of the
previous night.

It was the sun that awoke Ruby, by shining in at one of the small
windows of the library, in which he slept.  Of course it did not shine
in his face, because of the relative positions of the library and the
sun, the first being just below the lantern, and the second just above
the horizon, so that the rays struck upwards, and shone with dazzling
brilliancy on the dome-shaped ceiling.  This was the second time of
wakening for Ruby that night, since he lay down to rest.  The first
wakening was occasioned by the winding up of the machinery which kept
the lights in motion, and the chain of which, with a ponderous weight
attached to it, passed through a wooden pilaster close to his ear,
causing such a sudden and hideous din that the sleeper, not having been
warned of it, sprang like a Jack-in-the-box out of bed into the middle
of the room, where he first stared vacantly around him like an unusually
surprised owl, and then, guessing the cause of the noise, smiled
pitifully, as though to say, "Poor fellow, you're easily frightened,"
and tumbled back into bed, where he fell asleep again instantly.

On the second time of wakening Ruby rose to a sitting posture, yawned,
looked about him, yawned again, wondered what o'clock it was, and then
listened.

No sound could be heard save the intermittent roar of the magnificent
breakers that beat on the Bell Rock.  His couch was too low to permit of
his seeing anything but sky out of his windows, three of which, about
two feet square, lighted the room.  He therefore jumped up, and, while
pulling on his garments, looked towards the east, where the sun greeted
and almost blinded him.  Turning to the north window, a bright smile lit
up his countenance, and "A blessing rest on you" escaped audibly from
his lips, as he kissed his hand towards the cliffs of Forfarshire, which
were seen like a faint blue line on the far-off horizon, with the town
of Arbroath just rising above the morning mists.

He gazed out at this north window, and thought over all the scenes that
had passed between him and Minnie from the time they first met, down to
the day when they last parted.  One of the sweetest of the mental
pictures that he painted that morning with unwonted facility, was that
of Minnie sitting at his mother's feet, comforting her with the words of
the Bible.

At length he turned with a sigh to resume his toilette.  Looking out at
the southern window, he observed that the rocks were beginning to be
uncovered, and that the "rails", or iron pathway that led to the foot of
the entrance-door ladder, were high enough out of the water to be walked
upon.  He therefore hastened to descend.

We know not what appearance the library presented at the time when Ruby
Brand slept in it; but we can tell, from personal experience, that, at
the present day, it is a most comfortable and elegant apartment.  The
other rooms of the lighthouse, although thoroughly substantial in their
furniture and fittings, are quite plain and devoid of ornament, but the
library, or "stranger's room", as it is sometimes called, being the
guest-chamber, is fitted up in a style worthy of a lady's boudoir, with
a Turkey carpet, handsome chairs, and an elaborately carved oak table,
supported appropriately by a centre stem of three twining dolphins.  The
dome of the ceiling is painted to represent stucco panelling, and the
partition which cuts off the small segment of this circular room that is
devoted to passage and staircase, is of panelled oak.  The thickness of
this partition is just sufficient to contain the bookcase; also a
cleverly contrived bedstead, which can be folded up during the day out
of sight.  There is also a small cupboard of oak, which serves the
double purpose of affording shelf accommodation and concealing the iron
smoke-pipe which rises from the kitchen, and, passing through the
several storeys, projects a few feet above the lantern.  The centre
window is ornamented with marble sides and top, and above it stands a
marble bust of Robert Stevenson, the engineer of the building, with a
marble slab below bearing testimony to the skill and energy with which
he had planned and executed the work.

If not precisely what we have described it to be at the present time,
the library must have been somewhat similar on that morning when our
hero issued from it and descended to the rock.

The first stair landed him at the entrance to the sleeping-berths.  He
looked into one, and observed Forsyth's head and arms lying in the bed,
in that peculiarly negligent style that betokens deep and sweet repose.
Dumsby's rest was equally sound in the next berth.  This fact did not
require proof by ocular demonstration; his nose announced it sonorously
over the whole building.

Passing to the kitchen, immediately below, Ruby found his old messmate,
Jamie Dove, busy in the preparation of breakfast.

"Ha!  Ruby, good mornin'; you keep up your early habits, I see.  Can't
shake yer paw, lad, 'cause I'm up to the elbows in grease, not to speak
o' sutt an' ashes."

"When did you learn to cook, Jamie?" said Ruby, laughing.

"When I came here.  You see we've all got to take it turn and turn
about, and it's wonderful how soon a feller gets used to it.  I'm rather
fond of it, d'ye know?  We haven't overmuch to work on in the way o'
variety, to be sure, but what we have there's lots of it, an' it gives
us occasion to exercise our wits to invent somethin' new.  It's
wonderful what can be done with fresh beef, cabbage, carrots, potatoes,
