
Between one and two o'clock the Spanish fire abated, and soon
ceased altogether. The inhabitants took advantage of the lull to
hurry back to their houses, whence they removed the lighter and
more portable articles; but the heavy stores--of which it now
appeared many of them had large quantities concealed--they were, of
course, unable to take away.

The discovery of these stores excited much indignation among the
troops. The inhabitants had been constantly representing themselves
as reduced to the last point of hunger, and had frequently received
provisions from the scanty supplies of the garrison; and the
soldiers were exasperated on finding that, all this time, they
possessed great stores of wine, flour, and other articles; which
they were hoarding to produce, and sell, when prices should rise to
even more exorbitant heights than they had already reached.

At five o'clock the enemy's batteries opened again; and the firing
continued, without intermission, all that night. As several
casualties had taken place, in the barracks and quarters; marquees
were, on the following morning, served out to all the officers
whose quarters were exposed to fire, and these were pitched near
Europa Point, as were also a large number of tents for the use of
the inhabitants.

A considerable body of troops were kept under arms, near the
northern gate, in case the Spaniards should attempt to make an
assault under cover of their fire; and five hundred officers and
men were told off, to assist in the work of getting the supplies up
from the wharves, as fast as they were landed from the transports.

The bombardment continued during the whole of the next two days.
The mortars still poured their shells upon the town; but the guns
were now directed at our batteries, and their fire was remarkably
accurate.

On the 14th the unloading parties were increased to a thousand men,
and strong detachments of troops were told off to extinguish the
fires in the town; as the enemy were now discharging shell filled
with a composition that burned with great fury, igniting everything
with which it came in contact. The troops engaged upon this duty
were not long in broaching the casks of wine found, in such
abundance, in many of the ruined houses. For two years they had
been living almost entirely on salt provisions, and wine had been
selling at prices vastly beyond their means. It was scarcely
surprising, then, that they should take advantage of this
opportunity.

The stores were practically lost, for the whole town was crumbling
to pieces beneath the fire of the enemy's mortars, and was on fire
in several places; and little, if any, of the liquor and stores
consumed could, in any case, have been saved. However, for a time
insubordination reigned. The troops carried off liquor to their
quarters, barricaded themselves there, and got drunk; and it was
two or three days before discipline was restored. Up to this time
the conduct of the soldiers had been most exemplary, and they had
borne their prolonged hardships without a murmur; and this outbreak
was due as much to a spirit of revenge against the inhabitants, for
hiding away great stores of provisions and liquor, with a view to
making exorbitant profits, as from a desire to indulge in a luxury
of which they had been so long deprived.

On the 15th the enemy's fire was hotter than ever; and the guns
were withdrawn from our batteries, as they produced but little
effect upon the Spanish batteries, and the men working them
suffered a good deal from the besiegers' fire. Two officers were
dangerously wounded, in one of the casemates of the King's Bastion;
and the fire was so heavy, around some of the barracks, that all
the troops who could not be disposed of, in the casemates and
bomb-proofs, were sent out of the town and encamped southward and,
the next day, all the women and children who had gone with their
husbands and fathers into the casemates were also removed, and
placed under canvas. All this gave incessant work to the troops,
for there was no level ground upon which the tents could be pitched
and, as it was therefore necessary to level all the ground into
terraces, it was some days before the camps were ranged in anything
like order.

Each day the enemy sent out their gunboats to harass the
merchantmen, but these were always driven back by the guns of the
fleet. On the 17th the besiegers' shells set fire to the Spanish
church, which had been used as a storehouse. Strong parties were
sent down to remove the provisions, which consisted largely of
barrels of flour. These were carried up and piled, so as to afford
protection to the casemates, which had been frequently entered by
the enemy's shots--several men having been killed there. They
proved a valuable defence; and afforded, moreover, great amusement
to the soldiers who, whenever a barrel was smashed by a shell,
carried off the contents and quickly converted them into pancakes,
until so many casks had been emptied that the whole structure came
toppling down.

On the 18th a shell came through the arch of one of the casemates,
killing two and wounding four men and, in consequence, a good many
more of the troops were sent under canvas.

On the 20th the work of unloading the greater portion of the
transports was completed; and the admiral, who was most anxious to
take advantage of the easterly wind, that was blowing, to sail out
of the Straits, gave the signal for departure. Many of the
merchantmen, whose cargoes were consigned to merchants and traders
on the Rock, carried them back to England; as the merchants, having
no place, whatever, in which to store goods--for the town was now
almost entirely destroyed--refused to accept them. The transports,
with ordnance stores, were brought in behind the New Mole to be
discharged at leisure; while several colliers were run close in,
and scuttled, so that their cargoes could be removed as required.

A great many of the inhabitants, and of the officers' wives and
families, embarked on board the fleet before it left. The enemy's
fire still continued very heavy; and their guns and mortar boats,
on the 23rd, came boldly out and opened fire upon the working
parties, who were stacking the barrels and stores at the south end
of the Rock. The wife of a soldier was killed, and several men
wounded.

On the 26th the governor determined sternly to repress the
drunkenness that still prevailed, owing to the soldiers going down
among the ruins of the town, where they occasionally discovered
uninjured casks of wine. An order was therefore issued, on that
day, that any soldier convicted of being drunk, asleep at his post,
or marauding, should be immediately shot.

On the 27th a convoy of twenty ships, in charge of the Brilliant
and three other frigates, came in from Minorca; where the governor
had ordered provisions to be purchased, in case the convoy expected
from England did not arrive. The arrival of these ships largely
added to the stores at the disposal of the garrison.



Chapter 16: A Cruise In The Brilliant.


While the bombardment continued, Bob had been constantly occupied.
He had, some time before, put down his name as a volunteer for
service, if required; and he and several others, who had similarly
enrolled themselves, had been appointed to assist in looking after
the removal of the soldiers' wives and children to the tents
erected for them, and to seeing to their comfort there. He had also
been in charge of bodies of labourers, employed by the governor in
the work of levelling the ground and transporting stores.

Captain O'Halloran was constantly away on duty and, soon after the
bombardment began, it was found necessary to drive the whole of the
poultry into the lower part of the house; the Spaniards retaining
only one room for their own accommodation. Had not this step been
taken, the chickens would speedily have been stolen by marauders
as, in the absence of Captain O'Halloran and Bob, there was no one
to protect them. After the issue of the governor's proclamation,
discipline was speedily restored, and there was no longer any
occasion to keep them under shelter.

The bombardment was followed by heavy rains, which caused very
great discomfort to the troops. The water, pouring in torrents down
the face of the hills, swept away the newly raised banks; and
brought down the tents, the soldiers having to turn out in the
wet--and as the troops, owing to their heavy duties, were only one
night out of three in bed, the discomfort and annoyance were very
great. Great quantities of the provisions, too, were damaged; as
these were all stacked in the open air, with no other covering than
that afforded by the sails of the colliers, which were cut off and
used for the purpose. Until the end of the month the downfall of
rain was incessant, and was accompanied with heavy storms of
thunder and lightning. The batteries required constant repair, and
the labours of the troops were very severe.

Since the departure of Admiral Darby's fleet, the enemy appeared to
have given up all hopes of compelling the place to surrender by
hunger. The convoy from Minorca had not been interfered with and,
on the 2nd of May, two native craft came in from Algiers with
sheep, wine, and brandy, unmolested by the enemy's cruisers.

The enemy's fire had never entirely ceased, since the commencement
of the bombardment, and now amounted to about fifteen hundred
rounds, every twenty-four hours; the gunboats generally coming out,
every day, and sending their missiles into the town and
batteries--the latter being specially the mark of the enemy's land
guns, which reached even the highest batteries on the Rock. All
through May and June the enemy's fire continued; dropping, towards
the end of the latter month, to about five hundred shot and shell a
day. The gunboats were specially annoying, directing their fire
against the south end of the Rock, and causing great alarm and
distress among the fugitives from the town encamped there.
Occasionally they directed their fire towards the houses that had
escaped the fire of the land batteries; and several shot and shell
fell near the O'Hallorans' but, fortunately, without hitting the
house.

The volunteers had now been released from duty, and Bob was free to
wander about as he pleased. As, since his exploit in fetching in
the fruit, he had become known to every officer in the garrison; he
was a privileged person, and was able to enter any of the
batteries, and to watch the effects of their fire against the
enemy's forts and lines. He often spent the day on board the
Brilliant. At the end of June the frigate went away for a
fortnight's cruise, and the captain invited Bob to accompany them.

"We shall all expect great things from you, Mr. Repton. As you
managed to capture some fifty thousand pounds' worth of prizes,
when you were on board that privateer brig, you ought to put the
frigate into the way of taking at least four times as much."

"It is easy to turn a brig into anything, Captain Langton; but
there is no making one of His Majesty's frigates look other but
what she is. The mere sight of your topsails is enough to send
every Spanish craft into port."

For three or four days the frigate sailed along the coast; keeping
well out during the day, and closing with the land in the evening.
Two or three small coasters were picked up by the boats, but they
were scarcely worth sending into Gibraltar. On the fifth day a
large barque was seen, making in from the south. All sail was made,
but the barque had the weather gage and, crossing her, ran into the
shore and anchored under the shelter of a battery.

"That would be a prize worth having, Bob," Jim Sankey said. "I
wonder what she has got on board? Perhaps she is like that craft
you captured, choke-full of lead and silver, from Lima."

"I think I can tell you what she is full of," Bob, who had been
examining her through a glass he had borrowed from the third
lieutenant, replied.

"How do you mean you can tell, Bob? She has not got her bill of
lading stuck upon her broadside, I suppose?"

"She has not, Jim. But I can tell you, without that."

"Well, what has she got on board?"

"She has got a very strong crew, Jim, and twenty-four guns."

"Why, how on earth did you know that, Bob?" he asked, staring at
his friend in surprise.

"Because, Jim, I have been on board, and counted the guns. That is
the craft I swam off to, nearly two years ago. You hunted for her,
then, you know; but I suppose she had gone into one of the ports.
But that is her, I can almost swear.

"I don't know whether there is a better glass than this on board
but, if there is, I should be glad to have a look through it. Yet I
feel certain, without that. Her stern is of rather peculiar shape,
and that stern gallery looks as if it was pinched out of her,
instead of being added on. We particularly noticed that, when we
were sailing with her. I can't be mistaken about it."

"I think the captain ought to know, then," Jim said. "I will speak
to Mr. Rawdon. He is in charge of the watch."

Jim went up on to the quarterdeck, touched his hat, and informed
the second lieutenant what Bob had told him. Mr. Rawdon went up at
once to the captain, who was talking to the first lieutenant, and
examining the barque and battery through his glass.

"Mr. Sankey has reported to me, sir, that Mr. Repton is very
strongly of opinion that the barque, there, is the Spanish ship of
war he boarded by night, just after the beginning of hostilities.
He told us about it, sir, and we spent two or three days in looking
for her."

"Of course I remember," the captain said. "Have the kindness to
pass the word for Mr. Repton to come aft."

Bob soon stood before the captain.

"Mr. Rawdon tells me that you are of opinion that the barque, in
there, is the disguised Spanish sloop you boarded, two years ago?"

"Yes, sir, I am almost sure of it; but I should like to have
another look at her, through your glass, before I speak with
certainty."

The captain handed his glass, which was a remarkably good one, to
Bob.

"That is her," Bob said, after a minute's examination. "I could
swear to her, anywhere;" and he then pointed out, to the captain,
the peculiarities he had noticed.

"I can make out her figurehead, too," he said. "It is a saint,
though I don't know what saint; but if you notice, sir, you will
see that, instead of standing nearly upright, he leans much more
forward than usual. I remember the captain saying he looked as if
he was going to take a header. So with that, and the stern gallery,
there is no possibility of mistaking her."

The captain again examined the barque through his glass.

"Yes, I notice both the points you mention. Well, I am much obliged
to you for the news. It is very important. I was thinking of
cutting her out, tonight; and should have fallen into the same
error you so nearly did, in the privateer."

Bob bowed and retired.

"We should have caught a tartar, Mr. Lyons, if we had sent the
force we were talking about to cut her out; but I think we must
have her, somehow."

"I hope so, sir. We have had a very dull time of it; with nothing
to do but to exchange shots, occasionally, with those gunboats; and
to get under sail, now and then, to escort some craft or other into
port. The navy hasn't done much to boast of, during this siege; and
it has been very hard on us, being cooped up there in Gibraltar,
while the fleet all over the world are picking up prizes, and
fighting the French and Spanish. Why, we haven't made enough prize
money, in the last two years, to pay for pipe clay and powder."

"Yes, we all feel that, Mr. Lyons. We have certainly been terribly
out of luck. That privateer Mr. Repton was on board did more, in
her week's cruise, than all His Majesty's ships in Gibraltar have
done, in the last two years.

"We must take that craft, inshore, if we can. There is no doubt she
is ably commanded, for she is so well disguised that we never
suspected her for a moment; therefore there is not the least chance
of our catching her napping. She is a formidable craft to cut out
with the boats, even if she hadn't the aid of the battery."

"There is no doubt about that, sir. I think Mr. Repton reported,
before, that she carried twenty-four guns, and all heavy metal. As
far as I can make out, with the glass, the battery mounts twelve
guns."

"Yes, that is the number. Besides, you see, we dare not take the
frigate in nearer than a mile; and a mile and a quarter would be
safer. So that we could not be of any assistance, beyond annoying
the battery with long shot. It seems to me that there is only one
chance."

"What is that, sir?"

"We must land a strong party, some distance along the shore; and
make an attack upon the battery, and carry it by surprise. I can
make out some huts behind it. I suppose they wouldn't have less
than a hundred soldiers there--perhaps a hundred and fifty. If we
can drive them off, and capture the battery, we can open fire down
upon the ship. At that distance, we could fairly sweep her deck
with grape.

"The rest of our boats would be lying ahead and astern of her and,
as soon as the battery opened, they could make a dash for her. The
crew of the barque would be so disorganized, by the fire of the
battery, that they should hardly be able to make very much of a
fight of it."

"That seems a capital plan, sir. The only question is the number of
hands. Suppose you send eighty to take the battery; we should only
have as many more to spare, for the boat attack on the ship; and
that would leave us with only a hundred, on board. I should think
she would carry a fighting crew of two hundred, at least. These
Spaniards are always very strongly manned."

"I should think that would be about it. They are long odds, but not
too long, I think, Mr. Lyons. At any rate, we will try.

"Lay her off the land, Mr. Lyons, then we will go into my cabin,
and make all the arrangements."

There was much talk and excitement among the crew, for the general
opinion was that the captain would try to cut out the craft lying
under the Spanish battery. The navy had, for a long time, been very
sore at their inactivity; and had fretted that no attempts had been
made to cut out the Spanish vessels, across the bay. The admiral
had steadily set his face against all such attempts, considering
that the benefits to be gained did not justify the risks; for, had
any of his small squadron been damaged, or sunk, by the guns of the
batteries, the consequences would have been very serious, as the
Spanish gunboats would then have been able to carry on their
operations, without check, and it would have been next to
impossible for vessels to run the blockade.

The information Bob had given was soon known to all the officers,
and was not long before it permeated through the crew, and added to
their anxiety to cut the Spaniard out; for although the prize money
would be less than if she had been a richly laden merchantman, the
honour and glory was proportionately greater. The undertaking would
be a serious one, but the prospect of danger is never deterrent to
a British sailor.

There was great satisfaction when, presently, it became known that
the crews of the whole of the boats were to muster. Arms were
inspected, cutlasses ground, and everything prepared. It was early
in the morning when the Spanish barque had been first discovered;
and ten o'clock when the frigate had sailed away from land, as if
considering the Spanish craft too strongly protected to be
attacked. When five miles away from land, her course was laid east
and, under easy sail, she maintained the same distance on the
coast.

The plan of operations was that the first lieutenant, with thirty
marines and as many sailors, should land at a spot some two miles
from the battery; and should make their way inland, and come down
upon the position from the rear. A hundred men, in the rest of the
boats, should make for the barque, direct. This party was to act in
two divisions, under the second and third lieutenants, respectively;
and were to lie, one to the east and the other to the west of the
barque, and remain there until the guns of the battery opened upon
her. Then they were to row for her at all speed; a blue light being
burned, by each division, when they were within a hundred yards of
the enemy, as a warning to their friends in the battery; who were then
to fire round shot, instead of grape. The frigate was to venture in as
closely as she dared, anchor broadside on, and open fire at the enemy.

Jim Sankey was told off to the landing party, and Bob went up to
the captain, and requested leave to accompany him, as a volunteer.

"You see, sir," he said, "we may fall in with peasants, or be
challenged by sentries, as we approach the battery, and my ability
to speak Spanish might be an advantage."

"It would, undoubtedly," the captain said. "Well, Mr. Repton, I
shall be very glad to accept your services."

At four in the afternoon, the frigate's head was again turned west
and, at ten o'clock, the boats for the landing party were lowered
and, the men taking their places in them, rowed away for the shore,
which was some two miles distant. The night was dark; but Mr. Lyons
had with him a pocket compass and had, before embarking, taken the
exact bearings of the battery, from the spot where they would land.
He was therefore able to shape his course to a point half a mile in
its rear.

The strictest silence had been enjoined, and the little body of
sailors made their way inland, until they came upon a road running
parallel with the shore. They followed this for about half a mile,
and then struck off inland, again. The country was highly
cultivated, with orchards, vineyards, and orange groves. Their
progress was slow; for they had, many times, to cut a passage
through the hedges of prickly pear. At last, they reached a spot
where they believed themselves to be directly behind the battery.
Here there was a path, leading in the direction which they wished
to follow.

In a quarter of an hour they made out some lights ahead of them,
and the lieutenant halted his men, and again repeated the orders
they had before received.

"You are to go straight at the huts. As you approach them you are
to break up into parties of ten, as already formed. Each party is
to attack one hut, cut down all who resist, seize and carry away
all arms. Never mind the men, if you have once got their arms. They
cannot trouble us, afterwards. Waste no time but, directly you have
got all the firelocks in one hut, make for another. As soon as all
have been cleared out, make for the battery.

"Now, let the officers told off to command parties each fall in, at
the head of his ten men.

"Mr. Repton, you will keep beside me, to answer a challenge."

They were within fifty yards of the huts when a sentinel
challenged:

"Who goes there?"

"Soldiers of the king," Bob answered, in Spanish, "with
reinforcements for you."

"Halt till I call an officer," the sentry said.

But the lieutenant gave the word, and the whole party dashed
forward at a run. The sentry hesitated in surprise, for a moment,
and then discharged his piece. The sailors gave a cheer, and rushed
at the huts. Taken utterly by surprise, the Spaniards at first
offered no resistance, whatever, as the sailors rushed in. Indeed,
few of them attempted to get out of bed. The blue lights, with
which one man in each party was provided, were lighted as they
entered; and the arms were collected without a moment's delay, and
they were off again before the Spaniards were fairly awake to what
had happened.

There were ten huts, each containing twenty men. Two or three shots
