oppression acted upon him, as it were, mechanically, and aroused every
fibre of his being, and from that moment to the repairing of the
injustice, the undoing of the wrong, and the destruction of the
oppression, he gave his mind, his heart, his soul, his whole life with
an energy, with an intensity, with a vigour paralleled in no man
unless it be the first Napoleon. There are many evidences of this in
his life. When he was travelling in Southern Italy, as a tourist, for
pleasure and for the benefit of the health of his family, he became
aware of the abominable system which was there prevailing under the
name of Constitutional Government. He left everything aside, even the
object which had brought him to Italy, and applied himself to
investigate and to collect evidence, and then denounced the abominable
system in a trumpet blast of such power that it shook to its very
foundations the throne of King Ferdinand and sent it tottering to its
fall. Again, when he was sent as High Commissioner to the Ionian
Islands, the injustice of keeping this Hellenic population separated
from the rest of Greece, separated from the kingdom to which they were
adjacent, and toward which all their aspirations were raised, struck
his generous soul with such force that he became practically their
advocate, and secured their independence. Again, when he had
withdrawn from public life, and when, in the language of Thiers, under
somewhat similar circumstances, he had returned to "ses cheres
etudes," the atrocities perpetrated by the Turks on the people of
Roumania brought him back to public life with a vehemence, an
impetuosity, and a torrent of fierce indignation that swept everything
before it. If this be, as I think it is, the one distinctive feature
of his character, it seems to explain away what are called the
inconsistencies of his life. Inconsistencies there were none in his
life. He had been brought up in the most unbending school of Toryism.
He became the most active reformer of our times. But whilst he became
the leader of the Liberal party and an active reformer, it is only due
to him to say that in his complex mind there was a vast space for what
is known as conservatism. His mind was not only liberal but
conservative as well, and he clung to the affections of his youth
until, in questions of practical moment, he found them clashing with
that sense of right and abhorrence of injustice of which I have
spoken. But the moment he found his conservative affections clash with
what he thought right and just, he did not hesitate to abandon his
former convictions and go the whole length of the reforms demanded.
Thus he was always devotedly, filially, lovingly attached to the
Church of England. He loved it, as he often declared. He adhered to it
as an establishment in England, but the very reasons and arguments
which, in his mind, justified the establishment of the Church in
England, compelled him to a different course as far as that church was
concerned in Ireland. In England the Church was the church of the
majority, of almost the unanimity of the nation. In Ireland it was
the church of the minority, and, therefore, he did not hesitate. His
course was clear: he removed the one church and maintained the other.
So it was with Home Rule. But coming to the subject of Home Rule,
though there may be much to say, perhaps this is neither the occasion
nor the place to say it. The Irish problem is dormant, not solved; but
the policy proposed by Mr. Gladstone for the solution of this question
has provoked too much bitterness, too deep division, even on the floor
of this House, to make it advisable to say anything about it on this
occasion.

I notice it, however, simply because it is the last and everlasting
monument of that high sense of justice which, above all things,
characterized him. When he became convinced that Home Rule was the
only method whereby the long-open wound could be healed, he did not
hesitate one moment, even though he were to sacrifice friends, power,
popularity. And he sacrificed friends, power, popularity, in order to
give that supreme measure of justice to a long-suffering people.
Whatever may be the views which men entertain upon the policy of Home
Rule, whether they favour that policy or whether they oppose it,
whether they believe in it or whether they do not believe in it, every
man, whether friend or foe of that measure, must say that it was not
only a bold, but it was a noble thought, that of attempting to cure
discontent in Ireland by trusting to Irish honour and Irish
generosity.

Now, Sir, he is no more. England is to-day in tears, but fortunate is
the nation which has produced such a man. His years are over; but his
work is not closed; his work is still going on. The example which he
gave to the world shall live for ever, and the seed which he has sown
with such a copious hand shall still germinate and bear fruit under
the full light of heaven.

      --_Sir Wilfrid Laurier (By permission)_


  In reading this speech, apply the principles of Pause,
  Inflection, Grouping, Emphasis, and Perspective
  illustrated in the preceding lessons.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE DOWNFALL OF WOLSEY

From "King Henry VIII" Act III. Scene ii.


  Farewell! a long farewell, to all my greatness!
  This is the state of man: to-day he puts forth
  The tender leaves of hope; to-morrow blossoms,
  And bears his blushing honours thick upon him;
  The third day comes a frost, a killing frost,                        5
  And,--when he thinks, good easy man, full surely
  His greatness is a-ripening,--nips his root,
  And then he falls, as I do. I have ventured,
  Like little wanton boys that swim on bladders,
  This many summers in a sea of glory,                                10
  But far beyond my depth: my high-blown pride
  At length broke under me; and now has left me,
  Weary, and old with service, to the mercy
  Of a rude stream, that must for ever hide me.
  Vain pomp and glory of this world, I hate ye:                       15
  I feel my heart new open'd. O, how wretched
  Is that poor man that hangs on princes' favours!
  There is, betwixt that smile we would aspire to,
  That sweet aspect of princes, and their ruin,
  More pangs and fears than wars or women have;                       20
  And when he falls, he falls like Lucifer,
  Never to hope again.--

[_Enter Cromwell, and stands amazed_]

    Why, how now, Cromwell!

  _Crom._ I have no power to speak, sir.

  _Wol._ What! amaz'd
  At my misfortunes? can thy spirit wonder
  A great man should decline? Nay, an you weep,                       25
  I am fall'n indeed.

  _Crom._ How does your grace?

  _Wol._ Why, well;
  Never so truly happy, my good Cromwell.
  I know myself now; and I feel within me
  A peace above all earthly dignities,
  A still and quiet conscience. The king has cur'd me,                30
  I humbly thank his grace; and from these shoulders,
  These ruin'd pillars, out of pity, taken
  A load would sink a navy,--too much honour:
  O, 't is a burden, Cromwell, 't is a burden,
  Too heavy for a man that hopes for heaven!                          35

  _Crom._ I am glad your grace has made that right
  use of it.

  _Wol._ I hope I have: I am able now, methinks,--
  Out of a fortitude of soul I feel--
  To endure more miseries, and greater far,
  Than my weak-hearted enemies dare offer.                            40
  What news abroad?

  _Crom._ The heaviest, and the worst
  Is your displeasure with the king.

  _Wol._ God bless him!

  _Crom._ The next is, that Sir Thomas More is chosen
  Lord chancellor in your place.

  _Wol._ That's somewhat sudden:
  But he's a learned man. May he continue                             45
  Long in his highness' favour, and do justice
  For truth's sake, and his conscience; that his bones,
  When he has run his course and sleeps in blessings,
  May have a tomb of orphans' tears wept on 'em!--
  What more?                                                          50

  _Crom._ That Cranmer is return'd with welcome,
  Install'd Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

  _Wol._ That's news indeed.

  _Crom._                    Last, that the Lady Anne,
  Whom the king hath in secrecy long married,
  This day was view'd in open, as his queen,                          55
  Going to chapel; and the voice is now
  Only about her coronation.

  _Wol._ There was the weight that pull'd me down.
      O Cromwell,
  The king has gone beyond me: all my glories
  In that one woman I have lost for ever.                             60
  No sun shall ever usher forth mine honours,
  Or gild again the noble troops that waited
  Upon my smiles. Go, get thee from me, Cromwell;
  I am a poor fall'n man, unworthy now
  To be thy lord and master. Seek the king;                           65
  That sun, I pray, may never set! I have told him
  What and how true thou art: he will advance thee;
  Some little memory of me will stir him--
  I know his noble nature--not to let
  Thy hopeful service perish too. Good Cromwell,                      70
  Neglect him not; make use now, and provide
  For thine own future safety.

  _Crom._                  O my lord,
  Must I, then, leave you? must I needs forego
  So good, so noble, and so true a master?
  Bear witness, all that have not hearts of iron,                     75
  With what a sorrow Cromwell leaves his lord.
  The king shall have my service; but my prayers,
  For ever and for ever, shall be yours.

  _Wol._ Cromwell, I did not think to shed a tear
  In all my miseries; but thou hast forced me,                        80
  Out of thy honest truth, to play the woman.
  Let's dry our eyes; and thus far hear me, Cromwell:
  And--when I am forgotten, as I shall be,
  And sleep in dull cold marble, where no mention
  Of me more must be heard of--say, I taught thee,                    85
  Say, Wolsey, that once trod the ways of glory,
  And sounded all the depths and shoals of honour,
  Found thee a way, out of his wrack, to rise in;
  A sure and safe one, though thy master miss'd it.
  Mark but my fall, and that that ruin'd me.                          90
  Cromwell, I charge thee, fling away ambition:
  By that sin fell the angels; how can man, then,
  The image of his Maker, hope to win by 't?
  Love thyself last; cherish those hearts that hate thee;
  Corruption wins not more than honesty.                              95
  Still in thy right hand carry gentle peace,
  To silence envious tongues. Be just, and fear not:
  Let all the ends thou aim'st at be thy country's,
  Thy God's, and truth's: then if thou fall'st, O Cromwell,
  Thou fall'st a blessed martyr. Serve the king;                     100
  And--pr'ythee lead me in:
  There take an inventory of all I have,
  To the last penny; 't is the king's: my robe,
  And my integrity to Heaven, is all
  I dare now call my own. O Cromwell, Cromwell!                      105
  Had I but served my God with half the zeal
  I served my king, He would not in mine age
  Have left me naked to mine enemies.

  _Crom._ Good sir, have patience.

  _Wol._                  So I have. Farewell                        110
  The hopes of court! my hopes in heaven do dwell.

        --_Shakespeare_


  Compare the last words of Wolsey with those of Socrates
  as found in Jowett's translation of _The Apology_, (p.
  145.)

  BE JUST ... MARTYR. Show that the life and death of
  Socrates illustrates this ideal.

  Compare the Pitch in which Wolsey utters his monologue
  with that in which he addresses Cromwell. (Introduction,
  p. 23.)

  How is the parenthetical clause in ll. 6 and 7 kept in
  the back-ground? (Introduction, p. 24.) Select similar
  examples from Wolsey's speeches.

  AND FROM THESE SHOULDERS ... NAVY. Supply the ellipses.

  BY THAT SIN ... WIN BY 'T? Select the emphatic words and
  account for the Emphasis in each case. (Introduction, p.
  30.)

       *       *       *       *       *


THE ITALIAN IN ENGLAND


  That second time they hunted me
  From hill to plain, from shore to sea,
  And Austria, hounding far and wide
  Her blood-hounds thro' the country-side,
  Breathed hot and instant on my trace.--                              5
  I made, six days, a hiding-place
  Of that dry green old aqueduct
  Where I and Charles, when boys, have plucked
  The fireflies from the roof above,
  Bright creeping thro' the moss they love:                           10
  --How long it seems since Charles was lost!
  Six days the soldiers crossed and crossed
  The country in my very sight;
  And when that peril ceased at night,
  The sky broke out in red dismay                                     15
  With signal-fires. Well, there I lay
  Close covered o'er in my recess,
  Up to the neck in ferns and cress,
  Thinking on Metternich our friend,
  And Charles's miserable end,                                        20
  And much beside, two days; the third,
  Hunger o'ercame me when I heard
  The peasants from the village go
  To work among the maize: you know,
  With us in Lombardy, they bring                                     25
  Provisions packed on mules, a string
  With little bells that cheer their task,
  And casks, and boughs on every cask
  To keep the sun's heat from the wine;
  These I let pass in jingling line,                                  30
  And, close on them, dear noisy crew,
  The peasants from the village, too;
  For at the very rear would troop
  Their wives and sisters in a group
  To help, I knew. When these had passed,                             35
  I threw my glove to strike the last,
  Taking the chance: she did not start,
  Much less cry out, but stooped apart,
  One instant rapidly glanced round,
  And saw me beckon from the ground;                                  40
  A wild bush grows and hides my crypt,
  She picked my glove up while she stripped
  A branch off, then rejoined the rest
  With that; my glove lay in her breast:
  Then I drew breath; they disappeared:                               45
  It was for Italy I feared.

  An hour, and she returned alone
  Exactly where my glove was thrown.
  Meanwhile came many thoughts; on me
  Rested the hopes of Italy;                                          50
  I had devised a certain tale
  Which, when 't was told her, could not fail
  Persuade a peasant of its truth;
  I meant to call a freak of youth
  This hiding, and give hopes of pay,                                 55
  And no temptation to betray.
  But when I saw that woman's face,
  It's calm simplicity of grace,
  Our Italy's own attitude
  In which she walked thus far, and stood,                            60
  Planting each naked foot so firm,
  To crush the snake and spare the worm--
  At first sight of her eyes, I said,
  "I am that man upon whose head
  They fix the price, because I hate                                  65
  The Austrians over us; the State
  Will give you gold--oh, gold so much!--
  If you betray me to their clutch,
  And be your death, for aught I know,
  If once they find you saved their foe.                              70
  Now, you must bring me food and drink,
  And also paper, pen and ink,
  And carry safe what I shall write
  To Padua, which you'll reach at night
  Before the duomo shuts; go in,                                      75
  And wait till Tenebrae begin;
  Walk to the third confessional,
  Between the pillar and the wall,
  And kneeling whisper, _Whence comes peace?_
  Say it a second time, then cease;                                   80
  And if the voice inside returns,
  _From Christ and Freedom; what concerns
  The cause of Peace?_--for answer, slip
  My letter where you placed your lip;
  Then come back happy we have done                                   85
  Our mother service--I, the son,
  As you the daughter of our land!"

    Three mornings more, she took her stand
  In the same place, with the same eyes:
  I was no surer of sunrise                                           90
  Than of her coming: we conferred
  Of her own prospects, and I heard
  She had a lover--stout and tall,
  She said--then let her eyelids fall,
  "He could do much"--as if some doubt                                95
  Entered her heart,--then, passing out,
  "She could not speak for others, who
  Had other thoughts; herself she knew":
  And so she brought me drink and food.
  After four days, the scouts pursued                                100
  Another path; at last arrived
  The help my Paduan friends contrived
  To furnish me: she brought the news.
  For the first time I could not choose
  But kiss her hand, and lay my own                                  105
  Upon her head--"This faith was shown
  To Italy, our mother; she
  Uses my hand and blesses thee."
  She followed down to the sea-shore;
  I left and never saw her more.                                     110

    How very long since I have thought
  Concerning--much less wished for--aught
  Beside the good of Italy,
  For which I live and mean to die!
  I never was in love; and since                                     115
  Charles proved false, what shall now convince
  My inmost heart I have a friend?
  However, if I pleased to spend
  Real wishes on myself--say, three--
  I know at least what one should be.                                120
  I would grasp Metternich until
  I felt his red wet throat distil
  In blood thro' these two hands. And next,
  --Nor much for that am I perplexed--
  Charles, perjured traitor, for his part,                           125
  Should die slow of a broken heart
  Under his new employers. Last,
  --Ah, there, what should I wish? For fast
  Do I grow old and out of strength.
  If I resolved to seek at length                                    130
  My father's house again, how scared
  They all would look, and unprepared!
  My brothers live in Austria's pay
  --Disowned me long ago, men say;
  And all my early mates who used                                    135
