only retaining the head and legs.  The head, however, was sometimes
greatly extended, so as to include several joints of the back-bone.  At
length the explorers found themselves among a complete labyrinth of
islands, amidst which strong currents set in various directions, while
fogs and drift ice made navigation perilous in the extreme.  Successive
masses assailed the _Fury_.  At one time her anchor was dragged along
with a grinding noise, two flukes being broken off.  She was afterwards
carried forward by a violent stream amid thick mist, while it was found
impossible to steer her in any direction.

At length the ships emerged into the open sea, but a strong northerly
gale compelled them to run before it, when, on the 6th of August, they
found themselves close to the spot where they had been on the 3rd of
September.  Still Captain Parry persevered, examining every opening, in
the hopes that each might prove a passage into the polar ocean.

Lyon and Hoppner Inlets were surveyed.  When near the shore, a number of
Esquimaux came off to obtain some iron tools.  The behaviour of one of
the fair sex created considerable surprise.  She had sold one boot, but
obstinately retained the other.  At length the suspicions of the seamen
being aroused, she was seized and the buskin pulled off, when it proved
to be a receptacle of stolen treasure.  Besides other articles, it
contained a pewter plate and a couple of spoons.

The end of September was now approaching.  The summer was far from
genial, and now, at any moment, the icy hand of winter might grasp the
ships.  Pancake ice began to form on the surface of the ocean.  As the
ships rolled from side to side, the ice clung to them in vast masses,
and the various pieces which were tossing in the sea around became
cemented into one great field, which threatened every moment to bear
down upon them and dash them to pieces.

As it was important, without delay, to secure the ships for the winter,
a small island lying off the northern point of the entrance into Lyon
Inlet was fixed on.  The distance was about half a mile, but the soft
state of the pancake ice rendered the task not a very laborious one,
though often dangerous, as it bent like leather beneath the feet of the
seamen as they were working.  At length it was accomplished, and the two
ships were frozen in for another winter.

As there was no time to be lost, arrangements were at once made for
passing it comfortably.  Both ships were more thoroughly heated than had
been the case on the previous voyage.  They were both more amply
provisioned, and anti-scorbutics against scurvy had been more
bountifully supplied.

To amuse them, the theatre was opened on the 9th of November.  The play
of "The Rivals" being chosen, the two captains appeared as _Sir Anthony_
and _Captain Absolute_.

A school was also established, and it was interesting to observe the
zeal with which the hardy tars applied themselves to their books.

Sixteen of the men who had before been unable to form a letter could by
Christinas write very well.  That day was passed with the usual
festivities, the seamen being amply regaled with fresh beef, cranberry
pies, and grog, when they drank, with three hearty cheers, the health of
each officer in succession.  The shortest day was scarcely observed;
indeed, the sun did not entirely leave them.

A few hares were caught, with a purely white covering, which resembled
swans'-down rather than hair, and about a hundred white foxes were
snared in the nets.  At first they were perfectly ungovernable, but in a
short time the young ones threw off their timidity, and became tame.

The sky was frequently brilliantly lighted by the _aurora borealis_.
The light had a tendency to form an irregular arch, which in calm
weather was very distinct.  When the air became agitated, showers of
rays spread in every direction with the rapidity of lightning.
Sometimes long streams of light were spread out with inconceivable
swiftness.  No rule could be traced in the movement of the light parcels
which are called the "merry dancers."  The sun and moon were often
surrounded with haloes and concentric circles of vapour, tinted with the
brightest hues of the rainbow.  Parhelia, or mock suns, frequently shone
in different quarters of the firmament.  Still the life the explorers
were compelled to lead was becoming very monotonous, when, on the
morning of the ist of February, a number of figures were seen in the
distance, moving over the ice.  The spy-glasses were turned towards
them, and they were pronounced to be Esquimaux.

As it was important to establish friendly relations with these people,
the two commanders, attended by a few men, proceeded towards them,
walking in file behind each other, that they might cause no alarm.  As
the natives approached, they formed themselves into a line of
twenty-one; then they advanced slowly, until, making a full stop, they
saluted the English by the usual movement of beating their breasts.
They were well clothed in rich deer-skins.  On coming to the ships they
immediately began to strip; and the females, finding that they could
obtain knives, nails, and needles for their dresses, pulled them off,
when it was discovered that they had others of a similar character
beneath the outer ones.

A visit to their village, at their invitation, was paid; but at first no
one could discover their habitations.  They, however, led the way to a
hill in the snow, through which they crept, on hands and knees, along a
winding passage of considerable length, until they reached a little hall
with a dome-shaped roof, the doors of which opened into three
apartments, each occupied by a separate family.  This curious structure
was tenanted by sixty-four men, women, and children.  It was formed
entirely of slabs of snow, about two feet long and half a foot thick.
On the outside a series of cupolas rose about seven feet above the
ground, and were sixteen feet in diameter.  A plate of ice in the roof
served as a window.

When first seen the village appeared like a cluster of hillocks among
the snow; but successive falls filled up the intervening spaces, and
converted it into one smooth surface, so that the boys and dogs were
seen sporting over the roof.  In each room, suspended from the roof, a
lamp was burning, with a long wick formed from a species of moss, the
oil being the produce of the seal or walrus.  This lamp served at once
for light, heat, and cooking.

A few hours had been sufficient to put up the village.  The natives were
as desirous of pleasing as they were ready to be pleased, and a
favourable impression was thus made at the first interview, which was
not diminished during a constant intercourse of between three and four
months.  They were strictly honest, and frequently returned articles
which had been dropped by accident.

During a visit to the _Hecla_, the fiddler having struck up a tune,
these merry people danced with the seamen for an hour, and then returned
in high glee to their huts.  They were highly delighted with the tones
of the organ, as with the songs of the seamen and music of every
description.  They were very ingenious in employing such materials as
they had at their disposal.  A sledge being required to carry a lad to
some distance, one of them set to work, and in a short time cut out of
ice a serviceable little sledge, hollowed like a bowl, and smoothly
rounded at the bottom.  The thong to which the dogs were secured was
fixed to a groove cut round its upper edge.  Among the women was one
named Iliglink, the mother of a lad called Toolooak, who had frequently
come on board.  She was a superior person, of great natural talent.  Her
voice was soft; she had an excellent ear for music, and a great fondness
for singing.  It was somewhat difficult, indeed, when she once began, to
stop her.  She made beautiful models of canoes, sledges, and other
articles; but she showed her superior intelligence by the readiness with
which she communicated her knowledge of the geographical outline of the
sea-coast of the country and of the islands.  Several sheets of paper
were placed before her, and she drew roughly, on a large scale, an
outline of the land about Repulse Bay and Lyon Inlet, continuing it
northerly to the present winter station of the ships.  Sheet after sheet
was tacked on until she had completely lost sight of Winter Island, at
the other end of the table.  She afterwards drew, on a smaller scale,
with wonderful accuracy, a chart embracing a much wider extent of coast.
With intense interest it was found that she drew the extreme northern
boundary of America, or rather its north-east extremity, round which
Captain Parry had received instructions to proceed, if possible.

The armourer's forge especially attracted her attention, and she
expressed great astonishment at seeing two pieces of iron welded
together.  She was rather spoiled, however, by the attention paid her,
and seemed to claim as a right her privilege of coming on board whenever
she pleased.

Early in April some of the tribe deserted their habitations, proceeding
to the westward in search of food, and at the end of May the whole party
announced that they were about to migrate to the northward.  On
receiving what they considered the most valuable presents from the
commander, the women broke into such immoderate fits of laughter as to
be almost hysterical, finishing by bursting into tears.

The men were thankful, but less noisy in expressing their satisfaction.
As these good-humoured and very cheerful people took their departure,
they greeted the voyagers with three cheers, in true English style.

While preparations were being made for sailing three deaths occurred,
two on board the _Fury_, and one seaman of the _Hecla_.

On the 2nd of July the ships moved out of their winter quarters, but
they did not put to sea until the 8th.  They were almost immediately
exposed to most terrific danger, being driven along the ice at a furious
rate, frequently almost nipped by it.  At one time the _Hecla's_ stern
was lifted more than five feet out of the water, and her rudder unslung
by a violent jerk.  Had another floe backed the one which lifted her,
the ship must inevitably have turned over or parted amidships.
Providentially she righted, and drove several miles to the southward
before her rudder could be again slung.  The _Fury_ was exposed to
almost equal peril of destruction.  By long and unremitting
perseverance, and by taking advantage of every opening and breeze of
wind, the ships moved to the northward as far as latitude 67 degrees 18
minutes, to the mouth of a fresh water river.  The boats were lowered,
and parties landed and proceeded up the banks of the river, where, at
about two and a quarter miles from the entrance, they found a fine
waterfall, the scenery being romantic and beautiful in the extreme.  It
was named Barrow, after the Secretary of the Admiralty.  Its beauties
were enhanced by the vegetation on its banks, the enlivening brilliancy
of a cloudless sky, and the animation given to the scene by several
reindeer, which were grazing beside the stream.

On the 14th of July the ships reached the island of Amitiske, which by
Iliglink's chart appeared near the strait which they had reason to
believe would conduct them to the polar sea.  Here they saw an enormous
herd of walruses, lying piled up over each other on the loose drift ice.
A boat's crew from each ship was sent to attack them, but the animals--
some with their cubs on their backs,--making a most determined
resistance, kept their assailants at bay.  One of them, rushing forward,
tore the planks of a boat in several places, and very nearly sank her.
Three only were killed.

Sailing on, a strait was seen stretching westward in long perspective;
but the hopes of the explorers were soon disappointed, when the ice was
discovered extending in one unbroken line across it, from shore to
shore.

This passage was named Fury and Hecla Strait.  Hoping ultimately,
however, to force the ships through, Parry made an expedition along the
surface of the strait, and from an elevation saw a wide passage opening
out to the west, inducing him to believe that he saw before him the
polar sea.  Scarcely, however, had he returned when the ice began to
break in rents and fissures, and, soon entirely disappearing, the
vessels floated in open water.  With a brisk breeze he stood on, but at
the end of five days it was announced from the crow's nest that ice in a
continuous field occupied the whole breadth of the channel.  On
examining it, however, it was found to be rotten, and the captain,
therefore, determined to try and force the ships through it.  With all
canvas set, they had proceeded three or four hundred yards, when they
stuck, and, in spite of all their efforts, were unable to make the
slightest advance during the remainder of the season.  With the greatest
difficulty they were at length extricated, and proceeded to the
neighbouring harbour of Igloolik, into which, by the usual operation of
sawing, they made their way.  Here they prepared to spend another
winter.  The two ships were at some distance from each other, though not
sufficiently so to prevent constant intercourse.  They were prevented,
however, from continuing their theatrical entertainments, but schools
were carried on as industriously as before.  A wall of snow, twelve feet
high, was built round the _Fury_, at a distance of twenty yards from
her, forming a large square, like that of a farmyard, by which not only
was the snow-drift kept out, but a good walk, sheltered from every wind,
was afforded.  Before long the Esquimaux appeared, among whom were
several of their old friends; but Iliglink did not arrive, nor was any
reason given for her not coming.  The winter was less pleasantly spent
than the former, while some slight cases of scurvy appeared, arising
from the want of fresh anti-scorbutic plants.  At length, when the month
of August arrived, the ships were as securely confined in the ice as in
the middle of winter, except that a pool of water, about twice their own
length and diameter, had opened round them.  There was a distance of
four or five miles between the ships and the sea, yet notwithstanding,
Captain Parry determined to commence the laborious task of sawing his
way through it.

By the 6th of August, about four hundred yards of ice were sawn through,
leaving a broad canal, eleven hundred yards in length.  By this and the
disruption of the floe on the 8th of August, the _Fury_ floated once
more in open water, and was followed on the 12th by the _Hecla_.

Captain Parry had come to the resolution of sending the _Hecla_ home,
and by taking such stores and provisions as could be spared from her on
board the _Fury_, with her alone to brave a third winter in the polar
regions; but on desiring the medical officers to furnish him with their
opinions as to the probable effect that a third winter passed in these
regions would produce on the health of the ship's company, they
expressed it very strongly to the effect that it would be dangerous in
the extreme.  Captain Lyon fully agreed with this, and the ships,
therefore, stood out eastward.  The current rapidly hurried them along
to the southward, their drift being twenty-one miles in twenty-four
hours, though closely beset, without a single pool of water in sight the
whole time.  As they approached a headland, they were whirled round it
at the rate of two or three knots an hour, and on passing Barrow River
were drifted nine or ten miles off land by the current setting out of
it.

On the 17th of September, a strong westerly breeze clearing them from
the ice, enabled them to shape their course for Trinity Islands in a
perfectly open sea, from whence they ran down Hudson's Straits, without
meeting with any obstruction.  The favourable wind still continued, and
on the 10th of October they anchored in Brassa Sound, off Lerwick, where
they enjoyed their first sight of civilised man, after an absence of
seven and twenty months.

They were received by the people of Lerwick in the warmest manner.  The
bells were set ringing, the town was illuminated, and people flocked in
from all parts of the country, to express their joy at their unexpected
return.

On the 18th Captain Parry arrived at the Admiralty, and the ships were
paid off on the 16th of November.

The idea being entertained that the passage westward into the Pacific
might be made through Prince Regent's Inlet, Captain Parry was appointed
to the command of another expedition for the purpose of ascertaining if
this could be done.  The _Hecla_ was re-commissioned, he taking command
of her, while Commander Hoppner was appointed to the _Fury_, with
Horatio Thomas Austin and James Clark Ross as his lieutenants.  The
_Hecla_ carried sixty-two and the _Fury_ sixty persons.

The ships sailed from the Nore on the 19th of May, 1824, accompanied by
the _William Harris_ transport.  Captain Parry received his instructions
to make the best of his way to Davis Straits, to cross over to Lancaster
Sound, and, proceeding through Barrow Straits, endeavour to make through
Prince Regent's Inlet a passage into the sea which bounds the American
continent on its northern coast, and thence westward to the Pacific.  At
the Danish settlement of Lievely the ships received their stores from
the _William Harris_, which returned home.  On leaving the harbour, the
_Hecla_ struck on a sunken rock, but without receiving much damage.  On
the 17th of July the ice began to close round the ships, and from that
time forward the crews were constantly employed in warping or sawing
through the frozen mass.  On several occasions the _Hecla_ received
awkward nips, and it was not until the 9th of September that they got
into open water.  On the 10th of September they entered Lancaster Sound,
and found it free from ice; but on the 13th they had the mortification
of perceiving the sea ahead covered with young ice, through which they
made their way until they came to the entrance of Port Bowen, into which
the ships were warped by the ist of October, and here took up their
winter station.  The usual preparations for passing that dreary season
were made.  Numerous whales were seen off the coast, which would have
afforded a rich harvest to a whaler.

Parry's first care was to find occupation and diversion for the seamen.
As many of their former amusements were worn threadbare, he proposed a
masquerade, in which officers and men alike took part.  Admirably
dressed characters of various descriptions made their appearance, and
were supported with a degree of spirit and humour which would not have
discredited a more refined assembly.  It does especial credit to the
disposition and good sense of the men that, although the officers
entered fully into the spirit of these amusements, which took place once
a month alternately on board each ship, no instance occurred of anything
that could interfere with the regular discipline, or at all weaken the
respect of the men towards their officers.  Mr Hooper, purser of the
_Hecla_, superintended the school, aided by other officers.  The
progress of the men was surprisingly great.  He also attended to the
cultivation of that religious feeling which so essentially improves the
character of seamen, by furnishing the highest motives for increased
attention to their other duties.  The officers also found full
employment in the various observations to which their attention was
directed.  An expedition was also made to the eastward, under Commander
Hoppner.  On his return, two other parties, under the respective
commands of Lieutenants Sherer and Ross, travelled, the former to the
southward, and the latter to the northward, along the coast of Prince
Regent's Inlet, for the purpose of surveying it accurately.  The
travelling along the shore was so good that they were enabled to extend
their journeys far beyond the points intended.  On returning, Lieutenant
Ross brought the welcome intelligence that the sea was perfectly open at
a distance of twenty-two miles northward of Port Bowen.  On the 12th of
July the ice began to break up, and by the 20th, owing to the sudden
separation of the floe, the ships got free.  They first crossed over to
the western shore of Prince Regent's Inlet, then proceeded southward,
close in with the land, having alternately open water and floating ice,
to which they had occasionally to make fast.  Before long, however, the
ice was observed to be in rapid motion towards the shore.  The _Hecla_
was immediately beset, in spite of every exertion, and, after breaking
two of the largest ice-anchors, in endeavouring to heave in to the
shore, she was compelled to drift with the ice.  Both ships were in
extreme danger.  The cliffs next the sea, four or five hundred feet in
perpendicular height, were constantly breaking down, and the ships lay
so close in shore as to be almost within range of some of these falling
masses.  The following day the _Hecla_ managed to get to a greater
distance; but the _Fury_ remained where she was, and on the 31st a hard
gale brought the ice closer and closer, until it pressed with very
considerable violence on both ships, though mostly on the _Fury_, which
lay in a very exposed position.  Shortly afterwards the _Fury_ was
forced on the ground, where she lay, but was got off again at high
water.  A broad channel appearing and a fresh breeze springing up, an
attempt was made to reach the water; but the ice came bodily in upon the
ships, which were instantly beset in such a manner as to be literally
helpless and unmanageable.

Thus they were carried southward, when the _Hecla_, driving close in
shore, struck the ground several times, and remained immovable.  The
_Fury_ was seen driving past, narrowly escaping being forced on board
her.  She was driven about three hundred yards, powerfully pressed by
the ice, until she became so severely nipped and strained as to leak a
good deal, when she was again forced ashore.  Both ships, however, got
off at high water, but on the 2nd of August the _Fury_ was again driven
on the beach, and the _Hecla_ narrowly escaped.  Captain Parry went on
board the former vessel, and found four pumps going, and Commander
Hoppner and his men almost exhausted with the incessant labours of the
last eight and forty hours.  They were now looking out for a spot where
the Fury might be hove down, when again the ice drove down upon them.
Once more freed, however, the ships proceeded to a place where there
were three bergs, at which it was determined to heave down the _Fury_.
The formation of a basin was at once commenced, and completed by the
16th of August, and on the 18th all the _Fury's_ stores, provisions, and
other articles, were landed, and she was hove down.  Scarcely, however,
had this been done when a gale of wind came on, which destroyed the
bergs, and made it necessary to tow both the ships away from the land.
The _Fury_ was again reloaded, but on the 21st was once more driven on
shore.  It was now seen that any attempt to carry her to a place of
safety, even should she be got off, would be hopeless and productive of
extreme risk to the remaining ship, and that an absolute necessity
existed for abandoning her.  Her crew, with such stores as were
required, were transferred to the _Hecla_, and every effort was made to
carry the surviving ship into clear water.

Five and twenty days of the time when navigation was practicable had
been lost.  As soon, therefore, as the boats had been hoisted up and
stowed, they sailed away to the north-eastward, with a light air off the
land, in order to gain an offing before the ice should again set in
shore.  The _Hecla_ was at length worked out of Prince Regent's Inlet,
and arrived safely at Melville Harbour, where the necessary repairs were
effected for enabling her to cross the Atlantic.

Weighing anchor on the 1st of September, the _Hecla_ entered Barrow
Strait, where the sea was found perfectly open, and she was thus enabled
to bear away to the eastward.  In crossing Lancaster Sound more than the
usual quantity of icebergs were seen.  For ten miles she had only to
make one tack, when she reached the margin of the ice, and got on its
eastern side into the open sea.  On the 10th of October the Orkney
Islands were sighted, and on the 12th Captain Parry landed at Peterhead.

This last voyage to discover the north-west passage, though less
successful than the former ones, equally exhibited the courage,
perseverance, and hardihood which had before distinguished the officers
and crews employed; while we cannot help contrasting the admirable
discipline maintained with the sad want of it displayed in so many of
the voyages described in the preceding pages.

In 1827 Captain Parry commanded an expedition, which was fitted out in
the hopes of reaching the north pole by way of Spitzbergen, when,
accompanied by Captain Ross, he performed a long and hazardous journey
over the ice; but, after travelling six hundred miles, it was found that
they had only made good, owing to the drift of the ice, one hundred and
seventy miles.

As a reward for his laborious services, he received the honour of
knighthood, and Admiral Sir Edward Parry will ever be remembered as one
of the bravest, most sagacious, and enterprising officers who have done
honour to the British Navy.

The voyages of Sir John Franklin will now occupy us in succession to the
heroic Parry.



CHAPTER TWENTY NINE.

SIR JOHN FRANKLIN'S EXPEDITIONS.

Birth and youthful career of Franklin--His service at sea--Appointed to
survey the Coppermine River--His expedition--His second expedition to
the Arctic regions--Made Governor of Tasmania--His return--The last
Franklin expedition.

Sir John Franklin, whose Arctic expeditions and their consequences will
form the subject of this chapter, was born at Spilsby, in Lincolnshire,
on the 16th of April, 1786.  He was the youngest son of most respectable
parents and intended for the Church, but as he preferred the sea
service, his father yielded, and got him appointed a middy at fourteen
years of age.  Young Franklin soon saw some service.  He was present at
Copenhagen in 1801, and was appointed to the _Investigator_, which,
under his cousin Captain Flinders, explored the Australian coast.  The
_Investigator_ went to grief, and when the crew were transferred to the
_Porpoise_ she was wrecked, the ship's company and officers living on a
sandbank for fifty days.  After being taken off, Franklin was carried to
Canton, and when he eventually reached England he was appointed to the
_Bellerophon_, and was present at the battle of Trafalgar, where he was
signal midshipman, and behaved splendidly.

For several years he served in the _Bedford_, and was engaged and
wounded at New Orleans.  In 1818 he was put in command of the _Trent_ to
find an Arctic passage to India, and in this Captain Buchan, in the
_Dorothea_, took command.  But the latter vessel being damaged, the
expedition returned to England, though Franklin wished to proceed alone.

After this, his reputation having been well established, not only as a
thorough seaman but as a man of science, he was appointed to the
expedition to cross the continent from Hudson's Bay to the Coppermine,
and explore the coast eastward.

We will now, as briefly as possible, give the interesting narrative of
Franklin's Arctic expeditions.

While Sir Edward Parry, whose expedition we have already detailed, was
endeavouring to cross the Polar Sea westwards, Lieutenant John Franklin
was commissioned by the Admiralty to ascertain the sources of the
Coppermine River.  At the same time Doctor Richardson and Messrs. Hood
and Back were also nominated, with two English sailors, to accompany
him.  This small party embarked on board the Hudson Bay Company's vessel
_Prince of Wales_ on the 23rd of May, 1819, and after some perils they
arrived off York Factory, on the Hudson Bay shore, in August of the same
year.

On the 9th of September the party commenced their exploration, and
reached Cumberland House on the 22nd of October.  Franklin,
notwithstanding the advanced period of the year, determined to push on,
and after a delay he set out, accompanied only by Lieutenant Back, on
the 18th of January, 1820.  Doctor (afterwards Sir John) Richardson and
Mr Hood were to bring up the baggage and more stores in the early
spring.  The enterprising pair then journeyed more than eight hundred
miles in the terrible Arctic winter, and reached Fort Chepeywan on the
26th of March following.

Meanwhile Doctor Richardson and Mr Hood remained at Cumberland House
engaged in congenial pursuits and studying the Cree Indians, with other
natural history subjects.  The notes they give concerning the manners
and customs of the Indians are extremely interesting, but are by this
time pretty well known.  Their dexterity in hunting and hawking are
particularly commended, and much useful information concerning the fauna
of the district was collected by Doctor Richardson and his companion.

When spring began to appear Doctor Richardson and his friend, with the
Indian hunters, set out to join Franklin, and the "misery"--there is no
other name for it--which the party endured, not from cold but from the
mosquitoes, must be read about in detail to be even partially
appreciated.  This is a fearful plague of the northern regions just as
Nature is beginning to clothe herself anew in green, and the white
mantle of winter has disappeared in those places where snow is not
perpetual.

On the 18th of July, 1820, the whole party was assembled at Fort
Chepeywan, and they set out together, so as to reach the mouth of the
Coppermine in time to establish winter quarters for the next cold
season.  But tremendous difficulties beset them--lakes and rivers had to
be crossed, portages had to be made, as rapids had to be avoided, and
shallows had to be circumvented.  Thus it was the middle of August again
ere they reached a place whence further progress was impossible that
season.  The signs of approaching winter could not be disregarded: a
house was constructed as a winter residence, and called "Fort
Enterprise."

Their objective point was still many, many miles away, and those miles
they could not traverse with their boats and stores.  So, after a
hurried peep at the head of the river, they made ready to winter, and
with that view laid in a stock of provisions.  This consisted chiefly of
pemmican, which is frozen or dried reindeer-flesh kneaded with the fat
into a kind of paste.  Fish was added to this, but as people came
along--natives and their families, who "made for" shelter as quickly as
possible--the stock was not enough.  Ammunition gave out, many necessary
stores had not come up, and at length Mr--afterwards Admiral Sir
George--Back determined to return, and bring up the required stores.

After a lapse of five months this intrepid young officer returned to
Franklin.  In the meantime he had travelled one thousand miles in
snow-shoes, had no covering at night except a blanket and a deer-skin,
the thermometer at 40 degrees to 50 degrees below zero, and on occasions
he was for two or three days without food!  This was indeed intrepidity,
but he knew his friends were waiting for him, and that without some such
self-sacrifice they could not have remained in their winter quarters,
where, during Mr Back's absence, they suffered greatly from the
climate.

The young voyager brought back with him two interpreters, whose names in
English were "Stomach" and "Ear," but who were called Augustus and
Junius, in preference to the British equivalents of their baptismal
names.  During the winter all played games and wrote out their
journals--a favourite occupation with all travellers in their forced
idleness.  They subsisted on reindeer meat without vegetables, and drank
tea or chocolate.  The Indians were very kind and friendly all the time.
Many instances are related of their good-nature and simplicity.

The 14th of June had come before the travellers considered the icy river
navigable.  Some difficulties occurred with the hunters as to the
procuring of provisions by the way, but when all had been arranged
comfortably, a start was made, and the rocky river attempted.

The party arrived at the Copper hills, where the ore was searched for,
and then the expedition continued its course, though the Indians would
not go on after a while for fear of meeting the Esquimaux; and even the
Canadian hunters wanted to go back.  The sea was reached on the 18th of
July, and the party paddled their own canoes towards the east.  For more
than five hundred miles they coasted, until, instead of finding
themselves in the Arctic Ocean, they were only in an immense bay.  So
they turned back and went up Hood's River, with the intention to go as
far as possible by water, and then strike overland to Fort Enterprise
again.

This was a hazardous attempt, but it was their only chance.  They were
soon stopped by a waterfall, and then the pilgrimage began.  The large
canoes were made into two smaller ones, for the crossing of rivers and
lakes, and, with only provisions for two days, they started overland.

In three days they encountered quite a wintry climate, and from the 5th
to 26th of September they had to march through snow and live on mosses,
without any guide, or observation, to show the way, and many days they
had no food at all.  Frozen, and eventually almost in despair, the
Canadians grew impatient.  One canoe was disabled, the other lost, and,
at length, when they all reached the Coppermine River, they had no means
of crossing it.

In this emergency, Doctor Richardson volunteered to swim the hundred and
thirty yards of icy water (38 degrees), and carry a line over.  He made
the attempt, and had almost succeeded when the cold overcame him, and he
was dragged back nearly drowned.  He was with much difficulty restored
to animation.  A kind of basket was then rigged up, and in it Saint
Germain, an interpreter, paddled over, carrying the line.  He managed to
reach the opposite bank, and with no more than a wetting the rest all
crossed in safety after him.

This was in the beginning of October, and winter was upon them.  So
Franklin sent on some of the men with Mr Back to find the Indians near
Fort Enterprise, and the rest followed.  But the lichens disagreed with
two men, and though Doctor Richardson went back and endeavoured to cure
them and bring them along, he was obliged to abandon them to die in
their tracks.  Things looked so serious that Richardson and Hood
pluckily proposed to remain at the first convenient halting-place with
the weaker brethren, and let Franklin push on to the fort, and send back
help and food.  This was agreed to.  Franklin went on, but Hepburn, the
English sailor, volunteered to remain with Richardson.  This parting
took place on the 7th of October, twenty-four miles from the fort.  Of
the eight men who left with Franklin, four were taken ill and returned
to Doctor Richardson, but only one man, the Iroquois Michel, reached the
tent in rear.

On the 11th Franklin, with four men, reached the fort, and found it
completely empty and deserted--no food, no friends, nothing!  After a
