him a pile of money for the job, but didn't give him his name."

"But, Captain Shivernock, you said you gave him some money, and you
didn't tell us what you gave it to him for," added Beardsley.

"That was my joke."

"We do not see the point of it."

"I only wanted the privilege of proving to Captain Patterdale that he
was mistaken about the bill, by showing him three more just like it."

"How do you fold your money, Captain Shivernock?" asked the nabob.

"None of your business, you canting psalm-singer."

"I shall be obliged to commit you," said the sheriff, sharply.

"Commit me!" howled the wicked nabob. "I should like to see you do it."

"You shall have that satisfaction. If you give me any trouble about it,
I shall have to put these things on," added the sheriff, taking from his
pocket a pair of handcuffs.

The culprit withered at the sight of the irons. He and Laud both walked
to the county jail, where they were locked up. Of course the
imprisonment of such a man as the wicked nabob caused a sensation; but
there was no one to object. He was willing to pay any sum of money to
get out of the scrape; but the majesty of the law must be vindicated,
and there was a contest between money and justice. He obtained bail by
depositing the large amount required in the hands of two men, whom his
well-fed lawyer procured. Between two days he left the city; but
Beardsley kept the run of him, and when he was wanted for trial, he was
brought back from a western state.

On the trial a desperate attempt was made to break down the witnesses;
but it failed. The first for the defence was Mrs. Sykes; but her
evidence was not what had been expected of her. She had told, and
repeated the lie, that the captain left his house at four o'clock on the
morning after the outrage; but in court, and under oath, she would not
perjure herself. She declared that the defendant had left home about
eleven o'clock in the evening, dressed in her husband's blue frock,
boots, and hat. Mr. Sykes, after his wife had told the whole truth, was
afraid to testify as he had said he should do. A conviction followed;
and the prisoner was sentenced to the state prison for ten years. He was
overwhelmed by this result. He swore like a pirate, and then he wept
like a child; but he was sent to Thomaston, and put to hard work.

Laud pleaded guilty, and was sent to the same institution for a year.
There was hope of him; for if he could get rid of his silly vanity, and
go to work, he might be saved from a lifetime of crime.

Donald came out of the fire without the stain of smoke upon him. After
the great race, as Mr. Norwood was in no hurry for the Alice, he went on
the long cruise with the fleet, in the Sea Foam. They coasted along the
shore as far as Portland, visiting the principal places on the seaboard.
On the cruise down Donald "coached" his friend, Ned Patterdale, in the
art of sailing; and on the return he rendered the same service to
Rodman. Both of them proved to be apt scholars; and after long practice,
they were able to bring out the speed of their yachts, and stood a fair
chance in a regatta.

On the cruise, the yachts were racing all the time when under way, but
the results were by no means uniform. When Donald sailed the Maud, she
beat the Skylark; but when Rodman skippered her himself, the commodore
outsailed him. The Maud beat the Sea Foam, as a general rule; but one
day Robert Montague sailed the latter, and the former was beaten.

"Don John, I don't know yet which is the fastest craft in the fleet,"
said Commodore Montague, as they were seated on Manhegan Island, looking
down upon the fleet anchored below them.

"I thought you did, Bob," laughed Donald.

"No, I don't. I have come to the conclusion that you can sail a yacht
better than I can, and that is the reason that you beat me in the Maud,
as you did in the Sea Foam."

"No, no!" replied Donald. "I am sure I can't sail a boat any better than
you can."

"I can outsail any boat in the fleet when you are ashore."

"We can easily settle the matter, Bob."

"How?"

"You shall sail the Maud, and I will sail the Skylark. If the difference
is in the skippers, we shall come in about even. If the Maud is the
better sailer, you will beat me."

"Good! I'll do it."

"You will do your best in the Maud--won't you?"

"Certainly; and you will do the same in the Skylark."

"To be sure. We will sail around Matinicus Rock and back."

The terms of the race were agreed upon, and the interest of the whole
club was excited. The party went on board the fleet, and the two yachts
were moored in line. At the firing of the gun on board the Sea Foam,
they ran up their jibs and got a good start. The wind was west, a lively
breeze, but not heavy. Each yacht carried her large gaff-topsail and the
balloon-jib. The course was about forty miles, the return from the rock
being a beat dead to windward. Robert and Donald each did his best, and
the Maud came in twelve minutes ahead of the Skylark.

"I am satisfied now," said Robert, when they met after the race.

"I was satisfied before," laughed Donald. "I was confident the Maud was
faster than the Skylark or the Sea Foam."

"I agree with you now; and I have more respect for myself than I had
before, for I thought it was you, and not the Maud, which had beaten
me," added Robert. "I have also a very high respect for the firm of
Ramsay & Son."

[Illustration: THE MAUD WINNING THE RACE. Page 338.]

The members of the club enjoyed the excursion exceedingly; and on their
return it was decided to repeat it the next year, if not before. The
club-house on Turtle Head was finished when the fleet arrived at
Belfast; and during the rest of the vacation, the yachts remained in the
bay. They had chowders and fries at the Head, to which the ladies
were invited; and Donald made himself as agreeable as possible to Miss
Nellie on these occasions. Possibly her father and mother had some
objections to this continued and increasing intimacy; if they had, they
did not mention them. They were compelled to acknowledge, when they
talked the matter over between themselves, that Donald Ramsay was an
honest, intelligent, noble young man, with high aims and pure
principles, and that these qualifications were infinitely preferable to
wealth without them; and they tacitly permitted the affair to take its
natural course, as I have no doubt it will. Certainly the young people
were very devoted to each other; and though they are too young to think
of anything but friendship, it will end in a wedding.

In the autumn, after the frame of the Alice was all set up, Barbara
obtained a situation as a teacher in one of the public schools, and
added her salary to the income of the boat-builder. The family lived
well, and were happy in each other. After the boating season closed, the
yacht club hired apartments, in which a library and reading-room were
fitted up; and the members not only enjoyed the meetings every week,
but they profited by their reading and their study. Donald is still an
honored and useful member, and people say that, by and by, when the
country regains her mercantile marine, he will be a ship-builder, and
not, as now, THE YOUNG BOAT-BUILDER.




LEE & SHEPARD'S

LIST OF

JUVENILE PUBLICATIONS.

       *       *       *       *       *

OLIVER OPTIC'S BOOKS.

        Each Set in a neat Box with Illuminated Titles.


        =Army and Navy Stories.= A Library for Young and
        Old, in 6 volumes. 16mo. Illustrated. Per vol            $1.50

        The Soldier Boy.
        The Sailor Boy.
        The Young Lieutenant.
        The Yankee Middy.
        Fighting Joe.
        Brave Old Salt.


        =Famous "Boat-Club" Series.= A Library for Young
        People. Handsomely Illustrated. Six volumes, in neat
        box. Per vol                                              1.25

        The Boat Club; or, The Bunkers of Rippleton.
        All Aboard; or, Life on the Lake.
        Now or Never; or, The Adventures of Bobby Bright.
        Try Again; or, The Trials and Triumphs of Harry West.
        Poor and Proud; or, The Fortunes of Katy Redburn.
        Little by Little; or, The Cruise of the Flyaway.


        =Lake Shore Series, The.= Six volumes. Illustrated.
        In neat box. Per vol                                      1.25

        Through by Daylight; or, The Young Engineer of the
        Lake Shore Railroad.
        Lightning Express; or, The Rival Academies.
        On Time; or, The Young Captain of the Ucayga Steamer.
        Switch Off; or, The War of the Students.
        Break Up; or, The Young Peacemakers.
        Bear and Forbear; or, The Young Skipper of Lake
        Ucayga.


        =Soldier Boy Series, The.= Three volumes, in neat
        box. Illustrated. Per vol                                 1.50

        The Soldier Boy; or, Tom Somers in the Army.
        The Young Lieutenant; or, The Adventures of an Army
        Officer.
        Fighting Joe; or, The Fortunes of a Staff Officer.


        =Sailor Boy Series, The.= Three volumes in neat box.
        Illustrated. Per vol                                      1.50

        The Sailor Boy; or, Jack Somers in the Navy.
        The Yankee Middy; or, Adventures of a Naval Officer.
        Brave Old Salt; or, Life on the Quarter-Deck.


        =Starry Flag Series, The.= Six volumes. Illustrated.
        Per vol                                                   1.25

        The Starry Flag; or, The Young Fisherman of Cape Ann.
        Breaking Away; or, The Fortunes of a Student.
        Seek and Find; or, The Adventures of a Smart Boy.
        Freaks of Fortune; or, Half Round the World.
        Make or Break; or, The Rich Man's Daughter.
        Down the River; or, Buck Bradford and the Tyrants.


        =The Household Library.= 3 volumes. Illustrated.
        Per volume                                                1.50

        Living too Fast.
        In Doors and Out.
        The Way of the World.


        =Way of the World, The.= By William T. Adams (Oliver
        Optic)                                               12mo 1.50


        =Woodville Stories.= Uniform with Library for Young
        People. Six volumes. Illustrated. Per vol.           16mo 1.25

        Rich and Humble; or, The Mission of Bertha Grant.
        In School and Out; or, The Conquest of Richard Grant.
        Watch and Wait; or, The Young Fugitives.
        Work and Win; or, Noddy Newman on a Cruise.
        Hope and Have; or, Fanny Grant among the Indians.
        Haste and Waste; or, The Young Pilot of Lake Champlain.


        =Yacht Club Series.= Uniform with the ever popular
        "Boat Club" Series. Completed in six vols. Illustrated.
        Per vol.                                             16mo 1.50


        Little Bobtail; or, The Wreck of the Penobscot
        The Yacht Club; or, The Young Boat Builder.
        Money Maker; or, The Victory of the Basilisk.
        The Coming Wave; or, The Treasure of High Rock.
        The Dorcas Club; or, Our Girls Afloat.
        Ocean Born; or, The Cruise of the Clubs.


        =Onward and Upward Series, The.= Complete in six
        volumes. Illustrated. In neat box. Per vol.               1.25

        Field and Forest; or, The Fortunes of a Farmer.
        Plane and Plank; or, The Mishaps of a Mechanic.
        Desk and Debit; or, The Catastrophes of a Clerk.
        Cringle and Cross-Tree; or, The Sea Swashes of a Sailor.
        Bivouac and Battle; or, The Struggles of a Soldier.
        Sea and Shore; or, The Tramps of a Traveller.


        =Young America Abroad Series.= A Library of
        Travel and Adventure in Foreign Lands. Illustrated
        by Nast, Stevens, Perkins, and others. Per vol. 16mo      1.50

        _First Series._

        Outward Bound; or, Young America Afloat.
        Shamrock and Thistle; or, Young America in Ireland and Scotland.
        Red Cross; or, Young America in England and Wales.
        Dikes and Ditches, or, Young America in Holland and Belgium.
        Palace and Cottage; or, Young America in France and Switzerland.
        Down the Rhine; or, Young America in Germany.

        _Second Series._

        Up the Baltic; or, Young America in Norway, Sweden, and Denmark.
        Northern Lands; or, Young America in Russia and Prussia.
        Cross and Crescent; or, Young America in Turkey and Greece.
        Sunny Shores; or, Young America in Italy and Austria.
        Vine and Olive; or, Young America in Spain and Portugal.
        Isles of the Sea; or, Young America Homeward Bound.

        =Riverdale Stories.= Twelve volumes. A New Edition.
        Profusely Illustrated from new designs by Billings. In
        neat box. Per vol.

        Little Merchant.
        Young Voyagers.
        Robinson Crusoe, Jr.
        Dolly and I.
