overrated, even by the enthusiast in architectural beauty. At a
bookstore in the Domhof the party purchased some views of the
cathedral.

"I suppose the ladies will want some cologne, if the gentlemen do not,"
said Dr. Winstock, with a smile.

"I want some," added Paul. "My mother will be delighted with a bottle
of cologne from Cologne itself."

"The reputation of the article is world-wide, and I suppose many
fortunes have been made in the trade. Farina was the original inventor,
and there are not less than twenty-four establishments in this city
which claim to be the rightful owners of the receipt for the pure
article. I see that Murray and Fetridge both award to Jean Marie Farina
the glory of being the right one."

"The original Jacobs," laughed Paul.

"Yes. His place is opposite the Juelich's Platz; and after we have been
to the Churches of St. Cunibert and St. Ursula, we will call upon him.
There is a cologne shop," added the surgeon, as he pointed to the
opposite side of the Domhof. "I bought some there once, and I found it
very good."

There are half a dozen churches in Cologne from six to eight hundred
years old, and our party looked at them with interest. The church of
St. Ursula and the Eleven Thousand Virgins presented to them a very
remarkable display. The saint went from Brittany to Rome with her
virgin band. On their return by way of the Rhine, they were all
massacred at Cologne by the savage Huns. The remains of the saint and
her companions have been gathered together, and enshrined in this
church. The bones are buried under the pavement, displayed in the
walls, or exhibited in glass cases. St. Ursula herself lies in a
coffin, and near her are the skulls of some of her preferred
companions. The chains of St. Peter, and one of the clay vessels which
held the wine of Cana, are also exhibited.

Before dinner time, the party reached the Juelich's Platz, where the
original cologne shop is located. A blast of the vapor of the fragrant
water was blown in each of their faces by the aid of a machine made for
the purpose, and each one bought a supply of the genuine article.

In the afternoon the same party visited the house in the Sternengasse,
in which Rubens was born and Marie de Medicis died. There were objects
of interest enough in the city to occupy the attention of the
excursionists till night.

"Do you find Cologne a very dirty city?" said the doctor, as they were
returning to the hotel.

"Rather so in the old market-place," replied Mr. Arbuckle. "As a whole,
I don't think it is any dirtier than most of the cities of Europe."

"That is just my view. I find that all the guidebooks and all the works
of travel insist upon inserting and indorsing Coleridge's lines on the
subject."

"What are the lines?" asked Paul.

Dr. Winstock took his guide-book and read,--

    "Ye nymphs who reign o'er sewers and sinks,
    The River Rhine, it is well-known,
    Doth wash your city of Cologne;
    But tell me, nymphs, what power divine
    Shall henceforth wash the River Rhine."

"I protest that it is a slander, whatever it may have been in former
times."

The next morning the tourists took the train for Dusseldorf, where they
spent the forenoon in examining the pictures of the School of Art,
which has its headquarters in this place, and in a walk through the
beautiful Hofgarten. From this place a ride of two hours brought the
party to Aix-la-Chapelle, where they dined at the Hotel Grand Monarque.

"Aix-la-Chapelle was the birth-place of Charlemagne, who also died
here," said Professor Mapps, after dinner. "The German name of the city
is Aachen, which is derived from _Aachs_, meaning a spring. There are
several warm medicinal springs here, which have a considerable reputation
for their curative properties. The city is called Aix-la-Chapelle from
the chapel which Charlemagne built. From him the place derived its
chief importance. He raised it to the rank of the second city in his
empire, made it the capital of all his dominions north of the Alps, and
decreed that the sovereigns of Germany and of the Romans should be
crowned here. Between 814 and 1531, the coronations of thirty-seven
kings and emperors took place here.

"It has been the scene of many Diets and church councils, and in modern
times several treaties have been signed here."

The excursionists left the hotel and walked to the cathedral, which is
probably the oldest church in Germany. This is the chapel for which the
city is named, and was intended by Charlemagne as his burial-place. It
was consecrated by Pope Leo III., assisted by three hundred and
sixty-five archbishops and bishops. It was partially destroyed by
barbarians, but was rebuilt by the Emperor Otho III., and much of the
primitive structure still remains. Under the centre of the dome is a
marble slab in the floor on which are the words CAROLO MAGNO,
indicating the spot where the tomb of Charlemagne was located. It was
probably a little chapel above ground. It was opened in 1165, and the
body was found sitting on a throne, clothed in imperial robes, a
sceptre in the hand, and a copy of the Gospels on the knee. The crown
was on the bony brow, and his sword and other articles near him. All
these relics were subsequently used at the coronation of the emperors,
but are now kept at Vienna, except the throne, which is still here.

The church has an abundance of relics, including the skull and arm-bone
of Charlemagne, though the latter has, unfortunately, turned out to be
a leg-bone! It is said that the rest of the bones of his body were
found here in a chest in a dark closet; but we are not told by what
means they were identified. If some of the apostles, martyrs, and
worthies of the past had had a dozen skulls each, sight-seers might be
more credulous. There are also in this church a lock of the Virgin's
hair, the leathern girdle of Christ with the seal of Constantine upon
it, a nail of the cross, the sponge which was filled with vinegar for
the Saviour, blood and bones of St. Stephen, and bits of Aaron's rod.

In addition to these precious articles, the cathedral has what are
called the Grand Relics, which are shown only once in seven years, and
then for but two weeks. At the exhibition in 1860, half a million
people resorted to Aix to see them. Charlemagne received them direct
from the Patriarch of Jerusalem, and from Haroun-al-Raschid. They are
enclosed in a shrine of silver-gilt, of the workmanship of the ninth
century. There are four principal articles: The cotton robe, five feet
long, worn by the Virgin at the Nativity; the swaddling clothes, of a
coarse yellow cloth like sacking, in which the infant Saviour was
wrapped; the cloth on which the head of John the Baptist was laid; and
the scarf worn by the Saviour, at the crucifixion, which bears the
stains of blood. Other articles, such as religious emblems, are
doubtless of great antiquity.

The party visited the Hotel de Ville, on the spot where stood the
palace of the Frankish kings, in which Charlemagne was born. This was
the last sight to be seen in regular course, and the last city in
Germany which the tourists were to visit that season. It had been put
to vote whether the company would remain in Aix over Sunday, or make a
night trip to Paris, and the latter had been almost unanimously
adopted. Captain Shuffles voted against it, because the earl's party
were to remain till Monday; but he gracefully yielded, and the tourists
left at eight o'clock. Lady Feodora was very sad, and so was
Shuffles--Sir William was very glad. His lordship was kind enough to
hope that the acquaintance thus begun would be continued by letter, if
not possible in any other way.

The excursionists were in Paris at eight o'clock the next morning, and
most of them had slept very well in the cars. They were allowed to
attend such churches as they pleased, and while some heard the fine
singing in St. Roch, others listened to Mass in Notre Dame, while not a
few attended at the American Chapel.

On Monday forenoon, after breakfast had been disposed of in the Hotel
du Louvre, Mr. Arbuckle requested all the students to assemble in the
grand dining-room. When they were all in the apartment, their kind and
liberal friend rose, and was received with hearty applause.

"Young gentlemen, I thank you for this kindly greeting," said he. "I
shall never forget the debt of gratitude I owe you, and I hope, when
your squadron goes up the Baltic, you will put into Belfast on your
way. It has afforded me very great pleasure to contribute something to
your instruction and amusement, and I most sincerely regret that we
must part to-day. For myself and my family I thank you for all you have
done for us."

Mr. Arbuckle paused, and Mr. Lowington, for the ship's company, thanked
him for his liberal hospitality, and assured him that "all hands" would
remember him and his family as long as they lived.

"I thank you, Mr. Lowington; you are very kind," continued Mr.
Arbuckle. "Allow me to speak a word now for my daughter, the Grand
Protectress of the Order of the Faithful. Some of the young gentlemen
were saying something about perpetuating the association formed on our
voyage from Havre to Brest, and Grace desired me to provide a suitable
emblem for that purpose. I took the liberty, when we reached Paris,
nearly three weeks since, to order a sufficient number of badges for
all the members; and this morning I obtained them. They are very neat,
and I hope they will please you."

He held up one of the emblems.

"It is a gold anchor, with a star upon it," continued Mr. Arbuckle.
"The word FAITHFUL is inscribed upon it. Grace will be happy now to
present it to each member of the order."

The students applauded lustily, and one by one they passed before her,
and she attached the badge, which was made like a breastpin, to the
coats of the members, over the white ribbons. They were admonished
always to wear them, and always to be faithful. The Grand Protectress
was warmly cheered by the boys, when the ceremony was concluded. The
hour of parting had come, for the ship's company was to return to
Brest, while the Arbuckles proceeded to London. There was a general
shaking of hands, and a general exchanging of kind words. Paul and
Grace found the occasion a very trying one. What promises they made to
each other need not be repeated.

The Arbuckles attended the party to the station, and when the last
words of farewell had been spoken, the train moved off. The excitement
of the excursion was ended, and the ride to Brest was rather dull. The
buoyant spirit of youth, however, soon furnished a new hope, and they
now looked eagerly forward to the meeting of dear friends at home. The
train arrived at Brest in the evening, and the students slept that
night in their berths on board the ship.

The next morning the Young America sailed for Lisbon. She did not make
so quick a passage as the Josephine had made, and after a three days'
run, dropped anchor in the Tagus; but the consort had not yet arrived.




CHAPTER XX.

HOMEWARD BOUND.


The moon shone brightly on the deserted deck of the Josephine after the
runaways had departed in the four boats,--deserted by all save Bitts,
who was endeavoring to free himself from the rope by which he had been
secured. Before the conspirators had gone a cable's length, he
succeeded. Reaching the rope over his head, he went up, hand over hand,
till he had slack enough to make a bight for one of his feet. Then,
holding on with one hand, he loosed the rope from his neck with the
other, and descended to the deck.

Rogues always overreach themselves. Phillips had intended to secure the
arms of his prisoner by winding a line around his body, but,
considering him safe without it, he had neglected to do so. If he had
done this, the runaways might have reached the shore before any one
could come to the aid of the sufferer. He was free in three minutes
after Phillips left him. The boats were pulling for the shore, and
those below were laboring to release themselves from their
imprisonment. He went to the companion way, and tried to open it; but
the nail held it fast. Descending to the steerage, he removed the
handspike with which the cabin door was fastened.

"What does all this mean?" demanded Mr. Fluxion, as he hastened on
deck.

"The boys have taken all the boats, and left the vessel," replied
Bitts.

"Left the vessel!" exclaimed Mr. Fluxion. "Were you asleep on deck?"

"No, sir. Half a dozen of them hung me by the neck till I was nearly
choked to death," pleaded the carpenter.

"Where was Cleats?"

"I stepped below for half a minute, and they clapped the slide on over
me," answered Cleats, very sheepishly.

"You stepped below! I ordered you not to leave the deck," added the
vice-principal, angrily. "You are responsible for this."

"I did not think the young rascals would do such a thing as this,"
pleaded the culprit.

"I did; and I told you they would do anything. You have disobeyed my
orders. Take the helm, Gage."

Mr. Fluxion glanced at the boats, and gave a few hasty orders, by which
the Josephine was headed towards the shore. The cooks and stewards in
the forecastle were released, and the chase commenced.

"I did not think they were quite so bold as this," said Dr. Carboy.

"They will do anything. Cleats thinks more of his stomach than of his
duty, or it would not have happened," replied Mr. Fluxion. "I have seen
the boys talking together a great deal on this cruise, and I was sure
something was brewing. I charged all the officers not to leave the deck
for a single instant. Probably the young rascals have been watching for
this opportunity during the whole cruise."

"It is a very foolish movement on their part," added Dr. Carboy.

"Yet if they had kept us in the cabin half an hour longer, it might
have succeeded, for the boats would have been out of sight. If they had
tied Bitts's arms behind him, it might have been half an hour before we
could have broken out of the cabin."

Mr. Fluxion questioned the watch officers very closely in regard to the
conduct of the crew on deck, and he soon understood the whole matter.
He was very severe upon Cleats for leaving the deck, declared that he
could not be trusted, and that he should be discharged. The latter was
very humble, acknowledged his error, and made no attempt to palliate
it. He had always been faithful, so far as was known, and probably had
never been guilty of any graver offence than that of leaving the deck
for a few minutes during his watch. But he had been expressly cautioned
not to do this, and had sent a hand below for his lunch, until the
present time.

In the boats the runaways were pulling with all their might to get out
of sight of the Josephine before the officers should set themselves at
liberty. Perth urged the oarsmen in the captain's gig to the most
tremendous exertion. But in less than ten minutes, and before they had
made a single mile, they saw the Josephine fill away, and stand towards
them.

"Did you fasten Bitts?" said Perth, to Phillips, who was in the gig
with him.

"I did. He couldn't get away, I know," replied Phillips.

"They are after us, and I'm afraid the game is up," added Perth. "The
Josephine can make two knots to our one in this breeze."

The leader was very anxious for the result. The plan had really failed
because the officers had released themselves so much sooner than was
expected. But Perth hoped to make it partially successful. Standing up
in the gig, he ordered the other boats to separate, so that the
Josephine could not capture them all at once. He directed the first
cutter to pull to the north-west, while the gig went to the south-west,
and the second and third cutters were to take intermediate points. The
Josephine was headed to the north-west, with the evident intention of
getting between the boats and the shore. The second cutter would
therefore be her first victim; and Perth hoped that, by the time she
had picked up the other three boats, his own would be in shoal water,
where a schooner of her tonnage could not come.

Little was in command of the first cutter. He obeyed the order of
Perth, though he saw it would be a losing game for his boat. In less
than half an hour the Josephine came up with him. The wind was due
east, which gave the vessel every advantage, and she came about under
the lee of the cutter.

"Hold water! Back her!" shouted Little, who had prepared his plan of
operations, and intended to pull dead to windward of her, so that she
would have to go in stays before she could come up with the boat again.

Peaks spoiled his plan by throwing a boat grapnel into the fore-sheets
of the cutter, and hauling her alongside of the Josephine as her sails
shook in the wind. Cleats dropped into the boat, and, leaping aft,
seized Little by the collar. Gage followed him, and ten of the runaways
were captured. Mr. Fluxion ordered them on board the vessel, and the
two men in the boat expedited their movements by some rather rough
usage.

The vice-principal said nothing to the discomfited crew of the first
cutter, but gave his orders to chase the second cutter. As the
Josephine approached her, Peaks and Gage, with two of the stewards,
were sent off in the first cutter as the vessel lay to. They grappled
the boat, and as no one thought of resisting Peaks, they were readily
captured, and driven upon the deck of the schooner. The third cutter
was taken with no more difficulty. A few moments later, the Josephine
luffed up under the lee of the gig, having towed the first cutter, in
which the four men were seated, to this position. The boat pulled
towards the runaways. Perth was desperate when he saw how easily he was
to be captured.

"Bat them over the head with your oars, fellows!" shouted he. "Don't
let them take you!"

The oarsmen attempted to obey this order, and to beat off their
pursuers. A brief struggle ensued, in which Perth and Phillips fought
with desperation; but Peaks succeeded in getting into the gig, and the
strife was ended. With a blow of his fist the stalwart boatswain
justified the traditions of himself, and Perth was knocked senseless in
the bottom of the boat, while Phillips, with a bleeding face, yielded
the day. The runaways in the gig were driven to the deck, as their
companions had been, while Perth was handed up by the grim Peaks, put
in his berth, and attended by Dr. Carboy.

The long-cherished scheme of Little had ended in disaster, and all
hands had been captured. The runaways looked at each other with a sort
of astonishment when they found themselves on board again. Doubtless
they were satisfied that they had not bettered their condition by what
they had done. They obeyed whatever orders were given them, for the
terrible Peaks had verified all the stories told of him. He had knocked
Perth insensible, and badly damaged Phillips. It was not safe to refuse
to do duty, as some of them, in their chagrin, wished to do.

As soon as the boats were hoisted up, and the Josephine headed on her
course again, all hands were piped to muster. By this time Perth was
able to appear, for he had only been stunned by the boatswain's fist. A
savage lecture from the vice-principal was expected; but instead of
that, every one of the crew was searched. Perth's twenty pounds was
discovered and confiscated, as well as numerous bills on Paris, letters
of credit, and similar valuable papers. The conspirators had put them
in their pockets to use on shore. Without any further notice of the
affair of the night, the vice-principal stationed the watch, and
dismissed the rest of the crew.

Mr. Fluxion probably acted on the principle of the celebrated
schoolmaster who charged all the faults of his pupils upon himself. If
