'Perhaps, while you are about the wolf's house seeing after the bows,
it would do no harm if you were to make that knot-hole in the wall a
little bigger,' said he.  'Not large enough to draw attention, of
course; but it might come in handy.'  And with another nod he left her.

The next evening the mink washed and brushed himself carefully and set
out for the feast.  He smiled to himself as he looked at the dusty
track, and perceived that though the marks of wolves' feet were many,
not a single guest was to be seen anywhere.  He knew very well what
that meant; but he had taken his precautions and was not afraid.

The house door stood open, but through a crack the mink could see the
wolves crowding in the corner behind it.  However, he entered boldly,
and as soon as he was fairly inside the door was shut with a bang, and
the whole herd sprang at him, with their red tongues hanging out of
their mouths.  Quick as they were they were too late, for the mink was
already through the knot-hole and racing for his canoe.

The knot-hole was too small for the wolves, and there were so many of
them in the hut that it was some time before they could get the door
open.  Then they seized the bows and arrows which were hanging on the
walls and, once outside, aimed at the flying mink; but as they pulled
the bows broke in their paws, so they threw them away, and bounded to
the shore, with all their speed, to the place where their canoes were
drawn up on the beach.

Now, although the mink could not run as fast as the wolves, he had a
good start, and was already afloat when the swiftest among them threw
themselves into the nearest canoe.  They pushed off, but as they dipped
the paddles into the water, they snapped as the bows had done, and were
quite useless.

'I know where there are some new ones,' cried a young fellow, leaping
on shore and rushing to a little cave at the back of the beach.  And
the mink's heart smote him when he heard, for he had not known of this
secret store.

After a long chase the wolves managed to surround their prey, and the
mink, seeing it was no good resisting any more, gave himself up.  Some
of the elder wolves brought out some cedar bands, which they always
carried wound round their bodies, but the mink laughed scornfully at
the sight of them.

'Why I could snap those in a moment,' said he; 'if you want to make
sure that I cannot escape, better take a line of kelp and bind me with
that.'

'You are right,' answered the grandfather; 'your wisdom is greater than
ours.'  And he bade his servants gather enough kelp from the rocks to
make a line, as they had brought none with them.

'While the line is being made you might as well let me have one last
dance,' remarked the mink.  And the wolves replied: 'Very good, you may
have your dance; perhaps it may amuse us as well as you.'  So they
brought two canoes and placed them one beside the other.  The mink
stood up on his hind legs and began to dance, first in one canoe and
then in the other; and so graceful was he, that the wolves forgot they
were going to put him to death, and howled with pleasure.

'Pull the canoes a little apart; they are too close for this new
dance,' he said, pausing for a moment.  And the wolves separated them
while he gave a series of little springs, sometime pirouetting while he
stood with one foot on the prow of both.  'Now nearer, now further
apart,' he would cry as the dance went on.  'No! further still.'  And
springing into the air, amidst howls of applause, he came down
head-foremost, and dived to the bottom.  And through the wolves, whose
howls had now changed into those of rage, sought him everywhere, they
never found him, for he hid behind a rock till they were out of sight,
and then made his home in another forest.

[From the Journal of the Anthropological Institute.]



        Adventures of an Indian Brave



A long, long way off, right away in the west of America, there once
lived an old man who had one son.  The country round was covered with
forests, in which dwelt all kinds of wild beasts, and the young man and
his companions used to spend whole days in hunting them, and he was the
finest hunter of all the tribe.

One morning, when winter was coming on, the youth and his companions
set off as usual to bring back some of the mountain goats and deer to
be salted down, as he was afraid of a snow-storm; and if the wind blew
and the snow drifted the forest might be impassable for some weeks.
The old man and the wife, however, would not go out, but remained in
the wigwam making bows and arrows.

It soon grew so cold in the forest that at last one of the men declared
they could walk no more, unless they could manage to warm themselves.

'That is easily done,' said the leader, giving a kick to a large tree.
Flames broke out in the trunk, and before it had burnt up they were as
hot as if it had been summer.  Then they started off to the place where
the goats and deer were to be found in the greatest numbers, and soon
had killed as many as they wanted.  But the leader killed most, as he
was the best shot.

'Now we must cut up the game and divide it,' said he; and so they did,
each one taking his own share; and, walking one behind the other, set
out for the village.  But when they reached a great river the young man
did not want the trouble of carrying his pack any further, and left it
on the bank.

'I am going home another way,' he told his companions.  And taking
another road he reached the village long before they did.

'Have you returned with empty hands?' asked the old man, as his son
opened the door.

'Have I ever done that, that you put me such a question?' asked the
youth.  'No; I have slain enough to feast us for many moons, but it was
heavy, and I left the pack on the bank of the great river.  Give me the
arrows, I will finish making them, and you can go to the river and
bring home the pack!'

So the old man rose and went, and strapped the meat on his shoulder;
but as he was crossing the ford the strap broke and the pack fell into
the river.  He stooped to catch it, but it swirled past him.  He
clutched again; but in doing so he over- balanced himself and was
hurried into some rapids, where he was knocked against some rocks, and
he sank and was drowned, and his body was carried down the stream into
smoother water when it rose to the surface again.  But by this time it
had lost all likeness to a man, and was changed into a piece of wood.

The wood floated on, and the river got bigger and bigger and entered a
new country.  There it was borne by the current close to the shore, and
a woman who was down there washing her clothes caught it as it passed,
and drew it out, saying to herself: 'What a nice smooth plank!  I will
use it as a table to put my food upon.'  And gathering up her clothes
she took the plank with her into her hut.

When her supper time came she stretched the board across two strings
which hung from the roof, and set upon it the pot containing a stew
that smelt very good.  The woman had been working hard all day and was
very hungry, so she took her biggest spoon and plunged it into the pot.
 But what was her astonishment and disgust when both pot and food
vanished instantly before her!

'Oh, you horrid plank, you have brought me ill-luck!' she cried.  And
taking it up she flung it away from her.

 The woman had been surprised before at the disappearance of her food,
but she was more astonished still when, instead of the plank, she
beheld a baby.  However, she was fond of children and had none of her
own, so she made up her mind that she would keep it and take care of
it.  The baby grew and throve as no baby in that country had ever done,
and in four days he was a man, and as tall and strong as any brave of
the tribe.

'You have treated me well,' he said, 'and meat shall never fail to your
house.  But now I must go, for I have much work to do.'

Then he set out for his home.

It took him many days to get there, and when he saw his son sitting in
his place his anger was kindled, and his heart was stirred to take
vengeance upon him.  So he went out quickly into the forest and shed
tears, and each tear became a bird.  'Stay there till I want you,' said
he; and he returned to the hut.

'I saw some pretty new birds, high up in a tree yonder,' he remarked.
And the son answered: 'Show me the way and I will get them for dinner.'

The two went out together, and after walking for about half an hour
they old man stopped.  'That is the tree,' he said.  And the son began
to climb it.

Now a strange thing happened.  The higher the young man climbed the
higher the birds seemed to be, and when he looked down the earth below
appeared no bigger than a star.  Sill he tried to go back, but he could
not, and though he could not see the birds any longer he felt as if
something were dragging him up and up.

He thought that he had been climbing that tree for days, and perhaps he
had, for suddenly a beautiful country, yellow with fields of maize,
stretched before him, and he gladly left the top of the tree and
entered it.  He walked through the maize without knowing where he was
going, when he heard a sound of knocking, and saw two old blind women
crushing their food between two stones.  He crept up to them on tiptoe,
and when one old woman passed her dinner to the other he held out his
hand and took it and ate if for himself.

'How slow you are kneading that cake,' cried the other old woman at
last.

'Why, I have given you your dinner, and what more do you want?' replied
the second.

'You didn't; at least I never got it,' said the other.

'I certainly thought you took it from me; but here is some more.'  And
again the young man stretched out his hand; and the two old women fell
to quarrelling afresh.  But when it happened for the third time the old
women suspected some trick, and one of them exclaimed:

'I am sure there is a man here; tell me, are you not my grandson?'

'Yes,' answered the young man, who wished to please her, 'and in return
for your good dinner I will see if I cannot restore your sight; for I
was taught in the art of healing by the best medicine man in the
tribe.'  And with that he left them, and wandered about till he found
the herb which he wanted.  Then he hastened back to the old women, and
begging them to boil him some water, he threw the herb in.  As soon as
the pot began to sing he took off the lid, and sprinkled the eyes of
the women, and sight came back to them once more.

There was no night in that country, so, instead of going to bed very
early, as he would have done in his own hut, the young man took another
walk.  A splashing noise near by drew him down to a valley through
which ran a large river, and up a waterfall some salmon were leaping.
How their silver sides glistened in the light, and how he longed to
catch some of the great fellows!  But how could he do it?  He had
beheld no one except the old women, and it was not very likely that
they would be able to help him.  So with a sigh he turned away and went
back to them, but, as he walked, a thought struck him.  He pulled out
one of his hairs which hung nearly to his waist, and it instantly
became a strong line, nearly a mile in length.

'Weave me a net that I may catch some salmon,' said he.  And they wove
him the net he asked for, and for many weeks he watched by the river,
only going back to the old women when he wanted a fish cooked.

At last, one day, when he was eating his dinner, the old woman who
always spoke first, said to him:

'We have been very glad to see you, grandson, but now it is time that
you went home.'  And pushing aside a rock, he saw a deep hole, so deep
that he could not see to the bottom.  Then they dragged a basket out of
the house, and tied a rope to it.  'Get in, and wrap this blanket round
your head,' said they; 'and, whatever happens, don't uncover it till
you get to the bottom.'  Then they bade him farewell, and he curled
himself up in the basket.

Down, down, down he went; would he ever stop going?  But when the
basket did stop, the young man forgot what he had been told, and put
his head out to see what was the matter.  In an instant the basket
moved, but, to his horror, instead of going down, he felt himself being
drawn upwards, and shortly after he beheld the faces of the old women.

'You will never see your wife and son if you will not do as you are
bid,' said they.  'Now get in, and do not stir till you hear a crow
calling.'

This time the young man was wiser, and though the basket often stopped,
and strange creatures seemed to rest on him and to pluck at his
blanket, he held it tight till he heard the crow calling.  Then he
flung off the blanket and sprang out, while the basket vanished in the
sky.

He walked on quickly down the track that led to the hut, when, before
him, he saw his wife with his little son on her back.

'Oh! there is father at last,' cried the boy; but the mother bade him
cease from idle talking.

'But, mother, it is true; father is coming!' repeated the child.  And,
to satisfy him, the woman turned round and perceived her husband.

Oh, how glad they all were to be together again!  And when the wind
whistled through the forest, and the snow stood in great banks round
the door, the father used to take the little boy on his knee and tell
him how he caught salmon in the Land of the Sun.

[From the Journal of the Anthropological Institute.]



         How the Stalos Were Tricked



'Mother, I have seen such a wonderful man,' said a little boy one day,
as he entered a hut in Lapland, bearing in his arms the bundle of
sticks he had been sent out to gather.

'Have you, my son; and what was he like?' asked the mother, as she took
off the child's sheepskin coat and shook it on the doorstep.

'Well, I was tired of stooping for the sticks, and was leaning against
a tree to rest, when I heard a noise of 'sh-'sh, among the dead leaves.
 I thought perhaps it was a wolf, so I stood very still.  But soon
there came past a tall man--oh! twice as tall as father--with a long
red beard and a red tunic fastened with a silver girdle, from which
hung a silver-handled knife.  Behind him followed a great dog, which
looked stronger than any wolf, or even a bear.  But why are you so
pale, mother?'

'It was the Stalo,' replied she, her voice trembling; 'Stalo the
man-eater!  You did well to hide, or you might never had come back.
But, remember that, though he is so tall and strong, he is very stupid,
and many a Lapp has escaped from his clutches by playing him some
clever trick.'

Not long after the mother and son had held this talk, it began to be
whispered in the forest that the children of an old man called Patto
had vanished one by one, no one knew whither.  The unhappy father
searched the country for miles round without being able to find as much
as a shoe or a handkerchief, to show him where they had passed, but at
length a little boy came with news that he had seen the Stalo hiding
behind a well, near which the children used to play.  The boy had
waited behind a clump of bushes to see what would happen, and by-and-by
he noticed that the Stalo had laid a cunning trap in the path to the
well, and that anybody who fell over it would roll into the water and
drown there.

And, as he watched, Patto's youngest daughter ran gaily down the path,
till her foot caught in the strings that were stretched across the
steepest place.  She slipped and fell, and in another instant had
rolled into the water within reach of the Stalo.

As soon as Patto heard this tale his heart was filled with rage, and he
vowed to have his revenge.  So he straightway took an old fur coat from
the hook where it hung, and putting it on went out into the forest.
When he reached the path that led to the well he looked hastily round
to be sure that no one was watching him, then laid himself down as if
he had been caught in the snare and had rolled into the well, though he
took care to keep his head out of the water.

Very soon he heard a 'sh-'sh of the leaves, and there was the Stalo
pushing his way through the undergrowth to see what chance he had of a
dinner.  At the first glimpse of Patto's head in the well he laughed
loudly, crying:

'Ha! ha! This time it is the old ass!  I wonder how he will taste?' And
drawing Patto out of the well, he flung him across his shoulders and
carried him home.  Then he tied a cord round him and hung him over the
fire to roast, while he finished a box that he was making before the
door of the hut, which he meant to hold Patto's flesh when it was
cooked.  In a very short time the box was so nearly done that it only
wanted a little more chipping out with an axe; but this part of the
work was easier accomplished indoors, and he called to one of his sons
who were lounging inside to bring him the tool.

The young man looked everywhere, but he could not find the axe, for the
very good reason that Patto had managed to pick it up and hide it in
his clothes.

'Stupid fellow! what is the use of you?' grumbled his father angrily;
and he bade first one and then another of his sons to fetch him the
tool, but they had no better success than their brother.

'I must come myself, I suppose!' said Stalo, putting aside the box.
But, meanwhile, Patto had slipped from the hook and concealed himself
behind the door, so that, as Stalo stepped in, his prisoner raised the
axe, and with one blow the ogre's head was rolling on the ground.  His
sons were so frightened at the sight that they all ran away.

And in this manner Patto avenged his dead children.

But though Stalo was dead, his three sons were still living, and not
very far off either.  They had gone to their mother, who was tending
some reindeer on the pastures, and told her that by some magic, they
knew not what, their father's head had rolled from his body, and they
had been so afraid that something dreadful would happen to them that
they had come to take refuge with her.  The ogress said nothing.  Long
ago she had found out how stupid her sons were, so she just sent them
out to milk the reindeer, while she returned to the other house to bury
her husband's body.

Now, three days' journey from the hut on the pastures two brothers
Sodno dwelt in a small cottage with their sister Lyma, who tended a
large herd of reindeer while they were out hunting.  Of late it had
been whispered from one to another that the three young Stalos were to
