
'Well, now,' cried Wali Dad, as he viewed all the wealth laid at his
door, 'I can well repay that kind prince for his magnificent present of
horses; but to be sure you have been put to great expenses! Still,
if you will accept six mules and their loads, and will take the rest
straight to Nekabad, I shall thank you heartily.'

The merchant felt handsomely repaid for his trouble, and wondered
greatly how the matter would turn out. So he made no difficulty about
it; and as soon as he could get things ready, he set out for Nekabad
with this new and princely gift.

This time the prince, too, was embarrassed, and questioned the merchant
closely. The merchant felt that his credit was at stake, and whilst
inwardly determining that he would not carry the joke any further, could
not help describing Wali Dad in such glowing terms that the old man
would never have known himself had he heard them. The prince, like the
king of Khaistan, determined that he would send in return a gift that
would be truly royal, and which would perhaps prevent the unknown giver
sending him anything more. So he made up a caravan on twenty splendid
horses caparisoned in gold embroidered cloths, with fine morocco saddles
and silver bridles and stirrups, also twenty camels of the best breed,
which had the speed of race-horses, and could swing along at a trot
all day without getting tired; and, lastly, twenty elephants, with
magnificent silver howdahs and coverings of silk embroidered with
pearls. To take care of these animals the merchant hired a little army
of men; and the troop made a great show as they travelled along.

When Wali Dad from a distance saw the cloud of dust which the caravan
made, and the glitter of its appointments, he said to himself: 'By
Allah! here's a grand crowd coming! Elephants, too! Grass will be
selling well to-day!' And with that he hurried off to the jungle and cut
grass as fast as he could. As soon as he got back he found the caravan
had stopped at his door, and the merchant was waiting, a little
anxiously, to tell him the news and to congratulate him upon his riches.

'Riches!' cried Wali Dad, 'what has an old man like me with one foot in
the grave to do with riches? That beautiful young princess, now! She'd
be the one to enjoy all these fine things! Do you take for yourself two
horses, two camels, and two elephants, with all their trappings, and
present the rest to her.'

The merchant at first objected to these remarks, and pointed out to Wali
Dad that he was beginning to feel these embassies a little awkward. Of
course he was himself richly repaid, so far as expenses went; but still
he did not like going so often, and he was getting nervous. At length,
however he consented to go once more, but he promised himself never to
embark on another such enterprise.

So, after a few days' rest, the caravan started off once more for
Khaistan.

The moment the king of Khaistan saw the gorgeous train of men and beasts
entering his palace courtyard, he was so amazed that he hurried down
in person to inquire about it, and became dumb when he heard that
these also were a present from the princely Wali Dad, and were for the
princess, his daughter. He went hastily off to her apartments, and said
to her: 'I tell you what it is, my dear, this man wants to marry you;
that is the meaning of all these presents! There is nothing for it but
that we go and pay him a visit in person. He must be a man of immense
wealth, and as he is so devoted to you, perhaps you might do worse than
marry him!'

The princess agreed with all that her father said, and orders were
issued for vast numbers of elephants and camels, and gorgeous tents
and flags, and litters for the ladies, and horses for the men, to be
prepared without delay, as the king and princess were going to pay a
visit to the great and munificent prince Wali Dad. The merchant, the
king declared, was to guide the party.

The feelings of the poor merchant in this sore dilemma can hardly be
imagined. Willingly would he have run away; but he was treated with so
much hospitality as Wali Dad's representative, that he hardly got an
instant's real peace, and never any opportunity of slipping away. In
fact, after a few days, despair possessed him to such a degree that he
made up his mind that all that happened was fate, and that escape was
impossible; but he hoped devoutly some turn of fortune would reveal
to him a way out of the difficulties which he had, with the best
intentions, drawn upon himself.

On the seventh day they all started, amidst thunderous salutes from
the ramparts of the city, and much dust, and cheering, and blaring of
trumpets.

Day after day they moved on, and every day the poor merchant felt more
ill and miserable. He wondered what kind of death the king would invent
for him, and went through almost as much torture, as he lay awake nearly
the whole of every night thinking over the situation, as he would have
suffered if the king's executioners were already setting to work upon
his neck.

At last they were only one day's march from Wali Dad's little mud home.
Here a great encampment was made, and the merchant was sent on to tell
Wali Dad that the King and Princess of Khaistan had arrived and were
seeking an interview. When the merchant arrived he found the poor old
man eating his evening meal of onions and dry bread, and when he told
him of all that had happened he had not the heart to proceed to load
him with the reproaches which rose to his tongue. For Wali Dad was
overwhelmed with grief and shame for himself, for his friend, and for
the name and honour of the princess; and he wept and plucked at his
beard, and groaned most piteously. With tears he begged the merchant to
detain them for one day by any kind of excuse he could think of, and to
come in the morning to discuss what they should do.

As soon as the merchant was gone Wali Dad made up his mind that there
was only one honourable way out of the shame and distress that he had
created by his foolishness, and that was--to kill himself. So, without
stopping to ask any one's advice, he went off in the middle of the night
to a place where the river wound along at the base of steep rocky cliffs
of great height, and determined to throw himself down and put an end
to his life. When he got to the place he drew back a few paces, took a
little run, and at the very edge of that dreadful black gulf he stopped
short! He COULD not do it!

From below, unseen in the blackness of the deep night shadows, the water
roared and boiled round the jagged rocks--he could picture the place
as he knew it, only ten times more pitiless and forbidding in the
visionless darkness; the wind soughed through the gorge with fearsome
sighs, and rustlings and whisperings, and the bushes and grasses that
grew in the ledges of the cliffs seemed to him like living creatures
that danced and beckoned, shadowy and indistinct. An owl laughed 'Hoo!
hoo!' almost in his face, as he peered over the edge of the gulf, and
the old man threw himself back in a perspiration of horror. He was
afraid! He drew back shuddering, and covering his face in his hands he
wept aloud.

Presently he was aware of a gentle radiance that shed itself before him.
Surely morning was not already coming to hasten and reveal his disgrace!
He took his hands from before his face, and saw before him two lovely
beings whom his instinct told him were not mortal, but were Peris from
Paradise.

'Why do you weep, old man?' said one, in a voice as clear and musical as
that of the bulbul.

'I weep for shame,' replied he.

'What do you here?' questioned the other.

'I came here to die,' said Wali Dad. And as they questioned him, he
confessed all his story.

Then the first stepped forward and laid a hand upon his shoulder,
and Wali Dad began to feel that something strange--what, he did not
know--was happening to him. His old cotton rags of clothes were changed
to beautiful linen and embroidered cloth; on his hard, bare feet were
warm, soft shoes, and on his head a great jewelled turban. Round his
neck there lay a heavy golden chain, and the little old bent sickle,
which he cut grass with, and which hung in his waistband, had turned
into a gorgeous scimetar, whose ivory hilt gleamed in the pale light
like snow in moonlight. As he stood wondering, like a man in a dream,
the other peri waved her hand and bade him turn and see; and, lo! before
him a noble gateway stood open. And up an avenue of giant place trees
the peris led him, dumb with amazement. At the end of the avenue, on the
very spot where his hut had stood, a gorgeous palace appeared, ablaze
with myriads of lights. Its great porticoes and verandahs were occupied
by hurrying servants, and guards paced to and fro and saluted him
respectfully as he drew near, along mossy walks and through sweeping
grassy lawns where fountains were playing and flowers scented the air.
Wali Dad stood stunned and helpless.

'Fear not,' said one of the peris; 'go to your house, and learn that God
rewards the simple-hearted.'

With these words they both disappeared and left him. He walked on,
thinking still that he must be dreaming. Very soon he retired to rest in
a splendid room, far grander than anything he had ever dreamed of.

When morning dawned he woke, and found that the palace, and himself, and
his servants were all real, and that he was not dreaming after all!

If he was dumbfounded, the merchant, who was ushered into his presence
soon after sunrise, was much more so. He told Wali Dad that he had not
slept all night, and by the first streak of daylight had started to seek
out his friend. And what a search he had had! A great stretch of wild
jungle country had, in the night, been changed into parks and gardens;
and if it had not been for some of Wali Dad's new servants, who found
him and brought him to the palace, he would have fled away under the
impression that his trouble had sent him crazy, and that all he saw was
only imagination.

Then Wali Dad told the merchant all that had happened. By his advice he
sent an invitation to the king and princess of Khaistan to come and be
his guests, together with all their retinue and servants, down to the
very humblest in the camp.

For three nights and days a great feast was held in honour of the royal
guests. Every evening the king and his nobles were served on golden
plates and from golden cups; and the smaller people on silver plates and
from silver cups; and each evening each guest was requested to keep the
places and cups that they had used as a remembrance of the occasion.
Never had anything so splendid been seen. Besides the great dinners,
there were sports and hunting, and dances, and amusements of all sorts.

On the fourth day the king of Khaistan took his host aside, and asked
him whether it was true, as he had suspected, that he wished to marry
his daughter. But Wali Dad, after thanking him very much for the
compliment, said that he had never dreamed of so great an honour, and
that he was far too old and ugly for so fair a lady; but he begged the
king to stay with him until he could send for the Prince of Nekabad, who
was a most excellent, brave, and honourable young man, and would surely
be delighted to try to win the hand of the beautiful princess.

To this the king agreed, and Wali Dad sent the merchant to Nekabad, with
a number of attendants, and with such handsome presents that the prince
came at once, fell head over ears in love with the princess, and married
her at Wali Dad's palace amidst a fresh outburst of rejoicings.

And now the King of Khaistan and the Prince and Princess of Nekabad,
each went back to their own country; and Wali Dad lived to a good
old age, befriending all who were in trouble and preserving, in his
prosperity, the simple-hearted and generous nature that he had when he
was only Wali Dad Gunjay, the grass cutter.

[Told the author by an Indian.]




Tale of a Tortoise and of a Mischievous Monkey



Once upon a time there was a country where the rivers were larger, and
the forests deeper, than anywhere else. Hardly any men came there, and
the wild creatures had it all to themselves, and used to play all sorts
of strange games with each other. The great trees, chained one to the
other by thick flowering plants with bright scarlet or yellow blossoms,
were famous hiding-places for the monkeys, who could wait unseen, till a
puma or an elephant passed by, and then jump on their backs and go for
a ride, swinging themselves up by the creepers when they had had enough.
Near the rivers huge tortoises were to be found, and though to our eyes
a tortoise seems a dull, slow thing, it is wonderful to think how clever
they were, and how often they outwitted many of their livelier friends.

There was one tortoise in particular that always managed to get the
better of everybody, and many were the tales told in the forest of his
great deeds. They began when he was quite young, and tired of staying at
home with his father and mother. He left them one day, and walked off
in search of adventures. In a wide open space surrounded by trees he met
with an elephant, who was having his supper before taking his evening
bath in the river which ran close by. 'Let us see which of us two is
strongest,' said the young tortoise, marching up to the elephant. 'Very
well,' replied the elephant, much amused at the impertinence of the
little creature; 'when would you like the trial to be?'

'In an hour's time; I have some business to do first,' answered the
tortoise. And he hastened away as fast as his short legs would carry
him.

In a pool of the river a whale was resting, blowing water into the air
and making a lovely fountain. The tortoise, however, was too young and
too busy to admire such things, and he called to the whale to stop, as
he wanted to speak to him. 'Would you like to try which of us is the
stronger?' said he. The whale looked at him, sent up another fountain,
and answered: 'Oh, yes; certainly. When do you wish to begin? I am quite
ready.'

'Then give me one of your longest bones, and I will fasten it to my leg.
When I give the signal, you must pull, and we will see which can pull
the hardest.'

'Very good,' replied the whale; and he took out one of his bones and
passed it to the tortoise.

The tortoise picked up the end of the bone in his mouth and went back
to the elephant. 'I will fasten this to your leg,' said he, 'in the same
way as it is fastened to mine, and we must both pull as hard as we can.
We shall soon see which is the stronger.' So he wound it carefully
round the elephant's leg, and tied it in a firm knot. 'Now!' cried he,
plunging into a thick bush behind him.

The whale tugged at one end, and the elephant tugged at the other, and
neither had any idea that he had not the tortoise for his foe. When the
whale pulled hardest the elephant was dragged into the water; and when
the elephant pulled the hardest the whale was hauled on to the land.
They were very evenly matched, and the battle was a hard one.

At last they were quite tired, and the tortoise, who was watching, saw
that they could play no more. So he crept from his hiding-place, and
dipping himself in the river, he went to the elephant and said: 'I see
that you really are stronger than I thought. Suppose we give it up for
to-day?' Then he dried himself on some moss and went to the whale and
said: 'I see that you really are stronger than I thought. Suppose we
give it up for to-day?'

The two adversaries were only too glad to be allowed to rest, and
believed to the end of their days that, after all, the tortoise was
stronger than either of them.

A day or two later the young tortoise was taking a stroll, when he met
a fox, and stopped to speak to him. 'Let us try,' said he in a careless
manner, 'which of us can lie buried in the ground during seven years.'

'I shall be delighted,' answered the fox, 'only I would rather that you
began.'

'It is all the same to me,' replied the tortoise; 'if you come round
this way to-morrow you will see that I have fulfilled my part of the
bargain.'

So he looked about for a suitable place, and found a convenient hole at
the foot of an orange tree. He crept into it, and the next morning the
fox heaped up the earth round him, and promised to feed him every day
with fresh fruit. The fox so far kept his word that each morning when
the sun rose he appeared to ask how the tortoise was getting on. 'Oh,
very well; but I wish you would give me some fruit,' replied he.

'Alas! the fruit is not ripe enough yet for you to eat,' answered the
fox, who hoped that the tortoise would die of hunger long before the
seven years were over.

'Oh dear, oh dear! I am so hungry!' cried the tortoise.

'I am sure you must be; but it will be all right to-morrow,' said the
fox, trotting off, not knowing that the oranges dropped down the hollow
trunk, straight into the tortoise's hole, and that he had as many as he
could possibly eat.

So the seven years went by; and when the tortoise came out of his hole
he was as fat as ever.

Now it was the fox's turn, and he chose his hole, and the tortoise
heaped the earth round, promising to return every day or two with a nice
young bird for his dinner. 'Well, how are you getting on?' he would ask
cheerfully when he paid his visits.

'Oh, all right; only I wish you had brought a bird with you,' answered
the fox.

'I have been so unlucky, I have never been able to catch one,' replied
the tortoise. 'However, I shall be more fortunate to-morrow, I am sure.'

But not many to-morrows after, when the tortoise arrived with his usual
question: 'Well, how are you getting on?' he received no answer, for the
fox was lying in his hole quite still, dead of hunger.

By this time the tortoise was grown up, and was looked up to throughout
the forest as a person to be feared for his strength and wisdom. But he
was not considered a very swift runner, until an adventure with a deer
added to his fame.

One day, when he was basking in the sun, a stag passed by, and stopped
for a little conversation. 'Would you care to see which of us can run
fastest?' asked the tortoise, after some talk. The stag thought the
