sail.  But our luck seemed gone. We lay for days scarce moving
through the water, with the sail hanging idle and the sun blazing
down upon us. We had not been careful enough of the water at first,
making sure that in three or four days we should sight land, and
when after three days we put ourselves on short rations, there was
scarce a gallon of water left.

"It was a week after that before we saw a sail. Two of the men had
jumped overboard raving mad, the rest were lying well-nigh senseless
in the bottom of the boat. Only the woman was sitting up, holding
her child in her arms. She was very weak, too; but she had never
complained, never doubted for a moment. Her eyes went from the
child's face over the sea to look for the help she felt would come,
and back again, and at last she said quite quiet and natural:

"'There is the ship. I knew it must come to-day, for my child could
not live through another night.'

"We thought she was dreaming or off her head. But one of us made
a shift to stand up and look, and when he screamed out 'A sail!  A
sail!' two of us who were strong enough looked out also. There she
was and sailing, as we could soon see, on a line as directly for
us as if they had our bearings, and had been sent to fetch us.

"It was not until evening that she came up, though she was bringing
a light breeze along with her. And when we were lifted on to her
deck, and had water held to our lips, and knew that we were safe,
we felt, I expect, much the same as you do now, monsieur, that it
was the good God himself who had assuredly saved us from death.
That was my last voyage, for Henriette was waiting for me at home,
and I had promised her that after we had gone to church together I
would go no more to distant countries, but would settle down here
as a fisherman."

"That was a narrow escape indeed, Pierre," Harry said as he worked
away with the tar brush. "That idea of the turtle was a splendid
one, and you may well say that God put it into the woman's head,
for without it you could never have lived till the ship found you."

In the meantime Henriette had made her rounds to the cottage to see
what remarks had been made as to the coming of her visitors.  She
saw that everyone had guessed that the girls who had been picked
up by Pierre were victims of the massacre, but no one supposed that
it was the result of intention.

"Ah, Mere Gounard, but your good man was fortunate to-day," one
of the women said. "My man did not go out. We heard what was doing
at Nantes, and he had not the heart to go; besides, who would buy
fish caught to-day? If he had thought of it he would have gone too,
and perhaps he would have picked up somebody, as you have done.
Poor things, what an escape for them!"

"It is wonderful that they have come round," Henriette said.  "It
was lucky my husband had some brandy in the boat. He thought for a
time he would never bring the youngest round. They are only young
girls. What harm could they have done that those monsters at Nantes
should try to murder them? There is no fear, I hope, that any in
the village will say a word about it."

"What!" the woman said indignantly. "Do you think that anyone
here would betray a comrade to the Reds? Why, we would tear him to
pieces."

"No, no," Henriette said; "I never thought for a moment that anyone
would do it intentionally; but the boys might let slip a word
carelessly which might bring them down upon us."

"We will take care of that," the woman said. "Make your mind easy.
Not a soul outside the village will ever know of it."

"And," Henriette added, "one of them has some money hidden upon her,
and she told me just before I came out, when I was saying that the
village would have a bad time now the fishing was spoiled--that
as she hoped to cross to England in a few days, and would have
no need of the money, for it seems that she can get plenty over
there, she will give five crowns to each house in the village as
a thank-offering."

"Well, that is not to be despised," the woman said. "We shall have
a hard time of it for a bit, and that will carry us on through it.
You are sure she can spare it; because we would rather starve than
take it if she cannot."

Henriette assured her that her visitor said she could afford it
well.

"Well, then, it's a lucky day for the village, Mere Gounard, that
your husband picked them up."

"Well, I will go back now," Henriette said. "Will you go round the
village and tell the others about silencing the children? I must
get some broth ready by the time these poor creatures wake."

The next morning Jeanne appeared at breakfast in her dress as
a fish-girl, but few words were spoken between her and Harry, for
the fisherman and his wife were present.

"How is Virginie?" he asked.

"She's better, but she is weak and languid, so I told her she must
stop in bed for to-day. Do not look anxious. I have no doubt that
she will be well enough to be up to-morrow. She has been sleeping
ever since she went to bed yesterday, and when she woke she had
a basin of broth. I think by to-morrow she will be well enough to
get up. But it will be some time before she is herself again. It
is a terrible strain for her to have gone through, but she was very
brave all the time we were in prison. She had such confidence in
you, she felt sure that you would manage somehow to rescue us."

After breakfast Jeanne strolled down with Harry to the river-side.

"I feel strange with you, Harry," she said. "Before you seemed
almost like a brother, and now it is so different."

"Yes; but happier?" Harry asked gently.

"Oh, so much happier, Harry! But there is one thing I want to tell
you. It might seem strange to you that I should tell you I loved you
on my own account without your speaking to the head of the family."

"But there was no time for that, Jeanne," Harry said smiling.

"No," Jeanne said simply. "I suppose it would have been the same
anyhow; but I want to tell you, Harry, that in the first letter
which she sent me when she was in prison, Marie told me, that as
she might not see me again, she thought it right I should know that
our father and mother had told her that night we left home that
they thought I cared for you. You didn't think so, did you, Harry?"
she broke off with a vivid blush. "You did not think I cared for
you before you cared for me?"

"No, indeed, Jeanne," he said earnestly. "It never entered my mind.
You see, dear, up to the beginning of that time I only felt as a
boy, and in England lads of eighteen or nineteen seldom think about
such things at all. It was only afterwards, when somehow the danger
and the anxiety seemed to make a man of me, when I saw how brave
and thoughtful and unselfish you were, that I knew I loved you, and
felt that if you could some day love me, I should be the happiest
fellow alive. Before that I thought of you as a dear little girl
who inclined to make rather too much of me because of that dog
business.  And did you really care for me then?"

"I never thought of it in that way, Harry, any more than you did,
but I know now that my mother was right, and that I loved you all
along without knowing it. My dear father and mother told Marie
that they thought I was fond of you, and that, if at any time you
should get fond of me too and ask for my hand, they gave their
approval beforehand, for they were sure that you would make me
happy.

"So they told Marie and Ernest, who, if ill came to them, would be
the heads of the family, that I had their consent to marry you. It
makes me happy to know this, Harry."

"I am very glad, too, dear," Harry said earnestly.

"It is very satisfactory for you, and it is very pleasant to me to
know that they were ready to trust you to me. Ah!" he said suddenly,
"that was what was in the letter. I wondered a little at the time,
for somehow after that, Jeanne, you were a little different with
me. I thought at first I might somehow have offended you. But I did
not think that long," he went on, as Jeanne  uttered an indignant
exclamation, "because if anything offended you, you always spoke
out frankly. Still I wondered over it for some time, and certainly
I was never near guessing the truth."

"I could not help being a little different," Jeanne said shyly. "I
had never thought of it before, and though I am sure it made me
happy, I could not feel quite the same with you, especially as I
knew that you never thought of me like that."

"But you thought of me so afterwards, Jeanne?"

"Sometimes just for a moment, but I tried not to think of it,
Harry. We were so strangely placed, and it made it easier for you
to be a brother, and I felt sure you would not speak till we were
safely in England, and I was in Ernest's care. But," she said
with a little laugh, "you were nearly speaking that evening in the
cottage when you felt so despairing."

"Very nearly, Jeanne; I did so want comfort."

And so they talked happily together for an hour.

"I wonder Pierre does not come down to his boat," Harry said at
last. "There were several more things wanting doing to it. Why,
there he is calling. Surely it can never be dinner-time; but that's
what he says. It doesn't seem an hour since breakfast."

Jeanne hurried on into the hut.

"Why, Pierre," Harry said to the fisherman, who was waiting outside
for him, "I thought you were going on with your boat."

"So I was, monsieur, but Henriette told me I should be in the way."

"In the way, Pierre!" Harry repeated in surprise.

"Ah, monsieur," Pierre said with a twinkle in his eye, "you have
been deceiving us. My wife saw it in a moment when the young lady
came to breakfast.

"'Brother!' she said to me when you went out; 'don't tell me!
Monsieur is the young lady's lover. Brother and sister don't look
at each other like that. Why, one could see it with half an eye.'

"Your wife is right, Pierre; mademoiselle is my fiance. I am really
an Englishman. She and her sister had their old nurse with them,
till the latter died some three weeks since; but I have always been
called their brother, because it made it easier for her."

"Quite right, monsieur; but my wife and I are glad to see that it
is otherwise, and that, after all you have risked for that pretty
creature, you are going to be happy together. My wife was not
surprised.  Women are sharper than men in these matters, and she
said to me, when she heard what you were going to do to save them,
'I would wager, Pierre, that one of these mesdemoiselles is not
monsieur's sister.  Men will do a great deal for their sister, but
I never heard of a man throwing away his life as he is going to do
on the mere chance of saving one.'"

"I should have done just the same had it been one of my sisters,"
Harry said a little indignantly.

"Perhaps you would, monsieur, I do not say no," the fisherman said,
shaking his head; "but brothers do not often do so."

A stop was put to the conversation by Henriette putting her head
outside the door and demanding angrily what they were stopping
talking there for when the fish was getting cold.

In the evening Adolphe and his wife came in.

"Ah, mademoiselle," the woman said as she embraced Jeanne with tears
in her eyes, "how thankful I am to see you again! I never thought
I should do so. My heart almost stopped beating yesterday when
I heard the guns. I and my little one were on our knees praying
to the good God for the dear lady who had saved her life. Adolphe
had spoken hopefully, but it hardly seemed to me that it could be,
and when he brought back the news that he had left you all safely
here, I could hardly believe it was true."

"And I must thank you also, mademoiselle," Adolphe said, "for saving
the life of my little one. I never expected to see her alive again,
and when the lugger made fast to the wharf I was afraid to go home,
and I hung about till Marthe had heard we were in and came down
to me with Julie in her arms, looking almost herself again. Ah,
mademoiselle, you cannot tell how glad I was when she told me that
there was a way of paying some part of my debt to you."

"You have been able to pay more than your debt," Jeanne said gently;
"if I saved one life you have helped to save three."

"No, we shall be only quits, mademoiselle, for what would Marthe's
life and mine be worth if the child had died?

"There are fresh notices stuck up," he went on, "warning all
masters of ships, fishermen, and others, against taking passengers
on board, and saying that the penalty of assisting the enemies of
France to escape from justice is death."

"That is rather serious," Harry said.

"It is nothing," Adolphe replied confidently. "After yesterday's
work there is not a sailor or fisherman in the port but would do all
he could to help people to escape from the hands of the butchers,
and once on board, it will help you. You may be sure the sailors
will do their best to run away if they can, or to hide any on
board, should they be overhauled, now they know that they will be
guillotined if anyone is found. However, our captain has made the
agreement, and he is a man of his word; besides, he hates the Reds.
I have been helping ship the casks to-day, and we have stowed them
so as to leave space into which your sisters can crawl and the
entrance be stopped up with casks, if we should be overhauled. As
for you, monsieur, you will pass anywhere as one of the crew, and
we have arranged that one of the men shall at the last moment stay
behind, so that the number will be right, and you will answer to
his name. We have thought matters over, you see, and I can tell
you that the captain does it more because he hates the Reds than
for the money. The day before, he would give me no answer. He said
he thought the risk was too great; but when I saw him last night he
was a different man altogether. His face was as white as a sheet,
and his eyes seemed on fire, and he said, 'I will take your friends,
Adolphe. I would take them without a penny. I should never sleep
again if, owing to me, they fell into the hands of these monsters.'
So you see he is in it heart and soul."

After half an hour's talk Adolphe and Marthe took their leave.  Both
refused the reward which Harry had promised, but Harry insisted,
and at last Jeanne said:

"You can refuse for yourselves, but you will make me unhappy if
you do not take it. Put it by for Julie; it will help swell her dot
when she marries, and will set her husband up in a good fishing-boat
if she takes to a sailor."

So it was arranged, and Adolphe and his wife went off invoking
blessings on the heads of the fugitives. At daybreak the party took
their places in the boat with the fishermen. Virginie was still
weak, but was able to walk with Harry's help.  Half an hour later
a lugger was seen coming down with the wind and tide. She carried
a small white flag flying on the mizzen.

"That is her," the fisherman said; "that is the signal."

He rowed out into the middle of the river. In a few minutes the
lugger came dashing along, her course took her within a few feet
of the boat, a rope was thrown, and in an instant the boat was
tearing through the water alongside her. Half a dozen hands were
stretched out, the girls and Harry sprang on board, the rope was
cast off, and the fisherman, with a cheery "God speed you," put
out his oars again and rowed to shore.




CHAPTER XV

England


"Go below, mesdemoiselles," the captain of the lugger said as soon
as they had put foot on the deck. "If anyone on the shore were to
see us as we ran down, and notice women on deck, he would think it
strange. At anyrate it's best to be on the safe side."

So saying he led the way to his cabin below.

"It is a rough place, mesdemoiselles," he said, removing his cap,
"but it is better than the prisons at Nantes. I am sorry to say
that when we get down near the forts I shall have to ask you to
hide down below the casks. I heard last night that in future every
boat going out of the river, even if it is only a fishing-boat,
is to be searched. But you needn't be afraid; we have constructed
a hiding-place, where they will never find you unless they unloaded
the whole lugger, and that there is no chance of their doing."

"We do not mind where we hide, captain," Jeanne said. "We have been
hiding for the last six months, and we are indeed grateful to you
for having consented to take us with you."

"I hope that you will not be the last that the Trois Freres will
carry across," the captain said. "Whatever be the risk, in future
I will take any fugitives who wish to escape to England. At first
I was against the government, for I thought the people were taxed
