
"Did you think--" he said slowly--"did you EVER think that perhaps HE
knew where the descendant of the Lost Prince was?"

Marco answered even more slowly.

"If any one knew--surely he might.  He has known so much," he said.

"Listen to this!" broke forth The Rat.  "I believe he has gone to TELL
the people.  If he does--if he could show them--all the country would
run mad with joy.  It wouldn't be only the Secret Party.  All Samavia
would rise and follow any flag he chose to raise.  They've prayed for
the Lost Prince for five hundred years, and if they believed they'd got
him once more, they'd fight like madmen for him.  But there would not
be any one to fight.  They'd ALL want the same thing!  If they could
see the man with Ivor's blood in his veins, they'd feel he had come
back to them--risen from the dead.  They'd believe it!"

He beat his fists together in his frenzy of excitement.  "It's the
time!  It's the time!" he cried.  "No man could let such a chance go
by! He MUST tell them--he MUST.  That MUST be what he's gone for.  He
knows--he knows--he's always known!"  And he threw himself back on his
sofa and flung his arms over his face, lying there panting.

"If it is the time," said Marco in a low, strained voice--"if it is,
and he knows--he will tell them."  And he threw his arms up over his
own face and lay quite still.

Neither of them said another word, and the street lamp shone in on them
as if it were waiting for something to happen.  But nothing happened.
In time they were asleep.



XXIX

'TWIXT NIGHT AND MORNING

After this, they waited.  They did not know what they waited for, nor
could they guess even vaguely how the waiting would end.  All that
Lazarus could tell them he told.  He would have been willing to stand
respectfully for hours relating to Marco the story of how the period of
their absence had passed for his Master and himself.  He told how
Loristan had spoken each day of his son, how he had often been pale
with anxiousness, how in the evenings he had walked to and fro in his
room, deep in thought, as he looked down unseeingly at the carpet.

"He permitted me to talk of you, sir," Lazarus said.  "I saw that he
wished to hear your name often.  I reminded him of the times  when you
had been so young that most children of your age would have been in the
hands of nurses, and yet you were strong and silent and sturdy and
traveled with us as if you were not a child at all--never crying when
you were tired and were not properly fed.  As if you understood--as if
you understood," he added, proudly.  "If, through the power of God a
creature can be a man at six years old, you were that one.  Many a dark
day I have looked into your solemn, watching eyes, and have been half
afraid; because that a child should answer one's gaze so gravely seemed
almost an unearthly thing."

"The chief thing I remember of those days," said Marco, "is that he was
with me, and that whenever I was hungry or tired, I knew he must be,
too."

The feeling that they were "waiting" was so intense that it filled the
days with strangeness.  When the postman's knock was heard at the door,
each of them endeavored not to start.  A letter might some day come
which would tell them--they did not know what.  But no letters came.
When they went out into the streets, they found themselves hurrying on
their way back in spite of themselves.  Something might have happened.
Lazarus read the papers faithfully, and in the evening told Marco and
The Rat all the news it was "well that they should hear."  But the
disorders of Samavia had ceased to occupy much space.  They had become
an old story, and after the excitement of the assassination of Michael
Maranovitch had died out, there seemed to be a lull in events.
Michael's son had not dared to try to take his father's place, and
there were rumors that he also had been killed.  The head of the
Iarovitch had declared himself king but had not been crowned because of
disorders in his own party. The country seemed existing in a nightmare
of suffering, famine and suspense.

"Samavia is 'waiting' too," The Rat broke forth one night as they
talked together, "but it won't wait long--it can't.  If I were a
Samavian and in Samavia--"

"My father is a Samavian and he is in Samavia," Marco's grave young
voice interposed.

The Rat flushed red as he realized what he had said. "What a fool I am!"
he groaned. "I--I beg your pardon--sir." He stood up when he said the last
words and added the "sir" as if he suddenly realized that there was a
distance between them which was something akin to the distance between
youth and maturity--but yet was not the same.

"You are a good Samavian but--you forget," was Marco's answer.

Lazarus' intense grimness increased with each day that passed. The
ceremonious respectfulness of his manner toward Marco increased also.
It seemed as if the more anxious he felt the more formal and stately
his bearing became.  It was as though he braced his own courage by
doing the smallest things life in the back sitting-room required as if
they were of the dignity of services performed in a much larger place
and under much more imposing circumstances.  The Rat found himself
feeling almost as if he were an equerry in a court, and that dignity
and ceremony were necessary on his own part.  He began to experience a
sense of being somehow a person of rank, for whom doors were opened
grandly and who had vassals at his command.  The watchful obedience of
fifty vassals embodied itself in the manner of Lazarus.

"I am glad," The Rat said once, reflectively, "that, after all my
father was once--different.  It makes it easier to learn things
perhaps.  If he had not talked to me about people who--well, who had
never seen places like Bone Court--this might have been harder for me
to understand."

When at last they managed to call The Squad together, and went to spend
a morning at the Barracks behind the churchyard, that body of armed men
stared at their commander in great and amazed uncertainty.  They felt
that something had happened to him.  They did not know what had
happened, but it was some experience which had made him mysteriously
different.  He did not look like Marco, but in some extraordinary way
he seemed more akin to him.  They only knew that some necessity in
Loristan's affairs had taken the two away from London and the Game.
Now they had come back, and they seemed older.

At first, The Squad felt awkward and shuffled its feet uncomfortably.
After the first greetings it did not know exactly what to say.  It was
Marco who saved the situation.

"Drill us first," he said to The Rat, "then we can talk about the Game."

"'Tention!" shouted The Rat, magnificently.  And then they forgot
everything else and sprang into line.  After the drill was ended, and
they sat in a circle on the broken flags, the Game became more
resplendent than it had ever been.

"I've had time to read and work out new things," The Rat said. "Reading
is like traveling."

Marco himself sat and listened, enthralled by the adroitness of the
imagination he displayed.  Without revealing a single dangerous fact he
built up, of their journeyings and experiences, a totally new structure
of adventures which would have fired the whole being of any group of
lads.  It was safe to describe places and people, and he so described
them that The Squad squirmed in its delight at feeling itself marching
in a procession attending the Emperor in Vienna; standing in line
before palaces; climbing, with knapsacks strapped tight, up precipitous
mountain roads; defending mountain-fortresses; and storming Samavian
castles.

The Squad glowed and exulted.  The Rat glowed and exulted himself.
Marco watched his sharp-featured, burning-eyed face with wonder and
admiration.  This strange power of making things alive was, he knew,
what his father would call "genius."

"Let's take the oath of 'legiance again," shouted Cad, when the Game
was over for the morning.

"The papers never said nothin' more about the Lost Prince, but we are
all for him yet!  Let's take it!"  So they stood in line again, Marco
at the head, and renewed their oath.

"The sword in my hand--for Samavia!

"The heart in my breast--for Samavia!

"The swiftness of my sight, the thought of my brain, the life of my
life--for Samavia.

"Here grow twelve men--for Samavia.

"God be thanked!"

It was more solemn than it had been the first time.  The Squad felt it
tremendously.  Both Cad and Ben were conscious that thrills ran down
their spines into their boots.  When Marco and The Rat left them, they
first stood at salute and then broke out into a ringing cheer.

On their way home, The Rat asked Marco a question.

"Did you see Mrs. Beedle standing at the top of the basement steps and
looking after us when we went out this morning?"

Mrs. Beedle was the landlady of the lodgings at No. 7 Philibert Place.
She was a mysterious and dusty female, who lived in the "cellar
kitchen" part of the house and was seldom seen by her lodgers.

"Yes," answered Marco, "I have seen her two or three times lately, and
I do not think I ever saw her before.  My father has never seen her,
though Lazarus says she used to watch him round corners.  Why is she
suddenly so curious about us?"

"I'd like to know," said The Rat.  "I've been trying to work it out.
Ever since we came back, she's been peeping round the door of the
kitchen stairs, or over balustrades, or through the cellar-kitchen
windows.  I believe she wants to speak to you, and knows Lazarus won't
let her if he catches her at it.  When Lazarus is about, she always
darts back."

"What does she want to say?" said Marco.

"I'd like to know," said The Rat again.

When they reached No. 7 Philibert Place, they found out, because when
the door opened they saw at the top of cellar-kitchen stairs at the end
of the passage, the mysterious Mrs. Beedle, in her dusty black dress
and with a dusty black cap on, evidently having that minute mounted
from her subterranean hiding-place.  She had come up the steps so
quickly that Lazarus had not yet seen her.

"Young Master Loristan!" she called out authoritatively. Lazarus
wheeled about fiercely.

"Silence!" he commanded.  "How dare you address the young Master?"

She snapped her fingers at him, and marched forward folding  her arms
tightly.  "You mind your own business," she said.  "It's young Master
Loristan I'm speaking to, not his servant.  It's time he was talked to
about this."

"Silence, woman!" shouted Lazarus.

"Let her speak," said Marco.  "I want to hear.  What is it you wish to
say, Madam?  My father is not here."

"That's just what I want to find out about," put in the woman. "When is
he coming back?"

"I do not know," answered Marco.

"That's it," said Mrs. Beedle.  "You're old enough to understand that
two big lads and a big fellow like that can't have food and lodgin's
for nothing.  You may say you don't live high--and you don't--but
lodgin's are lodgin's and rent is rent. If your father's coming back
and you can tell me when, I mayn't be obliged to let the rooms over
your heads; but I know too much about foreigners to let bills run when
they are out of sight. Your father's out of sight.  He," jerking her
head towards Lazarus, "paid me for last week.  How do I know he will
pay me for this week!"

"The money is ready," roared Lazarus.

The Rat longed to burst forth.  He knew what people in Bone Court said
to a woman like that; he knew the exact words and phrases. But they
were not words and phrases an aide-de-camp might deliver himself of in
the presence of his superior officer; they were not words and phrases
an equerry uses at court.  He dare not ALLOW himself to burst forth.
He stood with flaming eyes and a flaming face, and bit his lips till
they bled.  He wanted to strike with his crutches.  The son of Stefan
Loristan!  The Bearer of the Sign!  There sprang up before his furious
eyes the picture of the luridly lighted cavern and the frenzied crowd
of men kneeling at this same boy's feet, kissing them, kissing his
hands, his garments, the very earth he stood upon, worshipping him,
while above the altar the kingly young face looked on with the nimbus
of light like a halo above it.  If he dared speak his mind now, he felt
he could have endured it better.  But being an aide-de-camp he could
not.

"Do you want the money now?" asked Marco.  "It is only the beginning of
the week and we do not owe it to you until the week is over.  Is it
that you want to have it now?"

Lazarus had become deadly pale.  He looked huge in his fury, and he
looked dangerous.

"Young Master," he said slowly, in a voice as deadly as his pallor, and
he actually spoke low, "this woman--"

Mrs. Beedle drew back towards the cellar-kitchen steps.

"There's police outside," she shrilled.  "Young Master Loristan, order
him to stand back."

"No one will hurt you," said Marco.  "If you have the money here,
Lazarus, please give it to me."

Lazarus literally ground his teeth.  But he drew himself up and saluted
with ceremony.  He put his hand in his breast pocket and produced an
old leather wallet.  There were but a few coins in it.  He pointed to a
gold one.

"I obey you, sir--since I must--" he said, breathing hard. "That one
will pay her for the week."

Marco took out the sovereign and held it out to the woman.

"You hear what he says," he said.  "At the end of this week if there is
not enough to pay for the next, we will go."

Lazarus looked so like a hyena, only held back from springing by chains
of steel, that the dusty Mrs. Beedle was afraid to take the money.

"If you say that I shall not lose it, I'll wait until the week's
ended," she said.  "You're nothing but a lad, but you're like your
father.  You've got a way that a body can trust.  If he was here and
said he hadn't the money but he'd have it in time, I'd wait if it was
for a month.  He'd pay it if he said he would. But he's gone; and two
boys and a fellow like that one don't seem much to depend on.  But I'll
trust YOU."

"Be good enough to take it," said Marco.  And he put the coin in her
hand and turned into the back sitting-room as if he did not see her.

The Rat and Lazarus followed him.

"Is there so little money left?" said Marco.  "We have always had very
little.  When we had less than usual, we lived in poorer places  and
were hungry if it was necessary.  We know how to go hungry.  One does
not die of it."

The big eyes under Lazarus' beetling brows filled with tears.

"No, sir," he said, "one does not die of hunger.  But the insult--the
insult!  That is not endurable."

"She would not have spoken if my father had been here," Marco said.
"And it is true that boys like us have no money.  Is there enough to
pay for another week?"

"Yes, sir," answered Lazarus, swallowing hard as if he had a lump in
his throat, "perhaps enough for two--if we eat but little.  If--if the
Master would accept money from those who would give it, he would alway
have had enough.  But how could such a one as he?  How could he?  When
he went away, he thought--he thought that--" but there he stopped
himself suddenly.

"Never mind," said Marco.  "Never mind.  We will go away the day we can
pay no more."

"I can go out and sell newspapers," said The Rat's sharp voice.

"I've done it before.  Crutches help you to sell them.  The platform
would sell 'em faster still.  I'll go out on the platform."

"I can sell newspapers, too," said Marco.

Lazarus uttered an exclamation like a groan.

"Sir," he cried, "no, no!  Am I not here to go out and look for work?
I can carry loads.  I can run errands."

"We will all three begin to see what we can do," Marco said.

Then--exactly as had happened on the day of their return from their
journey--there arose in the road outside the sound of newsboys
shouting.  This time the outcry seemed even more excited than before.
The boys were running and yelling and there seemed more of them than
usual.  And above all other words was heard "Samavia!  Samavia!"  But
to-day The Rat did not rush to the door at the first cry.  He stood
still--for several seconds they all three stood still--listening.
Afterwards each one remembered and told the others that he had stood
still because some strange, strong feeling held him WAITING as if to
hear some great thing.

       *       *       *       *       *
	   
It was Lazarus who went out of the room first and The Rat and Marco
followed him.

One of the upstairs lodgers had run down in haste and opened the door
to buy newspapers and ask questions.  The newsboys were wild with
excitement and danced about as they shouted.  The piece of news they
were yelling had evidently a popular quality.

The lodger bought two papers and was handing out coppers to a lad who
was talking loud and fast.

"Here's a go!" he was saying.  "A Secret Party's risen up and taken
Samavia!  'Twixt night and mornin' they done it!  That there Lost
Prince descendant 'as turned up, an' they've CROWNED him--'twixt night
and mornin' they done it!  Clapt 'is crown on 'is 'ead, so's they'd
lose no time."  And off he bolted, shouting, "'Cendant of Lost Prince!
'Cendant of Lost Prince made King of Samavia!"

It was then that Lazarus, forgetting even ceremony, bolted also. He
bolted back to the sitting-room, rushed in, and the door fell to behind
him.

