"The boy's got grit!" said one of the men to the other.

"Yes, but it won't save him. Boy, are you going to write what I told
you?"

"No."

"Are you not afraid that we will kill you?"

"You have power to do it."

"Don't you want to live?"

"Yes. Life is sweet to a boy of sixteen."

"Then why don't you write?"

"Because I think it would be taking a mean advantage of Mr. Pettigrew."

"You are a fool. Roderick, what shall we do with him?"

"Tell him simply to write that he is in our hands."

"Well thought of. Boy, will you do that?"

"Yes."

Rodney gave his consent for he was anxious that Mr. Pettigrew should
know what had prevented him from coming home when he was expected.

"Very well, write! You will know what to say."

Rodney drew the paper to him, and wrote as follows:


DEAR MR. PETTIGREW,

On my way home I was stopped by two men who have confined me in a cave,
and won't let me go unless a sum of money is paid for my ransom. I don't
know what to do. You will know better than I. RODNEY ROPES.


His chief captor took the note and read it aloud.

"That will do," he said. "Now he will believe us when we say that you
are in our hands."

He signed to Rodney to rise from the table and took his place. Drawing a
pile of paper to him, he penned the following note:


Rodney Ropes is in our hands. He wants his liberty and we want money.
Send us five thousand dollars, or arrange a meeting at which it can be
delivered to us, and he shall go free. Otherwise his death be on your
hands. HIS CAPTORS.


Rodney noticed that this missive was written in a handsome business
hand.

"You write a handsome hand," he said.

"I ought to," was the reply. "I was once bookkeeper in a large business
house."

"And what--" here Rodney hesitated.

"What made me an outlaw you mean to ask?"

"Yes."

"My nature, I suppose. I wasn't cut out for sober, humdrum life."

"Don't you think you would have been happier?"

"No preaching, kid! I had enough of that when I used to go to church in
my old home in Missouri. Here, Caesar!"

"Yes, massa."

"You know Oreville?"

"Yes, massa."

"Go over there and take this letter with you. Ask for Jefferson
Pettigrew, and mind you don't tell him where we live. Only if he asks
about me and my pal say we are desperate men, have each killed a round
dozen of fellows that stood in our way and will stick at nothing."

"All right, massa," said Caesar with an appreciative grin. "How shall I
go, massa?"

"You can take the kid's horse. Ride to within a mile of Oreville, then
tether the horse where he won't easily be found, and walk over to the
mines. Do you understand?"

"Yes, massa."

"He won't probably give you any money, but he may give you a letter.
Bring it safely to me."

Caesar nodded and vanished.

For an hour the two men smoked their pipes and chatted. Then they rose,
and the elder said: "We are going out, kid, for a couple of hours. Are
you afraid to stay alone?"

"Why should I be?"

"That's the way to talk. I won't caution you not to escape, for it would
take a smarter lad then you to do it. If you are tired you can lie down
on the bed and rest."

"All right!"

"I am sorry we haven't got the morning paper for you to look over," said
his captor with a smile. "The carrier didn't leave it this morning."

"I can get along without it. I don't feel much like reading."

"You needn't feel worried. You'll be out of this tomorrow if Jefferson
Pettigrew is as much your friend as you think he is."

"The only thing that troubles me is the big price you charge at your
hotel."

"Good! The kid has a good wit of his own. After all, we wouldn't
mind keeping you with us. It might pay you better than working for
Pettigrew."

"I hope you'll excuse my saying it, but I don't like the business."

"You may change your mind. At your age we wouldn't either of us like the
sort of life we are leading. Come, John."

The two men went out but did not allow Rodney to accompany them to the
place of exit.

Left to himself, Rodney could think soberly of his plight. He could not
foresee whether his captivity would be brief or prolonged.

After a time the spirit of curiosity seized him. He felt tempted
to explore the cavern in which he was confined. He took a lamp, and
followed in a direction opposite to that taken by his captors.

The cave he found was divided into several irregularly shaped chambers.
He walked slowly, holding up the lamp to examine the walls of the
cavern. In one passage he stopped short, for something attracted his
attention--something the sight of which made his heart beat quicker and
filled him with excitement.



CHAPTER XXXIV.


RODNEY'S DISCOVERY.


There was a good reason for Rodney's excitement. The walls of the
subterranean passage revealed distinct and rich indications of gold.
There was a time, and that not long before, when they would have
revealed nothing to Rodney, but since his residence at Oreville he had
more than once visited the mines and made himself familiar with surface
indications of mineral deposit.

He stopped short and scanned attentively the walls of the passage.

"If I am not mistaken," he said to himself, "this will make one of the
richest mines in Montana. But after all what good will it do me? Here am
I a prisoner, unable to leave the cave, or communicate with my friends.
If Mr. Pettigrew knew what I do he would feel justified in paying the
ransom these men want."

Rodney wondered how these rich deposits had failed to attract the
attention of his captors, but he soon settled upon the conclusion that
they had no knowledge of mines or mining, and were ignorant of the
riches that were almost in their grasp.

"Shall I enlighten them?" he asked himself.

It was a question which he could not immediately answer. He resolved to
be guided by circumstances.

In order not to excite suspicion he retraced his steps to the apartment
used by his captors as a common sitting room--carefully fixing in his
mind the location of the gold ore.

We must now follow the messenger who had gone to Oreville with a letter
from Rodney's captors.

As instructed, he left his horse, or rather Rodney's, tethered at some
distance from the settlement and proceeded on foot to the Miners' Rest.
His strange appearance excited attention and curiosity. Both these
feelings would have been magnified had it been known on what errand he
came.

"Where can I find Mr. Jefferson Pettigrew?" he asked of a man whom he
saw on the veranda.

"At the Griffin Mine," answered the other, removing the pipe from his
mouth.

"Where is that?"

"Over yonder. Are you a miner?"

"No. I know nothing about mines."

"Then why do you want to see Jefferson? I thought you might want a
chance to work in the mine."

"No; I have other business with him--business of importance," added the
black dwarf emphatically.

"If that is the case I'll take you to him. I am always glad to be of
service to Jefferson."

"Thank you. He will thank you, too."

The man walked along with a long, swinging gait which made it difficult
for Caesar to keep up with him.

"So you have business with Jefferson?" said the man with the pipe, whose
curiosity had been excited.

"Yes."

"Of what sort?"

"I will tell him," answered Caesar shortly.

"So its private, is it?"

"Yes. If he wants to tell you he will."

"That's fair. Well, come along! Am I walking too fast for you?"

"Your legs are much longer than mine."

"That's so. You are a little shrimp. I declare."

A walk of twenty minutes brought them to the Griffin Mine. Jefferson
Pettigrew was standing near, giving directions to a party of miners.

"Jefferson," said the man with the pipe, "here's a chap that wants to
see you on business of importance. That is, he says it is."

Jefferson Pettigrew wheeled round and looked at Caesar.

"Well," he said, "what is it?"

"I have a letter for you, massa."

"Give it to me."

Jefferson took the letter and cast his eye over it. As he read it his
countenance changed and became stern and severe.

"Do you know what is in this letter?" he asked.

"Yes."

"Come with me."

He led Caesar to a place out of earshot.

"What fiend's game is this?" he demanded sternly.

"I can't tell you, massa; I'm not in it."

"Who are those men that have written to me?"

"I don't know their right names. I calls 'em Massa John and Massa Dick."

"It seems they have trapped a boy friend of mine, Rodney Ropes. Did you
see him?"

"Yes; I gave him a good dinner."

"That is well. If they should harm a hair of his head I wouldn't
rest till I had called them to account. Where have they got the boy
concealed?"

"I couldn't tell you, massa."

"You mean, you won't tell me."

"Yes. It would be as much as my life is worth."

"Humph, well! I suppose you must be faithful to your employer. Do you
know that these men want me to pay five thousand dollars for the return
of the boy?"

"Yes, I heard them talking about it."

"That is a new kind of rascality. Do they expect you to bring back an
answer?"

"Yes, massa."

"I must think. What will they do to the boy if I don't give them the
money?"

"They might kill him."

"If they do--but I must have time to think the matter over. Are you
expected to go back this afternoon?"

"Yes."

"Can you get back? It must be a good distance."

"I can get back."

"Stay here. I will consult some of my friends and see if I can raise the
money."

"Very well, massa." One of those whom Jefferson called into consultation
was the person who had guided Caesar to the Griffin Mine.

Quickly the proprietor of the Miners' Rest unfolded the situation.

"Now," he said, "I want two of you to follow this misshapen dwarf, and
find out where he comes from. I want to get hold of the scoundrels who
