discomfiture of their followers they rowed rapidly away, and landed
far down the lake.  Alexander fled to England, where he ended his
life.

Bruce now advanced through the country of Lorne, which, having
never suffered from the English raids that had over and over again
devastated the rest of Scotland, was rich and flourishing, and large
quantities of booty were obtained.  Dunstaffnage was besieged and
captured, and having received hostages from all the minor chiefs
for their good behaviour the king and his army returned to Glasgow.

In the following spring a truce was negotiated by the intervention
of the King of France between the belligerents; but its duration was
but short, for so long as English nobles held estates and occupied
castles in Scotland breaches of the peace would be constantly
occurring. Bruce besieged the castle of Rutherglen, near Glasgow;
but Edward despatched the Earl of Gloucester to raise the siege,
and as Bruce's army was still small he was forced to retire at his
approach.

In February, 1309, the clergy of Scotland assembled in a provincial
council at Dundee, and issued a declaration in favour of Bruce
as lawful king of Scotland. In this document they set forth that
although Baliol was made king of Scotland by the King of England,
Bruce, the grandfather of the king, was always recognized by the
people as being nearest in right; and they said: "If any one, on
the contrary, claim right to the aforesaid kingdom in virtue of
letters in time passed sealed, and containing the consent of the
people and the commons, know ye that all this took place in fact
by force and violence, which could not at the time be resisted,
and through multiplied fears, bodily tortures, and various terrors."

This document was sealed by all the bishops, as representing the
clergy. A similar document was drawn up and signed by the estates
of Scotland. Therefore, henceforth Bruce could claim to be the king
not only as crowned and by right, but by the approval and consent
of the clergy and people of Scotland. A few months afterwards James,
the Steward of Scotland, whose course had ever been vacillating, died,
and his son Walter, a loyal Scotsman, succeeded him. He afterwards
married the king's daughter Marjory, and became the founder of the
royal line of Stuart.




Chapter XXV

The Capture of a Stronghold


While Bruce had by his energy and courage been wresting Scotland,
step by step, from the English, no serious effort had been made by
the latter to check his progress. Small bodies of troops had from
time to time been sent from the north; but the king had made no
great efforts, like those of his father, to reduce the country to
obedience by the exercise of the whole strength of England.  Edward
II differed widely from his father in disposition. At times he was
roused to fits of spasmodic energy, but for the most part he was
sunk in sloth and supineness. He angered and irritated his barons
by his fondness for unworthy favourites, and was engaged in constant
broils with them.

So called governors of Scotland were frequently appointed and as
often superseded, but no effectual aid was given them to enable
them to check the ever spreading insurrection.  But Perth was now
threatened by Bruce; and the danger of this, the strongest and most
important northern fortress, roused Edward from his lethargy.  A
fleet was fitted out for the Tay. Troops, under the Earl of Ulster,
were engaged to be transported by an English fleet of forty ships,
supplied by the seaports, and intended to cooperate with John of
Lorne in the west. Edward himself, with a powerful army, accompanied
by the Lords Gloucester, Warrenne, Percy, Clifford, and others,
advanced into Scotland as far as Renfrew.  Bruce could oppose no
effectual resistance in the field to so large a force, but he used
the tactics which Wallace had adopted with such success. The country
through which the English were advancing was wasted. Flocks and
herds were driven off, and all stores of grain burned and destroyed.
His adherents, each with their own retainers, hung upon the skirts
of the English army, cutting off small parties, driving back bodies
going out in search of provisions or forage, making sudden night
attacks, and keeping the English in a state of constant watchfulness
and alarm, but always retiring on the approach of any strong force,
and avoiding every effort of the English to bring on an engagement.

The invaders were soon pressed by want of provisions, and horses
died from lack of forage. The great army was therefore obliged to
fall back to Berwick without having struck a single effective blow.
After this Edward remained inactive at Berwick for eight months,
save that he once again crossed the Border and advanced as far as
Roxburgh, but only to retreat without having accomplished anything.
The Earls of Gloucester and Warrenne reduced the forest of Selkirk
and the district, and restored the English power there; while the
king's favourite, Piers Gaveston, Earl of Cornwall, went by sea to
Perth and tried to reduce the surrounding country, but the Scotch,
as usual, retired before him, and he, too, after a time, returned
to Berwick. The efforts of the defenders to starve out the invading
armies of England were greatly aided by the fact that at this time
a great famine raged both in England and Scotland, and the people
of both countries were reduced to a condition of want and suffering.
Not only did the harvest fail, but disease swept away vast numbers
of cattle and sheep, and in many places the people were forced to
subsist upon the flesh of horses, dogs, and other animals.

During the years which had elapsed since the battle of Methven,
Bruce had never been enabled to collect a force in any way worthy
of the name of an army. His enterprises had been a succession of
daring feats performed by small bodies of men. Even now, when the
nobles dared no longer openly oppose him, they remained sullenly
aloof, and the captures of the English strongholds were performed
either by the king or his brother Edward, with their retainers from
Annandale and Carrick; by Douglas with the men of Douglasdale; or
by some simple knights like Archie Forbes, the Frazers, Boyle, and
a few others, each leading their own retainers in the field.  The
great mass of the people still held aloof, and neither town nor
country sent their contingents to his aid. This was not to be wondered
at, so fearfully had all suffered from the wholesale vengeance of
Edward after the battle of Falkirk.

Great successes had certainly attended Bruce, but these had been
rendered possible only by the absence of any great effort on the
part of England, and all believed that sooner or later Edward would
arouse himself, and with the whole strength of England, Ireland,
and Wales again crush out the movement, and carry fire and sword
through Scotland. Still the national spirit was rising.

Archie Forbes divided his time pretty equally between the field and
home, never taking with him, when he joined the king, more than a
third of the entire strength of his retainers; thus all had time
to attend to their farms and the wants of their families, and
cheerfully yielded obedience to the call to arms when the time
came.

One day while the king was stopping for a few days' rest at Aberfilly,
a horseman rode in.

"I have great news, sire," he said. "Linlithgow has been captured
from the English."

"That were good news indeed," the king said; "but it can scarce be
possible, seeing that we have no men-at-arms in the neighbourhood."

"It has been done by no men-at-arms, my liege," the messenger said;
"but as Forfar was taken by Phillip the Forester and his mates,
so has Linlithgow been captured by a farmer and his comrades, one
William Bunnock."

It was indeed true. The castle of Linlithgow, forming as it did
a link between the two strongholds of Edinburgh and Stirling, was
a place of great importance and was strongly garrisoned by the
English.  Naturally the whole country round suffered severely from
the oppressions of the garrison, who supplied themselves by force
with such provisions and stores as were needful for them. Payment
was of course made to some extent, as the country otherwise would
speedily have been deserted and the land left untilled; but there
was almost necessarily much oppression and high handedness.  Bunnock,
hearing of the numerous castles which had been captured by the
king and his friends with mere handfuls of followers, determined at
last upon an attempt to expel the garrison of Linlithgow. He went
about among his friends and neighbours, and found many ready to
join his enterprise.  These one night placed themselves in ambush
among some bushes hard by the castle gate. Bunnock himself concealed
eight chosen men with arms in a wagon of hay.  The horses were
driven by a stout peasant with a short hatchet under his belt,
while Bunnock walked carelessly beside the wagon. As he was in the
habit of supplying the garrison with corn and forage, the gate was
readily opened on his approach. As soon as the wagon was exactly
between the gate posts Bunnock gave the signal and struck down the
warder at the gate; the driver with his hatchet cut the traces, the
men leapt up from their concealment in the hay, and the main body
lying in ambush close by rushed up, and, taken wholly by surprise,
unarmed and unprepared, the garrison was speedily overpowered and
the castle taken.

It was in the spring of 1311 that this important capture took place.
Bruce, as usual, had the castle levelled to the ground. Bunnock was
rewarded by a grant of land which still bears his name, softened
into Binney.  Again the English made preparations for a renewed
invasion, but the barons were too much occupied by their private
broils and their quarrels with the king to assemble at his order,
and nothing came of it. Bruce's position at home was so established
that he resolved upon a counter invasion, and accordingly, having
assembled a larger force than had hitherto gathered under his
banner, crossed the Border near the Solway, burnt and plundered the
district round Gilsland, ravaged Tynedale, and after eight days'
havock returned with much booty to Scotland. In the following
month he again entered England, carried fire and sword through the
country as far as Corbridge, swept Tynedale, ravaged Durham, and
after levying contributions for fifteen days returned with much
booty to Scotland.

Although the English made much outcry at this invasion, the English
author of the Chronicle of Lanercost, whose monastery was occupied
by the king during the raid, distinctly states that he slew none
save in actual conflict; and again, that though "all the goods of
the country were carried away, they did not burn houses or slay
men." Thus, though Bruce's wife and daughter were still prisoners
in England, though his brothers had been executed in cold blood,
he conducted his warfare in England in a manner which contrasts
strongly indeed with the conduct of the English in Scotland.

After this Bruce marched north again and laid siege to Perth. For
six weeks he invested the town, but without making any impression.
Then he retired his forces as if abandoning the attempt. At night,
however, he returned, ladders were placed in the ditches against
the walls, and with his knights he led his followers on to the
assault. The garrison were carousing in honour of their successful
defence and the defeat of the enemy, and taken wholly by surprise
were unable to oppose a vigorous resistance, and all were killed
or captured. Some accounts say that the English soldiers were made
prisoners, and the renegade Scots fighting with them were put to
the sword; while others affirm that all who were taken prisoners
were spared.

Another incursion into England followed the fall of Perth. Hexham,
Corbridge, and Durham were destroyed.  Douglas penetrated as far as
Hartlepool and an immense spoil was carried off, until the people
of the bishopric purchased a truce for the sum of 2000 pounds, and
those of Northumberland, Cumberland, and Westmoreland bought off
the invaders at a like price.

Carlisle was assaulted by Douglas, but unsuccessfully.  He also
attempted to surprise Berwick by a night attack, and had placed his
scaling ladders against the wall, when the garrison was alarmed by
the barking of a dog, and the assailants were repulsed. The Scots
recrossed the frontier laden with an enormous booty.

The king himself now entered Galloway and reduced the four remaining
strongholds held by the English there--the castles of Butele,
Dalswinton, Lochmaben, and Tibbers.  He then proceeded to Dumfries,
which he forced to surrender, and entered it as the victorious King
of Scotland, just seven years after the time when he had commenced
the war by expelling the English justiciary.

Archie Forbes did not accompany the king in this campaign. He
had indeed been summoned, but just before the army started on its
raid into England Bruce was lamenting, in Archie's hearing, that
the continued possession of the strong castle of Dunottar on the
east coast still afforded the English an opportunity for creating
diversions in the north, by landing troops there.

"If you will permit me, sire," Archie said, "I will undertake its
capture with my retainers. It is doubtless too strong to be captured
by open assault with such a strength, but as Douglas has thrice
taken Castle Douglas by stratagem, 'tis hard if I cannot find some
way for capturing Dunottar."

"Be it so, Sir Archie," the king said. "If you succeed you will have
done good service indeed; and as I know that though ever ready to
buckle on your armour when I need you, you would yet rather live
quiet at Aberfilly with your fair wife, I promise you that if you
capture Dunottar, for a year and a day you and your retainers shall
have rest, except if the English cross the Border in such force
that the arm of every Scotchman able to wield a sword is needed in
its defence."

Having chosen a hundred of his most active and experienced men
Archie set out for the north.  Crossing the Forth above Stirling,
he marched through Perth and across the Carse of Gowrie through
Forfar on to Montrose. Here he left his band, and taking with him
only William Orr, both being attired in peasants' dress, followed
the coast till he reached Dunottar.

The castle, which was of great strength, stood in a little bay
with a fishing village nestled beside it.  "'Tis a strong place,
William, and, if well provisioned, might hold out against an army
for months, and as supplies could be thrown in by sea it could only
be captured by battering down its solid walls by machines."

"'Tis indeed a strong place, Sir Archie," William Orr replied, "and
it were assuredly better to slip in by the gates than to climb over
the walls; but after the captures of so many of their strongholds
by sudden surprise, we may be sure that a careful watch will be
kept."

"Doubtless they are shrewdly on guard against surprise," Archie
said; "but as they know that the king and his host are just now
crossing the Border into Cumberland, they may well think that for
a time they are safe from disturbance. 'Tis in that that our best
chance lies."

Entering the village they purchased some fish from the fishermen,
and asking a few careless questions about the garrison, found
that it was composed of 150 men, and that extreme precautions were
taken against surprise. The gates were never opened save to allow
parties to pass in and out, when they were instantly closed and the
drawbridge raised.  Only ten of the garrison at a time were ever
allowed to leave the castle, and these must go out and come in
together, so that the gates should not be opened more than twice a
day.  "They generally come out," the man said, "at eleven o'clock
and go in at four; at eleven o'clock all with corn, wood, and
other stores for the castle must present themselves, so that the
drawbridge need only be lowered at those times.  The governor,
Sir John Morris, swears that he will not be caught asleep as were
those of Linlithgow and Castle Douglas. I fear," he concluded,
"that we of Dunottar will be the last in Scotland to be free from
the English yoke."

"That is as it may be. Other castles have been captured, and maybe
the lion of Scotland may float on those walls ere long."

The man looked keenly at him.

"Methinks there is meaning in your words," he said, "and your
language does not accord with your attire. I ask no questions; but
be sure that should an attempt be made, there are a score of strong
fellows among us who will be ready to strike a blow for freedom."

"Is that so?" Archie replied; "then, man, taking you to be a true
Scot, I will tell you that the attempt will be made, and that
soon, and that, if you will, you can aid the enterprise. I am Sir
Archibald Forbes, of whom, perhaps, you have heard."

"Assuredly," the man said in a tone of deep respect, "every Scotsman
knows the name as that of one of the king's truest and bravest
knights."

"My purpose is this," Archie said. "On a dark night some ninety-five
of my men will march hither; I need a faithful friend to meet them
outside the village to lead them in, and to hide them away in the
cottages, having already arranged beforehand with their owners to
receive them. I, myself, with four of my men will come hither in a
fishing boat well laden with fish; we will choose a time when the
wind is blowing, and will seem to have been driven here by stress
of weather and disabled. Then I shall try to sell our cargo for the
use of the garrison. As we carry it in we shall attack the guard,
and at the signal those hidden will rush out and cross the drawbridge."

"The plan is a good one," the fisherman said; "its difficulty mainly
lies in the fact that the drawbridge will be raised the moment you
have crossed it, and long before your followers could arrive it
would be high in the air, and you would be cut off from all aid. It
never remains down for an instant after men have passed over it."

"That adds to the difficulty," Archie said thoughtfully; "but
I must think of some plan to overcome it. Do you quietly go about
among those you can surely trust and arrange for them to be ready
to open their doors and take my men in without the slightest noise
which might attract the sentries on the walls. So long as the wind
is quiet and the sea smooth we shall not come, but the first day
that the wind blows hard you may expect us. Then do you go out on
the south road and wait for my party half a mile from the village.
If they come not by midnight, return home and watch the following
night."

"I understand," the fisherman said, "and will do as you bid me; and
when the time comes you can rely upon twenty stout fellows here in
addition to your own force."

"'Tis nigh eleven," Archie said, looking at the sun, "and we will
be off at once, as the soldiers will soon be coming out, and it
were best the governor did not hear that two strangers were in the
village. Vigilant as he is, a small thing might excite his suspicion
and add to his watchfulness."

Archie and William Orr returned to Montrose, and there the former
made an arrangement with the master of a large fishing boat to keep
his vessel ready to put to sea at any moment.

Three weeks passed without any change in the weather; then the wind
began to rise and the aspect of the sky betokened a storm. William
Orr at once set out with ninety-five men for Dunottar. Archie went
down to the port and purchased a large quantity of fish which had
been brought in that morning in various boats, and had it placed
on board the craft that he had hired. Then he with four of his
followers, the strongest and most determined of his retainers,
dressed as fishermen, went on board and the boat at once put to sea,
having, besides Archie and his men, the master and his two hands.
The main body had started on foot at ten in the morning, but it was
late in the afternoon before the boat put out, as Archie wished to
arrive in broad daylight next morning.

The wind was on the shore, and the boat was sorely tossed and
buffeted. Ere next morning, showing but a rag of sail, she ran into
Dunottar harbour. They had had great difficulty in keeping off the
coast all night, and the play had nigh turned into a tragedy, so
narrow had been their escape of being cast ashore. The bulwarks
were washed away, and the boat was in a sore plight as it drew
alongside the little quay.  Assuredly no suspicion would occur to
any who saw her enter that aught save stress of weather had driven
her in.

It was twelve o'clock in the day when they reached the port. Most
of the inhabitants had come down to the water side to see the
storm beaten craft enter, and among them were some soldiers of the
garrison. Archie bade four of his men remain below, so that the
unusual number of hands should attract no attention. One of the first
to come on board was the fisherman with whom Archie had spoken.

"Your men are all here," he said in a low tone to Archie, "and are
stowed away in the cottages. Everything went well, and there was
not the slightest noise."

Archie now went on shore and entered into conversation with one of
the soldiers.

"Think you," he said, "that the governor would buy my cargo of
fish. I have a great store on board, for I had good luck before
the storm suddenly broke upon me just as I was leaving the fishing
grounds for Montrose.  The gale may last for some days, and my boat
will need repairs before I put to sea, therefore my fish will be
spoiled before I can get them to market, and I will make a good
bargain with the governor if he will take them from me."

"I should think that he will do so gladly," the soldier said, "for
he can salt them down, and they make a pleasant change. How much
have you got?"

"About ten baskets full," Archie replied, "of some hundred pounds
each."

"I will go with you to the castle," the soldier said. "The governor
will lower the drawbridge for no man, but you can speak with the
warder across the moat and he will bear your message to the governor,
and should he agree, you must present yourself with your men with
the fish at four o'clock, at which time the drawbridge will be
