
That night they all went to bed at nine, except Carl, who was already
keeping vigil on the tombstone. Una slipped in to bid him good night.
Her tender heart was wrung with sympathy.

"Oh, Carl, are you much scared?" she whispered.

"Not a bit," said Carl airily.

"I won't sleep a wink till after twelve," said Una. "If you get lonesome
just look up at our window and remember that I'm inside, awake, and
thinking about you. That will be a little company, won't it?"

"I'll be all right. Don't you worry about me," said Carl.

But in spite of his dauntless words Carl was a pretty lonely boy when
the lights went out in the manse. He had hoped his father would be in
the study as he so often was. He would not feel alone then. But that
night Mr. Meredith had been summoned to the fishing village at the
harbour mouth to see a dying man. He would not likely be back until
after midnight. Carl must dree his weird alone.

A Glen man went past carrying a lantern. The mysterious shadows caused
by the lantern-light went hurtling madly over the graveyard like a dance
of demons or witches. Then they passed and darkness fell again. One by
one the lights in the Glen went out. It was a very dark night, with a
cloudy sky, and a raw east wind that was cold in spite of the calendar.
Far away on the horizon was the low dim lustre of the Charlottetown
lights. The wind wailed and sighed in the old fir-trees. Mr. Alec Davis'
tall monument gleamed whitely through the gloom. The willow beside it
tossed long, writhing arms spectrally. At times, the gyrations of its
boughs made it seem as if the monument were moving, too.

Carl curled himself up on the tombstone with his legs tucked under him.
It wasn't precisely pleasant to hang them over the edge of the stone.
Just suppose--just suppose--bony hands should reach up out of Mr.
Pollock's grave under it and clutch him by the ankles. That had been one
of Mary Vance's cheerful speculations one time when they had all been
sitting there. It returned to haunt Carl now. He didn't believe those
things; he didn't even really believe in Henry Warren's ghost. As for
Mr. Pollock, he had been dead sixty years, so it wasn't likely he cared
who sat on his tombstone now. But there is something very strange and
terrible in being awake when all the rest of the world is asleep. You
are alone then with nothing but your own feeble personality to pit
against the mighty principalities and powers of darkness. Carl was only
ten and the dead were all around him--and he wished, oh, he wished that
the clock would strike twelve. Would it NEVER strike twelve? Surely Aunt
Martha must have forgotten to wind it.

And then it struck eleven--only eleven! He must stay yet another hour in
that grim place. If only there were a few friendly stars to be seen! The
darkness was so thick it seemed to press against his face. There was
a sound as of stealthy passing footsteps all over the graveyard. Carl
shivered, partly with prickling terror, partly with real cold.

Then it began to rain--a chill, penetrating drizzle. Carl's thin little
cotton blouse and shirt were soon wet through. He felt chilled to the
bone. He forgot mental terrors in his physical discomfort. But he must
stay there till twelve--he was punishing himself and he was on his
honour. Nothing had been said about rain--but it did not make any
difference. When the study clock finally struck twelve a drenched little
figure crept stiffly down off Mr. Pollock's tombstone, made its way into
the manse and upstairs to bed. Carl's teeth were chattering. He thought
he would never get warm again.

He was warm enough when morning came. Jerry gave one startled look at
his crimson face and then rushed to call his father. Mr. Meredith came
hurriedly, his own face ivory white from the pallor of his long night
vigil by a death bed. He had not got home until daylight. He bent over
his little lad anxiously.

"Carl, are you sick?" he said.

"That--tombstone--over here," said Carl, "it's--moving--about--it's
coming--at--me--keep it--away--please."

Mr. Meredith rushed to the telephone. In ten minutes Dr. Blythe was
at the manse. Half an hour later a wire was sent to town for a trained
nurse, and all the Glen knew that Carl Meredith was very ill with
pneumonia and that Dr. Blythe had been seen to shake his head.

Gilbert shook his head more than once in the fortnight that followed.
Carl developed double pneumonia. There was one night when Mr. Meredith
paced his study floor, and Faith and Una huddled in their bedroom and
cried, and Jerry, wild with remorse, refused to budge from the floor of
the hall outside Carl's door. Dr. Blythe and the nurse never left the
bedside. They fought death gallantly until the red dawn and they won
the victory. Carl rallied and passed the crisis in safety. The news was
phoned about the waiting Glen and people found out how much they really
loved their minister and his children.

"I haven't had one decent night's sleep since I heard the child was
sick," Miss Cornelia told Anne, "and Mary Vance has cried until those
queer eyes of hers looked like burnt holes in a blanket. Is it true that
Carl got pneumonia from straying out in the graveyard that wet night for
a dare?"

"No. He was staying there to punish himself for cowardice in that affair
of the Warren ghost. It seems they have a club for bringing themselves
up, and they punish themselves when they do wrong. Jerry told Mr.
Meredith all about it."

"The poor little souls," said Miss Cornelia.

Carl got better rapidly, for the congregation took enough nourishing
things to the manse to furnish forth a hospital. Norman Douglas drove
up every evening with a dozen fresh eggs and a jar of Jersey cream.
Sometimes he stayed an hour and bellowed arguments on predestination
with Mr. Meredith in the study; oftener he drove on up to the hill that
overlooked the Glen.

When Carl was able to go again to Rainbow Valley they had a special
feast in his honour and the doctor came down and helped them with the
fireworks. Mary Vance was there, too, but she did not tell any ghost
stories. Miss Cornelia had given her a talking on that subject which
Mary would not forget in a hurry.



CHAPTER XXXII. TWO STUBBORN PEOPLE

Rosemary West, on her way home from a music lesson at Ingleside, turned
aside to the hidden spring in Rainbow Valley. She had not been there all
summer; the beautiful little spot had no longer any allurement for
her. The spirit of her young lover never came to the tryst now; and the
memories connected with John Meredith were too painful and poignant. But
she had happened to glance backward up the valley and had seen Norman
Douglas vaulting as airily as a stripling over the old stone dyke of the
Bailey garden and thought he was on his way up the hill. If he overtook
her she would have to walk home with him and she was not going to do
that. So she slipped at once behind the maples of the spring, hoping he
had not seen her and would pass on.

But Norman had seen her and, what was more, was in pursuit of her. He
had been wanting for some time to have talk with Rosemary, but she had
always, so it seemed, avoided him. Rosemary had never, at any time,
liked Norman Douglas very well. His bluster, his temper, his noisy
hilarity, had always antagonized her. Long ago she had often wondered
how Ellen could possibly be attracted to him. Norman Douglas was
perfectly aware of her dislike and he chuckled over it. It never worried
Norman if people did not like him. It did not even make him dislike them
in return, for he took it as a kind of extorted compliment. He thought
Rosemary a fine girl, and he meant to be an excellent, generous
brother-in-law to her. But before he could be her brother-in-law he had
to have a talk with her, so, having seen her leaving Ingleside as he
stood in the doorway of a Glen store, he had straightway plunged into
the valley to overtake her.

Rosemary was sitting pensively on the maple seat where John Meredith
had been sitting on that evening nearly a year ago. The tiny spring
shimmered and dimpled under its fringe of ferns. Ruby-red gleams of
sunset fell through the arching boughs. A tall clump of perfect asters
grew at her side. The little spot was as dreamy and witching and evasive
as any retreat of fairies and dryads in ancient forests. Into it Norman
Douglas bounced, scattering and annihilating its charm in a moment. His
personality seemed to swallow the place up. There was simply nothing
there but Norman Douglas, big, red-bearded, complacent.

"Good evening," said Rosemary coldly, standing up.

"'Evening, girl. Sit down again--sit down again. I want to have a talk
with you. Bless the girl, what's she looking at me like that for? I
don't want to eat you--I've had my supper. Sit down and be civil."

"I can hear what you have to say quite as well here," said Rosemary.

"So you can, girl, if you use your ears. I only wanted you to be
comfortable. You look so durned uncomfortable, standing there. Well,
I'LL sit anyway."

Norman accordingly sat down in the very place John Meredith had once
sat. The contrast was so ludicrous that Rosemary was afraid she would
go off into a peal of hysterical laughter over it. Norman cast his hat
aside, placed his huge, red hands on his knees, and looked up at her
with his eyes a-twinkle.

"Come, girl, don't be so stiff," he said, ingratiatingly. When he liked
he could be very ingratiating. "Let's have a reasonable, sensible,
friendly chat. There's something I want to ask you. Ellen says she
won't, so it's up to me to do it."

Rosemary looked down at the spring, which seemed to have shrunk to the
size of a dewdrop. Norman gazed at her in despair.

"Durn it all, you might help a fellow out a bit," he burst forth.

"What is it you want me to help you say?" asked Rosemary scornfully.

"You know as well as I do, girl. Don't be putting on your tragedy airs.
No wonder Ellen was scared to ask you. Look here, girl, Ellen and I want
to marry each other. That's plain English, isn't it? Got that? And Ellen
says she can't unless you give her back some tom-fool promise she made.
Come now, will you do it? Will you do it?"

"Yes," said Rosemary.

Norman bounced up and seized her reluctant hand.

"Good! I knew you would--I told Ellen you would. I knew it would only
take a minute. Now, girl, you go home and tell Ellen, and we'll have a
wedding in a fortnight and you'll come and live with us. We shan't leave
you to roost on that hill-top like a lonely crow--don't you worry. I
know you hate me, but, Lord, it'll be great fun living with some one
that hates me. Life'll have some spice in it after this. Ellen will
roast me and you'll freeze me. I won't have a dull moment."

Rosemary did not condescend to tell him that nothing would ever induce
her to live in his house. She let him go striding back to the Glen,
oozing delight and complacency, and she walked slowly up the hill
home. She had known this was coming ever since she had returned from
Kingsport, and found Norman Douglas established as a frequent evening
caller. His name was never mentioned between her and Ellen, but the very
avoidance of it was significant. It was not in Rosemary's nature to
feel bitter, or she would have felt very bitter. She was coldly civil to
Norman, and she made no difference in any way with Ellen. But Ellen had
not found much comfort in her second courtship.

She was in the garden, attended by St. George, when Rosemary came home.
The two sisters met in the dahlia walk. St. George sat down on the
gravel walk between them and folded his glossy black tail gracefully
around his white paws, with all the indifference of a well-fed,
well-bred, well-groomed cat.

"Did you ever see such dahlias?" demanded Ellen proudly. "They are just
the finest we've ever had."

Rosemary had never cared for dahlias. Their presence in the garden was
her concession to Ellen's taste. She noticed one huge mottled one of
crimson and yellow that lorded it over all the others.

"That dahlia," she said, pointing to it, "is exactly like Norman
Douglas. It might easily be his twin brother."

Ellen's dark-browed face flushed. She admired the dahlia in question,
but she knew Rosemary did not, and that no compliment was intended.
But she dared not resent Rosemary's speech--poor Ellen dared not
resent anything just then. And it was the first time Rosemary had ever
mentioned Norman's name to her. She felt that this portended something.

"I met Norman Douglas in the valley," said Rosemary, looking straight at
her sister, "and he told me you and he wanted to be married--if I would
give you permission."

"Yes? What did you say?" asked Ellen, trying to speak naturally and
off-handedly, and failing completely. She could not meet Rosemary's
eyes. She looked down at St. George's sleek back and felt horribly
afraid. Rosemary had either said she would or she wouldn't. If she would
Ellen would feel so ashamed and remorseful that she would be a very
uncomfortable bride-elect; and if she wouldn't--well, Ellen had once
learned to live without Norman Douglas, but she had forgotten the lesson
and felt that she could never learn it again.

"I said that as far as I was concerned you were at full liberty to marry
each other as soon as you liked," said Rosemary.

"Thank you," said Ellen, still looking at St. George.

Rosemary's face softened.

"I hope you'll be happy, Ellen," she said gently.

"Oh, Rosemary," Ellen looked up in distress, "I'm so ashamed--I don't
deserve it--after all I said to you--"

"We won't speak about that," said Rosemary hurriedly and decidedly.

"But--but," persisted Ellen, "you are free now, too--and it's not too
late--John Meredith--"

"Ellen West!" Rosemary had a little spark of temper under all her
sweetness and it flashed forth now in her blue eyes. "Have you quite
lost your senses in EVERY respect? Do you suppose for an instant that
_I_ am going to go to John Meredith and say meekly, 'Please, sir, I've
changed my mind and please, sir, I hope you haven't changed yours.' Is
that what you want me to do?"

"No--no--but a little--encouragement--he would come back--"

"Never. He despises me--and rightly. No more of this, Ellen. I bear you
no grudge--marry whom you like. But no meddling in my affairs."

"Then you must come and live with me," said Ellen. "I shall not leave
you here alone."

"Do you really think that I would go and live in Norman Douglas's
house?"

"Why not?" cried Ellen, half angrily, despite her humiliation.

Rosemary began to laugh.

"Ellen, I thought you had a sense of humour. Can you see me doing it?"

"I don't see why you wouldn't. His house is big enough--you'd have your
share of it to yourself--he wouldn't interfere."

"Ellen, the thing is not to be thought of. Don't bring this up again."

"Then," said Ellen coldly, and determinedly, "I shall not marry him. I
shall not leave you here alone. That is all there is to be said about
it."

"Nonsense, Ellen."

"It is not nonsense. It is my firm decision. It would be absurd for you
to think of living here by yourself--a mile from any other house. If you
won't come with me I'll stay with you. Now, we won't argue the matter,
so don't try."
