at a single draught, and held it out for more.

But the neighbour pushed her away, saying, 'No, I shall have none left
for my children.'

So the woman went into another house, and drank all the water she could
find; but the more she drank the more thirsty she became. She wandered
in this manner through the whole village till she had drunk every
water-pot dry. Then she rushed off to the nearest spring, and swallowed
that, and when she had finished all the springs and wells about she
drank up first the river and then a lake. But by this time she had drunk
so much that she could not rise from the ground.

In the evening, when it was time for the animals to have their drink
before going to bed, they found the lake quite dry, and they had to make
up their minds to be thirsty till the water flowed again and the streams
were full. Even then, for some time, the lake was very dirty, and the
lion, as king of the beasts, commanded that no one should drink till it
was quite clear again.

But the little hare, who was fond of having his own way, and was very
thirsty besides, stole quietly off when all the rest were asleep in
their dens, and crept down to the margin of the lake and drank his fill.
Then he smeared the dirty water all over the rabbit's face and paws, so
that it might look as if it were he who had been disobeying Big Lion's
orders.

The next day, as soon as it was light, Big Lion marched straight for
the lake, and all the other beasts followed him. He saw at once that the
water had been troubled again, and was very angry.

'Who has been drinking my water?' said he; and the little hare gave a
jump, and, pointing to the rabbit, he answered, 'Look there! it must be
he! Why, there is mud all over his face and paws!'

The rabbit, frightened out of his wits, tried to deny the fact,
exclaiming, 'Oh, no, indeed I never did;' but Big Lion would not listen,
and commanded them to cane him with a birch rod.

Now the little hare was very much pleased with his cleverness in causing
the rabbit to be beaten instead of himself, and went about boasting
of it. At last one of the other animals overheard him, and called out,
'Little hare, little hare! what is that you are saying?'

But the little hare hastily replied, 'I only asked you to pass me my
stick.'

An hour or two later, thinking that no one was near him, he said to
himself again, 'It was really I who drank up the water, but I made them
think it was the rabbit.'

But one of the beasts whose ears were longer than the rest caught the
words, and went to tell Big Lion about it. Do you hear what the little
hare is saying?'

So Big Lion sent for the little hare, and asked him what he meant by
talking like that.

The little hare saw that there was no use trying to hide it, so he
answered pertly, 'It was I who drank the water, but I made them think
it was the rabbit.' Then he turned and ran as fast as he could, with all
the other beasts pursuing him.

They were almost up to him when he dashed into a very narrow cleft in
the rock, much too small for them to follow; but in his hurry he had
left one of his long ears sticking out, which they just managed to
seize. But pull as hard as they might they could not drag him out of the
hole, and at last they gave it up and left him, with his ear very much
torn and scratched.

When the last tail was out of sight the little hare crept cautiously
out, and the first person he met was the rabbit. He had plenty of
impudence, so he put a bold face on the matter, and said, 'Well, my good
rabbit, you see I have had a beating as well as you.'

But the rabbit was still sore and sulky, and he did not care to talk, so
he answered, coldly, 'You have treated me very badly. It was really you
who drank that water, and you accused me of having done it.'

'Oh, my good rabbit, never mind that! I've got such a wonderful secret
to tell you! Do you know what to do so as to escape death?'

'No, I don't.'

'Well, we must begin by digging a hole.'

So they dug a hole, and then the little hare said, 'The next thing is to
make a fire in the hole,' and they set to work to collect wood, and lit
quite a large fire.

When it was burning brightly the little hare said to the rabbit,
'Rabbit, my friend, throw me into the fire, and when you hear my fur
crackling, and I call "Itchi, Itchi," then be quick and pull me out.'

The rabbit did as he was told, and threw the little hare into the fire;
but no sooner did the little hare begin to feel the heat of the flames
than he took some green bay leaves he had plucked for the purpose and
held them in the middle of the fire, where they crackled and made a
great noise. Then he called loudly 'Itchi, Itchi! Rabbit, my friend, be
quick, be quick! Don't you hear how my skin is crackling?'

And the rabbit came in a great hurry and pulled him out.

Then the little hare said, 'Now it is your turn!' and he threw the
rabbit in the fire. The moment the rabbit felt the flames he cried out
'Itchi, Itchi, I am burning; pull me out quick, my friend!'

But the little hare only laughed, and said, 'No, you may stay there! It
is your own fault. Why were you such a fool as to let yourself be thrown
in? Didn't you know that fire burns?' And in a very few minutes nothing
was left of the rabbit but a few bones.

When the fire was quite out the little hare went and picked up one of
these bones, and made a flute out of it, and sang this song:

Pii, pii, O flute that I love, Pii, pii, rabbits are but little boys.
Pii, pii, he would have burned me if he could; Pii, pii, but I burned
him, and he crackled finely.

When he got tired of going through the world singing this the little
hare went back to his friends and entered the service of Big Lion. One
day he said to his master, 'Grandfather, shall I show you a splendid way
to kill game?'

'What is it?' asked Big Lion.

'We must dig a ditch, and then you must lie in it and pretend to be
dead.'

Big Lion did as he was told, and when he had lain down the little hare
got up on a wall blew a trumpet and shouted--

Pii, pii, all you animals come and see, Big Lion is dead, and now peace
will be.

Directly they heard this they all came running. The little hare received
them and said, 'Pass on, this way to the lion.' So they all entered into
the Animal Kingdom. Last of all came the monkey with her baby on her
back. She approached the ditch, and took a blade of grass and tickled
Big Lion's nose, and his nostrils moved in spite of his efforts to keep
them still. Then the monkey cried, 'Come, my baby, climb on my back and
let us go. What sort of a dead body is it that can still feel when it
is tickled?' And she and her baby went away in a fright. Then the
little hare said to the other beasts, 'Now, shut the gate of the Animal
Kingdom.' And it was shut, and great stones were rolled against it. When
everything was tight closed the little hare turned to Big Lion and said
'Now!' and Big Lion bounded out of the ditch and tore the other animals
in pieces.

But Big Lion kept all the choice bits for himself, and only gave away
the little scraps that he did not care about eating; and the little hare
grew very angry, and determined to have his revenge. He had long ago
found out that Big Lion was very easily taken in; so he laid his plans
accordingly. He said to him, as if the idea had just come into his head,
'Grandfather, let us build a hut,' and Big Lion consented. And when they
had driven the stakes into the ground, and had made the walls of the
hut, the little hare told Big Lion to climb upon the top while he stayed
inside. When he was ready he called out, 'Now, grandfather, begin,'
and Big Lion passed his rod through the reeds with which the roofs are
always covered in that country. The little hare took it and cried, 'Now
it is my turn to pierce them,' and as he spoke he passed the rod back
through the reeds and gave Big Lion's tail a sharp poke.

'What is pricking me so?' asked Big Lion.

'Oh, just a little branch sticking out. I am going to break it,'
answered the little hare; but of course he had done it on purpose, as he
wanted to fix Big Lion's tail so firmly to the hut that he would not
be able to move. In a little while he gave another prick, and Big Lion
called again, 'What is pricking me so?'

This time the little hare said to himself, 'He will find out what I am
at. I must try some other plan. 'So he called out, 'Grandfather, you had
better put your tongue here, so that the branches shall not touch you.'
Big Lion did as he was bid, and the little hare tied it tightly to the
stakes of the wall. Then he went outside and shouted, 'Grandfather, you
can come down now,' and Big Lion tried, but he could not move an inch.

Then the little hare began quietly to eat Big Lion's dinner right before
his eyes, and paying no attention at all to his growls of rage. When
he had quite done he climbed up on the hut, and, blowing his flute, he
chanted 'Pii, pii, fall rain and hail,' and directly the sky was full of
clouds, the thunder roared, and huge hailstones whitened the roof of
the hut. The little hare, who had taken refuge within, called out again,
'Big Lion, be quick and come down and dine with me.' But there was no
answer, not even a growl, for the hailstones had killed Big Lion.

The little hare enjoyed himself vastly for some time, living comfortably
in the hut, with plenty of food to eat and no trouble at all in getting
it. But one day a great wind arose, and flung down the Big Lion's
half-dried skin from the roof of the hut. The little hare bounded with
terror at the noise, for he thought Big Lion must have come to life
again; but on discovering what had happened he set about cleaning
the skin, and propped the mouth open with sticks so that he could get
through. So, dressed in Big Lion's skin, the little hare started on his
travels.

The first visit he paid was to the hyaenas, who trembled at the sight
of him, and whispered to each other, 'How shall we escape from this
terrible beast?' Meanwhile the little hare did not trouble himself
about them, but just asked where the king of the hyaenas lived, and
made himself quite at home there. Every morning each hyaena thought to
himself, 'To-day he is certain to eat me;' but several days went by,
and they were all still alive. At length, one evening, the little hare,
looking round for something to amuse him, noticed a great pot full of
boiling water, so he strolled up to one of the hyaenas and said, 'Go and
get in.' The hyaena dared not disobey, and in a few minutes was scalded
to death. Then the little hare went the round of the village, saying to
every hyaena he met, 'Go and get into the boiling water,' so that in a
little while there was hardly a male left in the village.

One day all the hyaenas that remained alive went out very early into
the fields, leaving only one little daughter at home. The little hare,
thinking he was all alone, came into the enclosure, and, wishing to
feel what it was like to be a hare again, threw off Big Lion's skin, and
began to jump and dance, singing--

I am just the little hare, the little hare, the little hare; I am just
the little hare who killed the great hyaenas.

The little hyaena gazed at him in surprise, saying to herself, 'What!
was it really this tiny beast who put to death all our best people?'
when suddenly a gust of wind rustled the reeds that surrounded the
enclosure, and the little hare, in a fright, hastily sprang back into
Big Lion's skin.

When the hyaenas returned to their homes the little hyaena said to her
father: 'Father, our tribe has very nearly been swept away, and all this
has been the work of a tiny creature dressed in the lion's skin.'

But her father answered, 'Oh, my dear child, you don't know what you are
talking about.'

She replied, 'Yes, father, it is quite true. I saw it with my own eyes.'

The father did not know what to think, and told one of his friends, who
said, 'To-morrow we had better keep watch ourselves.'

And the next day they hid themselves and waited till the little hare
came out of the royal hut. He walked gaily towards the enclosure, threw
off, Big Lion's skin, and sang and danced as before--

I am just the little hare, the little hare, the little hare, I am just
the little hare, who killed the great hyaenas.

That night the two hyaenas told all the rest, saying, 'Do you know that
we have allowed ourselves to be trampled on by a wretched creature with
nothing of the lion about him but his skin?'

When supper was being cooked that evening, before they all went to bed,
the little hare, looking fierce and terrible in Big Lion's skin, said as
usual to one of the hyaenas 'Go and get into the boiling water.' But the
hyaena never stirred. There was silence for a moment; then a hyaena took
a stone, and flung it with all his force against the lion's skin. The
little hare jumped out through the mouth with a single spring, and fled
away like lightning, all the hyaenas in full pursuit uttering great
cries. As he turned a corner the little hare cut off both his ears,
so that they should not know him, and pretended to be working at a
grindstone which lay there.

The hyaenas soon came up to him and said, 'Tell me, friend, have you
seen the little hare go by?'

'No, I have seen no one.'

'Where can he be?' said the hyaenas one to another. 'Of course, this
creature is quite different, and not at all like the little hare.' Then
they went on their way, but, finding no traces of the little hare,
they returned sadly to their village, saying, 'To think we should have
allowed ourselves to be swept away by a wretched creature like that!'




The Sparrow with the Slit Tongue

From the Japanische Marchen und Sagen.


A long long time ago, an old couple dwelt in the very heart of a high
mountain. They lived together in peace and harmony, although they were
very different in character, the man being good-natured and honest, and
the wife being greedy and quarrelsome when anyone came her way that she
could possibly quarrel with.

One day the old man was sitting in front of his cottage, as he was very
fond of doing, when he saw flying towards him a little sparrow, followed
by a big black raven. The poor little thing was very much frightened and
cried out as it flew, and the great bird came behind it terribly fast,
flapping its wings and craning its beak, for it was hungry and wanted
some dinner. But as they drew near the old man, he jumped up, and beat
back the raven, which mounted, with hoarse screams of disappointment,
into the sky, and the little bird, freed from its enemy, nestled into
the old man's hand, and he carried it into the house. He stroked its
feathers, and told it not to be afraid, for it was quite safe; but as
he still felt its heart beating, he put it into a cage, where it soon
plucked up courage to twitter and hop about. The old man was fond of
all creatures, and every morning he used to open the cage door, and the
sparrow flew happily about until it caught sight of a cat or a rat or
some other fierce beast, when it would instantly return to the cage,
knowing that there no harm could come to it.

The woman, who was always on the look-out for something to grumble at,
grew very jealous of her husband's affection for the bird, and would
gladly have done it some harm had she dared. At last, one morning her
opportunity came. Her husband had gone to the town some miles away down
the mountain, and would not be back for several hours, but before he
left he did not forget to open the door of the cage. The sparrow hopped
about as usual, twittering happily, and thinking no evil, and all the
while the woman's brow became blacker and blacker, and at length her
fury broke out. She threw her broom at the bird, who was perched on a
bracket high up on the wall. The broom missed the bird, but knocked down
and broke the vase on the bracket, which did not soothe the angry woman.
Then she chased it from place to place, and at last had it safe between
her fingers, almost as frightened as on the day that it had made its
first entrance into the hut.

By this time the woman was more furious than ever. If she had dared,
she would have killed the sparrow then and there, but as it was she only
ventured to slit its tongue. The bird struggled and piped, but there was
no one to hear it, and then, crying out loud with the pain, it flew from
the house and was lost in the depths of the forest.

By-and-bye the old man came back, and at once began to ask for his pet.
His wife, who was still in a very bad temper, told him the whole story,
and scolded him roundly for being so silly as to make such a fuss over
a bird. But the old man, who was much troubled, declared she was a bad,
hard-hearted woman, to have behaved so to a poor harmless bird; then he
left the house, and went into the forest to seek for his pet. He walked
many hours, whistling and calling for it, but it never came, and he went
sadly home, resolved to be out with the dawn and never to rest till he
had brought the wanderer back. Day after day he searched and called; and
evening after evening he returned in despair. At length he gave up hope,
and made up his mind that he should see his little friend no more.

One hot summer morning, the old man was walking slowly under the cool
shadows of the big trees, and without thinking where he was going,
he entered a bamboo thicket. As the bamboos became thinner, he found
himself opposite to a beautiful garden, in the centre of which stood
a tiny spick-and-span little house, and out of the house came a lovely
maiden, who unlatched the gate and invited him in the most hospitable
way to enter and rest. 'Oh, my dear old friend,' she exclaimed, 'how
glad I am you have found me at last! I am your little sparrow, whose
life you saved, and whom you took such care of.'

The old man seized her hands eagerly, but no time was given him to ask
any questions, for the maiden drew him into the house, and set food
before him, and waited on him herself.

While he was eating, the damsel and her maids took their lutes, and sang
and danced to him, and altogether the hours passed so swiftly that the
old man never saw that darkness had come, or remembered the scolding he
would get from his wife for returning home so late.

Thus, in dancing and singing, and talking over the days when the maiden
was a sparrow hopping in and out of her cage, the night passed away, and
when the first rays of sun broke through the hedge of bamboo, the
old man started up, thanked his hostess for her friendly welcome, and
prepared to say farewell. 'I am not going to let you depart like that,'
said she; 'I have a present for you, which you must take as a sign of my
gratitude.' And as she spoke, her servants brought in two chests, one
of them very small, the other large and heavy. 'Now choose which of them
you will carry with you.' So the old man chose the small chest, and hid
it under his cloak, and set out on his homeward way.

But as he drew near the house his heart sank a little, for he knew
what a fury his wife would be in, and how she would abuse him for
