
"Where has he gone?"

"To Port Henry; he went in the carriage, and is coming back in the
new steamboat."

"Has he got a pilot?" continued Lawry anxiously.

"I don't know; he expected you, I believe; but when you didn't come
back, he couldn't wait any longer. I heard him say he could pilot her
himself, and I suppose he is going to do so."

"I'm sorry I didn't see him; I have but just got home," replied Lawry.

He wanted to pilot the beautiful little steamer up from Port Henry.
He wanted to see her; wanted to make her acquaintance, for she
promised to be the belle of the lake. He was sorry to lose the
chance, for it might prove to be a valuable one to him. Mr. Sherwood
was very liberal, and he hoped he would not engage another pilot. It
was no use to complain, and Lawry walked back to the ferry, where he
could see the steamer when she arrived. When he reached the landing-place,
the ferry-boat was about halfway across the lake, and his
attention was attracted by the strange movements of those on board of
her. His father was laboring at the steering-oar with a zeal which
indicated that some unusual event had occurred. The ferry-boat was
thrown up into the wind, and while Lawry was waiting to ascertain
what the matter was, his father leaped into the water.

It was now evident to Lawry that something serious had happened, and
he sprang into the small keel-boat, used for conveying foot-passengers
across the lake, which was fastened to a stake on the shore. Taking
the oars, he pulled with all his might toward the ferry-boat. He
was a stout boy, and handled his oars very skillfully; but before
 he could reach the scene of the excitement, his father had
returned to the bateau.

"There's your coat," said John Wilford.

Mr. Randall seized the garment with convulsive energy, and with
trembling hands felt for the pocketbook in which the six thousand
dollars had been kept.

"It is gone!" gasped he; and he seemed ready to sink down in the
bottom of the boat when he discovered his loss.

"Gone!" exclaimed John Wilford.

"What's the matter?" asked Lawry.

"I've lost my pocketbook with six thousand dollars in it," groaned
the bank director.

"How did you lose it?" demanded Lawry.

"That drop came down and let my coat into the lake; but I don't see
how my pocketbook could get out of the coat."

"I don't believe the money was in the pocket," added the ferryman.

"Yes, it was," persisted Mr. Randall.

"I don't see how it could fall out of the pocket," said John Wilford.

"Nor I; but the money is gone," answered the bank director, with a
vacant stare. "I'm ruined!"

"Well, I can't help it. I've done all I could for you. I tried to
save it; and if I get the rheumatism for a month or two, it will be a
bad job for me."

"Wasn't the pocketbook in the pocket when you picked up the coat?"
asked Mr. Randall, walking up to the ferryman.

"How should I know?" replied John Wilford. "I gave you the coat just
as I found it."

"I don't believe the pocketbook would sink," added the director.
"There was nothing but paper in it."

"Of course it wouldn't sink, then," interposed the owner of the
vehicle in the ferry-boat.

"I don't think it would," said Mr. Randall.

"I know it wouldn't," protested the stranger. "I dropped my
pocketbook into the lake once, and it floated ten minutes before I
could get it again."

"Then it must be floating about on the water," added Lawry. "I will
try to find it."

"I'll go with you," said Mr. Randall.

They got into the boat, and Lawry pulled about the spot where the
coat had fallen into the water for half an hour without discovering
the pocketbook.

"I suppose I must give it up," sighed the director.

"I'm sure it's not on the water," replied Lawry.

"Do you suppose it would sink?"

"I don't know; the gentleman in the ferry-boat says it wouldn't."

"Stop a minute, boy, and I will soon find out," continued the
unfortunate loser of the money.

He took all the money and papers out of his wallet, and stuffed it
with pieces of newspaper which Lawry gave him. Having thus prepared
the wallet, which he said was of the same material as the lost
pocketbook, he placed it on the surface of the water, holding his
hand underneath to save it, in case the trial should result
differently from his anticipations. It floated, and he removed his
hand from under it to exhibit his confidence in the law he had tested.

"That's plain enough," said he. "My pocketbook hasn't gone to the
bottom."

"It certainly has not," replied Lawry.

"Then where is it?--that's the next question."

"Are you sure it was in your pocket when you got into the ferry-boat?"

"Just as sure as I am that I sit here."

"You were very careless about your coat on board of the sloop."

"I know I was."

"I don't see how a man could throw down his coat with six thousand
dollars in the pocket," said Lawry.

"I know I'm careless; but I'm so used to carrying money that I don't
think much about it. I always carry it in a pocket inside of my
vest," continued the director, putting his hand in the place
indicated; "but this is a new vest, and hasn't any such pocket.
Things don't look all right to me. Is the ferryman your father?"

"Yes, sir; he is."

"Well, the money's gone," added Mr. Randall. "We will go back to the
ferry-boat."

"Did you find it?" asked John Wilford, as the bank director stepped
into the bateau.

"No; but I'm certain it has not gone to the bottom."

"Where is it, then?"

"I don't know; can you tell me?"

Mr. Randall looked at the ferryman very sharply. His manner
indicated that he had some suspicions.

"How can I tell you?" replied John Wilford.

"The money was in the coat pocket when you picked it up in the
water--I know it was."

"Do you mean to say I took it out?" demanded the ferryman angrily.

"If you didn't, I don't see what has become of it."

"Do you mean to accuse my father of stealing?" said Lawry indignantly.

"I don't accuse him of anything; but here are the facts, and you can
all see for yourselves."

"You throw your coat down anywhere. It would have gone overboard
from the sloop if I hadn't saved it; and it won't do for so careless
a man as you are to accuse anybody of stealing your money," added
Lawry angrily.

"Very likely you lost it out of the pocket before you got into the
ferry-boat."

"Never mind him, Lawry. I haven't got his pocketbook," interposed
the ferryman.

"I know you haven't, father; and it makes me mad to hear him accuse
you of stealing it."

"Mr. Randall, if you think I've got your money, I want you to
satisfy yourself on the point at once," continued John Wilford,
turning to the director.

"I hope you haven't."

"But you think I have. Search me, then."

Greatly to the indignation of Lawry, Mr. Randall did search the
ferryman; turned out his pockets, and examined every part of his wet
garments. The pocketbook was not upon his person; and the loser, in
spite of the laws of specific gravity, which he had just
demonstrated, was almost compelled to believe that his money had gone
to the bottom of the lake.




CHAPTER IV

THE STEAMER "WOODVILLE"


Mr. Randall, now that his money was lost, declared that he had no
business in Shoreham, and it was useless for him to go there. The six
thousand dollars belonged to his bank, and, having an opportunity to
put this sum in circulation, where it would be "kept out" for several
weeks, he was making this journey to accomplish the business. He
facetiously remarked that it was likely to be kept out longer than
was desirable.

Lawry was so sure Mr. Randall had dropped the pocketbook on the
shore before he got into the ferry-boat, that he insisted upon
returning to Pork Rock and having the ground searched. Though the
bank director was satisfied that the pocketbook was safe in his
possession when he entered the bateau, he was willing to return,
since the object of his journey had been defeated, and Lawry pulled
him back to the landing-place. The ground under the tree, and over
which Mr. Randall had walked while waiting for the ferryman, was
carefully examined, but the lost pocketbook could not be found.

The bank director had very little to say after he left the ferry-boat;
but he was very thoughtful, as a man who had lost six thousand
dollars might reasonably be. After the search on shore was completed,
he walked off toward the village without mentioning his intentions,
but he looked as though he purposed to do something.

"What's the matter, Lawry?" asked Mrs. Wilford, who had been
watching the movements of Mr. Randall and her son from the window, as
she came out of the house.

"The gentleman has lost his money--six thousand dollars," replied
Lawry.

"Lost it!" exclaimed Mrs. Wilford, recalling the conversation with
her husband at dinner.

"His coat fell overboard, and the pocketbook dropped out."

"Fell into the lake," added she, with a feeling of relief.

"Yes; father swam out and got the coat, but the money was gone."

Mrs. Wilford returned to the house. Perhaps she had some misgivings,
and felt more than before that those who make haste to be rich are
often ruined; but she said nothing. Lawry was perplexed at the
disappearance of the money. Mr. Randall had proved that a pocketbook
with nothing but paper in it would not sink within a reasonable time.
If the lost treasure had fallen into the water, he would certainly
have found it. If it had been dropped on shore or in the ferry-boat,
it would not have disappeared so strangely.

Lawry was so positive that the pocketbook was still in the ferry-boat,
or on the shore, that he renewed the search, and carefully scrutinized
every foot of ground between the house and the landing-place, but
with no better success than before. By this time the ferry-boat,
which had been favored by a good wind during the last half-hour,
returned.

"What do you suppose became of that pocketbook, father?" asked
Lawry, as he stepped into the boat.

"I don't know. I don't believe he lost any pocketbook," replied John
Wilford.

"He says he did, and I saw it myself."

"Perhaps you did, but I don't believe there was any six thousand
dollars in it. If there had been, he wouldn't have thrown it about as
he did."

"He says there was six thousand dollars in the pocketbook."

"I don't believe it. It's a likely story that a man would throw down
his coat, with all that money in the pocket, on the drop. In my
opinion it's some trick to cheat his creditors out of their just due."

"It don't seem possible."

"That's the truth, you may depend upon it. That's the way men make
money."

Lawry was by no means satisfied with this explanation. He went into
the boat, and carefully searched every part of it. His father watched
him with considerable interest, declaring that it was useless to look
for what had not been lost.

"You had better go up and see Mr. Sherwood now," said Mr. Wilford.

"I have been up, and he was not at home."

"You better go again, then."

"He has gone to Port Henry after the new steamer."

"Has he got a pilot?"

"Not that I know of."

"He can't get one at Port Henry," said the ferryman.

"I suppose he is going to pilot her himself."

"He will pilot her on the rocks, then. He don't know anything about
Lake Champlain. Why don't you row up the lake till you meet the boat?"

"I was thinking of doing so, but I can't keep this money out of my
mind."

"Why need you trouble yourself about that?" demanded the father
impatiently.

"It was lost in your boat, and I am very anxious that it should be
found. I'm sure Mr. Randall thinks you've got it."

"Well, he searched me, and found out that I hadn't got it--didn't
he?" added Mr. Wilford, with a sickly smile.

"I don't like to have you suspected of such a thing, and for that
reason I want to find the money."

"You can't find it, and I tell you he hasn't lost any money. He's
going to cheat the bank or his creditors out of six thousand dollars."

"I don't believe he would do such a thing as that."

"We have looked everywhere for the money, and it can't be found.
It's no use to bother any more about the matter. It's gone, and
that's the end of it--if he lost it at all. You have looked all over
the ferry-boat, and it isn't there. If it had been floating in the
lake, you couldn't help seeing it. Now, you better take your boat and
row up the lake till you meet the steamer."

"I'm going pretty soon."

"Better go now. I'm going up after a drink of water. If you don't go
pretty soon, you will be too late to do any good on board the
steamer," said Mr. Wilford, hoping, if he left the spot, his son
would depart also.

Lawry hauled in the rowboat, ready to embark; but, before he did so,
he made one more search in the bateau for the pocketbook. The timbers
of the ferry-boat were ceiled over on the bottom, leaving a space for
the leakage between the inner and the outer planking. Near the mast
there was a well, from which, with a grain-shovel, the water was
thrown out. Lawry examined this hole, feeling under the planks, and
thrusting the shovel in as far as he could. This search was
unavailing, and he gave it up in despair. As he stepped on shore, his
