"I'll say it as often as I like," said Paul, who wasn't troubled by
cowardice. "Come on, if you want to."

Mike advanced a step, doubling his fists; but, finding that Paul showed
no particular sign of fear, he stopped short, saying: "I'll lick you
some other time."

"You'd better put it off," said Paul. "Have a prize package, sir? Only
five cents!"

This was addressed to a young man who came out of an insurance office.

"I don't mind if I do," said the young man. "Five cents, is it? What
prize may I expect?"

"The highest is ten cents."

"There's a boy around the post office that gives fifty-cent prizes,
mister," said Mike. "You'd better buy of him."

"I'll wait till another time," said the young man. "Here's the money,
Johnny. Now for the package."

"Look here," said Paul, indignantly, when his customer had gone away;
"haven't you anything to do except to drive off my customers?"

"Give me two cents on every package," said Mike, "and I'll tell 'em you
give dollar prizes."

"That would be a lie, and I don't want to do business that way."

Mike continued his persecutions a while longer, and then turned the
corner into Nassau street.

"I'm glad he's gone," thought Paul. "Now there's a chance for me."

He managed after a while to sell twenty of his packages. By this time it
was twelve o'clock, and he began to feel hungry. He resolved, therefore,
to go home to dinner and come out again in the afternoon. He didn't know
how much he had made, but probably about fifty cents. He had made more
than double as much the day before in less time; but then he did not
suffer from competition.

He began to doubt whether he could long pursue this business, since
other competitors were likely to spring up.

As he walked by the post office he had the curiosity to look and see how
his competitor was getting along.

Teddy had started, originally, with seventy-five packages; but of those
scarcely a dozen were left. A group of boys were around him. Among
them was Mike, who was just on the point of buying another package. As
before, he put it in his pocket, and it was not till Teddy asked, "What
luck, Mike?" that he drew it out, and opening it again, produced fifty
cents.

"It's the big prize!" he said. "Sure I'm in luck, anyhow."

"You're the boy that's lucky," said Teddy, with a grin.

As Paul witnessed the scene a light broke upon him. Now he understood
how Teddy could afford to give such large prizes. Mike and the other
boy, Jim, were only confederates of his--decoy ducks--who kept drawing
over again the same prize, which was eventually given back to Teddy. It
was plain now why Mike put the package into his pocket before opening
it. It was to exchange it for another packet into which the money had
previously been placed, but which was supposed by the lookers-on to
be the same that had just been purchased. The prize could afterward be
placed in a new packet and used over again.

"That ain't the same package," said Paul, announcing his discovery. "He
had it all the while in his pocket."

"Look here," blustered Mike, "you jest mind your own business! That's
the best thing for you."

"Suppose I don't?"

"If you don't there may be a funeral to-morrow of a boy about your
size."

There was a laugh at Paul's expense, but he took it coolly.

"I'll send you a particular invitation to attend, if I can get anybody
to go over to the island."

As Mike had been a resident at Blackwell's Island on two different
occasions, this produced a laugh at his expense, in the midst of which
Paul walked off.



CHAPTER IV

TEDDY GIVES UP BUSINESS

"Have you sold all your packages, Paul?" asked Jimmy, as our hero
entered the humble room, where the table was already spread with a
simple dinner.

"No," said Paul, "I only sold twenty. I begin to think that the
prize-package business will soon be played out."

"Why?"

"There's too many that'll go into it."

Here Paul related his experience of the morning, explaining how it was
that Teddy had managed to distance him in the competition.

"Can't you do the same, Paul?" asked Jimmy. "Mother's got a gold dollar
she could lend you."

"That might do," said Paul; "but I don't know any boy I could trust to
draw it except you, and some of them would know we were brothers."

"I think, Paul, that would be dishonest," said Mrs. Hoffman. "I would
rather make less, if I were you, and do it honestly."

"Maybe you're right, mother. I'll try it again this afternoon, keeping
as far away from Teddy as I can. If I find I can't make it go, I'll try
some other business."

"Jimmy, have you shown Paul your drawing?" said his mother.

"Here it is, Paul," said Jimmy, producing his drawing-book, from which
he had copied a simple design of a rustic cottage.

"Why, that's capital, Jimmy," said Paul, in real surprise. "I had no
idea you would succeed so well."

"Do you really think so, Paul?" asked the little boy, much pleased.

"I really do. How long did it take you?"

"Only a short time--not more than half an hour, I should think," said
Mrs. Hoffman. "I think Jimmy succeeded very well."

"You'll make a great artist some time, Jimmy," said Paul.

"I wish I could," said the little boy. "I should like to earn some
money, so that you and mother need not work so hard."

"Hard work agrees with me. I'm tough," said Paul. "But when we get to
be men, Jimmy, we'll make so much money that mother needn't work at all.
She shall sit in the parlor all day, dressed in silk, with nothing to
do."

"I don't think I would enjoy that," said Mrs. Hoffman, smiling.

"Will you be in the candy business, then, Paul?" said Jimmy.

"No, Jimmy. It would never do for the brother of a great artist to be
selling candy round the streets. I hope I shall have something better to
do than that."

"Sit down to dinner, Paul," said his mother. "It's all ready."

The dinner was not a luxurious one. There was a small plate of cold
meat, some potatoes, and bread and butter; but Mrs. Hoffman felt glad to
be able to provide even that, and Paul, who had the hearty appetite of
a growing boy, did full justice to the fare. They had scarcely finished,
when a knock was heard at the door. Paul, answering the summons,
admitted a stout, pleasant-looking Irishwoman.

"The top of the mornin' to ye, Mrs. Donovan," said Paul, bowing
ceremoniously.

"Ah, ye'll be afther havin' your joke, Paul," said Mrs. Donovan,
good-naturedly. "And how is your health, mum, the day?"

"I am well, thank you, Mrs. Donovan," said Mrs. Hoffman. "Sit down to
the table, won't you? We're just through dinner, but there's something
left."

"Thank you, mum, I've jist taken dinner. I was goin' to wash this
afternoon, and I thought maybe you'd have some little pieces I could
wash jist as well as not."

"Thank you, Mrs. Donovan, you are very kind; but you must have enough
work of your own to do."

"I'm stout and strong, mum, and hard work agrees with me; but you're a
rale lady, and ain't used to it. It's only a thrifle, but if you want to
pay me, you could do a bit of sewin' for me. I ain't very good with the
needle. My fingers is too coarse, belike."

"Thank you, Mrs. Donovan; on those terms I will agree to your kind
offer. Washing is a little hard for me."

Mrs. Hoffman collected a few pieces, and, wrapping them up in a
handkerchief, handed them to her guest.

"And now what have you been doin', Jimmy darlint?" said Mrs. Donovan,
turning her broad, good-humored face toward the younger boy.

"I've been drawing a picture," said Jimmy. "Would you like to see it?"

"Now, isn't that illigant?" exclaimed Mrs. Donovan, admiringly, taking
the picture and gazing at it with rapt admiration. "Who showed you how
to do it?"

"Paul bought me a book, and I copied it out of that."

"You're a rale genius. Maybe you'll make pictures some time like them we
have in the church, of the Blessed Virgin and the Saints. Do you think
you could draw me, now?" she asked, with curiosity.

"I haven't got a piece of paper big enough," said Jimmy, slyly.

"Ah, it's pokin' fun at me, ye are," said Mrs. Donovan, good-humoredly.
"Just like my Pat; he run into the room yesterday sayin', 'Mother,
there's great news. Barnum's fat woman is dead, and he's comin' afther
you this afternoon. He'll pay you ten dollars a week and board.' 'Whist,
ye spalpeen!' said I; 'is it makin' fun of your poor mother, ye are?'
but I couldn't help laughing at the impertinence of the boy. But I must
be goin'."

"Thank you for your kind offer, Mrs. Donovan. Jimmy shall go to your
room for the sewing."

"There's no hurry about that," said Mrs. Donovan. "I'll jist bring it in
meself when it's ready."

"She is very kind," said Mrs. Hoffman, when Bridget Donovan had gone. "I
shall be glad to have her wash. I am apt to feel weak after it. What are
you going to do this afternoon, Paul?"

"I'll try to sell out the rest of my stock of packages. Perhaps I shan't
succeed, but I'll do my best. Shall you have another picture to show me
when I come back tonight, Jimmy?"

"Yes, Paul; I love to draw. I'm going to try this castle."

"It's rather hard, isn't it?"

"I can do it," said Jimmy, confidently.

Paul left the room with his basket on his arm.

He was drawn by curiosity to the spot where he had met with his first
success, as well as his first failure--the front of the post office.
Here he became witness to an unexpectedly lively scene; in other words,
a fight, in which Teddy O'Brien and his confederate, Mike, were the
contestants. To explain the cause of the quarrel, it must be stated that
it related to a division of the spoils.

Teddy had sold out his last package, seventy-five in number. For these
he had received five cents apiece, making in all three dollars and
seventy-five cents, of which all but a dollar and seventy-five cents,
representing the value of the prizes and the original cost of the
packages and their contents, was profit. Now, according to the
arrangement entered into between him and Mike, the latter, for his
services, was to receive one cent on every package sold. This, however,
seemed to Teddy too much to pay, so, when the time of reckoning came, he
stoutly asseverated that there were but sixty packages.

"That don't go down," said Mike, indignantly; "it's nearer a hundred."

"No, it isn't. It's only sixty. You've got the fifty cents, and I'll
give you ten more."

"You must give me the whole sixty, then," said Mike, changing his
ground. "I drawed the fifty as a prize."

Teddy was struck with astonishment at the impudence of this assumption.

"It wasn't no prize," he said.

"Yes, it was," said Mike. "You said so yourself. Didn't he, Jim?"

Jim, who was also a confederate, but had agreed to accept twenty-five
cents in full for services rendered, promptly answered:

"Shure, Mike's right. It was a prize he drew."

"You want to chate me!" said Teddy, angrily.

"What have you been doin' all the mornin'?" demanded Mike. "You're the
chap to talk about chatin', ain't you?"

"I'll give you twenty-five cents," said Teddy, "and that's all I will
give you."

"Then you've got to fight," said Mike, squaring off.

"Yes, you've got to fight!" chimed in Jim, who thought he saw a chance
for more money.

Teddy looked at his two enemies, each of whom was probably more than a
match for himself, and was not long in deciding that his best course was
to avoid a fight by running. Accordingly, he tucked all the money
into his pocket, and, turning incontinently, fled down Liberty street,
closely pursued by his late confederates. Paul came up just in time to
hear the termination of the dispute and watch the flight of his late
business rival.

"I guess Teddy won't go into the business again," he reflected. "I may
as well take my old stand."

Accordingly he once more installed himself on the post office steps, and
began to cry, "Prize packages. Only five cents!"

Having no competitor now to interfere with his trade, he met with fair
success, and by four o'clock was able to start for home with his empty
basket, having disposed of all his stock in trade.

His profits, though not so great as the day before, amounted to a
dollar.

"If I could only make a dollar every day," thought Paul, "I would be
satisfied."



CHAPTER V

PAUL LOSES HIS BASKET

Paul continued in the prize-package business for three weeks. His
success varied, but he never made less than seventy-five cents a day,
and sometimes as much as a dollar and a quarter. He was not without
competitors. More than once, on reaching his accustomed stand, he found
a rival occupying it before him. In such cases he quietly passed on,
and set up his business elsewhere, preferring to monopolize the trade,
though the location might not be so good.

Teddy O'Brien did not again enter the field. We left him, at the end
of the last chapter, trying to escape from Mike and Jim, who demanded a
larger sum than he was willing to pay for their services. He succeeded
in escaping with his money, but the next day the two confederates caught
him, and Teddy received a black eye as a receipt in full of all demands.
So, on the whole, he decided that some other business would suit
him better, and resumed the blacking-box, which he had abandoned on
embarking in commercial pursuits.

Mike Donovan and Jim Parker were two notoriously bad boys, preferring to
make a living in any other way than by honest industry. As some of these
ways were not regarded as honest in the sight of the law, each had more
than once been sentenced to a term at Blackwell's Island. They made a
