
"Come on," the sergeant said, "it is clear at any rate that you are
Englishmen." He had brought a torch with him, and as they came up
looked at them narrowly, then he saluted. "I know you, Sir Edgar,
disguised as you are. I was fighting behind you on the wall five weeks
since, and had it not been for the strength of your arm, I should have
returned no more to England."

"How is Sir Hugh Calverley?" Edgar asked, as they hurried towards the
camp.

"His wounds are mending fast," the sergeant said, "and he went out of
his tent to-day for the first time. I saw him myself."

A quarter of an hour's walking brought them to the tent occupied by Sir
Hugh and his followers. A light was still burning there, and they heard
voices within.

"May we enter?" Edgar said, as he slightly opened the flap of the tent.

"Surely, that must be the voice of Sir Edgar Ormskirk!" Sir Hugh
exclaimed.

"It is I, sure enough, and with me is Sir Albert De Courcy and my brave
man-at-arms."

As he spoke he stepped into the tent. Two knights were there, and they
and Sir Hugh advanced with outstretched hands to meet the new-comers.

"Welcome back, welcome back!" Sir Hugh exclaimed, in a tone of emotion.
"My brave knights, I and my two comrades here have to thank you for our
lives, for, although in truth I know naught about it, I have heard from
Sir Thomas Vokes and Sir Tristram Montford how you brought the band to
our assistance, and how you kept the enemy at bay, while this good
fellow of yours bore me down the ladder on his shoulder; while from
those who escaped afterwards we heard how you both, with but two or
three others, kept the foe back, and gave time for the rest to jump
from the walls or slide down the ladders. But your faces are blue, and
your teeth chattering!"

"We have had to swim three ditches, and the ice having formed pretty
thickly, it was no child's work."

"First, do you each drain a goblet of wine," Sir Hugh said, "and then
to your tent. All your things are untouched. Knights, will you go with
them and rub them down till their skin glows, and then wrap them up in
blankets?" He called, and two servants came in. "Heat three bottles of
wine in a bowl with plenty of spices," he said, "and carry it to these
knights' tent, and take a portion to the tent of their men-at-arms for
the use of this good fellow. See that your comrades rub you down," he
said to Hal. "They will be glad indeed to see you back; for, although
we heard from a prisoner that the two knights were alive, we knew not
whether any others had been taken with them. Tell Hawkins to light two
torches at once and fix them in the knights' tent, and put two others
in that of the men-at-arms. Mind, Sir Edgar, once between the blankets,
you stay there till morning. Your story will keep until then."

After throwing off their wet clothes, and being rubbed down until they
glowed, Edgar and Albert were soon covered up in blankets, and after
drinking the hot spiced wine, soon fell asleep. In the morning they
related their story to Sir Hugh Calverley and the other two knights.

"'Tis Sir Edgar who should tell the tale," Albert said, "for indeed I
know but little about it from the time I saw you lowered over the wall.
Things went well with us for a time; we were joined by more men, and
were strong enough to divide into two parties, Edgar going to the right
while I went to the left. We cleared the wall for some distance, and
methinks had there been ladders, so that we could have been helped more
quickly, the town would have been won, but the enemy were reinforced
more quickly than we were, and we began to lose ground. Then came a
body of knights who beat us back till we were close to the point where
the ladders were set. Then a knight made at me with a mace. I saw his
arms raised, and after that I knew nothing more."

"The last man who jumped from the wall, Sir Albert, told us that he saw
that you were down and that Sir Edgar and one of his men-at-arms were
fighting like demons over you. Now, Sir Edgar, tell us how the matter
ended."

"We made a shift to keep them back, Sir Hugh, for some five minutes,
when one of the French knights offered to give us terms of surrender on
ransom, and seeing no use in fighting longer when the matter could only
have terminated one way, I surrendered."

Then he related the good treatment they had met with at the hands of
Sir Robert De Beaulieu, and the manner in which he had enabled them to
escape the fury of the rabble of Ypres, and had sent them away free
from ransom.

"It was well done, indeed, of him," Sir Hugh said, warmly. "Truly a
courteous and knightly action. And so you have both given your pledge
to fight no more in this campaign. By St. George, I should not be
ill-pleased if someone would put me under a similar pledge, for I tell
you that I am heartily sick of it. Never did so disordered an army
start from England. An army led by bishops and priests is something
strange. Bishops have before now ridden often in battle, but never
before did they assume command. Methinks when I go home that I will ask
the king to give me the direction of Westminster Monastery and Abbey;
at any rate I could not make a worse hand of it than the Bishop of
Norwich is doing of this. And you say that De Beaulieu promised to send
your armour on the first opportunity. That is, indeed, a generous
action, for the armour of a prisoner is always the property of his
captor, and your armour is of great value. I would that we could do
something to show the good knight that we appreciate his generosity."

"We have our chains," Edgar said. "Of course we did not carry them
about us when we should have to fight, and they are very heavy and of
the finest workmanship. These would we gladly send to him, would we
not, Albert, in token of our gratitude? Though, costly as they are,
they are of much less value than the armour."

"I would gladly add something of my own account," Sir Hugh said,
"seeing that you are in my train, and one does not like to be surpassed
by a foreign knight. As to the matter of the ransom, that does not
trouble me, and indeed, seeing that you surrendered to him, and that he
felt that he could not give protection, and you had to risk your lives
in getting away, it was but reasonable that he should remit it, but in
the matter of the armour the case is different. I will add to your
chains a reliquary which was presented to me by Pedro of Castile when I
saved his life in the fight at Najarra. He told me that it contained a
nail of the true cross, and that it was brought to Spain by a Spaniard
of royal blood who was a knight commander of the Temple.

"I do not know how far this is true, for as one gets older one loses
faith in these monkish stories of reliquaries. However, the casket is
set with gems of value, and there is with it a parchment setting forth
its history; at any rate it is a gift that is worthy of even a prince's
acceptance. I will send it to him as a token that Sir Hugh Calverley
recognizes his chivalrous behaviour to the knights who were captured
while covering his carriage from the ramparts of Ypres, and, therefore,
sends this gift to him in all honour and courtesy, together with the
gold chains of the knights themselves. We shall not have long to wait.
There are fights well-nigh every day, and when these are over there is
a truce of an hour to carry off the wounded and dead."

The young knights thanked Sir Hugh for thus generously supplementing
their own offering in return for their armour, but he waved it aside.

"You saved my life," he said; "or at any rate you saved me from
capture, and had I fallen into their hands methinks that I should have
had to pay a far heavier ransom before they let me out again."

Two days later there was heavy fighting again and much loss on both
sides. It ceased as usual without any advantage being won by the
besiegers. The fighting ended soon after mid-day, and at one o'clock
the trumpet sounded a truce. Sir Hugh mounted, with his two knights,
saying to Edgar: "It were perhaps best that you should not ride with
me. 'Tis likely that the townsmen still think that you are in
Beaulieu's house, and were it known that you had escaped it might bring
trouble upon him and the two knights who aided your escape from the
wall."

He took with him a pursuivant and trumpeter, and, riding through the
English and Flemish men-at-arms, who were already engaged in carrying
away the dead and wounded, he rode up to within a short distance of the
wall, then the pursuivant and trumpeter advanced to the edge of the
moat, and the latter blew a loud blast.

In a short time a knight appeared on the wall, and the pursuivant cried
in a loud voice:

"Sir Hugh Calverley, a valiant and puissant knight of England, desires
speech with Sir Robert De Beaulieu, a brave and gentle knight of
Flanders."

"I am Sir Robert De Beaulieu. Pray tell Sir Hugh Calverley to do me the
courtesy to wait for me a quarter of an hour, and I will then issue
forth and speak to him."

At the end of that time Sir Robert rode out, and crossed the bridge
which had been lowered across the ditch for the passage of the soldiers
engaged in collecting the dead. He was followed by two esquires and
four men-at-arms, the latter bearing something behind them on their
horses. The two knights saluted each other courteously, and Sir Hugh
introduced his two companions to Sir Robert.

"I am glad, indeed," the latter said to Calverley, "thus to have the
opportunity of meeting one of the most famous knights in Europe. My
men-at-arms are bearers of the armour of Sir Edgar Ormskirk and Sir
Albert De Courcy, who are, I believe, knights riding in your train. I
promised them that I would send the armour on the first opportunity,
and am glad indeed that the occasion has come so speedily."

He and Sir Hugh had both dismounted after saluting each other, and the
latter held out his mailed hand to the Fleming.

"Sir Robert De Beaulieu," he said, "I have heard of you as a brave and
honourable knight, and you have in this matter proved yourself to be a
chivalrous and generous one in thus rendering up the spoil fairly won
by you, without ransom; but it is not our custom to be outdone in
generosity. The armour is of no ordinary value, and, as these knights
of mine were made prisoners while covering my removal when insensible
and helpless, I feel that the debt is mine as well as theirs. They have
begged me to give you these two chains, both, as you see, of value, and
of the best Italian work. To these I add, as a token of my esteem for
you, this casket, which was given to me by Don Pedro of Spain when I
rode with the Black Prince to aid him in his struggle with Don Henry.
As you will see by the parchment attached to the casket, it contains a
nail of the true cross, brought from Palestine by a Spanish grandee who
was knight commander of the Spanish branch of the Knights Templar. I
pray you to accept it, not as part of the ransom for my knights'
armour, but as a proof of my esteem for one who has shown himself a
flower of knightly courtesy."

"It would be churlish, Sir Hugh Calverley, for me to refuse so noble a
gift thus courteously tendered. I shall prize it beyond any in my
possession, not only for its own value and holiness, but as the gift of
so noble and famous a knight. As to the chains, I pray you to return
them to your brave young knights. Never did I see men who bore
themselves more gallantly, and Sir Edgar, especially, withstood with
honour a score of us for some time, and at last he yielded, not because
he was conquered, but to save further bloodshed. They are young, and
may, like enough, some day be again made prisoners. In that case they
may find the chains, which are of singular beauty, of value to them;
therefore, I pray you, hand them back to them again as a token of how
warmly I appreciate their bravery and conduct."

"Right gladly will I do so. As you put it in that way, Sir Robert, they
will appreciate the gift as much as I do, and, as you say, maybe the
chains will be useful to them some day, for they are not of those who
battle for spoil, and, like myself, have refused all share in that
which the army has taken in Flanders, holding that we had no cause of
dispute with your people, and that our assault upon them was unfairly
and unjustly made."

After some more compliments had been exchanged, the two knights grasped
each other's hands courteously, remounted, and then saluting again,
rode off. While the conversation had been going on, Sir Robert's
men-at-arms had handed over the armour to the three retainers who had
ridden behind Sir Hugh and his two knights.

Edgar and Albert were delighted at regaining their armour. It would
have been impossible for them to have replaced the harness by similar
suits, and, moreover, they felt that they would have been humiliated
had they, on their return to England, been obliged to confess to Sir
Robert Gaiton that they had lost the splendid presents that he had
given them. They were less pleased at the return of their chains, but
Sir Hugh assured them that it would be an act of discourtesy were they
to send them back to De Beaulieu.

There was now nothing to detain them longer in the camp, and taking
leave of Sir Hugh, they started the next morning, with Hal Carter and
the other surviving retainers, and rode by easy stages to Gravelines,
where they took ship for Dover. Instead of riding directly home, they
journeyed to London, as they were bearers of a letter from Sir Hugh
Calverley to the council, and one also to the king. The latter received
them with marked pleasure.

"What! back from the wars, sir knights?" he said, as they handed him
Sir Hugh's letter. "Surely Calverley might have chosen as his
messengers some whose swords could have been better spared."

"We were chosen, your Majesty, because we had the misfortune to be
taken prisoners at Ypres, and it was a condition of our release that we
should take no further part in the campaign, and as we were returning
in consequence, Sir Hugh committed to us this letter to yourself, and
one to the council."

"Prisoners!" the king said, with a laugh; "that you had got yourselves
killed would not have surprised me, but that you should surrender never
entered my mind."

The two young knights coloured.

"It cannot be said that Sir Albert surrendered," Edgar said, "seeing
that he was insensible from his wounds. As for myself, your Majesty, as
I and one of my men-at-arms stood alone on the walls of Ypres
surrounded by foes, I trust that your Majesty will see that it was
wiser for me to yield, and so to have the opportunity of fighting again
some day under your royal banner, than to give away my life uselessly."

"Assuredly, assuredly," the young king said, hastily. "I did but jest,
Sir Edgar, for I know that so long as a chance of victory remained, you
would not lower your sword. However, let me see what the stout knight
says. I know already that he does not approve of the way in which the
war is being carried on; and, indeed, had we thought that the
headstrong bishop would have disregarded Sir Hugh's counsel and
embroiled us with the Flemings, whom we regard as our allies, we should
not have placed him at the head of the army, for though it is but, as
the bishop maintains, a church army, and not an English army, Europe
will assuredly hold us responsible for its doings."

He cut with his dagger the silk that bound the roll of parchment
together.

The king read the letter carefully, and when he concluded said:

"Truly, young sirs, you have borne yourselves right gallantly and well;
Sir Hugh Calverley speaks strongly indeed in your favour, and says that
he owes his freedom if not his life to you. And now, tell me, think you
that Ypres will be taken?"

"I fear not, your Majesty," Edgar said. "I thought that the siege of
Oudenarde was worse conducted than anything I had ever read of, but the
siege of Ypres is to the full as faulty. The place is strong and
stoutly defended, and it can only be taken by regular works erected
against it and machines placed to batter a breach. Nothing of this sort
has been attempted. The troops march valiantly against the walls, but
they throw away their lives in vain; and if, as is said, the French
king is marching to its assistance with a strong army, there will be
naught for us but to retreat to the ports unless strong aid arrives
from England."

"But the bishop has some eight thousand Englishmen and twenty thousand
Ghentois," the king said. "Surely we might fight and win, as our
grandfathers did at Crecy."

"Yes, sire; but the English army at Crecy was commanded by a king, and
was composed of good fighting men, with a great number of knights and
nobles to lead them. The army in Flanders is commanded by a bishop, and
there are many of the men who have gone over for the sake of plunder,
and they will make but a poor stand in battle."

"My uncle of Lancaster has gathered a large force, and is ready to
cross over to their aid," the king said.

"So we have heard by the way, sire, and if he joins the bishop all may
be well, for his authority would be paramount, but at present he has
not crossed, and unless he arrives before the King of France, things
will assuredly go badly with the bishop."

"I have no doubt that Sir Hugh has set forth these matters in his
letter to the council," the king said, "but assuredly Lancaster should
be there in time. And now, tell me how you made your escape from Ypres."

Edgar related the circumstances.

"Your captor was an honourable gentleman," the king said, "and it is
well that you escaped, for these Flemish burghers are masterful men and
might well have murdered you. I must now to the council; I have
summoned it to assemble. Have you been home yet?"

"No, sire. Our first duty was to bring you the letters, but, with your
permission, we shall ride down into Kent tomorrow."

"Do you know that your friend Van Voorden has again returned to London?
He found that he could do naught in Flanders, which at present is
wholly at the orders of the King of France."

They rode first to Sir Robert Gaiton's house, where, as always, they
were welcomed most warmly, and Albert narrated their adventures in
Flanders, and how they still owned the armour he had given them.

After staying there for some time they went to the house where Van
Voorden was lodging, having obtained his address from Sir Robert
Gaiton. They had not seen him since they had parted from him in Ghent,
a year before.

"I thought you intended to settle in Flanders, Mynheer," Edgar said,
after the first greetings were over.

"I hoped to do so, and after I left Antwerp I went to Louvain and took
a house there, but when the King of France defeated and killed Van
Artevelde, and all Flanders save Ghent came under his power, the
country was no longer safe for me. It was known, of course, that I was
for many years here, and that I had done all in my power to effect a
league between Ghent and England, so three months ago I crossed hither,
leaving my wife and daughter at Louvain. I stopped for a short time at
Ghent, and had much to do with bringing it about that Ghent should send
an army to assist the English; but I fear that the doings of the
bishop's troops--the sacking of towns by them--has so set the Flemings
against England that there is no hope of a general alliance being made
with Flanders.

"There were other things for which I wished to come over. I had hoped
to return before this, but matters seem to be going on but badly, and
if the King of France and his army defeat or drive out the bishop, his
power will be greater than ever in Flanders, and in that case I shall
send for my wife and daughter to come over again, and establish myself
here finally."

On taking leave of them he handed a wooden box to each, saying:

"I pray you not to open these until you reach home."

The next day Edgar and Albert rode down into Kent. Great was the
surprise that their presence excited when they arrived at De Courcy's
castle. Aline ran down into the courtyard and embraced her brother
warmly, and then, as was the custom, held up her cheek to be kissed by
Edgar.

"What, tired of the wars already?" she said, laughing. "Or have you
killed all your enemies? or how is it that you are here?"

"We have been prisoners, Aline," her brother said, "and have been bound
to take no farther part in the war."

"Prisoners!" she repeated; "you are joking with me, Albert. Surely you
and Edgar would never have surrendered unharmed?"

"Nor did we, Aline. I was cut down and stunned by the blow of a mace,
