your time, little rascals?"

Both boys started, and looking up, recognized the padrone. He was a
short man, very dark with fierce black eyes and a sinister countenance.
It was his habit to walk about the streets from time to time, and keep a
watch, unobserved, upon his young apprentices, if they may be so called.
If he found them loitering about, or neglecting their work, they were
liable to receive a sharp reminder.

The boys were both startled at his sudden appearance, but after
the first start, Phil, who was naturally courageous, recovered his
self-possession. Not so with Giacomo, who was the more afraid because he
knew he had gained but little money thus far.

"We are not wasting our time, padrone," said Phil, looking up
fearlessly.

"We will see about that. How long have you been together?"

"Only five minutes."

"How much money have you, Filippo?"

"A dollar and twenty cents."

"Good; you have done well. And how is it with you, Giacomo?"

"I have forty cents."

"Then you have been idle," said the padrone, frowning.

"No, signore," said the boy, trembling. "I have played, but they did not
give me much money."

"It is not his fault," said Phil, coming boldly to the defense of his
friend.

"Attend to your own affairs, little scrape-grace," said the padrone,
roughly. "He might have got as much as you."

"No, padrone; I was lucky. A kind lady gave me fifty cents."

"That is not my affair. I don't care where you get the money. But if you
don't bring home all I expect, you shall feel the stick."

These last words were addressed to Giacomo, who understood their import
only too well. In the miserable lodging where he herded with thirty or
forty others scarcely a night passed without the brutal punishment of
one or more unfortunate boys, who had been unsuccessful in bringing home
enough to satisfy the rapacity of the padrone. But of this an account
will hereafter be given.

"Now, go to work, both of you," said the padrone, harshly.

The two boys separated. Giacomo went uptown, while Phil kept on his way
toward the Astor House. The padrone made his way to the nearest liquor
shop, where he invested a portion of the money wrung from the hard
earnings of his young apprentices.

Toward the close of the afternoon Phil found himself in front of the
Astor House. He had played several times, but was not fortunate in
finding liberal auditors. He had secured but ten cents during this time,
and it seemed doubtful whether he would reach the sum he wanted. He
crossed over to the City Hall Park, and, feeling tired, sat down on one
of the benches. Two bootblacks were already seated upon it.

"Play us a tune, Johnny," said one.

"Will you give me pennies?" asked Phil doubtfully, for he did not care,
with such a severe taskmaster, to work for nothing.

"Yes, we'll give you pennies."

Upon this, Phil struck up a tune.

"Where's your monkey?" asked one of the boys.

"I have no monkey."

"If you want a monkey, here's one for you," said Tim Rafferty, putting
his hand on his companion's shoulder.

"He's too big," said Phil, laughing.

"Hould yer gab, Tim Rafferty," said the other. "It's you that'll make a
better monkey nor I. Say, Johnny, do you pay your monkeys well?"

"Give me my pennies," said Phil, with an eye to business.

"Play another tune, then."

Phil obeyed directions. When he had finished, a contribution was taken
up, but it only amounted to seven cents. However, considering the
character of the audience, this was as much as could be expected.

"How much have you made to-day, Johnny?" asked Tim.

"A dollar," said Phil.

"A dollar! That's more nor I have made. I tell you what, boys, I think
I'll buy a fiddle myself. I'll make more money that way than blackin'
boots."

"A great fiddler you'd make, Tim Rafferty."

"Can't I play, then? Lend me your fiddle, Johnny, till I try it a
little."

Phil shook his head.

"Give it to me now; I won't be hurtin' it."

"You'll break it."

"Then I'll pay for it."

"It isn't mine."

"Whose is it, then?"

"The padrone's."

"And who's the padrone?"

"The man I live with. If the fiddle is broken, he will beat me."

"Then he's an ould haythen, and you may tell him so, with Tim Rafferty's
compliments. But I won't hurt it."

Phil, however, feared to trust the violin in unskillful hands. He knew
the penalty if any harm befell it, and he had no mind to run the
risk. So he rose from the seat, and withdrew to a little distance, Tim
Rafferty following, for, though he cared little at first, he now felt
determined to try the fiddle.

"If you don't give it to me I'll put a head on you," he said.

"You shall not have it," said Phil, firmly, for he, too, could be
determined.

"The little chap's showing fight," said Tim's companion. "Look out, Tim;
he'll mash you."

"I can fight him wid one hand," said Tim.

He advanced upon our young hero, who, being much smaller, would probably
have been compelled to yield to superior force but for an interference
entirely unexpected by Tim.



CHAPTER IV

AN INVITATION TO SUPPER

Tim had raised his fist to strike the young fiddler, when he was
suddenly pushed aside with considerable force, and came near measuring
his length on the ground.

"Who did that?" he cried, angrily, recovering his equilibrium.

"I did it," said a calm voice.

Tim recognized in the speaker Paul Hoffman, whom some of my readers will
remember as "Paul the Peddler." Paul was proprietor of a necktie stand
below the Astor House, and was just returning home to supper.

He was a brave and manly boy, and his sympathies were always in favor of
the oppressed. He had met Phil before, and talked with him, and seeing
him in danger came to his assistance.

"What made you push me?" demanded Tim, fiercely.

"What were you going to do to him?" rejoined Paul, indicating the
Italian boy.

"I was only goin' to borrer his fiddle."

"He would have broken it," said Phil.

"You don't know how to play," said Paul. "You would have broken his
fiddle, and then he would be beaten."

"I would pay for it if I did," said Tim.

"You say so, but you wouldn't. Even if you did, it would take time, and
the boy would have suffered."

"What business is that of yours?" demanded Tim, angrily.

"It is always my business when I see a big boy teasing a little one."

"You'll get hurt some day," said Tim, suddenly.

"Not by you," returned Paul, not particularly alarmed.

Tim would have gladly have punished Paul on the spot for his
interference, but he did not consider it prudent to provoke hostilities.
Paul was as tall as himself, and considerably stronger. He therefore
wisely confined himself to threatening words.

"Come along with me, Phil," said Paul, kindly, to the little fiddler.

"Thank you for saving me," said Phil, gratefully. "The padrone would
beat me if the fiddle was broke."

"Never mind about thanks, Phil. Tim is a bully with small boys, but he
is a coward among large ones. Have you had any supper?"

"No," said Phil.

"Won't you come home and take supper with me?"

Phil hesitated.

"You are kind," he said, "but I fear the padrone."

"What will he do to you?"

"He will beat me if I don't bring home enough money."

"How much more must you get?"

"Sixty cents."

"You can play better after a good supper. Come along; I won't keep you
long."

Phil made no more objection. He was a healthy boy, and his wanderings
had given him a good appetite. So he thanked Paul, and walked along by
his side. One object Paul had in inviting him was, the fear that Tim
Rafferty might take advantage of his absence to renew his assault upon
Phil, and with better success than before.

"How old are you, Phil?" he asked.

"Twelve years."

"And who taught you to play?"

"No one. I heard the other boys play, and so I learned."

"Do you like it?"

"Sometimes; but I get tired of it."

"I don't wonder. I should think playing day after day might tire you.
What are you going to do when you become a man?"

Phil shrugged his shoulders.

"I don't know," he said. "I think I'll go back to Italy."

"Have you any relations there?"

"I have a mother and two sisters."

"And a father?"

"Yes, a father."

"Why did they let you come away?"

"The padrone gave my father money."

"Don't you hear anything from home?"

"No, signore."

"I am not a signore," said Paul, smiling. "You may call me Paul. Is that
an Italian name?"

"Me call it Paolo."

"That sounds queer to me. What's James in Italian?"

"Giacomo."

"Then I have a little brother Giacomo."

"How old is he?"

"Eight years old."

"My sister Bettina is eight years. I wish I could see her."

"You will see her again some day, Phil. You will get rich in America,
and go back to sunny Italy."

"The padrone takes all my money."

"You'll get away from the old rascal some day. Keep up good courage,
Phil, and all will come right. But here we are. Follow me upstairs, and
I will introduce you to my mother and Giacomo," said Paul, laughing at
the Italian name he had given his little brother.

Mrs. Hoffman and Jimmy looked with some surprise at the little fiddler
as he entered with Paul.

"Mother," said Paul, "this is one of my friends, whom I have invited to
take supper with us."

"He is welcome," said Mrs. Hoffman, kindly. "Have you ever spoken to us
of him?"

"I am not sure. His name is Phil--Phil the fiddler, we call him."

"Filippo," said the young musician.

"We will call you Phil; it is easier to speak," said Paul. "This is my
little brother Jimmy. He is a great artist."

"Now you are laughing at me, Paul," said the little boy.

"Well, he is going to be a great artist some day, if he isn't one yet.
Do you think, Jimmy, you could draw Phil, here, with his fiddle?"

"I think I could," said the little boy, slowly, looking carefully at
their young guest; "but it would take some time."

"Perhaps Phil will come some day, and give you a sitting."

"Will you come?" asked Jimmy.

"I will come some day."

Meanwhile Mrs. Hoffman was preparing supper. Since Paul had become
proprietor of the necktie stand, as described in the last volume, they
were able to live with less regard to economy than before. So, when the
