
"O Jack! I have a terrible dread that they are going to commit some of
their cruel practices on these wretched men. We had better not go to
the temple. We shall only be horrified without being able to do any
good, for I fear they are going to kill them."

Jack's face wore an expression of deep compassion as he said in a low
voice, "No fear, Ralph; the sufferings of these poor fellows are over
long ago."

I turned with a start as he spoke, and glancing at the men, who were
now quite near to the spot where we stood, saw that they were all dead.
They were tied firmly with ropes in a sitting posture on the planks,
and seemed, as they bent their sightless eyeballs and grinning mouths
over the dancing crew below, as if they were laughing in ghastly
mockery at the utter inability of their enemies to hurt them now.
These, we discovered afterwards, were the men who had been slain in the
battle of the previous day, and were now on their way to be first
presented to the gods and then eaten, Behind these came two men leading
between them a third, whose hands were pinioned behind his back. He
walked with a firm step, and wore a look of utter indifference on his
face as they led him along; so that we concluded he must be a criminal
who was about to receive some slight punishment for his faults. The
rear of the procession was brought up by a shouting crowd of women and
children, with whom we mingled and followed to the temple.

Here we arrived in a few minutes. The temple was a tall circular
building, open at one side. Around it were strewn heaps of human bones
and skulls. At a table inside sat the priest, an elderly man with a
long grey beard. He was seated on a stool, and before him lay several
knives, made of wood, bone, and splinters of bamboo, with which he
performed his office of dissecting dead bodies. Farther in lay a
variety of articles that had been dedicated to the god, and among them
were many spears and clubs. I observed among the latter some with human
teeth sticking in them, where the victims had been clubbed in their
mouths.

Before this temple the bodies, which were painted with vermilion and
soot, were arranged in a sitting posture; and a man called a "dan-vosa"
(orator), advanced, and laying his hands on their heads, began to chide
them, apparently in a low, bantering tone. What he said we knew not,
but as he went on he waxed warm, and at last shouted to them at the top
of his lungs, and finally finished by kicking the bodies over and
running away, amid the shouts and laughter of the people, who now
rushed forward. Seizing the bodies by a leg or an arm, or by the hair
of the head, they dragged them over stumps and stones and through
sloughs until they were exhausted. The bodies were then brought back to
the temple and dissected by the priest, after which they were taken out
to be baked.

Close to the temple a large fire was kindled, in which stones were
heated red hot. When ready these were spread out on the ground, and a
thick coating of leaves strewn over them to slack the heat. On this
"lovo," or oven, the bodies were then placed, covered over, and left to
bake.

The crowd now ran with terrible yells towards a neighbouring hill or
mound, on which we observed the framework of a house lying ready to be
erected. Sick with horror, yet fascinated by curiosity, we staggered
after them mechanically, scarce knowing where we were going or what we
did, and feeling a sort of impression that all we saw was a dreadful
dream.

Arrived at the place, we saw the multitude crowding round a certain
spot. We pressed forward and obtained a sight of what they were doing.
A large wooden beam or post lay on the ground, beside the other parts
of the frame-work of the house, and close to the end of it was a hole
about seven feet deep and upwards of two feet wide. While we looked,
the man whom we had before observed with his hands pinioned was carried
into the circle. His hands were now free, but his legs were tightly
strapped together. The post of the house was then placed in the hole,
and the man put in beside it. His head was a good way below the surface
of the hole, and his arms were clasped round the post. Earth was now
thrown in until all was covered over and stamped down; and this, we
were afterwards told, was a ceremony usually performed at the
dedication of a new temple or the erection of a chiefs house!

"Come, come," cried Jack, on beholding this horrible tragedy; "we have
seen enough, enough--far more than enough! Let us go."

Jack's face looked ghastly pale and haggard as we hurried back to
rejoin the teacher, and I have no doubt that he felt terrible anxiety
when he considered the number and ferocity of the savages, and the
weakness of the few arms which were ready indeed to essay, but impotent
to effect, Avatea's deliverance from these ruthless men.




Chapter XXXII

An unexpected discovery, and a bold, reckless defiance, with its
consequences--Plans of escape, and heroic resolve.


When we returned to the shore and related to our friend what had
passed, he was greatly distressed, and groaned in spirit; but we had
not sat long in conversation, when we were interrupted by the arrival
of Tararo on the beach, accompanied by a number of followers bearing
baskets of vegetables and fruits on their heads.

We advanced to meet him, and he expressed, through our interpreter,
much pleasure in seeing us.

"And what is it that my friends wish to say to me?" he inquired.

The teacher explained that we came to beg that Avatea might be spared.

"Tell him," said Jack, "that I consider that I have a right to ask this
of him, having not only saved the girl's life, but the lives of his own
people also; and say that I wish her to be allowed to follow her own
wishes, and join the Christians."

While this was being translated, the chiefs brow lowered, and we could
see plainly that our request met with no favourable reception. He
replied with considerable energy, and at some length.

"What says he?" inquired Jack.

"I regret to say that he will not listen to the proposal. He says he
has pledged his word to his friend that the girl shall be sent to him,
and a deputy is even now on this island awaiting the fulfilment of the
pledge."

Jack bit his lip in suppressed anger. "Tell Tararo," he exclaimed with
a flashing eye, "that if he does not grant my demand it will be worse
for him. Say I have a big gun on board my schooner that will blow his
village into the sea, if he does not give up the girl."

"Nay, my friend," said the teacher gently, "I will not tell him that;
we must 'overcome evil with good.'"

"What does my friend say?" inquired the chief, who seemed nettled by
Jack's looks of defiance.

"He is displeased," replied the teacher.

Tararo turned away with a smile of contempt, and walked towards the men
who carried the baskets of vegetables, and who had now emptied the
whole on the beach in an enormous pile.

"What are they doing there?" I inquired.

"I think that they are laying out a gift which they intend to present
to some one," said the teacher.

At this moment a couple of men appeared, leading a young girl between
them, and, going towards the heap of fruits and vegetables, placed her
on top of it. We started with surprise and fear, for in the young
female before us we recognised the Samoan girl Avatea.

We stood rooted to the earth with surprise and thick-coming fears.

"Oh my dear young friend," whispered the teacher in a voice of deep
emotion, while he seized Jack by the arm, "she is to be made a
sacrifice even now!"

"Is she?" cried Jack with a vehement shout, spurning the teacher aside,
and dashing over two natives who stood in his way, while he rushed
towards the heap, sprang up its side, and seized Avatea by the arm. In
another moment he dragged her down, placed her back to a large tree,
and, wrenching a war-club from the hand of a native who seemed
powerless and petrified with surprise, whirled it above his head, and
yelled, rather than shouted, while his face blazed with fury, "Come on,
the whole nation of you, an ye like it, and do your worst!"

It seemed as though the challenge had been literally accepted; for
every savage on the ground ran precipitately at Jack with club and
spear, and doubtless would speedily have poured out his brave blood on
the sod, had not the teacher rushed in between them, and, raising his
voice to its utmost, cried--

"Stay your hands, warriors! It is not your part to judge in this
matter. It is for Tararo, the chief, to say whether or not the young
man shall live, or die."

The natives were arrested; and I know not whether it was the gratifying
acknowledgment of his superiority thus made by the teacher, or some
lingering feeling of gratitude for Jack's former aid in time of need,
that influenced Tararo, but he stepped forward, and, waving his hand,
said to his people, "Desist. The young man's life is mine." Then,
turning to Jack, he said, "You have forfeited your liberty and life to
me. Submit yourself, for we are more numerous than the sand upon the
shore. You are but one; why should you die?"

"Villain!" exclaimed Jack passionately, "I may die, but assuredly I
shall not perish alone. I will not submit until you promise that this
girl shall not be injured."

"You are very bold," replied the chief haughtily, "but very foolish.
Yet I will say that Avatea shall not be sent away--at least, for three
days."

"You had better accept these terms," whispered the teacher
entreatingly. "If you persist in this mad defiance, you will be slain,
and Avatea will be lost. Three days are worth having."

Jack hesitated a moment, then lowered his club, and throwing it moodily
to the ground, crossed his arms on his breast and hung down his head in
silence.

Tararo seemed pleased by his submission, and told the teacher to say
that he did not forget his former services, and therefore would leave
him free as to his person, but that the schooner would be detained till
he had further considered the matter.

While the teacher translated this, he approached as near to where
Avatea was standing as possible, without creating suspicion, and
whispered to her a few words in the native language. Avatea, who during
the whole of the foregoing scene had stood leaning against the tree
perfectly passive, and seemingly quite uninterested in all that was
going on, replied by a single rapid glance of her dark eye, which was
instantly cast down again on the ground at her feet.

Tararo now advanced, and taking the girl by the hand, led her
unresistingly away; while Jack, Peterkin, and I returned with the
teacher on board the schooner.

On reaching the deck, we went down to the cabin, where Jack threw
himself, in a state of great dejection, on a couch; but the teacher
seated himself by his side, and laying his hand upon his shoulder,
said--

"Do not give way to anger, my young friend. God has given us three
days, and we must use the means that are In our power to free this poor
girl from slavery. We must not sit in idle disappointment, we must
act--"

"Act!" cried Jack, raising himself and tossing back his hair wildly;
"it is mockery to talk of acting when one is bound hand and foot. How
can I act? I cannot fight a whole nation of savages single-handed.
Yes," he said with a bitter smile, "I _can_ fight them, but I cannot
conquer them, or save Avatea."

"Patience, my friend; your spirit is not a good one just now. You
cannot expect that blessing which alone can ensure success unless you
are more submissive. I will tell you my plans if you will listen."

"Listen!" cried Jack eagerly: "of course I will, my good fellow; I did
not know you had any plans. Out with them. I only hope you will show me
how I can get the girl on board of this schooner, and I'd up anchor and
away in no time. But proceed with your plans."

The teacher smiled sadly. "Ah, my friend! if one fathom of your anchor
chain were to rattle as you drew it in, a thousand warriors would be
standing on your deck. No, no, that could not be done. Even now your
ship would be taken from you were it not that Tararo has some feeling
of gratitude towards you. But I know Tararo well. He is a man of
falsehood, as all the unconverted savages are. The chief to whom he has
promised this girl is very powerful, and Tararo _must_ fulfil his
promise. He has told you that he would do nothing to the girl for three
days, but that is because the party who are to take her away will not
be ready to start for three days. Still, as he might have made you a
prisoner during those three days, I say that God has given them to us."

"Well, but what do you propose to do?" said Jack impatiently.

"My plan involves much danger, but I see no other, and I think you have
courage to brave it. It is this. There is an island about fifty miles
to the south of this, the natives of which are Christians, and have
been so for two years or more, and the principal chief is Avatea's
lover. Once there, Avatea would be safe. Now, I suggest that you should
abandon your schooner. Do you think that you can make so great a
sacrifice?"

"Friend," replied Jack, "when I make up my mind to go through with a
thing of importance, I can make any sacrifice."

The teacher smiled. "Well, then, the savages could not conceive it
possible that for the sake of a girl you would voluntarily lose your
fine vessel; therefore as long as she lies here they think they have
you all safe: so I suggest that we get a quantity of stores conveyed to
a sequestered part of the shore, provide a small canoe, put Avatea on
board, and you three would paddle to the Christian island."

"Bravo!" cried Peterkin, springing up and seizing the teacher's hand.
"Missionary, you're a regular brick. I didn't think you had so much in
you."

"As for me," continued the teacher, "I will remain on board till they
discover that you are gone. Then they will ask me where you are gone
to, and I will refuse to tell."

"And what'll be the result of that?" inquired Jack.

"I know not. Perhaps they will kill me; but," he added, looking at Jack
with a peculiar smile, "I, too, am not afraid to die in a good cause!"

"But how are we to get hold of Avatea?" inquired Jack.

"I have arranged with her to meet us at a particular spot, to which I
will guide you to-night. We shall then arrange about it. She will
easily manage to elude her keepers, who are not very strict in watching
her, thinking it impossible that she could escape from the island.
Indeed, I am sure that such an idea will never enter their heads. But,
as I have said, you run great danger. Fifty miles in a small canoe, on
the open sea, is a great voyage to make. You may miss the island, too,
in which case there is no other in that direction for a hundred miles
or more; and if you lose your way and fall among other heathens, you
know the law of Feejee--a castaway who gains the shore is doomed to
die. You must count the cost, my young friend."

"I have counted it," replied Jack. "If Avatea consents to run the risk,
most certainly I will; and so will my comrades also. Besides," added
Jack, looking seriously into the teacher's face, "your Bible--_our_
Bible--tells of ONE who delivers those who call on Him in the time of
trouble; who holds the winds in His fists, and the waters in the hollow
of His hand."

We now set about active preparations for the intended voyage; collected
together such things as we should require, and laid out on the deck
provisions sufficient to maintain us for several weeks, purposing to
load the canoe with as much as she could hold consistently with speed
and safety. These we covered with a tarpaulin, intending to convey them
to the canoe only a few hours before starting. When night spread her
sable curtain over the scene, we prepared to land; but first kneeling
along with the natives and the teacher, the latter implored a blessing
on our enterprise. Then we rowed quietly to the shore and followed our
sable guide, who led us by a long detour, in order to avoid the
village, to the place of rendezvous. We had not stood more than five
minutes under the gloomy shade of the thick foliage when a dark figure
glided noiselessly up to us.

"Ah! here you are," said Jack, as Avatea approached.--"Now, then, tell
her what we've come about, and don't waste time."

"I understan' leetl English," said Avatea in a low voice.

"Why, where did you pick up English?" exclaimed Jack in amazement; "you
were dumb as a stone when I saw you last."

"She has learned all she knows of it from me," said the teacher, "since
she came to the island."

We now gave Avatea a full explanation of our plans, entering into all
the details, and concealing none of the danger, so that she might be
fully aware of the risk she ran. As we had anticipated, she was too
glad of the opportunity thus afforded her to escape from her
persecutors to think of the danger or risk.

"Then you're willing to go with us, are you?" said Jack.

"Yis, I willing to go."

