never could be brought to see the serious side of anything.  When her
mother cried, she said,--

"What queer faces mamma makes!  And she squeezes water out of her
cheeks?  Funny mamma!"

And when her papa stormed at her, she laughed, and danced round and
round him, clapping her hands, and crying--

"Do it again, papa.  Do it again!  It's SUCH fun!  Dear, funny papa!"

And if he tried to catch her, she glided from him in an instant, not in
the least afraid of him, but thinking it part of the game not to be
caught.  With one push of her foot, she would be floating in the air
above his head; or she would go dancing backwards and forwards and
sideways, like a great butterfly.  It happened several times, when her
father and mother were holding a consultation about her in private,
that they were interrupted by vainly repressed outbursts of laughter
over their heads; and looking up with indignation, saw her floating at
full length in the air above them, whence she regarded them with the
most comical appreciation of the position.

One day an awkward accident happened.  The princess had come out upon
the lawn with one of her attendants, who held her by the hand.  Spying
her father at the other side of the lawn, she snatched her hand from
the maid's, and sped across to him.  Now when she wanted to run alone,
her custom was to catch up a stone in each hand, so that she might come
down again after a bound.  Whatever she wore as part of her attire had
no effect in this way: even gold, when it thus became as it were a part
of herself, lost all its weight for the time.  But whatever she only
held in her hands retained its downward tendency.  On this occasion she
could see nothing to catch up but a huge toad, that was walking across
the lawn as if he had a hundred years to do it in.  Not knowing what
disgust meant, for this was one of her peculiarities, she snatched up
the toad and bounded away.  She had almost reached her father, and he
was holding out his arms to receive her, and take from her lips the
kiss which hovered on them like a butterfly on a rosebud, when a puff
of wind blew her aside into the arms of a young page, who had just been
receiving a message from his Majesty.  Now it was no great peculiarity
in the princess that, once she was set agoing, it always cost her time
and trouble to check herself.  On this occasion there was no time.  She
must kiss-and she kissed the page.  She did not mind it much; for she
had no shyness in her composition; and she knew, besides, that she
could not help it.  So she only laughed, like a musical box.  The poor
page fared the worst.  For the princess, trying to correct the
unfortunate tendency of the kiss, put out her hands to keep her off the
page; so that, along with the kiss, he received, on the other cheek, a
slap with the huge black toad, which she poked right into his eye.  He
tried to laugh, too, but the attempt resulted in such an odd contortion
of countenance, as showed that there was no danger of his pluming
himself on the kiss.  As for the king, his dignity was greatly hurt,
and he did not speak to the page for a whole month.

I may here remark that it was very amusing to see her run, if her mode
of progression could properly be called running.  For first she would
make a bound; then, having alighted, she would run a few steps, and
make another bound.  Sometimes she would fancy she had reached the
ground before she actually had, and her feet would go backwards and
forwards, running upon nothing at all, like those of a chicken on its
back.  Then she would laugh like the very spirit of fun; only in her
laugh there was something missing.  What it was, I find myself unable
to describe.  I think it was a certain tone, depending upon the
possibility of sorrow--MORBIDEZZA, perhaps.  She never smiled.



7.  Try Metaphysics.

After a long avoidance of the painful subject, the king and queen
resolved to hold a council of three upon it; and so they sent for the
princess.  In she came, sliding and flitting and gliding from one piece
of furniture to another, and put herself at last in an armchair, in a
sitting posture.  Whether she could be said to sit, seeing she received
no support from the seat of the chair, I do not pretend to determine.

"My dear child," said the king, "you must be aware by this time that
you are not exactly like other people."

"Oh, you dear funny papa!  I have got a nose, and two eyes, and all the
rest.  So have you.  So has mamma."

"Now be serious, my dear, for once," said the queen.

"No, thank you, mamma; I had rather not."

"Would you not like to be able to walk like other people?" said the
king.

"No indeed, I should think not.  You only crawl.  You are such slow
coaches!"

"How do you feel, my child?" he resumed, after a pause of discomfiture.

"Quite well, thank you."

"I mean, what do you feel like?"

"Like nothing at all, that I know of."

"You must feel like something."

"I feel like a princess with such a funny papa, and such a dear pet of
a queen-mamma!"

"Now really!" began the queen; but the princess interrupted her.

"Oh Yes," she added, "I remember.  I have a curious feeling sometimes,
as if I were the only person that had any sense in the whole world."

She had been trying to behave herself with dignity; but now she burst
into a violent fit of laughter, threw herself backwards over the chair,
and went rolling about the floor in an ecstasy of enjoyment.  The king
picked her up easier than one does a down quilt, and replaced her in
her former relation to the chair.  The exact preposition expressing
this relation I do not happen to know.

"Is there nothing you wish for?" resumed the king, who had learned by
this time that it was useless to be angry with her.

"Oh, you dear papa!--yes," answered she.

"What is it, my darling?"

"I have been longing for it--oh, such a time!--ever since last night."
"Tell me what it is."

"Will you promise to let me have it?"

The king was on the point of saying Yes, but the wiser queen checked
him with a single motion of her head.  "Tell me what it is first," said
he.

"No no.  Promise first."

"I dare not.  What is it?"

"Mind, I hold you to your promise.--It is--to be tied to the end of a
string--a very long string indeed, and be flown like a kite.  Oh, such
fun!  I would rain rose-water, and hail sugar-plums, and snow
whipped-cream, and--and--and--"

A fit of laughing checked her; and she would have been off again over
the floor, had not the king started up and caught her just in time.
Seeing nothing but talk could be got out of her, he rang the bell, and
sent her away with two of her ladies-in-waiting.

"Now, queen," he said, turning to her Majesty, "what IS to be done?"

"There is but one thing left," answered she.  "Let us consult the
college of Metaphysicians."

"Bravo!" cried the king; "we will."

Now at the head of this college were two very wise Chinese
philosophers-by name Hum-Drum, and Kopy-Keck.  For them the king sent;
and straightway they came.  In a long speech he communicated to them
what they knew very well already--as who did not?--namely, the peculiar
condition of his daughter in relation to the globe on which she dwelt;
and requested them to consult together as to what might be the cause
and probable cure of her INFIRMITY.  The king laid stress upon the
word, but failed to discover his own pun.  The queen laughed; but
Hum-Drum and Kopy-Keck heard with humility and retired in silence.

The consultation consisted chiefly in propounding and supporting, for
the thousandth time, each his favourite theories.  For the condition of
the princess afforded delightful scope for the discussion of every
question arising from the division of thought-in fact, of all the
Metaphysics of the Chinese Empire.  But it is only justice to say that
they did not altogether neglect the discussion of the practical
question, what was to be done.

Hum-Drum was a Materialist, and Kopy-Keck was a Spiritualist.  The
former was slow and sententious; the latter was quick and flighty: the
latter had generally the first word; the former the last.

"I reassert my former assertion," began Kopy-Keck, with a plunge.
"There is not a fault in the princess, body or soul; only they are
wrong put together.  Listen to me now, Hum-Drum, and I will tell you in
brief what I think.  Don't speak.  Don't answer me.  I won't hear you
till I have done.--  At that decisive moment, when souls seek their
appointed habitations, two eager souls met, struck, rebounded, lost
their way, and arrived each at the wrong place.  The soul of the
princess was one of those, and she went far astray.  She does not
belong by rights to this world at all, but to some other planet,
probably Mercury.  Her proclivity to her true sphere destroys all the
natural influence which this orb would otherwise possess over her
corporeal frame.  She cares for nothing here.  There is no relation
between her and this world.

"She must therefore be taught, by the sternest compulsion, to take an
interest in the earth as the earth.  She must study every department of
its history--its animal history; its vegetable history; its mineral
history; its social history; its moral history; its political history,
its scientific history; its literary history; its musical history; its
artistical history; above all, its metaphysical history.  She must
begin with the Chinese dynasty and end with Japan.  But first of all
she must study geology, and especially the history of the extinct races
of animals-their natures, their habits, their loves, their hates, their
revenges.  She must--"

"Hold, h-o-o-old!" roared Hum-Drum.  "It is certainly my turn now.  My
rooted and insubvertible conviction is, that the causes of the
anomalies evident in the princess's condition are strictly and solely
physical.  But that is only tantamount to acknowledging that they
exist.  Hear my opinion.--  From some cause or other, of no importance
to our inquiry, the motion of her heart has been reversed.  That
remarkable combination of the suction and the force-pump works the
wrong way-I mean in the case of the unfortunate princess: it draws in
where it should force out, and forces out where it should draw in.  The
offices of the auricles and the ventricles are subverted.  The blood is
sent forth by the veins, and returns by the arteries.  Consequently it
is running the wrong way through all her corporeal organism--lungs and
all.  Is it then at all mysterious, seeing that such is the case, that
on the other particular of gravitation as well, she should differ from
normal humanity?  My proposal for the cure is this:--

"Phlebotomize until she is reduced to the last point of safety.  Let it
be effected, if necessary, in a warm bath.  When she is reduced to a
state of perfect asphyxy, apply a ligature to the left ankle, drawing
