rests and back rails; while the diagonally placed filling may be
about 2 in. in diameter. Start with the shortest lengths, cutting
them longer than required, as the paring necessary to fit them to
the rails and posts shortens them a little. Brad them in position
as they are fitted, and try to arrange them at regular intervals.



** Heated Steering Wheel [441]

Motorists that suffer with cold hands while driving their cars may
have relief by using a steering wheel that is provided with
electric heat. An English invention describes a steering wheel
with a core that carries two electrically heated coils insulated
one from the other and from the outer rim.



** Homemade Workbench [442]
By C. E. McKINNEY, Jr.

The first appliance necessary for the boy's workshop is a
workbench. The average boy that desires to construct his own
apparatus as much as possible can make the bench as described
herein. Four pieces of 2 by 4-in. pine are cut 23 in. long for the
legs, and a tenon made on each end of them, 1/2 in. thick, 3-1/2
in. wide and 1-1/2 in. long, as shown

[Illustration: Details of Construction of Homemade Workbench]

at A and B, Fig. 1. The crosspieces at the top and bottom of the
legs are made from the same material and cut 20 in. long. A
mortise is made 1-1/4 in. from each end of these pieces and in the
narrow edge of them, as shown at C and D, Fig. 1. The corners are
then cut sloping from the edge of the leg out and to the middle of
the piece, as shown. When each pair of legs are fitted to a pair
of crosspieces they will form the two supports for the bench.
These supports are held together and braced with two braces or
connecting pieces of 2 by 4-in. pine, 24 in. long. The joints are
made between the ends of these pieces and the legs by boring a
hole through each leg and into the center of each end of the
braces to a depth of 4 in., as shown at J, Fig. 2. On the back
side of the braces bore holes, intersecting the other holes, for a
place to insert the nut of a bolt, as shown at HH. Four 3/8 by
6-in, bolts are placed in the holes bored, and the joints are
drawn together as shown at J. The ends of the two braces must be
sawed off perfectly square to make the supports stand up straight.

In making this part of the bench be sure to have the joints fit
closely and to draw the bolts up tight on the stretchers. There is
nothing quite so annoying as to have the bench support sway while
work is being done on its top. It would be well to add a cross
brace on the back side to prevent any rocking while planing
boards, if the bench is to be used for large work.

The main top board M, Fig. 2, may be either made from one piece of
2 by 12-in. plank, 3-1/2 ft. long, or made up of 14 strips of
maple, 7/8 in. thick by 2 in. wide and 3-1/2 ft. long, set on
edge, each strip glued and screwed to its neighbor. When building
up a top like this be careful to put the strips together with the
grain running in the same direction so the top may be planed
smooth. The back board N is the same length as the main top board
M, 8-1/2 in. wide and only 7/8 in. thick, which is fitted into a
1/2/-in. rabbet int back of the board M. Thes boards form the top
of the bench, and are fastened to the top pieces of the supports
with long screws. The board E is 10 in. wide and nailed to the
back of the bench. On top of this board and at right angles with
it is fastened a 2-1/2-in. board, F. These two boards are 7/8 in.
thick and 3-1/2 ft. long. Holes are bored or notches are cut in
the projecting board, F, to hold tools.

Details of the vise are shown in Fig. 3, which is composed of a 2
by 6-in. block 12 in. long, into which is fastened an iron bench
screw, S. Two guide rails, GG, 7/8 by 1-1/2 in. and 20 in. long,
are fastened into mortises of the block as shown at KK, and they
slide in corresponding mortises in a piece of 2 by 4-in. pine
bolted to the under side of the main top board as shown at L. The
bench screw nut is fastened in the 2 by 4-in. piece, L, between
the two mortised holes. This piece, L, is securely nailed to one
of the top cross pieces, C, of the supports and to a piece of 2 by
4-in. pine, P, that is bolted to the under sides of the top boards
at the end of the bench. The bolts and the bench screw can be
purchased from any hardware store for less than one dollar.



** Forming Coils to Make Flexible Wire Connections [443]

When connections are made to bells and batteries with small copper
wires covered with cotton or silk, it is necessary to have a coil
in a short piece of the line to make it flexible. A good way to do
this is to provide a short rod about 3/16 in. in diameter cut with
a slit in one end to hold the wire and a loop made on the other
end to turn with the fingers. The end of the wire is

[Illustration: Forming Wire Coils]

placed in the slit and the coil made around the rod by turning
with the loop end.



** Photographing the North Star [443]

The earth revolving as upon an axis is inclined in such a position
that it points toward the North Star. To an observer in the
northern hemisphere the effect is the same as if the heavens
revolved with the North star as a center. A plate exposed in a
camera which is pointed toward that part of the sky on a clear
night records that effect in a striking manner. The accompanying
illustration is from a photograph taken with an exposure of about
three hours, and the trace of the stars shown on the plate by a
series of concentric circles are due to the rotation of the earth.

The bright arc of the circle nearest the center is the path of the
North star. The other arcs are the impressions left by neighboring
stars, and it will be noticed that their brightness varies with
their relative brilliancy. Many are so faint as to be scarcely
distinguished, and, of course, telescopic power would reveal
myriads of heavenly bodies which leave no trace on a plate in an
ordinary camera. The North or pole star is commonly considered at
a point directly out from the axis of the earth, but the
photograph shows that it is not so located. The variation is known
astronomically to be 1-1/4 deg. There is a slight irregularity in
the position of the earth's axis, but the changes are so slow as
to be noticed only by the lapse of a thousand years. Five thousand
years ago the pole star was Draconis, and in eighteen thousand
years it will be Lyrae. We have direct evidence of the change of
the earth's axis in one of the Egyptian pyramids where an aperture
marked the position of the pole star in ancient times, and from
this it is now deviated considerable.

[Illustration: Photograph of the North Star]

This experiment is within the reach of everyone owning a camera.
The photograph shown was taken by an ordinary instrument, using a
standard plate of common speed. The largest stop was used and the
only requirement beyond this is to adjust the camera in a position
at the proper inclination and to make the exposure for as long as
desired. On long winter nights the exposure may be extended to 12
hours, in which event the curves would be lengthened to full
half-circles.

The North star is one of the easiest to locate in the entire
heavens. The constellation known as the Great Dipper is near by,
and the two stars that mark the corners of the dipper on the
extremity farthest from the handle lie in a line that passes
across the North star. These two stars in the Great Dipper are
called the pointers. The North Star is of considerable brilliancy,
though by no means the brightest in that part of the heavens.
--Contributed by O. S. B.



** How to Relight a Match [444]

A match may be a small thing on which to practice economy and yet
a great many times one wishes to relight a match either for
economy or necessity. The usual method is to place the burnt
portion of the match in the flame to be relighted as shown

[Illustration: Relighting a Match]

in Fig. 1. It is very hard to relight the charred end and usually
burnt fingers are the result of pushing the match farther in the
flame. Hold the burnt end in the fingers and place the other end
in the flame as shown in Fig. 2. A light will be secured quickly
and the flame will only follow the stick to the old burnt portion.



** Home-Made Hand Drill [444]

In the old kitchen tool box I found a rusty egg beater of the type
shown in Fig. 1. A shoemaker friend

[Illustration: Details of Hand Drill Construction]

donated a pegging awl, Fig. 2, discarded by him due to a broken
handle. With these two pieces of apparatus I made a hand drill for
light work in wood or metal. By referring to Fig. 3 the chuck, A,
with stem, B, were taken from the awl. The long wire beater was
taken from the beater frame and a wire nail, 0, soldered to the
frame, D, in the place of the wire. The flat arms were cut off and
shaped as shown by E. The hole in the small gear, G, was drilled
out and a tube, F, fitted and soldered to both the gear and the
arms E. This tube, with the gear and arms, was slipped over the
nail, 0, then a washer and, after cutting to the proper length the
nail was riveted to make a loose yet neat fit for the small gear.
The hand drill was then completed by soldering the stem, B, of the
chuck to the ends of the flat arms E. Drills were made by breaking
off sewing-machine needles above the eye as shown in Fig. 4 at A,
and the end ground to a drill point.
--Contributed by R. B. J., Shippensburg, Pa.



** How to Make a Stationary Windmill [445]

A windmill that can be made stationary and will run regardless of
the

[Illustration: Runs in Any Wind]

direction of the wind is here illustrated. Mills of this kind can
be built of larger size and in some localities have been used for
pumping water.

Two semi-circular surfaces are secured to the axle at right angles
to each other and at 45 deg. angle with that of the axle as shown
in Fig. 2. This axle and wings are mounted in bearings on a solid
or stationary stand or frame. By mounting a pulley on the axle
with the wings it can be used to run toy machinery.



** Electric Anesthesia [445]

It is a well known fact that magnetism is used to demagnetize a
watch, and that frost is drawn out of a frozen member of the body
by the application of snow. Heat is also drawn out of a burned
hand by holding it close to the fire, then gradually drawing it
away. The following experiment will show how a comparatively
feeble electric current can undo the work of a strong one.

I once tried to electrocute a rat which was caught in a wire
basket trap and accidentally discovered a painless method. I say
painless, because the rodent does not object to a second or third
experiment after recovering, and is apparently rigid and without
feeling while under its influence.

To those who would like to try the experiment I will say that my
outfit consisted of an induction coil with a 3/8-in. iron core
about 3 in. long. The primary coil was wound with four layers of
No. 20 wire and the secondary contains 4 oz. No. 32 wire, and used
on one cell of bichromate of potash plunge battery. The proper
amount of current used can be determined by giving the rodent as
much as a healthy man would care to take. Fasten one secondary
electrode to the trap containing the rat and with a wire nail
fastened to the other terminal, hold the vibrator of the coil with
your finger and let the rat bite on the nail and while doing so
release the vibrator. In three seconds the rat will be as rigid as
if dead and the wires can be removed.

Now connect your wires to the primary binding-posts of the coil
and wind the end of one of them around the rat's tail and start
the vibrator. Touch the other terminal to the rat's ear and nose.
In a few minutes he will be as lively as ever.
--Contributed by Chas. Haeusser, Albany, N. Y.



** A Simple Battery Rheostat [445]

A spring from an old shade roller is mounted on a board 4 in.
wide, 9 in. long and 3/8 in. thick. A binding-post is fastened to
this board at each end, to which is attached the ends of the
spring, as shown in Fig. 1. The temper of a small portion of each
end of the

[Illustration: Battery Rheostat]

spring will need to be drawn. This can be accomplished by heating
over an alcohol lamp or in a fire and allowing it to cool slowly.
The ends are then shaped to fit the binding-posts. A wire is
connected to one of the binding-posts and a small square piece of
copper is attached to the other end of the wire, as shown in Fig.
2. When this device is placed in a circuit the current can be
regulated by sliding the small square copper piece along the
spring.
--Contributed by H. D. Harkins, St. Louis, Mo.



** A Frame for Drying Films [446]

[Illustration: Frame]

No doubt many amateur photographers are troubled about drying
films and to keep them from curling. The problem may be solved in
the following way:

Make a rectangular frame out of pine wood, 1/4 by 1/2 in., as
shown in the sketch. It is made a little wider and a little
shorter than the film to be dried. This will allow the end of the
film to be turned over at each end of the frame and fastened with
push pins. Do not stretch the film when putting it on the frame as
it shrinks in drying. The film will dry quicker and will be flat
when dried by using this frame.
--Contributed by Elmer H. Flehr, Ironton, Ohio.



** A Home-Made Novelty Clock [446]

This clock that is shown in the accompanying engraving is made in
scroll work, the cathedral and towers being of white maple, the
base is of walnut with mahogany trimmings, all finished in their
natural colors. It has 11 bells in the two towers at the sides and
13

[Illustration: Clock]

miniature electric lamps of different colors on two electric
circuits. The clock is operated by a small motor receiving its
power from dry cell batteries. This motor turns a brass cylinder
over which runs a continuous roll of perforated paper similar to
that used on a pianola. A series of metal fingers, connected by
wires to the bells, press lightly on this brass roll and are
insulated from the roll by the perforated paper passing between.
When a perforation is reached a finger will make a contact with
the brass roll for an instant which makes a circuit with the
magnet of an electric hammer in its respective bell or forms the
circuit which lights the electric bulbs as the case may be.

At each hour and half hour as the clock strikes, the motor is
started automatically and the chimes sound out the tunes while the
colored lights are turned on and off; two small doors in the
cathedral open and a small figure comes out while the chimes are
playing, then returns and the doors are closed.
--Contributed by C. V. Brokenicky, Blue Rapids, Kansas.



** Fourth-of-July Catapult [447]

Among the numerous exciting amusements in which boys may
participate during the Fourth-of-July celebration is to make a
cannon that will shoot life-sized dummies dressed in old clothes.
Building the cannon, as described in the following, makes it safe
to fire and not dangerous to others, provided care is taken to
place it at an angle of 45 deg. and not to fire when anyone is
within its range. The powder charge is in the safest form
possible, as it is fired with a blow from a hammer instead of
lighting a fuse. If the cannon is made according to directions,
there cannot possibly be any explosion.

The materials used in the construction of the catapult may be
found in almost any junk pile, and the only work required, outside
of what can be done at home, is to have a few threads cut on the
pieces of pipe. The fittings can be procured ready to attach,
except for drilling a hole for the firing pin.

[Illustration: Homemade Cannon Which will Hurl a Life-Size Dummy
100 Ft. through the Air]

Secure a piece of common gas pipe, 4 to 6 in. in diameter, the
length being from 18 to 24 in. Old pipe may be used if it is
straight. Have a machinist cut threads on the outside of one end,
as shown in Fig. 1, and fit an iron cap, Fig. 2, tightly on the
threaded end of the pipe. The cap is drilled and tapped in the
center for a 1-in. pipe. Thread both ends of a 1-in. pipe that is
4 in. long, Fig. 3, and turn one end securely into the threaded
hole of the cap. This pipe should project 1/4 in. inside of the
cap. Fit a cap, Fig. 4, loosely on the other end of the 1-in.
pipe. A hole is drilled into the center of this small cap just
large enough to receive a 6-penny wire nail, B, Fig. 4.

This completes the making of the cannon and the next step is to
construct a dummy which can be dressed in old clothes. Cut out two
round blocks of wood from hard pine or oak that is about 3 in.
thick, as shown in Fig. 5. The diameter of these blocks should be
about 1/8 in. less than the hole in the cannon, so they will slide
easily. In the center of each block bore a 1/4-in. hole. Secure an
iron rod, about 4 ft. long, and make a ring at one end and thread
4 in. of the other. Slip one of the circular blocks on the rod and
move it up toward the ring about 14 in. Turn a nut on the threads,
stopping it about 3-1/2 in. from the end of the rod. Slip the
other circular piece of wood on the rod and up against the nut,
and turn on another nut to hold the wooden block firmly in its
place at the end of the rod. If the rod is flattened at the place
where the upper block is located, it will hold tight. These are
shown in Fig. 5. Take some iron wire about 1/8 in. in diameter and
make a loop at the top of the rod for the head. Wire this loop to
the ring made in the rod and make the head about this loop by
using canvas or gunny cloth sewed up forming a bag into which is
stuffed either excelsior, paper or hay. The arms are made by
lashing with fine wire or strong hemp, a piece of wood 1 in.
square and 20 in. long, or one cut in the shape shown in Fig. 6,
to the rod. Place the wood arms close to the bottom of the head.
Make a triangle of wire and fasten it and the cross arm securely
to the top of the rod to keep them from slipping down. A false
face, or one painted on white cloth, can be sewed on the stuffed
bag. An old coat and trousers are put on the frame to complete the
dummy. If the clothing is not too heavy and of white material so
much the better. To greatly increase the spectacular flight
through the air, a number of different colored streamers, 6 or 8
in. wide and several feet in length made from bunting, can be
attached about the waist of the dummy. The complete dummy should
not weigh more than 6 lb.

The cannon is mounted on a board with the cap end resting against
a cleat which is securely nailed to the board and then bound
tightly with a rope as shown in Fig. 8. Lay one end of the board
on the ground and place the other on boxes or supports
sufficiently high to incline it at an angle of about 45. deg.
Enough of the board should project beyond the end of the cannon on
which to lay the dummy. When completed as described, it is then
ready to load and fire. Clear away everyone in front and on each
side of the cannon, as the dummy will fly from 50 to 100 ft. and
no one must be in range of its flight. This is important, as the
rod of the frame holding the clothes will penetrate a board at
short range. An ordinary shot gun cartridge of the paper shell
type is used for the charge and it must be loaded with powder
only. Coarse black powder is the best, but any size will do. When
loading. the rod with the wooden blocks, on which the dummy is
attached, do not place the end block against the breech end of the
cannon, leave about 2 or 3 in. between the end of the cannon and
the block. Insert the cartridge in the 1-in. pipe. The cartridge
should fit the pipe snug, which it will do if the proper size is
secured. Screw on the firing-cap, insert the wire nail firing pin
until it rests against the firing-cap of the cartridge. If the
range is clear the firing may be done by giving the nail a sharp
rap with a hammer. A loud report will follow with a cloud of smoke
and the dummy will be seen flying through the air, the arms, legs
and streamers fluttering, which presents a most realistic and
life-like appearance. The firing may be repeated any number of
times in the same manner.



** How to Make a Miniature Volcano [448]

A toy volcano that will send forth flames and ashes with lava
streaming down its sides in real volcanic action can be made by
any boy without any more danger than firing an ordinary
fire-cracker. A mound of sand or earth is built up about 1 ft.
high in the shape of a volcano. Roll up a piece of heavy paper,
making a tube 5 in. long and 1-1/2 in. in diameter. This tube of
paper is placed in the top of the mound by first setting it upon a
flat sheet of paper and building up the sand or

[Illustration: Volcano in Action]

earth about the sides until it is all covered excepting the top
opening. This is to keep all dampness away from the mixture to be
placed within.

A fuse from a fire-cracker, or one made by winding some powder in
tissue paper, is placed in the paper tube of the volcano with one
end extending over the edge. Get some potash from a drug store and
be sure to state the purpose for which it is wanted, as there are
numerous kinds of potash that will not be suitable. An equal
amount of sugar is mixed with the potash and placed in the paper
tube. On top of this put a layer of pure potash and on this pour
some gun powder. This completes the volcano and it only remains
for the fuse to be lighted and action will begin with an explosion
which sends fire, smoke and sparks upward. Flames will follow and
the lava pours down the sides of the mound.



** Wire Loop Connections for Battery Binding-Posts [449]

The trouble with battery binding post connections can be avoided
by winding the bare end of the connecting wire around the
binding-post screw and then back around its extending length as
shown in the sketch. Always screw down permanent connections with
pliers.

[Illustration: Loop]



** Melting Metal in the Flame of a Match [449]

The flame of an ordinary match has a much higher temperature than
is generally known and will melt cast-iron or steel filings. Try
it by striking a match and sprinkle the filings through the flame.
Sputtering sparks like gunpowder will be the result of the melting
metal.



** Russian Squirrels [449]

The squirrel slaughter of Russia amounts to 25,000,000 per year.



** Landscape Drawing Made Easy [449]

With this device anyone, no matter how little his artistic ability
may be, can draw accurately and quickly any little bit of scenery
or other subject and get everything in the true perspective and in
the correct proportion.

[Illustration: Drawing with the Aid of Reflecting Glasses]

No lens is required for making this camera-just a plain mirror set
at an angle of 45 deg., with a piece of ordinary glass underneath,
a screen with a peek hole and a board for holding the drawing
paper. The different parts may be fastened together by means of a
box frame, or may be hinged together to allow folding up when
carrying and a good tripod of heavy design should be used for
supporting it. In order to get the best results the screen should
be blackened on the inside and the eyepiece should be blackened on
the side next to the eye. A piece of black cardboard placed over
the end of the eyepiece and perforated with a pin makes an
excellent peek hole.

In operation the rays of light coming from any given object, such
as the arrow AB, strike the inclined mirror and are reflected
downward. On striking the inclined glass a portion of the light is
again reflected and the rays entering the eye of the operator
produce the virtual image on the paper as shown. The general
outlines may be sketched in quickly, leaving the details to be
worked up later. This arrangement may be used for interior work
when the illumination is good.



** Irrigating with Tomato Cans [450]

The following is an easy and effective way to start plants in dry
weather: Sink an ordinary tomato can, with a 1/8-in. hole 1/2 in.
from the bottom, in the ground so that the hole will be near the
roots of the plant. Tamp the dirt around both plant and can, and
fill the latter with water. Keep the can filled until the plant is
out of danger.
--Contributed by L. L. Schweiger, Kansas City, Mo.

[Illustration: Irrigation]



** Fountain for an Ordinary Pen [450]

Take two steel pens, not the straight kind, and place them
together, one above the other, in the penholder.

[Illustration: Two Pens In Holder]

With one dip of ink 60 or 70 words may be written. This saves time
and the arrangement also prevents the ink from dropping off the
pen.
--Contributed by L. M. Lytle, Kerrmoor, Pa.



** Homemade Mousetrap [450]

Bore a 1-in. hole, about 2 in. deep, in a block of wood and drive
a small nail with a sharp point at an angle so it will project
into the hole about half way between the top and bottom, and in
the center of the hole, as shown.

[Illustration: Hole In Wood Block]

File the end very sharp and bend it down so that when the mouse
pushes its head past it in trying to get the bait at the bottom of
the hole, the sharp point will catch it when it tries to back out.
Almost anyone can make this trap in a short time, and it will
catch the mice as surely as a more elaborate trap.



** Clear Wax Impressions from Seals [450]

A die must be slightly damp to make clear impressions on sealing
wax and to keep it from sticking to the wax. A very handy way to
moisten the die is to use a pad made by tacking two pieces of
blotting paper and one of

[Illustration: Blotter Pad]

cloth to a wooden block of suitable size, and saturate the
blotters with water before using. Stamp the die on the pad and
then on the hot wax. The result will be a clear, readable
impression.
--Contributed by Fred Schumacher, Brooklyn, N. Y.



** A Window Stick [450]

Although the windows in factories and houses are usually provided
with weights, yet the stick shown in the sketch will be found very
handy in case all of the windows are not so equipped. It is made
of a piece of pine wood long

[Illustration: Notches In Stick]

enough to hold the lower sash at a height even with the bottom of
the upper, and about 1-1/2 or 2 in. wide. Notches may be cut in
the stick as shown, each being wide enough to firmly hold the
sash. Thus, with the stick illustrated, the sash may be held at
three different heights on the side A, and at still another on the
side B.
--Contributed by Katharine D. Morse, Syracuse, N. Y.



** How to Make a Canoe [451]

A practical and serviceable canoe, one that is inexpensive, can be
built by any boy, who can wield hammer and saw, by closely
following the instructions and drawings, given in this article.

[Illustration: Canoe and Molds Details]

It is well to study these carefully before beginning the actual
work. Thus an understanding will be gained of how the parts fit
together, and of the way to proceed with the work.

Dimensioned drawings of the canoe and molds are contained in Fig.
1. The boat is built on a temporary base, A, Fig. 2, which is a
board, 14 ft. 1 in. long, 3 in. wide and 1-1/2 in. thick. This
base is fastened to the trestles and divided into four sections,
the sections on each side of the center being 4 ft. long.

The next thing to be considered are the molds (Fig. 3). These are
made of 1-in. material. Scrap pieces may be found that can be used
for these molds. The dimensions given in Fig 1 are for one-half of
each form as shown in Fig. 3, under their respective letters. The
molds are then temporarily attached to the base on the division
lines.

Proceed to make the curved ends as shown in Fig. 4. Two pieces of

[Illustration: Shaping the Canoe]

straight-grained green elm, 32 in. long, 1-3/4, in. wide and 1 in.
thick, will be required. The elm can be obtained from a carriage
or blacksmith's shop. The pieces are bent by wrapping a piece of
wire around the upper end and baseboard. The joint between the
curved piece and the base is temporary. Place a stick between the
wires and twist them until the required shape is secured. If the
wood does not bend readily, soak it in boiling water. The vertical
height and the horizontal length of this bend are shown in Fig. 4.
The twisted wire will give the right curve and hold the wood in
shape until it is dry.

The gunwales are the long pieces B, Fig. 2, at the top of the
canoe. These are made of strips of ash, 15 ft. long, 1 in. wide
and 1 in. thick. Fasten them temporarily to the molds, taking care
to have them snugly fit the notches shown. The ends fit over the
outside of the stem and stern pieces and are cut to form a sharp
point, as shown in Fig. 5. The ends of the gunwales are fastened
permanently to the upper ends of the bent stem and stern pieces
with several screws.

[Illustration: Construction of the Various Parts]

Two other light strips, C and D, Fig. 2, are temporarily put in,
and evenly spaced between the gunwales and the bottom board. These
strips are used to give the form to the ribs, and are removed when
they have served their purpose.

The ribs are now put in place. They are formed of strips of well
seasoned elm or hickory, soaked in boiling water until they bend
without breaking or cracking. Each rib should be 1-1/2 in.

[Illustration: Paddle Parts]

wide, 3/8 in. thick and long enough to reach the distance between
the gunwales after the bend is made. The ribs are placed 1 in.
apart. Begin by placing a rib in the center of the base and on the
upper side. Nail it temporarily, yet securely, and then curve the
ends and place them inside of the gunwales, as shown in Fig. 6.
Fasten the ends of the rib to the gunwales with 1-in. galvanized
brads. This method is used in placing all the ribs. When the ribs
are set, remove the pieces C and D, Fig. 2, and the molds.

A strip is now put in to take the place of the base. This strip is
1-3/4 in. wide, 1/2 in. thick and long enough to reach the entire
length of the bottom of the canoe. It is fastened with screws on
the inside, as shown in Fig. 7, and the ends are lap-jointed to
the stem and stern pieces as shown in Fig. 4. When this piece is
fastened in place, the base can be removed. The seats are attached
as shown in Fig. 8, and the small pieces for each end are fitted
as shown in Fig. 9.

The frame of the canoe is now ready to be covered. This will
require 5-1/2 yd. of extra-heavy canvas. Turn the framework of the
canoe upside down and place the canvas on it. The center of the
canvas is located and tacked to the center strip of the canoe at
the points where ribs are attached. Copper tacks should be used.
The canvas is then tacked to the ribs, beginning at the center rib
and working toward each end, carefully drawing the canvas as
tightly as possible and keeping it straight. At the ends the
canvas is split in the center and lapped over the bent wood. The
surplus canvas is cut off. A thin coat of glue is put on, to
shrink the cloth and make it waterproof.

The glue should be powdered and brought into liquid form in a
double boiler. A thin coat of this is applied with a paintbrush. A
small keel made of a strip of wood is placed on the bottom to
protect it when making a landing on sand and stones in shallow

[Illustration: A Single Paddle]

water. When the glue is thoroughly dry the canvas is covered with
two coats of paint, made up in any color with the best lead and
boiled linseed oil. The inside is coated with spar varnish to give
it a wood color.

The paddles may be made up in two ways, single or double. The
double paddle has a hickory pole, 7 ft. long and 2 in. in
diameter, for its center part. The paddle is made as shown in Fig.
10, of ash or cypress. It is 12 in. long, and 8 in. wide at the
widest part. The paddle end fits into a notch cut in the end of
the pole (Fig. 11).

A shield is made of a piece of tin or rubber and placed around the
pole near the paddle to prevent the water from running to the
center as the pole is tipped from side to side. The complete
paddle is shown in Fig. 12. A single paddle is made as shown in
Fig. 13. This is made of ash or any other tough wood. The
dimensions given in the sketch are sufficient without a
description.



** Thorns Used as Needles on a Phonograph [453]

Very sharp thorns can be used successfully as phonograph needles.
These substitutes will reproduce sound very clearly and with
beautiful tone. The harsh scratching of the ordinary needle is
reduced to a minimum, and the thorn is not injurious to the
record.



** Tool Hangers [453]

A tool rack that is serviceable for almost any kind of a tool may
be made

[Illustration: Tool Hanger]

by placing rows of different-size screw eyes on a wall close to
the workbench, so that files, chisels, pliers and other tools, and
the handles of hammers can be slipped through the eyes.

A place for every tool saves time, and besides, when the tools are
hung up separately, they are less likely to be damaged, than when
kept together on the workbench.



** Child's Footrest on an Ordinary Chair [453]

Small chairs are enjoyed very much by children for the reason that
they can rest their feet on the floor. In many households there
are no small chairs for the youngsters, and they have to use
larger ones. Two things result, the child's legs become tired from
dangling unsupported or by trying to support them on the
stretchers, and the finish on the chair is apt to

[Illustration: Footrest on Chair]

be scratched. The device shown in the sketch forms a footrest or
step that can be placed on any chair. It can be put on or taken
off in a moment. Two suitable pieces of wood are nailed together
at an angle and a small notch cut out, as shown, to fit the chair
stretcher.



** Drying Photo Postal Cards [453]

A novel idea for drying photo postal cards comes from a French
magazine. The drying of the cards takes a long time on account of
their thickness, but may be hastened by using corrugated paper for
packing bottles as a drying stand. Curve the cards, printed side
up, and place the ends between two

[Illustration: Card on Dryer]

corrugations at a convenient distance apart. They will thus be
held firmly while the air can circulate freely all around them.



** Preserving Key Forms [454]

After losing a key or two and having some difficulty in replacing
them, I used the method shown in the sketch

[Illustration: Key Forms Cut in Paper]

to preserve the outlines for making new ones. All the keys I had
were traced on a piece of paper and their forms cut out with a
pair of shears. When a key was lost, another could thus be easily
made by using the paper form as a pattern.
--Contributed by Ernest Weaver, Santa Anna, Texas.



** Renewing Typewriter Ribbons [454]

Roll the ribbon on a spool and meanwhile apply a little glycerine
with a fountain-pen filler. Roll up tightly and lay aside for a
week or ten days. Do not apply too much glycerine as this will
make the ribbon sticky--a very little, well spread, is enough. The
same application will also work well on ink pads.
--Contributed by Earl R. Hastings, Corinth, Vt.



** Drinking Trough for Chickens [454]

A quickly made and sanitary drinking trough for chickens is formed
of a piece of ordinary two or three-ply roofing paper. The paper
is laid out as shown, and the edges are cemented with asphaltum
and then tacked to the side of a fence or shed.

[Illustration: Trough of Roofing Paper]



** Ordinary Pen Used as a Fountain Pen [454]

It is a very simple matter to make a good fountain pen out of an
ordinary pen and holder. The device is in the form of an
attachment readily connected to or removed from any ordinary pen
and holder, although the chances are that when once used it will
not be detached until a new pen is needed.

Take the butt end of a quill, A, from a chicken, goose or turkey
feather--the latter preferred as it will hold more ink--and clean
out the membrane in it thoroughly with a wire or hatpin. Then make
a hole in the tapered end of the quill just large enough to pull
through a piece of cotton string. Tie a knot in one end of this
string, B, and pull it through the small end of the quill until
the knot chokes within, then cut off the string so that only 1/4
in. projects. Shave out a small stopper from a bottle cork for the
large end

[Illustration: Fountain Attachment]

of the quill. This completes the ink reservoir.

Place the quill on top of the penholder C, so that its small end
rests against the pen immediately above its eye. Pull the string
through this eye. Securely bind the quill to the pen and holder
with a thread, as shown, first placing under it a wedge-shaped
support of cork or wood, D, hollowed on both sides to fit the
curved surfaces of the quill and holder. The illustration shows
the detail clearly.

To fill the reservoir place the pen upright on its point and dip a
small camel's-hair brush or cloth-bound toothpick into the ink
bottle and "scrape" off the ink it will hold on the inner edge of
the quill. Cork tightly, and the device is ready for use. When not
in use place the holder at an angle with the pen uppermost.
--Contributed by Chelsea C. Fraser, Saginaw, Michigan.



** How to Construct a Small Thermostat [455]
By R. A. McCLURE

It is a well known fact, that there is a change in the dimensions
of a piece of metal, due to a change in its temperature. This
change in dimensions is not the same for all materials; it being
much greater in some

[Illustration: Simple Thermostat; Couple and Mounting Strip]

materials than in others, while in some there is practically no
change.

If two thin, narrow strips of different metals, that contract or
expand at different ratio due to a variation in temperature, be
rigidly fastened together at their ends, and the combination then
heated or cooled, the combined piece will have its shape changed.
One of the pieces will increase in length more than the other, due
to a rise in temperature, and this same piece will decrease in
length more than the other when subjected to a decrease in
temperature.

If one end of this combined piece be rigidly clamped to a support,
as shown in Fig. 1, and the combination then have its temperature
changed, the free end will move to the right or left of its
original position, depending upon which of the pieces changes in
length the more. If there is a rise in temperature and the
right-hand piece B increases in length faster than the left-hand
piece A, the free end of the combined piece win move to the left
of its original position. If, on the other hand, there is a
decrease in temperature, the right-hand piece will decrease in
length more than the left-hand piece, and the upper or free end
will move to the right of its original position.

Such a combination of two metals constitutes a simple thermostat.
If the movement of the free end of the combination be made to
actuate a needle moving over a properly calibrated scale we have a
simple form of thermometer. If two electrical contacts, CC, be
mounted on the right and left-hand sides of the upper end of the
combined piece, as shown in Fig. 1, we have a thermostat that may
be used in closing an electrical circuit when the temperature of
the room in which it is placed rises or falls a certain value.
These contacts should be so arranged that they can be moved toward
or away from the combined piece independently. By adjusting the
position of these contacts, the electrical circuit will be closed
when the temperature of the thermostat has reached an
experimentally predetermined value.

The following description is that of a thermostat, constructed by
the author of this article, which gave very satisfactory results.
First obtain a piece of steel, 6 in. long, 5/8 in. wide and 2/100
in. thick, and a piece of brass, 6 in. long, 5/8 in. wide and
3/100 in. thick. Clean one side of each of these pieces and tin
them well with solder. Place the two tinned surfaces just treated
in contact with each other and heat them until the solder on their
surfaces melts and then allow them to cool. A better way would be
to clamp the two thin pieces between two heavy metal pieces, and
then heat the whole to such a temperature that the solder will
melt, and then allow it to cool. This last method will give more
satisfactory results than would be obtained if no clamps are used,
as the thin metal pieces are liable to bend

[Illustration: Support for Couple, and Needle-Mounting Strip]

out of shape when they are heated, and as a result they will not
be in contact with each other over their entire surfaces. After
these pieces have been soldered together forming one piece, which
we shall for convenience speak of as the couple, two small holes
should be drilled in one end to be used in mounting it, and a
notch cut in the other end, as shown in Fig. 2.

Cut from some thin sheet brass, about 2/100 in. in thickness, two
pieces, 1/4 in. wide and 1/2 in. long. Bend these pieces of brass
over a piece of hatpin wire, thus forming two V-shaped pieces. Cut
off a piece of the hatpin, 5/8 in. long, and fasten it across the
notched end of the couple by means of the U-shaped piece of brass,
which should be soldered in place as shown in Fig. 3. All
superfluous solder should then be cleaned from the couple and the
steel pin. Now bend the couple so as to form a perfect half
circle, the brass being on the inside.

The base upon which this couple is to be mounted should be made as
follows: Obtain a piece of brass, 7 in. long, 3/4 in. wide, and
1/4 in. thick. In this piece drill holes, as indicated in Fig. 4,
except A, which will be drilled later. Tap the holes B, C and D
for 1/8-in. machine screws.

Cut from some 1/8-in. sheet brass a piece, 1-7/8 in. long and 3/4
in. wide, to be used as a support for the couple. In one end of
this piece drill two small holes, as indicated in Fig. 5, and tap
them for 3/16-in. machine screws. In the opposite end cut a slot,
whose dimensions correspond to those given in Fig. 5. Now bend the
piece, at the dotted line in Fig. 5, into the form shown in Fig.
6, making sure that the dimension given is correct. This piece can
now be mounted upon the piece shown in Fig. 4, by means of two
brass machine screws placed in the holes B. The slot in the
support for the couple will permit its being moved along the
mounting strip, the purpose of which will be shown later.

Next cut another piece of 1/8-in. brass, 2-3/4 in. long and 5/8
in. wide. In this piece drill two 1/8-in. holes, as indicated in
Fig. 7, and then bend it at the dotted lines into the form shown
in Fig. 8. Mount this strip upon the main mounting strip by means
of two brass machine screws placed in the holes C, so that the
upper part is over the center-punch mark for the hole A in the
main mounting strip.

You are now ready to drill the hole A, which should be done as
follows: Remove the piece you last mounted and then clamp the main
mounting strip in the drill press so that the center-punch mark
for the hole A is directly under the point of the drill. Then
remount the piece you just removed, without disturbing the piece
you clamped in the drill press, and drill a small hole through
both pieces. This hole should be about 3/64 in. in diameter. After
this small hole has been drilled through both pieces, a
countersink should be placed in the drill chuck and the hole in
the upper piece countersunk to a depth equal to half the thickness
of the metal in which it is drilled. Unclamp the pieces from the
drill press, turn them over, and countersink the small hole in
what was originally the lower piece. The object of countersinking
these holes is to reduce the bearing surface of a small shaft that
is to be supported in the holes and must be as free from friction
as possible.

We may now construct the needle, or moving portion of the
thermostat, which should be done as follows: The shaft that is to
carry the moving system must be made from a piece of steel rod,
about 3/32 in. in diameter. Its dimensions should correspond to
those given in Fig. 9. Considerable care should be used in turning
this shaft down, to make sure that it fits perfectly in the small
holes in the supporting pieces. The shaft should turn freely, but
it must not be loose in the holes, nor should it have but a very
small end play.

Cut from some 1/32-in. sheet brass a piece whose dimensions
correspond to those given in Fig. 10. Drill a 1/8-in. hole, A, in
this piece, and cut a slot, B, from one side of the piece into
this hole, and a second slot, C, along the center of the piece as
indicated in the figure. Considerable care should be exercised in
cutting the slot C, so that its breadth is exactly equal to the
diameter of the piece of steel wire fastened on the end of the
couple. Also make sure to get the sides of this slot perfectly
smooth. Cut from some 1/8-in. brass a disk having a diameter of
1/2 in., and solder it to the end of the needle. The dotted line
in Fig. 10 indicates the proper position of the disk. Now drill a
hole, D, through the disk and needle, of such a diameter that
considerable force must be applied to the steel shaft you have
already made, in order to force it through the hole. Force the
shaft

[Illustration: Shaft for Needle and Needle]

through this hole until the needle is exactly in the center of the
shaft.

The parts of the thermostat thus far made can now be assembled.
Place the steel shaft in its bearings and see that it turns
