his right, were gathered in the grove, and the warriors of the allied
nations approached, headed by their chiefs, nine for the Mohawks, ten
for the Oneidas, nine for the Cayugas, and eight for the Senecas, while
the Tuscaroras, who were a new nation in the League, had none at all,
but spoke through their friends, the Oneidas, within whose lands they
had been allowed to settle. And when the roll of the nations of the
Hodenosaunee was called it was not the Onondagas, Keepers of the Council
Fire, who were called first, although they were equal in honor, and
leaders in council, but the fierce and warlike Mohawks. Then came the
Onondagas, after them the numerous Senecas, followed by the Oneidas,
with the Cayugas next and the sachemless Tuscaroras last, but filled
with pride that they, wanderers from their ancient lands, and not large
in numbers, had shown themselves so valiant and enduring that the
greatest of all Indian leagues, the Hodenosaunee, should be willing to
admit them as a nation.

Behind the sachems stood the chiefs, the two names not being synonymous
among the Iroquois, and although the name of the Mohawks was called
first the Onondagas were masters of the ceremonies, were, in fact, the
priests of the Hodenosaunee, and their first chief, Tododaho, was the
first chief of all the League. Yet the Senecas, who though superior in
numbers were inferior in chiefs, also had an office, being Door Keepers
of the Long House, while the Onondagas were the keepers in the larger
sense. The eighth sachem of the Senecas, Donehogaweh, had the actual
physical keeping of the door, when the fifty sachems met within, and he
also had an assistant who obeyed all his orders, and who, upon occasion,
acted as a herald or messenger. But the Onondaga sachem, Honowenato,
kept the wampum.

The more Robert saw of the intertwined religious, military and political
systems of the Hodenosaunee, the more he admired them, and he missed
nothing as the Onondaga sachems received their brother sachems of the
allied tribes, all together being known as the Hoyarnagowar, while the
chiefs who were elective were known collectively as the Hasehnowaneh.

Robert, Willet, and Tayoga, who was yet too young to have a part in the
ceremonies, stood on one side with the crowd and watched with the most
intense interest. Among the nine Mohawk sachems they recognized
Dayohogo, who had given Robert the name Dagaeoga, and the lad resolved
to see him later and renew their friendship.

Meanwhile the thirty-six visiting sachems formed themselves in a circle,
with Tododaho, highest of the Onondagas in rank, among them, and facing
the sun which was rising in a golden sea above the eastern hills.
Presently the Onondaga lifted his hand and the hum and murmur in the
great crowd that looked on ceased. Then starting towards the north the
sachems moved with measured steps around the circle three times. Every
one of them carried with him a bundle of fagots, and in this case half
of the bundle was red and half white. When they stopped each sachem put
his bundle of fagots on the ground, and sat down before it, while an
assistant sachem came and stood behind him. Tododaho took flint and
steel from his pouch, set fire first to his own fagots and then to all
the others, after which he took the pipe of peace, lighted it from one
of the fires, and, drawing upon it three times, blew one puff of smoke
toward the center of the heavens, another upon the ground, and the last
directly toward the rising sun.

"He gives thanks," whispered Tayoga, to Robert, "first to Manitou, who
has kept us alive, next to our great mother, the Earth, who has produced
the food that we eat and who sends forth the water that we drink, and
last to the Sun, who lights and warms us."

Robert thought it a beautiful ceremony, full of idealism, and he nodded
his thanks to Tayoga while he still watched. Tododaho passed the pipe to
the sachem on his right, who took the three puffs in a similar manner,
and thus it was passed to all, the entire act requiring a long time, but
at its end the fourteen Onondaga sachems and the thirty-six visiting
sachems sat down together and under the presidency of Tododaho the
council was opened.

"But little will be done today," said Tayoga. "It is merely what you
call at the Albany school a preliminary. The really great meeting will
be after the Maple Dance, and then we shall know what stand the
Hodenosaunee will take in the coming war."

Robert turned away and came face to face with St. Luc. He had known that
the chevalier was somewhere in the vale of Onondaga, but in his
absorption in the Iroquois ceremonies he had forgotten about him. Now he
realized with full force that he had come to meet the Frenchman and to
measure himself against him. Yet he could not hide from himself a
certain gladness at seeing him and it was increased by St. Luc's frank
and gay manner.

"I was sure that we should soon meet again, Mr. Lennox," he said, "and
it has come to pass as I predicted and hoped. And you too, Mr. Willet! I
greet you both."

He offered a hand to each, and the hunter, as well as Robert, shook it
without hesitation.

"You reached Quebec and fulfilled your mission?" he said, giving Robert
a keen look of inquiry.

"Yes, but not without event," replied the youth.

"I take it from your tone that the event was of a stirring nature."

"It was rather a chain of events. The Ojibway chief, Tandakora, whom we
first saw with you, objected to our presence in the woods."

St. Luc frowned and then laughed.

"For that I am sorry," he said. "I would have controlled the Ojibway if
I could, but he is an unmitigated savage. He left me, and did what he
chose. I hope you do not hold me responsible for any attacks he may have
made upon you, Mr. Lennox."

"Not at all, Monsieur, but as you see, we have survived everything and
have taken no hurt. Quebec also, a great and splendid city, was not
without stirring event, not to say danger."

"But not to heralds, for such I take you and Mr. Willet and Tayoga to
have been."

"A certain Pierre Boucher, a great duelist, and if you will pardon me
for saying it, a ruthless bravo, also was disposed to make trouble for
us."

"I know Boucher. He is what you say. But since you are here safe and
unhurt, as you have just reminded me, you escaped all the snares he set
for you."

"True, Monsieur de St. Luc, but we have the word that the fowler may
fall into his own snare."

"Your meaning escapes me."

"Boucher, the duelist and bravo, will never make trouble for anybody
else."

"You imply that he is dead? Boucher dead! How did he die?"

"A man may be a great swordsman, and he may defeat many others, but the
time usually comes when he will meet a better swordsman than himself."

"Yourself! Why, you're but a lad, Mr. Lennox, and skillful as you may be
you're not seasoned enough to beat such a veteran as Boucher!"

"That is true, but there is another who was."

He nodded toward the hunter and the chevalier's eyes opened wide.

"And you, a hunter," he said, "could defeat Pierre Boucher, who has been
accounted the master swordsman! There is more in this than meets the
eye!"

He stared at Willet, who met his gaze firmly. Then he shrugged his
shoulders and said:

"I'm not one to pry into the secrets of another, but I did not think
there was any man in America who was a match for Boucher. Well, he is
gone to another world, and let us hope that he will be a better man in
it than he was in this. Meanwhile we'll return to the business that
brings us all here. I speak of it freely, since every one of us knows it
well. I wish to bring in the Hodenosaunee on the side of France. The
interests of these red nations truly lie with His Majesty King Louis,
since you British colonists will spread over their lands and will drive
them out."

"Your pardon, Chevalier de St. Luc, but it is not so. The English have
always been the good friends of the Six Nations, and have never broken
treaties with them."

"No offense was meant, Mr. Lennox. But we do not wish to waste our
energies here debating with each other. We will save our skill and
strength for the council of the fifty, where I know you will present the
cause of the British king in such manner that its slender justification
will seem better than it really is."

Robert laughed.

"A stab and praise at the same time," he said. "No, Monsieur de St. Luc,
I have no wish to quarrel with you now or at any other time."

"And while we're in the vale of Onondaga we'll be friends."

"If you wish it to be so."

"And you too, Mr. Willet?"

"I've nothing against you, Chevalier de St. Luc, although I shall fight
the cause of the king whom you represent here. On the other hand I may
say that I like you and I wish nothing better than to be friends with
you here."

"Then it is settled," said St. Luc in a tone of relief. "It is a good
way, I think. Why be enemies before we must? I shall see, too, that my
good Dubois becomes one of us, and together we will witness the Maple
Dance."

St. Luc's manner continued frank, and Robert could not question his
sincerity. He was glad that the chevalier had proposed the temporary
friendship and he was glad, too, that Willet approved of it, since he
had such a great respect for the opinion of the hunter. St. Luc, now
that the treaty was made, bore himself as one of their party, and the
dark Canadian, Dubois, who was not far away, also accepted the situation
in its entirety. Tayoga, too, confirmed it thoroughly and now that St.
Luc was with him on a footing of friendship Robert felt more deeply than
ever the charm of his manner and talk. It seemed to him that the
chevalier had the sincerity and honesty of de Galisonniere, with more
experience and worldly wisdom, his experience and worldly wisdom
matching those of de Courcelles with a great superiority in sincerity
and honesty.

The three quickly became the five. St Luc and Dubois being accepted were
accepted without reserve, although Dubois seldom spoke, seeming to
consider himself the shadow of his chief. The next day the five stood
together and witnessed the confessions of sins in the council grove,
the religious ceremony that always preceded the Maple Dance.

Tododaho spoke to the sachems, the chiefs and the multitude upon their
crimes and faults, the necessity for repentance and of resolution to do
better in the future. Robert saw but little difference between his
sermon and that of a minister in the Protestant faith in which he had
been reared. Manitou was God and God was Manitou. The Iroquois and the
white men had traveled by different roads, but they had arrived at
practically the same creed and faith. The feeling that for the time
being he was an Iroquois in a white man's skin was yet strong upon him.

Many of the Indian sachems and chiefs were men of great eloquence, and
the speech of Tododaho amid such surroundings, with the breathless
multitude listening, was impressive to the last degree. Its solemnity
was increased, when he held aloft a belt of white wampum, and,
enumerating his own sins, asked Manitou to forgive him. When he had
finished he exclaimed, "Naho," which meant, "I have done." Then he
passed the wampum to Tonessaah, who also made his confession, and all
the other sachems and chiefs did the same, the people, too, joining with
intense fervor in the manifestation.

A huge banquet of all that forest, river and field afforded was spread
the next morning, and at noon athletic games, particularly those with
the ball, in which the red man excelled long before the white man came,
began and were played with great energy and amid intense excitement. At
the same time the great Feather Dance, religious in its nature, was
given by twelve young warriors and twelve young girls, dressed in their
most splendid costumes.

Night came, and the festival was still in progress. What the Indian did
he did with his whole heart, and all his strength. Darkness compelled
the ball games to cease, but the dancing went on by the light of the
fires and fresh banquets were spread for all who cared. Robert knew that
it might last for several days and that it would be useless until the
end for either him or St. Luc to mention the subject so dear to their
hearts. Hence came an agreement of silence, and all the while their
friendship grew.

It is true that official enemies may be quite different in private life,
and Robert found that he and St. Luc had much in common. There was a
certain kindred quality of temperament. They had the same courage, the
same spirit of optimism, the same light and easy manner of meeting a
crisis, with the same deadly earnestness and concentration concealed
under that careless appearance. It was apparent that Robert, who had
spent so much of his life in the forest, was fitted for great events and
the stage upon which men of the world moved. He had felt it in Quebec,
when he came into contact with what was really a brilliant court, with
all the faults and vices of a court, one of the main objects of which
was pleasure, and he felt it anew, since he was in the constant
companionship of a man who seemed to him to have more of that knightly
spirit and chivalry for which France was famous than any other he had
ever met. St. Luc knew his Paris and the forest equally well. Nor was
he a stranger to London and Vienna or to old Rome that Robert hoped to
see some day. It seemed to Robert that he had seen everything and done
everything, not that he boasted, even by indirection, but it was drawn
from him by the lad's own questions, back of which was an intense
curiosity.

Robert noticed also that Willet, to whom he owed so much, never
intervened. Apparently he still approved the growing friendship of the
lad and the Frenchman, and Tayoga, too, showed himself not insensible to
St Luc's charm. Although he was now among his own people, and in the
sacred vale of which they were the keepers, he still stayed in the
community house with Robert and sought the society of his white friends,
including St. Luc.

"I had thought," said Robert to the hunter the third morning after their
arrival, "that you would prefer for us to show a hostile face to St.
Luc, who is here to defeat our purpose, just as we are here to defeat
his."

"Nothing is to be gained by a personal enmity," replied the hunter. "We
are the enemies not of St. Luc, but of his nation. We will meet him
fairly as he will meet us fairly, and I see good reasons why you and he
should be friends."

"But in the coming war he's likely to be one of our ablest and most
enterprising foes."

"That's true, Robert, but it does not change my view. Brave men should
like brave men, and if it is war I hope you and St. Luc will not meet in
battle."

"You, too, seem to take an interest in him, Dave."

"I like him," said Willet briefly. Then he shrugged his shoulders, and
changed the subject.

The great festival went on, and the agents of Corlear and Onontio were
still kept waiting. The sachems would not hear a word from either. As
Robert understood it, they felt that the Maple Dance might not be
celebrated again for years. These old men, warriors and statesmen both,
saw the huge black clouds rolling up and they knew they portended a
storm, tremendous beyond any that North America had known. France and
England, and that meant their colonies, too, would soon be locked fast
in deadly combat, and the Hodenosaunee, who were the third power, must
look with all their eyes and think with all their strength.

While the young warriors and the maidens sang and danced without
ceasing, the sachems and the chiefs sat far into the night, and as
gravely as the Roman Senate, considered the times and their needs.
Runners, long of limb, powerful of chest, and bare to the waist, came
from all points of the compass and reported secretly. One from Albany
said that Corlear and the people there and at New York were talking of
war, but were not preparing for it. Another, a Mohawk who came out of
the far east, said that Shirley, the Governor of Massachusetts, was
thinking of war and preparing for it too. A third, a Tuscarora, who had
traveled many days from the south, said that Dinwiddie, the Governor of
Virginia, was already acting. He was sending men, led by a tall youth
named Washington, into the Ohio country, where the French had already
gone to build forts. An Onondaga out of the north said that Quebec and
Montreal were alive with military preparations. Onontio was giving to
the French Indians muskets, powder, bullets and blankets in a profusion
never known before.

The red fagots were rapidly displacing the white, and the secret
councils of the fifty sachems were filled with anxiety, but they hid all
their disquietude from the people, and much of it from the chiefs. But,
to their eyes, all the heavens were scarlet and the world was about to
be in upheaval. It was a time for every sachem to walk with cautious
steps and use his last ounce of wisdom.

On the fourth night a powerful ally of St. Luc's arrived, although the
chevalier had not called him, and did not know until the next day that
he had come. He was a tall, thin man of middle years, wrapped in a black
robe with a cross upon his breast, and he had traveled alone through the
wilderness from Quebec to the vale of Onondaga. He carried no weapon but
under the black robe beat a heart as dauntless as that of Robert, or of
Willet, or of Tayoga, and an invincible faith that had already moved
mountains.

Onondaga men and women received Father Philibert Drouillard, and knelt
for his willing blessing. Despite the memories of Champlain and
Frontenac, despite the long and honored alliance with the English, the
French missionaries, whom no hardships could stop, had made converts
among the Onondagas, an enlightened nation with kindly and gentle
instincts, and of all these missionaries Father Drouillard had the most
tenacious and powerful will. And piety and patriotism could dwell
together in his heart. The love of his church and the love of his race
burned there with an equal brightness. He, too, had seen the clouds of
war gathering, thick and black, and knowing the power of the
Hodenosaunee, and that they yet waited, he had hastened to them to win
them for France. He was burning with zeal and he would have gone forth
the very night of his arrival to talk, but he was so exhausted that he
could not move, and he slept deeply in one of the houses, while his
faithful converts watched.

Robert encountered the priest early the next morning, and the meeting
was wholly unexpected by him, although the Frenchman gave no sign of
surprise and perhaps felt none.
