    "'My father holds a mortgage on his father's farm, and it will fall
    due in three months,' he answered.

    "'Surely he won't foreclose?'

    "'Surely he will,' returned Conrad. 'Old Grant will have to leave
    the farm and go to the poorhouse, or, at any rate, to some small
    place like the Sam Martin house. It contains four rooms, and is good
    enough for a bankrupt.'

    "This made me uneasy. I hope, Andy, you will find some friend who
    will be able and willing to advance money to pay the mortgage when
    it falls due. I hear Squire Carter is treating with a city man to
    buy the place. He evidently feels sure that it will come into his
    possession."

When Andy read this portion of the letter he smiled.

"I suspect Conrad and his father will be disappointed," he said to
himself. "The city man will have to look elsewhere for an investment."

One day Andy had a pleasant surprise. Just in front of him on Broadway
he saw a figure that looked familiar.

The tall, bent form, and long white hair he recognized at once as
belonging to Dr. Crabb, the principal of Penhurst Academy.

He pressed forward.

"Dr. Crabb!" he exclaimed. "It is long since we have met. I hope you are
well."

Dr. Crabb surveyed him with a puzzled look; Andy had grown so much that
he could not place him.

"I suppose you are one of my old pupils," he said, "but I shall have to
ask your name."

"Don't you remember Andy Grant?"

"Bless my soul! is it possible? Why, you have grown much taller and
larger."

"Yes, sir; I don't want to stand still."

"And what are you doing now?"

"I am in business in this city."

"That is well, but it is a great pity you could not have remained at
school."

"I thought so myself at the time I left, but I'm quite reconciled to the
change now."

"Doubtless you are doing your duty, wherever you are. In what business
are you engaged?"

"I am in a real estate office."

"I hope you are making fine wages?"

"I receive fifteen dollars a week."

"Bless my soul! Why, that is all I pay my head assistant. You must be
giving great satisfaction. And how is your father?"

"He is pretty well, sir; but his loss of property has worn upon him."

"Naturally. Did I not understand that he had to mortgage his farm."

"Yes, sir."

"I hope there is no danger of foreclosure?"

"There might be, sir; but when the danger comes I shall be able to help
him."

"I am not much of a capitalist, Andy. I understand Latin and Greek
better than I do investments, but if a loan of a few hundred dollars
will help him I shall be willing to let him have it."

"Thank you very much, Dr. Crabb, but my employer, Mr. Crawford, will
give me all the help I need."

"I am truly pleased to hear it. I wish you were able to return to the
academy. You were our _primus_, and I did not like to spare you. You
might in time have succeeded me."

"I hope it will be a long time before you require a successor, doctor. I
shall confine my ambitions to succeeding in my business."




CHAPTER XXXV.

THE RETURN OF AN OLD FRIEND.


One afternoon Andy was busy writing in the office when he heard himself
called by name, and, looking up, saw Walter Gale, who had just entered.

"Mr. Gale!" he exclaimed, joyfully, rising and grasping the hands of his
friend.

"So you know me? Upon my word, you have grown so that I find it
difficult to recognize you."

"Yes, I believe I have grown taller."

"And more manly. I need not ask if you are well. Your appearance answers
that question."

"I was never better."

"And you enjoy your work?"

"Immensely. But when did you reach the city?"

"This morning. As you see, I have lost no time in looking you up."

"Shall you stay here now?"

"Yes," answered Gale, gravely; "my poor uncle is dead. His sickness was
a painful one, and he is better off."

"I am glad you are to be in the city. I hope to see you often."

"You will, if I can have my way. I have hired a handsome and roomy flat
on Madison Avenue, and I expect you to come and live with me."

"I shall be delighted to do so if you will let me pay my share of the
expenses."

"You will pay me with your company. I will receive no other pay. My
uncle has left me all his property--at least a hundred thousand
dollars--and I was rich before."

"I will certainly accept your offer, since I am sure you will like to
have me."

"You were teaching a boy, I believe?"

"Yes; but he is so well advanced now that he does not need my
assistance. I am free to accept your kind offer."

"Call upon me this evening, and arrange to move to-morrow. I am very
lonely, and want young and cheerful company."

When Andy called upon his friend in the evening he found him sumptuously
lodged. The next evening he moved in.

"What news from Arden, Andy?" asked Mr. Gale.

"Nothing much, except that Squire Carter is expecting to foreclose the
mortgage on father's farm next week."

"Is that so? We must not permit that."

"No; I have a thousand dollars in bank, and I shall ask Mr. Crawford
to-morrow if he will advance me two thousand on some lots I own in
Tacoma."

"That will not be necessary. I will myself advance the full amount, and
you can pay me whenever you sell your lots."

"That is very kind, Mr. Gale, and relieves me very much."

"Don't overestimate the kindness. I have more money than I know what to
do with."

"There are others in the same position who would not help me."

"I am your friend. That makes the difference. When you go to Arden I
will go, too. It will be pleasant for me to see the place where I passed
so enjoyable a summer and made so good a friend."

"I shall be delighted to have your company, Mr. Gale."

Two evenings later, as Andy was walking up Broadway toward his new home,
he saw a familiar figure in front of him--the figure of a boy about his
own age. Evidently the boy had been drinking, and could not walk
straight.

Once, as he turned half around, Andy, with a start, recognized John
Crandall, who had treated him so meanly at Mr. Flint's. He had no reason
to like him, but his compassion was aroused.

"John," said Andy, linking his arm in his, "how do you happen to be in
this condition?"

"Who are you?" hiccoughed John.

"I am Andy Grant. Don't you know me?"

"Yes, you used to be at Mr. Flint's. Where are you taking me?" he asked,
suspiciously.

"To my room. I will take care of you to-night. What are you doing now?"

"I was in a place on Wall Street, but I got bounced yesterday. I took
the money they paid me and got drunk."

"That was foolish. Where is your uncle?"

"He has gone to Chicago. I'm awful unlucky, Andy."

"If you will turn over a new leaf and stop drinking I'll see if I can't
get you another place."

"Will you?" asked John, hopefully. "Don't you hate me?"

"No."

"I should think you would. I got you out of Flint's."

"You did me a service without intending it."

"You're a good fellow," hiccoughed John. "I'm sorry I treated you so
mean."

"I'm not, since it led to my securing my present place. But we must turn
down here."

"Where do you live?"

"On Madison Avenue."

"Madison Avenue? You must be a swell."

Andy smiled.

"If you work hard you may become a swell, too."

When they entered the flat, John stared about him in amazement.

"How can you afford to live in such a fine place?" he said.

"Because a friend bears the greater part of the expense. Now, let me
help you undress. We have a spare room, and I will let you occupy it. In
the morning I will wake you up for breakfast."

John Crandall was soon fast asleep. A few minutes later Mr. Gale came
in.

"We have a visitor to-night," said Andy.

"A friend of yours?"

"He may become so, but thus far he has been anything but that."

Andy told the story of John's attempt to injure him.

"And yet you befriend him?"

"Yes. Wouldn't you?"

Walter Gale smiled.

"Tell me your reasons," he said.

"I have no grudge against him. Besides, if we only benefit those whom
we like, there isn't much credit in that."

"Exactly. There isn't much credit in my doing you favors."

"Don't think I am ungrateful, Mr. Gale; I appreciate all you have done
for me."

"I understand you, Andy, and I like you better for what you have done.
What further plans have you?"

"I should like to get John a place, and give him a chance to redeem
himself. He needs a friend badly."

"He shall have one. We will both help him."

When John Crandall awoke the next morning he was himself again. The
effects of his intoxication had passed off, and he seemed ashamed of the
predicament in which Andy had found him.

"Have you any home, John?" asked Andy.

"No; that is, I have a room, but I spent all the money that was coming
to me, and they won't let me stay. I don't know what I shall do," he
said, despondently.

"If Mr. Gale and I will find you a new place, will you try to keep it?"

"Yes, I will."

"Then we will stand by you. You can stay here till I come from the
office this afternoon, and I will find you a boarding place."

"You are a good fellow, Andy. You are my very best friend."

"I will try to be."

"And I will try to deserve your kindness."

Before the week was out John had a new place on Pearl Street, and was an
inmate of the boarding house in Clinton Place, where Andy stayed when he
first came to the city.

He really turned over a new leaf, and became a favorite and trusted
employee in the Pearl Street store. Andy had saved him.

