CVIII. MINOT'S LEDGE.

Fitz-James O'Brien (b. 1828, d. 1862) was of Irish birth, and came to
America in 1852. He has contributed a number of tales and poems to various
periodicals, but his writings have never been collected in book form. Mr.
O'Brien belonged to the New York Seventh Regiment, and died at Baltimore
of a wound received in a cavalry skirmish.

1. Like spectral hounds across the sky,
     The white clouds scud before the storm;
   And naked in the howling night
     The red-eyed lighthouse lifts its form.
   The waves with slippery fingers clutch
     The massive tower, and climb and fall,
   And, muttering, growl with baffled rage
     Their curses on the sturdy wall.

2. Up in the lonely tower he sits,
     The keeper of the crimson light:
   Silent and awe-struck does he hear
     The imprecations of the night.
   The white spray beats against the panes
     Like some wet ghost that down the air
   Is hunted by a troop of fiends,
     And seeks a shelter anywhere.

3. He prays aloud, the lonely man,
     For every soul that night at sea,
   But more than all for that brave boy
     Who used to gayly climb his knee,--
   Young Charlie, with his chestnut hair,
     And hazel eyes, and laughing lip.
   "May Heaven look down," the old man cries.
     "Upon my son, and on his ship!"

4. While thus with pious heart he prays,
     Far in the distance sounds a boom:
   He pauses; and again there rings
     That sullen thunder through the room.
   A ship upon the shoals to-night!
     She cannot hold for one half hour;
   But clear the ropes and grappling hooks,
     And trust in the Almighty Power!

5. On the drenched gallery he stands,
     Striving to pierce the solid night:
   Across the sea the red eye throws
     A steady crimson wake of light;
   And, where it falls upon the waves,
     He sees a human head float by,
   With long drenched curls of chestnut hair,
     And wild but fearless hazel eye.

6. Out with the hooks! One mighty fling!
     Adown the wind the long rope curls.
   Oh! will it catch? Ah, dread suspense!
     While the wild ocean wilder whirls.
   A steady pull; it tightens now:
     Oh! his old heart will burst with joy,
   As on the slippery rocks he pulls
     The breathing body of his boy.

7. Still sweep the specters through the sky;
     Still scud the clouds before the storm;
   Still naked in the howling night
     The red-eyed lighthouse lifts its form.
   Without, the world is wild with rage;
     Unkenneled demons are abroad;
   But with the father and the son
     Within, there is the peace of God.

NOTE.--Minot's Ledge (also called the "Cohasset Rocks") is a dangerous
reef in Boston Harbor, eight miles southwest of Boston Light. It has a
fixed light of its own, sixty-six feet high.



CIX. HAMLET.

William Shakespeare (b. 1564, d. 1616), by many regarded as the greatest
poet the world has ever produced, was born at Stratford-upon-Avon,
England. He was married, when very young, to a woman eight years his
senior, went to London, was joint proprietor of Blackfriar's Theater in
1589, wrote poems and plays, was an actor, accumulated some property, and
retired to Stratford three or four years before his death. He was buried
in Stratford church, where a monument has been erected to his memory. This
is all that is known of him with any degree of certainty.

Shakespeare's works consist chiefly of plays and sonnets. They show a
wonderful knowledge of human nature, expressed in language remarkable for
its point and beauty.

(ACT I, SCENE II. HAMLET alone in a room, of the castle.
Enter HORATIO, MARCELLUS, and BERNARDO.)

Hor. Hail, to your lordship!

Ham.                         I am glad to see you well:
     Horatio,--or I do forgot myself.

Hor. The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.

Ham. Sir, my good friend; I'll change that name with you:
     And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?--
     Macellus?

Mar.             My good lord--

Ham. I am very glad to see you. [To Ber.] Good even, sir.
     But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?

Hor. A truant disposition, good my lord.

Ham. I would not hear your enemy say so,
     Nor shall you do mine ear that violence,
     To make it truster of your own report
     Against yourself: I knew you are no truant.
     But what is your affair in Elsinore?
     We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.

Hor. My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.

Ham. I pray thee, do not mock me, follow-student;
     I think it was to see my mother's wedding.

Hor. Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.

Ham. Thrift, thrift, Horatio! the funeral baked meats
     Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
     Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven
     Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!
     My father!--methinks I see my father.

Hor. Where, my lord?

Ham.    In my mind's eye, Horatio.

Hor. I saw him once; he was a goodly king.

Ham. He was a man, take him for all in all,
     I shall not look upon his like again.

Hor. My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.

Ham. Saw? who?

Hor. My lord, the king your father.

Ham.    The king my father!

Hor. Season your admiration for a while
     With an attent ear, till I may deliver,
     Upon the witness of these gentlemen,
     This marvel to you.

Ham.    For God's love, let me hear.

Hor. Two nights together had these gentlemen,
     Marcellus and Bernardo, on their watch,
     In the dead vast and middle of the night,
     Been thus encounter'd. A figure like your father,
     Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pie.
     Appears before them, and with solemn march
     Goes slow and stately by them: thrice he walk'd
     By their oppress'd and fear-surprised eyes,
     Within his trucheon's length; whilst they, distill'd
     Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
     Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
     In dreadful secrecy impart they did;
     And I with them the third night kept the watch:
     Where, as they had deliver'd, both in time,
     Form of the thing, each word made true and good,
     The apparition comes: I knew your father;
     These hands are not more like.

Ham.                    But where was this?

Mar. My lord, upon the platform where we watch'd.

Ham. Did you speak to it?

Hor.                    My lord, I did;
     But answer made it none: yet once methought
     It lifted up its head and did address
     Itself to motion, like as it would speak;
     But even then the morning cock crew loud,
     And at the sound it shrunk in haste away,
     And vanish'd from our sight.

Ham.                    'T is very strange.

Hor. As I do live, my honor'd lord, 't is true;
     And we did think it writ down in our duty
     To let you know of it.

Ham. Indeed, indeed, sirs, but this troubles me,
     Hold you the watch to-night?

Mar. Ber.                We do, my lord.

Ham. Arm'd, say you?

Mar.  Ber. Arm'd, my lord.

Ham. From top to toe?

Mar. Ber.               My lord, from head to foot.

Ham. Then saw you not his face?

Hor. Oh, yes, my lord; he wore his beaver up.

Ham. What, look'd he frowningly?

Hor. A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.

Ham. Pale or red?

Hor. Nay, very pale.

Ham.                    And fix'd his eyes upon you?

Hor. Most constantly.

Ham.                    I would I had been there.

Hor. It would have much amazed you.

Ham. Very like, very like. Stay'd it long?

Hor. While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.

Mar. Ber.  Longer, longer.

Hor. Not when I saw't.

Ham.                    His beard was grizzled,--no?

Hor. It was, as I have seen it in his life,
     A sable silver'd.

Ham.                    I will watch to-night;
     Perchance 't will walk again.

Hor.                    I warrant it will.

Ham. If it assume my noble father's person,
     I'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
     And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
     If you have hitherto conceal'd this sight,
     Let it be tenable in your silence still;
     And whatsoever else shall hap to-night,
     Give it an understanding, but no tongue:
     I will requite your loves. So, fare you well:
     Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,
     I'll visit you.


DEFINITIONS.--Tru'ant, wandering from business, loitering. Trust'er, a
believer. At-tent', attentive, heedful. De-liv'er, to communicate, to
utter. Cap-a-pie' (from the French, pro. kap-a-pee'), from head to foot.
Trun'cheon (pro. trun'shun), a short staff, a baton. Bea'ver, a part of
the helmet covering the face, so constructed that the wearer could raise
or lower it. Ten'a-ble, capable of being held.


NOTES.--What make you from Wittenberg? i.e., what are you doing away from
Wittenberg?

Wittenberg is a university town in Saxony, where Hamlet and Horatio had
been schoolfellows.

Elsinore is a fortified town on one of the Danish islands, and was
formerly the seat of one of the royal castles. It is the scene of
Shakespeare's "Hamlet."

Hard upon; i.e., soon after.

Funeral baked meats. This has reference to the ancient custom of funeral
feasts.

My dearest foe; i.e., my greatest foe. A common use of the word "dearest"
in Shakespeare's time.

Or ever, i.e., before.

Season your admiration; i.e., restrain your wonder.

The dead vast; i.e., the dead void.

Armed at point; i.e., armed at all points.

Did address itself to motion; i.e., made a motion.

Give it an understanding, etc.;  i.e., understand, but do not speak of it.

I will requite your loves, or, as we should say, I will repay your
friendship.



CX. DISSERTATION ON ROAST PIG.

Charles Lamb (b. 1775, d. 1834) was born in London. He was educated at
Christ's Hospital, where he was a schoolfellow and intimate friend of
Coleridge. In 1792 he became a clerk in the India House, London, and in
1825 he retired from his clerkship on a pension of 441 Pounds. Lamb never
married, but devoted his life to the care of his sister Mary, who was at
times insane. He wrote "Tales founded on the Plays of Shakespeare," and
several other works of rare merit; but his literary fame rests principally
on the inimitable "Essays of Elia" (published originally in the "London
Magazine"), from one of which the following selection is adapted.

1. Mankind, says a Chinese manuscript, which my friend M. was obliging
enough to read and explain to me, for the first seventy thousand ages ate
their meat raw, clawing or biting it from the living animal, just as they
do in Abyssinia to this day.

2. This period is not obscurely hinted at by their great Confucius in the
second chapter of his "Mundane Mutations," where he designates a kind of
golden age by the term Cho-fang, literally the Cooks' Holiday. The
manuscript goes on to say that the art of roasting, or rather broiling
(which I take to be the elder brother), was accidentally discovered in the
manner following:

3. The swineherd, Ho-ti, having gone out into the woods one morning, as
his manner was, to collect mast for his hogs, left his cottage in the care
of his eldest son, Bo-bo, a great lubberly boy, who, being fond of playing
with fire, as younkers of his age commonly are, let some sparks escape
into a bundle of straw, which, kindling quickly, spread the conflagration
over every part of their poor mansion till it was reduced to ashes.

4. Together with the cottage,--a sorry, antediluvian makeshift of a
building, you may think it,--what was of much more importance, a fine
litter of newborn pigs, no less than nine in number, perished. China pigs
have been esteemed a luxury all over the East from the remotest periods we
read of.

5. Bo-bo was in the utmost consternation, as you may think, not so much
for the sake of the tenement, which his father and he could easily build
up again with a few dry branches, and the labor of an hour or two, at any
time, as for the loss of the pigs. While he was thinking what he should
say to his father, and wringing his hands over the smoking remnants of one
of those untimely sufferers, an odor assailed his nostrils unlike any
scent which he had before experienced.

6. What, could it proceed from? Not from the burnt cottage,--he had smelt
that smell before,--indeed, this was by no means the first accident of the
kind which had occurred through the negligence of this unlucky young
firebrand. Much less did it resemble that of any known herb, weed, or
flower. A premonitory moistening at the same time overflowed his nether
lip. He knew not what to think.

7. He next stooped down to feel the pig, if there were any signs of life
in it. He burnt his fingers, and to cool them he applied them in his booby
fashion to his mouth. Some of the crumbs of the scorched skin had come
away with his fingers, and for the first time in his life (in the world's
life, indeed, for before him no man had known it) he tasted--crackling!
Again he felt and fumbled at the pig. It did not burn him so much now;
still he licked his fingers from a sort of habit.

8. The truth at length broke into his slow understanding that it was the
pig that smelt so, and the pig that tasted so delicious; and surrendering
himself up to the newborn pleasure, he fell to tearing up whole handfuls
of the scorched skin with the flesh next it, and was cramming it down his
throat in his beastly fashion, when his sire entered amid the smoking
rafters, armed with a retributory cudgel, and, finding how affairs stood,
began to rain blows upon the young rogue's shoulders as thick as
hailstones, which Bo-bo heeded not any more than if they had been flies.

9. His father might lay on, but he could not beat him from his pig till he
had fairly made an end of it, when, becoming a little more sensible of his
situation, something like the following dialogue eusued:

"You graceless whelp, what have you got there devouring? Is it not enough
that you have burnt me down three houses with your dog's tricks, and be
hanged to you! but you must be eating fire, and I know not what? What have
you got there, I say?"

"O father, the pig, the pig! do come and taste how nice the burnt pig
eats!"

10. The ears of Ho-ti tingled with horror. He cursed his son, and he
cursed himself that he should ever have a son that should eat burnt pig.

Bo-bo, whose scent was wonderfully sharpened since morning, soon raked out
another pig, and, fairly rending it asunder, thrust the lesser half by
main force into the fists of Ho-ti, still shouting out, "Eat, eat, eat the
burnt pig, father! only taste! Oh!" with such like barbarous ejaculations,
cramming all the while as if he would choke.

11. Ho-ti trembled in every joint while he grasped the abominable thing,
wavering whether he should not put his son to death for an unnatural young
monster, when the crackling scorching his fingers, as it had done his
son's, and applying the same remedy to them, he in his turn tasted some of
its flavor, which, make what sour mouths he would for a pretense, proved
not altogether displeasing to him. In conclusion (for the manuscript here
is a little tedious), both father and son fairly sat down to the mess, and
never left off till they had dispatched all that remained of the litter.

12. Bo-bo was strictly enjoined not to let the secret escape, for the
neighbors would certainly have stoned them for a couple of abominable
wretches, who could think of improving upon the good meat which God had
sent them. Nevertheless strange stories got about. It was observed that
Ho-ti's cottage was burnt down now more frequently than ever. Nothing but
fires from this time forward. Some would break out in broad day, others in
the night-time; and Ho-ti himself, which was the more remarkable, instead
of chastising his son, seemed to grow more indulgent to him than ever.

13. At length they were watched, the terrible mystery discovered, and
father and son summoned to take their trial at Pekin, then an
inconsiderable assize town. Evidence was given, the obnoxious food itself
produced in court, and verdict about to be pronounced, when the foreman of
the jury begged that some of the burnt pig, of which the culprits stood
accused, might be handed into the box.

14. He handled it, and they all handled it; and burning their fingers, as
Bo-bo and his father had done before them, and nature prompting to each of
them the same remedy, against the face of all the facts, and the clearest
charge which the judge had ever given,--to the surprise of the whole
court, townsfolk, strangers, reporters, and all present,--without leaving
the box, or any manner of consultation whatever, they brought in a
simultaneous verdict of "Not Guilty."

15. The judge, who was a shrewd fellow, winked at the manifest iniquity of
the decision; and when the court was dismissed, went privily, and bought
up all the pigs that could be had for love or money. In a few days his
lordship's townhouse was observed to be on fire.

16. The thing took wing, and now there was nothing to be seen but fire in
every direction. Fuel and pigs grew enormously dear all over the district.
The insurance offices one and all shut up shop. People built slighter and
slighter every day, until it was feared that the very science of
architecture would in no long time be lost to the world.

17. Thus this custom of firing houses continued till in process of time,
says my manuscript, a sage arose, like our Locke, who made a discovery
that the flesh of swine, or indeed of any other animal, might be cooked
(burnt, as they called it) without the necessity of consuming a whole
house to dress it.

18. Then first began the rude form of a gridiron. Roasting by the string
or spit came in a century or two later; I forget in whose dynasty. By such
slow degrees, concludes the manuscript, do the most useful, and seemingly
