
The Merced, which flows through the same pass, is a noble stream, a
hundred feet wide and ten feet deep. It is formed chiefly of the streams
that leap and rush through the narrower passes, and it is swollen, also,
by the bounty of the marvelous waterfalls that pour down from the ramparts
of the wider valley. The sublime poetry of Habakkuk is needed to describe
the impression, and, perhaps, the geology, of these mighty fissures: "Thou
didst cleave the earth with rivers."

At the foot of the breakneck declivity of nearly three thousand feet by
which we reach the banks of the Merced, we are six miles from the hotel,
and every rod of the ride awakens wonder, awe, and a solemn joy. As we
approach the hotel, and turn toward the opposite bank of the river, what
is that

    "Which ever sounds and shines,
    A pillar of white light upon the wall
    Of purple cliffs aloof descried"?

That, reader, is the highest waterfall in the world--the Yosemite
cataract, nearly twenty-five hundred feet in its plunge, dashing from a
break or depression in a cliff thirty-two hundred feet sheer.

A writer who visited this valley in September, calls the cataract a mere
tape line of water dropped from the sky. Perhaps it is so, toward the
close of the dry season; but as we saw it, the blended majesty and beauty
of it, apart from the general sublimities of Yosemite gorge, would repay a
journey of a thousand miles. There was no deficiency of water. It was a
powerful stream, thirty-five feet broad, fresh from the Nevada, that made
the plunge from the brow of the awful precipice.

At the first leap it clears fourteen hundred and ninety-seven feet; then
it tumbles down a series of steep stairways four hundred and two feet, and
then makes a jump to the meadows five hundred and eighteen feet more. But
it is the upper and highest cataract that is most wonderful to the eye, as
well as most musical. The cliff is so sheer that there is no break in the
body of the water during the whole of its descent of more than a quarter
of a mile. It pours in a curve from the summit, fifteen hundred feet, to
the basin that hoards it but a moment for the cascades that follow.

And what endless complexities and opulence of beauty in the forms and
motions of the cataract! It is comparatively narrow at the top of the
precipice, although, as we said, the tide that pours over is thirty-five
feet broad. But it widens as it descends, and curves a little on one side
as it widens, so that it shapes itself, before it reaches its first bowl
of granite, into the figure of a comet. More beautiful than the comet,
however, we can see the substance of this watery loveliness ever renew
itself and ever pour itself away.

  "It mounts in spray the skies, and thence again
    Returns in an unceasing shower, which round
  With its unemptied cloud of gentle rain,
    Is an eternal April to the ground,
    Making it all one emerald;--how profound
  The gulf! and how the giant element
    From rock to rock leaps with delirious bound,
  Crushing the cliffs."

The cataract seems to shoot out a thousand serpentine heads or knots of
water, which wriggle down deliberately through the air and expend
themselves in mist before half the descent is over. Then a new set burst
from the body and sides of the fall, with the same fortune on the
remaining distance; and thus the most charming fretwork of watery nodules,
each trailing its vapory train for a hundred feet or more, is woven all
over the cascade, which swings, now and then, thirty feet each way, on the
mountain side, as if it were a pendulum of watery lace. Once in a while,
too, the wind manages to get back of the fall, between it and the cliff,
and then it will whirl it round and round for two or three hundred feet,
as if to try the experiment of twisting it to wring it dry.

Of course I visited the foot of the lowest fall of the Yosemite, and
looked up through the spray, five hundred feet, to its crown. And I tried
to climb to the base of the first or highest cataract, but lost my way
among the steep, sharp rocks, for there is only one line by which the
cliff can be scaled. But no nearer view that I found or heard described,
is comparable with the picture, from the hotel, of the comet curve of the
upper cataract, fifteen hundred feet high, and the two falls immediately
beneath it, in which the same water leaps to the level of the quiet
Merced.



CXXV. A PSALM OF LIFE. (429)

Tell me not, in mournful numbers,
  Life is but an empty dream!
For the soul is dead that slumbers,
  And things are not what they seem.

Life is real! Life is earnest!
  And the grave is not its goal;
Dust thou art, to dust returnest,
  Was not spoken of the soul.

Not enjoyment, and not sorrow,
  Is our destined end or way;
But to act, that each to-morrow
  Find us farther than to-day.

Art is long, and Time is fleeting,
  And our hearts, though stout and brave,
Still, like muffled drums, are beating
  Funeral marches to the grave.

In the world's broad field of battle,
  In the bivouac of Life,
Be not like dumb, driven cattle!
  Be a hero in the strife!

Trust no Future, howe'er pleasant!
  Let the dead Past bury its dead!
Act--act in the living Present!
  Heart within, and God o'erhead.

Lives of great men all remind us
  We can make our lives sublime,
And, departing, leave behind us
  Footprints on the sands of time;--

Footprints, that perhaps another,
  Sailing o'er life's solemn main,
A forlorn and shipwrecked brother,
  Seeing, shall take heart again.

Let us, then, be up and doing,
  With a heart for any fate;
  Still achieving, still pursuing,
Learn to labor and to wait.
                                  --Longfellow.



CXXVI. FRANKLIN'S ENTRY INTO PHILADELPHIA. (431)

Benjamin Franklin, 1706-1790, was born in Boston. He received little
schooling, but being apprenticed to his brother, a printer, he acquired a
taste for reading and study. In 1723, he went to Philadelphia, where he
followed his chosen calling, and in time became the publisher of the
"Pennsylvania Gazette" and the celebrated "Poor Richard's Almanac."

As a philosopher Franklin was rendered famous by his discovery of the
identity of lightning with electricity. His career in public affairs may
be briefly summarized as follows: In 1736 he was made Clerk of the
Provincial Assembly; in 1737, deputy postmaster at Philadelphia; and in
1753, Postmaster general for British America. He was twice in England as
the agent of certain colonies. After signing the Declaration of
Independence, he was sent as Minister Plenipotentiary to France in 1776.
On his return, in 1785, he was made "President of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania," holding the office three years. He was also one of the
framers of the Constitution of the United States.

As a writer Franklin commenced his career when only twelve years old by
composing two ballads, which, however, he condemned as "wretched stuff."
Franklin's letters and papers on electricity, afterwards enlarged by
essays on various philosophical subjects, have been translated into Latin,
French, Italian, and German. The most noted of his works, and the one from
which the following extract is taken, is his "Autobiography." This book is
"one of the half dozen most widely popular books ever printed," and has
been published in nearly every written language. Franklin founded the
American Philosophical Society, and established an institution which has
since grown into the University of Pennsylvania. His life is a noble
example of the results of industry and perseverance, and his death was the
occasion of public mourning.
###


Walking in the evening by the side of the river, a boat came by, which I
found was going towards Philadelphia, with several people in her. They
took me in, and, as there was no wind, we rowed all the way; and about
midnight, not having yet seen the city, some of the company were confident
we must have passed it, and would row no farther; the others knew not
where we were; so we put toward the shore, got into a creek, landed near
an old fence, with the rails of which we made a fire, the night being
cold, in October, and there we remained till daylight.

Then one of the company knew the place to be Cooper's Creek, a little
above Philadelphia, which we saw as soon as we got out of the creek, and
arrived there about eight or nine o'clock on the Sunday morning, and
landed at the Market Street wharf.

I have been the more particular in this description of my journey, and
shall be so of my first entry into that city, that you may in your mind
compare such unlikely beginnings with the figure I have since made there.

I was in my working dress, my best clothes being to come round by sea. I
was dirty from my journey; my pockets were stuffed out with shirts and
stockings, and I knew no soul nor where to look for lodging. I was
fatigued with traveling, rowing, and want of rest; I was very hungry; and
my whole stock of cash consisted of a Dutch dollar, and about a shilling
in copper. The latter I gave the people of the boat for my passage, who at
first refused it on account of my rowing; but I insisted on their taking
it,--a man being sometimes more generous when he has but a little money
than when he has plenty, perhaps through fear of being thought to have but
little.

Then I walked up the street gazing about, till, near the market house, I
met a boy with bread. I had made many a meal on bread, and, inquiring
where he got it, I went immediately to the baker's he directed me to, in
Second Street, and asked for biscuit, intending such as we had in Boston:
but they, it seems, were not made in Philadelphia. Then I asked for a
threepenny loaf, and was told they had none such. So not considering or
knowing the difference of money, and the greater cheapness nor the names
of his bread, I bade him give threepenny worth of any sort. He gave me,
accordingly, three great puffy rolls. I was surprised at the quantity, but
took it, and, having no room in my pockets, walked off with a roll under
each arm, and eating the other.

Thus I went up Market Street as far as Fourth Street, passing by the door
of Mr. Read, my future wife's father: when she, standing at the door, saw
me, and thought I made, as I certainly did, a most awkward, ridiculous
appearance. Then I turned and went down Chestnut Street and part of Walnut
Street, eating my roll all the way, and, coming round, found myself again
at Market Street wharf, near the boat I came in, to which I went for a
draught of the river water; and, being filled with one of my rolls, gave
the other two to a woman and her child that came down the river in the
boat with us, and were waiting to go farther.

Thus refreshed, I walked again up the street, which by this time had many
clean-dressed people in it, who were all walking the same way. I joined
them, and thereby was led into the great meetinghouse of the Quakers, near
the market. I sat down among them, and, after looking round awhile and
hearing nothing said, being very drowsy through labor and want of rest the
preceding night, I fell fast asleep, and continued so till the meeting
broke up, when one was kind enough to rouse me. This was, therefore, the
first house I was in, or slept in, in Philadelphia.

Walking down again toward the river, and looking in the faces of people, I
met a young Quaker man, whose countenance I liked, and, accosting him,
requested he would tell me where a stranger could get lodging. We were
then near the sign of the Three Mariners. "Here," says he, "is one place
that entertains strangers, but it is not a reputable house; if thee wilt
walk with me, I'll show thee a better." He brought me to the Crooked
Billet, in Water Street. Here I got a dinner; and, while I was eating it,
several sly questions were asked me, as it seemed to be suspected from my
youth and appearance that I might be some runaway. After dinner my
sleepiness returned, and, being shown to a bed, I lay down without
undressing, and slept till six in the evening; was called to supper, went
to bed again very early, and slept soundly till next morning.


NOTE.--The river referred to is the Delaware. Franklin was on his way from
Boston to Philadelphia, and had just walked from Amboy to Burlington, New
Jersey, a distance of fifty miles.



CXXVII. LINES TO A WATERFOWL. (434)

    Whither 'midst falling dew,
While glow the heavens with the last steps of day,
Far, through their rosy depths, dost thou pursue
    Thy solitary way?

    Vainly the fowler's eye
Might mark thy distant flight to do thee wrong,
As, darkly painted on the crimson sky,
    Thy figure floats along.

    Seek'st thou the plashy brink
Of weedy lake, or marge of river wide,
Or where the rocky billows rise and sink
    On the chafed ocean side?

    There is a Power whose care
Teaches thy way along that pathless coast.
The desert and illimitable air,
    Lone wandering, but not lost.

    All day, thy wings have fanned,
At that far height, the cold, thin atmosphere,
Yet stoop not, weary, to the welcome land
    Though the dark night is near.

    And soon that toil shall end,
Soon shalt thou find a summer home, and rest,
And scream among thy fellows; reeds shall bend,
    Soon, o'er thy sheltered nest.

    Thou'rt gone; the abyss of heaven
Hath swallowed up thy form; yet, on my heart,
Deeply has sunk the lesson thou hast given,
    And shall not soon depart.

    He, who, from zone to zone,
Guides through the boundless sky thy certain flight,
In the long way that I must tread alone,
    Will lead my steps aright.
                                                     --Bryant.



CXXVIII. GOLDSMITH AND ADDISON. (435)

William Makepeace Thackeray, 1811-1863, was born in Calcutta, and is one
of the most popular of English novelists, essayists, and humorists. While
a boy, he removed from India to England, where he was educated at the
Charterhouse in London, and at Cambridge. When twenty-one years of age, he
came into possession of about 20,000 pounds. He rapidly dissipated his
fortune, however, and was compelled to work for his living, first turning
his attention to law and then to art, but finally choosing literature as
his profession. He was for many years correspondent, under assumed names,
at the "London Times," "The New Monthly Magazine," "Punch," and "Fraser's
Magazine." His first novel under his own name, "Vanity Fair," appeared in
monthly numbers during 1846-8, and is generally considered his finest
production: although "Pendennis," "Henry Esmond," and "The Newcomes" are
also much admired. His lectures on "English Humorists of the Eighteenth
Century," from which the following selections are taken, were delivered in
England first in 1851, and afterwards in America, which he visited in 1852
and again in 1855-6. During the latter visit, he first delivered his
course of lectures on "The Four Georges," which were later repeated in
England. At the close of 1859, Thackeray became editor of the "Cornhill
Magazine," and made it one of the most successful serials ever published.

Thackeray has been charged with cynicism in his writings, but he was noted
for his happy temper and genial disposition towards all who came in
contact with him.
###


1. GOLDSMITH.

To be the most beloved of English writers, what a title that is for a man!
A wild youth, wayward, but full of tenderness and affection, quits the
country village where his boyhood has been passed in happy musing, in idle
shelter, in fond longing to see the great world out of doors, and achieve
name and fortune--and after years of dire struggle, and neglect, and
poverty, his heart turning back as fondly to his native place as it had
longed eagerly for change when sheltered there, he writes a book and a
poem, full of the recollections and feelings of home; he paints the
friends and scenes of his youth, and peoples Auburn and Wakefield with the
remembrances of Lissoy.

Wander he must, but he carries away a home relic with him, and dies with
it on his breast. His nature is truant; in repose it longs for change: as
on the journey it looks back for friends and quiet. He passes to-day in
building an air castle for to-morrow, or in writing yesterday's elegy; and
he would flyaway this hour, but that a cage, necessity, keeps him. What is
the charm of his verse, of his style, and humor? His sweet regrets, his
delicate compassion, his soft smile, his tremulous sympathy, the weakness
which he owns?

Your love for him is half pity. You come hot and tired from the day's
battle, and this sweet minstrel sings to you. Who could harm the kind
vagrant harper? Whom did he ever hurt? He carries no weapon, save the harp
on which he plays to you, and with which he delights great and humble,
young and old, the captains in the tents, or the soldiers round the fire,
or the women and children in the villages, at whose porches he stops and
sings his simple songs of love and beauty. With that sweet story of "The
Vicar of Wakefield" he has found entry into every castle and every hamlet
in Europe. Not one of us, however busy or hard, but once or twice in our
lives has passed an evening with him, and undergone the charm of his
delightful music.


II. ADDISON. (436)

We love him for his vanities as much as his virtues. What is ridiculous is
delightful in him; we are so fond of him because we laugh at him so. And
out of that laughter, and out of that sweet weakness, and out of those
harmless eccentricities and follies, and out of that touched brain, and
out of that honest manhood and simplicity--we get a result of happiness,
goodness, tenderness, pity, piety; such as doctors and divines but seldom
have the fortune to inspire. And why not? Is the glory of Heaven to be
sung only by gentlemen in black coats?

When this man looks from the world, whose weaknesses he describes so
benevolently, up to the Heaven which shines over us all, I can hardly
fancy a human face lighted up with a more serene rapture; a human
intellect thrilling with a purer love and adoration than Joseph Addison's.
Listen to him: from your childhood you have known the verses; but who can
hear their sacred music without love and awe?

  "Soon as the evening shades prevail,
  The moon takes up the wondrous tale,
  And nightly to the listening earth
  Repeats the story of her birth;
  And all the stars that round her burn,
  And all the planets in their turn,
  Confirm the tidings as they roll,
  And spread the truth from pole to pole.

  "What though, in solemn silence, all
  Move round this dark terrestrial ball;
  What though no real voice nor sound
  Among their radiant orbs be found;
  In reason's ear they all rejoice,
  And utter forth a glorious voice,
  Forever singing, as they shine,
  The Hand that made us is divine."

It seems to me those verses shine like the stars. They shine out of a
great, deep calm. When he turns to Heaven, a Sabbath comes over that man's
mind; and his face lights up from it with a glory of thanks and prayers.
His sense of religion stirs through his whole being. In the fields, in the
town; looking at the birds in the trees; at the children in the streets;
in the morning or in the moonlight; over his books in his own room; in a
happy party at a country merrymaking or a town assembly, good will and
peace to God's creatures, and love and awe of Him who made them, fill his
pure heart and shine from his kind face. If Swift's life was the most
wretched, I think Addison's was one of the most enviable. A life
prosperous and beautiful--a calm death--an immense fame and affection
afterwards for his happy and spotless name.


NOTES.--Goldsmith (see biographical notice, page 215) founded his
descriptions of Auburn in the poem of "The Deserted Village," and of
Wakefield, in "The Vicar of Wakefield," on recollections of his early home
at Lissoy. Ireland.

Addison. See biographical notice, page 295. The quotation is from a
"Letter from Italy to Charles Lord Halifax."

Swift, Jonathan (b. 1667, d. 1745), the celebrated Irish satirist and
poet, was a misanthrope. His disposition made his life miserable in the
extreme, and he finally became insane.



CXXIX. IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL. (438)

SCENE--CATO, alone, sitting in a thoughtful posture;--in his hand,
  Plato's book on the immortality of the soul; a drawn sword on the
  table by him.

Cato. It must be so. Plato, thou reasonest well!
      Else whence this pleasing hope, this fond desire,
      This longing after immortality?
      Or whence this secret dread, and inward horror,
      Of falling into naught? Why shrinks the soul
      Back on herself, and startles at destruction?
      'T is the divinity that stirs within us;
      'T is heaven itself that points out an hereafter,
      And intimates eternity to man.
      Eternity! thou pleasing, dreadful thought!
      Through what variety of untried being,
      Through what new scenes and changes must we pass?
      The wide, unbounded prospect lies before me:
      But shadows, clouds, and darkness rest upon it.
      Here will I hold. If there's a Power above us,
      (And that there is, all Nature cries aloud
      Through all her works) he must delight in virtue;
      And that which he delights in must be happy.
      But when?--or where?--This world was made for Caesar.
      I'm weary of conjectures--this must end them.
                              (Seizes the sword.)
      Thus am I doubly armed: my death and life,
      My bane and antidote are both before me.
      This in a moment brings me to an end;
      But this informs me I shall never die.
      The soul, secured in her existence, smiles
      At the drawn dagger and defies its point.
      The stars shall fade away, the sun himself
      Grow dim with age, and Nature sink in years;
      But thou shalt flourish in immortal youth,
      Unhurt amidst the war of elements,
      The wrecks of matter, and the crush of worlds.
                                                      --Addison.

NOTES.--The above selection is Cato's soliloquy just before committing
suicide. It is from the tragedy of "Cato."

Cato, Marcus Porcius, (b. 95, d. 46 B. C.) was a Roman general, statesman,
and philosopher. He was exceptionally honest and conscientious, and
strongly opposed Caesar and Pompey in their attempts to seize the state.
When Utica, the last African city to resist Caesar, finally yielded, Cato
committed suicide.

Plato (b. 429, d. about 348 B. C.) was a celebrated Greek philosopher. His
writings are all in the form of dialogues, and have been preserved in a
wonderfully perfect state.



CXXX. CHARACTER OF WASHINGTON. (440)

Jared Sparks, 1789-1866, was born at Willington, Connecticut, and
graduated at Harvard in 1815. He was tutor in the University for two
years, and in 1819 was ordained pastor of the Unitarian Church in
Baltimore. In 1823 he returned to Boston, purchased the "North American
Review," and was its sole editor for seven years. From 1839 to 1849 he was
Professor in Harvard, and for the next three years was President of the
University. Mr. Sparks has written extensively on American history and
biography, including the lives of Washington and Franklin. He collected
the materials for his biographies with great care, and wrought them up
with much skill.
###


The person of Washington was commanding, graceful, and fitly proportioned;
his stature six feet, his chest broad and full, his limbs long and
somewhat slender, but well-shaped and muscular. His features were regular
and symmetrical, his eyes of a light blue color, and his whole
countenance, in its quiet state, was grave, placid, and benignant. When
alone, or not engaged in conversation, he appeared sedate and thoughtful;
but when his attention was excited, his eye kindled quickly, and his face
beamed with animation and intelligence.

He was not fluent in speech, but what he said was apposite, and listened
to with the more interest as being known to come from the heart. He seldom
attempted sallies of wit or humor, but no man received more pleasure from
an exhibition of them by others; and, although contented in seclusion, he
sought his chief happiness in society, and participated with delight in
all its rational and innocent amusements. Without austerity on the one
hand, or an appearance of condescending familiarity on the other, he was
affable, courteous, and cheerful; but it has often been remarked that
there was a dignity in his person and manner not easy to be defined, which
impressed everyone that saw him for the first time with an instinctive
deference and awe. This may have arisen, in part, from a conviction of his
superiority, as well as from the effect produced by his external form and
deportment.

The character of his mind was unfolded in the public and private acts of
his life; and the proofs of his greatness are seen almost as much in the
one as the other. The same qualities which raised him to the ascendency he
possessed over the will of a nation, as the commander of armies and chief
magistrate, caused him to be loved and respected as an individual. Wisdom,
judgment, prudence, and firmness were his predominant traits. No man ever
saw more clearly the relative importance of things and actions, or
divested himself more entirely of the bias of personal interest,
partiality, and prejudice, in discriminating between the true and the
false, the right and the wrong, in all questions and subjects that were
presented to him. He deliberated slowly, but decided surely; and when his
decision was once formed he seldom reversed it, and never relaxed from the
execution of a measure till it was completed. Courage, physical and moral,
was a part of his nature; and, whether in battle, or in the midst of
popular excitement, he was fearless of danger, and regardless of
consequences to himself.

His ambition was of that noble kind which aims to excel in whatever it
undertakes, and to acquire a power over the hearts of men by promoting
their happiness and winning their affections. Sensitive to the approbation
of others, and solicitous to deserve it, he made no concessions to gain
their applause, either by flattering their vanity or yielding to their
caprices. Cautious without timidity, bold without rashness, cool in
counsel, deliberate but firm in action, clear in foresight, patient under
reverses, steady, persevering, and self-possessed, he met and conquered
every obstacle that obstructed his path to honor, renown and success. More
confident in the uprightness of his intention than in his resources, he
sought knowledge and advice from other men. He chose his counselors with
unerring sagacity; and his quick perception of the soundness of an
opinion, and of the strong points in an argument, enabled him to draw to
his aid the best fruits of their talents, and the light of their collected
wisdom.

His moral qualities were in perfect harmony with those of his intellect.
Duty was the ruling principle of his conduct; and the rare endowments of
his understanding were not more constantly tasked to devise the best
methods of effecting an object, than they were to guard the sanctity of
conscience. No instance can be adduced in which he was actuated by a
sinister motive or endeavored to attain an end by unworthy means. Truth,
integrity, and justice were deeply rooted in his mind; and nothing could
rouse his indignation so soon, or so utterly destroy his confidence, as
the discovery of the want of these virtues in anyone whom he had trusted.
Weaknesses, follies, indiscretions be could forgive; but subterfuge and
dishonesty he never forgot, rarely pardoned.

He was candid and sincere, true to his friends, and faithful to all;
neither practicing dissimulation, descending to artifice, nor holding out
expectations which he did not intend should be realized. His passions were
strong, and sometimes they broke out with vehemence: but he had the power
of checking them in an instant. Perhaps self-control was the most
remarkable trait of his character. It was, in part, the effect of
discipline; yet he seems by nature to have possessed this power in a
degree which has been denied to other men.

A Christian in faith and practice, he was habitually devout. His reverence
for religion is seen in his example, his public communications, and his
private writings. He uniformly ascribed his successes to the beneficent
agency of the Supreme Being. Charitable and humane, he was liberal to the
poor, and kind to those in distress. As a husband, son, and brother, he
was tender and affectionate. Without vanity, ostentation, or pride, he
never spoke of himself or his actions unless required by circumstances
which concerned the public interests.

As he was free from envy, so he had the good fortune to escape the envy of
others by standing on an elevation which none could hope to attain. If he
had one passion more strong than another it was love of his country. The
purity and ardor of his patriotism were commensurate with the greatness of
its object. Love of country in him was invested with the sacred obligation
of a duty; and from the faithful discharge of this duty he never swerved
for a moment, either in thought or deed, through the whole period of his
eventful career.

Such are some of the traits in the character of Washington, which have
acquired for him the love and veneration of mankind. If they are not
