length of the road to see anything so poor and common. And so the
children are off--but the children were on. Now, I wish to goodness I
could see those children."

"I don't suppose they have anything to do with the lost children who
are spoken of in these posters," said the man. "They say they were
brown as gypsies, that the boy was timid, and the girl rode
wonderfully. She must have been trained for some time to ride as well
as she did."

Not being able to get anything more out of these folks, Fortune turned
on her heel and wandered in another direction. She crossed the
entrance to the great tent, and made for the exit at the opposite side
of the field. In doing this she ran right up against a fair-haired,
rather pretty circus girl.

"My dear," said Fortune, "you'll excuse my stopping to speak to you,
but will you tell me if I can get into the town by the gate yonder?"

"It's rather a roundabout way," answered the girl, "but you can go, of
course. You will have to walk quite a way down a country lane, then
turn to your left, and it will bring you to the other side of the
town."

"Fact is," continued Fortune, "I'm anxious to see some more of those
posters. I'm mighty took with them. They seem to describe a most
elegant little pair of children."

The girl uttered a sigh and changed color.

"Maybe, miss," said Fortune, fixing her with her keen eyes, "you can
tell me something about 'em? Now, if you could, and would, it would be
worth your while."

"Oh, I know nothing at all," said the girl, in alarm. "What should I
know?"

"How is it," continued Fortune, "that the little children belonging to
your circus were not present this afternoon? It seems a sort of
cheating of the public."

"The little children belonging to our circus?" repeated the girl. "But
we hasn't no children." She turned very white now, and suddenly
leaving Fortune, ran as fast as ever she could in the direction of the
tent.

Fortune followed her with her eyes. She saw a dark man peeping out.

"That girl is frightened; she's hiding something," thought the woman.
"There's no doubt the trail strengthens, and I, being an
American--well, well, 'taint likely I'm going to leave off now. Yes,
hot grows the trail."

Fortune pursued her way. She had just reached the gate of the opposite
exit of the field when a light hand was laid on her arm. Turning
quickly, she saw the same girl.

"For the love of God, madam," she said, "don't you tell on me--it's as
much as my place is worth--he would kill me, if he knew--but we had
two little kids here, and that poster in front of the circus gives
their very description to a hair. But they have run away--they ran
away some days ago, and God in heaven only knows where they are now."

"What were their names?" asked Fortune.

"Diana was the name of the girl----"

"Diana!" cried Fortune. "You need not tell me any more; and so it was
_you_ who stole 'em?"

"I!" said the girl; "I had nothing to do with it. I was kind to 'em
when I could, and nothing would ever frighten Diana. But oh, please,
promise you won't tell on me--you won't let out that I said anything?"

"No, my dear; I won't injure you," said Fortune; "but I must know
this: When was it they ran away?"

"Three nights ago, madam; and Ben Holt, he's fairly wild at losing the
girl. He doesn't think anything at all about the boy, but the little
girl--why, she won us all, she was so plucky and fearless. But they
ran away three nights back, and no one knows where they are."

"Don't keep me," said Fortune. "I'm much obliged to you; but don't
keep me now."

She left the field where the tent was, and began to walk rapidly down
the lane.

"Now, am I an American or am I not?" she thought. "Do I, or do I not,
want the police to interfere in this matter? Do I, or do I not, want
to find those children my very own self? They were here three nights
ago, and they have run away. What can be the meaning of it?"

Fortune pressed her hand to her forehead.

"Well, if there's one thing more evident than another." she muttered
after a pause, "it's this: I must not leave Madersley at present. I'll
just go to the hotel and tell Mr. Dolman that I am on the trail, and
that not all the coaxing and all the worriting in the world will get
me off it until I have found those children."

No sooner had this resolve formed itself in Fortune's stalwart mind
than she hailed a fly and desired the man to drive her to the
Madersley Arms. When she reached the big hotel she was shown at once
into Mr. Dolman's presence.

"Now, sir," she said; "I hope you have all had a good tea and enjoyed
it."

"Very much, thank you," replied Uncle William, who really, if the
truth must be known, was having quite a delightful time--no Aunt Jane
to pull him up, no sermons to write, and a vast amount of variety to
occupy his mind. "We have enjoyed our tea, all of us," he said; "and
now, Fortune, would not you like a cup? Iris, my dear, we'll ring the
bell for some more hot water."

"Thank you, sir" replied Fortune; "but I have no time to eat nor drink
at present. I am on the trail, and no one can get me off it."

"Do you really mean that you have had news of the children?"

"I have had very positive news. Why, they belonged to the circus we
went to see to-day! I had my suspicions as soon as ever I heard that
woman talking and saying that the performance was miserably poor
without the children. At that very instant it came right over me that
it was our little Miss Di who had made things so sparkling and
lively."

"Oh, Fortune! let me go to her," cried Iris. "Is she there? Please,
Fortune, take me to her at once."

"Now, Iris, love, that's just what I can't do. Patience has to be
exercised always in the matter of trails," continued Fortune; "and
when we hurry or flurry ourselves we lose the scent, and then we are
nowhere. The children did belong to the circus, for I had it from the
lips of one of the circus girls. Poor innocent lambs, to think of them
having anything to do with such a defiling place! But there they
were, and there they would not stay, for three nights ago, Iris, they
ran away, and nobody in the wide world knows where they are at the
present moment."

"Well, and what do you propose to do?" said Mr. Dolman. "For my part,
I think the police----"

"Excuse me, sir, this is a matter for me, not the police. I propose,
sir, to stay at Madersley until I bring the children back. I hope to
bring them back to-night."

"To-night!" cried Iris. "Oh, Fortune! do you mean it?"

"Yes, my love. I am an American, and I generally do what I say. I mean
to bring the little dears back to their rightful home to-night. And
now I'm off, and please expect me when you see me."

Fortune turned abruptly and left the hotel. She walked down the High
Street.

"Now," she said to herself, "why should not I just go and pay a visit
to my old friend and neighbor, Matty Bell. I want a woman that is a
gossip just now, and if there is a gossip in the whole of Madersley,
it's Matty Bell. As a rule, I can't abear her, but there are times
when a gossiping woman comes in handy; and Matty's neither very low
nor very high up in the world, so she's acquainted with all that goes
on in both circles, the high and the low. Yes, I'll go to Matty this
very moment; and as there's not any time to lose, I'll take a fly and
drive there."

Fortune hailed the first fly she came across, and was quickly borne to
the abode of her old neighbor, Matty Bell.

Matty Bell was a woman of about sixty years of age. At one time she
had been a servant at Delaney Manor, but having married, and then lost
her husband, she had set up in the laundry line. In that interesting
trade she had done a thriving business, and kept a comfortable roof
over her head. She had never had children, and consequently had plenty
of time to attend to her neighbors' affairs.

"Well, to be sure, Fortune, and what brings you here?" she said, when
Fortune alighted from the fly. "Dear heart! I didn't know that you
would care to leave Delaney Manor with all the troubles about."

"And what troubles do you mean now, Matty Bell?" said Fortune, as she
paid a shilling to the driver, and then tripped lightly into Matty's
little front parlor.

"Why, the death of the poor missus, Heaven bless her memory! and then
the master going off to the other end of nobody knows where, and all
them blessed little children took from their home and carried--oh, we
needn't go into that, Fortune--it's been a trouble to you, and I see
it writ on your face."

"You are right there, Matty," said Fortune; "it has been a bitter
trouble to me, and there's more behind, for the lady who took the
children had no right to interfere, not having a mother's heart in her
breast, for all that Providence granted her five babes of her own to
manage. What do you think she went and did, Matty? Why, lost two of
our children."

"Lost two of 'em? Sakes alive! you don't say so!" replied Matty. "Have
a cup of tea, Fortune, do; I have it brewing lovely on the hob."

"No, thank you," replied Fortune. "I'm in no mood for tea."

"Well, then, do go on with your story, for it's mighty interesting."

"It's simple enough," replied Fortune. "Two of the children are lost,
and now I have traced 'em to a circus in the town."

"A circus here--what, Holt's?" said the woman.

"No less. Why, Matty; you look queer yourself. Do you know anything?"

"I know nothing for certain," said Matty. "I can only tell you--but
there, perhaps I had better not say--only will you excuse me for a
minute or two, Fortune?"

"I'll excuse you, Matty, if you are on the trail of the children, but
if you aren't, you had better stay here and let me talk matters over.
You always were a fearful one for gossip, and perhaps you have picked
up news. Yes, I see you have--you have got something at the back of
your head this blessed minute, Matty Bell."

"That I have," replied Mrs. Bell. "But please don't ask me a word
more, only let me get on my bonnet and cloak."

Mrs. Bell left the room, and quickly returned dressed in her widow's
weeds, for though Bell had been dead for over ten years, his widow was
still faithful to his memory; she slipped a thick crepe veil over her
face, and went out, looking the very essence of respectability. She
was not more than twenty minutes away, and when she came back she
looked much excited. On each of her smooth, pasty cheeks might even be
seen a little flush of color, and her dull blue eyes were brighter
than their wont.

"Fortune," she cried, "as there's a heaven above me, I've found 'em!"

"Bless you, Matty; but where--where?"

"Why, at no less a place than Jonathan Darling's."

"Jonathan Darling? Who may he be?"

"He's as honest a fellow, Fortune, as you can find in the whole of
Madersley--he drives a milk cart. He found the two little dears three
mornings ago, wandering about in their circus dresses, and he took 'em
home."

"Well," said Fortune, "well--then _that's_ all right. It was a
trouble, but it's over, thank the good God. I could fall on my knees
this moment and offer up a prayer; that I could, Matty Bell."

Fortune's small, twinkling eyes were full of tears; she caught her
neighbor's hand and wrung it hard.

"And I bless you, Matty," she continued, "for you have put me on the
right trail. I'll never blame a gossiping neighbor again, never as
long as I live."

"But you haven't heard me out to the end," said Matty, "for one of the
little 'uns is very ill. You have found 'em, it is true; but it isn't
all beer and skittles, Fortune Squeers."

"One of the children ill?" said Fortune.

"Yes; little Miss Diana. You come along and see her at once. They say
she fell on her head out of a ring at the circus, and she must have
hurt herself rather bad. Anyhow, she don't know a word she is saying,
poor little dear."

When Fortune heard this news she shut up her mouth very tight, tied
her bonnet-strings, and followed her neighbor out of the house.

The Darlings' humble little domicile happened to be in the next
street, and in less than five minutes Fortune was standing over little
Diana's bed. The child was tossing from side to side, her big eyes
were wide open; she was gazing straight before her, talking eagerly
and incessantly.

"Is it to be a pwivate funeral?" she said, when Fortune entered the
room, and, falling on her knees, clasped the hot little hands in hers.

"Oh, my little darling!" said the good woman, "and have I really found
you at last?"

She sank down by the child and burst into more bitter tears than she
had even shed when Mrs. Delaney went away.




CHAPTER XXVI.

THE LITTLE MOTHER TO THE RESCUE.


Yes, the lost children were found, but little Diana was very ill. The
blow she had received on her head had developed into inflammation of
the brain. She was highly feverish, and did not in the least know what
she was saying. Fortune immediately made up her mind not to leave her.
After standing by her bedside for a minute or two, she went into the
next room and asked Mrs. Darling if she would take a fly and go with
little Orion to Delaney Manor.

"You are going to your own home, my poor little boy," said the nurse,
"and please tell your uncle and Iris and Apollo that I am staying here
to look after Diana."

The little boy was so excited at the prospect of being home once more
that he forgot any small anxieties which he had experienced with
regard to Diana. He started off, therefore, with Mrs. Darling in the
highest spirits, and Fortune returned to the bedside of the sick
child. Within a couple of hours after Orion's departure, Mr. Dolman
arrived in person. When he saw Diana he immediately insisted on the
best doctor in the place being sent for to see her.

The medical man arrived; but, when he did so, he shook his head.

"The child is dangerously ill," he said. "I could not hear of her
being moved at present. She must have absolute quiet and good
nursing."
