"But what has this to do with your journey, master?"

"It has much to do with it, Roger, seeing that I am on my way to
Glendower, to offer him alliance with the Percys."

"A good step!" Roger exclaimed. "We know that these Welsh can fight."

"Moreover, Roger, it may bring about the freeing of Mortimer; for the
evil feeling the king has shown against him will surely drive him to
raise all his vassals, and those of the young earl, in Herefordshire
and elsewhere; and thus the Percys will gain two powerful allies,
Glendower and Mortimer; and as they advance from the north, the Welsh
and Mortimer will join them from the west. When victory is gained,
there will be peace on the Welsh marches. Owen will be recognized for
what he is, the King of Wales; and doubtless he will then suffer the
English to live quietly there, just as the Welsh have lived quietly in
England.

"Then, too, all the western counties will see that it is their interest
to side with Mortimer and Glendower. Four times, during the last three
years, have they been called out, and forced to leave their homes to
follow the king into Wales; and as often have had to return, leaving
behind them many of their number. They will see that, if Glendower is
acknowledged King of Wales, this hard and grievous service will no
longer be required of them."

"That is so, Sir Oswald, and in truth I like the project well. It
matters not a straw to me who is king; but if a king treats my lords
scurvily, I am ready to shout 'Down with him!' and to do my best to put
another up in his place; though, indeed, 'tis a salve to my conscience
to know that the man I am fighting against is a usurper, and one who
has set himself up in the place of the lawful king."

"My conscience in no way pricks me, Roger. I fight at my lord's order,
against his foes. That is the duty I have sworn to. As between him and
the king, 'tis a matter for him alone. At the same time, I am glad that
the business is likely to end in the rescue of a knight who has been
very kind to me. Between Henry and the young Earl of March I have no
opinion; but it seems to me that, since Henry ascended to the throne by
might, and by the popular voice, he has no cause to complain, if he is
put out of it by the same means."

"But, should the war go against the Percys, master?"

"That, again, is a matter for the earl and Hotspur. They know what
force they and the Earl of Westmoreland can put in the field. They know
that Glendower can aid with ten thousand Welshmen, and that Mortimer
can raise three or four thousand men from his vassals. They should know
what help they can count on from Scotland; and doubtless, during the
last six months, have made themselves acquainted with the general
feeling respecting the king. It is upon them that the risk chiefly
falls. We knights and men-at-arms may fall in the field of battle; but
that is a risk that we know we have to face, when we take to the
calling of arms. If our cause is lost, and we escape from the
battlefield, we have but to depart to our holds or our villages, and we
shall hear nought more of the affair; while our lords, if taken, would
lose their heads. It will be a grief for us to lose masters we love,
and to have to pay our quittance with money or service to a new lord;
but beyond that, we risk nought save our lives in battle. Therefore I
trouble myself, in no way, as to the matter between the Percys and the
king, which I take it in no way concerns me; and am content to do my
duty, and to render my service, as I have sworn to do."

"It is well, Sir Oswald," Roger said, after a long pause, "that
Glendower gave us those rings; for from all accounts he and his
Welshmen are more furious than ever, and there would be small chance of
our ever reaching him, without them. The chain did its work, last time.
'Tis not every Welshman who would stop to examine it before striking,
and few who could read the inscription, if they did so; while 'tis like
that most of them are well acquainted with Glendower's signet."

"That is so; but nevertheless, Roger, it will be better, when we have
once crossed the border, that you should ride behind me with a white
flag displayed; as a token that we come, not for war, but on a peaceful
mission. 'Tis probable, at any rate, that any band of Welshmen who may
meet us will, in that case, before attacking, stop to inquire on what
errand we come."

They rode fast, for the earl had said that he needed to have the news
of Glendower's decision, before proceeding further in the matter, and
in four days arrived on the border. At Shrewsbury Oswald inquired,
carelessly, of the host of the inn where he put up, where Glendower was
now thought to be; as he intended to journey south to Hereford, and
would fain know whether there was any risk of falling in with bands of
the marauders.

"Methinks, Sir Knight, that you may travel without uneasiness; seeing
that the country between this and Hereford has been so harassed, by
them, that there is nought to tempt them to cross the border, save with
so large a force that they can invade Gloucester or Worcestershire. Men
say, moreover, that Glendower is, at present, in Cardiganshire. There
are still a few Welsh inhabitants here. They declare that they are
loyal to the king, and love not their wild countrymen. Whether it is
so, or not, I cannot say; but they certainly manage to keep up
communications with the Welsh. This may be for a treacherous purpose,
or it may be as they say; that, knowing that they and all belonging to
them would be slain, should Glendower capture the town; they, for their
own safety, try to learn his intentions and movements, in order to warn
us, should a surprise be intended."

Starting early the next morning, Oswald crossed into Montgomeryshire,
by a road through Worktree Forest, so as to avoid both Ludlow and
Welshpool; and kept along by a country track, near the border of
Radnor, so passing south of Llanidloes. As soon as they had left
Radnorshire, Roger fastened to his spear a white cloth they had brought
from Shrewsbury; then they continued their journey west.

It was not until they had crossed the Wye, here an insignificant
stream, that they came upon a native of the country. They were
following a track, between two rough hills covered with brushwood, when
a man, evidently of the better class, stepped out before them.

"Sir Knight," he said in English, "'tis a strange sight to see an
Englishman, with one esquire, travelling alone by so wild and lonely a
road as this; and strange, indeed, that he should bear a flag of truce;
for were you here on your king's business, you would surely be attended
with a braver show. I had notice, two hours ago, brought by one who had
seen you cross the Wye; and in the bushes round lie fifty men who, did
I raise my hand, would let fly their arrows against you. But if you
have reason for your coming this way, assuredly we should not hinder
you."

Oswald held out his hand.

"This signet ring, sir, was given me by Glendower, who said that any
Welshman to whom I might show it would act as my guide and escort to
him. I come on an important mission, not from the king, but from one
from whom Glendower may be glad to hear; therefore I pray you take me
to him, or at least send a party of your men; for I might,
peradventure, fall in with some who would shoot before they
questioned."

"'Tis assuredly the prince's signet," the man said, after carefully
examining it, "and right gladly will I escort you to him. He is, at
present, at Aberystwith."

"Thanks for your courtesy, sir. To whom am I speaking?"

"My name is Howel ap Ryddyn. You passed my abode, which cannot be seen
from the road; and I would, were you not pressed for time, gladly
entertain you; but if we push forward, we may reach Aberystwith before
nightfall, and I make no question that would better suit your wishes."

"Thanks, sir. My business is somewhat urgent, and I shall be glad to
meet the prince, as soon as possible. Indeed, I should not be sorry to
reach a spot where we can sup and sleep, seeing that we have twice
slept in the woods, since we left Shrewsbury."

The man called out an order, in Welsh. Four men at once issued from the
bushes, and under their guidance the horsemen soon reached Aberystwith.

"I had scarce expected this pleasure, Sir Oswald," Glendower said
warmly, as the young knight entered. "To what good fortune do I owe
your visit?

"But no, 'tis but poor hospitality questioning thus, when it will be
time enough to talk of such things, later."

"And 'tis a matter that is best discussed in private," Oswald replied,
in an undertone.

"And how have you fared since we parted?"

"Since I saw you, over a year ago, the time has passed quietly, save
for the battle with the Scots; where, although we beat them, there was
no credit gained by the knights and men-at-arms; seeing that the
archers, alone, did the fighting."

"So I heard. On our side, we have been busy ever since."

"And successful, too, as I have heard."

"Yes, fortune has been in our favour. Lord Grey's ransom has been of
much use to us and, having married my daughter Jane, he can no longer
be considered a foe. Yet, to do him justice, he would not promise even
to stand neutral; though, unless under special orders from the king, he
will not draw his sword again. I love a stanch man; and though Grey has
taken, as I consider, the wrong side, he stands to it faithfully. I
offered him freedom, without ransom, if he would promise neutrality,
and that, when I had put down all other opposition, he would hold his
Welsh lands from me; but he refused, and said that he would rather
remain in chains, all his life, than be false to his vows to Henry.

"That was good, and I would that all Welshmen were as faithful. They
take the oath to me one week, and make their peace with Henry the next.
Nay, some, to please him, would go so far as to try to assassinate me.
Two such plots have there been this year, and it was only that I wore a
good mail shirt under my garments, that my life was saved from a bow
shot, and from one who professed to be my warm friend, and who had
taken bread with me, half an hour before.

"It is destiny, Sir Oswald. The powers watch over me, and keep me from
harm; and these will, I know, protect me to the end, against the stroke
of English foes, or of Welsh traitors."

After supper was over, Glendower led Oswald to his private chamber.

"Now, Sir Oswald, you can speak freely. I have placed a guard outside
the door, and there is no fear of interruption. Do you come on your own
account, or from another?"

"I come from the Earl of Northumberland, and his son Sir Henry Percy;
and am charged, in the first place, to deliver this letter to you; and
then to give you such further intelligence, as to the matter, as it may
be needful for you to know."

"From the Percys!" Glendower said, in surprise, as he cut the silk that
held the roll together.

His countenance expressed great surprise, as he read the contents.

"There is no snare in this?" he said suddenly, after reading it through
two or three times, and looking sharply at Oswald. "'Tis not from the
Percys, who, more than any other, assisted the usurper to the throne,
that I should have looked for such an offer."

"I should be the last to bring such a letter to you, Glendower, were
there aught behind what is written. The earl and Hotspur spoke of the
matter at length to me. They regret, now, the part they took in
enthroning Henry; at whose hands they have now received such
indignities that they are resolved, if it may be, to undo their work,
and to place the lawful king, the young Earl of March, on the throne."

He then related the various complaints that the Percys had against the
king, and told Glendower that the matter had been brought to a head by
Henry's refusal to allow them to pay the ransom that had been collected
for Sir Edmund Mortimer.

"Whom have they with them?" Glendower asked, after listening in
silence.

"They have the Earl of Westmoreland, who, like themselves, is greatly
offended at the appointment of four commissioners, men of no standing
or position, to judge between two of the great barons of England; blood
relations, too, whose difference is on a matter of but small
importance. No other name was mentioned before me, but the earl stated
that he looked for much assistance from Scotland."

"Ay, ay! As they hold in their hands Douglas, and the Regent's son,
Moray, and Angus, they may well make terms with Scotland. Yes, it is a
very great plot, and since I can get no ransom for Mortimer, and he can
raise some three or four thousand men, he would be of more value to us
free than as a prisoner."

"It is not only that," Oswald said. "The fact that he, as young March's
uncle, should head his following and raise his banner, will show that
the Percys and you are not using young March's name as a mere pretext
for taking up arms. If Mortimer, the head of his house during his
minority, and guardian of his estates, were with them, men would see
that 'tis really a struggle to place the lawful king on the throne; and
many would join who, did they think it was but an affair between the
Percys, of whom they know but little in the south, and you, whom they
have been taught to consider a rebel, would stand aloof."

"'Tis well thought of, and the project pleases me. Even without such
allies, I may hold my mountains and continue my warfare, but there
could be neither peace nor prosperity for years; but with the overthrow
of the usurper, and my acknowledgment as King of Wales, and of the
entire independence of the country, from the Dee to the Severn, the
freedom of my country might be permanently secured.

"But I will give no certain answer, tonight. 'Tis a matter to be turned
over in my mind, as it seems to me that I may gain much good by the
alliance; and that, even if the Percys fail in their enterprise, I can
be no worse off than I am, at present."

It was not until the following evening that Glendower gave a decided
answer.

"I accept Percy's offer," he said. "I have thought it over in every
way; even putting aside the benefits, to my country and myself, I would
enter upon it; were it but for the satisfaction of seeing the usurper,
and murderer of my dear master, King Richard, have the same measure
meted out to him that he gave to his sovereign. Tonight I will write an
answer to the Percys, for you to bear to them. Tomorrow morning I will
ride, with you, to the stronghold where Mortimer is at present held in
durance; and if he consents to join us, I will give him his freedom,
without ransom."

They started the next morning, early; and at noon arrived at a strong
house, lying in the heart of the hills.

"It were best that you should see him first, Sir Oswald, and explain
the matter to him. After that, I will meet him with you."

Great was the astonishment of Sir Edmund, when Oswald was ushered into
the little room in which he was confined. It was some ten feet square,
furnished with a pallet, chair, and small table. The window was very
strongly barred, and Oswald observed, with pain, that his ten months'
imprisonment had told very heavily upon Mortimer.

"Why, Oswald! Ah! I see I should say Sir Oswald. What brings you here?
Some good news, I trust. Has my ransom been collected?"

"It has been collected, Sir Edmund," Oswald said, as they shook hands,
"but the king, who refused altogether to pay your ransom, as he did
Lord Grey's, has forbidden the money, raised partly by your tenants and
partly by the tenants of your nephew, to be handed over. 'Tis clear
that he views you as an enemy; and has, indeed, ventured to declare his
belief that your capture by Glendower was a thing arranged,
beforehand."

"He lies!" Sir Edmund exclaimed angrily. "We fought stoutly and, had it
not been for the treachery of the Welsh bowmen, should have won the
day.

"Then how stands the matter, Sir Oswald, and how is it that you are
here?"

Oswald then related the purport of his mission, and gave Mortimer some
messages with which Hotspur had charged him, on the evening before he
started.

"Assuredly I will join," Sir Edmund exclaimed, when Oswald brought his
story to a conclusion. "Have I not suffered enough by keeping a force
on foot, by having my lands harried and my vassals slain, in order to
support Henry's claims to the kingdom of Wales, only to be suspected of
treachery? Had I intended to join Glendower, I should have done so a
year before; and with my force and his, we could have kept Henry at
bay. Why should I have kept up the pretext of loyalty, when there was
nought to have prevented my joining Glendower? Why should I have fought
him, at the cost of the lives of some twelve hundred of my men, when I
could have marched them into his camp, as friends? Why should I suffer
nine months of close imprisonment, at the hands of an ally?

"Henry lied, and knew that he lied, when he brought such a charge
against me. He wished to be able to work his will on the young earl,
and maybe to murder him as he murdered Richard, without there being one
powerful enough to lift his voice to condemn the murder. All is at an
end between us, and henceforth I am his open enemy, as he is mine; and
would be heart and soul with the Percys in the overthrow of Henry, even
if my nephew were not concerned, and did the earl purpose, himself, to
grasp the crown."

"Glendower is below, Sir Edmund, and will himself speak to you; but he
thought that it were best that I should first open the matter to you."

A quarter of an hour later the keeper of the hold came up, and said
that the prince bade Sir Edmund to descend and speak with him. As they
entered the room where Glendower was waiting, the latter glanced at
Oswald, inquiringly.

"The matter is settled," the latter said. "Sir Edmund will join us,
with heart and hand."

"I am indeed glad to hear it, Sir Oswald.

"Sir Edmund Mortimer," he went on, courteously, "hitherto we have
regarded each other as enemies; henceforth we are friends, and you are
my guest and not my prisoner. I have thought it over, and methinks that
you must tarry here, till we have certain news of the day on which the
Percys will set on foot their enterprise. It would not be safe for you
to return to your estates, until you are in a position to call your
vassals to arms at once; for the king, were he to hear that you were at
Ludlow, might call on the lieutenants of the western counties, and the
owners of all the castles, to attack you at once. Therefore, until it
is time to strike, it were best that you should remain with me.

"I do not propose that you should accompany me on my expeditions, for
to do so might do harm across the border. I will, therefore, assign you
a suitable house at Aberystwith, with such attendance and furnishing as
are due to a guest of your quality.

"The prospect seems to be a fair one. The northern lords, aided by the
Scots, should by themselves be a match for any gathering Henry could
collect at short notice; and, joined by my forces and yours, should
surely be able to overthrow all opposition."

"So it appears to me," Sir Edmund said. "'Tis indeed a powerful
confederation and, if all goes well, ought to leave no option to the
usurper but to die in battle, or to fly to France."

"Will you return with us to Aberystwith, Sir Oswald?" Glendower
presently asked the young knight.

"I will ride straight for England, with your permission," Oswald said.
"I am already thirty miles on my way, and the Percys urged me to return
as soon as possible."

"So be it. As soon as we have dined, an officer and four horsemen will
be in readiness to ride with you, as an escort."

A week later Oswald reached Alnwick. He was the bearer of letters from
Glendower and Mortimer, and was able to report the complete success of
his mission. As a mark of his satisfaction, the earl ordered a deed of
gift to be made to him, of a large strip of land extending over the
hills between Stoubes and Yardhope.

"Some day," he said, as he handed the document to him, "you will be
master of Yardhope, and by thus joining that feu to that of Stoubes,
you will have an estate that will make you a power in the upper glades
of Reddesdale and Coquetdale; and will support the dignity of a knight
banneret, which I now bestow upon you, and also appoint you a deputy
warden of the marches, with power of life and death over all marauders,
reivers, and outlaws. I have long felt that it would be well that there
should be one who, in case of necessity, could raise a hundred spears;
and so prevent bodies of marauders, from the other side of the border,
making sudden irruptions into the dales; and from what I have heard of
you, from Sir Henry, I am sure that you will carry out the charge most
worthily."

The new acquisition would not very largely increase Oswald's revenues,
for the greater portion of the grant was hill and moor. Nevertheless,
there were a good many houses and small villages scattered in the
dales, and it was these that raised the tract of land to the value of a
knight's feu.

In point of position, however, it was a large addition. As a knight
banneret, with the castle of Stoubes at one end of his holding, and the
hold of Yardhope at the other, he would occupy an important position on
the border; and could raise at least a hundred spears among his
tenants, in addition to the men-at-arms of the two strongholds.

Three days later Hotspur released the whole of his Scottish prisoners; and
sent them, under escort, to the border. The Percys now began, in earnest,
their preparations for war. For greater convenience Hotspur went down to
Morpeth, while the earl betook himself to Berwick-on-Tweed, where he could
confer more easily with his Scottish allies; who, on their part, were
carrying out the condition on which they had been released without ransom;
namely, that they would join their forces to those of the Percys.

Oswald made another journey to Wales, this time by ship from Carlisle
to Aberystwith, and there acquainted Glendower and Mortimer with the
preparations that had been made, assuring them that the rising would
take place at the end of May. He also asked Glendower to raise as large
an army as possible, without delay; and Sir Edmund Mortimer to betake
himself at once to Hereford, there to raise his banner and summon his
vassals, and those of the Earl of March, to join him--the king having,
on his return from his last expedition, entered Ludlow, seized
Mortimer's plate and other property, and appointed to the governorship
of Ludlow a knight on whose devotion he could rely.



Chapter 21: Shrewsbury.


The Percys' preparations could not be carried on without exciting
attention; and in March the king, seeing that the open defiance of his
authority, by the release of the Scottish prisoners, would assuredly be
followed by armed rebellion, which the Douglas would probably have
pledged himself to aid as the condition of his release, began, on his
side, to make similar preparations. Levies were called out, and the
Prince of Wales was appointed to the command of the Welsh marches, and
the governorship of Wales.

Towards the end of June Douglas, faithful to his agreement, crossed the
frontier; and was at once joined by Hotspur, with the force he had
gathered. Hotspur's father was lying sick at Berwick, but was to
follow, as speedily as possible, with the army collected in the north
of the county, and from Dunbar's estates.

It had been arranged that Glendower should meet the allies at
Lichfield; and on his being joined by his uncle, the Earl of
Westmoreland, with his following, Hotspur marched south. His intention
was, after effecting a junction with Glendower, to march and give
battle to the army with which Henry and the Prince of Wales were
advancing against him. At Lichfield, however, he learned that Glendower
had not completed his preparations in sufficient time to join him. He
therefore changed his direction, and made for Shrewsbury, towards which
place Glendower was marching.

Percy's array had swollen as he went south. He had been joined by a
number of archers, from Cheshire, and by other adherents of the late
king; these regarding the war as an attempt, not to place the Earl of
