
The king, now that the excitement was over, felt the pain of his wound.
He descended the hill, and took up his quarters in the church at the
little village of Elsnig, where every house was full of wounded. He had
left Hulsen the charge of endeavouring to reform the scattered troops,
but he could do but little that way. In vain did the generals and
officers move about with orders, expostulations, and threats. For once
the Prussian soldier was deaf to the word of command. He had done all
that he could do, and nature triumphed over long habits of obedience;
even the sound of cannon and musketry, on the other side of the hill,
fell dead upon his ears. Ziethen had been cannonading all day. Nothing
had come of it, and nothing could come of it.

Still, Hulsen did a good deal, and by six o'clock had got some of
the cavalry and infantry battalions in fair order, on the extreme
right; where, in the morning, Daun's left flank stood.

Ziethen, ordinarily a brilliant and active man, had been a strange
failure that day. Not even the terrible din of the king's battle
had roused him to take any measure to support him, or even to make
a diversion in his favour. In vain Mollendorf, an active and
enterprising general, had implored him to attempt something, if
only to draw off a portion of the Austrian strength from the king.
Saldern, another general, had fruitlessly added his voice to that
of Mollendorf.

A feeling of deep gloom spread through the army, a feeling that the
king had been deserted, and must have been crushed; just as, on the
other side, all felt certain that some serious misfortune must have
happened to Ziethen.

At last, as darkness began to set in, at four o'clock, Ziethen was
persuaded to move. He marched towards the left, to the point where
he should have attacked in the morning, but which he had passed in
his hot pursuit of the small Austrian force; but first sent Saldern
against the village of Siptitz.

Burning with their repressed impatience, Saldern's infantry went at
the enemy with a rush, captured the battery there, and drove the
Austrians out; but the latter fired the bridge so that, for the
present, farther advance was barred to the Prussians.

Fortunately at this moment Mollendorf, more to the west, came upon
the road by which Ziethen should have marched. It was carried
firmly over the marsh ground, and by a bridge over a stream between
two of the ponds. Seizing this pass over the morasses, Mollendorf
sent to Ziethen; who, roused at last, ordered all his force to
hurry there.

The Austrians had now taken the alarm, and hurried to oppose the
passage; but Mollendorf had already many troops across the bridge,
and maintained himself till he was sufficiently reinforced to push
forward.

For an hour and a half a desperate fight raged. The Prussians
gained but little ground, while the Austrians were constantly being
reinforced from Lacy's command, on their left. Hulsen, however,
just as he had got a portion of his infantry and cavalry into some
sort of order, had marked the sudden increase of the cannonade on
the other side of the hill; and, presently seeing the glow of a
great fire, guessed that it must come from the village of Siptitz.
Then came a furious cannonade, and the continuous roar of musketry
that spoke of a battle in earnest. Ziethen, then, was coming at
last, and the old general determined to help him.

His own riding horses had all been killed, and he had been sorely
bruised by the falls. Sending for a cannon, he got astride of it,
called up the infantry round him--the brigade of General
Lestwitz--begged the drummers to strike up the Prussian march and,
through the blackness of the night, started for the point where the
din of battle was going on unceasingly.

Forgotten now were the fatigues of the day. The Prussians pressed
on with their quick strides, their excitement growing higher and
higher as they neared the scene of action; and breaking out into a
roar of cheering as, sweeping round on the side of the hill, they
joined Ziethen's hardly-pressed troops and rushed upon the enemy.

But though the news of their coming cheered all the line to fresh
exertions, not yet was the combat finished. The whole of Lacy's
command was opposed to them, swelled by reinforcements sent down
from above by O'Donnel who, in Daun's absence, was in command. It
was another hour before the foe gave way, and the Prussians pressed
steadily up the hill; until at nine o'clock they were planted on
the top of the Siptitz hill, on the highest point of the plateau,
whence their cannon commanded the whole ground down to Torgau.

Daun, conscious of the danger, had, as he heard of Ziethen's
advance, sent order after order that he must at all costs be driven
back; and even when the Prussians gained the position, they had
still to struggle fiercely for another hour to hold it. Daun knew
that, with Frederick established on one side of the position, and
with Ziethen well planted upon the other and commanding the whole
of it with his guns, there was nothing for it but to retreat; and
already he had sent orders that a strong force should form in order
of battle to repel an attack, close to the suburbs of Torgau. As
soon as this disposition was effected, he ordered the retreat to
commence.

Fortunately he had four bridges across the river; and he had, on
the previous day, taken the precaution of sending the whole of his
baggage wagons over. On occasions of this kind Daun's dispositions
were always admirable, and he drew off his army across the river in
excellent order; half the Prussian army knowing nothing of what was
going on, and the other half being too exhausted to attempt to
interfere, ignorant as they were of the position and state of
Frederick's division.

Had the king known earlier what was taking place, comparatively few
of the Austrian army would have got across the river. But it was
not until long after the battle was done that Frederick, sitting
depressed and heavy hearted, dictating his despatches in the little
church seven or eight miles away, learned that what had seemed
likely to terminate in a terrible disaster, had ended with a
decisive victory. Daun lost in the battle twelve thousand killed
and wounded, eight thousand prisoners, and forty-five cannon; while
the Prussians lost between thirteen and fourteen thousand, of whom
four thousand were prisoners.

It was not until nearly one o'clock in the morning that Ziethen
learned that the Austrians were already across the river. Then he
pushed down into Torgau, and crossed the town bridge in time to
capture twenty-six pontoons.

Daun retreated by the right side of the river, Lacy by the left;
and the two forces rejoined at Dresden, and took up their position,
as usual, in the Plauen stronghold; while Frederick, after
finishing the clearance of all Saxony save the capital, took up his
winter quarters at Leipzig on the 6th of December.

The result of the battle of Torgau was not to be measured by the
respective losses of the two armies. It had the effect of entirely
undoing all the advantages that the Austrians had gained,
throughout the campaign; and left the king in a better position
than when it opened in the spring. The Russian army had been
attacked and beaten, while the Austrians were shut up in their
natural stronghold, near Dresden. The whole of Saxony had been
recovered; and Silesia, with the exception of one or two
fortresses, was still in Frederick's hands. How light hearted the
king felt, after the load of care that had lain upon him had been
lifted, may be judged by an extract from a letter, written a
fortnight after the battle to an elderly lady of the court at
Magdeburg.

"I am exact in answering, and eager to satisfy you (in that matter
of the porcelain). You shall have a breakfast set, my good Mamma:
six coffee-cups, very pretty, well diapered, and tricked out with
all the little embellishments which increase their value. On
account of some pieces which they are adding to the set, you will
have to wait a few days; but I flatter myself this delay will
contribute to your satisfaction, and produce for you a toy that
will give you pleasure, and make you remember your old adorer. It
is curious how old people's habits agree. For four years past I
have given up suppers, as incompatible with the trade I am obliged
to follow; and on marching days my dinners consist of a cup of
chocolate.

"We hurried off like fools, quite inflated with our victory, to try
if we could not chase the Austrians out of Dresden. They made a
mockery of us from the tops of their mountains. So I have
withdrawn, like a bad little boy, to conceal myself, out of spite,
in one of the wretchedest villages in Saxony. And here the first
thing will be to drive the Circle gentlemen (Reich's army) out of
Freyberg into Chemnitz, and get ourselves soon to quarters, and
something to live upon.

"It is, I swear to you, a hideous life; the like of which nobody
but Don Quixote ever led before me. All this tumbling and toiling,
and bother and confusion that never ceases, has made me so old that
you would scarcely know me again. On the right side of my head the
hair is all gray. My teeth break and fall out. I have got my face
wrinkled like the falbalas of a petticoat, my back bent like a
fiddle bow, and spirit sad and cast down like a monk of La Trappe.
I forewarn you of all this lest, in case we should meet again in
flesh and bone, you might feel yourself too violently shocked by my
appearance. There remains to me nothing but the heart, which has
undergone no change; and which will preserve, as long as I breathe,
its feelings of esteem and of tender friendship for my good Mamma.

"Adieu."

Fergus knew nothing of the concluding scenes of the battle of
Torgau until some little time afterwards. He was not with the king
when the grenadiers first made their attack on the hill, having
been despatched to find and bring up Hulsen's column. Having
discovered it, he guided it through the forest to the point where
Frederick was so anxiously expecting its arrival; and when it
advanced, with the survivors of the grenadiers, to the second
attack, he took his place behind the king. They were halfway up the
ascent when a cannon ball struck him on the left arm, carrying it
away just above the elbow.


[Illustration: "As Fergus fell from his horse, Karl, who was
riding behind him, leapt from his saddle"]


As he fell from his horse, Karl, who was riding behind him, leapt
from his saddle with a hoarse cry of rage. Then, seeing the nature
of the wound, he lifted him in his arms, mounted Fergus's horse,
and rode down through an interval between the regiments of the
second line; and then into the wood, to the spot where the surgeons
were dressing the wounds of those hurt in the first charge. One who
had just finished attending one of the grenadiers, seeing that the
trooper was carrying a colonel of the king's staff, at once helped
Karl to lower him to the ground.

"You have done well to bring him down at once, my man," he said.
"It may be the saving of his life."

As he spoke, he was cutting off the tunic.

"There is not much flow of blood. You see, the contusion has closed
the main artery. If we can keep it from bursting out, he will do."

He took out from his case some stout tape, passed it round the arm,
asked Karl for a ramrod out of one his pistols and, with this,
twisted the tape until it almost cut into the skin. Then he gave a
few more turns, to hold the ramrod securely in its place. Then he
called a young surgeon to him.

"We had better make a good job of this, at once," he said. "This is
Colonel Drummond, one of the king's favourite officers, and a most
gallant young fellow. It will not take us five minutes."

The artery was first found and tied up; for Prussian surgery was,
at that time, far ahead of our own. The bruised flesh was pressed
up, the bone cut off neatly, above the point where it was
splintered, the flesh brought down again over it and trimmed, then
several thicknesses of lint put over it, and the whole carefully
bandaged up.

"There," he said to Karl, as he rose from his work, "that is all
that I can do for him; and unless it bursts out bleeding again, he
is likely to do well. If it does, you must tighten that tape still
more. All there is to do is to keep him as quiet as possible.

"Have you any spirits?"

"Yes, doctor, there is a flask in his holster."

"Mix some with as much water, and pour a little down his throat
from time to time. Fold his cloak, and put it under his head. He
will probably recover consciousness in a short time. When he does
so, impress upon him the necessity of lying perfectly quiet. As
soon as the battle is over, we must get him moved into shelter."

In half an hour Fergus opened his eyes. Karl, who was kneeling by
him, placed one hand on his chest and the other on the wounded arm.

"You must not move, colonel," he said. "You have been hit, but the
doctor says you will get over it; but you must lie perfectly
still."

Fergus looked round in bewilderment. Then, as the roar of the
battle came to his ears, he made an instinctive effort to rise.

"It is going on still," Karl said, repressing the movement. "We
shall thrash them, presently; but you can do nothing more today,
and you must do as the doctor bids you, sir."

"Where am I hit?"

"It is on the left arm, colonel. An Austrian cannonball did the
business. If it had been three or four inches farther to the right,
it would have finished you. As it is, I hope that you will soon get
about again."

"Then it has taken off my arm," Fergus said feebly.

"Better that than your head, sir. The left arm is of no great
account, except for holding a bridle; and there is a good bit of it
left.

"Drink a little more of this brandy and water. How do you feel now,
sir?"

"I feel cold," Fergus replied. "My feet are like ice."

Karl wrapped Fergus's fur-lined pelisse round his feet, undid his
blanket and cloak from his saddle, and laid them over him.

"That will be better, sir. Now, if you will promise to lie quite
quiet, I will fasten your horse up--I don't know what has become of
mine--and will go and collect some firewood and get up a good
blaze. I am afraid there is no chance of getting you into a
shelter, tonight."

"I am afraid we are being driven down the hill again, Karl. The
roll of musketry is coming nearer."

"That is so, colonel; but we shall have the cavalry up soon, and
that will make all the difference."

Just as Karl came back with an armful of firewood, a staff officer
rode up.

"The king has sent me to inquire how Colonel Drummond is," he said.
"His majesty has heard that he is badly wounded, and has been
carried here."

"This is the colonel, major," Karl said, leading him to the side of
Fergus.

"I am sorry to see you here," the officer said. "The king has sent
me to inquire after you."

"Will you thank his majesty, Major Kaulbach; and tell him that it
is nothing worse than the loss of a left arm, and that the
surgeon's opinion is that I shall do well. How goes the battle?"

"Badly, badly; but Holstein will be up in a quarter of an hour, and
then we shall have another try. We broke their line badly, last
time; and if we had had cavalry to launch at them, we should have
managed the business."

"The king is unhurt, I hope."

"Not altogether. He was struck from his horse by a piece of case
shot, but his pelisse saved him. He was able to mount again in a
few minutes, making very light of the affair; and was in the middle
of the fight, as usual. I was next you when you were hit, and I saw
your orderly lift you on to your horse before him and, as soon as
we got down here, reported it to the king."

"Our loss must be terribly heavy."

"Terrible! There is no saying how severe it is, yet; but not half
the grenadiers are on their feet.

"There is nothing I can do for you?"

"Nothing at all. My orders are to lie still; and as I feel too weak
to move, and there is no one to carry me away, and nowhere to take
me to, I am not likely to disobey the order."

The officer rode off again. Karl soon had a fire lighted,
sufficiently close to Fergus for him to feel its warmth. Wounded
men, who had made their way down the hill, came and sat down on the
other sides of it. Many other fires were lighted, as it grew dusk.

In front the battle had broken out again, as furiously as ever; and
ere long wounded men began to come down again. They brought
cheering news, however. The Prussians were still pressing forward,
the cavalry had thrown the Austrian line into terrible confusion.
No one knew exactly where any of the Prussian battalions had got
to, but all agreed that things were going on well.

At five o'clock the roar gradually ceased, and soon all was quiet.
The wounded now came in fast, but none could say whether the battle
was won or lost; for the night was so dark that each could only
speak of what had happened to his own corps.

Presently the number round the fires was swelled by the arrival of
numerous Austrians, wounded and unwounded. Most of these laid their
rifles by, saying:

"It is a bitter night, comrades. Will you let us have a share of
the fire?"

"Come in, come in," the Prussians answered. "We are all friends for
tonight, for we are all in equally bad plight. Can you tell us how
matters have gone, up there?"

But these knew no more than the Prussians. They had got separated
from their corps in the confusion and, losing their way altogether,
had seen the glow of the fires in the forest, and had come down for
warmth and shelter.

Presently Major Kaulbach rode up again.

"How have things gone, major?" Fergus asked eagerly.

"No one knows," he said. "The Austrians are broken up; and our
battalions and theirs are so mixed that there is no saying where
they are, or how matters will stand in the morning. The king has
gone to Elsnig, two or three miles away."

"Is there no news of Ziethen?"

"None. They have just begun to fire heavily again in that
direction, but what he has been doing all day, no one has any
idea."

But little was said round the fires. A short distance away the
surgeons were still at work with the more serious cases, while the
soldiers roughly bandaged each other's wounds; but as, gradually,
the distant firing increased in fury, and seemed to grow in
distinctness, men who had lain down sat up to listen. There was no
longer any talking, and a hush fell upon the forest.

"It is certainly coming closer, colonel," Karl said at last. "It
seems that Ziethen has woke up in earnest. May the good God grant
that he win his way up on to the heights!"

"If he does, we shall have the Austrians, in the morning. If he
doesn't, we shall have a poor chance with them."

"I am afraid we sha'n't, colonel; but it certainly sounds as if
Ziethen was making way."

At nine o'clock a cavalry officer came riding along. He drew rein
at the fire.

"Can anyone tell me where I can find the king?"

"He is at Elsnig, captain," Karl said, rising and saluting. "May I
ask what is the news, sir?"

"The news is good. Ziethen has gained the heights. We can see the
flash of fire round the Siptitz hill."

A cheer broke from all the Prussians within hearing. There was not
a man but knew that the fate of Prussia hung on the result of this
battle, and for the moment wounds were forgotten. Men shook hands,
with tears of joy streaming down their rugged cheeks; and as others
came running up from the other fires, to know what was the news,
and then hurried off again to tell their companions, the forest
rang with their cheering.

All was not over yet. For a time the firing was louder and heavier
than before, but towards ten o'clock news came that Ziethen was
firmly established on the Siptitz hill, and that the Austrian
battalions were drawing off. Then all lay down to sleep, rejoiced
and thankful; and even the Austrians, disconcerted as they were,
were not altogether sorry that they must now consider themselves
prisoners; and free, for a long time to come, from further risk of
battle.

The news, in the morning, that the Austrian army had already
crossed the river and was in full retreat southwards, afforded the
most intense satisfaction. There was now a hope of shelter and rest
in Torgau, instead of the prospect of remaining in the forest,
drenched to the skin by the rain that had come down, without
intermission, for the last twenty-four hours.

An hour later Major Kaulbach again rode up, accompanied by four
infantry men bearing a stretcher.

"The king has already gone on to Torgau, and he has given me orders
to see that you are carried there, at once. There will be no more
fighting, at present. Daun has got a long start, and there will be
enough to do here, for the next twelve hours, in collecting the
wounded. Lacy has retreated this side of the river, and Ziethen's
cavalry started in pursuit, some hours ago."

Fergus was carefully lifted onto the litter, and carried down to
Torgau; where several large houses had already been assigned for
the use of wounded officers, while the soldiers were to be placed
in the hospitals, public buildings, and churches, Austrians and
Prussians being distributed indiscriminately; and by nightfall some
twelve thousand wounded were housed in the town. A small body of
troops was left there. The inhabitants undertook the charge of the
wounded, and the next morning the king marched away south, with the
army.

Soon after Fergus was brought in, Frederick paid a visit to the
house where he had been carried, and said a few words to each of
the wounded officers.

"So you are down again, Drummond. Fortune is not treating you so
favourably as she used to do."

"It might have been a good deal worse, your majesty. I think that
one who has got off with only the loss of his left arm has no
reason to complain."

"No, it might have been worse," the king replied. "I have lost many
good friends, and thousands of brave soldiers. However, I too must
not complain; for it has saved Prussia.

"Don't hurry to rejoin too soon, Drummond. Another month, and we
shall all be in winter quarters."



Chapter 21: Home.


Fergus remained at Torgau for six weeks. He had, two days after the
battle, sent Karl off to carry a letter to Thirza; telling her that
