
"Back, through the filthy by-lanes!
  Back, through the trampled slush!
Up to the crazy garret,
  Wrapped in an awful hush.
My heart sank down at the threshold,
  And I paused with a sudden thrill,
For there in the silv'ry moonlight
  My Nance lay, cold and still.

"Up to the blackened ceiling
  The sunken eyes were cast--
I knew on those lips all bloodless
  My name had been the last:
She'd called for her absent husband--
  O God! had I but known!--
Had called in vain, and in anguish
  Had died in that den--_alone_.

"Yes, there, in a land of plenty,
  Lay a loving woman dead,
Cruelly starved and murdered
  For a loaf of the parish bread.
At yonder gate, last Christmas,
  I craved for a human life.
You, who would feast us paupers,
  _What of my murdered wife!_

       *       *       *       *       *

"There, get ye gone to you dinners;
  Don't mind me in the least;
Think of the happy paupers
  Eating your Christmas feast;
And when you recount their blessings
  In your snug, parochial way,
Say what you did for _me_, too,
  Only last Christmas Day."

    _George R. Sims._




Our Presidents--A Memory Rhyme


First on the list is Washington, Virginia's proudest name;
John Adams next, the Federalist, from Massachusetts came;
Three sons of old Virginia into the White House go--
'Twas Jefferson, and Madison, and then came James Monroe.

Massachusetts for one term sent Adams called John Q.,
And Tennessee a Democrat, brave Jackson staunch and true.
Martin Van Buren of New York, and Harrison we see,
And Tyler of Virginia, and Polk of Tennessee.

Louisiana Taylor sent; New York Millard Fillmore;
New Hampshire gave us Franklin Pierce; when his term was o'er
The keystone state Buchanan sent.  War thunders shook the realm
Abe Lincoln wore a martyr's crown, and Johnson took the helm.

Then U.S. Grant of Illinois who ruled with sword and pen;
And Hayes, and Garfield who was shot, two noble Buckeye men.
Chester Arthur from New York, and Grover Cleveland came;
Ben Harrison served just four years, then Cleveland ruled again.

McKinley--shot at Buffalo--the nation plunged in grief,
And "Teddy" Roosevelt of New York served seven years as chief.
Taft of Ohio followed him. Then Woodrow Wilson came--
New Jersey's learned Democrat; war set the world aflame;

And when the tide of strife and hate its baneful course had run,
The country went Republican and Warren Harding won.
No duty would he shirk,--he died while on a western trip;
Coolidge of Massachusetts then assumed the leadership.

    _Isabel Ambler Gilman._




Annie and Willie's Prayer


'Twas the eve before Christmas; "Good night" had been said,
And Annie and Willie had crept into bed;
There were tears on their pillows, and tears in their eyes,
And each little bosom was heaving with sighs,
For to-night their stern father's command had been given
That they should retire precisely at seven
Instead of at eight; for they troubled him more
With questions unheard of than ever before;
He had told them he thought this delusion a sin,
No such being as Santa Claus ever had been,
And he hoped, after this, he should never more hear
How he scrambled down chimneys with presents, each year,
And this was the reason that two little heads
So restlessly tossed on their soft downy beds.

Eight, nine, and the clock on the steeple tolled ten;
Not a word had been spoken by either till then;
When Willie's sad face from the blanket did peep,
And whispered, "Dear Annie, is oo fast asleep?"
"Why, no, brother Willie," a sweet voice replies,
"I've tried it in vain, but I can't shut my eyes;
For somehow, it makes me so sorry because
Dear papa has said there is no Santa Claus;
Now we know there is, and it can't be denied,
For he came every year before mamma died;
But then I've been thinking that she used to pray,
And God would hear everything mamma would say;
And perhaps she asked him to send Santa Claus here
With the sacks full of presents he brought every year."
"Well, why tant we pray dest as mamma did then,
And ask Him to send him with presents aden?"
"I've been thinking so, too," and, without a word more,
Four little bare feet bounded out on the floor,
And four little knees the soft carpet pressed,
And two tiny hands were clasped close to each breast.
"Now, Willie, you know we must firmly believe
That the presents we ask for we're sure to receive;
You must wait just as still till I say the 'Amen,'
And by that you will know that your turn has come then.
Dear Jesus, look down on my brother and me.
And grant as the favor we are asking of Thee!
I want a wax dolly, a tea-set and ring,
And an ebony work-box that shuts with a spring.
Bless papa, dear Jesus, and cause him to see
That Santa Claus loves us far better than he;
Don't let him get fretful and angry again
At dear brother Willie, and Annie, Amen!"
"Peas Desus 'et Santa Taus tum down to-night,
And bing us some pesents before it is 'ight;
I want he should div me a nice ittle sed,
With bight, shiny unners, and all painted yed;
A box full of tandy, a book and a toy--
Amen--and then Desus, I'll be a dood boy."
Their prayers being ended they raised up their heads,
And with hearts light and cheerful again sought their beds;
They were soon lost in slumber both peaceful and deep,
And with fairies in dreamland were roaming in sleep.

Eight, nine, and the little French clock had struck ten
Ere the father had thought of his children again;
He seems now to hear Annie's half suppressed sighs,
And to see the big tears stand in Willie's blue eyes.
"I was harsh with my darlings," he mentally said,
"And should not have sent them so early to bed;
But then I was troubled,--my feelings found vent,
For bank-stock to-day has gone down ten per cent.
But of course they've forgotten their troubles ere this,
And that I denied them the thrice asked-for kiss;
But just to make sure I'll steal up to their door,
For I never spoke harsh to my darlings before."
So saying, he softly ascended the stairs,
And arrived at the door to hear both of their prayers.
His Annie's "bless papa" draws forth the big tears,
And Willie's grave promise falls sweet on his ears.
"Strange, strange I'd forgotten," said he with a sigh,
"How I longed when a child to have Christmas draw nigh.
I'll atone for my harshness," he inwardly said,
"By answering their prayers, ere I sleep in my bed."

Then he turned to the stairs, and softly went down,
Threw off velvet slippers and silk dressing-gown;
Donned hat, coat, and boots, and was out in the street,
A millionaire facing the cold driving sleet,
Nor stopped he until he had bought everything,
From the box full of candy to the tiny gold ring.
Indeed he kept adding so much to his store
That the various presents outnumbered a score;
Then homeward he turned with his holiday load
And with Aunt Mary's aid in the nursery 'twas stowed.
Miss Dolly was seated beneath a pine-tree,
By the side of a table spread out for a tea;
A work-box well filled in the centre was laid,
And on it the ring for which Annie had prayed;
A soldier in uniform stood by a sled
With bright shining runners, and all painted red;
There were balls, dogs and horses, books pleasing to see,
And birds of all colors--were perched in the tree,
While Santa Claus, laughing, stood up in the top,
As if getting ready more presents to drop.
And as the fond father the picture surveyed,
He thought for his trouble he had amply been paid;
And he said to himself as he brushed off a tear,
"I'm happier to-night than I've been for a year,
I've enjoyed more true pleasure than ever before--
What care I if bank-stocks fall ten per cent more.
Hereafter I'll make it a rule, I believe,
To have Santa Claus visit us each Christmas eve."
So thinking he gently extinguished the light,
And tripped down the stairs to retire for the night.

As soon as the beams of the bright morning sun
Put the darkness to flight, and the stars, one by one,
Four little blue eyes out of sleep opened wide,
And at the same moment the presents espied;
Then out of their beds they sprang with a bound,
And the very gifts prayed for were all of them found;
They laughed and they cried in their innocent glee,
And shouted for papa to come quick and see
What presents old Santa Claus brought in the night
(Just the things that they wanted) and left before light;
"And now," added Annie, in a voice soft and low,
"You'll believe there's a Santa, Clans, papa, I know";
While dear little Willie climbed up on his knee,
Determined no secret between them should be,
And told in soft whispers how Annie had said
That their blessed mamma, so long ago dead,
Used to kneel down and pray by the side of her chair,
And that God, up in heaven, had answered her prayer!
"Then we dot up, and payed dust as well as we tould,
And Dod answered our payers; now wasn't he dood?"

"I should say that he was if he sent you all these,
And knew just what presents my children would please.
Well, well, let him think so, the dear little elf,
'Twould be cruel to tell him I did it myself."

Blind father! who caused your proud heart to relent,
And the hasty word spoken so soon to repent?
'Twas the Being who made you steal softly upstairs,
And made you His agent to answer their prayers.

    _Sophia P. Snow._




Trailing Arbutus


I wandered lonely where the pine-trees made
Against the bitter East their barricade,
  And, guided by its sweet
Perfume, I found, within a narrow dell,
The trailing spring flower tinted like a shell
  Amid dry leaves and mosses at my feet.

From under dead boughs, for whose loss the pines
Moaned ceaseless overhead, the blossoming vines
  Lifted their glad surprise,
While yet the bluebird smoothed in leafless trees
His feathers ruffled by the chill sea-breeze,
  And snow-drifts lingered under April skies.

As, pausing, o'er the lonely flower I bent,
I thought of lives thus lowly clogged and pent,
  Which yet find room,
Through care and cumber, coldness and decay,
To lend a sweetness to the ungenial day
  And make the sad earth happier for their bloom.

    _J.G. Whittier._




When the Light Goes Out


Tho' yer lamp o' life is burnin' with a clear and steady light,
An' it never seems ter flicker, but it's allers shinin' bright;
Tho' it sheds its rays unbroken for a thousand happy days--
Father Time is ever turnin' down the wick that feeds yer blaze.
So it clearly is yer duty ef you've got a thing to do
Ter put yer shoulder to ther wheel an' try to push her through;
Ef yer upon a wayward track you better turn about--
You've lost ther chance to do it
  When the
    Light
      Goes
        Out.

Speak kindly to the woman who is working fer yer praise,
Ther same way as you used ter in those happy courtin' days;
She likes appreciation just the same ez me an' you,
And it's only right and proper that yer give her what is due.
Don't wait until her lamp o' life is burnin' dim an' low,
Afore you tell her what you orter told her long ago--
Now's ther time ter cheer her up an' put her blues to rout--
You've lost ther chance to do it
  When the
    Light
      Goes
        Out.

Don't keep a-puttin' matters off an' settin' dates ahead--
To-morrow's sun'll find a hundred thousand of us dead;
Don't think because yer feelin well you won't be sick no more--
Sometimes the reddest pippin has a  worm-hole to the core.
Don't let a killin' habit grow upon you soft and still
Because you think thet you ken throw  it from you at your will--
Now's ther time ter quit it when yer feelin' brave an' stout--
You've lost ther chance to do it
  When the
    Light
      Goes
        Out.

I'd rather die with nothin' then ter hev ther people say
That I had got my money in a robbin', graspin' way;
No words above my restin' place from any tongue or pen
Would hev a deeper meanin' than "He helped his fellow-men."
So ef you hev a fortune and you want to help the poor,
Don't keep a-stavin' off until yon get a little more;
Ef yer upon a miser's track you better turn about--
Yer record keeps on burnin'
  When the
    Light
      Goes
        Out.

    _Harry S. Chester._




Prayer and Potatoes


An old lady sat in her old arm-chair,
With wrinkled visage and disheveled hair,
  And pale and hunger-worn features;
For days and for weeks her only fare,
As she sat there in her old arm-chair,
  Had been potatoes.

But now they were gone; of bad or good.
Not one was left for the old lady's food
  Of those potatoes;
And she sighed and said, "What shall I do?
Where shall I send, and to whom shall I go
  For more potatoes?"

And she thought of the deacon over the way,
The deacon so ready to worship and pray,
  Whose cellar was full of potatoes;
And she said: "I will send for the deacon to come;
He'll not mind much to give me some
  Of such a store of potatoes."

And the deacon came over as fast as he could,
Thinking to do the old lady some good,
  But never thought of potatoes;
He asked her at once what was her chief want,
And she, simple soul, expecting a grant,
  Immediately answered, "Potatoes."

But the deacon's religion didn't lie that way;
He was more accustomed to preach and pray
  Than to give of his hoarded potatoes;
So, not hearing, of course, what the old lady said,
He rose to pray with uncovered head,
  But _she_ only thought of potatoes.

He prayed for patience, and wisdom, and grace,
But when he prayed, "Lord, give her peace,"
  She audibly sighed "Give potatoes";
And at the end of each prayer which he said,
He heard, or thought that he heard in its stead,
  The same request for potatoes.

The deacon was troubled; knew not what to do;
'Twas very embarrassing to have her act so
  About "those carnal potatoes."
So, ending his prayer, he started for home;
As the door closed behind him, he heard a deep groan,
  "Oh, give to the hungry, potatoes!"

And that groan followed him all the way home;
In the midst of the night it haunted his room--
  "Oh, give to the hungry, potatoes!"
He could bear it no longer; arose and dressed;
From his well-filled cellar taking in haste
  A bag of his best potatoes.

Again he went to the widow's lone hut;
Her sleepless eyes she had not shut;
But there she sat in that old arm-chair,
With the same wan features, the same sad air,
And, entering in, he poured on the floor
A bushel or more from his goodly store
  Of choicest potatoes.

The widow's cup was running o'er,
Her face was haggard and wan no more.
"Now," said the deacon, "shall we pray?"
"Yes," said the widow, "_now_ you may."
And he kneeled him down on the sanded floor,
Where he had poured his goodly store,
And such a prayer the deacon prayed
As never before his lips essayed;
No longer embarrassed, but free and full,
He poured out the voice of a liberal soul,
And the widow responded aloud "Amen!"
  But spake no more of potatoes.

And would you, who hear this simple tale,
Pray for the poor, and praying, "prevail"?
Then preface your prayers with alms and good deeds;
Search out the poor, their wants and their needs;
Pray for peace, and grace, and spiritual food,
For wisdom and guidance,-for all these are good,--
  _But don't forget the potatoes_.

    _J.T. Pettee._




The Parts of Speech


Three little words you often see
Are articles _a_, _an_, and _the_.
A noun's the name of anything,
As _house_ or _garden_, _hoop_ or _swing_.
Instead of nouns the pronouns stand--
_Her_ head, _your_ face, _his_ arm, _my_ hand.
Adjectives tell the kind of noun,
As _great_, _small_, _pretty_, _white_ or _brown_.
Verbs tell something to be done--
To _read_, _count_, _sing_, _laugh_ or _run_.
How things are done the adverbs tell,
As _slowly_, _quickly_, _ill_ or _well_.
Conjunctions join the words together,
As men _and_ women, wind _or_ weather.
The preposition stands before
A noun, as _in_ or _through_ a door.
The interjection shows surprise,
As _oh!_ how pretty, _ah!_ how wise.
The whole are called nine parts of speech,
Which reading, writing, speaking teach.




A New Leaf


He came to my desk with, quivering lip--
  The lesson was done.
"Dear Teacher, I want a new leaf," he said,
  "I have spoiled this one."
I took the old leaf, stained and blotted,
And gave him a new one all unspotted,
  And into his sad eyes smiled,
  "Do better, now, my child."

I went to the throne with a quivering soul--
  The old year was done.
"Dear Father, hast Thou a new leaf for me?
  I have spoiled this one."
He took the old leaf, stained and blotted,
And gave me a new one all unspotted,
  And into my sad heart smiled,
  "Do better, now, my child."

    _Carrie Shaw Rice._




The Boy With the Hoe


How are you hoeing your row, my boy?
  Say, how are you hoeing your row?
    Do you hoe it fair?
    Do you hoe it square?
  Do you hoe it the best that you know?
Do you cut out the weeds as you ought to do?
  Do you plant what is beautiful there?
    For the harvest, you know,
    Will be just what you sow;
  Are you working it on the square?

Say, are you killing the weeds, my boy?
  Are you hoeing your row neat and clean?
    Are you going straight
    At a hustling gait?
  Are you cutting out all that is mean?
Do you whistle and sing as you toil along?
  Are you finding your work a delight?
    If you do it this way
    You will gladden the day,
  And your row will be tended right.

Hoeing your row with a will, my boy,
  And giving it thought and care,
    Will insure success
    And your efforts bless,
  As the crop to the garner you bear;
For the world will look on as you hoe your row,
  And will judge you by that which you do;
    Therefore, try for first prize,
    Though your utmost it tries,
  For the harvest depends on you.

    _T.B. Weaver._




Our Flag


Fling it from mast and steeple,
  Symbol o'er land and sea
Of the life of a happy people,
  Gallant and strong and free.
Proudly we view its colors,
  Flag of the brave and true,
With the clustered stars and the steadfast bars,
  The red, the white, and the blue.

Flag of the fearless-hearted,
  Flag of the broken chain,
Flag in a day-dawn started,
  Never to pale or wane.
Dearly we prize its colors,
  With the heaven light breaking through,
The clustered stars and the steadfast bars,
  The red, the white, and the blue.

Flag of the sturdy fathers,
  Flag of the loyal sons,
Beneath its folds it gathers
  Earth's best and noblest ones.
Boldly we wave its colors,
  Our veins are thrilled anew
By the steadfast bars, the clustered stars,
  The red, the white, and the blue.

    _Margaret E. Sangster._




The Little Fir-Trees
