      Drop forgiveness from heaven like dew,
    As I lay my heart on your dead heart, Douglas,
      Douglas, Douglas, tender and true.




XCV. AMOR MUNDI.

CHRISTINA GEORGINA ROSSETTI.--1830-


    "O where are you going with your love-locks flowing,
      On the west wind blowing along this valley track?"
    "The down-hill path is easy, come with me an it please ye,
      We shall escape the up-hill by never turning back."

    So they two went together in glowing August weather,
      The honey-breathing heather lay to their left and right;
    And dear she was to doat on, her swift feet seem'd to float on
      The air like soft twin pigeons too sportive to alight.

    "Oh, what is that in heaven where grey cloud-flakes are seven,
      Where blackest clouds hang riven just at the rainy skirt?"
    "Oh, that's a meteor sent us, a message dumb, portentous,
      An undecipher'd solemn signal of help or hurt."

    "Oh, what is that glides quickly where velvet flowers grow thickly,
      Their scent comes rich and sickly?" "A scaled and hooded worm."
    "Oh, what's that in the hollow, so pale I quake to follow?"
      "Oh, that's a thin dead body which waits the eternal term."

    "Turn again, O my sweetest,--turn again, false and fleetest:
      This beaten way thou beatest, I fear is hell's own track."
    "Nay, too steep for hill mounting; nay, too late for cost counting:
      This down-hill path is easy, but there's no turning back."




XCVI. TOUJOURS AMOUR.

EDMUND CLARENCE STEDMAN.--1833-


      Prithee tell me, Dimple-Chin,
      At what age does love begin?
      Your blue eyes have scarcely seen
      Summers three, my fairy queen,
      But a miracle of sweets,
      Soft approaches, sly retreats,
      Show the little archer there,
      Hidden in your pretty hair;
      When didst learn a heart to win?
      Prithee tell me, Dimple-Chin!
      "Oh!" the rosy lips reply,
      "I can't tell you if I try.
    Tis so long I can't remember:
      Ask some younger lass than I."

      Tell, O tell me, Grizzled-Face,
      Do your heart and head keep pace?
      When does hoary Love expire,
      When do frosts put out the fire?
      Can its embers burn below
      All that chill December snow?
      Care you still soft hands to press,
      Bonny heads to smooth and bless?
      When does Love give up the chase?
      Tell, O tell me, Grizzled-Face!
      "Ah!" the wise old lips reply,
      "Youth may pass and strength may die;
    But of Love I can't foretoken:
      Ask some older sage than I!"




XCVII. ENGLAND.

THOMAS BAILEY ALDRICH.--1836-


    While men pay reverence to mighty things,
    They must revere thee, thou blue-cinctured isle
    Of England--not to-day, but this long while
    In the front of nations, Mother of great kings,
    Soldiers, and poets. Round thee the Sea flings
    His steel-bright arm, and shields thee from the guile
    And hurt of France. Secure, with august smile,
    Thou sittest, and the East its tribute brings.
    Some say thy old-time power is on the wane,
    Thy moon of grandeur fill'd, contracts at length--
    They see it darkening down from less to less.
    Let but a hostile hand make threat again,
    And they shall see thee in thy ancient strength,
    Each iron sinew quivering, lioness!

       *       *       *       *       *


    _Such kings of shreds have woo'd and won her,
      Such crafty knaves her laurel own'd,
    It has become almost an honor
      Not to be crown'd._

        THOMAS BAILEY ALDRICH.
            _On Popularity._




XCVIII. ROCOCO.

THOMAS BAILEY ALDRICH.


    By studying my lady's eyes
      I've grown so learned day by day,
    So Machiavelian in this wise,
      That when I send her flowers, I say

    To each small flower (no matter what,
      Geranium, pink, or tuberose,
    Syringa, or forget-me-not,
      Or violet) before it goes:

    "Be not triumphant, little flower,
      When on her haughty heart you lie,
    But modestly enjoy your hour:
      She'll weary of you by-and-by."




XCIX. KINGS OF MEN.

JOHN READE.--1837-


    As hills seem Alps, when veil'd in misty shroud,
      Some men seem kings, through mists of ignorance;
    Must we have darkness, then, and cloud on cloud,
      To give our hills and pigmy kings a chance?
    Must we conspire to curse the humbling light,
      Lest some one, at whose feet our fathers bow'd,
    Should suddenly appear, full length, in sight,
      Scaring to laughter the adoring crowd?
    Oh, no! God send us light!--Who loses then?
      The king of slaves and not the king of men.
    True kings are kings for ever, crown'd of God,
      The King of Kings,--we need not fear for them.
    'Tis only the usurper's diadem
      That shakes at touch of light, revealing fraud.




C. THALATTA! THALATTA!

JOHN READE.


    In my ear is the moan of the pines--in my heart is the song of
              the sea,
    And I feel his salt breath on my face as he showers his kisses
              on me,
    And I hear the wild scream of the gulls, as they answer the call
              of the tide,
    And I watch the fair sails as they glisten like gems on the breast
              of a bride.

    From the rock where I stand to the sun is a pathway of sapphire
              and gold,
    Like a waif of those Patmian visions that wrapt the lone seer
              of old,
    And it seems to my soul like an omen that calls me far over
              the sea--
    But I think of a little white cottage and one that is dearest to me.

    Westward ho! Far away to the East is a cottage that looks to
              the shore,--
    Though each drop in the sea were a tear, as it was, I can see it
              no more;
    For the heart of its pride with the flowers of the "Vale of the
              Shadow" reclines,
    And--hush'd is the song of the sea and hoarse is the moan of
              the pines.




CI. THE FORSAKEN GARDEN.

ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE.--1837-


    In a coign of the cliff between lowland and highland,
      At the sea-down's edge between windward and lee,
    Wall'd round with rocks as an inland island,
      The ghost of a garden fronts the sea.
    A girdle of brushwood and thorn encloses
      The steep square slope of the blossomless bed
    Where the weeds that grew green from the graves of its roses
          Now lie dead.

    The fields fall southward, abrupt and broken,
      To the low last edge of the long lone land.
    If a step should sound or a word be spoken,
      Would a ghost not rise at the strange guest's hand?
    So long have the gray bare walks lain guestless,
      Through branches and briers if a man make way,
    He shall find no life but the sea-wind's, restless
          Night and day.

    The dense hard passage is blind and stifled,
      That crawls by a track none turn to climb
    To the strait waste place that the years have rifled
      Of all but the thorns that are touch'd not of time.
    The thorns he spares when the rose is taken;
      The rocks are left when he wastes the plain.
    The wind that wanders, the weeds wind-shaken,
          These remain.

    Not a flower to be prest of the foot that falls not;
      As the heart of a dead man the seed-plots are dry;
    From the thicket of thorns whence the nightingale calls not,
      Could she call, there were never a rose to reply.
    Over the meadows that blossom and wither
      Rings but the note of sea-bird's song;
    Only the sun and the rain come hither
          All year long.

    The sun burns sere and the rain dishevels
      One gaunt bleak blossom of scentless breath.
    Only the wind here hovers and revels
      In a round where life seems barren as death.
    Here there was laughing of old, there was weeping,
      Haply, of lovers none ever will know,
    Whose eyes went seaward a hundred sleeping
          Years ago.

    Heart handfast in heart as they stood, "Look thither,"
      Did he whisper? "Look forth from the flowers to the sea;
    For the foam-flowers endure when the rose-blossoms wither,
      And men that love lightly may die--but we?"
    And the same wind sang and the same waves whiten'd,
      And or ever the garden's last petals were shed,
    In the lips that had whisper'd, the eyes that had lighten'd,
          Love was dead.

    Or they lov'd their life through, and then went whither?
      And were one to the end--but what end who knows?
    Love deep as the sea as a rose must wither,
      As the rose-red seaweed that mocks the rose.
    Shall the dead take thought for the dead to love them?
      What love was ever as deep as a grave?
    They are loveless now as the grass above them
          Or the wave.

    All are at one now, roses and lovers,
      Not known of the cliffs and the fields and the sea.
    Not a breath of the time that has been hovers
      In the air now soft with a summer to be.
    Not a breath shall there sweeten the seasons hereafter
      Of the flowers or the lovers that laugh now or weep,
    When as they that are free now of weeping and laughter
          We shall sleep.

    Here death may deal not again for ever;
      Here change may come not till all change end.
    From the graves they have made they shall rise up never,
      Who have left nought living to ravage and rend.
    Earth, stones, and thorns of the wild ground growing,
      When the sun and the rain live, these shall be;
    Till a last wind's breath upon all these blowing
          Roll the sea.

    Till the slow sea rise and the sheer cliff crumble,
      Till terrace and meadow the deep gulfs drink,
    Till the strength of the waves of the high tides humble
      The fields that lessen, the rocks that shrink,
    Here now in his triumph where all things falter,
      Stretch'd out on the spoils that his own hand spread,
    As a god self-slain on his own strange altar,
          Death lies dead.




CII. A BALLAD TO QUEEN ELIZABETH OF THE SPANISH ARMADA.

(BALLADE.)

AUSTIN DOBSON.--1840-


    King Philip had vaunted his claims;
      He had sworn for a year he would sack us;
    With an army of heathenish names
      He was coming to fagot and stack us;
    Like the thieves of the sea he would track us,
      And shatter our ships on the main;
    But we had bold Neptune to back us,--
      And where are the galleons of Spain?

    His carackes were christen'd of dames
      To the kirtles whereof he would tack us;
    With his saints and his gilded stern-frames,
      He had thought like an egg-shell to crack us;
      Now Howard may get to his Flaccus,
    And Drake to his Devon again,
      And Hawkins bowl rubbers to Bacchus,--
    For where are the galleons of Spain?

    Let his Majesty hang to St. James
      The axe that he whetted to hack us;
    He must play at some lustier games
      Or at sea he can hope to out-thwack us;
      To his mines of Peru he would pack us
    To tug at his bullet and chain;
      Alas! that his Greatness should lack us!--
    But where are the galleons of Spain?


          ENVOY.

        GLORIANA!--the Don may attack us
      Whenever his stomach be fain;
      He must reach us before he can rack us, ...
    And where are the galleons of Spain?

       *       *       *       *       *


    _He lives not best who dreads the coming pain
      And shunneth each delight desirable:_
    FLEE THOU EXTREMES, _this word alone is plain,
      Of all that God hath given to Man to spell!_

        ANDREW LANG.--1844.
            _From Sonnets from the Antique._




CIII. CIRCE.

(TRIOLET.)

AUSTIN DOBSON.


    In the School of Coquettes
      Madame Rose is a scholar:--
    O, they fish with all nets
    In the School of Coquettes!
    When her brooch she forgets
      'Tis to show her new collar;
    In the School of Coquettes
      Madame Rose is a scholar!




CIV. SCENES FROM "TECUMSEH."[Q]

CHARLES MAIR.--1840-


SCENE.--TECUMSEH'S _Cabin_.

_Enter_ IENA.

_Iena._ 'Tis night, and Mamatee is absent still!
Why should this sorrow weigh upon my heart,
And other lonely things on earth have rest?
Oh, could I be with them! The lily shone
All day upon the stream, and now it sleeps
Under the wave in peace--in cradle soft
Which sorrow soon may fashion for my grave.
Ye shadows which do creep into my thoughts--
Ye curtains of despair! what is my fault,
That ye should hide the happy earth from me?
Once I had joy of it, when tender Spring,
Mother of beauty, hid me in her leaves;
When Summer led me by the shores of song,
And forests and far-sounding cataracts
Melted my soul with music. I have heard
The rough chill harpings of dismantled woods,
When Fall had stripp'd them, and have felt a joy
Deeper than ear could lend unto the heart;
And when the Winter from his mountains wild
Look'd down on death, and, in the frosty sky,
The very stars seem'd hung with icicles,
Then came a sense of beauty calm and cold,
That wean'd me from myself, yet knit me still
With kindred bonds to Nature. All is past,
And he--who won from me such love for him,
And he--my valiant uncle and my friend,
Comes not to lift the cloud that drapes my soul,
And shield me from the fiendish Prophet's power.

_Enter_ MAMATEE.

Give me his answer in his very words!

_Mamatee._ There is a black storm raging in his mind--
His eye darts lightning like the angry cloud
Which hangs in woven darkness o'er the earth.
Brief is his answer--you must go to him.
The Long-Knife's camp-fires gleam among the oaks
Which dot yon western hill. A thousand men
Are sleeping there cajoled to fatal dreams
By promises the Prophet breaks to-night.
Hark! 'tis the war-song.

_Iena._                  Dares the Prophet now
Betray Tecumseh's trust, and break his faith?

_Mamatee._ He dares do anything will feed ambition.
His dancing braves are frenzied by his tongue,
Which prophesies revenge and victory.
Before the break of day he will surprise
The Long-Knife's camp, and hang our people's fate
Upon a single onset.

_Iena._              Should he fail?

_Mamatee._ Then all will fail;--Tecumseh's scheme will fail.[R]

_Iena._ It shall not! Let us go to him at once!

_Mamatee._ And risk your life?

_Iena._                        Risk hovers everywhere
When night and man combine for darksome deeds.
I'll go to him, and argue on my knees--
Yea, yield my hand--would I could give my heart
To stay his purpose and this act of ruin.

_Mamatee._ He is not in the mood for argument.
Rash girl! they die who would oppose him now.

_Iena._ Such death were sweet as life--I go! But, first--
Great Spirit! I commit my soul to Thee.      [_Kneels._


SCENE.--_An open space in the forest near the Prophet's Town. A fire of
billets burning. War-cries are heard from the town._

_Enter the_ PROPHET.

_Prophet._ My spells do work apace! Shout yourselves hoarse,
Ye howling ministers by whom I climb!
For this I've wrought until my weary tongue,
Blister'd with incantation, flags in speech,
And half declines its office. Every brave
Inflamed by charms and oracles, is now
A vengeful serpent, who will glide ere morn
To sting the Long-Knife's sleeping camp to death.
Why should I hesitate? My promises!
My duty to Tecumseh! What are these
Compared with duty here? Where I perceive
A near advantage, there my duty lies;
Consideration strong which overweighs
All other reason. Here is Harrison--
Trepann'd to dangerous lodgment for the night--
Each deep ravine which grooves the prairie's breast
A channel of approach; each winding creek
A screen for creeping death. Revenge is sick
To think of such advantage flung aside.
For what? To let Tecumseh's greatness grow,
Who gathers his rich harvest of renown
Out of the very fields that I have sown!
By Manitou, I will endure no more!
Nor, in the rising flood of our affairs,
Fish like an osprey for this eagle longer.
                                           But, soft!
It is the midnight hour when comes
Tarhay to claim his bride. [_Calls._] Tarhay! Tarhay!

_Enter_ TARHAY _with several braves._

_Tarhay._ Tarhay is here!

_Prophet._                The Long-Knives die to-night.
The spirits which do minister to me
Have breathed this utterance within my ear.
You know my sacred office cuts me off
From the immediate leadership in fight.
My nobler work is in the spirit-world,
And thence come promises which make us strong.
Near to the foe I'll keep the Magic Bowl,
Whilst you, Tarhay, shall lead our warriors on.

_Tarhay._ I'll lead them; they are wild with eagerness.
But fill my cold and empty cabin first
With light and heat! You know I love your niece,
And have the promise of her hand to-night.

_Prophet._ She shall be yours!
            [_To the braves._] Go bring her here at once--
But, look! Fulfilment of my promise comes
In her own person.

_Enter_ IENA _and_ MAMATEE.

                   Welcome, my sweet niece!
You have forstall'd my message by these braves,
And come unbidden to your wedding-place.

_Iena._ Uncle! you know my heart is far away--

_Prophet._ But still your hand is here! this little hand!
                                    [_Pulling her forward._

_Iena._ Dare you enforce a weak and helpless girl,
Who thought to move you by her misery?
Stand back! I have a message for you too.
What means the war-like song, the dance of braves,
And bustle in our town?

_Prophet._              It means that we
Attack the foe to-night.

_Iena._                  And risk our all?
O that Tecumseh knew! his soul would rush
In arms to intercept you. What! break faith,
And on the hazard of a doubtful strife,
Stake his great enterprise and all our lives!
The dying curses of a ruin'd race
Will wither up your wicked heart for this!

_Prophet._ False girl! your heart is with our foes;
Your hand I mean to turn to better use.

_Iena._ Oh, could it turn you from your mad intent
How freely would I give it! Drop this scheme,
Dismiss your frenzied warriors to their beds;
And, if contented with my hand, Tarhay
Can have it here.

_Tarhay._         I love you, Iena!

_Iena._ Then must you love what I do! Love our race!
'Tis this love nerves Tecumseh to unite
Its scatter'd tribes--his fruit of noble toil,
Which you would snatch unripen'd from his hand,
And feed to sour ambition. Touch it not--
Oh, touch it not, Tarhay! and though my heart
Breaks for it, I am yours.

_Prophet._                 His anyway,
