
Altogether the "Firm" were not very sure how far their position was
improved by the recovery of the _Martha_.  If Pledge, or any one, chose
to tell tales, or if they themselves, in order to extricate Tom White,
had to tell tales of themselves, all might yet go wrong.  The one good
thing, they decided, was that Mr Richardson, when he came to-morrow,
would be saved the expense of buying at least one new boat for somebody.

Our heroes, as in duty bound, were at the station to meet the 3:5 train,
and give the worthy paterfamilias a reception.

"Hullo, father," cried Dick, as if he had only parted with his parent
five minutes ago, "they've found her, I say.  Do you see that two-masted
collier in the harbour?  She picked her up, the day after we slipped
her.  Isn't it jolly?"

Mr Richardson certainly looked surprised, and a trifle relieved; but
the matter did not yet occur to him in a "jolly" light.

"It's a good thing she has come back," said he; "and now, as I have a
great deal to do, I'll say good-bye for the present.  I have sent a note
to Doctor Winter, to ask him to let you breakfast with me at the
'George,' in the morning."

"Thanks, awfully, sir," said Coote, beaming all over.

Mr Richardson laughed.

"I'm afraid I only mentioned Basil in my note," said he, "but I daresay
we shall be able to have a meal together later in the day.  Good-bye."

"Rather cool cheek of you, Coote," said Dick, as the "Firm" returned to
the school, "cadging my father that way for breakfast."

"Very sorry," said Coote, humbly.  "I thought we were all in it, that's
all."

The evening passed anxiously for the boys, and no less so for poor Mr
Richardson, who was buffeted about from pillar to post, from lawyer to
lawyer, from boatman to pawnbroker, in his honest efforts to extricate
his son from his scrape.

The recovery of the _Martha_, he found, made very little improvement in
his prospects.  For now she had come back, everybody seemed to be
calculating the amount of money she would have brought in had she
remained at Templeton during the busy season.  This loss was estimated
at several times the value of the boat, and the high-principled
prosecutors would hear no suggestion of withdrawing the case until each
one of them--partners, pawnbroker, and all--had been refunded the entire
sum.

Then, when that was done, the lawyers pulled their bills out of their
desks, and hinted that some one would have to settle them; and as
neither the partners, nor the pawnbroker, nor Tom White, saw their way
to doing so, Mr Richardson had to draw his own inferences and settle
them himself.  Then, when all seemed settled, the police recollected
that they had had considerable trouble in looking after the case.  They
had made several journeys, and spent several hours on the beach looking
out for the supposed thief.  They had also had charge of Tom White for a
fortnight; and what with postages, telegrams, and office fees, they were
decidedly out of pocket over the whole business.

The long-suffering father put them in pocket, and after subscribing to
several local charities, and consoling the reporters of the _Templeton
Observer_ and other such outsiders, he retired, jaded, but comforted, to
the "George," feeling that if his mission had been successful, it had
cost him an amount of generosity which he could hardly have believed was
in him.

When Dick, "with shining morning face," presented himself next morning
for breakfast, he little imagined how much of his father's money was at
that moment scattered about in Templeton.

"Huzza! father," said he, when his parent presented himself in the
coffee-room.  "Such a game!  Cresswell says he'll give us his study this
evening, so our 'Firm's' going to give you a spread.  Coote and Georgie
are out ordering the tucker now--kidneys and tea-cake.  I asked Winter
when I went for my _exeat_ if we might have you, and he said, 'Yes; he'd
be very glad.'  Mind you come.  It'll be a stunning spread, and Georgie
and Coote are sure to pick out good things.  I wish mother could come
too."

In the face of this hospitable outburst, Mr Richardson could hardly
expatiate on the cost and anxiety of his mission to Templeton.  A calmer
moment must do for that.  Meanwhile he delighted his son's heart by
accepting his invitation on the spot.

He allowed Dick and his two friends, if it fitted in with school rules,
to be present in the Court to hear the end of Tom White's case--a
permission they were not slow to avail themselves of, although this time
they occupied a modest seat at the back, and attempted no public
manifestations of encouragement to the prisoner in court.

The case ended very simply.  When it was called on, and Tom, as friendly
as ever, was ushered into the box, no one appeared to accuse him, and
the magistrates, rightly concluding this to mean that the prosecution
had retired, dismissed the case accordingly.

Tom said, "Thank'ee, sir," and looked quite bewildered on being told he
might walk out of court a free man.

Our heroes, who had already got outside before he reached the door,
deemed it their duty to complete their efforts in his favour by
congratulating him on his escape.

"Jolly glad we are, Tom White," said Dick, as the worthy mariner came
towards them.  "It was hard lines for you, and it wasn't all your fault.
It's my father got you off, you know."

"Thank'ee, young gentleman.  It's very hard on a hard-working mariner
not to have his living.  If you could spare a trifle and tell the
gentlemen, I'd thank you kindly."

"We haven't got any tin to spare now," said Dick, who knew that the
resources of the "Firm" had been well-nigh exhausted in preparation for
the spread in Cresswell's study that evening; "but we won't forget.
Good-bye, old man.  Jolly glad you've got out at last!"



CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT.

HOW NEMESIS MAKES HER FINAL CALL.

Our heroes, as they returned arm-in-arm from the trial of Tom White,
were conscious that in proportion as the troubles behind them
diminished, those ahead loomed out big and ominous.

They had escaped transportation; at least, so they told one another; and
although, when all was said and done, they had not done much towards
righting Tom White or recovering the _Martha_ still, somehow, Nemesis
had been "choked off" in that direction.

But when they turned their faces from what lay behind to the immediate
future, their hearts failed them.  They had staked high for the
"Sociables."  Their run with the Harriers had been no trifle: and far
more important was the general attention it had drawn to themselves, and
to their efforts to get into, the select company.  Their candidature was
a master of public notoriety, and if Pledge should at the last moment
carry out his threat, their fall would be sad in proportion.

When they reached Templeton they found the place in a ferment.  Fellows
were going about with pencils and paper, making up their lists.

"I say," said Pauncefote, waylaying our heroes as they entered the Den;
"vote for us, I say.  I'll vote for you."

"Oh, ah!" said Dick; "that means we give you three votes, and you only
give us one.  See any green?  You get a couple of other chaps to stick
us down, and then we'll do it."

Pauncefote, rather bewildered by this way of putting the matter, went
off immediately, and canvassed actively among his particular friends on
behalf of the "Firm;" which was very kind of him, as several fellows
told him.

"Look here, you fellows," said Gosse, approaching the "Firm" with a
troubled face, "_do_ you know anybody in the lower Fourth who isn't a
cad?  I've got down all the other forms, but I can't get a single decent
name for the lower Fourth."

"Aspinall," said Dick.

"But he's such a muff.  I'd be ashamed to put him down."

"Aspinall would lick you left-handed at tennis, and knows more Greek
than you know English," said Dick, hotly; for he always looked upon the
Devonshire boy as a credit to his protecting arm.  "If you call that
being a muff, well, he is one, and you aren't, that's all."

Gosse received this judgment with attention, and went off to have a
private look at Aspinall at close quarters.

"Oh, I say, Dick," said Raggles, whom our heroes presently found
absorbed in the deepest study; "here's a go!  We've only got to put down
six in each form, and I've got a dozen down for ours, and don't see I
can cut any of them out."

"Let's hear their names," said Dick.

"All serene!  Raggles--"

"By Jove, that's modest!  You're determined _he's_ to have one vote."

"Oh, you know, I believe I'm safe; but, of course, everybody votes for
himself."

"Go on.  Who are the rest?"

"Raggles, Culver, Pauncefote, Smith, Gosse, Starkey, Crisp, Calverly,
Strahan, Jobling, Cazenove, and--well, I thought of sticking down one of
you three for the twelfth."

"Thanks," said Dick.  "We aren't particular, are we, you chaps?"

"I'm not," said Coote.  "You can stick me down if you like, Rag."

Raggles, finding not much assistance forthcoming to help him in his
difficulty, retired to a quiet corner, and privately tossed up for each
name in succession.  As his penny came down "tails" persistently both
for himself and everybody else, except Gosse, he resorted to the less
risky method of shutting his eyes, and dropping six blots on his paper.
This happy expedient was only partially successful, as none of the blots
fell anywhere near any of the names.  Finally, as time was growing
short, he put down his own name on the paper, and resolved to sacrifice
his other votes.  And when he had done it, he rather wondered the idea
had never struck him before.

Our heroes meanwhile were busy with their own lists, which, under Dick's
guiding influence, rapidly filled up with a set of good names.  When it
came to their own Form they agreed that, being a "Firm" and all "in it,"
they were entitled each of them to vote for the "Firm" as a body; which
they did amid much mutual rejoicing.

At a quarter to four the big Hall began to fill.  Everybody was there.
Fellows who were on the list, sanguine, anxious, touchy; fellows who
were not on the list, cross, sarcastic, righteous.  Nearly every one had
his paper in his hand, which he furtively glanced through for the last
time before the summons to deposit it in the basket on the platform.

As before, the Sixth took rank as ordinary Templetonians, and no
distinction was made between monitor and junior, eligible and non-
eligible.

When the clock struck there were loud cries for Freckleton, who
accordingly ascended the dais, and, after waiting patiently for order,
proceeded to explain the order of election.

"I suppose," said he, "all of us who mean to vote have by this time
filled up our papers with the names of the fellows we think most worthy
to be elected on the new Club.  You'd better have a last look to see you
haven't put down more than thirty names altogether, and that there are
not more than six in any one Form.  Also make sure you have none of you
signed your names to the papers, as this is secret voting, and it's not
supposed to be known how any one has voted.  Now, will fellows come up
by benches and drop their papers into the basket?"

The front bench, consisting chiefly of Sixth-form fellows, obeyed the
invitation, and deposited their papers in the receptacle.  The rest of
the meeting could not forbear the luxury of a few cheers as popular and
unpopular seniors presented themselves; but, on the whole, the ceremony
was gone through rapidly and in an orderly fashion.

Among the juniors, the Firm walked solemnly up the room amid cheers and
cries of "Well run, puppies!" and gave in their votes.  They glanced
nervously round at Pledge, where he sat with a sneer on his face, and
did not like the looks of him.  The sneer they would have thought
nothing of, but there was a serious, half-determined look about him
which was ominous.

"The beast!" whispered Dick.  "He's going to do something."

"Ugh!" said Georgie, "to think I ever liked him!"

"Now," said Freckleton, when the voting was over, "to insure the
counting being fairly done, I propose that three fellows who have not
had the good luck to be on the list be asked to count.  I dare say they
won't grudge the trouble, and it will be satisfactory to everybody to
know they see fair play for the rest."  (Hear, hear.) "Will any three
fellows volunteer?"

Five stood up.

"Will you five choose three among you?" said Freckleton.

This was soon done, and the scrutineers were in a few moments buried in
their work, watched eagerly by many anxious eyes.

It took a good while, but to our heroes, as they sat and watched
Pledge's ugly look, the end seemed to come all too soon.

There was a loud hum of excitement when the list, as finally made out,
was handed solemnly to Freckleton.

"I think, if you don't mind," said the Hermit, passing it back, "as I am
an interested party, it would be better if one of you read it."

"All right," said the obliging scrutineer.  "Gentlemen,--Unaccustomed as
I am to public speaking, I beg to read you the list of the Sociables'
Club.  I don't see my own name on the list, but perhaps you'll consider
the fag we three have been put to this afternoon is a public service for
the good of Templeton.  If so, please remember the poor scrutineers at
the next election."  (Cheers and laughter.) "Now for the list."

"Better only read the names of the elected ones in each form, and not
the number of votes," suggested Freckleton.

"Lucky Freckleton said so," remarked the scrutineer, "or I should have
told you that his name is at the top of the poll by a very long start."
(Tremendous cheers.) "But, as I'm not to let out figures, all I can say
is, he's in.  And so are Crossfield, Cartwright, Swinstead, Frith, and
Mansfield for the Sixth-Form."

It was curious to notice the effect of this announcement on the meeting
generally and on the boys specially concerned.  As name followed name
without that of the Captain, fellows looked round at one another in
something like consternation.  After all, the Captain of Templeton _was_
the Captain of Templeton, and those who had not voted for him had made
sure other fellows would.  But when five names were read out, and it was
found that even Swinstead and Frith were elected, a sudden tide of
repentance set in, which found vent in an unexpected cheer as the
Captain's name followed.  Templeton felt it had had a narrow escape of
making itself foolish, and the cheer was quite as much one of relief as
of congratulation.

Mansfield may have understood it.  He had kept his eyes steadily on the
reader, with a slight flush on his quiet face, and fellows who watched
him could not tell whether the peculiar gleam which passed his eyes as
his name was read was one of triumph or vexation.  Whatever it was,
every one knew the Captain would be altered neither in purpose nor
motive by the incident.  Jupiter would be Jupiter still, whether in
Olympus or out of it; and Templeton, on the whole, felt that, had the
vote gone otherwise, it would have had quite as much blushing to do as
the defeated hero.

The scrutineer continued his list in order of forms.  Of our particular
acquaintance, Birket, Hooker, Duffield, Braider, and Aspinall all got
safely "landed," while Bull, Wrangham, and Spokes were passed over.

Templeton, in fact, was a very good judge of honour when it was put to
the choice, and even the enemies of the new Club could not help
admitting that the best men, on the whole, were the elected ones.

A grim silence fell on the Hall as the scrutineer said--

"Now, Gentlemen, the Upper Third.  The following are elected:--

"Richardson."

Dick caught his breath and felt he dared not move a muscle.  Pledge was
looking that way, and, as the boy's eyes and his enemy's met, the cheers
of the Den sounded feeble, and the shouts of the Firm were spiritless.

"Pauncefote."

Dick started again at this and shook off the spell that was upon him.
How dared Pauncefote come between him and his Firm?  If fellows voted
for him--Dick--what on earth did they mean by not voting also for
Georgie and Coote?  He faced defiantly round towards the reader and
waited for the next name.

"Smith."

Dick quailed as he listened to the mighty cheer with which Pauncefote
welcomed his chum into the realms of the Select.  Pauncefote and Smith
were partners; they hunted in couples, they wrote novels together: and
here they were side by side, while the "Firm" was cruelly severed member
from member.  Surely Nemesis was having a fling too many if this was her
doing!

"Heathcote."

"Ah! about time, too," thought Dick, as he raised his voice in a defiant
cheer.  He'd like a quiet five minutes with the fellows who had dared to
pass his chum by in the voting.  But, at any rate, Georgie was safe,
and, if only Coote came next, the "Firm" could afford to snap its
fingers at its constituents.

"Cazenove."

What! fat Cazenove jammed in between the "Firm" and its junior partner!
Dick and Georgie glared at him, scarcely able to repress a howl at the
sight of his smiling expanse of countenance.  It had never occurred to
any of them that the ballot may part friends whom not even a sentence of
transportation could have severed, and they looked on, now more than
half bewildered, as the scrutineer read out the sixth name.

"For the sixth place," said he, "there appears to be a dead-heat.
Calverly and Coote have both the same number of votes.  What's to be
done, mighty Lycurgus?"

"Say you retire!" shouted Dick to the astonished Calverly, on whom the
announcement had fallen with as much surprise as it had on his friends.

"Don't you do anything of the sort," shouted Gosse; "you're are as good
as that lot.  Stick in!"

"Of course he will," shouted others.

So Calverly announced he would stick in, and Coote had better retire, a
suggestion Coote did not even condescend to notice.  He was in his
"Firm's" hands, and the "Firm" were determined to fight the thing out
till they had not a toe to stand on.

"The simplest way," said Freckleton, "is to vote again for the two.
What do you say, gentlemen of the Den?"

"All right," roared the Den.

"What's it to be: ballot or show of hands?"

"Show of hands," shouted most of them.

"Do you agree to show of hands, you two," said Freckleton, "or would you
sooner have ballot?"

"I'd rather have show of hands," said Calverly.

"So would Coote," shouted Dick and Georgie.

"Then those who vote for Calverly hold up one hand," said Freckleton.

It was a big show, and the scrutineers, as they went from bench to
bench, counted 141.

"Now for Coote."

Every one could see it was a terribly close affair.  As Dick and Georgie
scanned the benches, their hearts sank at the sight of so many not
voting.

"Another dead-heat, I expect," said Pauncefote.

The suggestion drove Dick almost frantic.  Coote _must_ come in, or the
consequences would be awful.

"Now, you fellows," he cried, starting up and addressing Templeton
generally, as the scrutineers started on their rounds, "all together for
old Coote!  Don't forget his trot with the Harriers!"

This simple election speech called forth a cheer, and, better still,
sent up two or three more hands.

Loud cries of "Order" from the top end of the room prevented any further
appeal, and amid dead silence the scrutineers finished their work.

"For Coote," announced the spokesman, "there are 146."

Then did the "Firm" go mad, and lose their heads.  Then did they yell
till their throats were hoarse, and wave their hands till their arms
ached.

Then did they link arms, as they sat victorious, and forget the sorrows
of a term in that one paean of victory.

"Very close," they heard Freckleton say, as soon as order was restored.
"Are you satisfied, Calverly?"

Woe betide Calverly had he ventured to be otherwise!

"All right," he said, meekly, cowed by the mighty triumph of the "Firm."

"Then Coote is in," announced the scrutineers.
