
"Ride steadily, Smithson," he said. "Keep me in view, and I will
keep him. We must overtake him in time, for his horse is carrying
double. I shall push on, for I am better mounted than you are; and
he may try to double, and throw us off his traces. If anything
happens to me don't stop for a moment, but hunt that fellow down to
the end."

Reuben had been holding his horse somewhat in hand, during the last
mile, for he thought there must be some reason for the constable's
strange conduct; but he now let him go and, urging him to his full
speed, soon left the constable behind. He knew that, for some
distance ahead, the country was flat and unbroken; and that the
fugitive would have no chance of concealment, whichever way he
turned.

Upon reaching the spot where he had seen the bush ranger pass, the
wide plain opened before him; and he gave a shout of exultation, as
he saw that he had gained considerably. The fugitive, indeed, had
evidently not been pressing his horse.

"He thinks he has a long journey before him," Reuben muttered. "I
fancy he's mistaken. He thinks he's only got a constable after him,
and that he can easily rid himself of him, whenever he comes up to
him. No doubt he learned from some of the convicts that everyone is
away, and therefore thinks himself safe from all pursuit, when once
he has wiped out Smithson. All the better. I shall overtake him all
the sooner."

Such indeed was the view of the bush ranger, who kept along at a
steady canter, troubling himself very little about the solitary
constable whom he believed to be in pursuit of him. When, indeed,
on glancing round, he saw that his pursuer was within a quarter of
a mile of him, he reined in his horse and, turning, calmly awaited
his coming.

Reuben at once checked the speed of his horse. He knew that the man
was said to be a deadly shot with his pistol, but he was confident
in his own skill; for, with constant and assiduous practice, he had
attained a marvellous proficiency with his weapon. But he did not
care to give his foe the advantage, which a man sitting on a steady
seat possesses, over one in the saddle of a galloping horse. He
therefore advanced only at a walk.

The bush ranger put down the change in speed to fear, caused by his
resolute attitude, and shouted:

"Look here, constable. You had best turn your horse's head, and go
home again. You know well enough that one constable is no match for
me, so you had best rein up before I put a bullet in your head. If
you shoot, you are just as likely to kill the young woman here, as
you are me; and you know I don't make any mistake."

Reuben was already conscious of his disadvantage in this respect,
for the bush ranger held the girl on the saddle in front of him, so
that her body completely covered his. She was enveloped in a shawl,
which covered her head as well as her figure. Her captor held her
tightly pressed to him with his left arm, while his right was free
to use a pistol.

Reuben checked his horse at a distance of some fifty yards, while
he thought over the best course to pursue. As he paused, Thorne,
for the first time, noticed that it was an officer with whom he had
to deal, and not with the constable; who, as he believed, was the
only one in the district. He uttered a savage exclamation, for he
felt that this materially altered the conditions of the affair.

"Oh, it's you, is it?" he said. "I thought it was only one of your
men; but the advice I gave is as good, for you, as for him. I
advise you to turn back, before all my mates are down on you."

"Your mates will never be down on anyone again, Tom Thorne," Reuben
said sternly. "We have wiped out seven of them, and the other is a
prisoner."

"It's a lie!" the bush ranger said, furiously. "They are two
hundred miles away, in the bush."

"With your friend Bobitu, eh? Yes, they were, but they are not now,
Thorne. They are lying under the ashes of that hut of yours, close
to the tree where you buried your treasure; and it's I who am going
to have help, not you. My man will be up in a few minutes," and he
glanced round at the constable, whom the bush ranger now perceived,
for the first time, less than half a mile away.

Reuben's words had the effect they were intended to excite. They
filled the bush ranger with fury, and desire for vengeance; while
the sight of the approaching constable showed him that, unless he
took prompt measures, he would have two adversaries to fight at
once.

Without a moment's hesitation, he set spurs to his horse and dashed
at Reuben. When within twenty yards, he fired.

Reuben felt a sharp pain, as if a hot iron had been passed across
his cheek. Thorne uttered a shout of exultation as he saw him start
but, as he kept his seat, again raised his hand to fire. In an
instant Reuben discharged his pistol, and the bush ranger's weapon
dropped from his hand, for Reuben's bullet passed through his
wrist.

Throwing the burden before him headlong to the ground, Thorne drew
a pistol with his left hand; and the two shots rung out again, at
almost the same instant. Reuben, however, was slightly the
quickest, and this saved his life. His bullet passed through the
bush ranger's body, while Thorne's pistol was diverted somewhat
from its aim, and the bullet struck Reuben's left shoulder, instead
of his head. In an instant, he had drawn another pistol.

"Surrender or I fire!" and then seeing, by the change in the bush
ranger's face, and by his collapsing figure, that he was badly hit;
he waited, still keeping Thorne covered with the muzzle, for the
bush ranger had a charge left in the pistol which he still grasped
in his left hand.

Twice Thorne tried to raise it, but in vain. Then he reeled in the
saddle, the pistol dropped from his hand, and he fell heavily over
on to the ground.

Reuben at once leaped from his horse, and ran to raise Kate
Ellison; who lay motionless on the ground, as she had been thrown.
Removing the shawl wrapped round her head, he found she was
insensible. Kneeling beside her, he raised her head to his shoulder
and, a minute later, the constable galloped up.

"Badly hurt, captain?" he asked, as he leaped off his horse; for
the blood was streaming down Reuben's face, and his left arm hung
useless.

"Nothing to speak of, Smithson. See to Miss Ellison, first. There
is some water in my flask in the holster. Just bring it here, and
sprinkle her face. I hope she is only stunned; but that scoundrel
threw her off with such force, that she may well be badly hurt."

"Is he done for, captain?" the man asked, glancing at the prostrate
figure of the bush ranger, as he proceeded to obey Reuben's
instructions; "because if you ain't certain about it, I had better
put a bullet into him. These fellows are very fond of playing
'possum, and then turning the tables upon you."

"There is no fear of that, Smithson. He's hard hit. I hope he's not
dead, for I would rather that he were tried for his crimes."

It was some time before Kate Ellison opened her eyes. For a moment
she looked vaguely round; then, as her eyes fell upon Reuben's
face, she uttered a little cry, and raised herself into a sitting
position.

"What is it, Captain Whitney? Are you badly hurt?"

"Thank God you have recovered, Miss Ellison. You began to frighten
me horribly. I was afraid you were seriously injured.

"Do not look so alarmed. I can assure you I am not much hurt; only
a flesh wound, I fancy, in the cheek, and a broken collarbone."

"And you have saved me again, Captain Whitney?"

"Yes, thank God I have had that good fortune," Reuben said quietly;
"and this time for good, for Tom Thorne will never molest you
again."

"But can't I do something? Your face is bleeding dreadfully. Please
let me bind it up;" and tearing a strip off the bottom of her
dress, she proceeded to bandage Reuben's face.

The constable took off the black silk handkerchief which he wore
round his neck.

"I think, miss, this will make a sling for his arm; and when that
is done the captain will be pretty right.

"Do you think you can ride back, sir?" he asked, when he had
fastened the handkerchief, "or will you wait till I ride back to
the farm, and fetch help."

"I can ride back well enough," Reuben said, trying to rise to his
feet; but he found himself unable to do so.

The ball, after breaking his collarbone, had glanced downwards, and
the wound was a more serious one than he had imagined.

"No, I don't think I can ride back, Smithson."

"There is a light cart at the farm," Kate Ellison said. "Please
fetch that. I will stop here, with Captain Whitney, till you come
back."

"I think that will be the best way, miss," the constable agreed
and, mounting, he rode off at once.

It was an hour and a half before he returned, bringing the cart;
but before he arrived, Mr. and Mrs. Barker had ridden up on
horseback, the former having returned from his visit to the farm,
just as the constable rode in. While they had been alone, Reuben
had heard from Kate what had taken place.

"I did as you told me, Captain Whitney, and did not go once outside
the door. The constables kept a very sharp lookout, and one of them
was always on guard by the door; so there really did not seem any
possibility of danger.

"This morning, as I was washing up the breakfast things with Mrs.
Barker, a shot was suddenly fired outside the door and, before I
had time to think what it meant, that man rushed in. He caught me
by the wrist, and said:

"'Come along, it's no use your screaming.'

"Mrs. Barker caught up something and rushed at him, but he knocked
her down with the butt end of his pistol. Then he caught up her
shawl, which was lying on the chair close by, and threw it right
over my head; and then caught me up, and carried me out.

"I tried to struggle, but he seemed to hold me as if I were in a
vice. I heard Alice scream, and then I must have fainted; for the
next thing I knew was that I was being carried along on horseback.
I was so muffled up, and he held me so tight, that I felt it was no
use to struggle; and I made up my mind to lie quite still, as if I
was still insensible, till he put me down; and then--I think I
intended to try and seize his pistol, or to get hold of a knife, if
there was one and, if I could not kill him, to kill myself.

"There did not seem the least hope of rescue. Mr. Barker was away,
and would not be back for hours. I supposed that the constables
were shot, and all the men round were away with you; and from the
distance you said you were going, I did not think you could be back
for days.

"Presently I felt him stop and turn his horse; and then, when he
spoke, I knew that he had not killed both the constables, and that
one of them had followed him. When you answered, I thought it was
your voice, though it seemed impossible; but I could not be sure,
because I could not hear plainly through the shawl. Then the
pistols were fired, and I suddenly felt myself falling; and I did
not know anything more, till I saw you leaning over me.

"But where are all the others, and how is it you are here alone? Of
course, you must have turned back before you got to where the bush
rangers were."

"No, I am glad to say we succeeded with that part of the work, Miss
Ellison, and have wiped out the bush rangers altogether. We have
got one of them a prisoner, but all the rest of the gang are
killed.

"The distance is not quite so far as we thought it was. It was a
thirty miles' march, and two sixties. We attacked them at daybreak,
on the third day after leaving."

"But it is only the fourth day today, is it not? At least, it seems
so to me."

"It is the fourth day, Miss Ellison. When we found that the leader
of the gang was not with them, and I learned from the man we had
taken prisoner that he had started to ride back here, twenty-four
hours before, I was naturally very anxious about you; knowing, as I
did, what desperate actions the man was capable of. So we started
at once and, after a sharp fight with the blacks, got down in the
evening to the water hole, sixty miles on our way back, where we
had camped the second night out.

"Of course the horse I had ridden could travel no further, but I
pushed on with my black boy, on two of the horses which we had
taken from the bush rangers, and which had been led so far. We made
another forty miles by midnight, and then halted till daybreak, to
give the horses rest; but they were so done up, this morning, that
we could not get them much beyond a foot pace. When we came to the
first settlement we exchanged them for fresh ones, and galloped on;
and, thank God, we are just in time."

The tears were standing in the girl's eyes, and she laid her hand
on his, and said quietly:

"Thank you. Then you have ridden a hundred and fifty miles since
yesterday morning, besides having two fights; and all because you
were uneasy about me?"

"I had, as you see, good reason to be uneasy, Miss Ellison."

At this moment a horse's hoofs were heard approaching, and Jim
galloped up. He had, on arriving at the station, been unable to
obtain any information as to what had taken place. Mrs. Donald was
in a dead faint. Mrs. Barker had, just before he arrived, ridden
off to meet her husband; but the dead body of the constable, by the
door, and the disappearance of Kate, showed him what had taken
place; and he at once started after his master.

His horse, however, was a very inferior one to that ridden by
Reuben, and until he met the constable returning, he had been
obliged to follow the track of the horses in front; so he did not
arrive at the scene of the fray till half an hour after its
conclusion. He uttered exclamations of dismay, at seeing his
master's condition; for Reuben had been gradually growing faint,
and could now scarcely support himself on his elbow.

Jim, however, had taken the precaution to snatch a bottle of
spirits from the shelf, before he started; having an eye to his own
comforts, as well as to the possibility of its being required. He
now knocked off the neck, and poured some into the cup of Reuben's
flask, and put it to his lips.

"Thank you, Jim; that is just what I wanted."

"Massa lie down quiet," Jim said. "No good sit up;" and, gathering
a large bunch of grass, he placed it under Reuben's head; and
Reuben lay quiet, in a half dreamy state, until Mr. and Mrs. Barker
rode up.

Kate rose to her feet as they approached; but she was so stiff and
bruised, with her fall, that she could scarcely move forward to
meet Mrs. Barker; and burst into tears, as her friend threw her
arms round her.

"That's right, my poor child," Mrs. Barker said. "A cry will do you
good. Thank God, my dear Kate, for your rescue."

"I do indeed, Mrs. Barker. It seems almost a miracle."

"Captain Whitney seems to spring out of the ground, whenever he's
wanted. He seems hurt badly. The constable said it was a broken
collarbone, but it must be something a good deal worse than that."

"Oh, don't say so, Mrs. Barker, after what he's done for me. If he
were to die!"

"There, there, don't tremble so, child. We must hope that it is not
so bad as that; but he would hardly be looking so bad as he does,
for only a broken collarbone. My husband broke his--one day the
horse ran away with him, among some trees--and he was up and about
again, in a day or two.

"Is he badly hurt, do you think, John?" she asked her husband, who
was kneeling beside Reuben.

"I hope not," the settler said. "He ought not to be like this, only
from a wound in the collarbone; but of course it may have glanced
down, and done some internal mischief. I am inclined to think that
it is extreme exhaustion, as much as anything--the reaction after a
tremendous nervous excitement."

"He has ridden a hundred and fifty miles, since yesterday morning,"
Kate said, "and has had two fights, besides this. Directly he knew
that the leader of the bush rangers had escaped, he came on by
himself."

"Oh! They caught the bush rangers, did they?" Mr. Barker said,
joyfully. "I was afraid, by his getting back here so soon, that
they must have missed them somehow, and found they were on the
wrong scent.

"And he has ridden all the way back, has he? A very zealous
officer, Miss Ellison, a very zealous young officer, indeed."

But Kate was too anxious, and shaken, to mark the significance of
Mr. Barker's tone.

"Don't tease her," his wife said, in a low voice. "She is terribly
upset and shaken, and can hardly stand.

"Ah! What is that?"

The interruption was caused by a low groan from the fallen bush
ranger.

"Shoot him dead, sah," Jim, who was supporting his master's head,
exclaimed. "Don't let dat fellow come 'live no longer."

"I can't do that, Jim," Mr. Barker said, moving towards the fallen
man. "The man is a thorough scoundrel, a murderer, and a robber;
but he is harmless now. One cannot wish he should recover, even for
his own sake; for there is enough against him to hang him, ten
times over. However, we must do what we can for the poor wretch."

So saying, he mixed some brandy with a little water in the cup, and
poured it between the bush ranger's lips.

"Is it mortal?" Mrs. Barker asked, as he rejoined her.

"I think so," he said. "I fancy he is shot through the lungs.

"You must really sit down, Miss Ellison. You look as white as a
ghost, and we cannot have you on our hands, just now. We have got
them pretty full, as they are.

"Ah! Here comes the cart."

The constable had put a quantity of straw in the bottom of the
light cart, and Barker and Jim raised Reuben, and laid him in it.

"We must take the other, too," Mr. Barker said. "The man is alive,
and we can't leave him here."

"Yes," Kate said; "he must go, too. He did Reuben a great wrong,
years ago. I hope he will confess it, before he dies."

