were fired, as they entered the last two huts; but the Spaniards
were overpowered in an instant, as they were here vastly
outnumbered. The officers were made prisoners and, ten men being
placed over them, the rest of the force, now carrying three muskets
each, ran down into the battery. The sentries here threw down their
arms, at once, and were allowed to go where they pleased.

"Pile the arms you have captured!" Lieutenant Lyons ordered. "Run
the ramrods down them, and see if they are loaded. The Spaniards
are not likely to rally but, if they do, we can give them a hot
reception.

"Now, gunner, break open the magazine, there, and load with grape."

By this time the drum was beating to arms, in the vessel below--the
shots fired having given the alarm--and lights were seen to flash
along the deck. In two minutes the guns were loaded; and these
opened with a fire of grape upon the deck of the vessel, which was
near enough to be distinctly seen, by the glare of the blue lights.
As the first gun was fired, an answering flash came from sea, as
the frigate also opened fire. For five minutes the guns were worked
fast, then two lights burst out in close succession, ahead and
astern of the barque.

"Cease firing grape. Load with round shot!" the lieutenant shouted
but, a moment later, a loud cheer broke from the sailors as, by the
lights in the boats, the Spanish ensign was seen to run up to the
peak of the barque, and then at once to fall again to the deck. The
barque had surrendered.

"Now, gunner, spike the guns," the lieutenant ordered, "and then
tumble them off the carriages."

This was soon done.

"Now let each man take one of the muskets, and throw the rest of
them over the parapet down the rocks.

"That is right. Now, fall in!"

The sailors fell in, and marched back to the huts. The Spanish
officers were placed in the midst, and twenty men were told off to
fire the huts. This was soon done. The lieutenant waited until they
were well alight, and then gave the order to march. They took the
coast road, this time, for two miles; and then struck off to the
shore and saw, a few hundred yards away, the lantern that had been
hoisted on one of the boats, as a signal.

They were challenged by the boat keeper, who had moored the boats
twenty yards from the shore. A cheer broke out, as the answer was
given. The grapnels were pulled up, and the boats were soon
alongside. The party, embarking, rowed out in the direction where
they knew the frigate to be and, as soon as they were fairly out
from the shore, they saw the three lights she had hoisted as a
signal. In half an hour they were alongside.

"I need not ask if you have succeeded, Mr. Lyons," the captain
said, as the boats came up, "for we have seen that. You have not
had many casualties, I hope?"

"Only one, sir. One of the marines has a ball in his shoulder.
There were only five or six shots fired, in all, and no one else
has as much as a scratch."

"I am truly glad to hear it," the captain said. "It has been a most
successful surprise. I don't think the boats can have suffered,
either."

"I don't think there was a shot fired at them, sir," the lieutenant
said. "The Spaniard ran up his colours and dropped them again,
directly the boats showed their lights. I fancy they must have
suffered very heavily from our fire. You see, they were almost
under our guns, and we must have pretty well torn up their decks."

"We shall soon hear," the captain said. "The boats are towing the
Spaniard out. She will be alongside in a few minutes."

The wind had entirely dropped now and, in a short time, the
Spaniard was brought close alongside the frigate, and Mr. Rawdon
came on board to report.

"The ship is the San Joaquin, mounting twenty-four guns, with a
crew of two hundred and twenty men, sir. Her casualties are very
heavy. The men had just poured up on deck, it seems, when the
battery opened fire. The captain, first lieutenant, and fifty-six
men are killed, and there are forty-three wounded. We have no
casualties. Their flag came down, just as we got alongside."

"Then, as far as we are concerned," the captain said, "this is one
of the most bloodless victories on record. There will be no death
promotions this time, gentlemen, but I am sure you won't mind that.
It has been a most admirably managed affair, altogether; and I am
sure that it will be appreciated by my lords of the admiralty.

"You will take command of her at present, Mr. Lyons, with the crew
now on board. Dr. Colfax and his assistant will go off with you, to
attend to the wounded, and will remain on board until we get into
Gibraltar.

"Mr. Rawdon, you will be acting first, and I can only say that I
hope you will be confirmed."

The frigate and her prize at once sailed for Gibraltar. On their
arrival there, the captain took some pains--by sending up larger
yards, and by repainting the broad white streaks showing the
portholes--to restore the prize to its proper appearance as a ship
of war.

"We should not get half so much credit for her capture, if you took
her into Portsmouth looking like a lubberly merchantman," the
captain said to Mr. Lyons. "I don't care about patching up all
those shot holes in the bulwarks. That gives her the appearance of
having been taken after a sharp action, and the deck looks almost
like a ploughed field.

"I shall give you fifty men, Mr. Lyons, I can't spare more than
that."

"That will do, sir. Nothing smaller than ourselves is likely to
interfere with us and, if a large frigate engaged us, we should not
have more chance with a hundred men on board than with fifty. In
that case we shall have to trust to our legs. Of course, if we fall
in with two or three of the enemy's ships, I should run up the
Spanish flag. I will find out if I can, from the prisoners, what is
her private number. If I hoist that, and a Spanish flag, it ought
to deceive them. I will get her back to England, if possible, sir."

"You will, of course, take home my report, Mr. Lyons. It is sure to
give you your step, I think."

Next day the San Joaquin sailed and, six weeks later, a sloop of
war brought despatches to the admiral. Among them was a letter from
the admiralty to Captain Langton, expressing their gratification at
the very able arrangements by which he had captured and silenced a
Spanish battery; and cut out the sloop of war, San Joaquin,
anchored under its guns, without any loss of life. It was, they
said, a feat almost without parallel. They stated that they had, in
accordance with his recommendation, promoted Mr. Lyons to the rank
of commander; and they confirmed Mr. Rawdon in rank of first
lieutenant, the third lieutenant becoming second, and the senior
passed midshipman, Mr. Outram, being promoted to that of third
lieutenant.

No change of any importance had taken place at Gibraltar, during
the absence of the Brilliant; except that the governor had
determined to retaliate for the nightly annoyance of the gunboats
and, accordingly, six guns were fixed at a very considerable
elevation behind the Old Mole, and shells fired from them. These
reached the enemy's camp; and caused, as could be seen from the
heights, great alarm and confusion. It was determined that in
future, when the enemy's gunboats bombarded our camps and huts, we
should retaliate by throwing shells into their camp.

The day after the Brilliant returned the Helena, sloop of war--with
fourteen small guns--was seen working in towards the Rock. The
wind, however, was so light that she scarcely moved through the
water. Fourteen Spanish gunboats came out to cut her off. For a
time she maintained a gallant contest, against odds that seemed
overwhelming; although the garrison gave her up as lost. But when
the wind suddenly freshened, she sailed through her opponents into
the port; where she was received, with ringing cheers, by the
soldiers lining the batteries.

Week after week passed in minor hostilities. There was a constant
exchange of fire between our batteries and those of the enemy. The
gunboats continued their operations; and we, in return, shelled
their camp. Fresh works were erected, on both sides. Casualties
took place almost daily, but both troops and inhabitants were now
so accustomed to the continual firing that they went about their
ordinary avocations, without paying any attention to the shot and
shell, unless one of the latter fell close at hand.

November came in and, in spite of the heavy fire maintained by our
batteries, the enemy's works continually advanced towards the Rock;
and when, in the middle of the month, it was seen that the new
batteries were being armed and placed in readiness to open fire,
the governor determined to take the offensive. Accordingly, after
gunfire on the evening of the twenty-sixth, an order was issued for
all the grenadier and light infantry companies--with the 12th, and
Hardenberg's Regiment--to assemble, at twelve o'clock at
night--with a party of Engineers, and two hundred workmen from the
line regiments--for a sortie upon the enemy's batteries. The 39th
and 59th Regiments were to parade, at the same hour, to act as
support to the attacking party. A hundred sailors from the ships of
war were to accompany them. The attacking party numbered 1014 rank
and file, besides officers and noncommissioned officers. This was
exclusive of the two regiments forming the supports. The attacking
force was divided into three columns.

At a quarter to three in the morning, the column moved out. The
enemy's pickets discovered the advance, as soon as it passed the
outlying work known as Forbes' Barrier and, after firing, fell
back. Lieutenant Colonel Hugo's column, which was in front, pushed
on rapidly; and entered the enemy's lines without opposition, when
the pioneers began to dismantle the work. Hardenberg's Regiment and
the central column attacked and carried the tremendous work known
as the San Carlos Battery. The enemy were unable to withstand, for
a moment, the fierce attack of the troops and, in a very short
time, the whole of the advanced works were in our hands.

The leading corps formed up, to resist any attempt the enemy might
make to repel the sortie; and the working parties began to destroy
the enemy's work. Faggots dipped in tar were laid against the
fascines and gabions and, in a short time, columns of fire and
smoke rose from all parts of the works occupied. In an hour, the
object of the sortie was effected. Trains were laid to the
magazines, and the troops fell back. Just as they reached the town,
the principal magazine blew up, with a tremendous explosion.

The enemy appeared to have been wholly confounded, at this sudden
attack upon their advanced works--the fugitives from which created
a panic throughout the whole army--and although the main Spanish
lines, mounting a hundred and thirty-five heavy pieces of
artillery, were but a few hundred yards behind the works attacked,
not a single shot was fired at the troops engaged. The batteries
continued burning for three days and, when they ceased to smoke,
nothing but heaps of sand remained of the works that had cost the
enemy months of labour to erect.

It was some days before the Spaniards appeared to come to any
definite conclusion as to their next step. Then large numbers of
men set to work, to reestablish their batteries; and things fell
into their old routine, again. Every day shots were exchanged,
occasionally. Vessels made their way in and out; being sometimes
briskly chased by the enemy's gunboats, sometimes passing in with
little interference--for, by this time, the Spaniards must have
recognized that there was no hope, whatever, of reducing Gibraltar
by blockade. There was a great deal of sickness in the garrison;
but comparatively little of this was due to scurvy, for every
available corner of ground was now cultivated, and the supply of
vegetables--if not absolutely sufficient to counteract the effects
of so long and monotonous a diet of salt meat--was yet ample to
prevent any serious outbreak of scurvy recurring.

In February, fresh activity was manifested among the besiegers.
Vast numbers of mules were seen, bringing fascines to their works.
At the end of March the Vernon store ship arrived and, a few hours
later, four transports with the 97th Regiment, under the convoy of
two frigates, came in.

A singular series of casualties was caused by a single shot, which
entered an embrasure in Willis's Battery, took both legs off two
men, one leg off another, and wounded another man in both legs;
thus four men had seven legs taken off, or wounded, by one shot.
These casualties were caused by the inattention of the men to the
warning of a boy who was looking out for shot. There were two boys
in the garrison whose eyesight was so keen that they could see the
enemy's shot coming, and both were employed in the batteries
especially exposed to the enemy's fire, to warn the men to withdraw
themselves into shelter, when shot were coming.

This quickness of eyesight was altogether exceptional. Standing
behind a gun--and knowing, therefore, the exact course the shot
will take--it is comparatively easy for a quick-sighted man to
follow it; but there are few, indeed, who can see a shot coming
towards them. In this respect, the ear is a far better index than
the eye. A person possessed of a fair amount of nerve can judge, to
within a few yards, the line that a shot coming towards him will
take. When first heard, the sound is as a faint murmur; increasing,
as it approaches, to a sound resembling the blowing off of steam by
an express engine, as it rushes through a station. At first, the
keenest ear could not tell the direction in which the shot is
travelling but, as it approaches, the difference in the angle
becomes perceptible to the ear, and a calm listener will
distinguish whether it will pass within twenty or thirty yards, to
the right or left. It would require an extraordinary acute ear to
determine more closely than this, the angle of flight being so very
small, until the shot approaches almost within striking distance.

The garrison had been trying experiments with carcasses and red-hot
shot. A carcass is a hollow shot, or shell, pierced with holes; but
instead of being charged with powder, to explode it either by means
of a fuse or by percussion, it is filled with a fierce-burning
composition so that, upon falling, it will set on fire anything
inflammable near it. Red-hot shot are fired by putting a wet wad in
over the dry wad, next to the powder. The red-hot shot is then run
into the gun, and rammed against the wet wad; and the gun fired in
the usual way. The carcasses several times set fire to the enemy's
works, but the use of the red-hot shot was reserved for a pressing
emergency. A number of furnaces were constructed, in the various
batteries, for heating the shot; which necessarily required a
considerable amount of time, to bring them to a white heat.

News came, in April, that great preparations were making, at Cadiz
and other Mediterranean ports, for a fresh and vigorous attack on
Gibraltar; and that the Duc de Crillon--who had lately captured
Minorca--would bring twenty thousand French and Spanish troops, in
addition to those at present engaged in the siege; that a large
fleet would also be present, and that the principal attack would be
made by means of ships turned into floating batteries, and
protected by an immense thickness of cork, or other wood.

On the 9th of May, the ships began to arrive. Among them were seven
large vessels, which appeared to be old men-of-war. A large number
of workmen immediately went on board them, and began to lower the
topmasts. This confirmed the news in respect to the floating
batteries.

About this time, three store ships fortunately arrived from
England, with powder, shell, and other stores. As there could be no
longer any doubt that the attack was, this time, to be delivered on
the sea face; strong working parties were employed in strengthening
the water batteries, in erecting lines of palisades, to prevent a
landing from boats, and in building furnaces for the heating of
shot in these batteries, also. At this time the Engineers began to
drive a gallery through the Rock, facing the neutral ground, in
order to place guns there. This work was carried on to the end of
the siege, and the batteries thus erected are now among the
strongest of the defences of Gibraltar.

At the end of the month a great fleet, consisting of upwards of a
hundred sail, entered the bay and anchored off Algeciras. Some nine
or ten thousand troops were landed and, from that time, scarce a
day passed without fresh vessels, laden with stores and materials
for the siege, arriving in the bay.

Early in May twelve gunboats, that had been sent out in pieces from
England, were completed and launched. Each carried one gun, and was
manned by twenty-one men. Six of these drew their crews from the
Brilliant, five from the Porcupine, and one from the Speedwell,
cutter. These craft had been specially designed for the purpose of
engaging the enemy's gunboats, and for convoying ships into the
port.

On the 11th of June a shell from the enemy burst, just at the door
of one of the magazines of Willis's Battery. This instantly blew
up, and the explosion was so violent that it seemed to shake the
whole Rock. Fourteen men were killed, and fifteen wounded, and a
great deal of injury done to the battery; but strong parties at
once set to work to repair it. A few days later a French convoy of
sixty sail and three frigates anchored in the bay and, from these,
another five thousand French troops landed.

At the end of the month the Duc de Crillon arrived, and took
command of the besiegers. A private letter, that was brought in by
a privateer that had captured a merchantman, on her way, gave the
garrison an idea of the method in which the attack was to be made.
It stated that ten ships were to be fortified, six or seven feet
thick, with green timber bolted with iron, and covered with cork,
junk, and raw hides. They were to carry guns of heavy metal, and to
be bombproof on the top, with a descent for the shells to slide
off. These vessels, which they supposed would be impregnable, were
to be moored within half gunshot of the walls with iron chains; and
large boats, with mantlets, were to lie off at some distance, full
of troops ready to take advantage of occurrences; that the mantlets
of these boats were to be formed with hinges, to fall down to
facilitate their landing. There would, by that time, be forty
thousand men in camp, but the principal attack was to be made by
sea, to be covered by a squadron of men-of-war with bomb ketches,
floating batteries, gun and mortar boats, etc.; and that the Comte
D'Artois--brother to the King of France--with other great
personages, was to be present at the attack.

At this time the enemy fired but little, and the garrison were able
to turn their whole attention to strengthen the points most
threatened. The activity of the enemy on their offensive works on
the neutral ground continued and, in one night, a strong and lofty
work, five hundred yards long, with a communication thirteen
hundred yards long to the works, was raised. It was calculated that
ten thousand men, at least, must have been employed upon it; and no
less than a million and a half sandbags used in its construction.

There could be no doubt, now, that the critical moment was
approaching; and that, ere long, the garrison would be exposed to
the most tremendous fire ever opened upon a besieged place.



Chapter 17: The Floating Batteries.


In spite of the unremitting work, of the daily cannonade, of
illness and hardship, life on the Rock had not been unpleasant to
the O'Hallorans. Although many of the officers' wives had, at one
time or another, taken advantage of ships sailing from the port to
return home--or rather, to endeavour to do so, for a considerable
number of the vessels that left were captured by the Spaniards,
before getting through the Straits--there still remained sufficient
for agreeable society; and the O'Hallorans' was, more than any
other house, the general meeting place.

From its position in the hollow, it was sheltered from the fire of
all the shore batteries--whose long distance shots searched all the
lower parts of the Rock--while the resources of the establishment
enabled the O'Hallorans to afford an open-handed hospitality that
would have been wholly beyond the means of others. They had long
since given up selling any of their produce, distributing all their
surplus eggs among families where there was illness, or sending
them up to the hospitals; and doing the same with their chickens,
and vegetables. The greatest care was bestowed upon the poultry,
fresh broods being constantly raised, so that they could kill eight
or ten couple a week, and still keep up their stock to its full
strength. Thus, with gatherings two evenings a week at their own
house, and usually as many at the houses of their friends; while
Captain O'Halloran and Bob frequently dined at the mess of their
own, or other regiments, the time passed pleasantly.

While Carrie was fully occupied with the care of the house, and a
general superintendence of what they called their farm; Bob was
never at a loss for amusement. There was always something to see,
some fresh work being executed, some fresh development in the
defences; while he was on terms of friendship with almost every
officer in the garrison. It was two years and a half since he had
come out, and he was now eighteen. His constant intercourse with
people older than himself, and with the officers of the garrison,
together with the exceptional position in which he found himself,
made him in some respects seem older than he was; but he still
retained his liveliness, and love of fun. His spirits never
flagged, and he was a general favourite with all who knew him.

On the 19th of August, a boat with a flag of truce brought in a
complimentary letter from the Duc de Crillon to the governor,
informing him of the arrival of the Comte D'Artois and the Duc de
Bourbon in his camp, and sending him a present of ice, fruit,
partridges, and other delicacies. The governor returned a letter in
similar complimentary terms, thanking the Duke for his letter and
the presents; but declining with thanks the supplies that had been
offered, saying that he never received, for himself, anything
beyond what was common to the garrison.

The sailors of the ships of war now pitched tents ashore, for their
use when they should be ordered to land to take part in the
defence; and the heavy guns were, for the most part, moved down
from the upper batteries to the sea lines. Day after day passed,
the bombardment being constantly expected; but the damage
inflicted, by fire, on the enemy's works by our carcasses delayed
the attack.

On the 8th of September a tremendous fire was suddenly opened, with
red hot shot and carcasses, upon the enemy's works. The Mahon
Battery was burned, while the San Carlos and San Marten Batteries
were so damaged that they had almost to be rebuilt. The enemy, as
on previous occasions, showed extreme bravery in their efforts to
extinguish the fire and to repair damages; and it was afterwards
known that the French troops, alone, had a hundred and forty killed
and wounded. The damage done probably convinced the Duc de Crillon
that no advantage could be hoped for by trying further to increase
his works and, at half past five next morning, a volley of sixty
shells was fired by their mortar batteries, followed by the
discharge of one hundred and seventy pieces of heavy artillery.

This tremendous fire was kept up for some time, while nine
line-of-battle ships, supported by fifteen gun and mortar boats,
passed to and fro along the sea face, pouring in their fire upon
us. At nightfall the enemy's guns ceased firing, but their mortars
kept up their shell fire all night. The next day the ships of war
renewed their attack, as did the land batteries. In the course of
the day the Brilliant and Porcupine frigates were scuttled by the
navy, alongside the New Mole, and their crews landed.

On the following day the enemy's fire was principally directed
against the barrier and chevaux de frise in front of the land port
and, in the afternoon, these barriers and palisades were all in
flames; and the troops at that end of the Rock got under arms, in
case an attack should be made.

On the morning of the 12th the combined fleets of France and Spain,
consisting of thirty-eight men-of-war, three frigates, and a number
of smaller craft, sailed into the bay and anchored near Algeciras.
Their fleet now consisted of forty-seven men-of-war, ten battering
ships--considered invincible, and carrying two hundred and twelve
guns--and innumerable frigates and small ships of war; while on the
land side were batteries mounting two hundred heavy guns, and an
army of forty thousand men. Tremendous odds, indeed, against a
fortress whose garrison consisted of seven thousand effective men,
including the Marine Brigade.

For some days past Bob had been engaged, with their landlord and
some hired labourers, in bringing in earth and filling up the lower
rooms four feet deep, in order to render the cellars bomb proof.
Some beds and furniture were taken below, so that Carrie, the
servants, and the Spanish family could retire there, in case the
enemy's shells fell thickly round the house.

It was noticed as a curious incident that, just as the combined
