the "rude seaman," he took Glynn's arm and sallied forth in search of
Tim Rokens and Mr Millons, both of whom they discovered enjoying their
pipes, after a hearty breakfast, in a small, unpretending, but excellent
and comfortable "sailors' home," in the dirty little street before
referred to.

The greater part of the crew of the late _Red Eric_ (now "sticks and
stivers") were found in the same place, engaged in much the same
occupation, and to these, in solemn conclave assembled, Captain Dunning
announced his intention of opening a law-suit against the captain of the
_Termagant_ for the unlawful appropriation of the whale harpooned by
Glynn.  The men highly approved of what they called a "shore-going
scrimmage," and advised the captain to go and have the captain and crew
of the _Termagant_ "put in limbo right off."

Thus advised and encouraged, Captain Dunning went to a lawyer, who,
after hearing the case, stated it as his opinion that it was a good one,
and forthwith set about taking the needful preliminary steps to
commencing the action.

Thereafter Captain Dunning walked rapidly home, wiping his hot brow as
he went, and entering the parlour of the cottage--the yellow-faced
cottage--flung himself on the sofa with a reckless air, and said, "I've
done it!"

"Horror!" cried Aunt Martha.

"Misery!" gasped Aunt Jane, who happened to be fondling Ailie at the
time of her brother's entrance.

"Is he dead?"

"_Quite_ dead?" added Martha.

"Is _who_ dead?" inquired the captain, in surprise.

"The man--the rude sailor!"

"Dead!  No."

"You said just now that you had done it."

"So I have.  I've done the deed.  I've gone to law."

Had the captain said that he had gone to "sticks and stivers," his
sisters could not have been more startled and horrified.  They dreaded
the law, and hated it with a great and intense hatred, and not without
reason; for their father had been ruined in a law-suit, and his father
had broken the law, in some political manner they could never clearly
understand, and had been condemned by the law to perpetual banishment.

"Will it do you much harm, dear, papa?" inquired Ailie, in great
concern.

"Harm?  Of course not.  I hope it'll do me, and you too, a great deal of
good."

"I'm _so_ glad to hear that; for I've heard people say that when you
once go into it you never get out of it again."

"So have I," said Aunt Martha, with a deep sigh.

"And so have I," added Aunt Jane, with a deeper sigh, "and I believe
it's true."

"It's false!" cried the captain, laughing, "and you are all silly geese;
the law is--"

"A bright and glorious institution!  A desirable investment for the
talents of able men!  A machine for justice usually--injustice
occasionally--and, like all other good things, often misused, abused,
and spoken against!" said Glynn Proctor, at that moment entering the
room, and throwing his hat on one chair, and himself on another.  "I've
had enough of the sea, captain, and have come to resign my situation,
and beg for dinner."

"You shall have it immediately, dear Glynn," said Martha, whose heart
warmed at the sight of one who had been so kind to her little niece.

"Nay, I'm in no hurry," said Glynn, quickly; "I did but jest, dear
madam, as Shakespeare has it.  Perhaps it was Milton who said it; one
can't be sure; but whenever a truly grand remark escapes you, you're
safe to clap it down to Shakespeare."

At this point the servant-girl announced dinner.  At the same instant a
heavy foot was heard in the passage, and Tim Rokens announced himself,
saying that he had just seen the captain's lawyer, and had been sent to
say that he wished to see Captain Dunning in the course of the evening.

"Then let him go on wishing till I'm ready to go to him.  Meanwhile do
you come and dine with us, Rokens, my lad."

Rokens looked awkward, and shuffled a little with his feet, and shook
his head.

"Why, what's the matter, man?"

Rokens looked as if he wished to speak, but hesitated.

"If ye please, cap'en, I'd raither not, axin' the ladies' parding.  I'd
like a word with you in the passage."

"By all means," replied the captain, going out of the room with the
sailor.  "Now, what's wrong?"

"My flippers, cap'en," said Rokens, thrusting out his hard, thick,
enormous hands, which were stained all over with sundry streaks of tar,
and were very red as well as extremely clumsy to look at--"I've bin an'
washed 'em with hot water and rubbed 'em with grease till I a'most took
the skin off, but they won't come clean, and I'm not fit to sit down
with ladies."

To this speech the captain replied by seizing Tim Rokens by the collar
and dragging him fairly into the parlour.

"Here's a man," cried the captain enthusiastically, presenting him to
Martha, "who's sailed with me for nigh thirty years, and is the best
harpooner I ever had, and has stuck to me through thick and thin, in
fair weather and foul, in heat and cold, and was kinder to Ailie during
the last voyage than all the other men put together, exceptin' Glynn,
and who tells me his hands are covered with tar, and that he can't wash
'em clean nohow, and isn't fit to dine with ladies; so you will oblige
me, Martha, by ordering him to leave the house."

"I will, brother, with pleasure.  I order you, Mr Rokens, to leave this
house _at your peril_!  And I invite you to partake of our dinner, which
is now on the table in the next room."

Saying this, Aunt Martha grasped one of the great tar-stained "flippers"
in both of her own delicate hands, and shook it with a degree of vigour
that Tim Rokens afterwards said he could not have believed possible had
he not felt it.

Seeing this, Aunt Jane turned aside and blew her nose violently.  Tim
Rokens attempted to make a bow, failed, and grinned.  The captain
cried--"Now, then, heave ahead!"  Glynn, in the exuberance of his
spirits, uttered a miniature cheer.  Ailie gave vent to a laugh, that
sounded as sweet as a good song; and the whole party adjourned to the
dining-room, where the servant-girl was found in the sulks because
dinner was getting rapidly cold, and the cat was found:--

  "Prowling round the festal board
  On thievish deeds intent."

[See Milton's _Paradise Regained_, latest edition.]



CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

THE LAW-SUIT--THE BATTLE, AND THE VICTORY.

The great case of Dunning _versus_ Dixon came on at last.

On that day Captain Dunning was in a fever; Glynn Proctor was in a
fever; Tim Rokens was in a fever; the Misses Dunning were in two
separate fevers--everybody, in fact, on the Dunning side of the case was
in a fever of nervous anxiety and mental confusion.  As witnesses in the
case, they had been precognosced to such an extent by the lawyers that
their intellects were almost overturned.  On being told that he was to
be precognosced.  Tim Rokens said stoutly, "He'd like to see the man as
'ud do it"; under the impression that that was the legal term for being
kicked, or otherwise maltreated; and on being informed that the word
signified merely an examination as to the extent of his knowledge of the
facts of the case, he said quietly, "Fire away!"  Before they had done
firing away, the gallant harpooner was so confused that he began to
regard the whole case as already hopeless.

The other men were much in the same condition; but in a private meeting
held among themselves the day before the trial, Rokens made the
following speech, which comforted them not a little.

"Messmates and shipmates," said Tim, "I'll tell ye wot it is.  I'm no
lawyer--that's a fact--but I'm a man; an' wot's a man?--it ain't a
bundle o' flesh an' bones on two legs, with a turnip a-top o't, is it?"

"Be no manes," murmured Briant, with an approving nod.

"Cer'nly not," remarked Dick Barnes.  "I second that motion."

"Good," continued Rokens.  "Then, bein' a man, I've got brains enough to
see that, if we don't want to contredick one another, we must stick to
the truth."

"You don't suppose I'd go fur to tell lies, do you?" said Tarquin
quickly.

"In coorse not.  But what I mean to say is, that we must stick to what
we _knows_ to be the truth, and not be goin' for to guess at it, or
_think_ that we knows it, and then swear to it as if we wos certain
sure."

"Hear! hear!" from the assembled company.

"In fact," observed Glynn, "let what we say be absolutely true, and say
just as little as we can.  That's how to manage a good case."

"An', be all manes," added Briant, "don't let any of ye try for to
improve matters be volunteerin' yer opinion.  Volunteerin' opinions is
stuff.  Volunteerin' is altogether a bad look-out.  I know'd a feller, I
did--a strappin' young feller he was, too, more betoken--as volunteered
himself to death, he did.  To be sure, his wos a case o' volunteerin'
into the Louth Militia, and he wos shot, he wos, in a pop'lar riot, as
the noosepapers said--a scrimmage, I calls it--so don't let any o' us be
goin' for to volunteer opinions w'en nobody axes 'em--no, nor wants
'em."

Briant looked so pointedly at Gurney while delivering this advice that
that obese individual felt constrained to look indignant, and inquire
whether "them 'ere imperent remarks wos meant for him."  To which Briant
replied that "they wos meant for him, as well as for ivery man then
present."  Whereupon Gurney started up and shook his fist across the
table at Briant, and Briant made a face at Gurney, at which the
assembled company of mariners laughed, and immediately thereafter the
meeting was broken up.

Next day the trial came on, and as the case was expected to be more than
usually interesting, the house was filled to overflowing long before the
hour.

The trial lasted all that day, and all the next, and a great part of the
third, but we do not purpose going into it in detail.  The way in which
Mr Rasp (Captain Dunning's counsel) and Mr Tooth (Captain Dixon's
counsel) badgered, browbeat, and utterly bamboozled the witnesses on
both sides, and totally puzzled the jury, can only be understood by
those who have frequented courts of law, but could not be fully or
adequately described in less than six hundred pages.

In the course of the trial the resolutions come to by the crew of the
_Red Eric_, that they would tell _nothing_ but the truth, and carefully
refrain from touching on what they were not quite sure of, proved to be
of the greatest advantage to the pursuer's case.  We feel constrained
here to turn aside for one moment to advise the general adoption of that
course of conduct in all the serious affairs of life.

The evidence of Tim Rokens was clear and to the point.  The whale had
been first struck by Glynn with a harpoon, to which a drogue was
attached; it had been followed up by the crew of the _Red Eric_ and also
by the crew of the _Termagant_.  The boats of the latter over-took the
fish first, fixed a harpoon in it, and lanced it mortally.  The drogue
and harpoon of the _Red Eric_ were still attached to the whale when this
was done, so that, according to the laws of the fishery, the crew of the
_Termagant_ had no right to touch the whale--it was a "fast" fish.  If
the drogue had become detached the fish would have been free, and both
crews would have been entitled to chase and capture it if they were
able.  Angry words and threats had passed between the crews of the
opposing boats, but the whale put a stop to that by smashing the boat of
the _Red Eric_ with its tail, whereupon the boat of the _Termagant_ made
off with the fish (which died almost immediately after), and left the
crew of the boat belonging to the _Red Eric_ struggling in the water.

Such was the substance of the evidence of the harpooner, and neither
cross-examination nor re-cross-examination by Mr Tooth, the counsel for
the defendant, could induce Tim Rokens to modify, alter, omit, or
contradict one iota of what he had said.

It must not be supposed, however, that all of the men gave their
evidence so clearly or so well.  The captain did, though he was somewhat
nervous, and the doctor did, and Glynn did.  But that of Nikel Sling was
unsatisfactory, in consequence of his being unable to repress his
natural tendency to exaggeration.  Tarquin also did harm; for, in his
spite against the crew of the _Termagant_, he made statements which were
not true, and his credit as a witness was therefore totally destroyed.

Last of all came Jim Scroggles, who, after being solemnly sworn, deposed
that he was between thirty-five and thirty-six years of age, on hearing
which Gurney said "Oh!" with peculiar emphasis, and the people laughed,
and the judge cried "Silence," and the examination went on.  After some
time Mr Tooth rose to cross-question Jim Scroggles, who happened to be
a nervous man in public, and was gradually getting confused and angry.

"Now, my man, please to be particular in your replies," said Mr Tooth,
pushing up his spectacles on his forehead, thrusting his hands into his
trousers pockets, and staring very hard at Jim.  "You said that you
pulled the second oar from the bow on the day in which the whale was
killed."

"Yes."

"Are you quite sure of that?  Was it not the _third_ oar, now?"

"Yes or no," interrupted Mr Tooth.

"It's so long since--"

"Yes or no," repeated Mr Tooth.

"Yes," roared Scroggles, forgetting at the moment, in his confusion and
indignation at not being allowed to speak, in what manner the question
had been put.

"Yes," echoed Mr Tooth, addressing the judge, but looking at the jury.
"You will observe, gentlemen.  Would your lordship be so good as to note
that?  This witness, on that very particular occasion, when every point
in the circumstances must naturally have been impressed deeply on the
memories of all present, appears to have been so confused as not to know
which oar of the boat he pulled.  So, my man" (turning to the witness),
"it appears evident that either you are now mis-stating the facts of the
case or were then incapable of judging of them."

Jim Scroggles felt inclined to leap out of the witness-box, and knocked
the teeth of Mr Tooth down his throat!  But he repressed the
inclination, and that gentleman went on to say--

"When the boat of the _Red Eric_ came up to the whale was the drogue
still attached to it?"

"In coorse it was.  Didn't ye hear me say that three or--"

"Be so good as to answer my questions simply, and do not make
unnecessary remarks, sir.  Was the drogue attached when the boat came
up?  Yes or no?"

"Yes."

"How do you know?"

"'Cause I seed it."

"You are quite sure that you saw it?"

"In coorse!--leastwise, Tim Rokens seed it, and all the men in the boat
seed it, and said so to me afterwards--w'ich is the same thing, though I
can't 'xactly say I seed it myself, 'cause I was looking hard at the men
in the enemy's boat, and considerin' which on 'em I should give a dab in
the nose to first w'en we come along side of 'em."

"Oh, then you did _not_ see the drogue attached to the whale?" said Mr
Tooth, with a glance at the jury; "and you were so taken up with the
anticipated fight, I suppose, that you scarcely gave your attention to
the whale at all!  Were the other men in your boat in a similarly
unobservant condition?"

"Eh?" exclaimed Scroggles.

"Were the other men as eager for the fight as you were?"

"I s'pose they wos; you'd better ax 'em.  _I_ dun know."

"No, I don't suppose you do, considering the state of mind you appear to
have been in at the time.  Do you know which part of the whale struck
your boat?  Was it the head?"

"No; it was the tail."

"Are you quite sure of that?"

"Ho, yes, quite sartin, for I've got a knot on my head this day where
the tip of its flukes came down on me."

"You're quite sure of that?  Might it not have been the part of the fish
near the tail, now, that struck you, or the fin just under the tail?"

"No; I'm quite sartin sure it warn't _that_."

"How are you so sure it wasn't that?"

"Because whales hain't got no fins just under their tails!" replied
Scroggles, with a broad grin.

There was another loud laugh at this, and Mr Tooth looked a little put
out, and the judge cried "Silence" again, and threatened to clear the
court.

After a few more questions Jim Scroggles was permitted to retire, which
he did oppressed with a feeling that his evidence had done the case
little good, if not some harm, yet rather elated than otherwise at the
success of his last hit.

That evening Captain Dunning supped with Ailie and his sisters in low
spirits.  Glynn and the doctor and Tim Rokens and the two mates, Millons
