the work I'm dreading. But I know Bee only too well. She'll ring a
bell and have me up to her room every five minutes to ask how things
are getting on, and what I've done and what I haven't done, and she'll
worry, worry, worry, and scold, scold, scold the whole time. There'll
be no credit in my slaving, not the least. No, I don't think it can be
expected from me. It's too hard."

Gwen made the last remark aloud, and she repeated it again
emphatically, because she just happened to catch sight of the New Year
motto that hung over her dressing table.

     "Oh do not pray for easy lives. Pray to be stronger men. Do
     not pray for tasks equal to your powers. Pray for powers
     equal to your tasks. Then the doing of your work shall be no
     miracle. But you shall be a miracle. Every day you shall
     wonder at yourself, at the richness of life which has come
     to you by the grace of God."

"I thought it meant school work," she said to herself. "But after all
I suppose it means home work as well, or any kind of work that comes
uppermost. I wonder if I could. Look here, Gwen Gascoyne, it's rather
a big sacrifice, but you've got to make it for once. With four
daughters, Dad has a right to expect somebody to keep the house
comfortable, and just at this critical moment you're the only one
available. It's hard, but it'll have to be. Your little ambition, my
dear, must take a back seat for the present, while you go and 'wash
dishes and feed the swine'. You'd better make the plunge and get it
over!"

Father and Winnie had adjourned to the garden, so Gwen hurried
downstairs before she repented her resolution.

"Dad! I believe I can manage, if Bee will let me try," she blurted
out, for Gwen generally did things abruptly.

Winnie drew a sigh of relief.

"I believe you could, too," she said hastily, "and I've been telling
Beatrice so. Miss Roscoe will think I'm playing her a very nasty trick
if I stop away. She'd never forgive me. You're strong, Gwen, and you
know all about the hens and the pigs, and you can keep an eye on
Nellie."

"Yes, try, childie. It will be a good practice for you--and there's
nobody else," agreed Father.

Thus it came about that Gwen entered upon an entirely new experience.
She had, of course, helped in the house before, but only under
Beatrice's personal supervision; it was quite a different matter to
have to take the responsibility of the whole establishment.

"Bother your sister as little as you can, I want her to have a
complete rest," said Dr. Chambers. "You mustn't let her worry about
what's going on downstairs."

It was easy enough for the doctor to give orders, thought Gwen, but a
difficult matter to carry them out. She was determined, however, to do
her best, and she made a most heroic effort to be patient with the
invalid. The fact was that poor Beatrice, who never spared herself,
was overworked, and the hot, damp weather had affected her nerves. Dr.
Chambers knew his patient when he prescribed a fortnight in bed, and
was well aware that it was the only way of persuading her to take the
rest she needed. At first Gwen's anticipations of a trying time were
literally fulfilled. Beatrice's bell was ringing constantly, and she
had to keep running up and down stairs and listening to endless and
minute directions, and to answer a perfect catechism of questions as
to how affairs were progressing in the kitchen. Nellie also was in a
grumpy mood, and difficult to conciliate. She did not like having
instructions sent to her through Gwen, and showed her resentment by
clattering about the kitchen and banging doors. It required more tact
than Gwen had ever made use of in her life before to keep the peace.
Then Martin was no slight anxiety, for the little scamp thought he
could take advantage of Beatrice's absence to get into as much
mischief as a magpie, and Gwen hardly dared trust him five minutes out
of her sight. Between Martin, household tasks, and certain parish
duties which could not be omitted, there was plenty to be done, and
the days seemed full from morning till night.

Gwen had never before realized how very much lay in Beatrice's hands,
and she began slowly to appreciate how heavy a burden her sister
carried year in and year out, with scarcely ever a holiday to relieve
the tension.

"It's far worse than any amount of lessons," she thought. "Going back
to school will be quite a holiday after this."

One resolve Gwen had made, and stuck to with grim determination--to
spend a certain time every day over mathematics and one or two other
subjects in which she feared she was weak. She got Lesbia to bring her
books from school, and every night, long after the latter was asleep,
she would sit up in their joint bedroom studying. It was impossible to
snatch five minutes during the day, but when the house was still and
quiet it was easier to concentrate her thoughts, and she was surprised
sometimes what progress she was able to make. Night after night she
heard the clock strike twelve before she put out her lamp, and once
even the early midsummer dawn stole in and caught her unawares. None
of the family knew that she sat up working so late, or probably Father
would have forbidden it, for it was certainly burning the candle at
both ends. It was very difficult to rise at six o'clock and help to
prepare breakfast when she seemed only to have had a few hours' sleep,
and it was often a great temptation to ignore the alarum and turn
over on her pillow. But having accepted the household drudgery, Gwen
had enough grit to carry out her duties thoroughly, however unwelcome
some of them might be, and to secure breakfast in time was a cardinal
virtue at the Parsonage. To her credit she never once let the others
start late for school, or forgot to place their packets of lunch
ready, and Beatrice herself could not have been more solicitous about
drying wet boots and stockings.

"You're getting quite grandmotherly, Gwen," laughed Basil. "You never
used to care about damp feet before. You're nearly as big a fusser as
Bee. You made my cricket flannels look no end, though. I will say that
for you."

"I like Gwen's housekeeping, she puts so much jam in the tarts!"
remarked Giles approvingly.

"Gwen lets me feed the chickens my own self," said Martin with a
satisfied chuckle. "And she mended my kite, too."

"I wish you'd mend my blue print dress, Gwen," said Lesbia. "I tore it
again at school yesterday. That last darn of yours was uncommonly
neat."

"Are they really getting to appreciate me more now I do more for
them?" Gwen asked herself. "I never thought they cared an atom about
me before. I was always the odd one at home. It's hard work, and a
fearful trouble to do all those extra things, but oh!--it is nice to
feel one's wanted."

At the end of a fortnight Beatrice was decidedly better, but Dr.
Chambers was still unwilling to allow her to come downstairs.

"Best complete the cure while we're about it, and take another week in
your room," he decreed. "If you begin to bustle round the house too
soon, it may undo all the good of this enforced rest.

"I feel such a slacker," groaned the invalid.

After the doctor had gone the family held another conference in
Beatrice's room.

"I had a letter from Cousin Edith this morning," said Mr. Gascoyne.
"She offers to come and take full charge, both of you and the
household. What do you think, Bee? Had we better let her come for a
while, just until you're fit to be about again?"

"It isn't worth it for a week--and I mean to be down then, doctor or
no doctor!" announced Beatrice, with characteristic firmness. "In the
meantime I'd rather have Gwen than anybody, if she doesn't mind
staying at home a few days longer. She's a kind little nurse, and
she's kept things going wonderfully. I'd never have believed she'd
manage so well."

Gwen's eyes filled with tears. Beatrice, of all people in the world,
to yield her so high a tribute of praise! Beatrice, who had been so
captious and hard to please as she lay in bed giving elaborate
directions, and whose fidgety ways had needed so much patience!

"I'm glad if I've been of any use," she faltered.

"Use! You've been a jewel. I don't know whatever we should have done
without you," said Beatrice, catching Gwen's hand, and squeezing it
hard. "Can you spare another week as general slavey? Miss Roscoe would
quite understand."

"I'll do anything you like, Bee," said Gwen, returning the squeeze.




CHAPTER XXIV

The Senior Oxford


Gwen went back to school after three weeks' absence, fearing that
every chance of the Senior Oxford must have faded into thin air. She
had worked as well as she could at home, but it had not been the same
as studying with a mistress, and she felt her deficiencies painfully.

"There's no time to make things up now, either," she thought. "The
exam. begins on the sixteenth, and that's actually next Monday. Oh
dear! If only I were better up in maths! I know the chemistry'll stump
me too. That's to say if I'm even allowed to go in at all!"

On this last point her doubts were soon dispelled. At eleven o'clock
she received a summons to the headmistress's study.

"Well, Gwen," said Miss Roscoe. "It has been very unfortunate that you
were obliged to stay away so long, but you must do your best,
notwithstanding. I entered your name as a candidate for the Senior
Oxford, so you will, of course, take the examination. Miss Trent has
arranged to give you some extra coaching in the dinner hour every day
this week, and I think you ought to be able at least to secure a pass.
You're fairly certain all round."

"Except in maths.," said Gwen.

"Well, you must give all the time you can spare to that. But don't
overdo the cramming. It's sometimes a fatal mistake to work early and
late till your brain's utterly exhausted. I did that once myself and
missed a scholarship through it. Take an hour at tennis every evening
before you go to bed. Exercise is an absolute necessity if you're to
be in form for next week. You're looking pale, and you mustn't break
down before Monday. Tell your father to buy you a tonic."

Miss Roscoe spoke kindly, more sympathetically indeed than Gwen ever
remembered to have heard her before. She had a wide experience with
girls, and could estimate their capacities to a nicety. She had chosen
her candidates carefully, and would ensure that they were sent in well
prepared. So far she had had few failures in public examinations, and
every pass brought extra credit to the school.

Five members of the Form were to take the Senior Oxford; Elspeth
Frazer, Edith Arnold, Louise Mawson, and Betty Brierly, being the
other four, all of them considerably older than Gwen.

"We call you the five victims!" said Charlotte Perry. "I'm glad I'm
out of it. I sang a jubilee last week when Miss Roscoe read the list
and my name wasn't on it."

"There were eight girls sent in last year," said Hilda Browne.

"Yes, and two failed--Majorie Stevens and Daisy Wilson. I don't think
Miss Roscoe has forgiven them yet."

"Oh, dear! I'm afraid she'll be very down on me then," wailed Gwen.
"I'm a doubtful quantity!"

"You? Oh, you'll be all right! She'd never let you try if you
weren't--trust her!" said Charlotte Perry, and the rest agreed.

In spite of her schoolmates' assurances Gwen did not feel at all
certain of success, and it was in very blue spirits and a state of
woeful apprehension that she betook herself on the fateful sixteenth
of July to the Stedburgh Town Hall, which was the local centre for the
examination. It was her fifteenth birthday, and it seemed a funny way
of celebrating the day. She had been so agitated that morning that she
had scarcely been able to realize her presents, except the fountain
pen which Father and Beatrice and Winnie had clubbed together to give
her, and which she had brought with her to the exam. room.

At her first paper, however, she cheered up a little. It was easier
than she had expected, and though one or two questions were beyond
her, the rest were well within her capacity. Her new pen flew over the
sheets of foolscap, and if she was too nervous to do herself full
justice she at least acquitted herself with credit. The time-table
only allowed an hour between one and two o'clock for lunch, which was
provided for the candidates in a room at the Town Hall. Gwen anxiously
compared notes with Elspeth, Edith, Louise, and Betty, as they hastily
demolished plates of beef sandwiches and drank tumblers of lemonade.
On the whole she had done as well or even better than they, and she
began to cherish hopes.

As the week went on, Gwen, though not daring to be too sanguine,
could not help feeling that her papers had reached a fair standard
even in her weakest subjects. She had grown so accustomed to the
examination room that she was no longer nervous and was able to
express the facts she knew at their best advantage.

"There!" she said, when she had at last handed in her final sheets.
"It's a toss-up whether I'm through or not. I expect it depends on the
temper of the examiner who reads my papers. I'll hope he'll get his
dinner before he tackles them!"

"Your writing's clear at any rate," said Elspeth. "Mine's such a
scrawl I'm afraid that will be against me. Aren't you thankful the
thing's over?"

"Thankful hardly expresses my state of bliss."

"It's rather sickening to have school exams, next week, after all
this!" said Louise.

"They'll seem a mere trifle compared with the Oxford!" declared Gwen.

After the ordeal they had passed through in common the candidates were
on terms of good comradeship, and with Elspeth Frazer Gwen felt there
was a prospect of permanent friendship.

The last days of the term passed rapidly away. To Gwen the great event
of the school year was over. Though she did her best at them,
Rodenhurst examinations were a matter of quite minor importance. She
welcomed the breaking-up with intense relief. After the strain of the
past few weeks the holidays seemed an imperative necessity. It was
delightful to have a complete rest, to idle about in the garden or on
the shore, or take long invigorating walks on the moors. It would be
five or six weeks before she could hear the result of the Senior
Oxford, so she was obliged to endure the suspense as best she could.

In the meantime something happened--something so very unexpected and
extraordinary that for a time it almost put even her examinations in
the shade. It was Beatrice who told her the good news. Lately Beatrice
had begun to treat Gwen as one of the grown-up members of the
household, and to include her in their discussions of family affairs.

"It seems almost too wonderful to believe," said Beatrice. "Old Mr.
Sutton has resigned his incumbency of North Ditton, and do you know
the living is to be divided, and Skelwick, Basingwold, Hethersedge,
and Rigby are all to be one big new parish by themselves. And who's to
be Vicar, do you think?"

"Not Dad?" gasped Gwen incredulously.

"Yes. It has been formally offered to him, and he's going to accept
it. Oh! and, Gwen, the funny part is, do you know, that queer old
gentleman you met upon the wold turns out to be Sir Benjamin Hazlett,
the patron of the living."
