one with another when they are absent from each other."

"What causes the regret just now?"

"I grudge to quit Leif without a parting word," returned Heika, looking
at his brother with peculiar earnestness; "it seems so ungrateful, so
unkind to one who has ever treated us well."

"I think with you in that, brother," said Hake.

"It would be so easy too," continued Heika, "to have some method of
letting him know what I think, if we could only agree about the signs or
signals beforehand."

Hake laughed softly.

"That would not be easy; for we could scarcely go to him and say, `Leif,
when you see these particular marks on a certain stone, you are to
understand that we take leave of you for ever with hearty good-will!'  I
fear that his suspicions might be aroused thereby."

"Nay, but I only express regret that we have not some such mode of
intercourse," returned Heika, smiling.  "Ye know the sign of the split
arrow which tells of war.  Why might we not multiply such signs?  For
instance, _by laying a billet of firewood across a man's bed_, one might
signify that he bade him farewell with tender affection and goodwill!"

"Why, brother," said Hake, laughing, "ye look at me as earnestly as if
you had said something smart; whereas I regard your idea as but a clumsy
one.  A billet of wood laid across your friend's bed might more fitly
suggest that you wanted to knock out his brains, or damage his skin, or
burn him alive!"

Heika laughed heartily, and said that he feared he had nothing of the
spirit of the skald about him, and that his power of invention was not
great.

"But I have more news to give thee, brother, besides that regarding
Bertha," said Hake.  "Do you know there is a countryman of ours on board
of one of the ships that brought out the men of the new religion, and he
has but lately seen our father and Emma?"

Heika started and laid his hand on his brother's arm, while he gazed
earnestly into his face.

"It is ill jesting on such a subject," he said somewhat sternly.

"So think I, brother; therefore I recommend you not to jest," returned
Hake gravely.

"Nay, but is it true?"

"Ay, true as that the sky is over our heads.  I have had a long talk
with him, and when he found I was a countryman he gave me a hug that
made my ribs bend.  His name is Sawneysson, a very giant of a man, with
hair that might have grown on the back of a Greenland bear, only that it
is red instead of white.  He told me that he knew our father well by
sight, and last saw him taking a ramble on Dunedin hill, whither he had
walked from our village on the Forth, which shows that the old man's
vigour has improved.  Emma was with him too, so Sawneysson said, looking
beautiful, but somewhat sad."

"How knew he her name?" asked Heika.

"He knew it not," replied Hake.  "He did but say that a fair maiden
walked with our father, and I knew at once from his description that it
was Emma.  But you can inquire for yourself at his own mouth, for this
countryman of ours is an enthusiastic fellow, and fond of talking about
home."

"Brother," said Heika, with a sad but earnest look, "I must give this
man the cold shoulder."

"Nay, then, disappointment must have changed thee much," said Hake, in
surprise, "for that is the last thing I had expected thee to say."

"It is not disappointment but caution that makes me speak and think as I
do.  If we seem to be too eager about our native land it may tend to
make Leif more watchful of us, which of all things would be the greatest
misfortune that could befall us just at this time."

"There is something in that," returned Hake; "but will it not suffice to
exercise a little caution and self-restraint, without giving our
countryman the cold shoulder?"

"I know not," replied Heika, with a troubled air; "but I would that he
had not turned up just now, though I confess it gladdens me to hear of
our father and Emma.--Now, Hake, we must to bed if we would be up
betimes to secure a little leisure for the carrying out of our
enterprise."

Without further conversation the brothers threw off their coats and
shoes, and lay down together with the rest of their clothing on, so as
to be ready for an early start.  The shield and helmet of each hung on
the wall just over the bed, and their two swords leaned against the bed
itself, within reach of their hands, for thus guardedly did men deem it
necessary to take their rest in the warlike days of old.



CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

DISAPPOINTMENT TERMINATES IN UNLOOKED-FOR SUCCESS, AND THE SAGA COMES TO
AN END.

During some weeks after the events narrated in the last chapter, the
Scottish brothers continued quietly, stealthily, and steadily to collect
provisions and all things necessary for the projected voyage across the
Atlantic.

During the same period the general business of the settlement was
prosecuted with activity.  The Christian missionaries not only
instructed the people in the new faith, and baptised those that
believed, but assisted and guided them in the building of huts and
houses, the planning of wharves and the laying out of townships; [see
Note at end of Chapter] while the crews of the two recently arrived
ships, having found it necessary to make up their minds to winter in
Greenland, busied themselves in collecting fats, oil, skins, feathers,
etcetera, to be packed and got ready for shipment in the following
spring.

Karlsefin also made preparations for a voyage in spring to Iceland, and
Thorward, Biarne, Krake, and the other Vinland heroes assisted in that
work, or in some other of the multifarious duties that had to be
attended to in the colony, while Olaf undertook the responsible duty of
superintending the education, mental and physical, of that rampant
little Vinlander, Snorro, the son of Karlsefin.

Leif Ericsson exercised a sort of general superintendence of the whole
colony.  It seemed to be tacitly agreed on and admitted that he was the
national chief or governor, and as no one was disposed to dispute his
claim to that position all was peace and harmony.

Nevertheless there was something unusual in Leif's manner at that time
which rather perplexed his friends, and quite puzzled Anders, his
major-domo.

That free and easy individual could not understand the dreamy moods into
which his master fell, still less could he comprehend the gleams of
quiet humour and expressions of intense seriousness, with other
contradictory appearances, which occasionally manifested themselves in
Leif's visage and demeanour.  It was plain that there was much on his
mind, and that much of that was gay as well as grave.  Anders made
several attempts to find out what was the matter, but was met at one
time with grave evasion, at another with quiet jocularity, which left
him as wise as before.

Towards the Scottish brothers Leif maintained an unvarying aspect of
reserve, which filled them with uneasiness; but with the female members
of his household, and the children, he was all gentleness, and often
playful.

"Leif," said Karlsefin to him one day, "it appears to me that something
weighs on your mind, or else ye have left some of your wits in Vinland."

"Think ye not that the cares of such a large and growing colony are
sufficient to account for any new wrinkles that may appear on my brow?"
replied Leif, with a peculiar smile, and a glance from the corner of his
eye.

"Well, I daresay that might account for it, and yet things are swimming
on so well that these cares do not seem to be much increased."

"Sometimes domestic cares trouble a man more than public ones,
Karlsefin.  Look at thy friend Thorward, now.  'Tis little that he would
care for a mountain of outside troubles on his broad shoulders if he
might only drop them when he crossed the threshold of his own door."

"That is true," returned the other; "if a man have not peace in his own
house, there is no peace for him on earth.  Nevertheless my friend
Thorward is not in such a bad case.  Freydissa has improved vastly of
late, and Thorward has also grown more amiable and less contradictions--
add to which, he and she love each other dearly.  But, Leif, there can
be no domestic troubles in your case, for your household is well
ordered."

"Thank God there are none," said Leif seriously.  It was the first time
that Leif had used that expression, and his friend heard it with some
surprise and pleasure, but said nothing.

"Still," continued Leif, "I am not destitute of troubles.  Has not that
thrall Hake overturned the peace of my sweet kinswoman Bertha?  The girl
loves the thrall--I can see that, as plain as I can see the vane on
yonder mast-head--and there is no cure for love!"

Karlsefin looked earnestly at his friend as if about to speak, but
observing the stern frown on Leif's countenance, he forbore.

In a minute or so Karlsefin remarked quietly that Hake was a faithful
thrall.

"I'm not so sure of that as ye seem to be," returned Leif, with
increasing sternness, "but, whether faithful or not, no thrall shall
ever wed Bertha."

"What is that you say about Bertha?" asked Biarne, coming up just then.

"Nothing of moment," replied Leif.  "What news bring you, Biarne? for
that ye bring news is plain by the glance of your eye."

"My eye is an incorrigible tell-tale," cried Biarne, laughing.
"However, it has not much to tell at present.  Only that you are about
to receive a visit from some old friends, and that Anders will have to
keep his kettles full for some time to come.  A band of Skraelingers
are--.  But here they come to speak for themselves."

At that moment a troop of the Greenland savages came round the point--
the identical point where they had received such a terrible shock some
years before--with Flatface dancing joyously in front of them.

Flatface had heard of their coming, had gone out to meet them, had found
several of his relations among them, and was now returning, scarce able
to contain himself with delight, as he made their mouths water by
dilating at great length on the delicious things contained in Anders's
capacious kettles.

While Leif and the others went to meet the Skraelingers, Heika and his
brother sat in their own sleeping-closet, talking in a low tone, and
making the final arrangements for their flight.

"Now are ye sure that all is on board--nothing omitted?" asked Hake,
"for it will be hard to obtain anything once we are out on the sea, and
we can't well return to fetch what we have forgotten."

"All is ready," answered Heika sadly.  "I cannot tell how much it
grieves me to go away in this fashion; but freedom must be regained at
any price.  Now remember, meet me exactly when the moon shows its upper
edge above the sea to-night.  Not later, and not sooner, for the longer
ye can remain about the hall the less likely will any one be to inquire
after _me_."

"I will be sure not to fail you; but, Heika, is that not a little too
late?  The flood-tide will be past, and if there is any sea on, it will
be ill passing the skerries, many of which are but little covered, even
at high water."

"Trust me, Hake; it will not be too late.  Be sure that ye come no
sooner--else evil may ensue."

"My heart sinks when I think of Bertha," said Hake, with a deep sigh.
"It will seem so cold, so hard, so unaccountable, to leave her without
one word, one farewell."

"Think better of it, brother," said Heika eagerly; "I am prepared to
start alone even now!"

"Never!" exclaimed Hake, flushing,--"What? shall I draw back like a
coward at the last moment, after pledging my word to go? and shall I
leave you to face this enterprise alone?  Nay, Heika, we have suffered
for many years together, we shall triumph now together--or perish."

"My poor brother," said Heika, grasping Hake's hand, and kissing it with
deep feeling.--"But go now to the hall, and leave me; I hear them laying
the tables for supper.  The window is easily removed; I will hasten at
once and get things ready.  Take good care not to re-enter this closet
after leaving it, for the carls are moving about the hall, and may
chance to observe that it is empty.  Be circumspect, brother."

They squeezed hands again, and Hake went into the hall, where he mingled
with the house-carls, and chatted carelessly about the events of the
day.

The instant he was gone Heika rose and removed the parchment window,
took a billet of firewood and laid it across the bed, then, leaping out,
he walked smartly towards the west end of the village.

It was beginning to grow dark, and few of the people were about.  To
those whom he passed Heika nodded familiarly, but did not stop.  The
moment he had rounded the cliff which hid Brattalid from view, he ran
westward at full speed.

Meanwhile supper was laid in the hall, and all were awaiting the
entrance of the master of the house and Karlsefin, but there was no
appearance of either.  After a quarter of an hour had passed, and they
were beginning to wonder what had become of them, the door opened and
Biarne entered, saying that Leif had sent him to say that as he had
business which would keep him out late, they were not to wait supper for
him.

Hake began to feel somewhat uneasy at this, and when supper was finished
he resolved to leave the house a little before the appointed time.  For
that purpose he entered the sleeping-closet, intending to pass out by
the window.

The first thing that caught his eye was the billet of firewood lying
_across the bed_!  His heart almost stood still at the sight, for this,
coupled with Heika's display of deep feeling, and their recent
conversation about signs, caused the truth to flash upon him.

With one bound he passed through the window and flew westward like the
wind-round the point, over the ridge, and down towards the appointed
rendezvous at the skerries.

But, to return to Heika.  When he neared the inlet he changed his pace
to a rapid walk, and glanced cautiously from side to side, to make quite
sure that he was not observed by any one who might chance to have
wandered in that direction.

Now, it is a well-known fact in the affairs of this world, that many
strange things occur in a most unaccountable manner.  Who can tell how
it was, or why it was that, just a few minutes before Heika approached
the inlet from the landward side, a small boat entered it from the
seaward side, out of which stepped Leif Ericsson and Karlsefin?  They
drew their boat into a corner in deep shadow, and then, going to another
corner, also in deep shadow, sat down on a ledge of rock without
uttering a single word.

They had never been in that inlet before; had never seen it, probably
never thought of it before, yet there they were, quietly seated in it--
and, just in the nick of time!

From the place where they sat neither their own boat nor Leif's could be
seen--only the landward opening of the inlet.

Presently approaching footsteps were heard.  The two friends rose.  A
moment later and Heika stood before them.  He stopped abruptly on
beholding them, and his eyes blazed with astonishment, rage, and
despair.  Suddenly he looked round as if in search of a weapon, or of a
way of escape.

"Be wise, lad," said Leif, kindly yet very gravely; "no evil will come
of it if ye are wise, and take your misfortunes like a man."

Heika was subdued by the gentle tone.  He crossed his arms on his
heaving chest, and stood erect before them with his head slightly
drooped, and a look of profound sadness, rather than disappointment, on
his countenance.

"Come hither, Heika," said Leif, pointing seaward, "I have somewhat to
show thee."

They went down the beach till they stood beside the boat, which was
ready for sea.

"This is a strange sight," he continued; "here is an excellent boat,
well found, well loaded, well busked in every way for a long voyage.
Knowest thou aught in regard to it, Heika?"

"I know," answered the Scot, bitterly, "that if ye had come hither only
half-an-hour later, that boat would have been on its way with me to
Scotland."

"What, with you _alone_?"

"Ay--with me alone."

"That is strange," said Leif, somewhat perplexed; "I had fancied that
