protectors at the end of the Hall, then scanning the benches before him,
then running his eye along the row of prefects, and finally taking the
measure of Yorke as he stood and waited for an answer.

Then suddenly the question seemed to come home.

"My son Alf a thief?  There's one of 'em says that, is there?  My son
Alf a thief?  Do to him!  Why, I'll tell you.  Just keep him till my son
Alf comes back, and make him go and say it to his face.  That's what _I_
should do to him, young gents."

"That's what we will do," said Yorke.  "The meeting is over."

And amid the excitement that ensued, the rush to put down names for the
new club, the cheers and hootings and hand-shakings of old enemies, Mr
Rollitt was carried off in triumph by his nine hosts to high tea in
Wally Wheatfield's room.



CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

THE WATCH-TOWER.

Wally's study--he always liked to call it a "study," but his friends
preferred to call it a den--could comfortably accommodate six.  The
juniors had frequently to own that nine, the normal size of the party,
was a jam.  When, in addition to that, a big, brawny man was thrown in,
it came to be a serious question as to how the four walls would sustain
the strain.

Wally, however, was determined to manage somehow.  He indignantly
rejected Percy's offer to his more spacious apartment over the way.  No.
He had captured the lion--he and D'Arcy--and they would entertain him
in their own den.

After all, it was not so bad.  It only meant letting the fire out and
putting one chair in the fender, and shoving the other end of the table
(which had been doubled in length by the addition of the table out of a
neighbouring room, that was within four inches of the same height) close
up against the door, which it was just possible to shut.  As, however,
the door opened outwards, it was necessary for the gentleman occupying
the foot of the table to sit out in the passage, much to the
inconvenience of the casual passers-by.

To a shy man like Mr Rollitt, it was a difficult position to find
himself the honoured guest of nine young gentlemen like these.

"Thank'ee kindly, young masters," said he, when Ashby relieved him of
his hat and Fisher minor of his bag, and Percy undermined him with a
chair, and Cottle handed him the _Boy's Own Paper_, and Cash came in
with a hassock, and D'Arcy put a railway rug over his knees.

Wally, whose ideas of hospitality were of the old school, deemed it
expedient, while tea was being served, to engage his guest on the
subject of the weather.

"Rather finer the last few days than it was the other week when it
rained?" said he.  "Rollitt's having fine weather for his trip."

This was an artful way of introducing the topic of the hour.

"Thank you kindly, yes.  He's bound to be somewheres, is my Alf,"
replied Mr Rollitt.

"It's all right; we're backing him up.  He made a ripping run for the
School against Rendlesham.  He bashed the ball through the scrimmage,
you know, and then nipped it up right under their noses and ran it
through.  They couldn't collar him, he bowled 'em over right and left,
and danced on 'em, and landed the touch clean behind the post."

"He meant no harm, young gents, didn't my Alf.  He ain't often wiolent,
he ain't.  There's no offence, I hope?" said the father, quite
overwhelmed by this alarming recital.

"No; it was a jolly good run.  You ought to have seen it; I and my lot
were up the oak, you know; we could have tucked you in.  My young
brother Percy and his Modern cads--k-i-d-s (I never can pronounce it)--
were on the steps."

"Oh," said the poor guest, feeling he ought to reciprocate the civility
of his entertainers.  "Steps is nice things to be on when you ain't got
nowheres else."

"Tea!" shouted Fisher minor, who with Ashby had been busily charging the
table.

It was now the turn of the hosts to be shy.  At this late period of the
term funds had run low, and extras were at a premium.  A busy hour had
been spent during the forenoon in both houses collecting outstanding
debts, contracting loans at the point of the sword, and laying out the
contents of the common purse at the shop in delicacies suitable to the
occasion.  Abernethys and ham, of course, figured prominently.  The cake
and jam was rather a "scratch lot," as they mostly consisted of
"outsides" and "pot-ends" collected from various sources and amalgamated
into one stock.  But, to compensate for this, Wally had managed to get
round the matron, and by representing to her the delicate nature of the
entertainment, wheedled her out of a pot of "extra special" tea, and a
small jug of cream.  For the rest, there were the relics of the "Cock-
House" commissariat, a cocoa-nut, generously contributed by Fisher
major, and the usual allowance of bread and butter.

The principal delicacy of the feast, however, was contributed by a fair
lady, and to Percy belonged the honour and glory of its acquisition.

On his way from Hall he had run flop into the arms of Mrs Stratton, who
was carrying in her hands a small basket of hothouse grapes.

"I'm awfully sorry, I say, Mrs Stratton," said the culprit, as the
basket and its contents fell to the ground.  "So am I," said Mrs
Stratton.  "There's two bunches out of three not bashed," said Percy, on
his knees picking up the ruin.  "I say, Mrs Stratton, if you'd let me
pay for the other I can give you twopence a week, beginning next week.
I'd rather, you know."

Mrs Stratton laughed pleasantly.  It was always a satisfaction, she
told her husband, to come into collision with a junior.  He always got
the best of it.

"No, thank you, Wheatfield.  But I tell you what you must do."

"All serene, Mrs Stratton," said Percy submissively, preparing himself
for a hundred lines at least.

"One of the bunches is damaged.  You must take it and get your friends
to help you eat it.  Good-bye."

On the whole, therefore, the spread provided for Mr Rollitt was a
respectable one, and not likely to do discredit to his entertainers.

He was installed in the place of honour in the fender, Wally occupying
the seat in the passage, the others ranging themselves on either side of
the board.  They watched their guest's eye somewhat anxiously, to detect
in it any signs of predilection for any particular dish.  But he, poor
man, was too bewildered by the novel experience he was undergoing to
betray any symptoms of appetite.

"What'll you have?" said Percy, presently.

"Well, if you've got a bit of bread and cheese and a drop of something,
I don't mind, thank you kindly."

This was rather a damper; but Wally was equal to the emergency.

"Have an Abernethy--that's what Rollitt's been living on.  You'll like
it.  We keep a stock in our shop."

"Only a penny each," said Ramshaw, explanatorily.

"Better have some jam with it," said Cottle.

"Like some tea?" inquired D'Arcy, who had charge of the pot, beginning
to fill up a mug the size of the slop-basin with the matron's "extra
special."

"The cake's not so bad--there's several lumps not a bit stale," said
Ashby.

"If you like cocoa-nut," said Fisher minor, "my brother's lent us one,
and I'll cut you a chunk."

"And there's some grapes for you, when you're ready," said Percy,
proudly; "a present from a lady."

The awkward thing was that, in their eagerness to see their guest eat,
none of the juniors took anything.  They continued to pile up the good
man's plate till he didn't know where to begin, and fairly bewildered
him by each commending the excellence of his own particular delicacy
"Thank'ee, young gents.  I ain't much of a eater when I'm away from
home; no more ain't my Alf.  But I'll take a snack, anyhow."

Whereupon, to their delight, he commenced an onslaught on the viands
before him, every morsel he ate being followed by eighteen admiring eyes
into his mouth.  He made short work of the Abernethys and cake, tossed
off the tea as if it were a thimbleful, jerked down the hunk of cocoa-
nut, gulped the grapes, and generally gave the spectators an admirable
and comprehensive performance.

They were charmed.  So much so, that out of sheer pleasure they began to
eat too.  The meal, if brief, was a merry one.  Mr Rollitt took a
special fancy to the Abernethys--a choice which of course put the shop-
directors in an ecstasy.  They only reproached themselves that they had
not provided twelve instead of six.

At length, partly because there was nothing left but lukewarm water and
the toughest crusts of the cake, and partly because the guest's appetite
was beginning to flag, the solid portion of the meal came to an end, and
the social began.

After sundry nudgings and whisperings and signals among the juniors,
Wally filled up his cup with warm water and rose to his feet.

"Ladies and gentlemen," he said, "I--you know--that is--shut up, young
Cash, unless you want to do it--instead of me--it's this way, you see,
you chaps: I sort of think we ought to drink the health of Rollitt's
governor.  He's a good old sort, and we're backing up old Rollitt.  It
wasn't a very grand spread.  There'd have been some sardines if you'd
come last week; but that greedy pig D'Arcy--"

"Go on; it was _you_ finished them, three in two gulps," protested the
outraged D'Arcy.

"Look here, young D'Arcy," said Wally, seriously, "am I making this
speech, or are you.  If you don't shut up, I'll jolly well make you.--We
hope you've liked it, and don't mind our drinking your health, you know.
It'll be jolly when old Rollitt turns up.  We'd ask you again to-
morrow, you know, only the grub's run short.  Therefore, I have much
pleasure in proposing your health."

The toast was drunk with acclamation, the party joining in "For he's a
jolly good fellow," much to the alarm of the occupants of the
neighbouring studies, who flocked out in the passage to see what the
noise was about.

Wally assured them there was no grub left, so they needn't hang about;
but a good many of them remained all the same, to hear Mr Rollitt's
speech.

"Thank'ee kindly, young masters," began he, with his usual formula; "I
ain't no schollard like my Alf is.  He could talk to you straight.  I'm
sorry he ain't here, gents.  He's bound to be somewheres, and I'm sure
it's no offence meant, his going away.  I likes your style, and I hopes
that young fly-by-night who says my Alf's a thief will tell him so to
his face.  My Alf'll settle him proper.  Them as pays for my Alf's
schooling--which it's two kind ladies, masters, as my missus was kinder
foster-sister to--means to make a gent of my Alf.  But, bless you, he'd
sooner be along of me in the building trade.  Not that my Alf ain't a
schollard, and can't behave himself.  He do behave beautiful to his
mother, does Alf, and ain't nothink of a fine gent at home.  So there, I
tell you straight, and no offence meant, young masters.  I like your
style, I do.  Don't you take on about my Alf bein' a-missing.  He's
bound to be somewheres.  I know'd him do it afore, when things went
contrairy.  But he wasn't fur off, and come back.  On'y don't let 'im
cop hold of that there jumper as says he's a thief, or there'll be a row
in the 'ouse.  Why, my Alf's that straight he wouldn't rob a dog of his
bone, not if he was starving.  That's flat.  So here's to you, young
gents; and if you happen to be passing near Crackstoke way, me and my
missus'll be proud to see yer.  Here's luck!"

The speech was rapturously applauded, not only by the party present, but
by the knot of fellows in the passage, who were taking advantage of the
necessarily open door to join in the proceedings as outsiders.

Wally, however, resented the intrusion, and as soon as the speech of the
evening was ended, ordered one of the tables to be cleared, and placing
his chair upon it, made room for the door to be closed on the intruders,
much to their disappointment.

After the favourable reception of his speech, Mr Rollitt became very
much more at home, and produced a pipe from his pocket, which he
proceeded in the most natural way to light.  His hosts gazed in a
somewhat awe-struck way at the proceeding, but Wally gave the right cue.

"That's right, Mr Rollitt; make yourself at home."

"So I are.  You see, in my days, schooling worn't what it is.  Now this
here school must be a topper."

"It's not bad," said Percy.  "You see there was a jolly row on this term
between the Classics and our lot, and they had to be taken down a bit."

"_Did_ they?" retorted Wally, very indignant; "how many pegs did _you_
come down?  Who had to get our chaps to come and give them a leg-up
every other day?"

"Who swindled at Elections and got licked on the hands, eh!"

"Who got their football bagged, and couldn't get it back?"

"Who got kicked out of the front row at the Rendlesham match?"

"'Armony, gents, 'armony," said Mr Rollitt, waving his pipe
encouragingly.

The rebuke was opportune.  It wasn't fair to the guest to squabble
before him.

"We've stashed all that," said Percy, presently; "they got civil to us,
so we got civil to them, and we're all in the shop together.  And we're
all backing up old Rollitt, ain't we, you chaps, and we're going down in
a lump for the clubs; and we all shelled out for this do; so it's all
right now.  See?"

Mr Rollitt thought he did, and nodded amiably.

"You see, it's not much larks unless we're all in it.  We went up Hawk's
Pike, you know."

"No," said Mr Rollitt.  "How did that happen?"

"Well, it was this way, you see," began Percy, taking up, as was his
wont, the narrative at a remote period.  "After those Classic cads--k-i-
d-s, you know, had--(Shut up, Wally, I said k-i-d-s; can't you spell?)
had caved in."

"Who caved in!" expostulated the Classics.

"Well, after Stratton's, you know, when we started the shop--I say,
you'll have to come and see the shop--well--it was before that, though;
it was when the row began about Corder not being stuck in--that was
before that, you know--Brinkman screwed his foot, so there was a man
short for the team, so Clapperton--that's our prefect, you know; he's
all right now, but he--hullo, I say, he's gone asleep!"

Sure enough Mr Rollitt, weary with his long journey, with the
excitement of the day, and with the excellence of the tea, had dozed off
comfortably, on his chair in the fender, with his pipe in his mouth.

Percy felt it unnecessary to pursue his lucid narrative, and the nine
hosts sat watching their man as his head nodded forward, and the urgent
necessity for a snore presently rendered the position of the pipe no
longer tenable.

It was a triumph!  No man could have gone off like that unless he had
felt thoroughly comfortable.  The railway rug was again produced and
laid over his knees, and his feet were gently lifted on the hassock, and
a pillow was neatly inserted at the back of the chair; and all looked so
snug, and the hospitable juniors were so pleased with the result, that
they had the vanity to let the door stand open, so that all who passed
by might see how comfortable they could make a guest when they liked.

To heighten the effect, they decided to do their preparation on the
spot, and so not only impress the sleeper when he awoke, but advertise
themselves to the outside world as boys who by no means neglected the
serious side of school life for its lighter functions.

It must be owned that next day when the work thus accomplished was
subjected to the microscopic test of the master's eyes, it was not any
better--some said it was even worse--than usual.  That had nothing to do
with the present.

Wally, who put his chair out again in the passage, had most of his time
occupied in making pantomimic appeals for silence from passers-by, to
whom he pointed out the figure of the sleeping Mr Rollitt as a
justification.  The others, debarred from speech (for it was considered
that even a whisper might awaken the sleeper, although the violent
process of tucking him up just now had failed to do so), were reduced to
communication with one another in writing, which took up so much time
and paper that very little of either was left for lessons.

At last, after half an hour's suspense, the clang of the house-bell for
call-over broke the spell.  Mr Rollitt grunted and yawned and opened
his eyes, looked about for his pipe, inspected the rug on his knees,
took his feet off the hassock, and finally realised where he was.

"I was nigh 'andy asleep that time," said he, rummaging in his pocket
for a lucifer.

"It's all right; we were doing our prep, you know.  Now we've got to be
called over.  If you stick here, we'll be back in a jiffy, and then
we'll take you to see the shop," said Wally.

"Thank'ee kindly," said the guest; "don't put yourselves about for me.
Take your time, young gents."

"We shan't be long.  I say, wait for us, won't you?  Don't you go out
with any other chaps.  They ain't in it, you know."

"I ain't a-going with nobody, don't you make no mistake," was the
visitor's satisfactory assurance.

They had some thoughts about locking him in, to make sure of him, but
decided to trust his parole, and trooped down impatiently to call-over,
binding one another to assemble at the shop immediately afterwards,
whither Wally and Percy were to conduct their guest.

To the satisfaction of these young gentlemen, the bird was safely in his
cage when they returned, dimly visible through the smoke, looking at the
pictures in the illustrated paper.  He meekly obeyed their summons,
relieving their embarrassment somewhat by putting his pipe away in his
pocket as he rose.

"Where's the rest of the pals?" asked he.

"Down at the shop.  It's not the regular hour, you know.  But we can get
in with the key.  Come along, Mr Rollitt."

The old Watch-Tower, which, as the reader knows, is the oldest remaining
portion of Fellsgarth, was rather an imposing-looking edifice for so
mundane an establishment as the School shop.  The shop, indeed, occupied
only a small apartment on the ground floor, which had previously been
used as a porter's lodge, the remainder of the structure, including the
disused belfry and watch-turret, being abandoned to the owls and ghosts
and ivy, which accorded best with the ancient traditions of the place.

Mr Rollitt, whose profession sharpened his observation for specimens of
bygone achievements in his own line of business, noted the venerable
exterior before him with admiration.

"That there bit of bricks and mortar," said he, "warn't built
yesterday."

