man.  He was, however, treated with the utmost consideration, and when
he proposed to accompany a division of the troops, in order to exercise
to the utmost his personal influence in recovering from his people the
cattle and horses due, and to apprehend the murderers, according to
treaty, he was allowed to do so, not only quite free in person, but even
with his weapons in his hands.

Colonel Smith, however, who commanded the force, distinctly told the
chief through an interpreter, that if he attempted to escape he would
instantly be shot.

The force consisted of detachments of the Cape Mounted Rifles, the 72nd
regiment, and the corps of Guides--350 men in all.

Towards the afternoon of the day on which they marched, a circumstance
occurred which justified Colonel Smith's suspicions as to Hintza's
sincerity.  They had reached a streamlet and encamped, when one of the
guides reported to him that two Kafirs, with five head of cattle, were
near the camp, and that Hintza, on the plea that they would be afraid to
approach, had sent one of his people to bring them in.

On being questioned, the chief declined to give any explanation on the
subject, and the Kafirs not only did not come in, as they were ordered,
but made off, and carried the horse of Hintza's messenger along with
them!  The suspicion excited by this circumstance was increased by the
evasive answers given to the Colonel's repeated inquiries as to the
point on which Hintza wished the troops to march.

"We are going right," was the only answer that could be elicited from
the taciturn savage.

After crossing the range of the Guadan Hills, the troops bivouacked on
the Guanga, and here Hintza became more communicative, said that he
wished them to march towards the mouth of the Bashee, by a route which
he would point out, and that they must move at midnight.  This was done,
and they continued to move forward till eight o'clock in the morning,
observing as they went the spoor of numerous herds of cattle that had
been driven in that direction quite recently.

The men, being tired, were then halted for refreshment.

At this point Hintza became particularly uneasy at the vigilance with
which he was watched.

"What have the cattle done," he said testily, "that you should want
them? and why should my subjects be deprived of them?"

"Why do you ask such questions, Hintza?" replied Colonel Smith; "you
know well the many outrages committed on the colonists by your people,
and the thousands of cattle that have been stolen.  It is in redress of
these wrongs that we demand them."

The chief looked stern, but made no rejoinder.  He appeared to recover
himself, however, after breakfast, and was in high spirits while on the
march.  He rode a remarkably strong horse that day, which he appeared
very anxious to spare from fatigue--dismounting and leading him up every
ascent.

As the party advanced, the tracks of numerous cattle were still found
leading onward, but the animals themselves were nowhere to be seen.

"You see," remarked the chief, with a touch of sarcasm in his tone as he
rode beside the Colonel, "you see how my subjects treat me: they drive
their cattle from me in spite of me."

"I do not want your _subjects'_ cattle, Hintza," was the Colonel's
pointed reply; "I want, and will have, the _colonial_ cattle which they
have stolen."

"Then," returned the chief, "allow me to send forward my councillor
Umtini to tell my people I am here, that they must not drive away their
cattle, and that the cattle of your nation will be alone selected."

Although it was quite evident that the chief meditated mischief it was
thought best to agree to this proposal.  Accordingly, the councillor,
after being enjoined to return that night, which he promised to do,
mounted and left the camp at full speed, accompanied by an attendant.

There was ground for uneasiness and much caution in all this, for those
who knew Hintza best were wont to say that he possessed in a high degree
all the vices of the savage--ingratitude, avarice, cunning, and cruelty,
and his treatment of the traders and missionaries under his protection,
as well as his secret encouragement of the border chiefs, fully bore out
their opinion.

"Now!" exclaimed the chief in high spirits when Umtini had left, "you
need not go on to the Bashee, you will have more cattle than you can
drive on the Xabecca."

The path the troops were passing was a mere cattle-track leading up
hill, from the bed of the Xabecca river, among tangled brushwood, and
occasionally passing through a cleft in the rocks.  Colonel Smith was
the only member of the party who rode up the hill; Hintza and the others
led their homes.  On drawing near to the summit, the chief and his
attendants mounted and rode silently but quickly past the Colonel into
the bushes.

One of the guides observing the action called to the Colonel, who
immediately shouted, "Hintza, stop!"

The savage had no intention of stopping, but, finding himself entangled
in the thicket, was compelled to return to the track.  He did so with
such coolness and with such an ingenuous smile, that the Colonel, who
had drawn a pistol, felt half ashamed of his suspicions, and allowed the
chief to ride forward as before.

At the top of the steep ascent the country was quite open.  The Xabecca
river was seen in front with a few Kafir huts on its banks.  Here the
chief set off at full speed in the direction of the huts.

Colonel Smith and three of the guides pursued.  The latter were quickly
left behind, but the Colonel, being well mounted, kept up with the
fugitive.  Spurring on with violence, he soon overtook him.

"Stop, Hintza!" he shouted.

But Hintza was playing his last card.  He urged his horse to greater
exertion, and kept stabbing at his pursuer with an assagai.

The Colonel drew a pistol, but it snapped.  A second was used with like
ill success.  He then spurred close up, struck the chief with the butt
end of the pistol, and, in so doing, dropped it.  Hintza looked round
with a smile of derision, and the Colonel, hurling the other pistol at
him, struck him on the back of the head.  The blow was ineffectual.
Hintza rode on; the troops followed as they best could.  They were now
nearing the huts.  At length, making a desperate effort, the Colonel
dashed close up to the chief.  Having now no weapon, he seized him by
the collar of his kaross, or cloak, and, with a violent effort, hurled
him to the ground.  Both horses were going at racing speed.  The
Colonel, unable to check his, passed on, but before he was beyond reach
the agile savage had leaped to his feet, drawn another assagai from the
bundle which he carried, and hurled it after his enemy.  So good was the
aim that the weapon passed within a few inches of the Colonel's body.

The act afforded time to those behind to come up.  Although Hintza
turned aside instantly and ran down the steep bank of the Xabecca, the
foremost of the guides--named Southey--got within gun-shot and shouted
in the Kafir tongue to the chief to stop.  No attention being paid to
the order, he fired, and Hintza fell, wounded in the left leg.  Leaping
up in a moment, he resumed his flight, when Southey fired again, and
once more the chief was hit and pitched forward, but rose instantly and
gained the cover of the thicket which lined the bank of the river.
Southey leaped off his horse and gave chase, closely followed by
Lieutenant Balfour of the 72nd regiment.  The former kept up, and the
latter down, the stream.

They had proceeded thus in opposite directions some distance when
Southey was startled by an assagai striking the cliff on which he was
climbing.  Turning sharply, he saw Hintza's head and his uplifted arm
among the bushes within a few feet of him.  The savage was in the act of
hurling another assagai.  Quick as thought the guide levelled his gun
and fired.  The shot completely shattered the upper part of Hintza's
skull, and next instant a mangled corpse was all that remained of the
paramount chief of Kafirland.



CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT.

THE RESULTS OF WAR.

"Peace at last!" said Edwin Brook to George Dally, on arriving at his
ravaged and herdless farm in the Zuurveld, whither George had preceded
him.

"Peace is it, sir?  Ah, that's well.  It's about time too, for we've got
a deal to do--haven't we, sir?"

George spoke quite cheerily, under the impression that his master
required comforting.

"You see, sir, we've got to go back pretty well to where we was in 1820,
and begin it all over again.  It _is_ somewhat aggrawatin'!  Might have
been avoided, too, if they'd kep' a few more troops on the frontier."

"Well, Jack, the treaty is signed at last," said Robert Skyd to his
brother, as he sat on his counter in Grahamstown, drumming with his
heels.

"Not too soon," replied John Skyd, taking a seat on the same convenient
lounge.  "It has cost us something: houses burnt all over the
settlement, from end to end; crops destroyed; cattle carried off, and,
worst of all, trade almost ruined--except in the case of lucky fellows
like you, Bob, who sell to the troops."

"War would not have broken out at all," returned Bob, "if the Kafirs had
only been managed with a touch of ordinary common sense in times past.
Our losses are tremendous.  Just look at the Kafir trade, which last
year I believe amounted to above 40,000 pounds,--_that's_ crushed out
altogether in the meantime, and won't be easily revived.  Kafirs in
hundreds were beginning to discard their dirty karosses, and to buy
blankets, handkerchiefs, flannels, baize, cotton, knives, axes, and what
not, while the traders had set up their stores everywhere in Kafirland--
to say nothing of your own business, Jack, in the gum, ivory, and
shooting way, and our profits thereon.  We were beginning to flourish so
well, too, as a colony.  I believe that we've been absorbing annually
somewhere about 150,000 pounds worth of British manufactured articles--
not to mention other things, and now--Oh, Jack, mankind is a monstrous
idiot!"

"Peace comes too late for us, Gertie," said Hans Marais to his wife, on
their return to the old homestead on the karroo, which presented nothing
but a blackened heap of dry mud, bricks, and charred timbers; herds and
flocks gone--dreary silence in possession--the very picture of
desolation.

"Better late than never," remarked Charlie Considine sadly.  "We must
just set to work, re-stock and re-build.  Not so difficult to do so as
it might have been, however, owing to that considerate uncle of mine.
We're better off than some of our poor neighbours who have nothing to
fall back upon.  They say that more than 3000 persons have been reduced
to destitution; 500 farm-houses have been burnt and pillaged; 900
horses, 55,000 sheep and goats, and above 30,000 head of cattle carried
off, only a few of which were recovered by Colonel Smith on that
expedition when Hintza was killed.  However, we'll keep up heart and go
to work with a will--shan't we, my little wife!"

Bertha--now Bertha Considine--who leaned on Charlie's arm, spoke not
with her lips, but she lifted her bright blue eyes, and with these orbs
of light declared her thorough belief in the wisdom of what ever Charlie
might say or do.

"They say it's all settled!" cried Jerry Goldboy, hastily entering
Kenneth McTavish's stable.

"What's all settled?" demanded Sandy Black.

"Peace with the Kafirs," said Jerry.

"Peace wi' the Kawfirs!" echoed Sandy, in a slightly contemptuous tone.
"H'm! they should never hae had war wi' them, Jerry, my man."

"But 'aving 'ad it, ain't it well that it's hover?" returned Jerry.

"It's cost us a bonnie penny," rejoined Black.

"Nae doot Glen Lynden has come off better than ither places, for we've
managed to haud oor ain no' that ill, but wae's me for the puir folk o'
the low country!  An' I'll be bound the Imperial Treasury'll smart
for't.  [See Note 1.] But it's an ill wind that blaws nae gude.  We've
taken a gude slice o' land frae the thievin' craters, for it's said Sir
Benjamin D'Urban has annexed all the country between the Kei and the
Keiskamma to the colony.  A most needfu' addition, for the jungles o'
the Great Fish River or the Buffalo were jist fortresses where the
Kawfirs played hide-an'-seek wi' the settlers, an' it's as plain as the
nose on my face that peace wi' them is not possible till they're driven
across the Kei--that bein' a defensible boundary."

"So, they say that peace is proclaimed," said Stephen Orpin to a pretty
young woman who had recently put it out of his power to talk of his
"bachelor home at Salem."  Jessie McTavish had taken pity on him at
last!

"Indeed!" replied Jessie, with a half-disappointed look; "then I suppose
you'll be going off again on your long journeys into the interior, and
leaving me to pine here in solitude?"

"That depends," returned Orpin, "on how you treat me!  Perhaps I may
manage to find my work nearer home than I did in days gone by.  At all
events I'll not go into Kafirland just now, for it's likely to remain in
an unsettled state for many a day.  It has been a sad and useless war,
and has cost us a heavy price.  Think, Jessie, of the lives lost--
forty-four of our people murdered during the invasion, and eighty-four
killed and thirty wounded during the war.  People will say that is
nothing to speak of, compared with losses in other wars; but I don't
care for comparisons, I think only of the numbers of our people, and of
the hundreds of wretched Kafirs, who have been cut off in their prime
and sent to meet their Judge.  But there has been one trophy of the war
at which I look with rejoicing; 15,000 Fingoes rescued from slavery is
something to be thankful for.  God can bring good out of evil.  It may
be that He will give me employment in that direction ere long."

These various remarks, good reader, were uttered some months after the
events recorded in the last chapter, for the death of the great chief of
Kafirland did not immediately terminate the war.  On the contrary, the
treaty of peace entered into with Kreli, Hintza's son and successor, was
scouted by the confederate chiefs, Tyali, Macomo, etcetera, who remained
still unsubdued in the annexed territory, and both there, and within the
old frontier, continued to commit murders and wide-spread depredations.

It was not until the Kafirs had been hunted by our troops into the most
impregnable of their woody fortresses, and fairly brought to bay, that
the chiefs sent messengers to solicit peace.  It was granted.  A treaty
of peace was entered into, by which the Kafirs gave up all right to the
country conquered, and consented to hold their lands under tenure from
the British Sovereign.  It was signed at Fort Wilshire in September.

Thereafter Sir Benjamin D'Urban laid down with great wisdom and ability
plans for the occupation and defence of the annexed territory, so as to
form a real obstruction to future raids by the lawless natives--plans
which, if carried out, would no doubt have prevented future wars, and on
_the strength of which_ the farmers began to return to their desolated
farms, and commence re-building and re-stocking with indomitable
resolution.  Others accepted offers of land in the new territory, and a
few of the Dutch farmers, hoping for better times, and still trusting to
British wisdom for protection, were prevailed on to remain in the colony
at a time when many of their kindred were moving off in despair of being
either protected, understood, or fairly represented.

Among these still trusting ones was Conrad Marais.  Strongly urged by
Hans and Considine, he consented to begin life anew in the old home, and
went vigorously to work with his stout sons.

But he had barely begun to get the place into something like order when
a shell was sent into the colony, which created almost as much dismay as
if it had been the precursor of another Kafir invasion.

Conrad was seated in a friend's house in Somerset when the said shell
exploded.  It came in the form of a newspaper paragraph.  He looked
surprised on reading the first line or two; then a dark frown settled on
his face, which, as he read on, became pale, while his compressed lips
twitched with suppressed passion.

Finishing the paragraph, he crushed the newspaper up in his hand, and,
thrusting it into his pocket, hastened to the stable, where he saddled
his horse.  Leaping on its back as if he had been a youth of twenty, he
drove the spur into its flanks and galloped away at full speed--away
over the dusty road leading from Somerset to the hills: away over the
ridge that separates it from the level country beyond; and away over the
brown karroo, until at last, covered with dust and flecked with foam, he
drew up at his own door and burst in upon the family.  They were
concluding their evening meal.

"Read that!" he cried, flinging down the paper, throwing himself into a
chair, and bringing his fist down on the table with a crash that set
cups and glasses dancing.

"There!" he added, pointing to the paragraph, as Hans took up the
paper--"that despatch from Lord Glenelg--the British Colonial
Secretary--at the top of the column.  Read it aloud, boy."

Hans read as follows:--

"`In the conduct which was pursued towards the Kafir nation by the
colonists and the public authorities of the colony, through a long
series of years, the Kafirs had ample justification of the late war;
they had to resent, and endeavour justly, though impotently, to avenge a
series of encroachments; they had a perfect right to hazard the
experiment, however hopeless, of extorting by force that redress which
they could not expect otherwise to obtain, and the claim of sovereignty
over the new province must be renounced.  It rests upon a conquest
resulting from a war in which, as far as I am at present enabled to
judge, the original justice is on the side of the conquered, not of the
victorious party.'"

"Mark that!" cried Conrad, starting to his feet when Hans had finished,
and speaking loud, as if he were addressing the assembled colony instead
of the amazed members of his own family,--"mark that: `_the claim of
sovereignty over the new province must be renounced_.'  So it seems that
