
Why should he express such surprise, I wondered, at my doing just what
he was doing?

"What brings you here at this hour?" he demanded, dropping for a moment
the coaxing tone with which I had become so familiar the last day or
two.

"What brings you here, for the matter of that?"  I retorted.

If he thought I was going to clear out to please him, he was mistaken.

"Don't address me like that," he replied, with as great a tone of
authority as he could assume.  "I have a right to be here.  You have
none."

"Until I am told so by some one better than yourself I sha'n't believe
it," I replied.

I was losing my temper fast.  Masham's letter burned in my pocket, and
the sight of this fellow giving himself airs to me was as much as I
could stand.

Fortunately for us both, however, he did not prolong the discussion, but
went to his desk.

It was evident, despite his assumed displeasure, he was very much put
out about something.  That something, I could not help thinking, must be
my presence.  He fidgeted about uneasily, looking now at the clock, now
at me, now opening his desk, now shutting it, now scribbling on the
paper before him, now tearing it up.

All this I saw as I tried to proceed steadily with my work.  At last he
brought me an envelope he had just addressed, and said in a rather more
persuasive manner than he had yet assumed--

"Batchelor, would you kindly take this note round to Hodge and
Company's?  It is very important; they should have had it yesterday."

"Hodge's are never open till ten," I said.

"Oh yes, indeed they are.  At least they expect this letter by nine
o'clock.  It's a bill of lading for their goods."

"If that's so," replied I, "the mail went out yesterday--you know that--
and there's not another till Monday."

"Oh, but there's a letter with it that has to be attended to
immediately."

"It's not been copied," said I, who had charge of the letter-book, and
was responsible for copying everything that went out.

"I've kept a copy.  I'll see to that.  It's only to ask them to call
round," he said, with evident confusion.

I did not believe a word he said.  And more than that, I strongly
suspected all this was a device to get me out of the office--and that
was what I had no intention of submitting to.

"If it's to ask them to call round," I said, "it will do when the
commissionaire comes at half-past nine."

"But I tell you it must be there at _nine_," he exclaimed.

"Then," said I, "you had better take it yourself."

I had ceased to be afraid of Hawkesbury, or the look with which he
returned to his desk might have made me uneasy.

I could see that as the time went on he became still more uneasy.

Once more he came to me.

"Will you go with the letter?" he demanded angrily.

"No, I won't go with the letter," I replied, in decided tones.

"You'll be sorry for it, Batchelor," he said, in a significant way.

"Shall I?"

"You would not like my uncle and Mr Barnacle to be told of your early
visits here without leave."

"They are quite welcome to know it."

"And of my catching you and Smith going into their private room."

"Where we found _you_," I replied, laughing, "busy at nobody knows
what?"

He looked at me hard as I drew this bow at a venture, and then said,
"You must know, Batchelor, that I have a right to sit in that room when
I choose.  And," he added, dropping his voice to a whisper and looking
at me in a most significant way--"and if the door happens to be open,
and if you and Smith happen to talk secrets, there's every chance of
their being overheard!"

This was his trump card!  If anything was to settle the question of my
obeying him and taking Hodge and Company's letter, this was to do it.

"Then you did hear what was said?"  I asked.

"Yes, I did," he said.

"And you mean to say--"

"I mean to say," said he, with a glance up at the clock, "that you had
better take this letter at once, Batchelor."

"And if I don't?"

"If you don't, your friend Smith shall smart for it."

Before I could make up my mind what to do--whether to feign alarm and
take the letter, leaving him to suppose he still had the whip-hand over
us, or whether to undeceive him at once, and defy him point-blank--
before I could reply at all, the door suddenly opened, and Masham
entered.

If anything was still wanted to decide me, this sufficed.  I felt
certain now that there was mischief on foot somewhere, and the
appearance of this bird of ill-omen was sufficient to account for
Hawkesbury's eagerness to get me out of the way.

What could have brought these two to arrange a meeting here, at the
office, and at an hour when in the ordinary course of things no one else
would be present?

I determined to stay where I was at all risks.

Masham on seeing me started, and looked inquiringly at Hawkesbury.

"What's he doing here?" he said.  The very sound of his voice made my
blood boil.

"He is going to take a letter to the Borough for me," said Hawkesbury,
bestowing a meaning glance on me.

"I'm not going to take it," said I.

"What?" exclaimed Hawkesbury, in sudden fury.

"I'm not going to take it.  I'm going to stay where I am."

"You know the consequences?" he muttered between his teeth.

"Yes."

"You know what it means for your friend Smith?"

"Yes."

He looked perplexed, as well he might.  That I should defy him in the
face of his threat against Jack Smith was the last thing he had
expected, "Batchelor," said he, altering his tone suddenly to one of
entreaty, "I have very important business to arrange with Masham.  Would
you mind leaving us for half an hour?  I would not ask you, only I shall
get into awful trouble if I can't talk to him alone for a little."

It passed my comprehension how, after threatening me with Jack's ruin,
he should now turn round with such an appeal.  And he put on such a
beseeching manner that in the midst of my wrath I half pitied him.
However, I was not to be moved.  "If you want to see him so privately as
all that," said I, "take him up to the sample-room.  No one will disturb
you there."

He gave me one look of hatred and menace, and then said to Masham, "We
must fix another time, Masham; we can't go into the matter now."

"Eh?" said Masham, who had hitherto stood by in silence.  "What do you
say?  If we can't do it now, we won't do it at all, my boy."

Hawkesbury went up to him and whispered something.

"Oh, we'll soon settle that!" said the other, laughing.  "He won't go,
won't he!  We'll help him, that's all?  Whereabouts is the coal-hole?"

So saying he made a grab at my arm, and before I could resist Hawkesbury
had secured the other.

I struggled all I could, but unavailingly.  Between them I was dragged
up stairs to the sample-room, into which I were ignominiously thrust,
and the door locked behind me.  At first my rage and indignation were
too great to allow me to think of anything but kicking at the door and
shouting to my captors to release me.  But this I soon discovered was
fruitless, and in due time I gave it up, and resolved to wait my time
and make the best of my lot.

That some mischief was afoot I now felt certain, and whatever it was, I
felt equally sure it was being enacted during my imprisonment.  Yet what
could I do?  I could only listen to the sound of voices below and
speculate as to what was going on.  Suddenly, however, it flashed across
me that the room in which I was was not over the office, but over the
partners' room, and that therefore the sounds I heard must proceed from
thence.

What could they be up to?  I heard a door open and shut, and a noise of
what might have been keys, followed by a heavy slamming-to of something
which, for the thud it gave, might have been the iron safe itself.

I felt very uncomfortable, but I was forced to remain chafing where I
was for nearly half an hour, when the lock of my prison turned and the
two entered the room.  They both seized me as before.

"Now you can come down," said Masham.

"Not till he promises to say nothing about this," said Hawkesbury.

"He knows what to expect if he doesn't!" said Masham.

"After all," said Hawkesbury, "we didn't mean to hurt you; Masham and I
only wanted to settle some horse-racing and other scores, and as the
papers were all in my desk, we were bound to use the office, and of
course I couldn't ask him round any other time.  If you'd been half a
gentleman, Batchelor, you would have left us at once."

"I don't believe you," I replied.  "What did you want in the partners'
room, I should like to know, eh?"

"What!" exclaimed Hawkesbury, in a rage.  "We were never there, were we,
Masham?"

"Never knew there was a partners' room," said Masham, "and if there had
been, what if we had been in it?"

"We were in the counting-house all the time," said Hawkesbury.  Then he
added, "But come down now, and take my advice, Batchelor, and don't ruin
yourself."

"Ruin myself!" cried I, with a scornful laugh; "I don't see how letting
the partners know your goings on would ruin me."

"You'll see!" was the reply.

He doubtless considered the threat enough, but, knowing as I did that
Jack had told the partners everything Hawkesbury could possibly tell, I
could afford to treat it with contempt.

Masham took his departure, and I returned with Hawkesbury to the
counting-house, where we were soon joined by our fellow-clerks.

I was very uncomfortable, and hardly knew how to act.  That it was my
duty to tell the partners what had happened I had no doubt; but how much
to tell them, and when, I could not make up my mind.  I determined to
take Doubleday into my confidence, and get the advantage of his good
advice and clear head.

But it was easier said than done.  Almost as soon as he came in
Doubleday had to go down to the docks, and the opportunity of consulting
him was thus delayed.  Every moment that passed I felt more and more
uneasy.  Mr Barnacle had already arrived, and Mr Merrett was due in a
few minutes.  What right had I to delay even for a moment a matter which
affected the credit of the whole house?

Yet suppose, after all, I had found a mare's-nest!  Suppose Hawkesbury's
explanation of what had occurred should by any chance have been
correct--suppose the sounds I heard during my confinement had not been
caused by those two at all, but by the housekeeper sweeping out the room
and putting it in order?  If that was so, what a fool I should make of
myself!

No; I resolved, for all the difference it would make, I would wait till
I could consult Doubleday.

Hawkesbury was very busy that morning; he was constantly fidgeting in
and out of his little box, giving vague directions to one clerk and
another, and keeping a special eye on me and all I did.

When Mr Merrett arrived he went as usual to say good-morning to his
uncle, and as usual followed him into the partners' room, to receive
such letters as might require answering.

I wished Doubleday had not been called down to the docks this morning of
all others.  He would have told me in a moment what I ought to do, or,
which came to the same thing, what he would have done in my place.
Anything would be better than this suspense.  I was tempted even then to
break in upon the partners and tell them what had happened, and what my
suspicions were.  But I could not do it while Hawkesbury was there.
When he came out--

By the way, what an unconscionable lot of letters there must be to keep
him in there all this time!  He was usually there about five minutes,
but this morning he had been half an hour at the very least.

The thought suddenly occurred to me, could he be telling the partners
about Jack Smith's antecedents?  In the midst of all my uneasiness I
almost smiled to think how sold he would be when he discovered they had
heard it all already!

Ah! here he was at last.

No.  It was Mr Merrett who appeared at the door with an extremely long
face; and looking round the office, fixed his eyes on me, and said,
"Batchelor--come in here!"

I obeyed.

Instead of going in as usual before me, he waited till I had entered,
and then followed me, closing the door behind him.

What on earth does it all mean?

Mr Barnacle sat looking straight before him through his spectacles.
Hawkesbury also sat at the table, twisting a quill pen backwards and
forwards with his fingers.

"Hawkesbury," said Mr Merrett, as he re-entered, "you might leave us,
please.  I will call you when you are wanted."

Hawkesbury, without looking at me, rose to obey.  As he reached the
door, Mr Merrett stepped after him, and whispered something.  At
ordinary times I should not have heard what he whispered, or thought of
listening for it.  But there was such a silence in the room, and my
nerves were strung up to such a pitch, that I distinctly caught the
words.

What I heard was this--

"Fetch a policeman!"



CHAPTER THIRTY SEVEN.

HOW HAWKESBURY AND I SPENT A MORNING IN THE PARTNERS' ROOM.

"Fetch a policeman!"  The truth flashed across me as I heard the words.
Instead of standing here an accuser, I stood the accused.  Hawkesbury
had been before me with a vengeance!

The very shock of the discovery called back the presence of mind, which,
on my first summons, I had almost lost.  I was determined at least that
nothing I should do or say would lend colour to the false charge against
me.

"Batchelor," said Mr Merrett, after Hawkesbury had gone and the door
was locked--"Batchelor, we have sent for you here under very painful
circumstances.  You doubtless know why."

"I must ask you to tell me, sir," I replied, respectfully, but with a
tremble in my voice which I would have given anything to conceal.

"I will tell you," said Mr Merrett, "when you have first told Mr
Barnacle and me what you have been doing since eight o'clock this
morning."

"And let me advise you," said Mr Barnacle, looking up, "to tell the
truth."

"I certainly will tell the truth," I began.

What possessed that unlucky voice of mine to quaver in the way it did?
Those few words, I was convinced, would tell more against me than the
most circumstantial narrative.  I clutched hold of the back of a chair
near me, and made a desperate effort to steady myself as I proceeded.  I
gave an exact account of everything that had happened since I entered
the office that morning, omitting nothing, glossing over nothing,
shirking nothing.  They both listened attentively, eyeing me keenly all
the time, and betraying no sign in their faces whether they believed me
or not.

"Then you mean to say," said Mr Merrett, when it was done, "that you
were not in this room at all?"

"Yes, I never entered it."

"Were you ever in this room without our knowledge?"

"Yes, a fortnight ago.  Smith and I were here early, and hearing a noise
inside, we opened the door and came in to see what it was."

"What did you find?"

"Hawkesbury, working at the table where Mr Barnacle is now sitting."

"What occurred?"

I related precisely what had occurred, repeating as nearly as I could
the very words that had been used.

There was a silence, and then Mr Merrett, in his most solemn tones,
said, "Now, Batchelor, answer this question.  You say you were here
before any one else arrived this morning?"

"Yes, sir.  I had been here about five minutes before Hawkesbury came."

"What were you doing during that time?"

"I was working at my desk."

"You are quite sure?"

"Perfectly," said I, my cheeks burning and my heart swelling within me
to be thus spoken to by those whom, with all my faults, I had never once
so much as dreamt of deceiving.

"You did not enter this room?"

"No."

Mr Merrett touched his bell, and Hawkesbury appeared.  I scarcely
wondered he should try to avoid my eye as he stood at the table waiting.

"Hawkesbury, repeat once more, in Batchelor's hearing, what you have
already told us."

He kept his head down and his face averted from me as he said, "I
arrived here at a quarter to nine this morning, and noticed the door of
this room open, and when I came to see who was there I saw Batchelor in
the act of shutting the safe.  He did not notice me at first, not until
he was coming out of the room.  I asked him what he was doing here.  He
seemed very much disconcerted, and said he had been looking for some
papers he had left on Mr Barnacle's table the day before.  I asked him
what he had been doing with the safe, and where he had got the key to
open it.  He got into a great state, and begged me to say nothing about
it.  I said I was bound to tell you what I had seen.  Then he flew into
a rage, and told me he'd serve me out.  I told him that wouldn't prevent
me doing what was right.  Then he left the office, and didn't come back
till a quarter to ten."

All this Hawkesbury repeated glibly and hurriedly in a low voice.  To
me, who stood by and heard it, it was a cowardly lie from beginning to
end.  But to my employers, I felt, it must sound both businesslike and
straightforward; quite as straightforward, I feared, as my own equally
exact but tremblingly-spoken story.

"You hear what Hawkesbury says?" said Mr Merrett, turning to me.

I roused myself with an effort, and answered quietly, "Yes, sir."

"What have you to say to it?"

"That it is false from beginning to end."

"You deny, in fact, ever having been at this safe, or in this room?"

"Most certainly."

They all looked grave, and Mr Merrett said, solemnly, "I am sorry to
hear you deny it, Batchelor.  If you had made a full confession we
should have been disposed to deal more leniently with you."

"I never did it--it's all false!"  I cried, suddenly losing all self-
control.  "You know it's false; it's a plot to ruin me and Jack."

"Silence, sir!" said Mr Merrett, sternly.

"I won't be silent," I shouted; "I never deceived you, and yet you go
and believe what this miserable--"

Mr Merrett touched his bell angrily; but before any one answered it Mr
Barnacle had looked up.

The junior partner had been silent all this time, an attentive but
impassive listener to all that had passed.  Once or twice during
Hawkesbury's story he had darted a quick glance at the speaker, and once
or twice during my indignant protest his brows had knit, as it seemed,
in anger.  Mr Barnacle had always had the reputation of being the
sterner of the two partners, and now, as he abruptly joined in the
conversation, I felt as if it boded very little good for me.

"One moment," said he to Mr Merrett; "there are a few more questions we
should ask, I think.  Batchelor, you are doing yourself no good by this
noise," he added, turning to me.

He was right, and I saw it.  I quieted down with an effort, and wondered
what was coming next.

Wallop appeared at the door in answer to the bell, and was told he was
not wanted.  Then Mr Barnacle turned to Hawkesbury and asked, "What
brought you here so early as a quarter to nine, Hawkesbury?"

This question surprised Hawkesbury as much as it delighted me.  I hardly
expected to have a cross-examination in my favour conducted by Mr
Barnacle.

"I came to do some work," said Hawkesbury.

"What work?"

"I had several things to catch up."

"What?  Invoices, or letters, or accounts, or what?"

"I had the petty-cash to balance."

"That is supposed to be done every day, is it not?"

"Yes; but I had got rather behind."

"How many days behind?" said Mr Barnacle.

"Really I can't quite say," said Hawkesbury, who did not seem used to
being driven into a corner.  "My journey North threw me out of it."

"Then you have not balanced the petty-cash since before you went North,
nearly three weeks ago?  Am I to understand that?"

"Yes," said Hawkesbury.

"Is this the first morning you have come here early?"

"No.  I have been once or twice."

"This is the only time you found Batchelor here?"

"No; about a fortnight ago he was here with Smith.  I found them both in
this room."

"What were they doing?"

"They were writing something at the table.  They were in a great rage
with me when I came in."

"Was the safe open at the time?"

Hawkesbury had got past the stage of sticking at trifles.

"Yes," he said; "when I came in it was.  But they made a rush and turned
me out of the room and locked the door.  And then when I came in again
it was shut."

"And did you mention this to anybody?"

"No."

"And why, pray?"

Hawkesbury was taken aback by the sudden question.  It was evident he
could not make his story square at all four corners.

"I--I--hoped I might be mistaken," said he, uncomfortably.  "In fact, I
meant to mention the affair, but--but I forgot."

"Oh," said Mr Barnacle, in a way that made the witness writhe.

"I hope you don't doubt my word," said Hawkesbury, attempting to assume
a lofty air of virtuous indignation.

Mr Barnacle vouchsafed no reply.

"What we desire," said Mr Merrett, "is to come at the truth of the
matter, and I can only say that it would be much better if the culprit
were to make a full confession here now."

He looked hard at me as he spoke, and I did my best to stand the look as
an innocent man should.

"A cheque for eight pounds has been missed," continued Mr Merrett,
"which was only drawn yesterday, and left in the safe.  I ask you,
Batchelor, do you know anything of it?"

"No, sir," I replied.

"Do you?" said Mr Barnacle to Hawkesbury.

Hawkesbury flushed as he replied, "I never expected to be asked such a
question, Mr Barnacle.  I know nothing about it."

Mr Merrett evidently disliked his partner's persistency in putting to
Hawkesbury the same questions as had been put to me, but he could hardly
complain.  He turned to his nephew and said, "Did you fetch a policeman,
Hawkesbury?"

"No; I was just going when you called me in here."

Mr Merrett touched his bell, and Crow appeared.

"Is Doubleday in?" asked the senior partner.

"No, sir."

"As soon as he comes in, tell him he is wanted."

Crow took an eyeful of us as we stood there, evidently dying of
curiosity to know what it all meant, and then retired.
