As time went on, he, of course, obtained help, sympathy, and counsel
from the men and women whom he had been training for God around him; but
he seems to have been loath formally to hand over the helm, either
wholly or in part, to any one else as long as he had strength to steer
the ship.

We have said that England was too much engaged with her European wars to
give much thought to this gem in her crown, which was thus gradually
being polished to such a dazzling brightness.  She knew it was but a
little gem, if gem at all, and at such a distance did not see its
brilliant sheen.  Amid the smoke and turmoil of war she forgot it; yet
the God of Battles and the Prince of Peace were winning a grand, moral,
bloodless victory in that lonely little island.

It was not till the year 1814, six years after the visit of the _Topaz_,
that the solitude of Pitcairn was again broken in upon by visitors from
the outside world.

In that year two frigates, H.M.S. _Britain_ and _Tagus_, commanded
respectively by Captain Sir F. Staines and Captain Pipon, came
unexpectedly on Pitcairn Island while in pursuit of an American ship,
the _Essex_, which had been doing mischief among the British whalers.

It was evening when the ships sighted Pitcairn, and were observed by one
of the almost innumerable youngsters with which the island had by that
time been peopled.  With blazing eyes and labouring breath, the boy
rushed down the cliffs, bounded over the level ground, and burst into
the village, shouting, "Ships!"

No warwhoop of Red Indians ever created greater excitement.  Pitcairn
swarmed at once to the cliffs with flushed faces, glittering eyes, and
hopeful looks.  Yes, there they were, and no mistake,--two ships!

"They're men-o'-war, father," said Thursday October Christian, a little
anxiously.

"So I see, lad; but I won't hide _this_ time.  I don't believe they'd
think it worth while hangin' me now.  Anyhow, I'll risk it."

Many of the people spent the whole of that night on the cliffs, for, as
it was too late to attempt a landing, Captain Staines did not venture to
approach till the following morning.

Soon after daybreak the ships were seen to stand inshore, and a canoe
was launched through the surf to meet them.  As on the occasion of the
visit of the _Topaz_, Thursday was deputed to represent the islanders.
He was accompanied by Edward Young, now a handsome youth of eighteen
years of age.  As on the previous boarding of a ship, Toc amazed the
sailors by shouting in English to "throw him a rope."  Being now
possessed of a wardrobe, he had in his heart resolved to appear in a
costume worthy of the great occasion.  For this end he had put on a vest
without sleeves, trousers that had done duty in the _Topaz_, and were
much too short, and a beaver hat which he had jauntily ornamented with
cock-tail feathers, and wore very much on the back of his head.

Thursday met the eager inquiries of Sir F. Staines with his usual
good-humoured off-hand urbanity, and gave his name in full; but a sudden
change came over his face while he spoke--a look of amazement, mingled
with alarm.

"Look! look there, Ned," he said, in a low tone, laying his hand on his
comrade's shoulder and pointing towards a certain part of the ship.
"What is that?"

Ned looked with an expression of awe in the direction indicated.

"What is it that puzzles you?" asked the Captain, not a little amused by
their looks.

"The beast! the beast!" said Toc.

"What, d'you mean the cow?"

"Is it a cow?" asked Toc in wonder.

"Of course it is.  Did you never see a cow before?"

"No, never.  I thought it was a big goat, or a horned sow," returned the
young man, as he approached the quiet animal cautiously.  "I say, Ned,
it's a _cow_!  It don't look much like the things that father Adams used
to draw, do it?"

Ned agreed that Adams's representation fell far short of the original,
and for some time they stood cautiously examining the strange creature,
and gently touching its sides.

Just then a little black terrier came bounding forward and frisked round
the Captain.

"Ha!" exclaimed Edward Young, with an intelligent look, "I know that
beast, Toc; it's a dog!  I'm sure it is, for I have read of such things
in Carteret, and father has described 'em often, so have the women.
They have dogs, you know, on some islands."

But the surprise and interest raised in them by two animals were nothing
to what they felt on being conducted over the ship and shown all the
details of stores and armament in a man-of-war.  The surprise changed
sides, however, when, on being asked to partake of luncheon, these men
stood up, clasped their hands, shut their eyes, and asked a blessing
before commencing to eat, in the familiar phrase, "For what we are about
to receive," etcetera.

Of course Captains Staines and Pipon went on shore, where they were
received by Adams, hat in hand, and by the rest of the population down
to the minutest infant, for no one would consent to miss the sight, and
there was no sick person to be looked after.  Up at the village the pigs
and poultry had it all their own way, and made the most of their
opportunity.

It was curious to mark the air of respect with which Adams regarded the
naval uniform which had once been so familiar.  As he stood conversing
with the officers, he occasionally, in sailor-like fashion, smoothed
down his scanty locks, for although little more than fifty at that time,
care, sorrow, and anxiety had given his countenance an aged and worn
look, though his frame was still robust and healthy.

In the course of the interview, Captain Pipon offered to give him a
passage to England, with any of his family who chose to accompany him.
To his surprise Adams at once expressed a desire to go.

We know not whether this was a piece of pleasantry on Adams's part, but
when he sent for his old wife and daughters to tell them of it, the
scene of distress that ensued baffles description.  The old woman was in
despair.  Dinah Adams burst into tears, and entreated the officers not
to take her dear father away.  Her sister Rachel flung her arms round
her father's neck and held on.  Hannah Adams clasped her hands and wept
in silent despair, and even George, at that time about ten years of age,
and not at all given to the melting mood, felt a tear of sympathy
trickling down his nose.  Of course, when the cause of the ebullition
became known, the whole Pitcairn colony was dissolved in tears or
lamentations, insomuch that Adams gave up all idea of leaving them.  We
firmly believe that he never had any intention of doing so, but had
merely thrown out the hint to see what effect it would have.

Like Captain Folger of the _Topaz_, the captains of the _Britain_ and
_Tagus_ wrote eloquent and enthusiastic letters to the Admiralty about
their discovery, but the dogs of war were still loose in Europe.  Their
Lordships at Whitehall had no time to devote to such matters, and once
again the lonely island was forgotten.

It is a curious coincidence that death came close on the heels of this
visit, as it had come on that of the _Topaz_.  Scarcely had the two
frigates left when Matthew Quintal took a fit while out fishing in his
canoe and was drowned.  About the same time Jack Mills was killed by
falling from the rocks when out after gulls' eggs.  Thus poor Bessy
Quintal lost her husband and brother in the same year, but she was not
without comfort.  She had been early taught to carry her cares to Jesus,
and found Him now a very present help.  Besides, she had now two little
sons, John and Matthew, who were old enough to fondle her and sympathise
with her to some extent, though they scarce understood her sorrow; and
her fast friend and comforter, Sally Christian, did not fail her in the
hour of need.  Indeed, that warm-hearted Otaheitan would have taken poor
Bessy into her house to live with her and Charlie, but for the
difficulty that six riotous little creatures of her own, named Fletcher,
Edward, Charles, Isaac, Sarah, and Maria, already filled it to
overflowing.

A little more than six years after this, there came a visitant of a rare
and heart-gladdening kind, namely, a parcel of _books_.  Although the
Government of England was too busy to think of the far-off isle, there
were Englishmen who did not forget her.  The _Society for Promoting
Christian Knowledge_, happening, in 1819, to hear of an opportunity of
communicating with Pitcairn, made up and despatched to it a parcel of
books, containing, besides Bibles and Prayer-books, "works of
instruction fitted for all ages."  Who can imagine the delight produced
by this gift to minds which had been well educated and were thirsting
for more knowledge?  It must have been as food to the starving; as water
to the dry ground.

Four years after that, a whale-ship from London, named the _Cyrus_,
touched in passing.

As this visit was a noteworthy epoch in the lonely island, we shall
devote a new chapter to it.



CHAPTER THIRTY THREE.

NEW ARRIVALS AND STRANGE ADVENTURES.

"My dear," said Adams one morning to his spouse, as he was about to go
forth to superintend the working of his busy hive, "I'm beginnin' to
feel as if I was gettin' old, and would soon have to lay up like an old
hulk."

"You've done good service for the Master, John; perhaps He thinks you
should rest now," answered his wife.  "You've got plenty able helpers to
take the heavy work off your hands."

"True, old woman, able, willin', and good helpers, thank God, but they
want a headpiece still.  However, there's a deal of life in the old dog
yet.  If that dear angel, Otaheitan Sally, were only a man, now, I could
resign the command of the ship without a thought.  But I've committed
the matter to the Lord.  He will provide in His own good time.
Good-day, old girl.  If any one wants me, you know where to send 'em."

Not many days after that in which these remarks were made a sail was
seen on the horizon.  So few and far between had these visitants been
that the excitement of the people was as wild as when the first ship
appeared, and much more noisy, seeing that the juveniles had now become
so very numerous.

The ship soon drew near.  Canoes were sent off to board her.  Thursday
October, as of old, introduced himself, and soon the captain and several
men were brought on shore, to the intense joy of the inhabitants.

One of the sailors who landed attracted Adams's attention in a special
manner, not so much because of his appearance, which was nothing
uncommon, as because of a certain grave, kindly, serious air which
distinguished him.  This man's name was John Buffett.  Another of the
men, named John Evans, less serious in manner, but not less hearty and
open, made himself very agreeable to the women, especially to old Mrs
Adams, to whom he told a number of nautical anecdotes in an undertone
while the captain was chatting with Adams himself.  Buffett spoke
little.

After spending an agreeable day on shore, the sailors walked down to the
beach towards evening to return to their ship.

"You lead a happy life here, Mr Adams," said Buffett, in an earnest
tone.  "Would you object to a stranger staying among you!"

"Object!" said Adams, with a quick, pleasant glance.  "I only wish the
Lord would send us one; one at least who is a follower of Himself."

John Buffett said no more, but that same evening he expressed to his
captain so strong a desire to remain behind that he obtained leave, and
next day was sent on shore.

The sailor named John Evans accompanied him to see him all right and
bring off the latest news; but Evans himself had become so delighted
with the appearance of the place and people, that he deserted into the
mountains, and the ship had to sail without him.

Thus were two new names added to the muster-roll of Pitcairn.

John Buffett in particular turned out to be an invaluable acquisition.
He was a man of earnest piety, and had obtained a fairly good education.
Adams and he drew together at once.

"You'll not object, p'r'aps," said the former on the occasion of their
first talk over future plans, "to give me a lift wi' the school?"

"Nothing would please me better," answered Buffett.  "I'm rather fond o'
teachin', to say truth, and am ready to begin work at once."

Not only did Buffett thereafter become to Adams as a right arm in the
school, but he assisted in the church services on Sundays, and
eventually came to read sermons, which, for the fixing of them more
effectually on the minds of the people, he was wont to deliver three
times over.

But Buffett could tell stories as well as read sermons.  One afternoon
some of the youngsters caught him meditating under a cocoa-nut tree, and
insisted on his telling the story of his life.

"It ain't a long story, boys an' girls," said he, "for I've only lived
some six-and-twenty years yet.  I was born in 1797, near Bristol, and
was apprenticed to a cabinet-maker.  Not takin' kindly to that sort o'
work, I gave it up an' went to sea.  However, I'm bound to say, that the
experience I had with the saw and plane has been of the greatest service
to me ever since; and it's my opinion, that what ever a man is, or
whoever he may be, he should learn a trade; ay, even though he should be
a king."

The Pitcairn juveniles did not see the full force of this remark, but
nevertheless they believed it heartily.

"It was the American merchant service I entered," continued Buffett,
"an' my first voyage was to the Gulf of Saint Lawrence.  I was wrecked
there, and most o' the crew perished; but I swam ashore and was saved,
through God's mercy.  Mark that, child'n.  It wasn't by good luck, or
good swimmin', or chance, or fate, or anything else in the shape of a
second cause, but it was the good God himself that saved, or rather
spared me.  Now, I say that because there's plenty of people who don't
like to give their Maker credit for anything, 'cept when they do it in a
humdrum, matter-of-course way at church."

These last remarks were quite thrown away upon the children, whose
training from birth had been to acknowledge the goodness of God in
everything, and who could not, of course, comprehend the allusions to
formalism.

"Well," he continued, "after suffering a good deal, I was picked up by
some Canadian fishermen, and again went to sea, to be once again wrecked
and saved.  That was in the year 1821.  Then I went to England, and
entered on board a ship bound for China, from which we proceeded to
Manilla, and afterwards to California, where I stayed some time.  Then I
entered an English whaler homeward bound, intendin' to go home, and the
Lord _did_ bring me home, for he brought me here, and here I mean to
stay."

"And we're all _so_ glad!" exclaimed Dolly Young, who had now become an
enthusiastic, warm-hearted, pretty young woman of twenty-three summers.

Dolly blushed as she spoke, but not with consciousness.  It was but
innocent truthfulness.  John Buffett paused, and looked at her steadily.
What John Buffett thought we are not prepared to say, but it may be
guessed, when we state that within two months of that date, he and Dolly
Young were united in marriage by old Adams, with all the usual
ceremonial, including the curtain-ring which did duty on all such
occasions, and the unfailing game of blind-man's-buff.

John Evans was encouraged, a few months later, to take heart and do
likewise.  He was even bolder than Buffett, for he wooed and won a
princess; at least, if John Adams was in any sense a king, his second
daughter Rachel must have been a princess!  Be this as it may, Evans
married her, and became a respected member of the little community.

And now another of these angel-like visits was looming in the distance.
About twelve years after the departure of the _Britain_ and _Tagus_, one
of H.M. cruisers, the _Blossom_, Captain Beechy, sailed out of the Great
Unknown into the circlet of Pitcairn, and threw the islanders into a
more intense flutter than ever, for there were now upwards of fifty
souls there, many of whom had not only never seen a man-of-war, but had
had their imaginations excited by the glowing descriptions of those who
had.  This was in 1825.

The _Blossom_ had been fitted out for discovery.  When Buffett first
recognised her pennant he was in great trepidation lest they had come to
carry off Adams, but such was not the case.  It was merely a passing
visit.  Three weeks the _Blossom_ stayed, during which the captain and
officers were entertained in turn at the different houses; and it seems
to have been to both parties like a brief foretaste of the land of
Beulah.

Naturally, Captain Beechy was anxious to test the truth of the glowing
testimony of former visitors.  He had ample opportunity, and afterwards
sent home letters quite as enthusiastic as those of his predecessors in
regard to the simplicity, truthfulness, and genuine piety alike of old
and young.

If a few hours' visit had on former occasions given the community food
for talk and reflection, you may be sure that the three weeks' of the
_Blossom's_ sojourn gave them a large supply for future years.  It
seemed to Otaheitan Sally, and Dinah Adams, and Dolly and Polly Young,
and the rest of them, that the island was not large enough now to
contain all their new ideas, and they said so to John Adams one evening.

"My dears," said John, in reply, laying his hand on that of Sally, who
sat beside him on their favourite confabulation-knoll, which overlooked
Bounty Bay, "ideas don't take up much room, and if they did, we could
send 'em out on the sea, for they won't drown.  Ah!  Sall, Sall--"

"What are you thinking of, dear father?" asked Sally, with a sympathetic
look, as the old man stopped.

"That my time can't be long now.  I feel as if I was about worn-out."

"Oh, _don't_ say that, father!" cried his daughter Hannah, laying her
cheek on his arm, and hugging it.  "There's ever so much life in you
