examination 14 years 364 days, and Magnus being a week younger, no one
supposed for a moment they had a chance against the fellows of eleven
and twelve who went up against them; and no one was disappointed.

I asked Magnus afterwards how it was he came to grief.

"It was those beasts, the Greek gods.  I'd like to kick them," said he.

By an odd coincidence I put the same question on the following day to my
young brother.

"Eh?" said he, "what do you call them, you know, the thingamybobs that
lived in Mount what's its name?  I'm sick of 'em."

"Mount Olympus, you mean?"

"That's it--"

"Mount Olympus, Pack of Shrimpers."

This was a good specimen of my brother's poetic style!

I gathered from this that a new bond of sympathy had arisen between the
two friends.  They had both been ploughed in an unexpected paper on
Greek Mythology, and were in consequence death on the divinities.  I
genuinely pitied the divinities!

Well--mind, as I wasn't in the affair, I can only relate it as I heard
it--a very curious adventure happened to Magnus Minor and my young
brother, shortly after this.

It was in the holidays, and we went, as usual, to Llandudno; and oddly
enough, Magnus's people went there too.  The two chums consequently had
an opportunity of feeding the fires that consumed them, and of carrying
on their feud with the Greek gods in boats and bathing machines, on the
Great Orme's Head, and in the pier refreshment-room.  Whenever I came
across them they were still implacable; and once or twice I believe they
actually spoke to one another on the subject, which shows how deeply
they felt.

One day they made up their minds to do Snowdon, and with a respectable
basket of provender, and an alpenstock apiece (on which the name of the
mountain--in fact, several mountains, had already been cut), they
started off by the train to Llanberis.

Magnus minor, being an athlete, occupied most of the journey in training
himself on cold boiled eggs and damsons; while Joe, being a poet, read
somebody's "Half Holiday" in a corner.

At the place where the train stopped they got out, and wondered whether
they had not already had enough of it.  It was a grilling hot day.  They
hadn't an idea which was the way to Snowdon, and nobody seemed to know.
A railway porter said "Second to the right"; but they could see he was
humbugging.  As if a mountain _could_ be up a turning!

"Let's jack it up," said Magnus, who was feeling a little depressed
after the damsons.

"Eh?" said Joe, "there's no train back to what's-his-name for two hours.
What would it cost to cab it up?"

"Oh, pots," said Magnus.  "I tell you what--we might have a go of
ginger-beer somewhere, and see how we feel after that."

Whereupon in silence they found out the leading hotel or the place, and
expended sixpence apiece on ginger-beer, at threepence a bottle.

Naturally they felt much refreshed after this, and, without
condescending to further parley, decided to stroll on; only, as the
porter had mentioned a turning to the right, they selected a turning to
the left as decidedly more probable.

It may have been Snowdon, or it may not--in any case it was a hill, and
a stiff one.

Magnus, the athlete, taking out his watch, said he meant to do it under
twenty minutes, and begged Joe to time him.

Joe, the poet, agreed, and sat down on the shady side of a rock with the
watch in one hand, the "Half Holiday" in the other, and his share of the
damsons in his mouth.

"How long have I been?" shouted the athlete, after stumbling up the
slippery grass slope for about five minutes.

"Time's up!" shouted the poet.

Whereat Magnus, surprised at the rapid flight of the enemy, checked his
upward career, and not only did that, but, assaying to take a seat on
the grass, began to slide at a considerable pace, and in a sitting
posture, downwards, until, in fact, he was providentially brought up
short by the very rock under which his friend rested.

"_Facilis descensus Averni_," observed Joe, making a brilliant sally in
a foreign tongue.

The remark was followed by instant gloom.  It was too painfully
suggestive of the heathen deities.  Besides, Magnus had nearly smashed
himself against the rock, and had to be brought round with more cold
boiled eggs and damsons.

After this the ascent was resumed in a more rational way.  They
accomplished a quarter of a mile in the phenomenal time of two hours,
during which period they sat down fourteen times, drank at twenty-one
streams, fell on their noses about eighty times, and wished a hundred
times they had never heard the name of Snowdon.

"I thought you said there was a `thingamy' all the way up?" said Joe.

"So there is--we're on it," said Magnus minor.

"Oh," said Joe.  He had previously had some misgivings that he was
growing shortsighted, but he was convinced of it now.

At the rate at which they were going there was every prospect of getting
to the top of the first ridge about three o'clock on the following
afternoon.  But Magnus minor and my brother Joe were fellows who
preferred doing a thing thoroughly--even though speed had to be
sacrificed to the thoroughness.

So they pegged on, detesting this mountain as if it had been Olympus
itself, and making a material difference in the level of the lakes below
by the number of tributary streams they tried to drink up by the way.

At last they actually began to get up a bit.

"How far now?" said Joe, lying on his back with his coat off, his shirt-
sleeves turned up, his collar off, and his braces slack.

"Just about there," said Magnus minor.

He spoke figuratively, of course.  They were a quarter of the way up,
perhaps.

"I don't believe this beast is what-you-may-call-him at all.  It strikes
me we ought to have turned to the--you know."

"It looks like him," said Magnus.  "Anyhow, it'll do for him."

"I'd like to do for him," growled Joe.

They went on presently, in shocking tempers, both of them.  They loathed
that mountain, and yet neither liked to propose to go back.  That is the
way in which a good many mountains are climbed.

Magnus got riled with Joe for not giving in--he was the elder, and it
was his business to begin.  Joe, on the other hand, never thought so ill
of Magnus as when he saw him pegging up twenty yards ahead, never giving
him (Joe) time to catch up.  He made faces at him behind his back, and
tried to think of all the caddish things he had done since he came to
the school.  But it was no good.  As sure as ever Joe tried artfully to
cut a corner or "put it on" for a yard or two, Magnus, on ahead, cut a
corner and put it on too.

When Magnus presently, having improved his lead, sat down to rest, Joe
made sure he had caught his man at last.  But--would you believe it?--
just as he approached the place, with every show of friendship,
announcing that he had something particular to say, Magnus got up and
went on again, leaving poor Joe not only still in the rear, but without
time even for a rest.

All this astonishing activity, as I said, was the result, not of energy,
but of bad temper.  The worse their tempers became the greater the pace,
and the greater the pace the nearer the top of that interminable ridge.
Towards the end it was uncommonly like running.  Magnus would have given
worlds to venture to look behind and see how the idiot below was
fagging; and Joe would have given a lot to see the lout above come a
cropper and smash his leg.  It wants a pretty hot friendship to stand
the test of a mountain-side.

At last (without a suspicion of what o'clock it was, or how far they had
come), Magnus actually stopped and lay down.

"Serves him right," said Joe, triumphantly, running with all his might
to take advantage of his chance.  Alas! when he got up to his friend, he
discovered that after all he was not dead-beat, or wounded, or ill.

The reason he had stopped was that he had got to the top.

As was natural, as soon as this agreeable and amazing discovery was
made, Magnus minor and my brother Joe forgot their rancour and loved one
another again with a mighty affection.  Their own brothers weren't in
it.

"Good old Joey!" cried Magnus, as my brother lay on the turf beside him;
"crowd in, old hoss--lots of room!"

"Good old Magny!" responded Joe; "what a day we're having!"

Presently they condescended to look about them.  They were on a sharp
ridge, one side of which sloped down into the valley from which they had
ascended, the other looked out on an uninterrupted prospect of cloud and
mist.

"This isn't what's-his-name at all," said Joe.  "There's a tuck shop on
the top of it--there's none here."

"That chap was right," said Magnus.  "That must be Snowdon over there--
we've missed him."

"Horrid bore," said Joe, who, however, regretted the mountain less than
the tuck shop.

The afternoon was changing.  The clouds were beginning to sweep up from
the other side and begriming the sky which had been so ruthlessly clear
all the morning.

All of a sudden the mist below them parted, and disclosed through a
frame of cloud a great cauldron of rock yawning at their feet, at the
bottom of which--as it seemed, miles below--lay a black lake.  It was a
scene Dante could have described better than I.

"If we could get down there we could have a tub," said Magnus.

"It's snug enough up here," replied the poet; "don't you think so?"
Magnus admitted it was snug, and did not press his motion.  For, though
he scorned to say so, he was fagged, and felt he could do with a half-
hour's lounge before undertaking a new venture.

So the reconciled friends took their siesta on the top of the mysterious
mountain, and, in doing so, oddly enough fell asleep.

Sub-Chapter II.

THE IMMORTALS.

When they woke, the sun was still shining; but it had got round to the
side of them which, when they dropped off, had been wrapped in cloud,
while the mist had taken possession of the valley and hillside by which
they had ascended.

The transformation scene was so complete that had they not seen Joe's
paper on the ground beside them, and recognised the bank of heather
against which they reclined, they would have found it difficult to say
exactly where they were.

To all appearances they were at the end of the world.  The great
cauldron gaped below them, apparently perpendicular on every side,
enclosing in its depths the black lake, on whose still surface the rays
of the sun gleamed weirdly and gloomily.

Not a sound was to be heard except a distant sullen rumble, which might
have been thunder, or earthquake, or the six-o'clock train going back to
Llandudno.  Above them, as the clouds drifted past, they could see, as
they lay on their backs, occasional glimpses of blue, and sometimes in
the far distance a shining peak bathed in crimson light.

All this was natural enough; and, were it not that they had their return
tickets in their pockets, Magnus minor and Joe would probably have been
content to enjoy the show for an hour or so.

What did concern them, when they got to their feet, was to observe that,
so far from being as they supposed, and could have testified on solemn
affidavit, on the top of the mountain, the ground now appeared to rise
on every side except that occupied by the cauldron.

Whichever way they tried to walk they found themselves going uphill.

"Rum start," said Magnus minor, after ramping round in a semicircle and
finding no trace of their homeward path.  "It strikes me we shall have
to hang out here till the clouds roll by, Joey."

"All very well.  How about grub?" said the poet.  "We shall be just
about what-do-you-call-it by then."

"Hullo," said Magnus, looking at his watch, "do you know it's 11 p.m.
and broad daylight."

Joe consulted his watch, and wound it up as he did so.

"So it is--must be a thingamybob--a roaring boreali, or whatever you
call it, going on.  Wouldn't be so bad if it was good to eat."

Magnus assented, and the two outcasts stood and watched with somewhat
mingled feelings the battalion of clouds as they swirled past and soared
up at the heights above.

"May as well go upstairs too," said the poet, dismally.  So they began
the ascent.  This time Magnus showed no inclination to forge ahead, and
Joe took every precaution not to lag behind.  In fact, they proceeded
arm in arm, trying to enjoy it, but inwardly wondering who would have
the benefit of their supper at Llandudno.

It was easy enough going; the turf was crisp and soft, and as they got
up a little, flowers began to peep out.  Though they could not see
through the mists, they fancied they could catch the sound of birds and
the splash of water.  The clouds, sweeping up on every side, seemed to
help them along, so that sometimes they could hardly be quite sure
whether they were walking on earth or air.  Altogether, had they but
dined, they would have voted the walk one of the jolliest they ever had
in their lives.

Presently a strange sound above brought them suddenly to a halt.  It was
music of some sort, but mingling with it the even sweeter music of
plates and knives and forks; and when for a moment the music ceased,
they seemed to detect voices and laughter.

"Some fellows having a picnic," said Magnus, joyfully; "keep it up,
chappie, and we shall get some of the pickings--you see."

"Give them a--what-do-you-call-it?" said Joe.  Whereupon Magnus startled
the air with a loud "coo-oo-ey!"

The sounds above ceased all of a sudden, and the weather seemed to
change to thundery.

Then a faint echo of the shout came back, and almost immediately
afterwards a gentleman appeared through the mist.

He was a young-looking man, who had apparently been bathing, and had not
had time to dress after it.  He wore a curious sort of cap, with a wing
sticking out at either side, and carried in his hand a very elaborately
carved walking-stick.

"Please, can you tell us the way down to Llanberis?" asked Magnus,
thinking it better not to appear to notice the gentleman's _deshabille_.

The gentleman stared at the two boys in a startled sort of way, and
shrugged his shoulders.

"A foreigner," said Joe.  "Try him in--what's-its--name--French."

"_S'il vous plait, pouvez vous dire nous le chemin a bas a Llanberis_?"
said Magnus, who was a capital French scholar.

