
"Oh!" cried Morris, springing up.  "Impossible!"

"Mr Morris, I must ask you to be silent," said the Colonel sternly.

"But--"

"I will hear anything you have to say, sir, when I have finished with
this witness," said the Colonel firmly.--"Go on, my man.  Who was this
gentleman?"

"Pro--Professor Barlow, sir.  No, sir; Professor Barclay, sir.  And he
said he was very much disappointed, as he had come down expressly from
London to see Mr Morris.  He said he couldn't stop, but he would write
a letter if I would give him pens, ink, and paper."

"Go on," said the Colonel, as the hearers bent forward with eager
interest.  "Did you supply him with pens, ink, and paper?"

"Yes, sir.  You see, he wasn't a stranger, but a friend of master's."

"And you took him to my study?" said the Doctor almost fiercely.

"I beg your pardon, Doctor," said the Colonel stiffly.

"I beg yours, Colonel Severn, for the interruption."

"Now then, my man," continued the Colonel; "you took this visitor, this
Professor Barclay--"

There was a low, indignant murmur here, and the Colonel looked round
sharply.

"You took this Professor Barclay into your master's study, I understand,
and gave him pens, ink, and paper, and left him to write the letter?"

"No, sir, that I didn't," said Wrench, grinning with triumph.  "I have
been a servant too many years, sir, to go and do a thing like that.
What, take him into master's room, where he keeps his cash-box and
cheque-book in the little iron safe in the closet!  And there's the
presentation clock on the chimney-piece, and his old gold watch that he
never wears in the table-drawer!  No, sir.  That gentleman was master's
friend to some extent; but he was a stranger to me, and if he'd been a
royal duke I shouldn't have done it."

"Then, what did you do?" said the Colonel.

"Took him into the theaytre lecture-room, sir, where there's little
tables, and the young gentlemen writes out their exercises.  That's what
I did, sir," said Wrench triumphantly; and he looked hard at his master,
who sat shaking his head at him solemnly.--"What!  Wasn't that right,
sir?" cried Wrench.

"Oh Wrench, Wrench, Wrench!" said the Doctor.  "And you left him there,
with the staircase close at hand leading right up to the corridor and
the young gentlemen's dormitories?"

Wrench's jaw dropped, and one hand went slowly up to the back of his
head and began to scratch.

"Well," continued the Colonel; "and how long did this gentleman stay?"

"I don't know, sir.  Not half an hour--I'd swear to that.  I gave him
long enough to write a letter, and then I come back to see if he was
ready to go."

"Let me protest," cried Morris indignantly.  "No such letter was written
for or delivered to me; that I declare."

"Pray be calm, sir," said the Colonel judicially.  "You can ask this man
any questions when I have done with him.--Now, my man, go on.  Did you
find this gentleman where you left him?"

"Yes, sir."

"And he gave you a letter to deliver to Mr Morris?"

"No, sir," cried Wrench sharply.  "I'd forgotten all about it till you
began arxing me questions like this.  When I come in he got up in a
disappointed sort of way and began tearing up the letter he had written
quite small, and throwing it into the waste-paper basket.  `It's no use,
my lad,' he said.  `I can't say in a letter one-hundredth part'--I ain't
sure, sir, he didn't say a thousandth-part--`of what I want to tell Mr
Morris.  I'll stay in the town to-night, and come and see Mr Morris in
the morning.'"

"And did he come and see Mr Morris in the morning?"

Morris half-rose in his chair, but sat down again.

"No, sir; and I haven't seen him from that day to this, though I had
often seen them together before."

"That will do, my man," said the Colonel quietly.--"Now, Mr Morris; you
wish to ask this man some questions?"

"Yes, sir," cried Morris springing up.--"Now, Wrench, did you ever tell
me that Professor Barclay called when I was absent?"

"No, sir.  I suppose it was the cricket-match put it all out of my
head."

"Bah!" cried Morris.

"And then, you see, sir, I have so many things to think of about my work
and the young gentlemen that I haven't got room to remember everything;
and I always have to tick things off."

"Tick things off?  What do you mean by that?" cried Morris.

"Well, sir, there's things to do and there's things that's done; things
I have got to remember, and things I haven't.  The Professor said that
he'd come and see you, so that was his job and not mine; and if you'll
believe me, gentlemen all, I never remembered about his coming until
Colonel Severn here asked me about any one coming and wanting to write a
letter."

"I believe you," said the Colonel quietly, as if speaking to himself;
but it was sufficiently loud for Morris to hear, and he turned upon the
speaker fiercely.

"I protest, sir," he cried indignantly, "partly against my name being
dragged into this despicable theft, and partly on behalf of my friend
Professor Barclay, a scholar, a gentleman, and a professor of Sanskrit
and other Eastern languages; a gentleman, sir, though a poor and needy
gentleman upon whom the world had frowned, but whom I considered it an
honour and a privilege to know, as I should any gentleman whom I was
introduced to by my revered principal the Doctor.  I cannot sit still
and hear such a man even suspected of being dishonest; and I beg you,
sir, and the Doctor will go on with this investigation so as to prove to
the world that Professor Barclay was a gentleman indeed."



CHAPTER THIRTY SIX.

THE COLONEL OPENS FOLK'S EYES.

Morris sat down, panting, and began wiping the perspiration from his
forehead.  He looked very much agitated, and then he smiled with
satisfaction, for Singh sprang up and cried, "Mr Morris is quite right,
guardian.  The Professor was a scholar and a gentleman, whom I knew
too."

"Indeed!" said the Colonel.

"Yes, sir.  He spoke Hindustani very well for an Englishman.  Why, you
saw him, sir!"

"I?" said the Colonel sharply.  "Yes, sir; that night we were dining
with you at your hotel."

"The Colonel forgets," said Morris quickly.  "He was with me in the
hall, sir, and wanted to be introduced to you."

"Oh," said the Colonel; "that man?  No, I don't forget.  I remember
perfectly well."

"And, guardian, he took such an interest in my belt!"

"Indeed!" said the Colonel quietly.

"Yes, sir, when I showed it to him.  He asked to see it, you know, when
I told him about the Sanskrit letters."

"Naturally, as a Sanskrit scholar," said the Colonel drily.  "Sit down,
my boy.--Doctor, I am very glad you sent for me, and that I am able to
clear up this miserable little mystery.  You knew this Professor
Barclay?"

"Only as coming to me with testimonials to prove that he had been one of
the professors at Stillham College."

"Yes; and his name?"

"Barclay--Professor Barclay, Professor of Sanskrit and Hindustani.  He
applied for an engagement here."

"Humph!  All wrong," said the Colonel.  "I thought I knew his face when
he tried to thrust himself upon me in the hotel; and I was right.  I did
know it, though thirty years had elapsed since we last met.  A man who
had been out in Calcutta and picked up a little Sanskrit and a pretty
good smattering of Hindustani--a man who can chatter a bit in a foreign
tongue always seems a big scholar to one who can't.  This fellow, on the
strength of his acquirements, came back to England and obtained an
appointment near London where military cadets were in training for the
Honourable East India Company's Service.  I was there--not Stillham, but
Barniscombe; name not Barclay, but Roberts.  He was kicked out, Doctor,
for blackmailing the students.  He was not much more than a boy himself
in those days."

"Colonel," cried the Doctor indignantly, "are you prepared to say you
are sure, and that this is a fact?"

"Yes," said the Colonel coolly.  "He blackmailed me."

"Oh, impossible!" cried Morris wildly.

"No, sir," said the Colonel, smiling.  "Quite possible.  But you don't
offend me, sir.  I admire the way in which you defend the man whom you
seem to have made your friend.--Well, Doctor, there's your man.--Why,
boys, you seem to have been babies in his hands.  Glyn, I'm ashamed of
you."

Glyn looked at the Doctor, and then at Morris, as he felt that his
father was not treating him fairly; but he held his tongue, and then his
eyes flashed with satisfaction as Singh gave him a quick look and then
spoke out.

"Glyn had nothing to do with it, sir," he said.  "He protested against
it, and regularly bullied me for showing this man the belt and lending
him money."

"Ha, ha!" said the Colonel.  "Then he fleeced you a little, did he, my
boy?"

"Well, yes, sir.  I lent or gave him some money, because I thought that
he was a poor gentleman.  How was I to know that he was not honest,
when--when--"

He was about to say "when my teachers were deceived," but the Colonel
checked him.

"There, there, there," he said; "that'll do, Singh.  You are not the
first fellow of your age who has been imposed upon by a needy
scoundrel."

"No," said the Doctor sharply.  "If any one is to blame it is I, who
pitied the position of a man out of employment and tried to befriend
him.  Well, Colonel Severn, I am very sorry; but it is forced upon me.
I feel it a duty to you to try and make some recompense."

"Oh, nonsense!" said the Colonel rather haughtily.  "I need no
recompense."

"Indeed, sir," said the Doctor, "but I am answerable to Mr Singh here
for his loss through my want of care and foresight."

"Oh, pooh, sir! pooh!  The belt was not worth much; eh, Singh?"

"Oh no," said the boy contemptuously, and raising his head he walked up
to the Doctor and held out his hand.  "Don't say any more about it, sir,
please," he added rather proudly.  "I don't mind losing the belt a bit."

"Oh, but," cried the Doctor, catching at and pressing the boy's hand
warmly, "this is very brave and noble of you, my boy.  Still I must put
aside all false shame and accept the punishment that may fall upon me
from the want of confidence that people may feel in the future.--Colonel
Severn, this must go into the hands of the police.  Such a man as this
must be run down; it is a duty, and before he imposes upon others as he
has imposed upon me."

"No, no, no, my dear sir!  No, no," cried the Colonel.  "The swindling
scoundrel has had his punishment before this, so let him go."

"I beg your pardon," said the Doctor; "he cannot have had his
punishment; and such a man as this should not be allowed to be at
large."

"There, there, sir," cried the Colonel, laughing pleasantly, and greatly
to the annoyance of the Doctor that he should treat the loss of his
ward's valuable belt in so light a way.  "I find that I must make a
confession.  That belt really was not intrinsically worth more than a
ten-pound note.  It cost me about twenty; but I very much doubt whether
the scoundrel would be able to sell it for a tithe of the amount."

"Guardian," cried Singh, "what are you saying?"

"Something in very plain English, my boy.  Let's see, how old are you
now?"

"Sixteen, sir."

"Well, it's about two years since you began to attack me about letting
you have that part of the Dour regalia, and I wanted to satisfy you and
do my duty in the trust my good old friend your father placed in me."

"I don't understand, sir," cried the boy, flushing.

"You soon will, my lad.  I, in my desire to do my duty by you, felt that
it would not be right to let a mere schoolboy like you come away to make
your home at some place of education with so costly, and, from its
associations, unique a jewel as the one in question."

"You used to say so to me, sir," said the boy quickly.

"Yes.  But in your young hot-blooded Indian nature you were not
pacified, and I felt bound to do something that I thought then would be
right."

Singh looked at him and then at Glyn, while the rest of those assembled
listened eagerly for the Colonel's next words.

"Do you remember, boys, our long stay in Colombo?"

"Yes!" they cried in a breath.

"Well, they are famous people for working in jewellery there, and I
easily found a man ready to undertake the task of making a facsimile of
the belt."

"Facsimile!" cried Singh, starting away from the speaker.

"Yes, my boy; and he did it beautifully--so well that I was almost
startled by its exactitude and the way in which a few pieces of green
glass resembled emeralds."

"But the Sanskrit inscription?" cried the Doctor.

"Exactly copied," said the Colonel; "cut in the glass.  I tell you it
was so well done that I was almost startled."

"Then--then--then," cried Singh wildly, "I have been deceived!" and his
voice seemed to cut down that of Glyn, who was about to burst out in a
triumphant "Hooray!"

"Well, yes, my boy," said the Colonel quietly.  "I told you I must
confess.  I did deceive you in that, but with the best intentions."

A look of agony crossed the boy's face, and he turned from father to son
and then back.

"Treated as a child!" he cried.  "Deceived again!  Oh, in whom am I to
trust?"

"In me, I hope, boy," almost thundered the Colonel in the deepest tones.
"I had the trust imposed on me by your dead father to care for you and
your wealth until you came of age.  Should I have been acting my part
had I given up to you and let you treat as a toy that valuable jewel
that was almost sacred in his eyes?"

"But to--but to--Then where--where is it now?"

"Lying safely with others, sir, in the bankers' vaults."

"Oh-h-h-oh!" cried Singh, and his whole manner changed as he stood for a
few moments striving for utterance yet unable to speak.  But at last the
words came, hoarsely and with a violent effort, as in the reaction from
his fit of indignation he almost murmured, "What have I done?  What have
I said?"

"Nothing, my boy," said the Colonel, holding out his hands, "but what
had my son been in your place I would have gladly seen him do and heard
him say."

One moment Singh's face, quivering with emotion, was hidden in the
Colonel's breast; the next, he rushed from the room, closely followed by
Glyn.



CHAPTER THIRTY SEVEN.

THE SORE PLACE IN THE FENCE.

Time had gone on after his good old fashion, moving silently and
insidiously, seeming to crawl to those who were waiting for something,
till it suddenly dawns upon them that he has been making tremendous
strides with those long legs of his which puzzled the little girl who
asked her mother whether it was true that Time had those means of
progression.  Many will remember that the mother asked the child why she
supposed that Time had legs, "Because," she replied, "people speak about
the lapse of Time, and if he has laps he must have legs to make them
of."

The troubles connected with the disappearance of the belt, and the
unpleasant weeks during which masters, scholars, and servants seemed to
have been mentally poisoned by suspicion and were all disposed to look
askant at each other, had passed away, and, in his busy avocations and
