hesitate.

"Hallo!  Gunter, what pretty little thing is that you've got?"

The words were uttered by Dick Herring of the _White Cloud_, who, being
like-minded with John, had remained on deck like him to smoke and
lounge.

"You've got no business wi' that," growled Gunter, as he closed his hand
on the watch, and thrust it back into his pocket.

"I didn't say I had, mate," retorted Herring, with a puff of contempt,
which at the same time emptied his mouth and his spirit.

Herring said no more; but when the service was over, and the men were
chatting about the deck, he quietly mentioned what he had seen, and some
of the waggish among the crew came up to Gunter and asked him, with
significant looks and laughs, what time o' day it was.

At first Gunter replied in his wonted surly manner; but at last, feeling
that the best way would be to put a bold face on the matter, he said
with an off-hand laugh--

"Herring thinks he's made a wonderful discovery, but surely there's
nothing very strange in a man buyin' a little watch for his sweetheart."

"You don't mean to say that _you_ have a sweetheart do you?" said a
youth of about seventeen, who had a tendency to be what is styled
cheeky.

Gunter turned on him with contempt.  "Well, now," he replied, "if I had
a smooth baby-face like yours I would _not_ say as I had, but bein' a
man, you see, I may ventur' to say that I have."

"Come, Gunter, you're too hard on 'im," cried Spivin; "I don't believe
you've bought a watch for her at all; at least if you have, it must be a
pewter one."

Thus taunted, Gunter resolved to carry out the bold line of action.
"What d'ee call that?" he cried, pulling out the watch and holding it up
to view.

Captain Bream chanced to be an amused witness of this little scene, but
his expression changed to one of amazement when he beheld the peculiar
and unmistakable watch which, years before, he had given to Ruth
Dotropy's father.  Recovering himself quickly he stepped forward.

"A very pretty little thing," he said, "and looks uncommonly like
silver.  Let me see it."

He held out his hand, and Gunter gave it to him without the slightest
suspicion, of course, that he knew anything about it.  "Yes, undoubtedly
it is silver, and a very curious style of article too," continued the
captain in a low off-hand tone.  "You've no objection to my taking it to
the cabin to look at it more carefully?"

Of course Gunter had no objection, though a sensation of uneasiness
arose within him, especially when Captain Bream asked him to go below
with him, and whispered to Joe Davidson in a low tone, as he passed him,
to shut the cabin skylight.

No sooner were they below, with the cabin-door shut, than the captain
looked steadily in the man's face, and said--

"Gunter, you stole this watch from a young lady in Yarmouth."

An electric shock could not have more effectually stunned the convicted
fisherman.  He gazed at the captain in speechless surprise.  Then his
fists clenched, a rush of blood came to his face, and a fierce oath rose
to his white lips as he prepared to deny the charge.

"Stop!" said the captain, impressively, and there was nothing of
severity or indignation in his voice or look.  "Don't commit yourself,
Gunter.  See, I place the watch on this table.  If you bought it to give
to your sweetheart, take it up.  If you stole it from a pretty young
lady in one of the rows of Yarmouth some months ago, and would now wish
me to restore it to her--for I know her and the watch well--let it lie."

Gunter looked at the captain, then at the watch, and hesitated.  Then
his head drooped, and in a low voice he said--

"I am guilty, sir."

Without a word more, Captain Bream laid his hand on the poor man's
shoulder and pressed it.  Gunter knew well what was meant.  He went down
on his knees.  The captain kneeled beside him, and in a deep, intensely
earnest voice, claimed forgiveness of the sin that had been confessed,
and prayed that the sinner's soul might be there and then cleansed in
the precious blood of Jesus.

John Gunter was completely broken down; tears rolled over his cheeks,
and it required all his great physical strength to enable him to keep
down the sobs that well-nigh choked him.

Fishermen of the North Sea are tough.  Their eyes are not easily made to
swell or look red by salt water, whether it come from the ocean without
or the mightier ocean within.  When Gunter had risen from his knees and
wiped his eyes with the end of a comforter, which had probably been
worked under the superintendence of Ruth herself; there were no signs of
emotion left--only a subdued look in his weatherworn face.

"I give myself up, sir," he said, "to suffer what punishment is due."

"No punishment is due, my man.  Jesus has borne all the punishment due
to you and me.  In regard to man, you have restored that which you took
away, and well do I know that the young lady--like her Master--forgives
freely.  I will return the watch to her.  You can go back to your
comrades--nobody shall ever hear more about this.  If they chaff you, or
question you, just say nothing, and smile at them."

"But--but, sir," said Gunter, moving uneasily.

"I ain't used to smilin'.  I--I've bin so used to look gruff that--"

"Look gruff, then, my man," interrupted the captain, himself unable to
repress a smile.  "If you're not gruff in your heart, it won't matter
much what you look like.  Just look gruff, an' keep your mouth shut, and
they'll soon let you alone."

Acting on this advice, John Gunter returned to his mates looking
gruffer, if possible, and more taciturn than ever, but radically
changed, from that hour, in soul and spirit.



CHAPTER THIRTY.

THE CLIMAX REACHED AT LAST.

As the calm weather continued in the afternoon, Joe Davidson tried to
persuade Captain Bream to pay the _Evening Star_ a visit, but the latter
felt that the excitement and exertion of preaching to such earnest and
thirsting men had been more severe than he had expected.  He therefore
excused himself, saying that he would lie down in his bunk for a short
time, so as to be ready for the evening service.

It was arranged that the skipper of the mission smack should conduct
that service, and he was to call the captain when they were ready to
begin.  When the time came, however, it was found that the exhausted
invalid was so sound asleep that they did not like to disturb him.

But although Captain Bream was a heavy sleeper and addicted to sonorous
snoring, there were some things in nature through which even he could
not slumber; and one of these things proved to be a hymn as sung by the
fishermen of the North Sea!

When, therefore, the Lifeboat hymn burst forth in tones that no
cathedral organ ever equalled, and shook the timbers of the mission-ship
from stem to stern, the captain turned round, yawned, and opened his
eyes wide, and when the singers came to--

  "Leave the poor old stranded wreck, and pull for the shore,"

he leaped out of his bunk with tremendous energy.

Pulling his garments into order, running his fingers through his hair,
and trying to look as if he had not been asleep, he slipped quietly into
the hold and sat down on a box behind the speaker, where he could see
the earnest faces of the rugged congregation brought into strong relief
by the light that streamed down the open hatchway.

What the preacher said, or what his subject was, Captain Bream never
knew, for, before he could bring his mind to bear on it, his eyes fell
on an object which seemed to stop the very pulsations of his heart,
while his face grew pale.  Fortunately he was himself in the deep shadow
of the deck, and could not be easily observed.

Yet the object which created such a powerful sensation in the captain's
breast was not in itself calculated to cause amazement or alarm, for it
was nothing more than a pretty-faced, curly-haired fisher-boy, who, with
lips parted and his bright eyes gazing intently, was listening to the
preacher with all his powers.  Need we say that it was our friend Billy
Bright, and that in his fair face Captain Bream thought, or rather felt,
that he recognised the features of his long-lost sister?

With a strong effort the captain restrained his feelings and tried to
listen, but in vain.  Not only were his eyes riveted on the young face
before him, but his whole being seemed to be absorbed by it.  The
necessity of keeping still, however, gave him time to make up his mind
as to how he should act, so that when the service was brought to a
close, he appeared on deck without a trace of his late excitement
visible.

"What lad is this?" he asked, going up to Joe, who was standing close to
Billy.

"This," said Joe, laying his hand kindly on the boy's shoulder, "is
Billy Bright, son of the late owner of the old _Evenin' Star_."

"What!" exclaimed the captain, unable to repress his surprise, "son of
the widow who owns the new _Evening Star_? then that proves that your
mother _must_ be alive?"

"In _course_ she is!" returned Billy, with a look of astonishment.

"Come down to the cabin with me, Billy," said the captain, with
increasing excitement.  "I want to have a chat with you about your
mother."

Our little hero, although surprised, at once complied with the
invitation, taking the opportunity, however, to wink at Zulu in passing,
and whisper his belief that the old gen'l'man was mad.

Setting Billy on a locker in front of him, Captain Bream began at once.

"Is your mother alive, Billy,--tut, of course she's alive; I mean, is
she well--in good health?"

Billy became still more convinced that Captain Bream was mad, but
answered that his mother was well, and that she had never been ill in
her life to the best of his knowledge.

While speaking, Billy glanced round the cabin in some anxiety as to how
he should escape if the madman should proceed to violence.  He made up
his mind that if the worst should come to the worst, he would dive under
the table, get between the old gentleman's legs, trip him up, and bolt
up the companion before he could regain his feet.  Relieved by the
feeling that his mind was made up, he waited for more.

"Billy," resumed the captain, after a long gaze at the boy's features,
"is your mother like you?"

"I should think not," replied Billy with some indignation.  "She's a
woman, you know, an' I'm a--a--man."

"Yes--of course," murmured the captain to himself, "there can be no
doubt about it--none whatever--every gesture--every look!"

Then aloud: "What was her name, my boy?"

"Her name, sir? why, her name's Bright, of course."

"Yes, yes, but I mean her maiden name."

Billy was puzzled.  "If you mean the name my father used to call 'er,"
he said, "it was Nell."

"Ah! that's it--nearly, at least.  Nellie she used to be known by.  Yes,
yes, but that's not what I want to know.  Can you tell me what her name
was before she was married?"

"Well now, that _is_ odd," answered Billy, "I've bin pumped somethink in
this way before, though nuffin' good came of it as I knows on.  No, I
_don't_ know what she was called afore she was married."

"Did you ever hear of the name of Bream?" asked the captain anxiously.

"Oh yes, I've heerd o' that name," said the boy, promptly.  "There's a
fish called bream, you know."

It soon became evident to poor Captain Bream that nothing of importance
was to be learned from Billy, he therefore made up his mind at once as
to how he should act.  Feeling that, with such a possibility unsettled,
he would be utterly unfit for his duties with the fleet, he resolved to
go straight to Yarmouth.

"What is your mother's address?" he asked.

Billy gave it him.

"Now my boy, I happen to be much interested in your mother, so I'm goin'
to Yarmouth on purpose to see her."

"It's wery good o' you, sir, an' if you takes your turn ashore afore we
do, just give mother my respec's an' say I'm all alive and kickin'."

"I will, my boy," said the Captain, patting Billy on the head and
actually stooping to kiss his forehead affectionately, after which he
gave him leave to return on deck.

"I don' know how it is," said Billy to Zulu afterwards, "but I've took a
likin' for that old man, an' at the same time a queer sort o' fear of
'im; I can't git it out o' my noddle that he's goin' to Yarmouth to
inweigle my mother to marry him!"

Zulu showed all his teeth and gums, shut his eyes, gave way to a burst
of laughter, and said, "Nonsense!"

"It may be nonsense," retorted Billy, "but if I thought he really meant
it, I would run my head butt into his breadbasket, an' drive 'im
overboard."

Explaining to the surprised and rather disappointed skipper of the
mission vessel that an unexpected turn of affairs required his immediate
presence in Yarmouth, the captain asked what means there were of getting
to land.

"One of our fleet, the _Rainbow_, starts to-morrow morning, sir," was
the reply; "so you can go without loss of time.  But I hope we shall see
you again."

"Oh yes, please God, I shall come off again--you may depend on that, for
I've taken a great fancy to the men of the Short Blue, although I've
been so short a time with them--moreover, I owe service as well as
gratitude to the Mission for sending me here."

Accordingly next morning he set sail with a fair wind, and in due course
found himself on shore.  He went straight to the old abode of Mrs
Dotropy, and, to his great satisfaction, found Ruth there.  He also
found young Dalton, which was not quite so much to his satisfaction, but
Ruth soon put his mind at rest by saying--

"Oh!  Captain Bream, I'm _so_ glad to have this unexpected visit,
because, for months and months past I have wanted you to go with me to
visit a particular place in Yarmouth, and you have always slipped
through my fingers; but I'm determined that you shan't escape again."

"That's odd, my dear," returned the captain, "because my object in
coming here is to take _you_ to a certain place in Yarmouth, and,
although I have not had the opportunity of letting you slip through my
fingers, I've no doubt you'd do so if you were tempted away by a bait
that begins with a D."

"How dare you, sir!" said Ruth, blushing, laughing, and frowning all at
once--"but no.  Even D will fail in this instance--for my business is
urgent."

"Well, Miss Ruth, my business is urgent also.  The question therefore
remains, which piece of business is to be gone about _first_."

"How can you be so ungallant?  Are not a lady's wishes to be considered
before those of a gentleman?  Come, sir, are you ready to go?  _I_ am
quite ready, and fortunately D, to whom you dared to refer just now, has
gone to the post with a letter."

Although extremely anxious to have his mind set at rest, Captain Bream
gave in with his accustomed good-nature, and went out with Ruth to
settle _her_ business first.

Rejoiced to have her little schemes at last so nearly brought to an
issue, the eager girl hurried through the town till she came to one of
its narrow Rows.

"Well, my dear," said the captain, "it is at all events a piece of good
luck that so far you have led _me_ in the very direction I desired to
lead you."

"Indeed?  Well, that is odd.  But after all," returned Ruth with a
sudden feeling of depression, "it _may_ turn out to be a wild-goose
chase."

"_What_ may turn out to be a wild-goose chase?"

"This--this fancy--this hope of mine, but you shall know directly--
come."

Ruth was almost running by this time, and the captain, being still far
from strong, found it difficult to keep up with her.

"This way, down here," she cried, turning a corner.

"What, _this_ way?" exclaimed the captain in amazement.

"Yes, why not?" said Ruth, reflecting some of his surprise as she looked
