  To praise me so--perhaps induced
  More than one early step of mine--
  Are turning wise: while some opine
  "Freedom grows license", some suspect
  "Haste breeds delay", and recollect                                140
  They always said, such premature
  Beginnings never could endure!
  So, with a sullen "All's for best",
  The land seems settling to its rest.
  I think then, I should wish to stand                               145
  This evening in that dear, lost land,
  Over the sea the thousand miles,
  And know if yet that woman smiles
  With the calm smile; some little farm
  She lives in there, no doubt: what harm                            150
  If I sat on the door-side bench,
  And, while her spindle made a trench
  Fantastically in the dust,
  Inquired of all her fortunes--just
  Her children's ages and their names,                               155
  And what may be the husband's aims
  For each of them. I'd talk this out,
  And sit there, for an hour about,
  Then kiss her hand once more, and lay
  Mine on her head, and go my way.                                   160

  So much for idle wishing--how
  It steals the time! To business now.

      --_Robert Browning (By permission)_


  PREPARATORY.--What is the historical back-ground of this
  poem? Suggest the possible details of the exiled
  patriot's life in England, his surroundings and frame of
  mind at the moment of speaking.

  Reconstruct for yourself the three scenes of which the
  peasant woman is the centre.

  What qualities did the Italian at once recognize in the
  peasant woman which led him to intrust his safety to
  her?

  79. WHENCE COMES PEACE? In what Quality of voice is this
  read? Give your reason. (Introduction, p. 34.)

  95. HE COULD DO MUCH. How is the doubt in this speech
  and in the one following indicated by the Inflection?
  (Introduction, p. 18.)

  111-112. With what is THOUGHT CONCERNING connected? How?

  120-123. I KNOW AT LEAST ... HANDS. What Quality of
  voice expresses the feeling here? What succeeding lines
  have the same Quality? (Introduction, p. 35.) With what
  is NEXT connected? How?

  139-142. FREEDOM GROWS LICENSE ... ENDURE. How is the
  irony of these lines indicated? (Introduction, pp. 21
  and 30.)

  How does the mood of the last two lines differ from the
  preceding? What is the difference in vocal expression?

       *       *       *       *       *


ADVANTAGES OF IMPERIAL FEDERATION

From an address delivered in Toronto, January 30th, 1891, under the
auspices of the Imperial Federation League


I now go on to mention another and greater advantage of Imperial
Federation than the one which we have just been considering; an
advantage too that is so connected with that of improved trade that
the two must be considered together. In fact, in my opinion, the first
is not likely to be obtained without the second. We cannot expect
Britain to concede preferential trade to us, on the ground that we are
part of the Empire, unless we are willing to share the
responsibilities of the Empire. I say then, secondly, that only by
some form of Imperial Federation can the independence of Canada be
preserved, with due regard to self-respect.

If this is true, if Imperial Federation can do this, and if it can be
done in no other way, then the necessity for Imperial Federation is
proved; for national independence is an advantage so great that no
price can be named that is too great to give in payment. It is the
same with a country as with a man. Independent he must be, or he
ceases to be a man. Burns advises his young friend to "gather gear" in
every honourable way, and what for?

  Not for to hoard it in a dyke,
    Not for a train attendant;
  But for the glorious privilege
    Of being independent.

And that which is the supreme dignity of manhood is even more
essential in the case of a nation.

What do we mean when we speak of the independence of the country? We
mean something beyond price, something that is the indispensable
condition of true manhood in any country, something without which a
country is poor in the present and a butt for the world's scorn in the
future. There are men, or things that look like men, who say that as
long as we put money in our purse, nothing else counts. How that class
of men must have laughed some centuries ago at a fool called William
Wallace! How clearly they could point out that it was much better to
be part of the richer country to the south. When they heard of the
fate of the patriot, did they not serenely say: "We told you so?" Did
they not in their hearts envy the false Menteath the price he got for
betraying the man who acted as true sentiment bade? But, give it time,
and the judgment of the world is just. Even the blind can now see
whether the patriot or the so-called "practical man" did most for
Scotland's advantage. Now

  At Wallace' name, what Scottish blood
  But boils up in a springtime flood!
  Oft have our fearless fathers strode
        By Wallace' side,
  Still pressing onward, red-wat shod,
        Or glorious died.

What has his memory been worth to Scotland! Would you estimate it in
millions? Superior persons will tell me that Wallace is an
anachronism. In form, yes; in spirit, never. It may be said that in
the end Scotland did unite with England. Yes, but first, what a curse
the union would have been if unaccompanied, as in the case of Ireland,
with national self-respect! And, secondly, Canada is ready for union
with the States any day on the same terms as those which Scotland got:
(1) That the States accept our Queen or King as their head. (2) That
we keep our own civil and criminal law and parliamentary constitution,
as Scotland did. (3) That the whole Empire be included in the
arrangement, as the whole of Scotland was in the union. Surely the men
who are never tired of citing the case of Scotland and England as
parallel to ours must admit that this is fair.

But, here comes a question that must be faced. Is it worth while
preserving the independence, the unity, and dignity of Canada? There
are men who, for one reason or another, doubt whether it is. They have
lost faith in the country, or rather they never had any faith to lose.
It is this absence of faith that is at the bottom of all their
arguments and all their unrest. Now, I do not wonder that there should
be men who do not share our faith. Men who were brought up in England,
and who have seen and tasted the best of it; who are proud of that
"dear, dear land", as Shakespeare called it, proud of its history, its
roll of saints, statesmen, heroes; of its cathedrals, colleges,
castles; of its present might as well as its ancient renown; and who
have then come to live in Canada,--well, they naturally look with
amused contempt at our raw, rough ways, our homespun legislators and
log colleges, combined with lofty ambitions expressed sometimes--it
must be admitted--in bunkum. I do not wonder, either, that men who
have been citizens of the United States, who exult in its vast
population, its vast wealth, and its boundless energy, should think it
madness on our part that we are not knocking untiringly at their door
for admission, and that the only explanation of our attitude that they
can give is that we are "swelled heads", or "the rank and file of
jingoism." But, after all, they must know that this question is not to
be settled by them. It must be settled by genuine Canadians. We, like
Cartier, are Canadians _avant tout_. Most of us have been born in the
land, have buried our fathers and mothers, and some of us our
children, too, in the natal soil, and above the sacred dust we have
pledged ourselves to be true to their memories and to the country they
loved, and to those principles of honour that are eternal! God
helping, we will do so, whether strangers help or hinder! We do not
think so meanly of our country that we are willing to sell it for a
mess of pottage. I know Canada well, from ocean to ocean; from the
rich sea pastures on the Atlantic all the way across to Vancouver and
Victoria. Every province and every territory of it, I know well. I
know the people, too, a people thoroughly democratic and honest to the
core. I would now plainly warn those who think that there is no such
thing as Canadian sentiment that they are completely mistaken. They
had better not reckon without their host. The silent vote is that
which tells, and though it will not talk, it will vote solid all the
time for those who represent national sentiment when the national life
is threatened. I am not a party man. In my day, I have voted about
evenly on both sides, for when I do vote, it is after consideration of
the actual issues involved at the time. Both sides therefore rightly
consider me unreliable, but, perhaps, both will listen when I point
out that the independent vote is increasing, and that it is the only
vote worth cultivating. The true Grit or Tory will vote with his
party, right or wrong. No time, therefore, need be given to him. Let
the wise candidate win the men who believe that the country is higher
than party, and there is, I think, only one thing that these men will
not forgive--lack of faith in the country. They have no doubt that it
is worth while to preserve the unity, dignity, and independence of
Canada.

We are quite sure of this. Are we as sure that it is our duty to pay
the price? The United States are paying three or four times our whole
revenue in pensions to those who fought to keep the country united.
They do not grudge this enormous price. They have besides a
respectable army, and a fleet that will soon be formidable. What means
do we find it necessary to use? In any trouble we simply call on the
Mother Country. The present system is cheap. No! it is dear and nasty,
and cannot last.

What should we do? First, let us remember what Britain has dared for
us within the last two or three years. Britain would fight the rest of
the world rather than the United States,--not because the Republic
could hurt her seriously, not because her trade with it is five times
as much as with us, but because she is proud of her own eldest child
and knows that a war between mother and daughter would be a blow
struck at the world's heart. Yet, for us she spoke the decisive word
from which there was no drawing back. For us, once and again, because
we were in the right, she dared a risk which she hated with her whole
soul.

Let us show that we appreciate her attitude. Let us, at any rate, do
what Australia has done--enter into a treaty, according to which we
shall pay so much a year for a certain number of ships, to be on our
own coasts in peace, and in war at the disposal of the Empire. That
would be tantamount to saying: "You have shared our risks, we will
share yours; we will pay part of the insurance that is necessary to
guarantee peace; we are educating officers for the army, and we are
willing to give a much needed addition to the fleet". That would be a
first step toward the attainment of full citizenship. What would be
the next? We could ask that our voice should be heard in some
constitutional way before any war was decided on. And we would have
the right standing ground from which to urge a wise system of
preferential trade in the common interest. These three things are, in
my opinion, connected, and I have ventured to indicate the order in
which they should be taken.

Would it pay? The experience of the world proves that nothing pays in
the long run but duty-doing. How can a country grow great men if it is
content to be in leading-strings, and to give plausible excuses to
show that that state of things is quite satisfactory?

Only by some form of Imperial Federation can the unity of the Empire
be preserved.

The previous advantages to which I referred concerned Canada directly.
This one may appear, to some persons, far away from us, but it is not.
In another speech I may enlarge on this advantage, but suffice it to
say now, that we cannot isolate ourselves from humanity. Canada ought
to be dearer to us than any other part of the Empire, but none the
less we must admit that the Empire is more important to the world than
any of its parts, and every true man is a citizen of the world.

I will not speak to-night of what the Empire has done for us in the
past, of the rich inheritance into which we have entered, and of the
shame that falls on children who value lightly the honour of their
family and race. Consider only the present position of affairs. The
European nations are busy watching each other. Britain is detaching
herself from them, understanding that she is an oceanic, colonizing,
and world power, much more than a European state. The United States
and Britain are the two Powers, one in essence, cradled in freedom,
that have a great future before them. According to the last census,
the first has a population of some fifty-four millions of whites. The
census of next April will show that the other has nearly forty
millions in the home islands and ten millions in the self-governing
Colonies. The two Powers have thus about the same population of white
men, and the two are likely to grow at the same rate.

In Britain the rate of increase will be less, but in the Colonies it
will be greater than in the States during the next half century. The
States will keep united. They have stamped out disunion. We have to
prove that we intend to keep the Empire united; but that can be done
only by giving the ten millions a gradually increasing share in common
privileges and responsibilities. Surely such a work is not beyond the
resources of statesmanship. For a long time decentralization was
needed. Now, all the signs of the times indicate the necessity to
centralize. The days of small powers are over, and modern inventions
make communication easy between east and west, as well as between
north and south.

If this is not done, what will certainly happen? Separation, first of
one part then of another; weakness of each part and weakness all
round. Think of the impetus that this would give to every force that
makes for chaos among the three hundred millions over whom God in His
providence has placed us. The work that the British Empire has in hand
is far grander than the comparatively parochial duties with which the
States are content to deal. Its problems are wider and more inspiring;
yet, at the same time, the white race that alone, so far, has proved
itself fit for self-government, lives by itself, instead of being
commingled with a coloured race to which only nominal freedom is
allowed. Any one who has lived either in South Africa or in the
Southern States will understand what a free hand and what an
unspeakable leverage this gives us. We need no Force Bill to ensure a
free ballot in Britain, Canada, Australia, or New Zealand. Already our
sons are taking their part in introducing civilization into Africa,
under the aegis of the flag, and in preserving the _Pax Britannica_
among the teeming millions of India and southeastern Asia, those
peoples kindred to ourselves, who for centuries before had been the
prey of successive spoilers. Think of the horizon that this opens up,
and remember that in building a state we must think not of the present
but of the future.

In a generation all the best land on this continent will have been
taken up. But, thanks to the far-reaching wisdom of our fathers, the
greater part of the world will be open to the trade, to the
colonizing, and to the enterprise of our children. We shall not be
confined to a frozen north or to a single continent. We shall take
part in work that is of world-wide significance, and shall act out our
belief that God loves not North America only, but the whole world.
Only on conditions of the British Empire standing, can this be done.
This is the ideal that we should set before us, and remember that no
people has ever been a great or permanent factor in the world that was
without high ideals. I know that this advantage to which I am
referring is not one that can be calculated in dollars, any more than
the work of a Wallace or the poems of a Shakespeare, the life of
Sydney or the death of Gordon; but it is an advantage none the less
for which many of us are content to struggle and, if need be, to
suffer. What are we in this world for? Surely for something higher
than to still the daily craving of appetite. Surely for something
higher than to accumulate money, though it should be to the extent of
adding million to million. Surely we are in the world for something
better! Yes, we are here to think great thoughts, to do great things,
to promote great ideals. This can be done only through faithfulness to
the best spirit of our fathers. Society is an organism, and must
preserve its continuity. It must work, too, through instruments; and
the most potent, keenest, best-tried instrument on earth for
preserving peace, order, liberty and righteousness, is the Empire of
which we are citizens. Shall we throw away that citizenship, or shall
we maintain and strengthen that Empire?

      --_George Monro Grant (By permission)_


  Apply the principles of Emphasis, Inflection, Grouping,
  and Perspective in reading this address. Give specific
  illustrations of each.

       *       *       *       *       *


COLLECT FOR DOMINION DAY


  Father of nations! Help of the feeble hand!
    Strength of the strong! to whom the nations kneel!
  Stay and destroyer, at whose just command
    Earth's kingdoms tremble and her empires reel!
  Who dost the low uplift, the small make great,                       5
    And dost abase the ignorantly proud,
  Of our scant people mould a mighty state,
    To the strong, stern,--to Thee in meekness bowed!
  Father of unity, make this people one!
    Weld, interfuse them in the patriot's flame,--                    10
  Whose forging on Thine anvil was begun
    In blood late shed to purge the common shame;
  That so our hearts, the fever of faction done,
    Banish old feud in our young nation's name.

      --_Charles G. D. Roberts_ (_By arrangement_)

       *       *       *       *       *


ENGLAND


  This royal throne of kings, this scepter'd isle,
  This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars,
  This other Eden, demi-paradise,
  This fortress, built by Nature for herself
  Against infection and the hand of war,
  This happy breed of men, this little world,
  This precious stone set in the silver sea.

       *       *       *       *       *




APPENDIX


A

EXERCISES IN VOWEL SOUNDS AND IN ARTICULATION


1. [=a] as in ate, fate, cave, made, glade, pale.

   a as in air, fair, chair, hair, lair, pair, care, dare, bare,
     share, bear, fairy, compare, parent, prayer, garish, there, heir.

   [)a] as in at, that, and, damp, glad, bade, castle, baron, barrel.

   ae as in far, arm, hark, charm, march, bard, calm, palm, psalm,
     balm, half, alms, father, dark, wrath, path, marsh, laugh.

   [.a] as in ask, grasp, fast, last, pass, past, branch, chance, dance,
     mast, vast, gasp, quaff, craft, staff, chant, grass, mass.

   [a:] as in all, talk, squall, dawn, warp, hawk, laurel, haughty, halt.

   a obscure, in final medial syllables, unaccented, and closed by n,
     l, nt, nce, nd, s, ss, st, p or ph or ff, m, or d, as in sylvan,
     vacancy, mortal, loyal, valiant, guidance, husband, breakfast,
     gallant, ballad, etc.

   [=e] as in me, seem, reap, weed, lean, evil, redeem.

   [)e] as in met, end, spell, debt, text, jest, when, merry, America,
     ceremony.

   [~e] (coalescent) as in her, fern, earth, mercy, verse, stern, earl,
     pearl, term, verge, prefer, serge, earn, early.

   [=i] as in time, tide, mile, wine, high, size.

