while a note was found from Mr Back saying he had gone after the
Indians, but he was unsuccessful in finding them.  Others were sent
afterwards, and so for eighteen days Franklin lived miserably on the
skins, bones, and remains of the reindeer which had been eaten the
previous winter!

On the 29th of October Richardson and Hepburn came in--walking
skeletons.  Where was poor Hood?  Where were the others?  A tragic tale
had to be told by Doctor Richardson.  Here is the account of what
happened.

For two days the party left by Franklin had no food.  Michel then
brought a little game.  Then another day and no food, and Mr Hood was
very ill.  Next day the Iroquois carried home some "wolf-meat," but
Richardson believes it was a part of the body of one of the wanderers
who had been killed by the Iroquois.  This man now became very
ill-natured and got worse and worse in his conduct, refusing to supply
his companions with food or to share what he had procured.  One day
after being remonstrated with while Doctor Richardson and Hepburn were
absent from the tent, this wretch shot Hood in the back, and Michel was
so evidently the murderer that afterwards, in self-defence, Richardson
shot him unexpectedly as he was coming to the fort.  Hepburn had noticed
certain acts which left no doubt of Michel's intention to murder his
companions, and Richardson anticipated the murderer's aim.

After this Richardson, emaciated and half dead, with Hepburn a perfect
skeleton, found Franklin as bad as themselves.  Utterly unable to find
any food they gnawed skins and bones.  They were on the point of death
when on the 7th of November assistance came.  Three Indians sent by Back
appeared with food.  They afforded material assistance, and finally
conducted the remainder of the party to the next fort.  The survivors
reached York Factory in July, 1822, having been absent from it just
three years.

Many Arctic expeditions were sent out after this for the north-west
exploration.  Commander Lyon, in the _Hecla_, has been already
mentioned.  We shall hear of the _Blossom_ in connection with Sir John
Franklin.  The _Victory_, under Captain John Ross and Lieutenant Ross,
Captain Back in the _Terror_ and in boats, the Hudson Bay Company's
_employes_ in 1836-39, and Doctor John Rae, 1846-47, all added their
"notable voyages" to the record of Arctic expeditions, and were we to
detail them there would be a sameness in the narratives, though the
adventurous spirit breathed through them all.  But later on we will
mention Doctor Kane's expedition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

We will at present confine ourselves to Sir John Franklin's expeditions
undertaken in 1825-27 and 1845-50, with the search made for him by
various vessels.

Not contented with what had been done, and was being done, by Parry and
others in the North, Franklin undertook to conduct a second expedition,
which Captain Beachey was appointed to meet by going round Cape Horn,
and through Behring's Strait to the eastward, so as to unite with
Franklin, who hoped to come overland.  Four expeditions, including
these, were fitted out; but we have already seen what Parry did.
Captain Lyon's attempt to survey the coast failed; so we will follow
Franklin in his second venture.

The explorer was again accompanied by Doctor Richardson and Lieutenant
Back; Mr Kendall and Mr Drummond also went as members of the "staff."
Their object was to descend the Mackenzie River to the sea.  There it
was determined the party should divide, one portion going eastward, the
other westward to Behring's Strait.

The whole expedition reached Fort Chepeywan once again in July, 1825,
and pressed onto the Great Bear Lake; then, following the river which
runs out of it to the Mackenzie River, they took up winter quarters;
but, as there was still time to explore a little, Franklin descended the
Mackenzie to the sea, and returned to the Fort (Franklin) before the
severity of winter had overtaken him.

Winter passed over in the usual manner, and in June, 1826, it was judged
that an advance might safely be made.  On the 15th June all were ready.
Two parties were formed.  Franklin and Lieutenant Back, with fourteen
men, were to go westward in the _Reliance_ and _Lion_ (boats); Doctor
Richardson and Mr Kendall, with the _Dolphin_ and _Unicorn_, were to
proceed eastward.  They all descended the Mackenzie together, and when
they reached the mouth they separated as agreed on.  Franklin's party
proceeded westward, and met with some opposition from the Esquimaux, who
tried to steal the stores and other things.

Eventually the explorers got free, and sailed on in continually thick,
foggy weather.  It was the middle of August before the boats reached the
half-way point between the Mackenzie and the Cape.  After a careful
consideration of the circumstances, and being ignorant of the vicinity--
comparatively speaking--of Captain Beachey in the _Blossom_, which had
been directed to unite with him, Franklin made up his mind to return, as
the winter was already beginning to manifest its approach.

Beachey was at that time actually expecting Captain Franklin.  Only one
hundred and forty-six miles intervened between them, and the brave
explorer afterwards declared that had he known of the _Blossom_ being so
near he would have risked the meeting.  But he had no reason to think
that Beachey had got nearer than Kotzebue Sound, whereas a party from
the _Blossom_ had even ventured round Icy Cape in the search for
Franklin.

The result was that Franklin returned, encountering severe weather, and
on the 21st of September again gained the shelter of Fort Franklin.
Beachey, meanwhile, waited in Kotzebue Sound as long as he dared, and
then retreated to Petropavlovok.  The extent of Franklin's survey had
extended over three hundred and seventy-four miles of dreary coast
without discovering a single harbour for vessels.  He penetrated as far
as latitude 70 degrees 24 minutes, and longitude 149 degrees 37 minutes
West.

Doctor Richardson's party made some very valuable observations in his
survey of five hundred miles--a much more pleasant journey than
Franklin's.  In the account of the expedition are many interesting
details of Esquimaux life.  Doctor Richardson and his companions reached
winter quarters in safety on the Great Bear Lake.  In 1827 Captain
Beachey again made his way up to Kotzebue Sound, in the expectation of
encountering Franklin, but, of course, did not meet him.  These three
parties traced the coast down to Return Reef westward, from the
Mackenzie eastward to Cape Kensurstern, and circumnavigated the Great
Bear Lake, this, "if continued eastward, would have solved the
North-West Passage."

Before considering the several Arctic expeditions which made attempts to
discover the desired North-West Passage, we will speak of Sir John
Franklin's third and last expedition to the Icy Regions.  In the year
1829, Captain Franklin had been created a Knight, and received the
degree of D.C.L. at Oxford.  In 1830 he commanded the _Rainbow_ in the
Mediterranean, which ship was known as "Franklin's Paradise," so well
did he treat his crew.  In the year 1836, he was appointed Governor of
Van Dieman's Land (Tasmania), and in that colony he remained until 1843,
where he was, and is still, gratefully remembered.  He returned to
England in consequence, it is said, of some misunderstanding with the
Colonial Office, and in 1845 he claimed the command of the new
expedition.

THE LAST VOYAGE OF FRANKLIN.

In 1844 public attention was again directed to the discovery of the
North-West Passage.  The expedition under Sir James Ross, in the
_Erebus_ and _Terror_, to the South Polar regions had reopened the
Arctic question.  The vessels had been proved sound; they were available
for a new advance.  Sir John Franklin had returned from Tasmania, and
when the Admiralty had decided to send out an expedition, he laid claim
to the post of commander of it.

It was not until May, 1845, that the _Erebus_ and _Terror_, fitted with
auxiliary screws, were ready to go.  A store-vessel accompanied them as
far as Disco, on the Greenland coast, and there the two ships entered
Baffin's Bay.  Along the coast and into the ice they go, meeting it as
it is making its slow way to the south.  At length the ships are
completely surrounded, and anchored to the snowy floes which extend in
all directions.

By the end of July they have managed to press on out of the track of all
the whaling vessels, and make for Lancaster Sound, westward.  The
desolate coast of North Devon is skirted, and subsequently Beachey
Island is reached.  From hence they move northward again, and to
Wellington Channel, only to be turned back again by the ice.

But the signs of coming winter made it absolutely necessary that some
sheltered place should be found in which the long dreary months might be
passed.  Day after day the _Erebus_ and _Terror_ sought such a
resting-place, and found none.  Any advance was now out of the question;
the "massing" ice prevented that, and threatened them daily.  At length
it was decided to run for shelter to Beachey Island, and in Erebus and
Terror Bay the expedition was made as snug as possible for the winter.
The daily record of the passed months tells us of a continual struggle
with ice and snow; checks and renewed efforts; storm-tossed seas, and
icebergs innumerable.

At Beachey Island the vessels remained after their exploration of nearly
three hundred miles of new ground.  Plans, no doubt, were made for the
following year, while the cold death-like hand of winter came and
grasped everything in its iron grip.  The sun, of course, left the
ships, and after climbing the hills to see the last of him, the crews
went back in darkness to the vessels.  How the crews amused themselves
during the winter we can imagine, and we find plenty of testimony to the
games, the acting, the reading, and study, in which time was passed.
The great thing to be aimed at was occupation--action.  Stagnation meant
death.

Three men died during the winter, and when the sun reappeared, when the
creeks in the ice warned the crews that the time of release was at hand,
a good and anxious look-out was kept.  At length the ice-floes moved
away, and after a while the channel was cut out for the release of the
_Erebus_ and _Terror_.  The open water was at length gained, the
instructions were to go south-west from Cape Walker, and that was now
the point aimed at.  When the Cape had been gained, and quitted for Cape
Herschel, the ships fell into the Melville Island ice-stream, and they
struggled on till King William's Land was sighted.  But unfortunately by
that time another winter had began to reform the ice.  So there was
nothing to do but find winter quarters, which were finally established
northward of Cape Felix, in anything but a happy place, for the ice
there is described as of a most fearful nature, and of terrible
pressure.

Here there was a fearful prospect--nothing but ice in mountains, and in
masses which tossed the ships--slowly indeed--and threatened to "nip"
them in halves.  But notwithstanding all the hardships, the men bore up,
and prepared for the overland journey to Cape Herschel--a hundred miles
only!--as soon as the spring should open.  As soon as possible, a
pioneer party, under Lieutenant Gore and Mr Des Voeux, of the _Erebus_,
started off to see the channel or path by which they might reach
America.  When they rapidly returned to tell their comrades the good
news they had gathered, they found Sir John Franklin dead!

Shortly afterwards, in a deep crevasse in the ice, the body was laid
while the burial service was read over it by Captain Fitzjames.
Franklin, "like another Moses, fell when his work was accomplished--with
the long object of his life in view."

The movement of such ice as was still around the vessels would not take
place till very late.  The ice will move, but winter may again shut the
ships in before they have traversed one half of the ninety miles still
remaining.  Captains Fitzjames and Crozier consult accordingly.

The floe moves, and the imbedded ships go south with it, but there is no
water.  No sailing is possible.  Drifting helpless with the ice, the
_Erebus_ and _Terror_ are carried along, but unless open water be found,
they will drift back again in the autumn, or at any rate remain
imprisoned in it.

Autumn has arrived--the new ice is forming, the floe no longer moves at
all.  Thirty miles have been passed over by the floe; the explorers are
so much nearer, but then the drift ceases.  Sixty miles or less of ice
intervene, and then the open sea will be reached.  But the doom has gone
forth.  Winter closes again on the brave, the sick, and the suffering;
cold, disease, and privation are fast decimating the available hands.
The snow-cloud settles down upon the vessels, darkness shrouds them; and
when the curtain again rises, and the sun shines out, we find twenty-one
officers and men had been laid to their long, last rest in the Arctic
solitudes.  One hundred and four men still remain--hungry, frozen,
patient, brave.  Alas that all the bravery was no avail!

It is pitiful to dwell upon the remainder of the sad story of the
expedition.  We can picture the band now reduced to such extremity that
they must all remain to die, or struggle on across the ice and snow to
Cape Herschel.  They must go.  They pack the boats, and put them upon
sleighs, and then wait for spring to set about their weary work.

April comes, and has nearly gone, when the command is given.  The men
look their last upon the _Erebus_ and _Terror_, give them three cheers,
and go away into the desolate waste--to die!  Point Victory their
object.  They gained it, and then their helplessness came and stared
them in the face.  In a cairn on the point Fitzjames placed a brief
record, and that is all.  They have only food for a month more, and day
by day the strong are growing weak and the weak are dying.

The increase in the number of the latter necessitated a division.  The
sick must remain till help comes, or go back to the ships.  We can
picture the fearful alternative.  Many remained, and of that number two
skeletons were afterwards found, and on board one of the ships the
"bones of a large man with long teeth!"  That is all!

The remainder pushed on to Cape Herschel, and left a record in a cairn.
They were desperate and dying men, yet they endeavoured to reach the
Great Fish River, but alas! alas! the skeleton found lying face
downwards, left unburied as he fell, tells us as much of the fate of the
whole party as if the record had been kept.

  "The Polar clouds uplift
  One moment, and no more."

For a long time no one knew the fate of the _Erebus_ and _Terror_, until
Lady Franklin sent out McClintock in the _Fox_ to lift the veil which
hung over the last voyage of the intrepid John Franklin.  But before
giving the account of McClintock's successful search we will enumerate
the various attempts made by Government to ascertain the fate of
Franklin.  Our summary must be a very brief one.

Three years after Franklin had set out considerable uneasiness was felt
in Great Britain concerning him.  In 1848 two ships, the _Herald_ and
the _Plover_, were sent out by the Admiralty to afford assistance, but
Sir John Richardson and Doctor Rae had anticipated the Government
vessels, and gone via New York to the Mackenzie, which he had already
twice visited with Franklin.  Captain Sir James Ross also was searching
by the Lancaster Sound, and he experienced many hardships; but in 1850
his vessels (the _Enterprise_ and _Investigator_, under Collinson and
McClure) were sent, and later on an international squadron was
dispatched to Lancaster Sound under Captains Austin and Penny, Sir John
Ross in the _Felix_, and Mr Grinnell's two American ships under
Lieutenant De Haven, as well as the _Albert_, sent out by Lady Franklin
at her own cost, commanded by Commander Forsyth.

This mixture of royal and mercantile naval commands gave rise to some
unfriendly feelings, but Captain Penny succeeded in finding many traces
of Franklin's crews, and the tombs of those who had died in 1846.  Many
most useful surveys and some geographical discoveries were made, but
beyond the traces found by Ommaney and Penny nothing of the fate of the
Franklin expedition was discovered.

In 1852 Sir E. Belcher sailed on the same errand.  Lady Franklin also
dispatched the _Isabel_.  Doctor Rae in 1854, however, discovered,
through the information afforded by the Esquimaux, that some white men
had been seen in King William's Land a few years previously, "dragging
boats across the ice," and "looking thin."  The Hudson's Bay Company
then sent Mr Anderson, in accordance with a request of the English
Government, to explore the district; and on Montreal Island he found the
remains of a boat, and obtained from the Esquimaux many relics of
Franklin's expedition, with articles which had belonged to the crews.
This intelligence decided Lady Franklin to make another attempt to learn
the actual fate of her brave husband.

Before Doctor Rae had returned with the intelligence he had gained
concerning the Franklin Expedition, a very important Arctic Expedition
had been undertaken by Doctor Elisha Kane.  To this we must turn our
attention in a new chapter, as he went out to the limits of the Arctic
Zone in search of Sir J. Franklin, and accomplished a most adventurous
journey.



CHAPTER THIRTY.

DR KANE'S VOYAGE TO THE POLAR REGIONS.

American exploration--The "open Polar Sea"--Dr Kane's voyage in the
_Advance_--Sledge-work--The _Advance_ in winter quarters--Incidents of
the winter--Abandonment of the ship--Terrible suffering--Drifting--
Rescued.

The Americans had already sent out an expedition to search for Franklin,
which was commanded by Lieutenant De Haven.  These vessels were the
_Advance_ and _Rescue_, and the expedition, which we have referred to as
the "Grinnell Expedition," was accompanied by Doctor E.K. Kane as
"surgeon, naturalist, and historian."  In the spring of 1853, when more
search expeditions were being sent out, Mr Grinnell, Mr Peabody, and
other gentlemen, dispatched Doctor Kane as leader of this important
undertaking.

Doctor Kane had minutely studied the Arctic problem, and he entertained
the idea that around the Pole is open water--a theory afterwards acted
on by Doctor Hayes, and set forth in a pamphlet by Captain Bent, called
"Gateways to the Pole," which sustains the belief that the Gulf Stream,
by its warm water, keeps the northern channel free from ice, and by
following the Gulf Stream the Pole may be reached.

But this is a digression.  Doctor Kane had accepted the conduct of the
expedition, and at once embarked upon it.  He went upon the supposition
of the "open Polar Sea," and sailed in the _Advance_ from New York, on
the 30th of May, 1853.  He had determined to penetrate as far up
"Smith's Strait" as possible, and by it enter the Polar Sea.  His party
consisted of eighteen officers and men, including Doctor Hayes.

At Saint John's, Newfoundland, they paused to embark some dogs for
sleigh-hauling, and steered thence for Baffin's Bay.  Early in July the
ship entered Frikernaes, in Greenland, where the people received the
crew gladly.  On the 16th the promontory of Swartchuk was passed; and,
later, icebergs were met with in considerable numbers, under one of
which they were nearly swamped, the warning fragments only giving the
ship time to cast off her icy moorings.  Melville Bay was however
navigated, and by the 3rd of August the North Water, through which Kane
wished to reach Smith's Strait (or Sound), was opening to their view.

The "Red Snow," or Crimson Cliffs mentioned by Sir John Ross, were
safely passed, and then doubling Alexander Cape, Smith's Sound was
fairly entered.  When Littlebow Island was at length reached, Doctor
Kane determined to form a store depot there, and leave a boat, in view
of future contingencies.  Stones, and sand, and water were placed and
poured upon the covered stores, blankets, etcetera.  This _cache_ was
soon frozen solid, and thus preserved from the weather and the Polar
bears.  The boat was left near what proved to be an old Esquimaux camp.

When these far-seeing preparations had been made, Doctor Kane
endeavoured to press on, but all attempts were defeated by the ice which
pressed upon the vessel; so an advance along the coast was tried.  A
storm arose, and the bergs came dashing along before the wind.  The
brave Kane determined to utilise his threatening foes, and, making fast
to one fine iceberg, the _Advance_ was towed along, while the storm
lasted, through the ice which the drifting berg cleared away merrily.
Thus, after considerable peril from storm and ice, the vessel lay at
rest in temporary shelter under another iceberg, which, fortunately,
protected them from the hurricane.

They had come fully ten miles in the track of the convenient iceberg;
and, when the storm abated--which it did on the 22nd--the crew took the
_Advance_ in tow, but made little progress along the ice-belt.  Doctor
Kane was too impatient to stay with the vessel, so, with a few
followers, he hurried on in front to survey the coast in a boat,
somewhat unpleasantly named the _Forlorn Hope_, which, however, they
soon abandoned for a sleigh.

The journey in this conveyance was neither so easy nor so rapid as
perhaps may be expected, but some progress was made, though eight miles
a day does not come up to our European notions of sledge-travelling.
Finding the ice more and more difficult the sleigh was in its turn
quitted, and the party advanced on foot.  In this manner, in not very
cold weather, they proceeded rapidly.  They passed Cape Thackeray, which
they named, and reached Cape George Russell; whence they viewed the
great Humboldt Glacier, Cape Jackson, and Cape Barrow, all illustrious
titles in the archives of the world.

When Doctor Kane had made a search for a harbour, and found none so
convenient as the place he had left the _Advance_, he made his way back
again, satisfied that he had as good winter quarters as he could
reasonably expect to find.  But he, perhaps, overlooked the fact that
had he discovered a convenient inlet in the ice fifty miles from the
ship, how was the _Advance_ to be brought into it over an ice-pack,
where a boat or a sleigh could not travel?  So, perhaps, all things
considered, it was fortunate that he did not find a better shelter.

Doctor Kane and his men returned to the _Advance_, and had her warped in
between two islands for the winter, which was then rapidly approaching.
Soundings were taken in seven fathoms, and when all had been made snug,
the vessel was secured, laid-up in harbour--a shelter which she was
destined never to quit--at any rate, not as a "commissioned" ship.

Preparations were made for sleigh journeys.  The dogs were trained,
sleighs were constructed, while an observatory was also erected.  Some
of the party made excursions during the winter, and found their course
barred by an immense glacier four hundred feet high.  Varied means were
resorted to to kill the usual monotony of the Arctic winter.  A
newspaper was started, "hare and hounds" was practised, and perhaps
amateur plays were acted, beside the "Frozen Deep."  They did get up a
fancy ball, and enjoyed it very much.

A fire on board ship varied these more interesting proceedings.  It
occurred while an experiment was being made to kill rats with carbonic
acid gas.  The chief immediate effects were to nearly suffocate Doctor
Kane and three others, a considerable fire, and some discomfort.  Then
some dogs went mad in consequence of the depression induced by darkness
and the intense cold.  The explorers encountered many dangers in their
excursions, also in falling into crevasses, etcetera.  Some dogs died
owing to want of sunlight.

Never had any explorers wintered in such high latitudes before,
excepting perhaps in Spitzbergen.  We cannot picture to ourselves the
intense Egyptian darkness which prevails in such places as Kane and his
companions wintered.  The thermometer was more than 100 degrees _below
freezing_ point.  This was in February, 1854, and the "madness" of the
dogs, though not harmful to their masters, was evidently attributable to
the terrible cold, which affected the air passages, and to the continued
absence of light.

At length Doctor Kane went with a selected party to meet the sun.  He
set off to find the light for which all were perishing.  The sun was
sighted, and the news was quickly followed by the orb, which revived the
half-frozen crew and the remaining dogs, of which only six were alive,
the rest had died mad--"mentally" afflicted--not with "hydrophobia," but
with "brain" disease.  As for the effect on the men, we may quote Doctor
Kane, who says, "An Arctic night and an Arctic day age a man more
harshly than a year anywhere else in all this weary world."

Doctor Kane had made preparations for his sledge expedition to the
north, and a small party was sent ahead on the 19th of March to
establish a depot of stores.  But by the 31st of the month three men
returned, swollen, haggard, and scarcely able to articulate.  Four men
had been left frozen in the ice in a tent, perfectly disabled.  Even the
direction in which they lay was uncertain, but Kane and nine men started
to the rescue.  They nearly relinquished the search in sheer despair
until some footprints were discovered which gave them the clue.  They
reached the tent after a continued search of twenty-one hours.

After a brief rest--some sleeping in the small tent by turns, while the
rest walked about outside to keep themselves from freezing--they set out
on their homeward journey, but quickly became aware of their rapidly
failing energies.  They were still nine miles from home, and some men
wanted to lie down and sleep, another was frozen stiff, and another lay
down in the snow.  A halt was necessary.

The tent was pitched: no fire could be lighted, as no one could hold the
materials for striking the flame.  The worst patients were put inside
the tent, and then Kane and Godfrey pushed on to the camp for food.
They could only keep themselves awake by incessant talking all the way,
and Doctor Kane states they were neither of them entirely in their right
senses during this trying walk.  They remember a bear which tore a
"jumper" that one of the men had thrown off on the previous day;
however, the animal did not mind the explorers at all.  But Bruin had
upset the tent, and it was with much difficulty Kane and his companion
raised it.  They then went to sleep, and Kane's beard was frozen to the
buffalo skin, so he had to be "cut out."  By the time they had made
preparations, the remainder of the party arrived, and they all made for
the brig.

The remainder of the journey was scarcely accomplished with life.  Many
ate snow, and their mouths swelled fearfully.  Nearly all were
exhausted.  At length they became delirious, and only reached the
_Advance_ by instinct, for they were all staggering along blindly when
Peterson and Whipple met them with some restoratives.  This expedition
cost two men amputation, and two others died.

During the short summer some expeditions were organised, as the
_Advance_ remained immovable.  Some discoveries were made, but the
expeditions ended in disaster.  The Humboldt Glacier and Tennyson
Monument--the latter a column of ice, like an obelisk four hundred and
eighty feet high, on a pedestal--were visited.  But nothing resulted
from the excursions but blindness, privation, and suffering.  An attempt
was made to communicate with Sir E. Belcher on Beachey Island, but it
failed, and another winter in the ice had to be faced.  Some men
preferred to leave the ship, but they returned after a while.

The winter passed drearily, amid privations which brought the men almost
down to the lowest pitch of despair but employment fortunately kept them
from the last depth, and preparations for a spring excursion cheered
them up.  The Esquimaux were friendly, and a treaty was entered into
with them, which proved useful.

At last summer appeared.  The 17th of May was fixed for the start; the
_Advance_ was to be abandoned.  The day was Sunday.  Prayers were read,
and then Doctor Kane addressed his men, hopefully pointing out their
duty, and encouraging them to proceed, unselfishly helping the sick and
behaving like men.  The flags were then hoisted and struck; then the
_Advance_ was abandoned, and the retreat commenced to Littleton Island
first, and thence to Danish Settlements.

It was Tuesday, the 19th of June, when the party took a last leave of
the Esquimaux and put to sea; that first night a boat was swamped.  The
_Eric_ went down in the ice; the _Faith_ and _Hope_ remained.  On the
22nd, Northumberland Island was reached in a blinding snowstorm; but
fresh provisions were fortunately procured.

They then succeeded, by dragging the boats over the ice, with occasional
rowing, in crossing the Murchison Channel, and encamped for the night on
the land ice-floe.  Thus they proceeded, amid tremendous difficulties,
on scanty food--bread-dust and a lump of tallow about the size of a
walnut--and tea when they could procure water.  At length they found the
loads heavier, and came to the sad conclusion that their energies were
giving way.  Nothing in view, "we were sorely disheartened," says Doctor
Kane.

No wonder!  Utterly at the mercy of the ice, which at times broke up,
and fell down, threatening to carry them to destruction with it, or bury
them amid the hummocks.  Hemmed in, and in imminent danger of death,
they nevertheless clung to the ice until the rising tide should float
them up and enable them to scale the icy cliffs into comparative
shelter--"Weary Man's Rest."

There they remained till the snow had abated, and then they struggled on
amid ice and "sludge" until checked by a glacier.  They had doubled Cape
Dudley Digges, and after a survey, decided to wait in the ice at
"Providence Halt."  After a week's rest they again continued their way,
past the "Crimson Cliffs," and into more cheerful regions.  They were,
however, nearly starving, but managed to secure a seal, which saved them
for the time; their feet were badly swollen, and they had no desire to
sleep.  They were now drifting in the open bay (in the Atlantic
"ice-drift") in leaky boats, a position sufficiently perilous, even
without the accompaniments of hunger and sleeplessness.

On the 1st of August, however, they had reached familiar waters.  Two
days later a cry was heard, ending in a "hullo."  Men were coming, in a
small boat.  "It is the Upernavik oil-boat," said Petersen.  He was
right.  From the men they learned the news of the Crimean War, and the
discovery of the remains of Franklin's party a thousand miles south of
the places they had explored.

Next day they gained Upernavik in safety, after eighty-four days'
travelling; in the open air all the time.  In Upernavik they remained
until the 6th of September, and then embarked for the Shetland Isles.
On the way they fell in with some American vessels which had been
dispatched to search for them, and they were soon welcomed in New York.

From a scientific point of view Doctor Kane's expedition had most
important results in the discovery of a large channel to the north-west,
and in many other discoveries and surveys of the American and Greenland
coasts.



CHAPTER THIRTY ONE.

THE "FOX" EXPEDITION.

Expeditions in search of Franklin--The _Fox_ commissioned by Sir L.
McClintock--The search by Hobson--Relics found--The fate of Sir John
Franklin's expedition--The North-West Passage discovered.

While Doctor Kane was away in 1853 the North-West Passage had been
demonstrated by Captains McClure and Collinson, who it may be remembered
went on in 1850 in the _Investigator_ and _Resolute_ to carry out the
"Behring Strait Expedition."  In 1853 Lady Franklin sent out the
_Rattlesnake_ and _Isabel_ to find McClure.  Captain Inglefield also
went out, as already stated, to aid Sir E. Belcher in Barrow Strait.  It
was on this voyage that Lieutenant Bellot was lost (August, 1853).
Belcher found no traces of Franklin, but they found McClure and his
ships' company, who had been in the ice for three years.  They had gone
in by Behring's Strait and returned by Baffin's Bay, which established
the fact of the so long doubted passage parallel with the American coast
between these pieces of water.  In 1854 the ships _Assistance_,
_Resolute_, _Pioneer_, _Intrepid_, and the _Investigator_ were all
abandoned.  The crews were taken on board the _Talbot_, _Phoenix_, and
_North Star_, and reached England in 1854 without having found any true
trace of Franklin, though it had been ascertained that he wintered upon
Beachey Island in 1845-6.

The crews of the _Erebus_ and _Terror_ were given up.  War was
threatening in Europe, and the relics of Franklin were obscured in the
smoke of the Crimean battles.  Nevertheless, the idea that Sir John
Franklin and his devoted followers were in the Arctic regions, and still
alive, was entertained by a good many people.  The Admiralty declined to
inquire farther, but Lady Franklin again found means to equip and
dispatch a fourth expedition.  In 1857 the preparations were made.
Captain McClintock, who had commanded former expeditions, undertook the
post of leader.  The _Fox_ was purchased, and on the 1st of July, 1857,
the search again was entered upon.

