
"Yes, O yes!  I know it all," groaned La Certe.

"Well," continued Dan, bitterly, "his fate is not unlikely to be ours."

The poor half-breed made no reply to this.  For some time he lay quite
still, and his comrade had almost fallen into an uneasy slumber, when he
was awakened by La Certe breaking out into a soliloquy in which he
apostrophised his absent wife.

"O my Slowfoot!" he murmured.  "Shall we never meet again on earth?
Yes, you are right.  I have been lazy!  I _am_ lazy.  I suppose that
this is punishment for my sin.  But it is hard to bear, and very heavy--
is it not?--for only following one's nature in longing for repose.  O!
why was I born?  Why was our little one born, to enjoy for so brief a
time the delights of smoke, and then have it denied her--except on the
sly, when with her miserable father, who will never see her more--
perhaps."

He paused for a few minutes, and then broke out again.

"Yes, my Slowfoot--you are right.  I must reform.  I will cast off my
sloth as a garment--even--even though I should go naked all the rest of
my days!  I will work--energise!  I will--"

"Hold your tongue, La Certe, and listen," said Dan in a low, stern
voice.

"I am all attention," returned the poor man in a similarly low tone.

"Are you game to fight, if you get the chance?"

"Game to fight!" echoed the other--"to fight for my Slowfoot, my little
one, my smoke, and my repo--I mean my--my--new--"

"Speak lower, man, and listen to a plan I have in my head."

Here Dan spoke so low that he could not be heard at all, save only by
his companion; but that is of little consequence, for the plan, whatever
it might have been, was never carried out.

Next day the Nor'-west party with their two prisoners paddled away
towards the mouth of the grand turbulent Winnipeg River, and began to
traverse the weary wilderness-route of rivers and lakes, which at that
time formed the only direct means of communication between the frontiers
of Canada and "Rupert's Land."



CHAPTER THIRTY FIVE.

THE LAST.

Eagerly, earnestly, doggedly, did Daniel Davidson and Francois La Certe
watch for a favourable opportunity to escape from their captors, but
they waited and watched in vain, for their captors were cruel, suspected
them of the intention to escape, and were consequently careful to
prevent even an attempt being made.  They never freed their wrists from
strong cords; kept knives and axes out of their way; tethered them to a
tree each night, and watched them continually.

Can it be wondered at that, in the circumstances, our unfortunate hero
became almost insane?  The wedding-day had been fixed before he left Red
River; preparations were being made for the great event, and it was
pretty well understood that Dan had gone off hunting with the view,
chiefly, to be out of people's way till the day should arrive.  They
would scarcely begin to notice his prolonged absence till the day
approached.  Then, no doubt, when too late, and he should be far on the
way to Canada, they would in some alarm send out parties to search for
him.

Dan became desperate, but he was gifted with an unusual power of
self-control, so that, beyond a very stern expression, his countenance
betrayed no sign of the terrible conflict that was raging within--a
conflict in which mortal hatred of mankind in general and an
overwhelming desire to kill or be killed formed elements.  Ah! reader,
poor human beings have many and many a time in the past been brought to
this terrible condition.  God grant that we and ours may never know what
it is to tremble on the brink of madness because of the combined
influence of gross injustice and horrible cruelty.  To do the
Nor'-westers justice, they were unaware of the intensity of the pain
they were inflicting.  They had only captured a powerful enemy, and
meant, by keeping a tight hold of him, to render him powerless in the
future--that was all!

As for La Certe, they had no intention of taking him to Canada.  They
only meant to carry him so far on the road, that, when set free, it
would be impossible for him to get back to the colony in time to give
effective warning to Dan's friends.

One afternoon the voyagers put ashore at one of the numerous portages
which obstruct the navigation of that route to Canada, and, after
unloading the canoe and lifting her out of the water, they proceeded to
carry the lading across to the still water above the rapids which
rendered this portage necessary.

Although bound, the prisoners were by no means freed from labour.  The
cords had been so arranged that they could use the paddle while in the
canoe; while, on the portages, although unable to load themselves, they
were quite able to carry a load which others placed on their shoulders.
On this occasion Dan was first sent off with a load, and then La Certe
and some of the others followed.  When he reached the upper end of the
portage, Dan flung down his load, and, from his elevated position, gazed
wistfully down the valley through which the waters of the Winnipeg River
roared and seethed among jagged rocks as far as the eye could reach.  It
was a wild majestic scene, but no thought of its grandeur touched the
mind of the poor prisoner.  He thought only of escape.  His intimate
knowledge, however, of the terrific power of rushing water told him that
there could be no escape in that direction.

"Oh! if my arms were only free, I would risk it!" he murmured, as he
raised his hands and looked at the powerful thongs of hide with which
they were bound--thongs which were always drawn tighter when he landed,
to render an attempt at escape more hopeless.  Then he glanced at the
rushing river beside him.  A sheer precipice of full thirty feet
descended from the spot on which he stood to the edge of the flood.
Just below there was a whirlpool, and beyond that began the first of the
series of falls and rapids which were avoided by means of the portage.
Half-mad though he was, he did not dream of attempting such a leap with
bound hands.  He would wait, and continue to hope for a more favourable
opportunity, but the possibility of such an opportunity was now growing
very faint indeed, for even if he did escape, and had a canoe to use, it
was by that time barely possible to accomplish the journey in time for
the wedding-day.  But although his hope of being in time had pretty well
died out, his whole heart was still concentrated on the simple desire to
escape.

A rush of despair came upon the poor youth just then, and the idea of
ending his misery by taking his own life occurred to him for a fleeting
moment, as he gazed wistfully around on water, wood, and sky, and
observed the laden and toiling men who were slowly clambering up the
steep towards him--La Certe being in front.

Just then an object among the grass at his feet attracted his attention.
Stooping, he picked it up and found it to be a scalping-knife!--
dropped, probably, long before by some passing Indians or voyageurs, for
it was very rusty.

With a bounding heart and a wild rush of blood to his temples, he sprang
towards a tree: stuck the point of the knife into it; held the handle
with his teeth; sawed the thongs across its edge once or twice--and was
free!

His first impulse was to bound into the woods, but the thought of his
comrade arrested him.  La Certe was already close at hand.  Running
towards him he said, quickly, "Drop your load!  Now or never!" and cut
his bonds at once.  Then, turning, he sprang towards the woods.  But
from the very opening through which he meant to plunge into the tangled
thicket, there issued the leader of the Nor'-westers and two of his men.
The chief was armed with a gun, which he immediately presented.  With
the instinct of bush-warriors the two prisoners dodged behind rocks, and
made for the higher ground which Dan had recently quitted.  Here a sheer
precipice barred further progress.  There was no way of escape but the
river.  They ran to the edge and looked down.  La Certe shrank back,
appalled.  Dan glanced quickly round to see if there was any other
opening.  Then there came over his spirit that old, old resolve which
has, in the moment of their extremity, nerved so many men to face danger
and death, from the days of Adam downward.

"Now, La Certe," he said, grasping his comrade's hand: "Farewell!  Death
or Freedom!  Tell Elspie my last thoughts were of her!"

Almost before the half-breed could realise what was said, Dan had leaped
over the cliff and disappeared in the raging torrent.  A few seconds
later he was seen to rise in the whirlpool below the first cataract, and
to buffet the stream vigorously, then he disappeared a second time.
Before La Certe could make out whether his friend rose again, he was
seized from behind, and dragged from the brink of the precipice.

Swift as the hunted stag springs from his covert, and bounds over every
obstacle with speed and apparent ease, so sprang the chief of the
Nor'-westers down the rugged path which led to the foot of the series of
rapids, and the lower end of the portage.  There was good grit in the
man, morally and physically, for he was bent on a rescue which involved
considerable danger.

Throwing off his capote, and tightening his belt, he stood on a ledge
just below the last fall, intently watching the water.

The fall was not high, but it was deep, and rushed into a large dark
basin with terrible velocity, causing the tormented foam-speckled water
to circulate round its edges.  In a few moments the form of Dan was seen
to shoot down the fall and disappear in the basin.  The chief stooped,
but did not spring until, not far from him, the apparently inanimate
form reappeared on the surface and began to circle slowly round among
the flecks of foam.  Then he plunged, swam out with powerful strokes,
and quickly returned to the shore with Dan in his grasp.

Soon they were surrounded by the other voyageurs, who had left La Certe
to look after himself,--not caring much, in the excitement of the
moment, whether he escaped or not.

"He is dead," said one; "he breathes not; and see how his face is
bruised and cut."

"And his chest, too," said another.  "I think his ribs have been broken.
Poor fellow!  It was a wild, a reckless jump!"

"Keep back, and let him have air," said the chief, who was doing his
best, according to his knowledge, to resuscitate Dan.

Presently La Certe arrived, panting.

"O! he is gone!  My comrade, my friend, is dead!" he exclaimed,
clenching his hands, and gazing at the pale, bruised face.

"You are wrong," exclaimed the chief, testily.  "Out of the way, man!
See! his eyelids quiver."

And so they did; and so also quivered his lips, and then a sigh came--
faint and feeble--then stronger, and at last Dan opened his eyes and
thanked God that his life had been spared.  But when he recovered
sufficiently to realise his true position as being again a captive, the
feeling of despair returned.

That night they encamped a mile above the upper end of the portage.  At
supper the two prisoners were allowed to sit by the camp-fire and eat
with their hands free.

"Monsieur," said the guide to Dan, respectfully, "you see it is
impossible to escape.  Why compel us to bind you?  Give me your word of
honour that you will not try, and your limbs may then remain as free as
mine."

"I give you my word of honour," answered Dan, with a sardonic smile,
"that till after breakfast to-morrow I will not try, for I need rest and
food; but after that, I give you my word that I will never cease to
try."

With this promise the guide was fain to rest content, and that night Dan
and his friend were allowed to sleep untethered, which they did soundly.

Next morning they were roused in gentler tones than usual, and not
required to work--as had been the case hitherto--before breakfast.  In
short, there was an evident change in the feelings of their captors
towards them, founded largely, no doubt, on admiration of Dan's reckless
courage; but that did not induce them in the least degree to relax their
vigilance, for the moment the hour of truce had passed, the chief
advanced towards Dan with the thongs to bind him.

For one moment Dan felt an impulse to knock the man down, and then fight
the whole party until death should end the matter; but the good-humoured
look on his jailer's face, the fact that the man had saved his life the
day before, and the certainty of defeat with such odds against him,
induced him to quell the evil spirit and to hold out his hands.

"Pardon, Monsieur," said the chief, with the politeness of a French
half-breed.  "I am sorry you refuse to give me your parole.  I would
rather see you like the rest of us; but my orders are strict, and I must
obey."

Before Dan could reply, a sound struck on their ears, which caused the
whole party to listen, immovable and in perfect silence.

It was the wild, plaintive, beautiful song of the voyageur which had
floated to them on the morning air, softened by distance to a mere echo
of sweet sound.  After listening intently for a few moments, the guide
said gently: "Voyageurs."

Again they listened to the familiar sound, which increased in volume and
strength as it approached, proving that the voyageurs were descending
the river towards them.  As yet nothing could be seen, for a
thickly-wooded point intervened.  Presently the song burst on them in
full resonant chorus; at the same moment two large north-canoes--in all
the brilliancy of orange-coloured bark, painted bows and sterns,
red-bladed paddles, with crews of scarlet-capped or bare-headed men
swept round the point with quick stroke, in time to the rapid measure.

A cheer was the irrepressible impulse of the men on shore, causing the
newcomers to stop and listen.

"Perhaps," said Dan, "they may be your foes of the Hudson's Bay
Company."

"That may be so," returned the Nor'-west Chief, gravely.

The unfurling of an "H.B.C." (Hudson's Bay Company) flag proved that it
was so, to a certainty, and the depressed Nor'-westers did not cheer
again; but the H B C men came on, paddling with wild vigour and cheering
hilariously.

"They seem in great spirits," growled the Nor'-west leader.  "We are
almost as strong as they, boys, and have the advantage of woods and
cliffs.  Shall we fight and keep our prisoners?"

"What is that white thing in the bow of the first canoe?" said one of
the men.

"It looks like a flag," said another.

"If so, it is a flag of truce," observed Dan.  "They have something to
say, and do not want to fight."

"That may be trite, but we won't let _you_ be at the conference,"
returned the leader, sternly.  "Come, four of you, lead them out of
earshot.  Take your guns, and use them if need be."

Four powerful fellows at once obeyed the order, and led the prisoners,
who had been once more bound, into the woods.  Once again Dan was
tempted to offer fierce resistance, but he knew that the Hudson's Bay
men were yet too far off to be able to hear shouts--at least to
understand the meaning of them--and that it would be useless to resist
such a guard.  He therefore submitted to be led a mile or so into the
woods, and finally was permitted to sit down with La Certe under a tree
to await the result of the conference.

They had not to wait long.  In less than half-an-hour one of the younger
among the Nor'-westers came bounding towards them, waving his cap and
shouting.

"You are free, Messieurs--free!" he cried, seizing both prisoners by the
hands.  "We are no longer enemies!"

"Free!  What do you mean?" demanded Dan, who fancied that the young man
must have gone mad.

"The companies have joined!" he cried, excitedly.  "They are one!  We
are all friends now; but come and see and hear for yourself."

Filled with wonder, and some small degree of hope, Dan and La Certe
followed the young man, accompanied by their guards, who were not less
mystified than themselves.  Arrived at their camping-place, they found
that the canoes had brought a Chief Trader--or officer of the Hudson's
Bay Company--who was conveying to Red River, and the interior of
Rupert's Land generally, the good news of a momentous historical event,
namely, the union of the two companies.

The important event here referred to, namely, the coalition between the
two great rival companies, which took place in 1821, was the death-blow
to party strife over the whole of Rupert's Land, and also inaugurated
the dawn of lasting prosperity in the Red River Colony.

"Cut their bonds," said the Chief Trader, as the prisoners approached.

No touch of the surgeon's knife ever effected a cure more speedily.

"I congratulate you, young sir," said the Trader, grasping Dan's hand:
"you are now free, for I understand that your loss of liberty had
nothing to do with crime, and the rival companies are no longer
opponents; they are friends.  Indeed, we have been married, so to speak,
and are now one.  I am on my way to Red River with the good news."

"When do you start?" asked Dan, abruptly.

"Well, if you mean from this spot," answered the Trader, somewhat
surprised as well as amused at the eagerness of the question, "I start
at once.  Indeed, I would not have landed here had I not seen your
party.  You appear to be anxious.  Why do you ask?"

"Because it is of the utmost importance to me that I should be in Red
River on a certain date, and I fear that that is all but impossible
now."

Dan then explained, as briefly as possible, his circumstances.
Fortunately, the Trader was a sympathetic man.  He ordered his crews to
embark at once and bade the two captives take a brief, if not an
affectionate, farewell of their late captors.

"I cannot promise you to push on," he said, "at a rate which will
satisfy you--or even accomplish the end you have in view--but I will do
the best I can, without overworking my men.  I fear, however, that you
will have to make up your mind to a delayed wedding!"

"If you will only do your best for a day or two," said Dan, "until we
reach the mouth of this river, that will do, for there my own hunting
canoe was left; and, once in that, La Certe and I can go ahead and tell
them you are coming."

"Nay, that would be requiting me ill--returning evil for good--to take
the wind out of my sails and make my news stale," returned the Trader,
with a good-natured laugh.

