graciously. 'And what may you be wanting, Gossip?' said she.

'You can do a good turn for me if you will;' he answered. 'A King, who
is a friend of mine, was unlucky enough to offend you--'

'Aha! I know who you mean,' interrupted the Fairy. 'I am sorry not to
oblige you, Gossip, but he need expect no mercy from me unless he
will marry my goddaughter, whom you see yonder looking so pretty and
charming. Let him think over what I say.'

The Enchanter hadn't a word to say, for he thought Turritella really
frightful, but he could not go away without making one more effort for
his friend the King, who was really in great danger as long as he lived
in a cage. Indeed, already he had met with several alarming accidents.
Once the nail on which his cage was hung had given way, and his
feathered Majesty had suffered much from the fall, while Madam Puss, who
happened to be in the room at the time, had given him a scratch in the
eye which came very near blinding him. Another time they had forgotten
to give him any water to drink, so that he was nearly dead with thirst;
and the worst thing of all was that he was in danger of losing his
kingdom, for he had been absent so long that all his subjects believed
him to be dead. So considering all these things the Enchanter agreed
with the Fairy Mazilla that she should restore the King to his natural
form, and should take Turritella to stay in his palace for several
months, and if, after the time was over he still could not make up his
mind to marry her, he should once more be changed into a Blue Bird.

Then the Fairy dressed Turritella in a magnificent gold and silver robe,
and they mounted together upon a flying Dragon, and very soon reached
King Charming's palace, where he, too, had just been brought by his
faithful friend the Enchanter.

Three strokes of the Fairy's wand restored his natural form, and he
was as handsome and delightful as ever, but he considered that he paid
dearly for his restoration when he caught sight of Turritella, and the
mere idea of marrying her made him shudder.

Meanwhile, Queen Fiordelisa, disguised as a poor peasant girl, wearing
a great straw hat that concealed her face, and carrying an old sack over
her shoulder, had set out upon her weary journey, and had travelled far,
sometimes by sea and sometimes by land; sometimes on foot, and sometimes
on horseback, but not knowing which way to go. She feared all the time
that every step she took was leading her farther from her lover. One day
as she sat, quite tired and sad, on the bank of a little brook, cooling
her white feet in the clear running water, and combing her long hair
that glittered like gold in the sunshine, a little bent old woman passed
by, leaning on a stick. She stopped, and said to Fiordelisa:

'What, my pretty child, are you all alone?'

'Indeed, good mother, I am too sad to care for company,' she answered;
and the tears ran down her cheeks.

'Don't cry,' said the old woman, 'but tell me truly what is the matter.
Perhaps I can help you.'

The Queen told her willingly all that had happened, and how she was
seeking the Blue Bird. Thereupon the little old woman suddenly stood up
straight, and grew tall, and young, and beautiful, and said with a smile
to the astonished Fiordelisa:

'Lovely Queen, the King whom you seek is no longer a bird. My sister
Mazilla has given his own form back to him, and he is in his own
kingdom. Do not be afraid, you will reach him, and will prosper. Take
these four eggs; if you break one when you are in any great difficulty,
you will find aid.'

So saying, she disappeared, and Fiordelisa, feeling much encouraged, put
the eggs into her bag and turned her steps towards Charming's kingdom.
After walking on and on for eight days and eight nights, she came at
last to a tremendously high hill of polished ivory, so steep that it was
impossible to get a foothold upon it. Fiordelisa tried a thousand times,
and scrambled and slipped, but always in the end found herself exactly
where she started from. At last she sat down at the foot of it in
despair, and then suddenly bethought herself of the eggs. Breaking one
quickly, she found in it some little gold hooks, and with these fastened
to her feet and hands, she mounted the ivory hill without further
trouble, for the little hooks saved her from slipping. As soon as she
reached the top a new difficulty presented itself, for all the other
side, and indeed the whole valley, was one polished mirror, in which
thousands and thousands of people were admiring their reflections. For
this was a magic mirror, in which people saw themselves just as they
wished to appear, and pilgrims came to it from the four corners of the
world. But nobody had ever been able to reach the top of the hill, and
when they saw Fiordelisa standing there, they raised a terrible outcry,
declaring that if she set foot upon their glass she would break it
to pieces. The Queen, not knowing what to do, for she saw it would
be dangerous to try to go down, broke the second egg, and out came a
chariot, drawn by two white doves, and Fiordelisa got into it, and was
floated softly away. After a night and a day the doves alighted outside
the gate of King Charming's kingdom. Here the Queen got out of the
chariot, and kissed the doves and thanked them, and then with a beating
heart she walked into the town, asking the people she met where she
could see the King. But they only laughed at her, crying:

'See the King? And pray, why do you want to see the King, my little
kitchen-maid? You had better go and wash your face first, your eyes are
not clear enough to see him!' For the Queen had disguised herself, and
pulled her hair down about her eyes, that no one might know her. As they
would not tell her, she went on farther, and presently asked again,
and this time the people answered that to-morrow she might see the King
driving through the streets with the Princess Turritella, as it was said
that at last he had consented to marry her. This was indeed terrible
news to Fiordelisa. Had she come all this weary way only to find
Turritella had succeeded in making King Charming forget her?

She was too tired and miserable to walk another step, so she sat down in
a doorway and cried bitterly all night long. As soon as it was light
she hastened to the palace, and after being sent away fifty times by the
guards, she got in at last, and saw the thrones set in the great hall
for the King and Turritella, who was already looked upon as Queen.

Fiordelisa hid herself behind a marble pillar, and very soon saw
Turritella make her appearance, richly dressed, but as ugly as ever, and
with her came the King, more handsome and splendid even than Fiordelisa
had remembered him. When Turritella had seated herself upon the throne,
the Queen approached her.

'Who are you, and how dare you come near my high-mightiness, upon my
golden throne?' said Turritella, frowning fiercely at her.

'They call me the little kitchen-maid,' she replied, 'and I come to
offer some precious things for sale,' and with that she searched in her
old sack, and drew out the emerald bracelets King Charming had given
her.

'Ho, ho!' said Turritella, those are pretty bits of glass. I suppose you
would like five silver pieces for them.'

'Show them to someone who understands such things, Madam,' answered the
Queen; 'after that we can decide upon the price.'

Turritella, who really loved King Charming as much as she could love
anybody, and was always delighted to get a chance of talking to him, now
showed him the bracelets, asking how much he considered them worth. As
soon as he saw them he remembered those he had given to Fiordelisa, and
turned very pale and sighed deeply, and fell into such sad thought that
he quite forgot to answer her. Presently she asked him again, and then
he said, with a great effort:

'I believe these bracelets are worth as much as my kingdom. I thought
there was only one such pair in the world; but here, it seems, is
another.'

Then Turritella went back to the Queen, and asked her what was the
lowest price she would take for them.

'More than you would find it easy to pay, Madam,' answered she; 'but if
you will manage for me to sleep one night in the Chamber of Echoes, I
will give you the emeralds.'

'By all means, my little kitchen-maid,' said Turritella, highly
delighted.

The King did not try to find out where the bracelets had come from, not
because he did not want to know, but because the only way would have
been to ask Turritella, and he disliked her so much that he never spoke
to her if he could possibly avoid it. It was he who had told Fiordelisa
about the Chamber of Echoes, when he was a Blue Bird. It was a little
room below the King's own bed-chamber, and was so ingeniously built
that the softest whisper in it was plainly heard in the King's room.
Fiordelisa wanted to reproach him for his faithlessness, and could not
imagine a better way than this. So when, by Turritella's orders, she
was left there she began to weep and lament, and never ceased until
daybreak.

The King's pages told Turritella, when she asked them, what a sobbing
and sighing they had heard, and she asked Fiordelisa what it was all
about. The Queen answered that she often dreamed and talked aloud.

But by an unlucky chance the King heard nothing of all this, for he took
a sleeping draught every night before he lay down, and did not wake up
until the sun was high.

The Queen passed the day in great disquietude.

'If he did hear me,' she said, 'could he remain so cruelly indifferent?
But if he did not hear me, what can I do to get another chance? I have
plenty of jewels, it is true, but nothing remarkable enough to catch
Turritella's fancy.'

Just then she thought of the eggs, and broke one, out of which came a
little carriage of polished steel ornamented with gold, drawn by six
green mice. The coachman was a rose-coloured rat, the postilion a grey
one, and the carriage was occupied by the tiniest and most charming
figures, who could dance and do wonderful tricks. Fiordelisa clapped her
hands and danced for joy when she saw this triumph of magic art, and as
soon as it was evening, went to a shady garden-path down which she knew
Turritella would pass, and then she made the mice galop, and the tiny
people show off their tricks, and sure enough Turritella came, and the
moment she saw it all cried:

'Little kitchen-maid, little kitchen-maid, what will you take for your
mouse-carriage?'

And the Queen answered:

'Let me sleep once more in the Chamber of Echoes.'

'I won't refuse your request, poor creature,' said Turritella
condescendingly.

And then she turned to her ladies and whispered

'The silly creature does not know how to profit by her chances; so much
the better for me.'

When night came Fiordelisa said all the loving words she could think of,
but alas! with no better success than before, for the King slept heavily
after his draught. One of the pages said:

'This peasant girl must be crazy;' but another answered:

'Yet what she says sounds very sad and touching.'

As for Fiordelisa, she thought the King must have a very hard heart if
he could hear how she grieved and yet pay her no attention. She had but
one more chance, and on breaking the last egg she found to her great
delight that it contained a more marvellous thing than ever. It was
a pie made of six birds, cooked to perfection, and yet they were all
alive, and singing and talking, and they answered questions and told
fortunes in the most amusing way. Taking this treasure Fiordelisa once
more set herself to wait in the great hall through which Turritella was
sure to pass, and as she sat there one of the King's pages came by, and
said to her:

'Well, little kitchen-maid, it is a good thing that the King always
takes a sleeping draught, for if not he would be kept awake all night by
your sighing and lamenting.'

Then Fiordelisa knew why the King had not heeded her, and taking a
handful of pearls and diamonds out of her sack, she said, 'If you can
promise me that to-night the King shall not have his sleeping draught, I
will give you all these jewels.'

'Oh! I promise that willingly,' said the page.

At this moment Turritella appeared, and at the first sight of the
savoury pie, with the pretty little birds all singing and chattering,
she cried:--

'That is an admirable pie, little kitchen-maid. Pray what will you take
for it?'

'The usual price,' she answered. 'To sleep once more in the Chamber of
Echoes.'

'By all means, only give me the pie,' said the greedy Turritella. And
when night was come, Queen Fiordelisa waited until she thought everybody
in the palace would be asleep, and then began to lament as before.

'Ah, Charming!' she said, 'what have I ever done that you should forsake
me and marry Turritella? If you could only know all I have suffered, and
what a weary way I have come to seek you.'

Now the page had faithfully kept his word, and given King Charming a
glass of water instead of his usual sleeping draught, so there he lay
wide awake, and heard every word Fiordelisa said, and even recognised
her voice, though he could not tell where it came from.

'Ah, Princess!' he said, 'how could you betray me to our cruel enemies
when I loved you so dearly?'

Fiordelisa heard him, and answered quickly:

'Find out the little kitchen-maid, and she will explain everything.'

Then the King in a great hurry sent for his pages and said:

'If you can find the little kitchen-maid, bring her to me at once.'

'Nothing could be easier, Sire,' they answered, 'for she is in the
Chamber of Echoes.'

The King was very much puzzled when he heard this. How could the lovely
Princess Fiordelisa be a little kitchen-maid? or how could a little
kitchen-maid have Fiordelisa's own voice? So he dressed hastily, and
ran down a little secret staircase which led to the Chamber of Echoes.
There, upon a heap of soft cushions, sat his lovely Princess. She had
laid aside all her ugly disguises and wore a white silken robe, and her
golden hair shone in the soft lamp-light. The King was overjoyed at the
sight, and rushed to throw himself at her feet, and asked her a thousand
questions without giving her time to answer one. Fiordelisa was equally
happy to be with him once more, and nothing troubled them but the
remembrance of the Fairy Mazilla. But at this moment in came the
Enchanter, and with him a famous Fairy, the same in fact who had given
Fiordelisa the eggs. After greeting the King and Queen, they said that
as they were united in wishing to help King Charming, the Fairy Mazilla
had no longer any power against him, and he might marry Fiordelisa as
soon as he pleased. The King's joy may be imagined, and as soon as it
was day the news was spread through the palace, and everybody who saw
Fiordelisa loved her directly. When Turritella heard what had happened
she came running to the King, and when she saw Fiordelisa with him she
was terribly angry, but before she could say a word the Enchanter and
the Fairy changed her into a big brown owl, and she floated away out of
one of the palace windows, hooting dismally. Then the wedding was held
with great splendour, and King Charming and Queen Fiordelisa lived
happily ever after.

L'Oiseau Bleu. Par Mme. d'Aulnoy.






THE HALF-CHICK



Once upon a time there was a handsome black Spanish hen, who had a large
brood of chickens. They were all fine, plump little birds, except the
youngest, who was quite unlike his brothers and sisters. Indeed, he was
such a strange, queer-looking creature, that when he first chipped his
shell his mother could scarcely believe her eyes, he was so different
from the twelve other fluffy, downy, soft little chicks who nestled
under her wings. This one looked just as if he had been cut in two. He
had only one leg, and one wing, and one eye, and he had half a head and
half a beak. His mother shook her head sadly as she looked at him and
said:

'My youngest born is only a half-chick. He can never grow up a tall
handsome cock like his brothers. They will go out into the world and
rule over poultry yards of their own; but this poor little fellow will
always have to stay at home with his mother.' And she called him Medio
Pollito, which is Spanish for half-chick.

Now though Medio Pollito was such an odd, helpless-looking little thing,
his mother soon found that he was not at all willing to remain under her
wing and protection. Indeed, in character he was as unlike his brothers
and sisters as he was in appearance. They were good, obedient chickens,
and when the old hen chicked after them, they chirped and ran back to
her side. But Medio Pollito had a roving spirit in spite of his one leg,
and when his mother called to him to return to the coop, he pretended
that he could not hear, because he had only one ear.

When she took the whole family out for a walk in the fields, Medio
Pollito would hop away by himself, and hide among the Indian corn. Many
an anxious minute his brothers and sisters had looking for him, while
his mother ran to and fro cackling in fear and dismay.

As he grew older he became more self-willed and disobedient, and his
manner to his mother was often very rude, and his temper to the other
chickens very disagreeable.

One day he had been out for a longer expedition than usual in the
fields. On his return he strutted up to his mother with the peculiar
little hop and kick which was his way of walking, and cocking his one
eye at her in a very bold way he said:

'Mother, I am tired of this life in a dull farmyard, with nothing but a
dreary maize field to look at. I'm off to Madrid to see the King.'

'To Madrid, Medio Pollito!' exclaimed his mother; 'why, you silly chick,
it would be a long journey for a grown-up cock, and a poor little thing
like you would be tired out before you had gone half the distance. No,
no, stay at home with your mother, and some day, when you are bigger, we
will go a little journey together.'

But Medio Pollito had made up his mind, and he would not listen to his
mother's advice, nor to the prayers and entreaties of his brothers and
sisters.

'What is the use of our all crowding each other up in this poky little
place?' he said. 'When I have a fine courtyard of my own at the King's
palace, I shall perhaps ask some of you to come and pay me a short
visit,' and scarcely waiting to say good-bye to his family, away he
stumped down the high road that led to Madrid.

'Be sure that you are kind and civil to everyone you meet,' called his
mother, running after him; but he was in such a hurry to be off, that he
did not wait to answer her, or even to look back.

A little later in the day, as he was taking a short cut through a field,
he passed a stream. Now the stream was all choked up, and overgrown with
weeds and water-plants, so that its waters could not flow freely.

'Oh! Medio Pollito,' it cried, as the half-chick hopped along its banks,
'do come and help me by clearing away these weeds.'

'Help you, indeed!' exclaimed Medio Pollito, tossing his head, and
shaking the few feathers in his tail. 'Do you think I have nothing to do
but to waste my time on such trifles? Help yourself, and don't trouble
busy travellers. I am off to Madrid to see the King,' and hoppity-kick,
hoppity-kick, away stumped Medio Pollito.

A little later he came to a fire that had been left by some gipsies in a
wood. It was burning very low, and would soon be out.

'Oh! Medio Pollito,' cried the fire, in a weak, wavering voice as the
half-chick approached, 'in a few minutes I shall go quite out, unless
you put some sticks and dry leaves upon me. Do help me, or I shall die!'

'Help you, indeed!' answered Medio Pollito. 'I have other things to do.
Gather sticks for yourself, and don't trouble me. I am off to Madrid
to see the King,' and hoppity-kick, hoppity-kick, away stumped Medio
Pollito.

The next morning, as he was getting near Madrid, he passed a large
chestnut tree, in whose branches the wind was caught and entangled. 'Oh!
Medio Pollito,' called the wind, 'do hop up here, and help me to get
free of these branches. I cannot come away, and it is so uncomfortable.'

'It is your own fault for going there,' answered Medio Pollito. 'I can't
waste all my morning stopping here to help you. Just shake yourself
off, and don't hinder me, for I am off to Madrid to see the King,' and
hoppity-kick, hoppity-kick, away stumped Medio Pollito in great glee,
for the towers and roofs of Madrid were now in sight. When he entered
the town he saw before him a great splendid house, with soldiers
standing before the gates. This he knew must be the King's palace, and
he determined to hop up to the front gate and wait there until the King
came out. But as he was hopping past one of the back windows the King's
cook saw him:

'Here is the very thing I want,' he exclaimed, 'for the King has just
sent a message to say that he must have chicken broth for his dinner,'
and opening the window he stretched out his arm, caught Medio Pollito,
