
So everyone waited for the poet, till something happened which
produced a greater sensation in the family than if all the boys had
simultaneously taken to rhyming.

Dr. Alec got very impatient and suddenly announced that he was going to
L to see after those young people, for Phebe was rapidly singing herself
into public favor with the sweet old ballads which she rendered so
beautifully that hearers were touched as well as ears delighted, and her
prospects brightened every month.

"Will you come with me, Rose, and surprise this ambitious pair who are
getting famous so fast they'll forget their homekeeping friends if we
don't remind them of us now and then?" he said when he proposed the trip
one wild March morning.

"No, thank you, sir I'll stay with Aunty; that is all I'm fit for and
I should only be in the way among those fine people," answered Rose,
snipping away at the plants blooming in the study window.

There was a slight bitterness in her voice and a cloud on her face,
which her uncle heard and saw at once, half guessed the meaning of, and
could not rest till he had found out.

"Do you think Phebe and Mac would not care to see you?" he asked,
putting down a letter in which Mac gave a glowing account of a concert
at which Phebe surpassed herself.

"No, but they must be very busy," began Rose, wishing she had held her
tongue.

"Then what is the matter?" persisted Dr. Alec.

Rose did not speak for a moment, and decapitated two fine geraniums with
a reckless slash of her scissors, as if pent-up vexation of some kind
must find a vent. It did in words also, for, as if quite against her
will, she exclaimed impetuously: "The truth is, I'm jealous of them
both!"

"Bless my soul! What now?" ejaculated the doctor in great surprise.

Rose put down her water pot and shears, came and stood before him with
her hands nervously twisted together, and said, just as she used to do
when she was a little girl confessing some misdeed: "Uncle, I must tell
you, for I've been getting very envious, discontented, and bad lately.
No, don't be good to me yet, for you don't know how little I deserve it.
Scold me well, and make me see how wicked I am."

"I will as soon as I know what I am to scold about. Unburden yourself,
child, and let me see all your iniquity, for if you begin by being
jealous of Mac and Phebe, I'm prepared for anything," said Dr. Alec,
leaning back as if nothing could surprise him now.

"But I am not jealous in that way, sir. I mean I want to be or do
something splendid as well as they. I can't write poetry or sing like a
bird, but I should think I might have my share of glory in some way. I
thought perhaps I could paint, and I've tried, but I can only copy I've
no power to invent lovely things, and I'm so discouraged, for that is
my one accomplishment. Do you think I have any gift that could be
cultivated and do me credit like theirs?" she asked so wistfully that
her uncle felt for a moment as if he never could forgive the fairies who
endow babies in their cradles for being so niggardly to his girl. But
one look into the sweet, open face before him reminded him that the good
elves had been very generous and he answered cheerfully: "Yes, I do, for
you have one of the best and noblest gifts a woman can possess. Music
and poetry are fine things, and I don't wonder you want them, or that
you envy the pleasant fame they bring. I've felt just so, and been ready
to ask why it didn't please heaven to be more generous to some people,
so you needn't be ashamed to tell me all about it."

"I know I ought to be contented, but I'm not. My life is very
comfortable, but so quiet and uneventful, I get tired of it and want to
launch out as the others have, and do something, or at least try. I'm
glad you think it isn't very bad of me, and I'd like to know what my
gift is," said Rose, looking less despondent already.

"The art of living for others so patiently and sweetly that we enjoy it
as we do the sunshine, and are not half grateful enough for the great
blessing."

"It is very kind of you to say so, but I think I'd like a little fun and
fame nevertheless." And Rose did not look as thankful as she ought.

"Very natural, dear, but the fun and the fame do not last, while the
memory of a real helper is kept green long after poetry is forgotten and
music silent. Can't you believe that, and be happy?"

"But I do so little, nobody sees or cares, and I don't feel as if I was
really of any use," sighed Rose, thinking of the long, dull winter, full
of efforts that seemed fruitless.

"Sit here, and let us see if you really do very little and if no one
cares." And, drawing her to his knee, Dr. Alec went on, telling off each
item on one of the fingers of the soft hand he held.

"First, an infirm old aunt is kept very happy by the patient, cheerful
care of this good-for-nothing niece. Secondly, a crotchety uncle, for
whom she reads, runs, writes, and sews so willingly that he cannot get
on without her. Thirdly, various relations who are helped in various
ways. Fourthly, one dear friend never forgotten, and a certain cousin
cheered by praise which is more to him than the loudest blast Fame could
blow. Fifthly, several young girls find her an example of many good
works and ways. Sixthly, a motherless baby is cared for as tenderly as
if she were a little sister. Seventhly, half a dozen poor ladies made
comfortable; and, lastly, some struggling boys and girls with artistic
longings are put into a pleasant room furnished with casts, studies,
easels, and all manner of helpful things, not to mention free lessons
given by this same idle girl, who now sits upon my knee owning to
herself that her gift is worth having after all."

"Indeed, I am! Uncle, I'd no idea I had done so many things to please
you, or that anyone guessed how hard I try to fill my place usefully.
I've learned to do without gratitude now I'll learn not to care for
praise, but to be contented to do my best, and have only God know."

"He knows, and He rewards in His own good time. I think a quiet life
like this often makes itself felt in better ways than one that the world
sees and applauds, and some of the noblest are never known till they
end, leaving a void in many hearts. Yours may be one of these if you
choose to make it so, and no one will be prouder of this success than I,
unless it be Mac."

The clouds were quite gone now, and Rose was looking straight into her
uncle's face with a much happier expression when that last word made
it color brightly and the eyes glance away for a second. Then they came
back full of a tender sort of resolution as she said: "That will be
the reward I work for," and rose, as if ready to be up and doing with
renewed courage.

But her uncle held her long enough to ask quite soberly, though his eyes
laughed: "Shall I tell him that?"

"No, sir, please don't! When he is tired of other people's praise, he
will come home, and then I'll see what I can do for him," answered Rose,
slipping away to her work with the shy, happy look that sometimes came
to give to her face the charm it needed.

"He is such a thorough fellow, he never is in a hurry to go from one
thing to another. An excellent habit, but a trifle trying to impatient
people like me," said the doctor and, picking up Dulce, who sat upon
the rug with her dolly, he composed his feelings by tossing her till she
crowed with delight.

Rose heartily echoed that last remark, but said nothing aloud, only
helped her uncle off with dutiful alacrity and, when he was gone, began
to count the days till his return, wishing she had decided to go too.

He wrote often, giving excellent accounts of the "great creatures," as
Steve called Phebe and Mac, and seemed to find so much to do in various
ways that the second week of absence was nearly over before he set a
day for his return, promising to astonish them with the account of his
adventures.

Rose felt as if something splendid was going to happen and set her
affairs in order so that the approaching crisis might find her fully
prepared. She had "found out" now, was quite sure, and put away all
doubts and fears to be ready to welcome home the cousin whom she was
sure Uncle would bring as her reward. She was thinking of this one day
as she got out her paper to write a long letter to poor Aunt Clara, who
pined for news far away there in Calcutta.

Something in the task reminded her of that other lover whose wooing
ended so tragically, and opening a little drawer of keepsakes, she took
out the blue bracelet, feeling that she owed Charlie a tender thought in
the midst of her new happiness, for of late she had forgotten him.

She had worn the trinket hidden under her black sleeve for a long time
after his death, with the regretful constancy one sometimes shows in
doing some little kindness all too late. But her arm had grown too round
to hide the ornament, the forget-me-nots had fallen one by one,
the clasp had broken, and that autumn she laid the bracelet away,
acknowledging that she had outgrown the souvenir as well as the
sentiment that gave it.

She looked at it in silence for a moment, then put it softly back and,
shutting the drawer, took up the little gray book which was her pride,
thinking as she contrasted the two men and their influence on her life
the one sad and disturbing, the other sweet and inspiring "Charlie's was
passion Mac's is love."

"Rose! Rose!" called a shrill voice, rudely breaking the pensive
reverie, and with a start, she shut the desk, exclaiming as she ran to
the door: "They have come! They have come!"




Chapter 21 HOW PHEBE EARNED HER WELCOME

Dr. Alec had not arrived, but bad tidings had, as Rose guessed the
instant her eyes fell upon Aunt Plenty, hobbling downstairs with her
cap awry, her face pale, and a letter flapping wildly in her hand as she
cried distractedly: "Oh, my boy! My boy! Sick, and I not there to nurse
him! Malignant fever, so far away. What can those children do? Why did I
let Alec go?"

Rose got her into the parlor, and while the poor old lady lamented, she
read the letter which Phebe had sent to her that she might "break the
news carefully to Rose."

DEAR MISS PLENTY, Please read this to yourself first, and tell my little
mistress as you think best. The dear doctor is very ill, but I am with
him, and shall not leave him day or night till he is safe. So trust me,
and do not be anxious, for everything shall be done that care and skill
and entire devotion can do. He would not let us tell you before, fearing
you would try to come at the risk of your health. Indeed it would be
useless, for only one nurse is needed, and I came first, so do not let
Rose or anybody else rob me of my right to the danger and the duty. Mac
has written to his father, for Dr. Alec is now too ill to know what we
do, and we both felt that you ought to be told without further delay. He
has a bad malignant fever, caught no one can tell how, unless among some
poor emigrants whom he met wandering about quite forlorn in a strange
city. He understood Portuguese and sent them to a proper place when they
had told their story. But I fear he has suffered for his kindness, for
this fever came on rapidly, and before he knew what it was I was there,
and it was too late to send me away.

Now I can show you how grateful I am, and if need be give my life so
gladly for this friend who has been a father to me. Tell Rose his last
conscious word and thought were for her. "Don't let her come; keep my
darling safe." Oh, do obey him! Stay safely at home and, God helping me,
I'll bring Uncle Alec back in time. Mac does all I will let him. We have
the best physicians, and everything is going as well as can be hoped
till the fever turns.

Dear Miss Plenty, pray for him and for me, that I may do this one happy
thing for those who have done so much for Your ever dutiful and loving

PHEBE

As Rose looked up from the letter, half stunned by the sudden news
and the great danger, she found that the old lady had already stopped
useless bewailing and was praying heartily, like one who knew well where
help was to be found. Rose went and knelt down at her knee, laying her
face on the clasped hands in her lap, and for a few minutes neither
wept nor spoke. Then a stifled sob broke from the girl, and Aunt Plenty
gathered the young head in her arms, saying, with the slow tears of age
trickling down her own withered cheeks: "Bear up, my lamb, bear up. The
good Lord won't take him from us I am sure and that brave child will be
allowed to pay her debt to him. I feel she will."

"But I want to help. I must go, Aunty, I must no matter what the danger
is," cried Rose, full of a tender jealousy of Phebe for being first to
brave peril for the sake of him who had been a father to them both.

"You can't go, dear, it's no use now, and she is right to say, 'Keep
away.' I know those fevers, and the ones who nurse often take it, and
fare worse for the strain they've been through. Good girl to stand by so
bravely, to be so sensible, and not let Mac go too near! She's a grand
nurse Alec couldn't have a better, and she'll never leave him till he's
safe," said Miss Plenty excitedly.

"Ah, you begin to know her now, and value her as you ought. I think few
would have done as she has, and if she does get ill and die, it will be
our fault partly, because she'd go through fire and water to make us
do her justice and receive her as we ought," cried Rose, proud of an
example which she longed to follow.

"If she brings my boy home, I'll never say another word. She may marry
every nephew I've got, if she likes, and I'll give her my blessing,"
exclaimed Aunt Plenty, feeling that no price would be too much to pay
for such a deed.

Rose was going to clap her hands, but wrung them instead, remembering
with a sudden pang that the battle was not over yet, and it was much too
soon to award the honors.

Before she could speak Uncle Mac and Aunt Jane hurried in, for Mac's
letter had come with the other, and dismay fell upon the family at the
thought of danger to the well-beloved Uncle Alec. His brother decided
to go at once, and Aunt Jane insisted on accompanying him, though all
agreed that nothing could be done but wait, and leave Phebe at her post
as long as she held out, since it was too late to save her from danger
now and Mac reported her quite equal to the task.

Great was the hurry and confusion till the relief party was off. Aunt
Plenty was heartbroken that she could not go with them, but felt that
she was too infirm to be useful and, like a sensible old soul, tried to
content herself with preparing all sorts of comforts for the invalid.
Rose was less patient, and at first had wild ideas of setting off alone
and forcing her way to the spot where all her thoughts now centered. But
before she could carry out any rash project, Aunt Myra's palpitations
set in so alarmingly that they did good service for once and kept Rose
busy taking her last directions and trying to soothe her dying bed, for
each attack was declared fatal till the patient demanded toast and tea,
when hope was again allowable and the rally began.

The news flew fast, as such tidings always do, and Aunt Plenty was
constantly employed in answering inquiries, for her knocker kept up a
steady tattoo for several days. All sorts of people came: gentlefolk
and paupers, children with anxious little faces, old people full of
sympathy, pretty girls sobbing as they went away, and young men who
relieved their feelings by swearing at all emigrants in general and
Portuguese in particular. It was touching and comforting to see how many
loved the good man who was known only by his benefactions and now lay
suffering far away, quite unconscious how many unsuspected charities
were brought to light by this grateful solicitude as hidden flowers
spring up when warm rains fall.

If Rose had ever felt that the gift of living for others was a poor one,
she saw now how beautiful and blessed it was how rich the returns, how
wide the influence, how much more precious the tender tie which knit so
many hearts together than any breath of fame or brilliant talent that
dazzled but did not win and warm. In after years she found how true her
uncle's words had been and, listening to eulogies of great men, felt
less moved and inspired by praises of their splendid gifts than by the
sight of some good man's patient labor for the poorest of his kind. Her
heroes ceased to be the world's favorites and became such as Garrison
fighting for his chosen people; Howe restoring lost senses to the deaf,
the dumb, and blind; Sumner unbribable, when other men were bought and
sold and many a large-hearted woman working as quietly as Abby Gibbons,
who for thirty years had made Christmas merry for two hundred little
paupers in a city almshouse, besides saving Magdalens and teaching
convicts.

The lesson came to Rose when she was ready for it, and showed her what
a noble profession philanthropy is, made her glad of her choice, and
helped fit her for a long life full of the loving labor and sweet
satisfaction unostentatious charity brings to those who ask no reward
and are content if "only God knows."

Several anxious weeks went by with wearing fluctuations of hope and
fear, for Life and Death fought over the prize each wanted, and more
than once Death seemed to have won. But Phebe stood at her post, defying
both danger and Death with the courage and devotion women often show.
All her soul and strength were in her work, and when it seemed most
hopeless, she cried out with the passionate energy which seems to send
such appeals straight up to heaven: "Grant me this one boon, dear Lord,
and I will never ask another for myself!"

Such prayers avail much, and such entire devotion often seems to work
miracles when other aids are in vain. Phebe's cry was answered, her
self-forgetful task accomplished, and her long vigil rewarded with a
happy dawn. Dr. Alec always said that she kept him alive by the force of
her will, and that, during the hours when he seemed to lie unconscious,
he felt a strong, warm hand holding his, as if keeping him away from
the swift current trying to sweep him away. The happiest hour of all her
life was that in which he knew her, looked up with the shadow of a smile
in his hollow eyes, and tried to say in his old cheery way: "Tell Rose
I've turned the corner, thanks to you, my child."

She answered very quietly, smoothed the pillow, and saw him drop asleep
again before she stole away into the other room, meaning to write the
good news, but could only throw herself down and find relief for a full
heart in the first tears she had shed for weeks. Mac found her there,
and took such care of her that she was ready to go back to her place now
indeed a post of honor while he ran off to send home a telegram which
made many hearts sing for joy and caused Jamie, in his first burst of
