France could be of no benefit. Of military glory he had gained enough
to content any man, and some of the richest provinces of France were
already his. Therefore it may well be believed that, feeling secure very
many years must elapse before France could again become dangerous, he
was well content to let matters continue as they were.

King John still remained a prisoner in his hands, for the princes and
nobles of France were too much engaged in broils and civil wars to think
of raising the money for his ransom, and Languedoc was the only province
of France which made any effort whatever towards so doing. War still
raged between the Dauphin and the King of Navarre.

At the conclusion of the two years' truce Edward, with the most
splendidly-equipped army which had ever left England, marched through
the length and breadth of France. Nowhere did he meet with any
resistance in the field. He marched under the walls of Paris, but took
no steps to lay siege to that city, which would have fallen an easy
prey to his army had he chosen to capture it. That he did not do so is
another proof that he had no desire to add France to the possessions of
the English crown. At length, by the efforts of the pope, a peace was
agreed upon, by which France yielded all Aquitaine and the town of
Calais to England as an absolute possession, and not as a fief of the
crown of France; while the English king surrendered all his captures in
Normandy and Brittany and abandoned his claim to the crown of France.
With great efforts the French raised a portion of the ransom demanded
for the king, and John returned to France after four years of captivity.

At the commencement of 1363 Edward the Black Prince was named Prince
of Aquitaine, and that province was bestowed upon him as a gift by the
king, subject only to liege homage and an annual tribute of one ounce
of gold. The prince took with him to his new possessions many of the
knights and nobles who had served with him, and offered to Walter a high
post in the government of the province if he would accompany him. This
Walter begged to be excused from doing. Two girls had now been added
to his family, and he was unwilling to leave his happy home unless the
needs of war called him to the prince's side. He therefore remained
quietly at home.

When King John returned to France, four of the French princes of the
blood-royal had been given as hostages for the fulfilment of the treaty
of Bretigny. They were permitted to reside at Calais, and were at
liberty to move about as they would, and even to absent themselves from
the town for three days at a time whensoever they might choose. The Duke
of Anjou, the king's second son, basely took advantage of this liberty
to escape, in direct violation of his oath. The other hostages followed
his example.

King John, himself the soul of honour, was intensely mortified at this
breach of faith on the part of his sons, and after calling together the
states-general at Amiens to obtain the subsidies necessary for paying
the remaining portion of his ransom, he himself, with a train of two
hundred officers and their followers, crossed to England to make excuses
to Edward for the treachery of the princes. Some historians represent
the visit as a voluntary returning into captivity; but this was not
so. The English king had accepted the hostages in his place, and was
responsible for their safe-keeping, and had no claim upon the French
monarch because they had taken advantage of the excess of confidence
with which they had been treated. That the coming of the French king was
not in any way regarded as a return into captivity is shown by the
fact that he was before starting furnished by Edward with letters of
safe-conduct, by which his secure and unobstructed return to his own
country was expressly stipulated, and he was received by Edward as an
honoured guest and friend, and his coming was regarded as an honour and
an occasion for festivity by all England.

At the same time that John was in London the King of Cyprus, the King
of Denmark, and the King of Scotland were also there, and the meeting
of four monarchs in London was the occasion of extraordinary festivities
and rejoicing, the king and his royal guests being several times
entertained at sumptuous banquets by the lord-mayor, the ex-mayor Henry
Pickard, and several of the aldermen.

Six weeks after John's arrival in London he was seized with illness
at the palace of the Savoy, and died on the 8th of April, 1364. The
Dauphin, Charles, now succeeded him as Charles V, and the war between
the houses of Navarre and Valois was carried on with greater fury than
ever. The armies of Navarre were commanded by the Captal de Buch, who
was a distant relation of the king; while those of Charles were headed
by the Marechal de Boucicault and Bertrand du Guesclin, one of the most
gallant of the French knights. A great battle was fought near Cocherel.
Contrary to the orders of the Captal, his army, which consisted
principally of adventurers, descended from the strong position he had
chosen, and gave battle in the plain. They were completely defeated, and
the Captal himself taken prisoner.

In Brittany John of Montford and Charles of Blois had renewed their
struggle, and King Charles, seeing the danger of Brittany falling into
the hands of De Montford, who was a close ally of England, interfered in
favour of Charles of Blois, and sent Du Guesclin to his assistance.

This was a breach of the treaty of Bretigny, and De Montford at once
sent to the Black Prince for assistance. The Prince did not treat the
conduct of Charles as a breach of the treaty, and took no part himself
in the war, but permitted Sir John Chandos, who was a personal friend of
De Montford, to go to his aid. De Montford's army, after the arrival of
Chandos with 200 spears, amounted to but 1600 men-at-arms and from
800 to 900 archers, while Charles of Blois had 4000 men-at-arms and a
proportionate number of infantry. De Montford tried to negotiate.
He offered to divide the dukedom, and to agree that in case he died
childless it should revert to the family of Charles. Charles, however,
refused all terms, even to grant his adversary's request to put off
the battle until the morrow, so as to avoid violating the Sabbath; and
having given orders that all prisoners taken in the battle should be
hung, he advanced upon De Montford.

Both forces were divided in four bodies. The first on De Montford's side
was commanded by Sir Robert Knolles, the second by Oliver de Clisson,
the third by Chandos and De Montford, the fourth by Sir Hugh de
Calverley. Du Guesclin led the front division of Charles's army, the
Counts of Auxerre and Joigny the second, Charles himself the third, and
the Lords of Roye and Rieux the reserve. The ducal arms of Brittany were
displayed on both sides.


By slow degrees the two armies closed with each other in deadly strife.
Both parties had dismounted and fought on foot with lances shortened
to five feet. Du Guesclin and his division attacked that of Knolles.
Auxerre fell upon De Clisson, while the divisions of the two rival
princes closed with each other. After desperate fighting numbers
prevailed. De Montford was driven back, but Calverley advanced to his
aid, fell upon the rear of the French, threw them into disorder, and
then having rallied De Montford's men, retired to his former position in
readiness to give succour again where it might be needed.

In the meantime Clisson had been engaged in a desperate struggle with
the Count of Auxerre, but was obtaining no advantage. Clisson himself
had received the blow of a battle-axe which had dashed in the vizor of
his helmet and blinded for ever one of his eyes. He was still leading
his men, but the enemies' superior numbers were pressing him back,
when Chandos, the instant the assistance of Calverley had relieved De
Montford's division, perceiving his danger, drew off a few men-at-arms,
and with them fell upon the rear of the Count of Auxerre, and dashing
all who opposed him to the ground with his battle-axe, cleft his way to
the very centre of the enemy. Pressed by De Clisson in front and broken
by the sudden attack of Chandos in the rear, the French division gave
way in every direction. Auxerre was desperately wounded, and he and
Joigny both taken prisoners.

Chandos then returned to De Montford, who had gallantly followed up the
advantage gained by the confusion into which Charles's division had been
thrown by the attack of Calverley. Charles was routed; he himself struck
down and slain by an English soldier, and the division defeated with
great slaughter. De Montford's whole force now gathered round Du
Guesclin's division, which now alone remained, and after fighting
gallantly until all hope was gone, the brave French knight and his
companions yielded themselves as prisoners.

The battle of Auray terminated the struggle between the houses of Blois
and Montford. More than 1000 French men-at-arms died on the field, among
whom were many of the noblest in Brittany. Two counts, 27 lords, and
1500 men-at-arms were made prisoners. De Montford now took possession of
the whole of Brittany, and at the suggestion of King Edward himself
did homage to Charles V for the duchy, which he afterwards ruled with
wisdom.



CHAPTER XXII: VICTORY AND DEATH


While the Black Prince was with difficulty governing his province
of Aquitaine, where the mutual jealousies of the English and native
officers caused continual difficulties, King Edward turned all his
attention to advancing the prosperity of England. He fostered trade,
commerce, and learning, was a munificent patron of the two universities,
and established such order and regularity in his kingdom that England
was the admiration of all Europe. Far different was the state of France.
The cessation of the wars with England and the subsequent disbandment of
troops had thrown upon their own resources great numbers of men who had
been so long engaged in fighting that they had no other trade to turn
to. The conclusion of the struggle in Brittany after the battle of Auray
and the death of Charles of Blois still further added to the number,
and these men gathered in bands, some of which were headed by men of
knightly rank, and scattered through France plundering the country and
extracting heavy sums from the towns.

These "great companies," as they were called, exceeded 50,000 men in
number, and as almost all were trained soldiers they set the king and
his nobles at defiance, and were virtually masters of France. The most
tempting offers were made to them to lay down their arms, and the
pope sent legates threatening excommunication, but the great companies
laughed alike at promises and threats. At last a way of deliverance
opened to France. Pedro, named the Cruel, of Castile, had alienated
his people by his cruelty, and had defeated and driven into exile his
half-brother, Henry of Trastamare, who headed an insurrection against
him. Pedro put to death numbers of the nobles of Castile, despoiled
the King of Arragon, who had given aid to his brother, plundered and
insulted the clergy, and allied himself with the Moors.

His quarrel with the clergy was the cause of his ruin. The pope summoned
him to appear before him at Avignon to answer to the crimes laid to his
charge. Pedro refused to attend, and the pope at once excommunicated
him. The King of Arragon and Henry of Trastamare were then summoned to
Avignon, and a treaty of alliance was concluded between them, and the
pope declared the throne of Castile vacant owing to the excommunication
of Pedro, and appointed Henry to it.

These measures would have troubled Pedro little had it not been that
France groaned under the great companies, and the French king and the
pontiff at once entered into negotiations with them to support Henry in
his war against his brother. It was necessary that a leader in whom
the companies should have confidence should be chosen, and Du Guesclin,
still a prisoner of Chandos, who had captured him at Auray, was
selected, and the pope, the King of France, and Don Henry, paid between
them the 100,000 francs demanded for his ransom. Du Guesclin on his
release negotiated with the leaders of the great companies, and as the
pope and king promised them large gratuities they agreed to march
upon Spain. They were joined by a great number of French knights and
men-at-arms.

The expedition was under the nominal command of John of Bourbon, but the
real guidance was in the hands of Du Guesclin. As the army marched past
Avignon they worked upon the terrors of the pope until he paid them
200,000 francs in gold. France was filled with joy at the prospect of a
riddance of the free companies which had so long been a prey upon them.
They were, too, eager to avenge upon the cruel King of Spain the murder
of his queen, who was a princess of France. The same feeling animated
the people of Aquitaine, and Calverley, D'Ambrecicourt, Sir Walter
Hewitt, Sir John Devereux, Sir John Neville, and several other
distinguished knights, with a large train of men-at-arms, joined the
adventurers. The great army moved through Arragon, whose king in every
way facilitated their progress. As they entered Castile the whole
people declared in favour of Henry, and Pedro, deserted by all, fled to
Bordeaux and besought aid from the Prince of Wales.

Between Pedro and the English court a firm alliance had existed from
the time when the former so nearly married the Princess Joan, and
immediately the king heard of the expedition against him he issued
orders that no English knights should take part in it. The order,
however, came too late. The English knights had already marched into
Spain with Du Guesclin. As for the English who formed no inconsiderable
portion of the great companies, they had already declined to obey the
king, when, at the insistence of the pope and the King of France, he had
ordered them to disband.

On Pedro's arrival at Bordeaux with his three daughters and his son,
they were kindly received by the Black Prince, courtesy and kindness
to those in misfortune being among the leading characteristics of
his nature. Pedro, cruel and ruthless as he was, was a man of great
eloquence and insinuating manners, and giving his own version of
affairs, he completely won over the prince, who felt himself, moreover,
bound in some degree to support him, inasmuch as he, an ally of England,
had been dethroned by an army composed partly of English. Pedro made the
most magnificent promises to the prince in return for his aid, ceding
him the whole of the province of Biscay, and agreeing to pay the British
troops engaged in his service when he regained his throne, the Black
Prince engaging to pay them in the meantime.

King Edward aided his son by raising an army in England, which sailed
for Bordeaux under the command of the prince's brother, John of Gaunt,
Duke of Lancaster. Walter formed part of this expedition. The king had
issued his writs to him and other barons of the southern counties, and
the Black Prince had himself written to ask him to join him, in memory
of their former deeds of arms together.

As it was now some years since he had taken the field, Walter did not
hesitate, but with thirty retainers, headed by Ralph, joined the army of
John of Gaunt.

The Black Prince's first step was to endeavour to recall the Englishmen
of the free companies, estimated to amount to at least 30,000 men.
The news that he was taking up arms and would himself command the army
caused Calverley and the whole of the other English knights to return
at once, and 10,000 of the English men-at-arms with the great companies
also left Don Henry and marched to Aquitaine. The road led through the
territory of the King of Navarre, and the Black Prince advanced 56,000
florins of gold to pay this grasping and treacherous king for the right
of passage of the army.

By Christmas, 1366, the preparations were complete, but the severity of
the weather delayed the advance for some weeks. Fresh difficulties were
encountered with Charles the Bad, of Navarre, who, having obtained the
price for the passage, had now opened negotiations with Don Henry, and
the governors of the frontier towns refused to allow Sir Hugh Calverley
and the free companies, who formed the advance, to pass. These were
not, however, the men to stand on ceremony, and without hesitation
they attacked and captured the towns, when the King of Navarre at once
apologized for his officers, and renewed his engagements. As, however,
the Black Prince had received intelligence that he had formed a plan
for attacking the English as they passed through the terrible pass of
Roncesvalles, he compelled him to accompany the army. The invitation
was couched in language which was friendly, but would yet admit of no
denial.

On the 17th of February the English army, 30,000 strong, reached the
pass. It marched in three divisions, the first commanded by the Duke of
Lancaster and Lord Chandos, the second by the Black Prince, the third
by the King of Majorca and the Count of Armaguac. The divisions crossed
over on different days, for the pass was encumbered by snow and the
obstacles were immense. Upon the day when the prince's division were
passing a storm burst upon them, and it was with the greatest difficulty
that they succeeded in crossing. On the 20th of February, however, all
arrived safe on the other side of the Pyrenees. Du Guesclin, who, seeing
the storm which was approaching from Aquitaine, had returned to France
and levied a French army, was nigh at hand, and kept within a few miles
of the English army as it advanced, avoiding an engagement until the
arrival of Don Henry, who was marching to join him with the great
companies and 60,000 Spanish troops.

Du Guesclin kept up secret communications with the King of Navarre, who
was still forced to accompany the English army. The latter accordingly
went out from the camp under pretence of hunting and was captured by a
detachment of French troops.

On the 1st of April, the Spanish army having joined the French, the
Black Prince sent letters to Don Henry, urging him in mild but dignified
language to return to obedience, and to resign the throne he had
usurped, offering at the same time to act as mediator between him
and his brother, and to do all in his power to remove differences and
abuses. Henry, confident in his strength, replied haughtily and prepared
for battle.

The forces were extremely unequal. The Black Prince had under him 30,000
men; while under Don Henry were 3000 men-at-arms on mail-clad horses,
20,000 men-at-arms on horses not so protected, 6000 light cavalry,
10,000 crossbow-men, and 60,000 foot armed with spear and sword.

The night before the battle the Black Prince lodged in the little
village of Navarretta, which had been deserted by its inhabitants.
Walter had been his close companion since he started, and occupied the
same lodging with him in the village.

"This reminds me," the prince said, "of the day before Cressy. They
outnumber us by more than three to one.

"There were greater odds still," Walter replied, "at Poitiers, and I
doubt not that we shall make as good an example of them."

"They are more doughty adversaries," the prince replied. "There are nigh
20,000 English in their ranks--all veterans in war--and they are led by
Du Guesclin, who is a host in himself."

"Their very numbers will be a hindrance to them," Walter replied
