lowered for us to return to the castle."

Archie accompanied the soldier to the end of the drawbridge, and
parleyed with the warder. The latter acquainted the governor that
the master of the fishing boat which had been driven in by stress
of weather would fain dispose of his cargo of fish on cheap terms,
and returned for answer that the governor would give sixpence for
each basket of a hundred pounds. Archie grumbled that he should
receive thrice that sum at Montrose; still that as he must sell
them or let them spoil, he accepted the offer, and would be there
with the fish at four o'clock.

He then returned to the boat, his ally, the fisherman, taking word
round to the cottages that at four o'clock all must be in readiness
to sally out on the signal, and that William Orr was to dress half
a dozen of his men in fishermen's clothes and saunter up carelessly
close to the castle, so as to be able to rush forward on the instant.

At the appointed hour Archie, accompanied by his four followers,
each of whom carried on his shoulder a great basket filled with
fish, stepped on to the quay and made their way to the castle. By
the side of the moat facing the drawbridge the ten English soldiers
who had been out on leave for the day were already assembled.

"Are you all there?" the warder asked.

"Yes," Archie said, "but I shall have to make another two trips
down to the boat, seeing that I have ten baskets full and but four
men to carry them."

"Then you must bring another load," the warder said, "when the
drawbridge is lowered tomorrow. You will have to stop in the castle
tonight, and issue out at eleven tomorrow, for the governor will
not have the drawbridge lowered more than twice a day."

"I would fain return to my boat," Archie said, "as I want to be at
work on the repairs; but if that be the rule I must needs submit
to it."

The drawbridge was now lowered. The soldiers at once stepped on to
it. The four pretended fishermen had set down their baskets, and
now raised them on their shoulders again.  One of them apparently
found it a difficult task, for it was not until Archie and his
comrades were half across the drawbridge that he raised it from
the ground. As he did so he stumbled and fell, the basket and its
contents rolling on to the ground.

"You must wait until the morning," the warder called; "you are too
late to enter now."

The man lay for a moment where he had fallen, which was half on the
drawbridge, half on the ground beyond it.  "Now, then," the warder
called sharply, "make haste; I am going to raise the drawbridge."

The man rose to his feet with a shout just as the drawbridge began
to rise. He had not been idle as he lay.  As he fell he had drawn
from underneath his fisherman's frock a stout chain with a hook
at one end and a large ring at the other. This he had passed round
one of the chains by which the drawbridge was raised, then under
the beam on which it rested when down, and had fastened the hook
in the ring.

Surprised at the shout, the warder worked the windlass with extra
speed, but he had scarcely given a turn when he found a sudden
resistance. The chain which the fisherman had fixed round the end
prevented the bridge from rising.  As the man had shouted, Archie
and his three comrades were entering the gate.  Simultaneously they
emptied their baskets before them. Concealed among the fish were
four logs of wood; two were three feet long, the full depth of the
baskets, two were short wedge shaped pieces.  Before the soldiers
in front had time even to turn round, the two long pieces were
placed upright in the grooves down which the portcullis would fall,
while the two wedge shaped pieces were thrust into the jamb of the
gate so as to prevent it from closing.  Then the four men drew long
swords hidden beneath their garments and fell upon the soldiers.




Chapter XXVI

Edinburgh


So vigilant was the watch in the castle of Dunottar that the instant
the cry of alarm rose almost simultaneously from the warder above
and the soldiers at the gate, the portcullis came thundering down.
It was caught, however, by the two upright blocks of wood, and
remained suspended three feet above the sill.  The armed guards
at the gate instantly fell upon Archie and his companions, while
others endeavoured in vain to close the gates. Scarcely had the
swords clashed when the man who had chained down the drawbridge
joined Archie, and the five with their heavy broadswords kept at
bay the soldiers who pressed upon them; but for only a minute or
two did they have to bear the brunt of the attack unsupported, for
William Orr and the five men who had been loitering near the moat
dashed across the bridge, and passing under the portcullis joined
the little band.

The alarm had now spread through the castle, and the governor
himself, followed by many of his men, came rushing down to the
spot, shouting furious orders to the warder to raise the drawbridge,
being in ignorance that it was firmly fixed at the outer end.

Archie and his followers were now hotly pressed, but soon a thunder
of steps was heard on the drawbridge, and the whole of the band,
together with some twenty or thirty of the fishermen, passed under
the portcullis and joined them. Archie now took the offensive, and
bearing down all opposition burst with his men into the courtyard.

The combat was desperate but short. The governor with some of his
soldiers fought stoutly, but the suddenness of the surprise and
the fury and vigour with which they were attacked shook the courage
of many of the soldiers.  Some, instead of joining in the fray, at
once threw away their arms and tried to conceal themselves, others
fought feebly and half heartedly, and the cries of "A Forbes!  A
Forbes!  Scotland!  Scotland!" rose louder and louder as the
assailants gradually beat down all resistance. In ten minutes from
the falling of the portcullis all resistance was virtually over.
The governor himself fell by the hand of Archie Forbes, and at
his death those who had hitherto resisted threw down their arms
and called for quarter. This was given, and the following day the
prisoners were marched under a strong guard down to Montrose, there
to be confined until orders for their disposal were received from
the king. For the next fortnight Archie and his retainers, aided by
the whole of the villagers, laboured to dismantle the castle. The
battlements were thrown down into the moat, several wide breaches
were made in the walls, and large quantities of straw and wood piled
up in the keep and turrets. These were then fired, and the Castle
of Dunottar was soon reduced to an empty and gaping shell. Then
Archie marched south, and remained quietly at home until the term
of rest granted him by the king had expired.

Two girls and a son had by this time been born to him, and the
months passed quietly and happily away until Bruce summoned him to
join, with his retainers, the force with which Randolph had sat down
before Edinburgh Castle. Randolph was delighted at this accession
of strength. Between him and Douglas a generous rivalry in gallant
actions continually went on, and Douglas had scored the last
triumph. The castle of Roxburgh had long been a source of trouble
to the Scots.  Standing on a rocky eminence on the margin of the
Teviot, just at its junction with the Tweed and within eight miles
of the Border, it had constituted an open door into Scotland, and
either through it or through Berwick the tides of invasion had ever
flowed.  The castle was very strongly fortified, so much so that
the garrison, deeming themselves perfectly safe from assault, had
grown careless. The commandant was a Burgundian knight, Gillemin
de Fienne. Douglas chose Shrove Tuesday for his attack. Being a
feast day of the church before the long lenten fast the garrison
would be sure to indulge in conviviality and the watch would be
less strict than usual. Douglas and his followers, supplied with
scaling ladders, crept on all fours towards the walls. The night
was still and they could hear the sentries' conversation. They had
noticed the objects advancing, but in the darkness mistook them for
the cattle of a neighbouring farmer. Silently the ladders were
fixed and mounted, and with the dreaded war cry, "A Douglas! A
Douglas!" the assailants burst into the castle, slaying the sentries
and pouring down upon the startled revellers. Fienne and his men
fought gallantly for a time, but at length all surrendered, with
the exception of the governor himself and a few of his immediate
followers, who retired into a tower, where they defended themselves
until the following day; then Fienne being seriously wounded, the
little party also surrendered. As Douglas had no personal quarrel
with the garrison of Roxburgh such as he bore with those who occupied
his ancestral castle, he abstained from any unnecessary cruelties,
and allowed the garrison to withdraw to England, where Fienne soon
afterwards died of his wounds.

The castle was as usual levelled to the ground, and as the stronghold
of Carlaverock soon afterwards surrendered, the districts of Tweeddale
and Galloway were now completely cleared of the English, with the
exception of the Castle of Jedburgh, which they still held.

Randolph had been created Earl of Moray, and after establishing
himself in his new earldom he had returned with his feudal followers
and laid siege to Edinburgh, whose castle was considered all but
impregnable. It had been in the possession of the English ever since
it was captured by Edward I in 1296, and was strongly garrisoned
and well provisioned.

Even when joined by Archie Forbes and his retainers Randolph felt
that the castle could not be captured by force.  The various attempts
which he made were signally foiled, and it was by stratagem only
that he could hope to carry it.  The news of the capture of Roxburgh
by Douglas increased his anxiety to succeed.  Accompanied by Archie
he rode round the foot of the steep rock on which the castle stands,
eagerly scanning its irregularities to see if by any possibility
it could be scaled.

"I would give a brave reward," he said to Archie, "to any who could
show us a way of climbing those rocks, which, methinks, even a goat
could scarcely manage to ascend."

"I can tell you of a way," a Scotch soldier who was standing a few
paces off when he made the remark, said, saluting the earl.  "It
needs a sure foot and a stout heart, but I can lead a score of
men with such qualifications to the foot of yonder walls;" and he
pointed to the castle rising abruptly from the edge of the rocks.

"If you can make good your word, my brave fellow," Randolph said,
"you may ask your own reward, and I pledge you my word, that if it
be aught in reason it shall be granted.  But who are you, and how
did it come that you know of a way where none is supposed to exist?"

"My name is William Francus," the soldier said. "I was at one time,
before the king took up arms, a soldier in the castle there. I had
a sweetheart in the town, and as my turn to go out from the castle
came but slowly I used at night to steal away to visit her. I found
after a great search that on the face of yonder wall where it looks
the steepest, and where in consequence but slight watch is kept,
a man with steady foot and head could make shift to climb up and
down, and thus, if you please, will I guide a party to the top of
the rock."

"It looks impossible," Randolph said, gazing at the precipice;
"but as you tell me that you have done it others can do the same.
I will myself follow your guidance."

"And I," Archie said.

"What, Sir Archie, think you is the smallest number of men with
whom, having once gained footing on the wall, we may fight our way
to the gates and let in our friends."

"I should think," Archie replied, "that with thirty men we might
manage to do so. The confusion in the garrison will be extreme
at so unexpected a surprise, and if we divide in two parties and
press forward by different ways they will think rather of holding
together and defending themselves than of checking our course, and
one or other of the parties should surely be able to make its way
to the gates."

"Thirty let it be then," Randolph said. "Do you choose fifteen
active and vigilant men from among your retainers; I will pick as
many from mine, and as there is no use in delaying let us carry
out the enterprise this very night; of course the rest of our men
must gather near the gates in readiness to rush in when we throw
them open."

As soon as it was dark the little party of adventurers set out
on their way. Francus acted as guide, and under his leading they
climbed with vast difficulty and no little danger up the face of
the precipice until they reached a comparatively easy spot, where
they sat down to recover their breath before they prepared for the
final effort.

They could hear the sentries above speaking to each other, and
they held their breath when one of them, exclaiming suddenly, "I
can see you!" threw down a stone from the battlement, which leapt,
crashing down the face of the rock close beside them. Great was
their relief when a loud laugh from above told them that the sentry
had been in jest, and had but tried to startle his comrade; then
the two sentries, conversing as they went, moved away to another
part of the walls.

The ascent was now continued, and proved even more difficult than
that which they had passed. They were forced continually to halt,
while those in front helped those following them, or were themselves
hoisted up by the men behind.  At last, panting and breathless, they
stood on the summit of the rock, on a narrow ledge, with the castle
wall rising in front of them. They had, with enormous difficulty,
brought up a light ladder with them. This was placed against the
wall. Francus was the first to mount, and was followed by Sir Andrew
Grey, whom Randolph had invited to be of the party, by Archie Forbes,
and by the earl. Just as the latter stepped on to the battlements
the sentries caught sight of them and shouted:

"Treason! treason! to arms!" An instant stir was heard in the
castle. Rapidly the thirty men followed each other up the ladder,
and so soon as the last had gained the battlements they divided in
three bodies, each headed by one of the leaders. One party descended
straight into the castle and there attacked the soldiers who were
hurrying to arms, while the others ran along the wall in opposite
directions, cutting down the sentries and brushing aside all
opposition until together they met at the gate. This was thrown
open, and the Scots outside running up at the top of their speed
poured into the castle. At first Randolph's party, which had
descended into the courtyard, had been hotly pressed, and had with
difficulty defended themselves; but the attention of the startled
garrison was distracted by the shouts upon the walls, which told
that other parties of their assailants had gained footing there.
All sorts of contradictory orders were issued. One commanded them
to cut down the little party opposed to them, another ordered them
to hurry to the walls, a third to seize the gate and see that it
was not opened. The confusion reached its height as the Scots poured
in through the open gate. The garrison, surprised and confounded
as they were at this, to them, almost magical seizure of the castle
by their foes, fought bravely until the governor and many of the
officers were killed. Some of the men threw down their arms, and
others, taking advantage of their knowledge of the castle, made
their way to the gate and escaped into the open country.

The news of the capture was immediately sent to the king, by whose
orders the castle and walls were razed to the ground, and thus
another of the strongholds, by whose possession the English were
enabled to domineer over the whole of the surrounding country, was
destroyed.

While Douglas and Randolph were thus distinguishing themselves
Edward Bruce captured the castle of Rutherglen, and afterwards the
town of Dundee; and now, save Stirling Castle, scarcely a hold in
all Scotland remained in English hands. Thus was Scotland almost
cleared of the invader, not by the efforts of the people at large,
but by a series of the most daring and hazardous adventures by the
king himself and three or four of his knights, aided only by their
personal retainers. For nine years they had continued their career
unchecked, capturing castle by castle and town by town, defeating
such small bodies of troops as took the field against them, England,
under a supine and inactive king, giving itself up to private
broils and quarrels, while Scotland was being torn piecemeal from
her grasp.

After Edward Bruce had captured Dundee he laid siege to Stirling.
As this castle had for many months resisted Edward I backed by the
whole power of England, Bruce could make little impression upon
it with the limited appliances at his disposal. From February till
the 24th of June the investment continued, when the governor, Sir
Philip Mowbray, becoming apprehensive that his provisions would
not much longer hold out, induced Edward Bruce to agree to raise
the siege on condition that if by the 24th of June next, 1314, the
castle was not effectually relieved by an English force, it should
then be surrendered.

No satisfactory explanation has ever been given of the reasons which
induced Edward Bruce to agree to so one sided a bargain.  He had
already invested the place for four months, there was no possibility of
an army being collected in England for its relief for many months
to come, and long ere this could arrive the garrison would have
been starved into surrender. By giving England a year to relieve
the place he virtually challenged that country to put forth all
its strength and held out an inducement to it to make that effort,
which internal dissension had hitherto prevented. The only feasible
explanation is that Edward Bruce was weary of being kept inactive
so long a time before the walls of the fortress which he was unable
to capture, and that he made the arrangement from sheer impatience
and thoughtlessness and without consideration of the storm which he
was bringing upon Scotland. Had it been otherwise he would surely
have consulted the king before entering upon an agreement of such
extreme importance.

Bruce, when he heard of this rash treaty, was highly displeased,
but he nevertheless accepted the terms, and both parties began at
once their preparations for the crowning struggle of the war. The
English saw that now or never must they crush out the movement
which, step by step, had wrested from them all the conquests which
had been won with such vast effort under Edward I; while Bruce saw
that a defeat would entail the loss of all that he had struggled
for and won during so many years.

King Edward issued summonses to the whole of the barons of England
and Wales to meet him at Berwick by the 11th of June with all their
feudal following, while the sheriffs of the various counties and
towns were called upon to supply 27,000 foot soldiers. The English
of the settlements in Ireland were also summoned, besides O'Connor,
Prince of Connaught, and twenty-five other native Irish chiefs,
with their following, all of whom were to be under the command of
Richard de Burgh, Earl of Ulster.

The Prince Bishop of Constance was requested to furnish a body
of mounted crossbowmen. A royal fleet of twenty-three vessels was
appointed to assemble for the purpose of operating on the east
coast, while the seaports were commanded to fit out another fleet
of thirty vessels. A third fleet was ordered to assemble in the
west, which John of Lorne was appointed to command under the title
of High Admiral of the Western Fleet of England. From Aquitaine
and the French possessions the vassals were called upon to attend
with their men-at-arms, and many knights from France, Gascony, and
Germany took part in the enterprise.

Thus, at the appointed time over 100,000 men assembled at Berwick,
of whom 40,000 were men-at-arms, and the rest archers and pikemen.
For the great armament the most ample arrangements were made in the
way of warlike stores, provisions, tents, and means of transport,
together with the necessary workmen, artificers, and attendants.

This army surpassed both in numbers and equipments any that Edward
I had ever led into Scotland, and is considered to have been the most
numerous and best equipped that ever before or since has gathered
on English ground. Of the whole of the great nobles of England only
four were absent--the Earls of Warrenne, Lancaster, Arundel, and
Warwick--who, however, sent their feudal arrays under the charge
of relations.

Among the leaders of this great army were the Earls of Gloucester,
Pembroke, Hereford, and Angus, Lord Clifford, Sir John Comyn, Sir
Henry Beaumont, Sir John Seagrave, Sir Edmund Morley, Sir Ingram
de Umfraville, Sir Marmaduke de Twenge, and Sir Giles de Argentine,
one of the most famous of the Continental knights.

While this vast army had been preparing, Bruce had made every
effort to meet the storm, and all who were loyal and who were able
to carry weapons were summoned to meet at Torwood, near Stirling,
previous to the 24th of June. Here Edward Bruce, Sir James Douglas,
Randolph, Earl of Moray, Walter the Steward, Angus of Isla, Sir
Archibald Forbes, and a few other knights and barons assembled with
30,000 fighting men, besides camp followers and servants.  It was
a small force indeed to meet the great army which was advancing
against it, and in cavalry in particular it was extremely weak.
The English army crossed the Border, and marched by Linlithgow and
Falkirk toward the Torwood.

Each army had stirring memories to inspire it, for the English in
their march crossed over the field of Falkirk, where sixteen years
before they had crushed the stubborn squares of Wallace; while from
the spot which Bruce selected as his battleground could be seen
the Abbey Craig, overlooking the scene of the Scottish victory of
Stirling Bridge. On the approach of the English the Scotch fell
back from the Torwood to some high ground near Stirling now called
the New Park.  The lower ground, now rich agricultural land called
the Carse, was then wholly swamp. Had it not been so, the position
now taken up by Bruce would have laid the road to Stirling open to
the English.

The Scotch army was divided into four divisions. The centre was
commanded by Randolph. Edward Bruce commanded the second, which
