bidden higher. It was all your fault; it was you who got me into debt.
I would not be in the awful, awful plight I am in to-night but for
you, Maggie."

"Hush!" said Maggie. The pupils of her eyes dilated curiously; she put
her hand before them.

"The fruits of my bad half-hours," she murmured under her breath.
After a long pause, she said:

"There is some truth in your words, Rosalind; I did help you to get
into this false position. I am sorry; and when I tell Miss Heath the
whole circumstance-- as I must to-morrow-- you may be sure I shall not
exonerate myself."

"Oh, Maggie, Maggie, you won't tell Miss Heath! If you do, I am
certain to be expelled, and my mother-- my mother will die; she is not
over strong just now, and this will kill her. You cannot be so cruel
as to kill my mother, Maggie Oliphant, particularly when you yourself
got me into this."

"I did not get you into this," retorted Maggie. "I know I am not
blameless in the matter; but could I imagine for a moment that any
girl, any girl who belonged to this college, could debase herself to
steal and then throw the blame on another. Nancy Banister has told me,
Rose, how cruelly you spoke to Priscilla-- what agony your cruel words
cost her. I did wrong, I own, but no act of mine would have tempted
another girl to do what you have done. Now, stop crying; I have not
brought you here to discuss your wickedness with you. I shall tell the
whole circumstance to Miss Heath in the morning. It is my plain duty
to do so, and no words of yours can prevent me."

With a stifled cry Rosalind Merton again fell on her knees.

"Get up," said Maggie, "get up at once, or I shall bring Miss Heath
here now. Your crime, Rosalind, is known to Miss Day and to Miss
Marsh. Even without consulting Miss Heath, I think I can take it upon
me to say that you had better leave St. Benet's by the first train in
the morning."

"Oh, yes-- yes! that would be much the best thing to do."

"You are to go home, remember."

"Yes, I will certainly go home. But, Maggie, I have no money-- I have
literally no money."

"I will ask Priscilla Peel to go with you to the railway station, and
I will give her sufficient money to pay your fare to London-- you live
in London, don't you?"

"Yes, at Bayswater."

"What is your address''

"19 Queen Street, Bayswater."

"Priscilla shall telegraph to your mother, when you start, and ask her
to meet you at King's Cross."

Rosalind's face grew paler and paler. "What excuse am I to give to
mother?" she asked.

"That is your own affair; I have no doubt you will find something to
say. I should advise you, Rosalind, to tell your poor mother the
truth, for she is certain to hear all about it from Miss Heath the
following morning."

"Oh, what a miserable, miserable girl I am, Maggie!"

"You are a very miserable and sinful girl; It was a wretched day for
St. Benet's when a girl such as you are came to live here. But I don't
want to speak of that now, Rosalind; there is something you must do
before you leave."

"What is that?"

"You must go to Priscilla Peel and humbly beg her pardon."

"Oh, I cannot, I cannot! You have no idea how I hate Priscilla."

"I am not surprised; the children of darkness generally hate those who
walk in the light."

"Maggie, I can't beg her pardon."

"You can please yourself about that: I certainly shall not force you;
but, unless you beg Priscilla's pardon and confess to her the wicked
deed you have done, I shall lend you no money to go home. You can go
to your room now, Rosalind; I am tired and wish to go to bed. You will
be able to let me know your decision in the morning."

Rosalind turned slowly away. She reached her room before the other
girls had arrived home, and tossing the coral ornaments on her
dressing-table, she flung herself across her bed and gave way to the
most passionate, heart-broken sobs that had ever rent her baby frame.

She was still sobbing, but more quietly, for the force of her passion
had exhausted her, when a very light touch on her shoulder caused her
to raise herself and look up wildly. Prissie was bending over her.

"I knocked several times," she said, "but you did not hear me, so I
came in. You will be sick if you cry like this, Rose. Let me help you
go to bed."

"No, no; please don't touch me. I don't want you, of all people, to do
anything for me."

"I wish you would let me undress you. I have often helped Aunt Raby to
go to bed when she was very tired. Come, Rose, don't turn away from
me. Why should you?"

"Priscilla, you are the last person in the world who ought to be kind
to me just now; you don't know, you can never, never guess, what I did
to you."

"Yes, I can partly guess, but I don't want to think of it."

"Listen, Prissie: when I stole that money, I hoped people would accuse
you of the theft."

Prissie's eyes filled with tears. "It was a dreadful thing to do," she
said faintly.

"Oh, I knew you could never forgive me."

"I do forgive you."

"What! aren't you angry? Aren't you frantic with rage and passion?"

"I don't wish to think of myself at all: I want to think of you. You
are the one to be pitied."

"I? Who could pity me?"

"Well, Rosalind, I do," answered Priscilla in a slow voice; "you have
sunk so low, you have done such a dreadful thing, the kind of thing
that the angels in heaven would grieve over."

"Oh, please don't talk to me of them."

"And then, Rosalind," continued Prissie, "you look so unlike a girl
who would do this sort of thing. I have a little sister at home-- a
dear, little innocent sister, and her eyes are blue like yours, and
she is fair, too, as you are fair. I love her, and I think all good
things of her. Rosalind, I fancy that your mother thinks good things
of you. I imagine that she is proud of you, and that she loves to look
at your pretty face."

"Oh, don't-- don't!" sobbed Rosalind. "Oh, poor mother, poor mother!"
she burst into softened and sorrowful weeping. The hardness of her
heart had melted for the time under the influence of Priscilla's
tender words.

"I wish I had known you sooner," whispered Rose when Prissie bent down
and kissed her before leaving her for the night. "Perhaps I might have
been a good girl if I had really known you sooner, Priscilla Peel."

  CHAPTER XXXI

 A MESSAGE

EARLY the next morning Rosalind Merton left St. Benet's College never
to come back. She took all her possessions with her, even the pink
coral, which, to their credit be it spoken, not a girl in the college
would have accepted at her hands. Annie Day and Lucy Marsh were not
the sort of people to keep their secret long, and before the day of
her departure had expired nearly everyone at Heath Hall knew of
Rosalind's crime. Miss Heath was made acquainted with the whole story
at an early hour that morning.

"I may have done very wrong to let her go without obtaining your
permission, Miss Heath," said Maggie, when the story was finished. "If
so, please forgive me, and also allow me to say that, were the same
thing to occur again, I fear I should act in the same way. I think my
primary object in giving Rosalind money to go home this morning was to
save the college from any open slur being cast upon it."

Miss Heath's face had grown very pale while Maggie was speaking. She
was quite silent for a moment or two after the story was finished;
then, going up to Miss Oliphant, she took her hand and kissed her.

"On the whole, my dear," she said, "I am obliged to you. Had this
story been told me while Miss Merton, was in the house I should have
been obliged to detain her until all the facts of this disgraceful
case were laid before the college authorities, and then, of course,
there would have been no course open but to publicly expel her. This,
at least, you have spared St. Benet's, and I am relieved from the
terrible responsibility. I'll say nothing now about the rule you have
broken, for, of course, you had no right to assist Rosalind to go home
without permission. It lies within my discretion to forgive you,
Maggie, however, so take my kiss, dear."

The vice-principal and Miss Oliphant talked for some little time
longer over Rosalind's terrible fall, and, as Miss Heath felt
confident that the story would get abroad in the college, she said she
would be forced to mention the circumstances to their principal, Miss
Vincent, and also to say something in public to the girls of Heath
Hall on the subject.

"And now we will turn to something else," she said. "I am concerned at
those pale cheeks, Maggie. My dear," as the young girl colored
brightly, "your low spirits weigh on my heart."

"Oh, don't mind me," said Maggie hastily.

"It is scarcely kind to say this to one who loves you. I have been
many years vice-principal of this hall, and no girl, except Annabel
Lee, has come so close to my heart as you have, Maggie. Some girls
come here, spend the required three years and go away again without
making much impression on any one. In your case this will not be so. I
have not the least doubt that you will pass your tripos examination
with credit in the summer; you will then leave us, but not to be
forgotten. I, for one, Maggie can never forget you."

"How good you are!" said Maggie.

Tears trembled in the eyes which were far too proud to weep except in
private.

Miss Heath looked attentively at the young student, for whom she felt
so strong an interest. Priscilla's words had scarcely been absent from
her night or day since they were spoken.

"Maggie ought to marry Mr. Hammond. Maggie loves him and he loves her,
but a bogie stands in the way." Night and day Miss Heath had pondered
these words. Now, looking at the fair face, whose roundness of outline
was slightly worn, at the eyes which had looked at her for a moment
through a veil of sudden tears, she resolved to take the initiative in
a matter which she considered quite outside her province.

"Sit down, Maggie," she said. "I think the time has come for me to
tell you something which has lain as a secret on my heart for over a
year."

Maggie looked up in surprise, then dropped into a chair and folded her
hands in her lap. She was slightly surprised at Miss Heath's tone, but
not as yet intensely interested.

"You know, my dear," she said, "that I never interfere with the life a
student lives outside this hall. Provided she obeys the rules and
mentions the names of the friends she visits, she is at liberty,
practically, to do as she pleases in those hours which are not devoted
to lectures. A girl at St. Benet's may have a great, a very great
friend at Kingsdene or elsewhere of whom the principals of the college
know nothing. I think I may add with truth that were the girl to
confide in the principal of her college in case of any friendship
developing into-- into love, she would receive the deepest sympathy
and the tenderest counsels that the case would admit of. The principal
who was confided in would regard herself for the time being as the
young girl's mother."

Maggie's eyes were lowered now; her lips trembled; she played
nervously with a flower which she held in her hand.

"I must apologize," continued Miss Heath, "for having alluded to a
subject which may not in the least concern you, my dear. My excuse for
doing so is that what I have to tell you directly bears on the
question of marriage. I would have spoken to you long ago, but, until
lately, until a few days ago, I had not the faintest idea that such a
subject had even distantly visited your mind."

"Who told you that it had?" questioned Maggie. She spoke with anger.
"Who has dared to interfere-- to spread rumors? I am not going to
marry. I shall never marry."

"It is not in my power at present to tell you how the rumor has
reached me," continued Miss Heath, "but, having reached me, I want to
say a few words about-- about Annabel Lee."

"Oh, don't!" said Maggie, rising to her feet, her face pale as death.
She put her hand to her heart as she spoke. A pang, not so much mental
as bodily, had gone through it.

"My dear, I think you must listen to me while I give you a message
from one whom you dearly loved, whose death has changed you, Maggie,
whose death we have all deeply mourned."

"A message?" said Maggie; "a message from Annabel! What message?"

"I regarded it as the effects of delirium at the time," continued Miss
Heath, "and as you had fever immediately afterward, dreaded referring
to the subject. Now I blame myself for not having told you sooner, for
I believe that Annabel was conscious and that she had a distinct
meaning in her words."

"What did she say? Please don't keep me in suspense."

"It was shortly before she died," continued Miss Heath; "the fever had
run very high, and she was weak, and I could scarcely catch her words.
She looked at me. You know how Annabel could look, Maggie; you know
how expressive those eyes could be, how that voice could move one."

Maggie had sunk back again in her chair; her face was covered with her
trembling hands.

"Annabel said," continued Miss Heath, "'tell Maggie not to mistake me.
I am happy. I am glad she will marry'-- I think she tried to say a
name, but I could not catch it-- tell her to marry him, and that I am
very glad.'"

A sob broke from Maggie Oliphant's lips. "You might have told me
before!" she said in a choked voice.

  CHAPTER XXXII

 THE PRINCESS

THE great event of the term was to take place that evening. The
Princess was to be acted by the girls of St. Benet's, and, by the kind
permission of Miss Vincent, the principal of the entire college,
several visitors were invited to witness the entertainment. The
members of the Dramatic Society had taken immense pains; the
