


                    CHAPTER V. ON THE YELLOWSTONE.

BALDY BICKNELL was a hunter and trapper who, at the time we bring him
to the notice of the reader, had spent something over ten years among
the mountains and prairies of the West.

He was a brave, skillful hunter, who had been engaged in many
desperate affrays with the red-skins, and who, in addition to the loss
of the hair upon the crown of his head, bore many other mementos on
his person of the wild and dangerous life that he had led.

Like most of his class, he was a restless being, constantly flitting
back and forth between the frontier towns and the western wilds. He
never went further east than St. Louis, while his wanderings, on more
than one occasion, had led him beyond the Rocky Mountains.

One autumn he reached the Yellowstone, near the head of navigation,
just as a small trading propeller was descending the stream. As much
from the novelty of the thing, as anything else, he rode on board,
with his horse, with the intention of completing his journey east by
water.

On board the steamer he first met Ethan Hopkins and Mickey McSquizzle,
who had spent ten years in California, in a vain hunt for gold, and
were now returning to their homes, thoroughly disgusted with the
country, its inhabitants and mineral resources.

Baldy was attracted to them by their peculiarities of manner; but it
is not probable that anything further would have resulted from this
accidental meeting, but for a most startling and unforeseen
occurrence.

While still in the upper waters of the Yellowstone, the steamer
exploded her boiler, making a complete wreck of the boat and its
contents. The hunter, with the others, was thrown into the water, but
was so bruised and injured that he found it impossible to swim, and he
would assuredly have been drowned but for the timely assistance of his
two acquaintances.

Neither the Yankee nor Irishman were hurt in the least, and both
falling near the trapper, they instantly perceived his helplessness
and came to his rescue. Both were excellent swimmers, and had no
difficulty in saving him.

'Do ye rist aisy!' said Mickey, as he saw the hunter's face contorted
with pain, as he vainly struggled in the water, 'and it's ourselves
that 'll take the good care of yees jist.'

'Stop yer confounded floundering,' admonished Hopkins; 'it won't do no
good, and there ain't no necessity for it.'

One of them took the arm upon one side, and the other the same upon
the opposite side, and struck out for the shore. The poor trapper
realized his dire extremity, and remained motionless while they towed
him along.

'Aisy jist-aiey now!' admonished Mickey: 'ye're in a bad fix; but by
the blessin' of Heaven we'll do the fair thing wid yees. We understand
the science of swimmin', and--'

At that moment some drowning wretch caught the foot of the Irishman,
and he was instantly drawn under water, out of sight.

Neither Hopkins nor Baldy lost presence of mind in this fearful
moment, but continued their progress toward shore, as though nothing
of the kind had happened.

As for the Irishman, his situation for the time was exceedingly
critical. The man who had clutched his foot did so with the grasp of a
drowning man; in their struggle both went to the bottom of the river
together. Here, by a furious effort, Mickey shook him free, and coming
to the surface, struck out again for the suffering hunter.

'It is sorry I am that I was compelled to leave yees behind,' he
muttered, glancing over his shoulder in search of the poor fellow from
whom he had just freed himself; 'but yees are past helpin', and so
it's maeself that must attend to the poor gentleman ahead.'

Striking powerfully out, he soon came beside his friends again and
took the drooping arm of Baldy Bicknell.

'Be yees sufferin' to a great extent?' inquired the kind-hearted
Irishman, looking at the white face of the silent hunter.

'Got a purty good whack over the back,' he replied, between his
compressed lips, as he forced back all expression of pain.

''Ye'll be aisier when we fotch ye to the land, as me uncle obsarved
whin he hauled the big fish ashore that was thrashing his line to
pieces jist.'

'Twon't take you long to git over it,' added Hopkins, anxious to give
his grain of consolation; 'you look, now, like quite a healthy young
man.'

The current was quite rapid, and it was no light labor to tow the
helpless hunter ashore; but the two friends succeeded, and at length
drew him out upon the land and stretched him upon the sward.

The exertion of keeping their charge afloat, and breasting the current
at the same time, carried them a considerable distance downstream, and
they landed perhaps an eighth of a mile below where the main body of
shivering wretches were congregated.

'Do yees feel aisy?' inquired Mickey, when the hunter had been laid
upon the grass, beneath some overhanging bushes.

'Yes, I'll soon git over it but woofh! that thar war a whack of the
biggest kind I got. It has made me powerful weak.'

'What might it have been naow!' inquired Hopkins.

'Can't say, fust thing I know'd, I didn't know nothin', remember suthin'
took me back the head, and the next thing I kerwholloped in the
water.'

The three men had lost everything except what was on their bodies when
the catastrophe occurred. Their horses were gone, and they hadn't a
gun between them; nothing but two revolvers, and about a half dozen
charges for each.

Of the twenty odd who were upon the steamer at the time of the
explosion, nearly one-half were killed; they sinking to the bottom
almost as suddenly as the wrecked steamer, of which not a single trace
now remained.

The survivors made their way to land, reaching it a short distance
below their starting-point, and here they assembled, to commiserate
with each other upon their hapless lot and determine how they were to
reach home.

Our three friends had remained upon shore about half an hour, the two
waiting for the third to recover, when the latter raised himself upon
his elbow in the attitude of listening. At the same time he waved his
hand for the others to hold their peace.

A moment later he said:

'I
hear Injins.''

'Begorrah! where bees the same?' demanded Mickey, starting to his
feet, while Ethan gazed alarmedly about.

'Jist take a squint up the river, and tell me ef they ain't pitchin'
into the poor critters thar.'

Through the sheltering trees and undergrowth, which partly protected
them, the two men gazed up-stream. To their horror, they saw fully
fifty Indians massacring the survivors of the wreck, whooping,
screeching and yelling like demons, while their poor victims were
vainly endeavoring to escape them.

'Begorrah, now, but that looks bad!' exclaimed the Irishman. 'Be the
same towken, what is it that we can do?'

'Jerusalem!  They'll be sure to pay us a visit.  I'll be gumtued if they
won't,' added the Yankee, in some trepidation, as he cowered down
again by the side of the hunter, and said to him in a lower Voice:

'The worst of it is, we haven't got a gun atwixt us. Of course we
shall stick by you if we have to lose our heads fur it. But don't you
think they'll pay us a visit?'

'Like 'noughtin',' was the indifferent reply of the hunter, as he laid
his head back again, as if tired of listening to the tumult.

'Can't we do anything to get you out of danger!'

'Can't see that you kin; you two fellers have done me a good turn in
gittin' me ashore, so jist leave me yere, and it don't make no
difference about me one way or t'other, Ef I hear 'em comin' I'll jist
roll into the water and go under in that style.'

'May the Howly Vargin niver smile upon us if we dissart you in this
extremity,' was the reply of the fervent-hearted Irishman.

'And by the jumpin' jingo! if we was consarnedly mean enough to do it,
there ain't no need of it.'

As the Yankee spoke, he ran down to the river, and walking out a short
distance, caught a log drifting by and drew it in.

'Naow, Mr. Baldy, or Mr. Bicknell, as you call yourself, we'll all
three git hold of that and float down the river till we git beyond
fear of the savages.'

The plan was a good one, and the hunter so expressed himself. With
some help he managed to crawl to the river bank, where one arm was
placed over the log, in such a manner that he could easily float,
without any danger of sinking.

'Keep as close to shore as you kin,' he said, as they were about
shoving off.

'We can go faster in the middle,' said Hopkins.

'But the reds'll see us, and it'll be all up then.'

This was the warning of prudence, and it was heeded.



                       CHAPTER VI. THE MINERS.

IT WAS late in the afternoon when the explosion occurred, and it was
just beginning to grow dark when the three friends began drifting down
the Yellowstone.

This fact was greatly in their favor, although there remained an hour
or two of great danger, in case the Indians made any search for them.
In case of discovery, there was hardly an earthly chance for escape.

The log or raft, as it might be termed, had floated very quietly
down-stream for about half an hour, when the wonderfully acute ears of
the trapper detected danger.

'Thar be some of the skunks that are creep-in 'long shore,' said he;
'you'd better run in under this yar tree and hold fast awhile.'

The warning was heeded. Just below them, the luxuriant branches of an
oak, dipped in the current, formed an impenetrable screen. As the log,
guided thither, floated beneath this, Mickey and Ethan both caught
hold of the branches and held themselves motionless.

'Now wait till it's dark, and then thar'll be no fear of the
varmints,' added the trapper.

''Sh! I haars sumfin'!' whispered the Irishman

'What is it?' asked Ethan.

'How does I know till yees kaaps still?'

'It's the reds goin' long the banks,' said the trapper.

The words were yet in his mouth, when the voice of one Indian was
heard calling to another. Neither Mickey nor Ethan had the remotest
idea of the meaning of the words uttered, but the trapper told them
that they were inquiring of each other whether anything had been
discovered of more fugitives. The answer being in the negative, our
friends considered their present position safe.

When it was fairly dark, and nothing more was seen or heard of the
Indians, the raft was permitted to float free, and they drifted with
the current. They kept the river until daylight, when, having been in
the water so long, they concluded it best to land and rest themselves.
By the aid of their revolvers they succeeded in' kindling a fire, the
warmth of which proved exceedingly grateful to all.

They would have had a very rough time had they not encountered a party
of hunters who accompanied them to St. Louis, where the trapper had
friends, and where, also, he had a good sum of money in the bank.

Here Baldy remained all winter, before he entirely recovered from the
hurt which he received during the explosion and sinking of the
steamer. When the Irishman and Yankee were about to depart, he asked
them where they were going.

'I'm goin' home in Connecticut and goin' to work on the farm, and
that's where I'm goin' to stay. I was a fool ever to leave it for this
confounded place. I could live decent put there, and that's more than
I can do in this blamed country.'

'And I shall go back to work on the Erie railroad, at thirty-siven
cents a day and boord myself,' replied the Irishman.

'If yer were sartin of findin' all the gold yor want, would yer go
back to Califony?''

'Arrah. Now, what are yees talkin' about?' asked McSquizzle, somewhat
impatiently. 'What is the good of talkin'?'

'I didn't ax yer to fool with yer,' replied the trapper, 'thar's a place
that I know away out West, that I call Wolf Ravine, whar thar's enough
gold to make both of yer richer than yer ever war afore, and then
leave some for yer children.'

'Jerusalem! but you're a lucky dog!' exclaimed Ethan Hopkins, not
daring to hope that he would reveal the place. 'Why don't you dig it
up naow, yourself?'

'I only found it a month ago, and I made a purty good haul of it, as
it was. When that old boss of mine went down with the steamer, he
carried a powerful heft of gold with him, and if anybody finds his
carcass, it'll be the most vallyable one they ever come across.'

'Jingo! if I'd know'd that, I'd taken a hunt for him myself.'

'Howsumever, that's neither yar nor thar. You both done me a good turn
when I got into trouble on the river, and I mud' up my mind to do what
I could toward payin' it back the first chance I got. I didn't say
nothin' of it when we was on our way, 'cause I was afeard it would
make you too crazy to go back ag'in: but if you'll come back this way
next spring I'll make the trip with you.'

'Why not go naow?' eagerly inquired Hopkins.

'It's too late in the season. I don't want to be thar when thar's too
much snow onto the ground, and then I must stay yar till I git well
over that whack I got on the boat.'

It is hardly necessary to say that the offer of the kind-hearted
trapper was accepted with the utmost enthusiasm. Mickey and Ethan were
more anxious to go out upon the prairies than they had been a year and
a half before, when they started so full of fife and hope for that
vast wilderness, and had come back with such discouragement and
disgust.

It was arranged that as soon as the succeeding spring had fairly set
in, they would set out on their return for St. Louis, where the
trapper would meet and accompany them to the wonderful gold region of
which he had spoken.

Before continuing their journey homeward, Baldy presented each with a
complete outfit, paid their passage to their homes, and gave them a
snug sum over. Like the Indian, he never could forget a kindness shown
him, nor do too great a favor to those who had so signally benefited
him.

So the separation took place again; and, on the following spring
Mickey and Ethan appeared in St. Louis, where they had no difficulty
in finding their old friend, the trapper.

He had recovered entirely from his prostrating blow, and was expecting
them, anxious and glad to join in the promised search for gold. As the
fair weather had really begun, there was no time lost in unnecessary
delay. The purse of Baldy Bicknell was deep, and he had not the common
habit of intoxication, which takes so much substance from a man. He
purchased a horse and accouterments for each of his friends; and,
before they started westward, saw that nothing at all was lacking in
their outfit.

Three weeks later the men drew rein in a tort of valley, very deep but
not very wide. It was on the edge of an immense prairie, while a river
of considerable size flowed by the rear, and by a curious circuit
found its way into the lower portion of the ravine, dashing and
roaring forward in a furious canyon.

The edge and interior of the ravine was lined with immense bowlders
and rocks, while large and stunted trees seemed to grow everywhere.

'Yar's what I call Wolf Ravine,' said Baldy when they had spent some
time in looking; about them.

'And be the same towken, where is the goold?' inquired Mickey.

'Yes, that there is what I call the important question,' added Ethan.

'That it is, of the greatest account, as me grandmither observed, whin
she fell off the staaple, and axed whether her pipe was broke.'

'It's in thar,' was the reply of the hunter, as he pointed to the
wildest-looking portion of the ravine.

'Let's geit it then.'

'Thar be some other things that have got to be looked after first,'
was the reply, 'and we've got to find a place to stow ourselves away.'

This was a matter of considerable difficulty: but they succeeded at
last in discovering a retreat in the rocks, where they were secure
from any attack, no matter by how formidable a number made.

After this, they hunted up a grazing place for their animals, which
were turned loose.

They soon found that the trapper had not deceived them. There was an
unusually rich deposit of gold in one portion of the ravine, and the
men fell to work with a will, conscious that they would reap a rich
reward for their labor.

The name, Wolf Ravine, had been given to it by the trapper, because on
his first discovery of it he had shot a large mountain wolf, that was
clambering up the side; but none others were seen afterward.

But there was one serious drawback to this brilliant prospect of
wealth. Indians of the most treacherous and implacable kind were all
around them, and were by no means disposed to-let them alone.

On the second day after their labor, a horde of them came screeching
down upon them; and had it not been for the safe retreat, which the
trapper's foresight had secured, all three would have been massacred.

As it was, they had a severe fight, and were penned up for the better
part of two days, by which time they had slain too many of their
enemies that the remaining ones were glad to withdraw.

But when the trapper stole out on a visit to his horses he found that
every one had been completely riddled by balls. The treacherous dogs
had taken every means of revenge at hand.

'Skin me fur a skunk, but we've stood this long as we ought to!'
exclaimed Baldy Bicknell, when he returned. 'You take care of
yourselves till I come back again!'

With which speech he slung his rifle over his shoulder and started for
St. Louis.



              CHAPTER VII. THE STEAM MAN ON HIS TRAVELS.

YOUNG BRAINERD had a mortal fear that the existence of the steam man
would be discovered by some outsider, when a large crowd would
probably collect around his house, and his friends would insist on a
display of the powers of the extraordinary mechanism.

But there was no one in the secret except his mother, and there was no
danger of her revealing it. So the boy experimented with his invention
until there was nothing more left for him to do, except to sit and
watch its workings.

Finally, when he began to wonder at the prolonged delay of the
trapper, who had visited him some weeks before, he made his appearance
as suddenly as if he had risen from the ground, with the inquiry:

'Have you got that thundering old thing ready?'

'Yes: he has been ready for a week, and waiting.'

'Wal, start her out then, fur I'm in a hurry.'

'You will have to wait awhile, for we can't get ready under half a
day.'

