
"I shall leave Norman to do the arguing," said Rosemary.

"I'LL deal with Norman. I can manage HIM. I would never have asked
you to give me back my promise--never--but I had to tell Norman why I
couldn't marry him and he said HE would ask you. I couldn't prevent him.
You need not suppose you are the only person in the world who possesses
self-respect. I never dreamed of marrying and leaving you here alone.
And you'll find I can be as determined as yourself."

Rosemary turned away and went into the house, with a shrug of her
shoulders. Ellen looked down at St. George, who had never blinked an
eyelash or stirred a whisker during the whole interview.

"St. George, this world would be a dull place without the men, I'll
admit, but I'm almost tempted to wish there wasn't one of 'em in it.
Look at the trouble and bother they've made right here, George--torn our
happy old life completely up by the roots, Saint. John Meredith began it
and Norman Douglas has finished it. And now both of them have to go into
limbo. Norman is the only man I ever met who agrees with me that
the Kaiser of Germany is the most dangerous creature alive on this
earth--and I can't marry this sensible person because my sister is
stubborn and I'm stubborner. Mark my words, St. George, the minister
would come back if she raised her little finger. But she won't
George--she'll never do it--she won't even crook it--and I don't dare
meddle, Saint. I won't sulk, George; Rosemary didn't sulk, so I'm
determined I won't either, Saint; Norman will tear up the turf, but the
long and short of it is, St. George, that all of us old fools must just
stop thinking of marrying. Well, well, 'despair is a free man, hope is
a slave,' Saint. So now come into the house, George, and I'll solace you
with a saucerful of cream. Then there will be one happy and contented
creature on this hill at least."



CHAPTER XXXIII. CARL IS--NOT--WHIPPED

"There is something I think I ought to tell you," said Mary Vance
mysteriously.

She and Faith and Una were walking arm in arm through the village,
having foregathered at Mr. Flagg's store. Una and Faith exchanged looks
which said, "NOW something disagreeable is coming." When Mary Vance
thought she ought to tell them things there was seldom much pleasure in
the hearing. They often wondered why they kept on liking Mary Vance--for
like her they did, in spite of everything. To be sure, she was generally
a stimulating and agreeable companion. If only she would not have those
convictions that it was her duty to tell them things!

"Do you know that Rosemary West won't marry your pa because she thinks
you are such a wild lot? She's afraid she couldn't bring you up right
and so she turned him down."

Una's heart thrilled with secret exultation. She was very glad to
hear that Miss West would not marry her father. But Faith was rather
disappointed.

"How do you know?" she asked.

"Oh, everybody's saying it. I heard Mrs. Elliott talking it over with
Mrs. Doctor. They thought I was too far away to hear, but I've got ears
like a cat's. Mrs. Elliott said she hadn't a doubt that Rosemary was
afraid to try stepmothering you because you'd got such a reputation.
Your pa never goes up the hill now. Neither does Norman Douglas. Folks
say Ellen has jilted him just to get square with him for jilting her
ages ago. But Norman is going about declaring he'll get her yet. And
I think you ought to know you've spoiled your pa's match and _I_ think
it's a pity, for he's bound to marry somebody before long, and Rosemary
West would have been the best wife _I_ know of for him."

"You told me all stepmothers were cruel and wicked," said Una.

"Oh--well," said Mary rather confusedly, "they're mostly awful cranky, I
know. But Rosemary West couldn't be very mean to any one. I tell you if
your pa turns round and marries Emmeline Drew you'll wish you'd behaved
yourselves better and not frightened Rosemary out of it. It's awful that
you've got such a reputation that no decent woman'll marry your pa on
account of you. Of course, _I_ know that half the yarns that are told
about you ain't true. But give a dog a bad name. Why, some folks are
saying that it was Jerry and Carl that threw the stones through Mrs.
Stimson's window the other night when it was really them two Boyd boys.
But I'm afraid it was Carl that put the eel in old Mrs. Carr's buggy,
though I said at first I wouldn't believe it until I'd better proof than
old Kitty Alec's word. I told Mrs. Elliott so right to her face."

"What did Carl do?" cried Faith.

"Well, they say--now, mind, I'm only telling you what people say--so
there's no use in your blaming me for it--that Carl and a lot of other
boys were fishing eels over the bridge one evening last week. Mrs. Carr
drove past in that old rattletrap buggy of hers with the open back. And
Carl he just up and threw a big eel into the back. When poor old Mrs.
Carr was driving up the hill by Ingleside that eel came squirming out
between her feet. She thought it was a snake and she just give one awful
screech and stood up and jumped clean over the wheels. The horse bolted,
but it went home and no damage was done. But Mrs. Carr jarred her legs
most terrible, and has had nervous spasms ever since whenever she thinks
of the eel. Say, it was a rotten trick to play on the poor old soul.
She's a decent body, if she is as queer as Dick's hat band."

Faith and Una looked at each other again. This was a matter for the
Good-Conduct Club. They would not talk it over with Mary.

"There goes your pa," said Mary as Mr. Meredith passed them, "and never
seeing us no more'n if we weren't here. Well, I'm getting so's I don't
mind it. But there are folks who do."

Mr. Meredith had not seen them, but he was not walking along in his
usual dreamy and abstracted fashion. He strode up the hill in agitation
and distress. Mrs. Alec Davis had just told him the story of Carl and
the eel. She had been very indignant about it. Old Mrs. Carr was her
third cousin. Mr. Meredith was more than indignant. He was hurt and
shocked. He had not thought Carl would do anything like this. He was not
inclined to be hard on pranks of heedlessness or forgetfulness, but
THIS was different. THIS had a nasty tang in it. When he reached home he
found Carl on the lawn, patiently studying the habits and customs of a
colony of wasps. Calling him into the study Mr. Meredith confronted him,
with a sterner face than any of his children had ever seen before, and
asked him if the story were true.

"Yes," said Carl, flushing, but meeting his father's eyes bravely.

Mr. Meredith groaned. He had hoped that there had been at least
exaggeration.

"Tell me the whole matter," he said.

"The boys were fishing for eels over the bridge," said Carl. "Link Drew
had caught a whopper--I mean an awful big one--the biggest eel I ever
saw. He caught it right at the start and it had been lying in his basket
a long time, still as still. I thought it was dead, honest I did. Then
old Mrs. Carr drove over the bridge and she called us all young varmints
and told us to go home. And we hadn't said a word to her, father, truly.
So when she drove back again, after going to the store, the boys dared
me to put Link's eel in her buggy. I thought it was so dead it couldn't
hurt her and I threw it in. Then the eel came to life on the hill and
we heard her scream and saw her jump out. I was awful sorry. That's all,
father."

It was not quite as bad as Mr. Meredith had feared, but it was quite bad
enough. "I must punish you, Carl," he said sorrowfully.

"Yes, I know, father."

"I--I must whip you."

Carl winced. He had never been whipped. Then, seeing how badly his
father felt, he said cheerfully,

"All right, father."

Mr. Meredith misunderstood his cheerfulness and thought him insensible.
He told Carl to come to the study after supper, and when the boy had
gone out he flung himself into his chair and groaned again. He dreaded
the evening sevenfold more than Carl did. The poor minister did not even
know what he should whip his boy with. What was used to whip boys? Rods?
Canes? No, that would be too brutal. A timber switch, then? And he, John
Meredith, must hie him to the woods and cut one. It was an abominable
thought. Then a picture presented itself unbidden to his mind. He saw
Mrs. Carr's wizened, nut-cracker little face at the appearance of that
reviving eel--he saw her sailing witch-like over the buggy wheels.
Before he could prevent himself the minister laughed. Then he was angry
with himself and angrier still with Carl. He would get that switch at
once--and it must not be too limber, after all.

Carl was talking the matter over in the graveyard with Faith and Una,
who had just come home. They were horrified at the idea of his being
whipped--and by father, who had never done such a thing! But they agreed
soberly that it was just.

"You know it was a dreadful thing to do," sighed Faith. "And you never
owned up in the club."

"I forgot," said Carl. "Besides, I didn't think any harm came of it.
I didn't know she jarred her legs. But I'm to be whipped and that will
make things square."

"Will it hurt--very much?" said Una, slipping her hand into Carl's.

"Oh, not so much, I guess," said Carl gamely. "Anyhow, I'm not going to
cry, no matter how much it hurts. It would make father feel so bad, if
I did. He's all cut up now. I wish I could whip myself hard enough and
save him doing it."

After supper, at which Carl had eaten little and Mr. Meredith nothing at
all, both went silently into the study. The switch lay on the table. Mr.
Meredith had had a bad time getting a switch to suit him. He cut one,
then felt it was too slender. Carl had done a really indefensible thing.
Then he cut another--it was far too thick. After all, Carl had thought
the eel was dead. The third one suited him better; but as he picked it
up from the table it seemed very thick and heavy--more like a stick than
a switch.

"Hold out your hand," he said to Carl.

Carl threw back his head and held out his hand unflinchingly. But he was
not very old and he could not quite keep a little fear out of his eyes.
Mr. Meredith looked down into those eyes--why, they were Cecilia's
eyes--her very eyes--and in them was the selfsame expression he had once
seen in Cecilia's eyes when she had come to him to tell him something
she had been a little afraid to tell him. Here were her eyes in Carl's
little, white face--and six weeks ago he had thought, through one
endless, terrible night, that his little lad was dying.

John Meredith threw down the switch.

"Go," he said, "I cannot whip you."

Carl fled to the graveyard, feeling that the look on his father's face
was worse than any whipping.

"Is it over so soon?" asked Faith. She and Una had been holding hands
and setting teeth on the Pollock tombstone.

"He--he didn't whip me at all," said Carl with a sob, "and--I wish he
had--and he's in there, feeling just awful."

Una slipped away. Her heart yearned to comfort her father. As
noiselessly as a little gray mouse she opened the study door and crept
in. The room was dark with twilight. Her father was sitting at his desk.
His back was towards her--his head was in his hands. He was talking to
himself--broken, anguished words--but Una heard--heard and understood,
with the sudden illumination that comes to sensitive, unmothered
children. As silently as she had come in she slipped out and closed the
door. John Meredith went on talking out his pain in what he deemed his
undisturbed solitude.



CHAPTER XXXIV. UNA VISITS THE HILL

Una went upstairs. Carl and Faith were already on their way through the
early moonlight to Rainbow Valley, having heard therefrom the elfin lilt
of Jerry's jews-harp and having guessed that the Blythes were there and
fun afoot. Una had no wish to go. She sought her own room first where
she sat down on her bed and had a little cry. She did not want anybody
to come in her dear mother's place. She did not want a stepmother
who would hate her and make her father hate her. But father was so
desperately unhappy--and if she could do any anything to make him
happier she MUST do it. There was only one thing she could do--and she
had known the moment she had left the study that she must do it. But it
was a very hard thing to do.

After Una cried her heart out she wiped her eyes and went to the spare
room. It was dark and rather musty, for the blind had not been drawn
up nor the window opened for a long time. Aunt Martha was no fresh-air
fiend. But as nobody ever thought of shutting a door in the manse this
did not matter so much, save when some unfortunate minister came to stay
all night and was compelled to breathe the spare room atmosphere.

There was a closet in the spare room and far back in the closet a gray
silk dress was hanging. Una went into the closet and shut the door, went
down on her knees and pressed her face against the soft silken folds.
It had been her mother's wedding-dress. It was still full of a sweet,
faint, haunting perfume, like lingering love. Una always felt very close
to her mother there--as if she were kneeling at her feet with head in
her lap. She went there once in a long while when life was TOO hard.

"Mother," she whispered to the gray silk gown, "_I_ will never forget
you, mother, and I'll ALWAYS love you best. But I have to do it, mother,
because father is so very unhappy. I know you wouldn't want him to be
unhappy. And I will be very good to her, mother, and try to love her,
even if she is like Mary Vance said stepmothers always were."

Una carried some fine, spiritual strength away from her secret shrine.
She slept peacefully that night with the tear stains still glistening on
her sweet, serious, little face.

The next afternoon she put on her best dress and hat. They were shabby
enough. Every other little girl in the Glen had new clothes that summer
except Faith and Una. Mary Vance had a lovely dress of white embroidered
lawn, with scarlet silk sash and shoulder bows. But to-day Una did not
mind her shabbiness. She only wanted to be very neat. She washed her
face carefully. She brushed her black hair until it was as smooth as
satin. She tied her shoelaces carefully, having first sewed up two runs
in her one pair of good stockings. She would have liked to black her
shoes, but she could not find any blacking. Finally, she slipped away
from the manse, down through Rainbow Valley, up through the whispering
woods, and out to the road that ran past the house on the hill. It was
quite a long walk and Una was tired and warm when she got there.

She saw Rosemary West sitting under a tree in the garden and stole past
the dahlia beds to her. Rosemary had a book in her lap, but she was
gazing afar across the harbour and her thoughts were sorrowful enough.
Life had not been pleasant lately in the house on the hill. Ellen had
not sulked--Ellen had been a brick. But things can be felt that
are never said and at times the silence between the two women was
intolerably eloquent. All the many familiar things that had once
made life sweet had a flavour of bitterness now. Norman Douglas made
periodical irruptions also, bullying and coaxing Ellen by turns. It
would end, Rosemary believed, by his dragging Ellen off with him some
day, and Rosemary felt that she would be almost glad when it happened.
Existence would be horribly lonely then, but it would be no longer
charged with dynamite.

She was roused from her unpleasant reverie by a timid little touch on
her shoulder. Turning, she saw Una Meredith.

"Why, Una, dear, did you walk up here in all this heat?"

"Yes," said Una, "I came to--I came to--"

But she found it very hard to say what she had come to do. Her voice
failed--her eyes filled with tears.

"Why, Una, little girl, what is the trouble? Don't be afraid to tell
me."

