
'Are you afraid of being poisoned?' asked the old woman. 'See, I will
cut this apple in half. I'll eat the white cheek and you can eat the
red.'

But the apple was so cunningly made that only the red cheek was
poisonous. Snowdrop longed to eat the tempting fruit, and when she saw
that the peasant woman was eating it herself, she couldn't resist
the temptation any longer, and stretching out her hand she took the
poisonous half. But hardly had the first bite passed her lips than she
fell down dead on the ground. Then the eyes of the cruel Queen sparkled
with glee, and laughing aloud she cried:

'As white as snow, as red as blood, and as black as ebony, this time the
Dwarfs won't be able to bring you back to life.'

When she got home she asked the mirror:


     'Mirror, mirror, hanging there,
     Who in all the land's most fair?'


and this time it replied:


     'You are most fair, my Lady Queen,
     None fairer in the land, I ween.'


Then her jealous heart was at rest--at least, as much at rest as a
jealous heart can ever be.

When the little Dwarfs came home in the evening they found Snowdrop
lying on the ground, and she neither breathed nor stirred. They lifted
her up, and looked round everywhere to see if they could find anything
poisonous about. They unlaced her bodice, combed her hair, washed her
with water and wine, but all in vain; the child was dead and remained
dead. Then they placed her on a bier, and all the seven Dwarfs sat round
it, weeping and sobbing for three whole days. At last they made up their
minds to bury her, but she looked as blooming as a living being, and her
cheeks were still such a lovely colour, that they said:

'We can't hide her away in the black ground.'

So they had a coffin made of transparent glass, and they laid her in it,
and wrote on the lid in golden letters that she was a royal Princess.
Then they put the coffin on the top of the mountain, and one of the
Dwarfs always remained beside it and kept watch over it. And the very
birds of the air came and bewailed Snowdrop's death, first an owl, and
then a raven, and last of all a little dove.

Snowdrop lay a long time in the coffin, and she always looked the same,
just as if she were fast asleep, and she remained as white as snow, as
red as blood, and her hair as black as ebony.

Now it happened one day that a Prince came to the wood and passed by
the Dwarfs' house. He saw the coffin on the hill, with the beautiful
Snowdrop inside it, and when he had read what was written on it in
golden letters, he said to the Dwarf:

'Give me the coffin. I'll give you whatever you like for it.'

But the Dwarf said: 'No; we wouldn't part with it for all the gold in
the world.'

'Well, then,' he replied, 'give it to me, because I can't live without
Snowdrop. I will cherish and love it as my dearest possession.'

He spoke so sadly that the good Dwarfs had pity on him, and gave him
the coffin, and the Prince made his servants bear it away on their
shoulders. Now it happened that as they were going down the hill they
stumbled over a bush, and jolted the coffin so violently that the
poisonous bit of apple Snowdrop had swallowed fell out of her throat.
She gradually opened her eyes, lifted up the lid of the coffin, and sat
up alive and well.

'Oh! dear me, where am I?' she cried.

The Prince answered joyfully, 'You are with me,' and he told her all
that had happened, adding, 'I love you better than anyone in the whole
wide world. Will you come with me to my father's palace and be my wife?'

Snowdrop consented, and went with him, and the marriage was celebrated
with great pomp and splendour.

Now Snowdrop's wicked step-mother was one of the guests invited to the
wedding feast. When she had dressed herself very gorgeously for the
occasion, she went to the mirror, and said:

     'Mirror, mirror, hanging there,
     Who in all the land's most fair?'


and the mirror answered:


     'My Lady Queen, you are fair, 'tis true,
     But Snowdrop is fairer far than you.'


When the wicked woman heard these words she uttered a curse, and was
beside herself with rage and mortification. At first she didn't want to
go to the wedding at all, but at the same time she felt she would never
be happy till she had seen the young Queen. As she entered Snowdrop
recognised her, and nearly fainted with fear; but red-hot iron shoes
had been prepared for the wicked old Queen, and she was made to get into
them and dance till she fell down dead.(29)

(29) Grimm.




THE GOLDEN GOOSE

THERE was once a man who had three sons. The youngest of them was called
Dullhead, and was sneered and jeered at and snubbed on every possible
opportunity.

One day it happened that the eldest son wished to go into the forest to
cut wood, and before he started his mother gave him a fine rich cake and
a bottle of wine, so that he might be sure not to suffer from hunger or
thirst.

When he reached the forest he met a little old grey man who wished him
'Good-morning,' and said: 'Do give me a piece of that cake you have got
in your pocket, and let me have a draught of your wine--I am so hungry
and thirsty.'

But this clever son replied: 'If I give you my cake and wine I shall
have none left for myself; you just go your own way;' and he left the
little man standing there and went further on into the forest. There he
began to cut down a tree, but before long he made a false stroke with
his axe, and cut his own arm so badly that he was obliged to go home and
have it bound up.

Then the second son went to the forest, and his mother gave him a good
cake and a bottle of wine as she had to his elder brother. He too met
the little old grey man, who begged him for a morsel of cake and a
draught of wine.

But the second son spoke most sensibly too, and said: 'Whatever I give
to you I deprive myself of. Just go your own way, will you?' Not long
after his punishment overtook him, for no sooner had he struck a couple
of blows on a tree with his axe, than he cut his leg so badly that he
had to be carried home.

So then Dullhead said: 'Father, let me go out and cut wood.'

But his father answered: 'Both your brothers have injured themselves.
You had better leave it alone; you know nothing about it.'

But Dullhead begged so hard to be allowed to go that at last his father
said: 'Very well, then--go. Perhaps when you have hurt yourself, you may
learn to know better.' His mother only gave him a very plain cake made
with water and baked in the cinders, and a bottle of sour beer.

When he got to the forest, he too met the little grey old man, who
greeted him and said: 'Give me a piece of your cake and a draught from
your bottle; I am so hungry and thirsty.'

And Dullhead replied: 'I've only got a cinder-cake and some sour beer,
but if you care to have that, let us sit down and eat.'

So they sat down, and when Dullhead brought out his cake he found it
had turned into a fine rich cake, and the sour beer into excellent wine.
Then they ate and drank, and when they had finished the little man
said: 'Now I will bring you luck, because you have a kind heart and are
willing to share what you have with others. There stands an old tree;
cut it down, and amongst its roots you'll find something.' With that the
little man took leave.

Then Dullhead fell to at once to hew down the tree, and when it fell he
found amongst its roots a goose, whose feathers were all of pure gold.
He lifted it out, carried it off, and took it with him to an inn where
he meant to spend the night.

Now the landlord of the inn had three daughters, and when they saw the
goose they were filled with curiosity as to what this wonderful bird
could be, and each longed to have one of its golden feathers.

The eldest thought to herself: 'No doubt I shall soon find a good
opportunity to pluck out one of its feathers,' and the first time
Dullhead happened to leave the room she caught hold of the goose by its
wing. But, lo and behold! her fingers seemed to stick fast to the goose,
and she could not take her hand away.

Soon after the second daughter came in, and thought to pluck a golden
feather for herself too; but hardly had she touched her sister than
she stuck fast as well. At last the third sister came with the same
intentions, but the other two cried out: 'Keep off! for Heaven's sake,
keep off!'

The younger sister could not imagine why she was to keep off, and
thought to herself: 'If they are both there, why should not I be there
too?'

So she sprang to them; but no sooner had she touched one of them than
she stuck fast to her. So they all three had to spend the night with the
goose.

Next morning Dullhead tucked the goose under his arm and went off,
without in the least troubling himself about the three girls who were
hanging on to it. They just had to run after him right or left as best
they could. In the middle of a field they met the parson, and when he
saw this procession he cried: 'For shame, you bold girls! What do you
mean by running after a young fellow through the fields like that? Do
you call that proper behaviour?' And with that he caught the youngest
girl by the hand to try and draw her away. But directly he touched her
he hung on himself, and had to run along with the rest of them.

Not long after the clerk came that way, and was much surprised to see
the parson following the footsteps of three girls. 'Why, where is your
reverence going so fast?' cried he; 'don't forget there is to be a
christening to-day;' and he ran after him, caught him by the sleeve, and
hung on to it himself: As the five of them trotted along in this fashion
one after the other, two peasants were coming from their work with their
hoes. On seeing them the parson called out and begged them to come and
rescue him and the clerk. But no sooner did they touch the clerk
than they stuck on too, and so there were seven of them running after
Dullhead and his goose.

After a time they all came to a town where a King reigned whose daughter
was so serious and solemn that no one could ever manage to make her
laugh. So the King had decreed that whoever should succeed in making her
laugh should marry her.

When Dullhead heard this he marched before the Princess with his
goose and its appendages, and as soon as she saw these seven people
continually running after each other she burst out laughing, and could
not stop herself. Then Dullhead claimed her as his bride, but the
King, who did not much fancy him as a son-in-law, made all sorts of
objections, and told him he must first find a man who could drink up a
whole cellarful of wine.

Dullhead bethought him of the little grey man, who could, he felt sure,
help him; so he went off to the forest, and on the very spot where he
had cut down the tree he saw a man sitting with a most dismal expression
of face.

Dullhead asked him what he was taking so much to heart, and the man
answered: 'I don't know how I am ever to quench this terrible thirst I
am suffering from. Cold water doesn't suit me at all. To be sure I've
emptied a whole barrel of wine, but what is one drop on a hot stone?'

'I think I can help you,' said Dullhead. 'Come with me, and you shall
drink to your heart's content.' So he took him to the King's cellar, and
the man sat down before the huge casks and drank and drank till he drank
up the whole contents of the cellar before the day closed.

Then Dullhead asked once more for his bride, but the King felt vexed at
the idea of a stupid fellow whom people called 'Dullhead' carrying
off his daughter, and he began to make fresh conditions. He required
Dullhead to find a man who could eat a mountain of bread. Dullhead did
not wait to consider long but went straight off to the forest, and there
on the same spot sat a man who was drawing in a strap as tight as he
could round his body, and making a most woeful face the while. Said he:
'I've eaten up a whole oven full of loaves, but what's the good of that
to anyone who is as hungry as I am? I declare my stomach feels quite
empty, and I must draw my belt tight if I'm not to die of starvation.'

Dullhead was delighted, and said: 'Get up and come with me, and you
shall have plenty to eat,' and he brought him to the King's Court.

Now the King had given orders to have all the flour in his kingdom
brought together, and to have a huge mountain baked of it. But the man
from the wood just took up his stand before the mountain and began to
eat, and in one day it had all vanished.

For the third time Dullhead asked for his bride, but again the King
tried to make some evasion, and demanded a ship 'which could sail on
land or water! When you come sailing in such a ship,' said he, 'you
shall have my daughter without further delay.'

Again Dullhead started off to the forest, and there he found the little
old grey man with whom he had shared his cake, and who said: 'I have
eaten and I have drunk for you, and now I will give you the ship. I have
done all this for you because you were kind and merciful to me.'

Then he gave Dullhead a ship which could sail on land or water, and when
the King saw it he felt he could no longer refuse him his daughter.

So they celebrated the wedding with great rejoicings; and after the
King's death Dullhead succeeded to the kingdom, and lived happily with
his wife for many years after.(30)

(30) Grimm.




THE SEVEN FOALS

THERE was once upon a time a couple of poor folks who lived in a
wretched hut, far away from everyone else, in a wood. They only just
managed to live from hand to mouth, and had great difficulty in doing
even so much as that, but they had three sons, and the youngest of them
was called Cinderlad, for he did nothing else but lie and poke about
among the ashes.

One day the eldest lad said that he would go out to earn his living;
he soon got leave to do that, and set out on his way into the world. He
walked on and on for the whole day, and when night was beginning to fall
he came to a royal palace. The King was standing outside on the steps,
and asked where he was going.

'Oh, I am going about seeking a place, my father,' said the youth.

'Wilt thou serve me, and watch my seven foals?' asked the King. 'If thou
canst watch them for a whole day and tell me at night what they eat and
drink, thou shalt have the Princess and half my kingdom, but if thou
canst not, I will cut three red stripes on thy back.'

The youth thought that it was very easy work to watch the foals, and
that he could do it well enough.

Next morning, when day was beginning to dawn, the King's Master of the
Horse let out the seven foals; and they ran away, and the youth after
them just as it chanced, over hill and dale, through woods end bogs.
When the youth had run thus for a long time he began to be tired, and
when he had held on a little longer he was heartily weary of watching
at all, and at the same moment he came to a cleft in a rock where an old
woman was sitting spinning with her distaff in her hand.

As soon as she caught sight of the youth, who was running after the
foals till the perspiration streamed down his face, she cried:

'Come hither, come hither, my handsome son, and let me comb your hair
for you.'

The lad was willing enough, so he sat down in the cleft of the rock
beside the old hag, and laid his head on her knees, and she combed his
hair all day while he lay there and gave himself up to idleness.

When evening was drawing near, the youth wanted to go.

'I may just as well go straight home again,' said he, 'for it is no use
to go to the King's palace.'

'Wait till it is dusk,' said the old hag, 'and then the King's foals
will pass by this place again, and you can run home with them; no one
will ever know that you have been lying here all day instead of watching
the foals.'

So when they came she gave the lad a bottle of water and a bit of moss,
and told him to show these to the King and say that this was what his
seven foals ate and drank.

'Hast thou watched faithfully and well the whole day long?' said the
King, when the lad came into his presence in the evening.

'Yes, that I have!' said the youth.

'Then you are able to tell me what it is that my seven foals eat and
drink,' said the King.

So the youth produced the bottle of water and the bit of moss which he
had got from the old woman, saying:

'Here you see their meat, and here you see their drink.'

Then the King knew how his watching had been done, and fell into such a
rage that he ordered his people to chase the youth back to his own home
at once; but first they were to cut three red stripes in his back, and
rub salt into them.

When the youth reached home again, anyone can imagine what a state of
mind he was in. He had gone out once to seek a place, he said, but never
would he do such a thing again.

Next day the second son said that he would now go out into the world to
seek his fortune. His father and mother said 'No,' and bade him look
at his brother's back, but the youth would not give up his design, and
stuck to it, and after a long, long time he got leave to go, and set
forth on his way. When he had walked all day he too came to the King's
palace, and the King was standing outside on the steps, and asked where
he was going; and when the youth replied that he was going about in
search of a place, the King said that he might enter into his service
and watch his seven foals. Then the King promised him the same
punishment and the same reward that he had promised his brother.

The youth at once consented to this and entered into the King's service,
for he thought he could easily watch the foals and inform the King what
they ate and drank.

In the grey light of dawn the Master of the Horse let out the seven
foals, and off they went again over hill and dale, and off went the lad
after them. But all went with him as it had gone with his brother. When
he had run after the foals for a long, long time and was hot and tired,
he passed by a cleft in the rock where an old woman was sitting spinning
with a distaff, and she called to him:

'Come hither, come hither, my handsome son, and let me comb your hair.'

The youth liked the thought of this, let the foals run where they chose,
and seated himself in the cleft of the rock by the side of the old hag.
So there he sat with his head on her lap, taking his ease the livelong
day.

The foals came back in the evening, and then he too got a bit of moss
and a bottle of water from the old hag, which things he was to show to
the King. But when the King asked the youth: 'Canst thou tell me what my
seven foals eat and drink?' and the youth showed him the bit of moss and
the bottle of water, and said: 'Yes here may you behold their meat, and
here their drink,' the King once more became wroth, and commanded that
three red stripes should be cut on the lad's back, that salt should be
strewn upon them, and that he should then be instantly chased back to
his own home. So when the youth got home again he too related all that
had happened to him, and he too said that he had gone out in search of a
place once, but that never would he do it again.

On the third day Cinderlad wanted to set out. He had a fancy to try to
watch the seven foals himself, he said.

The two others laughed at him, and mocked him. 'What I when all went so
ill with us, do you suppose that you are going to succeed? You look like
succeeding--you who have never done anything else but lie and poke about
among the ashes!' said they.

'Yes, I will go too,' said Cinderlad, 'for I have taken it into my
head.'

The two brothers laughed at him, and his father and mother begged him
not to go, but all to no purpose, and Cinderlad set out on his way. So
when he had walked the whole day, he too came to the King's palace as
darkness began to fall.

There stood the King outside on the steps, and he asked whither he was
bound.

'I am walking about in search of a place,' said Cinderlad.

'From whence do you come, then?' inquired the King, for by this time he
wanted to know a little more about the men before he took any of them
into his service.

So Cinderlad told him whence he came, and that he was brother to the two
who had watched the seven foals for the King, and then he inquired if he
might be allowed to try to watch them on the following day.

'Oh, shame on them!' said the King, for it enraged him even to think of
them. 'If thou art brother to those two, thou too art not good for much.
I have had enough of such fellows.'

'Well, but as I have come here, you might just give me leave to make the
attempt,' said Cinderlad.

'Oh, very well, if thou art absolutely determined to have thy back
flayed, thou may'st have thine own way if thou wilt,' said the King.

'I would much rather have the Princess,' said Cinderlad.

Next morning, in the grey light of dawn, the Master of the Horse let
out the seven foals again, and off they set over hill and dale, through
woods and bogs, and off went Cinderlad after them. When he had run thus
for a long time, he too came to the cleft in the rock. There the old
hag was once more sitting spinning from her distaff, and she cried to
Cinderlad;

'Come hither, come hither, my handsome son, and let me comb your hair
for you.'

'Come to me, then; come to me!' said Cinderlad, as he passed by jumping
and running, and keeping tight hold of one of the foals' tails.

When he had got safely past the cleft in the rock, the youngest foal
said:

'Get on my back, for we have still a long way to go.' So the lad did
this.

And thus they journeyed onwards a long, long way.

'Dost thou see anything now?' said the Foal.

'No,' said Cinderlad.

So they journeyed onwards a good bit farther.

'Dost thou see anything now?' asked the Foal.

'Oh, no,' said the lad.

When they had gone thus for a long, long way, the Foal again asked:

'Dost thou see anything now?'

