"My gift to my little granddaughter," taking especial care to emphasize
the relationship, "has always been a doll, I suppose you knew that,
Cousin Eunice; and to try to procure one exactly like the one I have
purchased, is very presuming in you, to say the least."

"And why may I not present a doll to Phronsie Pepper, if I care to,
pray tell?" demanded Mrs. Chatterton in a high, cold tone.

"Why? because you have always showed a marked dislike for the child,"
cried old Mr. King angrily, "that's why, Cousin Eunice."

"Grandpapa--Grandpapa," said Phronsie, laying her hand on his arm.

"And to parade any special affection, such as the presentation of a
gift indicates, is a piece of presumption on your part, I say it again,
Cousin Eunice."

"Grandpapa!" said Phronsie again at his elbow.

"Now, Phronsie," turning to her, "you are to take that doll," pointing
to a gorgeous affair reposing on the sofa, with Mrs. Algernon
Chatterton's card attached to it, "and go over to Mrs. Chatterton, and
say, very distinctly, 'I cannot accept this gift;' mind you say it
distinctly, Phronsie, that there may be no mistake in the future."

"Oh, Grandpapa!" cried Phronsie in dismay.

"Yes, child; I know what is best for you. Take that doll, and do
exactly as I bid you."

A dreadful pause fell upon the room. Polly clasped her hands, while
Alexia and the other girls huddled into a corner saying softly, "Oh!
how perfectly dreadful!"

"No use to say anything to father when he looks like that," groaned
Jasper, when Polly besought him to try his influence, "his blood is up
now; he's borne a good deal, you know, Polly."

"O dear, dear!" whispered Polly, back again, "just look at Mrs.
Chatterton's face, and at poor Phronsie's; can't you do something,
Jasper?"

"I'm afraid not," said Jasper gloomily. "No; he's making her give it
back; see, Polly."

"You'll know it's for the best," Mr. King was repeating as he led the
child to Mrs. Chatterton standing cold and silent at the end of the
room, "sometime, child, and then you'll thank me that I saved you from
further annoyance of this sort. There, Cousin Eunice, is your gift,"
taking the doll from Phronsie's hand, and placing it in the long,
jeweled one. "My little granddaughter receives presents only from those
who love her. All others are unwarranted, and must be returned."

Phronsie burst out tearfully, "She's sorry, Grandpapa, I know she is,
and she loves me now. Please let me keep the doll."

But Mrs. Chatterton had left the room, the doll in her hand.




XXIV

AWAY


And after that everybody had to be as gay as possible, to keep
Phronsie's sad little face from being flooded with tears.

"Dear me!" exclaimed Jasper, "here comes Candace! Now what do you
suppose she has for you, Phronsie?"

Candace sailed through the doorway with ample satisfaction with
everything and herself in particular.

"Whar's little Miss?" she demanded, her turban nodding in all
directions, and her black eyes rolling from side to side.

"There, Candace," said some one, "over in the corner with Jasper."

"Oh! I see her," said Candace, waddling over to them. "Well, now,
Phronsie, seein' you couldn't come to me for somethin' I made 'xpressly
fer you, w'y, Candace has to come to you. See dat now, chile!"

She unrolled the parcel, disclosing the wonderful doll adorned with
Candace's own hair, and "Ole Missus' ruffles," then stood erect, her
bosom swelling with pride and delight.

"O my goodness me!" exclaimed Alexia, tumbling back after the first and
only glance, and nearly overturning Cathie who was looking over her
shoulder. "Polly Pepper, O dear me!" Then she sat down on the floor and
laughed till she cried.

"Hush--hush!" cried Polly, running over to her, "do stop, Alexia, and
get up. She'll hear you, and we wouldn't hurt her feelings for the
world. Do stop, Alexia."

"O dear me!" cried Alexia gustily, and holding her sides while she
waved back and forth; "if it had been--a--respectable doll, but
that--horror! O dear me!"

"Stop--stop!" commanded Polly, shaking her arm.

But Alexia was beyond stopping herself. And in between Candace's
delighted recital how she combed "de ha'r to take de curl out," and how
"ole Missus' ruffles was made into de clothes," came the peals of
laughter that finally made every one in the room stop and look at the
girls.

"Candace, come into my 'den' and get a pattern for some new pins I want
you to make for me," cried Jasper, desperately dragging her off.

"It's no use to lecture me," said Alexia, sitting straight as Candace's
feet shuffled down the hall, and wiping her face exhaustedly. "I know
it was dreadful--O dear me! Don't anybody speak to me, or I shall
disgrace myself again!"

"Now, Phronsie, what do you suppose we are to do next?"

Phronsie looked up into old Mr. King's face.

"I don't know, Grandpapa," she said wonderingly.

"Well, now, my dear, you've had Punch and Judy, and these nice
children," waving his hand to indicate the delegation from the orphan
asylum, "have sung beautifully for you. Now what comes next, Phronsie?"

"I don't know, Grandpapa," repeated Phronsie.

"When gifts become burdensome they no longer are kindnesses," said Mr.
King. "Now, Phronsie, I have found out--never mind how; little birds,
you now, sometimes fly around telling people things they ought to know.
Well, I have discovered in some way that my little girl has too many
children to care for."

Here Phronsie's brown eyes became very wide.

"And when there are too many children in the nest, Phronsie, why, they
have to go out into the world to try their fortunes and make other
homes. Now there are so many poor little girls who haven't any
children, Phronsie. Think of that, dear; and you have so many."

Phronsie at this drew nearer and stole her hand into his.

"Now what is to be done about it?" asked the old gentleman, putting his
other broad palm over her little one and holding it fast. "Hey, my pet?"

"Can't we buy them some children?" asked Phronsie with warm interest.
"Oh, Grandpapa dear, do let us; I have money in my bank."

"Phronsie," said the old gentleman, going to the heart of the matter at
once and lifting her to his lap, "I really think the time has come to
give away some of your dolls. I really do, child."

Phronsie gave a start of incredulity and peered around at him.

"I really do. You are going abroad to be gone--well, we'll say a year.
And your dolls would be so lonely without anything to do but to sit all
day and think of their little mother. And there are so many children
who would love them and make them happy." Now Mr. King's white hair was
very near the yellow waves floating over his shoulder, so that none but
Phronsie's ears caught the next words. "It's right, Phronsie dear; I'd
do it if I were you," he said in a low voice.

"Do you want it, Grandpapa?" asked Phronsie softly.

"I do, child; but not unless you are willing"--

"Then I do," declared Phronsie, sitting quite straight on his knee. And
she gave a relieved sigh. "Oh, Grandpapa, if we only had the poor
children now!" she exclaimed, dreadfully excited.

"Come, then." Old Mr. King set her on her feet. "Clear the way there,
good people; we are going to find some poor children who are waiting
for dolls," and he threw wide the door into a back passage, and there,
presided over by Jencks, and crowding for the first entrance, was a
score of children with outstretched hands.

"Oh--oh!" exclaimed Phronsie with cheeks aflame.

"Please, he said we was to have dolls," cried one hungry-eyed girl,
holding out both her hands. "I've never had one. Please give me one
quick."

"Never had one?" echoed Phronsie, taking a step toward her.

"Only a piece, Miss, I found in a rag-barrel. Please give me one quick."

"She's never had a doll--only a piece," repeated Phronsie, turning back
to the family, unable to contain this information.

"Ask the others if they have had any," said Mr. King, leaning against a
tall cabinet. "Try that girl there in a brown plaid dress."

"Have you ever had a doll?" asked Phronsie obediently, looking over at
the girl indicated, and holding her breath for the answer.

At this, the girl in the brown plaid dress burst into tears, which so
distressed Phronsie that she nearly cried.

"Yes, but it died," said the girl after a little.

"Oh, Grandpapa, her doll died!" exclaimed Phronsie in horror.

"No, it didn't, Jane," corrected another girl, "the dog et it; you know
he did."

"Yes, I know," said Jane, between small sobs, "it died, and we couldn't
have any fun'ral, 'cause the dog had et it."

"Well, now, Phronsie," exclaimed Mr. King, getting away from the
support of the cabinet, "I think it's time that we should make some of
these children happy. Don't you want to take them up to the playroom
and distribute the dolls?"

"No, no," protested Phronsie suddenly. "I must go up and tell my
children. They will understand it better then, Grandpapa. I'll be back
in a very few minutes," and going out she went quickly upstairs, and
after a while returned with both arms full.

"This doll is for you," she said gravely, putting a doll attired in a
wonderful pink satin costume into Jane's arms. "I've told her about
your dog, and she's a little frightened, so please be careful."

"What's the fun down there now?" asked Joel of Van, who with Percy
could not be persuaded to leave his bedside a moment, "open the door,
do, and let's hear it."

So Van threw wide the door.

"Go out and listen, Percy, will you?" he said.

"I don't want to," said Percy, who shared Van's wish to keep in the
background.

"You two fellows act like muffs," said Joel. "Now if you want me to get
well, go out, do, and tell me what the fun is going on down there."

So persuaded, the two boys stole out into the hall in time to see
Phronsie go down the stairs with her armful, and carefully using their
ears they soon rushed back with "Phronsie's giving away her dolls!"

"Stuff and nonsense!" exclaimed Joel, "if you can't bring back anything
better than that yarn, you might as well stay here."

"But I tell you it's true," declared Van, "isn't it, Percy?"

"Yes, it is," said Percy. "I heard her distinctly say, 'This doll is
for you'--and she had her arms full, so I suppose she's going to give
those away too"--

"A likely story," said Joel, bursting into a laugh. At the noise up in
the boys' room, Mother Fisher ran quickly over the stairs.

"Oh, boys! what is it? Joel, are you worse?"

"No, indeed," said Joel, "I was laughing. Percy and Van have been
telling such a big story. Mamsie, they actually said that Phronsie was
giving away her dolls."

"Is that all?" cried Mrs. Fisher in relief. "Well, so she is, Joel."

"PHRONSIE GIVING AWAY HER DOLLS, MAMSIE?" screamed Joel. "Why, what
does Grandpapa say?"

"He's the very one that proposed it," said Mrs. Fisher. "There, Joey,
don't get excited, for I don't know what the doctor will say," as Joel
sank back on his pillow, overcome by this last piece of news.

When Phronsie went to bed that night she clasped Mr. King's new gift to
her breast.

"Grandpapa, dear," she said confidingly as they went up the stairs
together, "do you know I really think more of this doll, now that the
others are gone? Really I do, Grandpapa, and I can take better care of
her, because I shall have more time."

"So you will, dear," assented Mr. King. "Well, Phronsie, I think you
and I, dear, haven't made a bad day's work."

"I think my children will be happy," said Phronsie with a small sigh,
"because you see it's so nice to make good times for their new mothers.
And, Grandpapa, I couldn't play with each one more than once a week. I
used to try to, but I couldn't, Grandpapa."

"Why didn't you tell me, Phronsie," asked the old gentleman a bit
reproachfully as they reached the top step, "how it was, dear? You
should have given them away long ago."

"Ah, but," said Phronsie, slowly shaking her head, "I didn't want to
give them away before; only just now, Grandpapa, and I think they will
be happy. And now I'm going to take this newest one to bed, just as I
used to take things to bed years ago, when I was a little girl."

And after all, there was an extension of time for the three boys'
vacation, Dr. Marks not getting up from his sudden attack of fever as
quickly as was expected. But there came a day at last, when Percy, Van
and David bade Joel "good-by."

"It won't be for long," observed that individual cheerfully, "you'll be
back in three weeks."

"O dear!" groaned Percy when safe within the coach, "we've ruined all
his chances. He certainly will be plucked now--with those three weeks
to make up."

Van gathered himself up and leaned forward in his corner.

"Don't look so, Dave," he cried desperately.

David tried to smooth the troubled lines out of his face, but only
succeeded in making it look worse than before.

"And it will kill Mrs. Fisher," Percy continued gloomily, "if he does
get plucked, as of course he will."

"Keep still, will you?" cried Van, his irritation getting beyond
bounds. "What's the use of talking about a thing till it's done," which
