gentleman sighed heavily), "and riding far knocks me up; but I've got
business to attend to in my glass house which will occupy me till
dinner-time."

"If the business you speak of," began Charley, "is not incompatible
with a cigar, I shall be happy to--"

"Why, as to that, the business itself has special reference to tobacco,
and, in fact, to nothing else; so come along, you young dog," and the
old gentleman's cheek went into violent convulsions as he rose, put on
his cap, with the peak very much over one eye, and went out in company
with the young men.

An hour afterwards four horses stood saddled and bridled in front of
the house. Three belonged to Mr. Kennedy; the fourth had been borrowed
from a neighbour as a mount for Jacques Caradoc. In a few minutes more
Harry lifted Kate into the saddle, and having arranged her dress with a
deal of unnecessary care, mounted his nag. At the same moment Charley
and Jacques vaulted into their saddles, and the whole cavalcade
galloped down the avenue that led to the prairie, followed by the
admiring gaze of Mr. Kennedy, senior, who stood in the doorway of his
mansion, his hands in his vest pockets, his head uncovered, and his
happy visage smiling through a cloud of smoke that issued from his
lips. He seemed the very personification of jovial good-humour, and
what one might suppose Cupid would become were he permitted to grow
old, dress recklessly, and take to smoking!

The prairies were bright that morning, and surpassingly beautiful. The
grass looked greener than usual, the dew-drops more brilliant as they
sparkled on leaf and blade and branch in the rays of an unclouded sun.
The turf felt springy, and the horses, which were first-rate animals,
seemed to dance over it, scarce crushing the wild-flowers beneath their
hoofs, as they galloped lightly on, imbued with the same joyous feeling
that filled the hearts of their riders. The plains at this place were
more picturesque than in other parts, their uniformity being broken up
by numerous clumps of small trees and wild shrubbery, intermingled with
lakes and ponds of all sizes, which filled the hollows for miles
round--temporary sheets of water these, formed by the melting snow,
that told of winter now past and gone. Additional animation and life
was given to the scene by flocks of water-fowl, whose busy cry and
cackle in the water, or whirring motion in the air, gave such an idea
of joyousness in the brute creation as could not but strike a chord of
sympathy in the heart of a man, and create a feeling of gratitude to
the Maker of man and beast. Although brilliant and warm, the sun, at
least during the first part of their ride, was by no means oppressive;
so that the equestrians stretched out at full gallop for many miles
over the prairie, round the lakes and through the bushes, ere their
steeds showed the smallest symptoms of warmth.

During the ride Kate took the lead, with Jacques on her left and Harry
on her right, while Charley brought up the rear, and conversed in a
loud key with all three. At length Kate began to think it was just
possible the horses might be growing wearied with the slapping pace,
and checked her steed; but this was not an easy matter, as the horse
seemed to hold quite a contrary opinion, and showed a desire not only
to continue but to increase its gallop--a propensity that induced Harry
to lend his aid by grasping the rein and compelling the animal to walk.

"That's a spirited horse, Kate," said Charley, as they ambled along;
"have you had him long?"

"No," replied Kate; "our father purchased him just a week before your
arrival, thinking that you would likely want a charger now and then. I
have only been on him once before.--Would he make a good
buffalo-runner, Jacques?"

"Yes, miss; he would make an uncommon good runner," answered the
hunter, as he regarded the animal with a critical glance--"at least if
he don't shy at a gunshot."

"I never tried his nerves in that way," said Kate, with a smile;
"perhaps he would shy at _that_. He has a good deal of spirit--oh, I do
dislike a lazy horse, and I do delight in a spirited one!" Kate gave
her horse a smart cut with the whip, half involuntarily, as she spoke.
In a moment it reared almost perpendicularly, and then bounded forward;
not, however, before Jacques's quick eye had observed the danger, and
his ever-ready hand arrested its course.

"Have a care, Miss Kate," he said, in a warning voice, while he gazed
in the face of the excited girl with a look of undisguised admiration.
"It don't do to wallop a skittish beast like that."

"Never fear, Jacques," she replied, bending forward to pat her
charger's arching neck; "see, he is becoming quite gentle again."

"If he runs away, Kate, we won't be able to catch you again, for he's
the best of the four, I think," said Harry, with an uneasy glance at
the animal's flashing eye and expanded nostrils.

"Ay, it's as well to keep the whip off him," said Jacques. "I know'd a
young chap once in St. Louis who lost his sweetheart by usin' his whip
too freely."

"Indeed," cried Kate, with a merry laugh, as they emerged from one of
the numerous thickets and rode out upon the open plain at a foot pace;
"how was that, Jacques? Pray tell us the story."

"As to that, there's little story about it," replied the hunter. "You
see, Tim Roughead took arter his name, an' was always doin' some
mischief or other, which more than once nigh cost him his life; for the
young trappers that frequent St. Louis are not fellows to stand too
much jokin', I can tell ye. Well, Tim fell in love with a gal there who
had jilted about a dozen lads afore; an' bein' an oncommon handsome,
strappin' fellow, she encouraged him a good deal. But Tim had a
suspicion that Louise was rayther sweet on a young storekeeper's clerk
there; so, bein' an off-hand sort o' critter, he went right up to the
gal, and says to her, says he, 'Come, Louise, it's o' no use humbuggin'
with _me_ any longer. If you like me, you like me; and if you don't
like me, you don't. There's only two ways about it. Now, jist say the
word at once, an' let's have an end on't. If you agree, I'll squat with
you in whativer bit o' the States you like to name; if not, I'll bid
you good-bye this blessed mornin', an' make tracks right away for the
Rocky Mountains afore sundown. Ay or no, lass: which is't to be?'

"Poor Louise was taken all aback by this, but she knew well that Tim
was a man who never threatened in jest, an' moreover she wasn't quite
sure o' the young clerk; so she agreed, an' Tim went off to settle with
her father about the weddin'. Well, the day came, an' Tim, with a lot
o' his comrades, mounted their horses, and rode off to the bride's
house, which was a mile or two up the river out of the town. Just as
they were startin', Tim's horse gave a plunge that well-nigh pitched
him over its head, an' Tim came down on him with a cut o' his heavy
whip that sounded like a pistol-shot. The beast was so mad at this that
it gave a kind o' squeal an' another plunge that burst the girths. Tim
brought the whip down on its flank again, which made it shoot forward
like an arrow out of a bow, leavin' poor Tim on the ground. So slick
did it fly away that it didn't even throw him on his back, but let him
fall sittin'-wise, saddle and all, plump on the spot where he sprang
from. Tim scratched his head an' grinned like a half-worried
rattlesnake as his comrades almost rolled off their saddles with
laughin'. But it was no laughin' job, for poor Tim's leg was doubled
under him, an' broken across at the thigh. It was long before he was
able to go about again, and when he did recover he found that Louise
and the young clerk were spliced an' away to Kentucky."

"So you see what are the probable consequences, Kate, if you use your
whip so obstreperously again," cried Charley, pressing his horse into a
canter.

Just at that moment a rabbit sprang from under a bush and darted away
before them. In an instant Harry Somerville gave a wild shout, and set
off in pursuit. Whether it was the cry or the sudden flight of Harry's
horse, we cannot tell, but the next instant Kate's charger performed an
indescribable flourish with its hind legs, laid back its ears, took the
bit between its teeth, and ran away. Jacques was on its heels
instantly, and a few seconds afterwards Charley and Harry joined in the
pursuit, but their utmost efforts failed to do more than enable them to
keep their ground. Kate's horse was making for a dense thicket, into
which it became evident they must certainly plunge. Harry and her
brother trembled when they looked at it and realised her danger; even
Jacques's face showed some symptoms of perturbation for a moment as he
glanced before him in indecision. The expression vanished, however, in
a few seconds, and his cheerful, self-possessed look returned, as he
cried out,--"Pull the left rein hard, Miss Kate; try to edge up the
slope."

Kate heard the advice, and exerting all her strength, succeeded in
turning her horse a little to the left, which caused him to ascend a
gentle slope, at the top of which part of the thicket lay. She was
closely followed by Harry and her brother, who urged their steeds madly
forward in the hope of catching her rein, while Jacques diverged a
little to the right. By this manoeuvre the latter hoped to gain on the
runaway, as the ground along which he rode was comparatively level,
with a short but steep ascent at the end of it, while that along which
Kate flew like the wind was a regular ascent, that would prove very
trying to her horse. At the margin of the thicket grew a row of high
bushes, towards which they now galloped with frightful speed. As Kate
came up to this natural fence, she observed the trapper approaching on
the other side of it. Springing from his jaded steed, without
attempting to check its pace, he leaped over the underwood like a stag
just as the young girl cleared the bushes at a bound. Grasping the
reins and checking the horse violently with one hand, he extended the
other to Kate, who leaped unhesitatingly into his arms. At the same
instant Charley cleared the bushes, and pulled sharply up; while
Harry's horse, unable, owing to its speed, to take the leap, came
crashing through them, and dashed his rider with stunning violence to
the ground.

Fortunately no bones were broken, and a draught of clear water, brought
by Jacques from a neighbouring pond, speedily restored Harry's shaken
faculties.

"Now, Kate," said Charley, leading forward the horse which he had
ridden, "I have changed saddles, as you see; this horse will suit you
better, and I'll take the shine out of your charger on the way home."

"Thank you, Charley," said Kate, with a smile. "I've quite recovered
from my fright--if, indeed, it is worth calling by that name; but I
fear that Harry has--"

"Oh, I'm all right," cried Harry, advancing as he spoke to assist Kate
in mounting. "I am ashamed to think that my wild cry was the cause of
all this."

In another minute they were again in their saddles, and turning their
faces homeward, they swept over the plain at a steady gallop, fearing
lest their accident should be the means of making Mr. Kennedy wait
dinner for them. On arriving, they found the old gentleman engaged in
an animated discussion with the cook about laying the table-cloth,
which duty he had imposed on himself in Kate's absence.

"Ah, Kate, my love," he cried, as they entered, "come here, lass, and
mount guard. I've almost broke my heart in trying to convince that
thick-headed goose that he can't set the table properly. Take it off my
hands, like a good girl.--Charley, my boy, you'll be pleased to hear
that your old friend Redfeather is here."

"Redfeather, father!" exclaimed Charley, in surprise.

"Yes; he and the parson, from the other end of Lake Winnipeg, arrived
an hour ago in a tin kettle, and are now on their way to the upper
fort."

"That is, indeed, pleasant news; but I suspect that it will give much
greater pleasure to our friend Jacques, who, I believe, would be glad
to lay down his life for him, simply to prove his affection."

"Well, well," said the old gentleman, knocking the ashes out of his
pipe, and refilling it so as to be ready for an after-dinner smoke,
"Redfeather has come, and the parson's come too; and I look upon it as
quite miraculous that they have come, considering the _thing_ they came
in. What they've come for is more than I can tell, but I suppose it's
connected with church affairs.--Now then, Kate, what's come o' the
dinner, Kate? Stir up that grampus of a cook! I half expect that he has
boiled the cat for dinner, in his wrath, for it has been badgering him
and me the whole morning.--Hollo, Harry, what's wrong?"

The last exclamation was in consequence of an expression of pain which
crossed Harry's face for a moment.

"Nothing, nothing," replied Harry. "I've had a fall from my horse, and
bruised my arm a little. But I'll see to it after dinner."

"That you shall not," cried Mr Kennedy energetically, dragging his
young friend into his bedroom. "Off with your coat, lad. Let's see it
at once. Ay, ay," he continued, examining Harry's left arm, which was
very much discoloured, and swelled from the elbow to the shoulder,
"that's a severe thump, my boy. But it's nothing to speak of; only
you'll have to submit to a sling for a day or two."

"That's annoying, certainly, but I'm thankful it's no worse," remarked
Harry, as Mr. Kennedy dressed the arm after his own fashion, and then
returned with him to the dining-room.




CHAPTER XXX.

Love--Old Mr. Kennedy puts his foot in it.


One morning, about two weeks after Charley's arrival at Red River,
Harry Somerville found himself alone in Mr. Kennedy's parlour. The old
gentleman himself had just galloped away in the direction of the lower
fort, to visit Charley, who was now formally installed there; Kate was
busy in the kitchen giving directions about dinner; and Jacques was
away with Redfeather, visiting his numerous friends in the settlement:
so that, for the first time since his arrival, Harry found himself at
the hour of ten in the morning utterly lone, and with nothing very
definite to do. Of course, the two weeks that had elapsed were not
without their signs and symptoms, their minor accidents and incidents,
in regard to the subject that filled his thoughts. Harry had fifty
times been tossed alternately from the height of hope to the depth of
despair, from the extreme of felicity to the uttermost verge of sorrow,
and he began seriously to reflect, when he remembered his desperate
resolution on the first night of his arrival, that if he did not "do"
he certainly would "die." This was quite a mistake, however, on Harry's
part. Nobody ever did _die_ of unrequited love. Doubtless many people
have hanged, drowned, and shot themselves because of it; but, generally
speaking, if the patient can be kept from maltreating himself long
enough, time will prove to be an infallible remedy. O youthful reader,
lay this to heart: but pshaw! why do I waste ink on so hopeless a task?
_Every_ one, we suppose, resolves once in a way to _die_ of love;
so--die away, my young friends, only make sure that you don't _kill_
yourselves, and I've no fear of the result.

But to return. Kate, likewise, was similarly affected. She behaved like
a perfect maniac--mentally, that is--and plunged herself,
metaphorically, into such a succession of hot and cold baths, that it
was quite a marvel how her spiritual constitution could stand it.

But we were wrong in saying that Harry was _alone_ in the parlour. The
gray cat was there. On a chair before the fire it sat, looking
dishevelled and somewhat _blase,_ in consequence of the ill-treatment
and worry to which it was continually subjected. After looking out of
the window for a short time, Harry rose, and sitting down on a chair
beside the cat, patted its head--a mark of attention it was evidently
not averse to, but which it received, nevertheless, with marked
suspicion, and some indications of being in a condition of armed
neutrality. Just then the door opened, and Kate entered.

"Excuse me, Harry, for leaving you alone," she said, "but I had to
attend to several household matters. Do you feel inclined for a walk?"

"I do indeed," replied Harry; "it is a charming day, and I am
exceedingly anxious to see the bower that you have spoken to me about
once or twice, and which Charley told me of long before I came here."

"Oh, I shall take you to it with pleasure," replied Kate; "my dear
father often goes there with me to smoke. If you will wait for two
minutes I'll put on my bonnet," and she hastened to prepare herself for
the walk, leaving Harry to caress the cat, which he did so
energetically, when he thought of its young mistress, that it instantly
declared war, and sprang from the chair with a remonstrative yell.

On their way down to the bower, which was situated in a picturesque,
retired spot on the river's bank about a mile below the house, Harry
and Kate tried to converse on ordinary topics, but without success, and
were at last almost reduced to silence. One subject alone filled their
minds; all others were flat. Being sunk, as it were, in an ocean of
love, they no sooner opened their lips to speak, than the waters rushed
in, as a natural consequence, and nearly choked them. Had they but
opened their mouths wide and boldly, they would have been pleasantly
drowned together; but as it was, they lacked the requisite courage, and
were fain to content themselves with an occasional frantic struggle to
the surface, where they gasped a few words of uninteresting air, and
sank again instantly.

On arriving at the bower, however, and sitting down, Harry plucked up
heart, and, heaving a deep sigh, said--

"Kate, there is a subject about which I have long desired to speak to
you-"

Long as he had been desiring it, however, Kate thought it must have
been nothing compared with the time that elapsed ere he said anything
else; so she bent over a flower which she held in her hand, and said in
a low voice, "Indeed, Harry, what is it?"

Harry was desperate now. His usually flexible tongue was stiff as stone
and dry as a bit of leather. He could no more give utterance to an
intelligible idea than he could change himself into Mr. Kennedy's gray
cat--a change that he would not have been unwilling to make at that
moment. At last he seized his companion's hand, and exclaimed, with a
burst of emotion that quite startled her,--

"Kate, Kate! O dearest Kate, I love you! I _adore_ you! I--"

At this point poor Harry's powers of speech again failed; so being
utterly unable to express another idea, he suddenly threw his arms
round her, and pressed her fervently to his bosom.

Kate was taken quite aback by this summary method of coming to the
point. Repulsing him energetically, she exclaimed, while she blushed
crimson. "O Harry--Mr Somerville!" and burst into tears.

Poor Harry stood before her for a moment, his head hanging down, and a
deep blush of shame on his face.

"O Kate," said he, in a deep tremulous voice, "forgive me; do--do
forgive me! I knew not what I said. I scarce knew what I did" (here he
seized her hand). "I know but one thing, Kate, and tell it you _will,_
if it should cost me my life. I love you, Kate, to distraction, and I
wish you to be my wife. I have been rude, very rude. Can you forgive
me, Kate?"

Now, this latter part of Harry's speech was particularly comical, the
comicality of it lying in this, that while he spoke, he drew Kate
gradually towards him, and at the very time when he gave utterance to
the penitential remorse for his rudeness, Kate was infolded in a much
more vigorous embrace than at the first; and what is more remarkable
still, she laid her little head quietly on his shoulder, as if she had
quite changed her mind in regard to what was and what was not rude, and
rather enjoyed it than otherwise.

While the lovers stood in this interesting position, it became apparent
to Harry's olfactory nerves that the atmosphere was impregnated with
tobacco smoke. Looking hastily up, he beheld an apparition that tended
somewhat to increase the confusion of his faculties.

In the opening of the bower stood Mr. Kennedy, senior, in a state of
inexpressible amazement. We say inexpressible advisedly, because the
extreme pitch of feeling which Mr. Kennedy experienced at what he
beheld before him cannot possibly be expressed by human visage. As far
as the countenance of man could do it, however, we believe the old
gentleman's came pretty near the mark on this occasion. His hands were
in his coat pockets, his body bent a little forward, his head and neck
outstretched a little beyond it, his eyes almost starting from the
sockets, and certainly the most prominent feature in his face: his
teeth firmly clinched on his beloved pipe, and his lips expelling a
multitude of little clouds so vigorously that one might have taken him
for a sort of self-acting intelligent steam-gun that had resolved
utterly to annihilate Kate and Harry at short range in the course of
two minutes.

When Kate saw her father she uttered a slight scream, covered her face
with her hands, rushed from the bower, and disappeared in the wood.

"So, young gentleman," began Mr. Kennedy, in a slow, deliberate tone of
voice, while he removed the pipe from his mouth, clinched his fist, and
confronted Harry, "you've been invited to my house as a guest, sir, and
you seize the opportunity basely to insult my daughter!"

"Stay, stay, my dear sir," interrupted Harry, laying his hand on the
old man's shoulder and gazing earnestly into his face. "Oh, do not,
even for a moment, imagine that I could be so base as to trifle with
the affections of your daughter. I may have been presumptuous, hasty,
foolish, mad if you will, but not base. God forbid that I should treat
her with disrespect, even in thought! I love her, Mr. Kennedy, as I
never loved before. I have asked her to be my wife, and--she--"

"Whew!" whistled old Mr. Kennedy, replacing his pipe between his teeth,
gazing abstractedly at the ground, and emitting clouds innumerable.
After standing thus a few seconds, he turned his back slowly upon
Harry, and smiled outrageously once or twice, winking at the same time,
after his own fashion, at the river. Turning abruptly round, he
regarded Harry with a look of affected dignity, and said, "Pray, sir,
what did my daughter say to your very peculiar proposal?"

"She said ye--ah! that is--she didn't exactly _say_ anything, but
she--indeed I--"

"Humph!" ejaculated the old gentleman, deepening his frown as he
regarded his young friend through the smoke. "In short, she said
nothing, I suppose, but led you to infer, perhaps, that she would have
said yes if I hadn't interrupted you."

Harry blushed, and said nothing.

"Now, sir," continued Mr. Kennedy, "don't you think that it would have
been a polite piece of attention on your part to have asked _my_
permission before you addressed my daughter on such a subject, eh?"

"Indeed," said Harry, "I acknowledge that I have been hasty, but I must
disclaim the charge of disrespect to you, sir. I had no intention
whatever of broaching the subject to-day, but my feelings, unhappily,
carried me away, and--and--in fact--"

"Well, well, sir," interrupted Mr. Kennedy, with a look of offended
dignity, "your feelings ought to be kept more under control. But come,
sir, to my house. I must talk further with you on this subject. I must
read you a lesson, sir--a lesson, humph! that you won't forget in a
hurry."

"But, my dear sir--" began Harry.

"No more, sir--no more at present," cried the old gentleman, smoking
