this moment, burst into tears, and listened in silence to the genius,
who hinted that by-and-by everything would be put right.

'At the last assembly of the fairies,' he said, 'when the doings of each
fairy were examined and discussed, a proposal was made to lessen, as
far as possible, the mischief caused by Dindonette by enchanting
the fountain. And it was decided that, as she had meant nothing but
kindness, she should have the power of undoing one half of the spell. Of
course she might always have destroyed the fatal fountain, which would
have been best of all; but this she never thought of. Yet, in spite of
this, her heart is so good, that I am sure that the moment she hears
that she is wanted she will fly to help. Only, before she comes, it is
for you, Madam, to make up your mind which of the two shall regain their
former strength and beauty.'

At these words the fairy's soul sank. Both Cornichon and Toupette were
equally dear to her, and how could she favour one at the cost of the
other? As to the courtiers, none of the men were able to understand why
she hesitated a second to declare for Toupette; while the ladies were
equally strong on the side of Cornichon.

But, however undecided the fairy might be, it was quite different with
Cornichon and Toupette.

'Ah, my love,' exclaimed Cornichon, 'at length I shall be able to
give you the best proof of my devotion by showing you how I value the
beauties of your mind above those of your body! While the most charming
women of the court will fall victims to my youth and strength, I shall
think of nothing but how to lay them at your feet, and pay heart-felt
homage to your age and wrinkles.'

'Not so fast,' interrupted Toupette, 'I don't see why you should have it
all. Why do you heap such humiliations upon me? But I will trust to the
justice of the fairy, who will not treat me so.'

Then she entered her own rooms, and refused to leave them, in spite of
the prayers of Cornichon, who begged her to let him explain.

No one at the court thought or spoke of any other subject during the few
days before the arrival of Dindonette, whom everybody expected to set
things right in a moment. But, alas! she had no idea herself what was
best to be done, and always adopted the opinion of the person she was
talking to. At length a thought struck her, which seemed the only way
of satisfying both parties, and she asked the fairy to call together all
the court and the people to hear her decision.

'Happy is he,' she began, 'who can repair the evil he has caused, but
happier he who has never caused any.'

As nobody contradicted this remark, she continued:

'To me it is only allowed to undo one half of the mischief I have
wrought. I could restore you your youth,' she said to Cornichon, 'or
your beauty,' turning to Toupette. 'I will do both; and I will do
neither.'

A murmur of curiosity arose from the crowd, while Cornichon and Toupette
trembled with astonishment.

'No,' went on Dindonette, 'never should I have the cruelty to leave one
of you to decay, while the other enjoys the glory of youth. And as I
cannot restore you both at once to what you were, one half of each of
your bodies shall become young again, while the other half goes on
its way to decay. I will leave it to you to choose which half it shall
be--if I shall draw a line round the waist, or a line straight down the
middle of the body.'

She looked about her proudly, expecting applause for her clever idea.
But Cornichon and Toupette were shaking with rage and disappointment,
and everyone else broke into shouts of laughter. In pity for the unhappy
lovers, Selnozoura came forward.

'Do you not think,' she said, 'that instead of what you propose, it
would be better to let them take it in turns to enjoy their former youth
and beauty for a fixed time? I am sure you could easily manage that.'

'What an excellent notion!' cried Dindonette. 'Oh, yes, of course that
is best! Which of you shall I touch first?'

'Touch her,' replied Cornichon, who was always ready to give way to
Toupette. 'I know her heart too well to fear any change.'

So the fairy bent forward and touched her with her magic ring, and in
one instant the old woman was a girl again. The whole court wept with
joy at the sight, and Toupette ran up to Cornichon, who had fallen down
in his surprise, promising to pay him long visits, and tell him of all
her balls and water parties.

The two fairies went to their own apartments, where the genius followed
them to take his leave.

'Oh, dear!' suddenly cried Dindonette, breaking in to the farewell
speech of the genius. 'I quite forgot to fix the time when Cornichon
should in his turn grow young. How stupid of me! And now I fear it is
too late, for I ought to have declared it before I touched Toupette with
the ring. Oh, dear! oh, dear! why did nobody warn me?'

'You were so quick,' replied Selnozoura, who had long been aware of
the mischief the fairy had again done, 'and we can only wait now till
Cornichon shall have reached the utmost limits of his decay, when he
will drink of the water, and become a baby once more, so that Toupette
will have to spend her life as a nurse, a wife, and a caretaker.'

After the anxiety of mind and the weakness of body to which for so long
Toupette had been a prey, it seemed as if she could not amuse herself
enough, and it was seldom indeed that she found time to visit poor
Cornichon, though she did not cease to be fond of him, or to be kind to
him. Still, she was perfectly happy without him, and this the poor man
did not fail to see, almost blind and deaf from age though he was.

But it was left to Kristopo to undo at last the work of Dindonette, and
give Cornichon back the youth he had lost, and this the genius did all
the more gladly, as he discovered, quite by accident, that Cornichon was
in fact his son. It was on this plea that he attended the great yearly
meeting of the fairies, and prayed that, in consideration of his
services to so many of the members, this one boon might be granted
him. Such a request had never before been heard in fairyland, and
was objected to by some of the older fairies; but both Kristopo and
Selnozoura were held in such high honour that the murmurs of disgust
were set aside, and the latest victim to the enchanted fountain was
pronounced to be free of the spell. All that the genius asked in return
was that he might accompany the fairy back to Bagota, and be present
when his son assumed his proper shape.

They made up their minds they would just tell Toupette that they
had found a husband for her, and give her a pleasant surprise at her
wedding, which was fixed for the following night. She heard the news
with astonishment, and many pangs for the grief which Cornichon would
certainly feel at his place being taken by another; but she did not
dream of disobeying the fairy, and spent the whole day wondering who the
bridegroom could be.

At the appointed hour, a large crowd assembled at the fairy's palace,
which was decorated with the sweetest flowers, known only to fairyland.
Toupette had taken her place, but where was the bridegroom?

'Fetch Cornichon!' said the fairy to her chamberlain.

But Toupette interposed: 'Oh, Madam, spare him, I entreat you, this
bitter pain, and let him remain hidden and in peace.'

'It is necessary that he should be here,' answered the fairy, 'and he
will not regret it.'

And, as she spoke, Cornichon was led in, smiling with the foolishness of
extreme old age at the sight of the gay crowd.

'Bring him here,' commanded the fairy, waving her hand towards Toupette,
who started back from surprise and horror.

Selnozoura then took the hand of the poor old man, and the genius came
forward and touched him three times with his ring, when Cornichon was
transformed into a handsome young man.

'May you live long,' the genius said, 'to enjoy happiness with your
wife, and to love your father.'

And that was the end of the mischief wrought by the fairy Dindonette!

[Cabinet des Fees.]




Long, Broad, and Quickeye

(A Bohemian Story)


Once upon a time there lived a king who had an only son whom he loved
dearly. Now one day the king sent for his son and said to him:

'My dearest child, my hair is grey and I am old, and soon I shall feel
no more the warmth of the sun, or look upon the trees and flowers. But
before I die I should like to see you with a good wife; therefore marry,
my son, as speedily as possible.'

'My father,' replied the prince, 'now and always, I ask nothing better
than to do your bidding, but I know of no daughter-in-law that I could
give you.'

On hearing these words the old king drew from his pocket a key of gold,
and gave it to his son, saying:

'Go up the staircase, right up to the top of the tower. Look carefully
round you, and then come and tell me which you like best of all that you
see.'

So the young man went up. He had never before been in the tower, and had
no idea what it might contain.

The staircase wound round and round and round, till the prince was
almost giddy, and every now and then he caught sight of a large room
that opened out from the side. But he had been told to go to the top,
and to the top he went. Then he found himself in a hall, which had an
iron door at one end. This door he unlocked with his golden key, and he
passed through into a vast chamber which had a roof of blue sprinkled
with golden stars, and a carpet of green silk soft as turf. Twelve
windows framed in gold let in the light of the sun, and on every window
was painted the figure of a young girl, each more beautiful than the
last. While the prince gazed at them in surprise, not knowing which
he liked best, the girls began to lift their eyes and smile at him. He
waited, expecting them to speak, but no sound came.

Suddenly he noticed that one of the windows was covered by a curtain of
white silk.

He lifted it, and saw before him the image of a maiden beautiful as the
day and sad as the tomb, clothed in a white robe, having a girdle of
silver and a crown of pearls. The prince stood and gazed at her, as if
he had been turned into stone, but as he looked the sadness which, was
on her face seemed to pass into his heart, and he cried out:

'This one shall be my wife. This one and no other.'

As he said the words the young girl blushed and hung her head, and all
the other figures vanished.

The young prince went quickly back to his father, and told him all he
had seen and which wife he had chosen. The old man listened to him full
of sorrow, and then he spoke:

'You have done ill, my son, to search out that which was hidden, and you
are running to meet a great danger. This young girl has fallen into the
power of a wicked sorcerer, who lives in an iron castle. Many young men
have tried to deliver her, and none have ever come back. But what is
done is done! You have given your word, and it cannot be broken. Go,
dare your fate, and return to me safe and sound.'

So the prince embraced his father, mounted his horse, and set forth
to seek his bride. He rode on gaily for several hours, till he found
himself in a wood where he had never been before, and soon lost his way
among its winding paths and deep valleys. He tried in vain to see where
he was: the thick trees shut out the sun, and he could not tell which
was north and which was south, so that he might know what direction to
make for. He felt in despair, and had quite given up all hope of getting
out of this horrible place, when he heard a voice calling to him.

'Hey! hey! stop a minute!'

The prince turned round and saw behind him a very tall man, running as
fast as his legs would carry him.

'Wait for me,' he panted, 'and take me into your service. If you do, you
will never be sorry.'

'Who are you?' asked the prince, 'and what can you do?'

'Long is my name, and I can lengthen my body at will. Do you see that
nest up there on the top of that pine-tree? Well, I can get it for you
without taking the trouble of climbing the tree,' and Long stretched
himself up and up and up, till he was very soon as tall as the pine
itself. He put the nest in his pocket, and before you could wink your
eyelid he had made himself small again, and stood before the prince.

'Yes; you know your business,' said he, 'but birds' nests are no use to
me. I am too old for them. Now if you were only able to get me out of
this wood, you would indeed be good for something.'

'Oh, there's no difficulty about that,' replied Long, and he stretched
himself up and up and up till he was three times as tall as the tallest
tree in the forest. Then he looked all round and said, 'We must go in
this direction in order to get out of the wood,' and shortening himself
again, he took the prince's horse by the bridle, and led him along.
Very soon they got clear of the forest, and saw before them a wide plain
ending in a pile of high rocks, covered here and there with trees, and
very much like the fortifications of a town.

As they left the wood behind, Long turned to the prince and said, 'My
lord, here comes my comrade. You should take him into your service too,
as you will find him a great help.'

'Well, call him then, so that I can see what sort of a man he is.'

'He is a little too far off for that,' replied Long. 'He would hardly
hear my voice, and he couldn't be here for some time yet, as he has so
much to carry. I think I had better go and bring him myself,' and this
time he stretched himself to such a height that his head was lost in the
clouds. He made two or three strides, took his friend on his back, and
set him down before the prince. The new-comer was a very fat man, and as
round as a barrel.

'Who are you?' asked the prince, 'and what can you do?'

'Your worship, Broad is my name, and I can make myself as wide as I
please.'

'Let me see how you manage it.'

'Run, my lord, as fast as you can, and hide yourself in the wood,' cried
Broad, and he began to swell himself out.

The prince did not understand why he should run to the wood, but when he
saw Long flying towards it, he thought he had better follow his example.
He was only just in time, for Broad had so suddenly inflated himself
that he very nearly knocked over the prince and his horse too. He
covered all the space for acres round. You would have thought he was a
mountain!

At length Broad ceased to expand, drew a deep breath that made the whole
forest tremble, and shrank into his usual size.

'You have made me run away,' said the prince. 'But it is not every day
one meets with a man of your sort. I will take you into my service.'

So the three companions continued their journey, and when they were
drawing near the rocks they met a man whose eyes were covered by a
bandage.

'Your excellency,' said Long, 'this is our third comrade. You will do
well to take him into your service, and, I assure you, you will find him
worth his salt.'

'Who are you?' asked the prince. 'And why are your eyes bandaged? You
can never see your way!'

'It is just the contrary, my lord! It is because I see only too well
that I am forced to bandage my eyes. Even so I see as well as people who
have no bandage. When I take it off my eyes pierce through everything.
Everything I look at catches fire, or, if it cannot catch fire, it falls
into a thousand pieces. They call me Quickeye.'

And so saying he took off his bandage and turned towards the rock. As
he fixed his eyes upon it a crack was heard, and in a few moments it
was nothing but a heap of sand. In the sand something might be detected
glittering brightly. Quickeye picked it up and brought it to the prince.
It turned out to be a lump of pure gold.

'You are a wonderful creature,' said the prince, 'and I should be a fool
not to take you into my service. But since your eyes are so good, tell
me if I am very far from the Iron Castle, and what is happening there
just now.'

'If you were travelling alone,' replied Quickeye, 'it would take you at
least a year to get to it; but as we are with you, we shall arrive there
to-night. Just now they are preparing supper.'

'There is a princess in the castle. Do you see her?'

'A wizard keeps her in a high tower, guarded by iron bars.'

'Ah, help me to deliver her!' cried the prince.

And they promised they would.

Then they all set out through the grey rocks, by the breach made by
the eyes of Quickeye, and passed over great mountains and through deep
woods. And every time they met with any obstacle the three friends
contrived somehow to put it aside. As the sun was setting, the prince
beheld the towers of the Iron Castle, and before it sank beneath the
horizon he was crossing the iron bridge which led to the gates. He was
only just in time, for no sooner had the sun disappeared altogether,
than the bridge drew itself up and the gates shut themselves.

There was no turning back now!

The prince put up his horse in the stable, where everything looked as
if a guest was expected, and then the whole party marched straight up to
the castle. In the court, in the stables, and all over the great halls,
they saw a number of men richly dressed, but every one turned into
stone. They crossed an endless set of rooms, all opening into each
other, till they reached the dining-hall. It was brilliantly lighted;
the table was covered with wine and fruit, and was laid for four. They
waited a few minutes expecting someone to come, but as nobody did, they
sat down and began to eat and drink, for they were very hungry.

When they had done their supper they looked about for some place to
sleep. But suddenly the door burst open, and the wizard entered the
hall. He was old and hump-backed, with a bald head and a grey beard that
fell to his knees. He wore a black robe, and instead of a belt three
