reached the site of Andy's cabin, and then Angus and Hannah developed
strength which fairly took Molly's breath away, for the tarpaulin was
absolutely lifted up and deposited as a sort of temporary roof over the
roofless walls; and when this had been done Angus managed to cut a hole
in the center to make a chimney; then the fagots were placed on the
hearth and the turf put on top of them, and the remainder of the turf
laid handy near by; and the straw was ready, soft and inviting, in a
corner not too far away from the fire, and the blankets were spread over
it; and the basket of provisions, cold boiled potatoes, cold bacon,
and the little bottle of potheen were all left handy. It was indeed
a miserable home, but, compared to the desolate appearance it had
presented, it now looked almost comfortable. Nora laughed with pleasure.
"He shall come back here. It is better than nothing. He shall stop here.
I will explain things to my father by and by," said the girl; and then
they all turned their steps homeward.

At the appointed hour that evening Nora went down to the shore. She
fully expected to find Andy Neil waiting for her. Wild and half-insane
as he was, he kept his selfmade appointments, as a rule. She wandered
about, fearing that someone would notice her; for she knew that if John
Finnigan thought for a single moment that she was secretly befriending
Andy, he would not leave a single stone unturned to circumvent her. He
was very proud of his powers of evicting tenants, and, as he had the
Squire's permission to do his worst on this occasion, would be the last
man in the world to relax his iron grip. Nora, however, wandered about
in vain; there was no sign of Andy. She even ventured to go to the
borders of the plantation and softly call his name.

"Andy--Andy Neil," called the girl, but no Andy responded. She now
felt really nervous. Why was Andy not there? What could possibly have
happened? She returned slowly and thoughtfully to the house. It
would not do to show any alarm, but she certainly felt the reverse of
comfortable. What had happened to the man? She did not for a moment
think that he could be dead; on the contrary, she pictured him alive
and still more insane than the night before, still more desperate in his
mind, still more darkly pursued by the grim phantom of revenge. Was Andy
now so really insane that he had even forgotten his appointment with
Nora? This was probably the case. But although the man was too insane to
think of meeting the girl, he was probably not at all too insane to make
another attempt on the Squire's life. He was perhaps so desperate now
that his one idea was to carry out his revenge before he died. What was
Nora to do? She thought and thought, and walked up to the house with
more and more lagging footsteps. Finally she made up her mind. There was
nothing whatever left for it but for her to sit up with the Squire
that night; she herself must be his guardian angel, for he must not be
alarmed, and yet most certainly he must be protected. Nora carefully
considered this idea. She had made the little cabin quite ready for
Andy's reception; he could creep into it once more, light his fire, eat
his food, and lie down on the bed at least, as good as any other bed he
had ever slumbered on; and if death came to him, it would find him in
his old house, and perhaps God would forgive him, seeing that he was so
desperate and life had been so hard. Yes, Nora felt that God was very
merciful--far more merciful than man. But to-night--how was to-night to
be got through? She had now reached the yard, and found herself face to
face with Angus.

"Is there nothing I can do for you, miss?" said the young man, touching
his hat respectfully to the girl.

"If you could be near somewhere, Angus, and if it were necessary, and we
wanted the long cart to-night, could we get it?"

"You ask me, Miss Nora, what we could get and what we could not get at
O'Shanaghgan," answered Angus; "and I answer ye back that what ye want,
Miss Nora, ye shall have, if it is the heart out of me body. The long
cart, is it? To be sure, me pretty lady, and at a moment's notice, too.
Why, it's meself will slape in the bottom of the long cart this blessed
night, and all you has to do is to come and pull the front lock of me
hair, and I'll be up in a jiffy. You give it a sharp tug, Miss Nora,
for I slapes heavy; but if you come, the long cart and the powny will be
there."

"Then that's all right," answered Nora.

She went into the barn. The Squire had now contrived to renew all his
old accustomed habits. On the little wooden table was a small lamp which
smoked badly; the local paper was laid on the table, and the pipe which
the Squire best loved lay near. He had been enjoying a good smoke, and
was thinking of turning in, as he expressed it, when Nora appeared.

"Good-night, father," she said. She went up to him, and bent down over
him, to give him her accustomed kiss.

"Why, then, it's sleepy I am," said the Squire. "I am thinking of
turning into bed. I am getting on fine; and Angus, boy that he is,
always comes and gives me a helping hand on to my bed. I cannot see
your face with the smoke of that lamp, mavoureen; but things are all
right--aren't they?"

"That they are, father," replied the girl; "but I am a little tired; and
if Angus is coming to help you, and you do not want anything more from
me, I will go to bed myself."

"Do that," said the Squire. "Your voice sounds peaky; you have been
doing too much."

Nora lingered another moment or two. How thankful she felt that that
smoky lamp prevented her father reading the anxiety in her eyes! She
could not keep all the tiredness out of her voice, but she could at
least keep anxiety from it; and the Squire bade her a hearty goodnight,
and parted with her with one of his usual jokes. Nora then went into
the house. The hour for late dinner was over; she herself had not been
present, but Molly had managed to appear as usual. Nora ran down to the
kitchen premises. The cook, a very stately English woman, stared when
she saw the young lady of the Castle appear in the great kitchen.

"What is it, Miss O'Shanaghgan?" she said, gazing at Nora all over.
What did this wild and eccentric girl want? How was it possible that she
could demean herself by coming so freely into the servants' premises?

"I want to know, Mrs. Shaw," said Nora, "if you will oblige me?"

"Of course I will, Miss O'Shanaghgan; if I can."

"Will you pack a little basket with some cold pie, and anything else
tasty and nourishing which you have got; and will you put a tiny bottle
of brandy into the basket, and also a bottle of water; and can I have it
at once, for I am in a great hurry?"

"Well, there is a fresh pigeon pie in the larder," answered the cook;
"but why should you want it?"

"Oh! please, Mrs. Shaw," answered Nora, "will you give it to me without
asking questions? I will love you for all the rest of my life if you
will."

"Love me, is it?" thought the cook. "A pretty creature like that love
me!"

"Your love is cheaply purchased, miss," she said aloud, and then went
without a word into the larder, and soon returned with a well-filled
basket, which she placed in Nora's hand. "And I added some fruit, a
little cup of jelly, and a knife and fork and a spoon, and some salt;
but why you, Miss Nora, should need a picnic in the middle of the night
beats me."

"Remember our compact," said Nora. "You say nothing of this, and--I love
you;" and then, overcome by a sudden impulse, she bent forward and laid
the lightest of kisses on the astonished Mrs. Shaw's forehead.

Mrs. Shaw felt slightly overawed. "Bless her! What a beautiful young
lady she is!" thought the good woman. "But the ways of the Irish beat
all comprehension."




CHAPTER XXXV.


THE COT WHERE HE WAS BORN.

Nora avoided Molly that night. On reflection, it occurred to her that
it would be best for Molly to know nothing of her design. If she were
in complete ignorance, no amount of questioning could elicit the truth.
Nora went into her bedroom, and changed her pretty jacket and skirt and
neat sailor hat for a dark-blue skirt and blouse of the same material.
Over these she put a long, old-fashioned cloak which at one time
had belonged to her mother. Over her head she tied a little red
handkerchief, and, having eaten a small portion of Mrs. Shaw's
provisions, she left the room. It was already night-time; and Mrs.
O'Shanaghgan, Molly, and the servants had gone to bed. Nora now locked
her door from the outside, slipped the key into her pocket, and her
basket of provisions partly hidden under the falls of her cloak, ran
downstairs. The dogs generally slept in the big hall; but they knew
Nora's step, and rose slowly, wagging their heavy tails. Nora patted
them on their heads, gave them each an endearing word, and stooped to
kiss pretty Cushla on her black forehead. She then softly unbolted one
of the windows, lifted the sash, and got out. She carefully shut the
window as noiselessly as she had opened it. She now found herself on
the grassy sward in the neighborhood of the drawing-room. Under the old
_regime_ that sward was hard, and knotty tufts of weed as well as grass
grew up here and there in profusion; but already, under the English
government, it was beginning to assume the velvet-like appearance which
a properly kept lawn ought to have.

Nora hated to feel such softness; she disliked everything which seemed
to her to flavor of the English and their ways. There was a hot,
rebellious feeling in her heart. Why should these things be? Why should
not her Irish land and her Irish people be left in their wild freedom?
She ran round to the yard. Angus had received instructions to leave the
little postern door on the latch, and Nora now opened it and went softly
in. The moon was beginning to rise, but was not at the full. There
was, however already sufficient light for her to see each object with
distinctness. She went and sat down in the shadow made by the great
barn. She sat on the step to the barn, wrapping her warm cloak tightly
round her, and keeping her basket of provisions by her side. Here she
would sit all night, if necessary. Her vigil might have no result, but
at any rate it would insure her father from danger. For now only over
Nora's dead body could the wild Andy Neil approach the Squire.

"Andy shall kill me first," she thought; "and if I die, I will scream
and father will awaken. Angus is on the watch; the alarm will be given;
at least my father's life will be spared. But why do I think of danger
of this sort? Andy will not kill me. I place my trust in God. I am doing
the right thing--I know I am doing the right thing."

When Nora had let herself in at the postern door she had immediately
drawn the bolt at the other side, thus preventing anyone else from
entering the great yard by the same way; but she knew that, although
Andy could not now enter the yard, in all probability he was already
hiding there. There were no end to the ways and devices of a wild
Irishman of Andy's sort. He was so thin and emaciated, too, that he
could squeeze himself into the tiniest space. It lay in his power to
remain motionless all night, until the moment when his revenge was ripe.
Nora sat on. She heard the old clock in the ancient tower of the Castle
strike the hours. That old clock had been severely animadverted on by
Mrs. O'Shanaghgan on account of the cracked sound in the bell; but Nora
felt relieved to find that, amongst all the modern innovations, the old
clock still held its own; it had not, at least, _yet_, been removed from
the tower. It struck solemnly now the hour of midnight.

"The witching hour," thought the girl. "The hour when the Banshee walks
abroad. I wonder if I shall see her. I should like to see her. Did she
hear me when I called to her in the cave? Would she help me if she came
to my rescue now? She belongs to us; she is our own Banshee; she has
belonged to our family for many, many generations."

Nora thought these thoughts; but then the feeling that _Someone_ else
who never fails those who trust Him was also watching her during this
silent hour came to her with a sense of comfort. She could hear her
father turning once or twice in the creaky old wooden bed. She was glad
to feel that, unknown to him, she was his guardian angel. She began to
think about the future, and almost to forget Andy and the possible and
very great peril of the present, when, shortly before the hour of one,
all her senses were preternaturally excited by the sound of a footfall.
It was a very soft footfall--the noise made by a bare foot. Nora heard
it just where the shadow was deepest. She stood up now; she knew that,
from her present position, the one who was making this dead sort of
heavy sound could not possibly see her. She waited, her breath coming
hard and fast. For a minute, or perhaps more, there was again absolute
and complete silence. The night was a breathless one; there was not a
sound abroad; overhead the sky was of an inky blue-black, the stars were
shining gloriously, and the moon was growing brighter and more clear,
and more nearly approaching her meridian each moment. The girl stood
with her hand pressed against her beating heart; she had flung aside her
little red handkerchief, and her hair had fallen loose and was tumbling
over her shoulders; she raised her other hand to her left ear to listen
more intently--she was in the attitude of one about to spring.

Again there came the sound which she expected, and which, now that it
had arrived, caused her heart to beat no longer with fear, but with a
sort of wild exultation. Her suspicions had been right--the danger
was real; her father's most precious life was in peril. The steps came
quicker and more quick; they approached the other window of the barn.
This window lay in complete shadow. Nora now stepped out of her hiding
place, and, going with two or three quick strides down the yard, waited
within a foot or two of the man, who now proceeded to lift himself up by
the window ledge preparatory to opening the barn window. With the aid
of a claspknife he could very easily push back the quaint and imperfect
fastening; then it was but to push in the glass, and he could enter the
barn. He sat on the window ledge with his back to Nora. His huge, gaunt
form looked larger than ever, intensified now by the light of the moon.
He breathed quickly; his breathing proclaimed that he himself was in
physical suffering.

"Andy," said Nora in a low, very low whisper.

But this low tone was as startling to the madman on the window as though
a pistol shot had been sounded in his ears.

"Be the powers!" he said, and he tumbled so quickly off the window sill
that Nora herself held out her hand to help him. Then he turned fiercely
and faced the girl. She saw the light of madness gleaming in his sunken
eyes; his wild face looked more cadaverous than ever; his great, skinny,
long hand shook. He raised it as if to fell the girl to the ground, but
paused to look in her face, and then his hand hung feebly to his side.

Nora had enacted all this scene beforehand to herself; she now thrust
into Andy's face, within an inch or two of his nose, a great lump of
bread and a slab of cold pie.

"Before you do anything more, eat," she said; "eat quickly; make no
noise."

It was as impossible for the famished man to resist the good and
tempting food as it would have been impossible for a needle to resist
the influence of a powerful magnet. He grasped the bread, thrust the
knife into his wretched shirt, and, tearing the bread in fragments,
began to stuff it into his mouth. For a couple of minutes there was no
sound but that of the starved creature tearing the bread and feeding
himself. When he had slightly satisfied the first cravings of his
starved body Nora took his hand.

"You have not had enough yet," she said. "You have fasted long, and are
very hungry; there is more where this came from."

She took his hand quite unresistingly, and led him round to the entrance
of the barn.

"I am up," she said, "but no one else. No one else knows of this. You
have come without a gun?"

"I have a knife instead," he said. His eye glittered strangely.

"Give me your knife," said the girl. "I will give you food in exchange
for it."

The famished creature began to gibber now in the most horrible manner;
he pointed to his breast and uttered a laugh.

"Laugh again, and I will call those who will soon put a stop to your
wild and terrible purposes, Andy," said the girl, "Here's food--fruit,
jelly, bread. You shall have them all--all, when you give me that
knife."

The man looked at the food, and now his eyes softened. They became full
not only of rapture, but also of laughter. He gave a low guttural sound,
sank down on the ground, and held out both his hands imploringly for
some of the nourishment.

"The knife," said Nora.

He thrust his hands into his bosom and held the knife out to her. It was
a huge clasp knife, and Nora noticed with a shudder that it had all the
appearance of having been newly sharpened. The moment she got it she
put it in her pocket, and then invited the man to feed. He sat now quite
humbly. Nora helped him to pie. She had already taken the precaution to
hide the knife which Mrs. Shaw had supplied her with. The man ate and
ate, until his consuming hunger was satisfied. Nora now gave him a very
little of the brandy mixed with water. He lay back at last, exhausted
and also satisfied.

"It's wake I am, it's wake I am--it's wake I am entoirely," said he.
"Why are you so good to me, Miss Nora? It was to take the life of the
Squire I was afther to-night."

"I knew that," said Nora, "and I thought I would prevent you. Why did
you not meet me this evening down by the shore?"

The miserable creature now raised his hand and pushed back a gray lock
of unkempt hair from his forehead.

"Why, then," he said, "it was bothered I was entoirely. I knew there was
something I had got to do. It was waker and waker I was getting, for I
did not touch bite nor sup since I saw you last, except a morsel of a
cold pitatie; and there was not much of the nourishment in that; and as
the night came, I could not think of anything except to keep me word and
have me victory."

"Well, you have had it," said Nora.

"What do you mane now, missie?"

"You have conquered yourself; that is the best victory of all. But come,
you made a bargain with me last night, and I am prepared to keep it. I
went down to the shore to tell you that I would do what you wanted me
to do. The cabin is ready on Slieve Nagorna; we have made it fairly
comfortable for you; and I will do better--yes, I will try to do better
by and by. I will speak to my father when he is strong enough. Go to
Slieve Nagorna now, and you will find the old cot in which you were
born. You can sleep there, and--and _I_--I will see that you are not
interfered with."

"The old cot in which I was born," said Neil very slowly. "The old cot,
and I'll see it again. Is it a-joking me you are, Miss Nora?"

"Would I joke with you just now, Andy? Would I?"

"I know it's saft you are making me. There was a lump of ice in me; but,
somehow, it's melted. It's the food and your bonny face, and yer ways.
But do you know that it was your _father_ I wanted to kill--t'ould
Squire? There, I have said it!"

"I know--and I have saved him," answered Nora. "But come, he may hear
us speaking; he would wonder. I do not want him to know anything of this
night. When he is stronger I will plead with him. Come, Andy, come; your
