down with his sword, and then fell dead under the blow of a heavy axe.
This mad exploit had scarce terminated when the Norman infantry advanced up
the hill. They were greeted with a shower of stones and javelins, which
slew many, but with unbroken front they pressed upwards until they reached
the palisade. Here a desperate struggle began. The Norman sword and spear
were met by the axes of the housecarls, and the clubs, spears, and forks of
the levies. In vain Norman, Breton, Frenchmen, and Fleming strove to break
the English line. The high position of the defenders gave them a great
advantage over their assailants, among whose crowded ranks the javelin-men
did great execution, while the Normans could receive little aid from their
archers. Both sides fought with obstinate valour. The Norman battle-cry was
"God help us!" the English "God Almighty and the Holy Cross!" The latter
invocation being to the relic at Waltham, which was the king's special
object of devotion.

With jeering cries too they greeted the efforts of their assailants to
cross the palisade and break their line. At last the Norman infantry fell
back broken and baffled, having suffered terrible loss, and now the knights
and horsemen, who formed the backbone of William's army, rode up the hill.
The duke himself, as well as his brother Odo, Bishop of Bayeau, who fought
beside him, had laid aside their Norman swords, and were armed with heavy
maces, weapons as formidable as the English axe. But the valour of the
horsemen, the strength of their armour, the length of their lances, and the
weight of their horses, availed no more against the shield-wall of the
housecarls than the infantry had done. The superior height and strength of
the English, and the sweep of their terrible battle-axes, counterbalanced
the advantage the horses afforded to the Normans, and the hitherto
irresistible chivalry of Normandy and France were, for the first time,
dashed backwards by trained infantry.

In front of the English line the ground was thickly covered with fallen men
and horses. There were but few wounded among them, for where the English
axe fell, whether on horse or rider, it did its work thoroughly. But the
English, too, had suffered. The action of swinging the axe with both arms
above the head left the neck and upper part of the body exposed, and many
had fallen pierced through and through by the Norman spears. A great shout
of triumph rose from the English line as the Norman horsemen, unable to do
more, fell sullenly back down the hill. As in the centre the king with his
thanes and housecarls had repelled the attack of the Normans, so on the
flanks the English levies had held their ground against the Bretons and
French; but, carried away by their exultation, the levies on the right,
forgetful of Harold's express orders that no man was to stir from his place
until he himself gave the signal for pursuit, broke their line, and rushing
down the hill fell on the retreating Bretons.

Unable to withstand the onslaught, and already disheartened by their
failure, the Bretons fled in wild alarm, and rushing towards the centre for
protection threw the Normans also into confusion. The panic spread rapidly,
the host wavered, and had already begun to fly, when William, throwing off
his helmet, rode among them, and exhorting some and striking others with a
lance he had caught up, at last restored order, and the Breton infantry
rallied and fell upon their pursuers, killing many and driving the rest
back up the hill.

Again the Norman infantry and cavalry together advanced up the hill, and
the terrible struggle recommenced. William and his brother the bishop
performed prodigies of valour, but not less valiantly fought Harold of
England and his brothers. The palisade was by this time destroyed in many
places, and desperate hand-to-hand contests now took place. Cutting his way
through meaner foes the duke strove to reach the royal standard and
encounter Harold himself. He was nearing his goal, when Gurth sprang
forward, eager above all things to protect Harold from harm. He hurled a
javelin at William, but the dart struck the Norman's horse only, and it
fell beneath him. William leapt to his feet, and springing upon Gurth smote
with his heavy mace full on his helmet, and the noble Earl of East Anglia
fell dead at his feet. Almost at the same moment his brother Leofwin,
fighting sword in hand, was slain. But the fall of the two royal brothers
in no way changed the fate of the battle. The men of Kent and Essex,
furious at the fall of their beloved earls, fought even more fiercely than
before to avenge their deaths.

William had remounted, but his second horse was also slain. Eustace of
Boulogne offered him his horse, and himself mounting that of one of his
followers they fell together upon the English line, but all the valour of
the duke and his chivalry failed to break it. On the French left the
Bretons had, indeed, succeeded in completely destroying the palisade, but
the levies stood firm, and no impression was made upon their solid line.
The attack had failed, and even William saw that it was hopeless any more
to hurl his troops against the shield-wall, but the manner in which the
English irregulars had been induced to break their array led him to try by
a feigned retreat to induce them to repeat their error. While the fight yet
raged around him he sent orders to the Bretons to turn and flee, and then
if the defenders pursued them to turn upon them while he ordered a portion
of his Norman force to make straight for the gap as soon as the English
left their posts.

The stratagem was successful. Again with exulting shouts the levies poured
out in pursuit of the Bretons. These fled for some distance, and then
suddenly turning fell on their pursuers. Ill-armed and undisciplined as the
levies were, and unable to withstand the attack of such overwhelming
numbers, they bore themselves gallantly. One party took possession of a
small outlying hill, and with showers of darts and stones they killed or
drove off all who attacked them. The greater part, however, made their way
to broken ground to the west of the hill, and made a stand on the steep
bank of a small ravine. The French horsemen charging down upon them,
unaware of the existence of the ravine, fell into it, and were slaughtered
in such numbers by the knives and spears of the English that the ravine was
well-nigh filled up with their dead bodies.

But gallantly as the levies had retrieved their error, it was a fatal one.
As soon as they had left their line, the Normans told off for the duty
pressed into the gap, and were followed by the whole of their main body,
and thus the English lost the advantage of position, and the contending
hosts faced each other on the hill, the ground now occupied by the Normans
being somewhat higher than that on which the housecarls stood. It was now
about three in the afternoon, and the fight had been raging for six hours,
but though thus outflanked and the order of their battle destroyed, the
veterans of Harold showed neither alarm nor discouragement. Their formation
was changed, the shield-wall still faced the Normans, and for a time every
effort to break it failed.

In vain the Norman cavalry charged down upon it, in vain their duke plied
his terrible mace. Occasionally men worn out by the long defensive battle
sprang from the English ranks and engaged knight or baron hand to hand. All
along the line such single-handed conflicts were going on, and the roar of
battle was as loud and fierce as at the beginning of the day. So for three
more hours the fight went on; with diminishing numbers, but with
undiminished bravery the English still held their ground, and as twilight
was now closing in, it seemed as if they would maintain it till nightfall.
Then William ordered up his archers again, bade them shoot their arrows
high into the air, so that they should fall among the king and his thanes
grouped round the standard.

The effect was terrible. Through helm and shoulder-guard the arrows made
their way; the soldiers held their shields above their heads, but the
thanes had no such protection. Harold glanced up for a moment, and as if
directed by the hand of fate an arrow struck him full in the eye, and he
fell prostrate as if struck by a thunderbolt. A cry of horror and dismay
burst from the thanes around him, but there was no time for the indulgence
of grief. The Normans too had seen the king fall, and with shouts of
triumph a body of knights tried to force their way in to take possession of
his body. But so long as an Englishman could swing axe this was not to be,
and the assault was repulsed as others had been before. Nor, when the news
of Harold's fall spread, did the brave housecarls lose heart, but sternly
and obstinately as ever held together.

At last the Normans burst in at the centre, each baron and knight striving
to be the first to pluck down the standards, the one the king's own
cognizance, the other the national banner, that waved side by side. One
after another the thanes were smitten down. Not one asked for quarter, not
one turned his back upon the foe.

Beorn and Wulf had, through the long fight, stood side by side, and the
watchfulness with which they guarded each other had carried them so far
unharmed through it.

"It is all over now, Beorn," Wulf said. "But it is not hard to die, for
with Harold the cause of England is lost."

"At any rate we will sell our lives dearly," Beorn said, as he struck a
Norman knight from his horse. But they were the last defenders of the
standards, and the end was at hand. Blows rained down upon them. Beorn was
beaten on to one knee; Wulf was so exhausted by his exertions that he could
scarce swing his axe, when a Norman baron pressed his horse through the
throng, and springing to the ground held his sword aloft and shouted:
"Stand back! stand back! these two men hold the duke's solemn pledge for
their lives!" Some of the others still pressed on, but he shouted again:
"Whoever strikes at them strikes at me!"

There was still hesitation, so furious were the Normans at the resistance
they had met with and the tremendous losses they had suffered. But another
baron exclaimed, "De Burg is right! I heard the pledge given, and so did
many of you. This is the young Saxon who saved the duke's camp from the
attack by the Bretons, and bore the brunt of their assault till we had time
to arm. The other brought with him the news that Harold was wrecked." The
words were decisive, and the Normans turned aside their horses to attack
other foes.

"Thank God I arrived in time, Wulf," Baron de Burg said. "I knew you would
be near the standard, but I was fighting elsewhere when the news reached me
that the line was broken and the standard on the point of capture. Are you
badly hurt, Beorn?"

"I am dizzy and faint," Beorn, who had risen to his feet, replied
unsteadily, "but I think not badly wounded."

"Walk by me one on each side holding my stirrup-leathers. I would place
you on my horse, but it were best that I myself should be seen."

He removed his helmet, and bareheaded moved off with the young thanes
walking beside him. Many Normans stopped as he made his way down the hill,
but to their questions he replied, "The duke has himself guaranteed the
safety of these thanes," and as he was well known to stand high in the
duke's favour his word was at once accepted.

In the meantime Harold's standard, whose emblem was a fighting man, and the
golden dragon, the national banner, had been carried off in triumph. Four
of the Normans whose names were long held in infamy by the English
discovered the body of the dying king, for it is said that he still
breathed. One of these was Eustace of Boulogne, the only man in the two
armies who had during the engagement shown signs of craven fear. Another
was the son of that Count of Ponthieu, who had once held Harold prisoner.
The others were Gifford and Montfort. One ran his spear through Harold's
breast, another struck off his head with his sword, a third pierced the
dead body, while the fourth further insulted the dead hero by cutting off
one of his legs--an action, however, which William when he heard of it
pronounced to be shameful, and expelled its perpetrator from the army.

But though the king was dead and the standard lost, the survivors of the
housecarls still fought on until darkness fell. The levies had fled just
before, hotly pursued by the Norman horse. Knowing the ground well the
light-armed footmen fled across a bog, and in the fast-gathering darkness
their pursuers did not notice the nature of the ground, but galloping on
plunged into the morass, where great numbers of them perished miserably,
either suffocated in the mud or slain by the English, who turned and fell
upon them with axe and spear as soon as they saw their plight. So great was
the slaughter, that those who had reined up their horses in time were
stricken with horror even after all the carnage they had witnessed on the
field of battle.

With darkness the battle came to an end. Few indeed of the housecarls drew
off under cover of the darkness; their force being almost annihilated. With
them had perished almost the whole of the thanes of the South of England
and East Anglia. The Sheriff of London had been carried off desperately
wounded by a few of his friends, but with this exception none of Harold's
companions and thanes left the field alive while daylight lasted. A few
only the next morning were found breathing among the mass of dead, and some
of these survived and returned at last to their homes: for William,
satisfied with the complete victory he had gained, issued orders that all
found alive on the field were to be well treated. He felt that he was now
King of England, and that clemency was his best policy. Permission was
given to the women who flocked in from the country round, to search for the
bodies of their friends and to remove them for burial. He also commanded a
search to be made for the body of Harold, but during the night, while the
exhausted soldiers slept heavily after their labours, the camp-followers
had been busy with the work of plunder, busiest round the spot where the
standards had stood, for here were stores of gold bracelets and rings, the
emblems of authority of the thanes, to be collected, and rich garments to
be carried off. Thus then, the heaps of corpses that marked the spot where
the fighting had all day been heaviest, were unrecognizable, so terrible
had been the wounds dealt by sword, battle-axe, and mace.

De Burg had kept Wulf and Beorn with him all night, and they had lain down
and slept together. In the morning he committed them to the charge of some
of his personal followers, while he went to the duke to inform him of what
he had done.

"Thank you, De Burg," William said; "they are two brave young fellows. I
marked them in the fight more than once when I was near the standard, and I
should have grieved if ill had befallen them, for they did me loyal
service. I had given my word that they should retain their estates in case
I ever came to the throne here. I know not what to do with them. Were I to
let them go now, they would assuredly take part in any further resistance
that the English may offer to me. I will not ask them now to swear
allegiance to me, for fresh from the battle where they have lost so many
friends and the earl they loved so loyally, they would assuredly refuse."

"If you will grant me a short leave I will take ship back to Normandy and
place them in the care of my wife, where they can remain until matters have
settled down here."

"It is a good idea, De Burg; do so without delay. Methinks that after
yesterday there will be no real resistance offered to me. Harold and his
brothers and all the leading thanes lie dead. There is no one left to lead
the people or organize a resistance, therefore I can spare you for a time."

Thanking the duke, De Burg returned to his captives and told them what had
been arranged.

"We owe you our heartiest thanks, Lord de Burg, for your kindness," Beorn
said. "Assuredly so long as England resists we will not acknowledge William
of Normandy as king, but when resistance ceases, we will of course take the
oath to him if only for the sake of our people; partial risings could but
bring down his vengeance and cause suffering and ruin to all concerned.
Therefore, we gratefully accept your offer, but first of all we beg you to
let us go to the spot where our housecarls fought. You remember Wulf's man,
Osgod?"

"That do I indeed," De Burg replied. "The great fellow who fought by his
side that night against the Bretons, and saved my son's life. Was he
there?"

"He was," Wulf said, "though greatly against my wishes; for he had lost an
arm in the fight at Stamford Bridge, and though it is little more than a
fortnight since, he had himself carried down here, contrary to my orders,
and insisted upon joining in the battle. I would fain search for his body
and give him burial."

"I will come with you at once," the Norman said, "I too owe him a debt of
gratitude."

The housecarls of Steyning had fallen to a man where they stood, and among
them after some searching they came upon the body of Osgod, distinguished
alike by its bulk and the loss of an arm. His axe lay with a broken shaft
by his side. His helmet was cleft asunder, and his face covered with
blood.

"His body is yet warm," Wulf said, as he lifted his arm. "I believe he
still lives."

De Burg called upon two Norman soldiers near to aid, and with their
assistance Wulf and Beorn carried Osgod down to the stream, where they
washed the blood from his face and bathed the wound in his head.

"He is certainly alive," Beorn said. "Doubtless he was stunned by the blow,
and has remained unconscious from the loss of blood."

De Burg sent for a flask of wine, and a little of this was poured through
Osgod's lips. Presently there was a deep sigh and a slight motion of the
figure, and then Osgod opened his eyes.

At first he seemed bewildered, but as his eyes fell on Wulf a look of
pleasure came into them, and he smiled faintly.

"I am alive, Osgod, and glad indeed to find that you are also. Beorn has
also escaped. Take a draught of wine; you have lost a lot of blood and had
none to spare."

They lifted him into a sitting position, and held the cup to his lips while
he drank a long draught.

"That is better," he murmured. "I can feel it going through my veins. I
shall be able to wield an axe yet again. This comes of fighting with a
weapon you don't know. The shaft broke as I was guarding my head, and I
don't remember anything after."

"It saved your life though, Osgod, for it broke the force of the blow which
would otherwise have cleft your skull. As it is, it has not gone very deep,
and the blood you have lost has run chiefly from a wound on your left
shoulder."

"How is it that you are here?" Osgod asked, looking round at the Normans.

"We are prisoners, though we have not surrendered," Wulf replied. "We were
saved by our good friend Lord de Burg, who has joined us in our search for
you. We are to be taken to Normandy as prisoners, and to remain in charge
of Lady de Burg."

"You shall go too, Osgod," De Burg said. "You will find it hard to be
nursed here, and my wife will see that your wounds are well cared for. Your
master will stay with you for the present, for I have matters to see about
before we start for the coast."

In half an hour he returned. "I have to ask you to perform a last service
to your dead king," he said. "The bodies of Gurth and Leofwin have been
found and borne away by your people for burial, but none can find the body
of Harold. All the dead that were near the standard were removed last
night by the soldiers, and among the great pile of dead none can recognize
that of your king."

Well as they knew him, Wulf and Beorn were unable to recognize the body of
Harold among the ghastly heap of mutilated corpses. After a time Wulf said:

"There is one who might recognize it when all others failed. It is Edith,
whom he so long loved as his wife. She may recognize it by some mark or
sign unknown to others. If you will give me leave I will ride to Lewes,
where she is staying, and bring her hither."

"Certainly, Wulf; I will obtain a safe conduct for you from the duke."

Wulf had ridden, however, but a mile along the western road when he saw a
litter approaching borne by four men. He reined in his horse by its side.
An order was given from within, and as the bearers lowered it to the ground
Edith stepped out. She was deadly pale. Her eyes were red with weeping, and
she seemed to Wulf to have aged years since he saw her a week before.

"My presentiments have come true, Wulf," she said. "It was no surprise to
me when last night the news came that the battle was lost and Harold slain.
I had looked and waited for it. You were coming to fetch me?"

"Yes, lady; Harold's body has not been found. Early this morning two monks
of Waltham, who had followed the army and seen the fight afar off, came
into camp, and with them Gytha, Harold's mother. She saw the duke, and
begged for Harold's body, offering its weight in gold if she might carry it
for burial to the Abbey of Waltham. The duke refused, saying that an
excommunicated man could not be buried in a holy place; she might remove
the bodies of her other two sons, but Harold's, when found, should be
buried by the seacoast. The monks searched in vain for the body. Beorn and
I have done the same, but have failed to recognize it in so vast a heap of
slain."

"I shall know it," Edith said. "Among a thousand dead I should know
Harold."

"It is a terrible sight, lady, for a woman to look upon," Wulf said gently.

"I shall see nothing but him," she replied firmly.

He accompanied her back to the battle-ground, where the two monks joined
her. Wulf, who was greatly shaken by the sight of her set and white face,
left her with them.

What the eye of friendship had failed to accomplish, that of love detected
unerringly. There were marks on Harold's body by which Edith recognized it.
One of the monks bore the news to the duke, who charged Sir William Malet
to superintend the burial, and to do it with all honour. The remains were
collected and reverently placed together. They were wrapped in a purple
robe, and laid on a litter. Beorn and Wulf and the two monks lifted it;
Edith walked behind, followed by Lord de Burg and several other Norman
knights and barons who had known Harold in Normandy, and could admire and
appreciate the valour of the dead hero. The little procession went down to
the shore, where Norman soldiers had already dug a grave, and there by the
coast he had defended so well Harold was laid to rest, and over his body a
great cairn of stones was raised by order of the duke.




CHAPTER XXII.


THE LORD OF BRAMBER.

Edith stood by while the Norman soldiers piled the stones over the grave.
No tear had fallen from her eyes from the time that she had reached the
field of battle. Her face was as pale as marble, and looked almost as
rigid. When the last stone was placed on the top of the cairn she turned to
Wulf and Beorn:

"Farewell, Wulf! farewell, Beorn! I am glad you were here. I am glad that
beside me stood two of his most trusted thanes, and two of the monks from
the abbey he founded, and whose welfare was so dear to him. I go to Lewes,
and when the doors of the convent close on me I shall be dead to the world.
Would that I were lying beneath that cairn by the side of my dear lord. I
cannot weep for him now, the springs of my heart seem frozen, but I have
time for that. Farewell, thanes! I shall remember you in my prayers." So
saying she turned away, and walked back to the litter.

"Poor lady!" Beorn exclaimed as he watched the litter, escorted by the two
monks, carried along the road.

"Poor lady indeed!" Wulf repeated; "and yet there are thousands in England
and Normandy who were widowed yesterday, and maybe she is better off than
many. She lost Harold the day she resigned him to another, and it was
harder perhaps to be parted from him in that fashion than to know that he
is dead now. She can think of him as his true widow, for assuredly the
queen who never cared aught for him is a widow but in name. Before, Edith
was tortured by the desire to see him and to comfort him, and yet his
marriage stood as a gulf between them, a gulf that she would never have
passed. Now she can think of him as her very own, as the man who had loved
