barns and oast houses and stables, or things like that. And the other
way the garden lawn goes on till it comes to the churchyard. The
churchyard is not divided from the garden at all except by a little
grass bank. In the front of the house there is more garden, and the big
fruit garden is at the back.

The man the house belongs to likes new houses, so he built a big one
with conservatories and a stable with a clock in a turret on the top,
and he left the Moat House. And Albert's uncle took it, and my father
was to come down sometimes from Saturday to Monday, and Albert's uncle
was to live with us all the time, and he would be writing a book, and we
were not to bother him, but he would give an eye to us. I hope all this
is plain. I have said it as short as I can.

We got down rather late, but there was still light enough to see the
big bell hanging at the top of the house. The rope belonging to it went
right down the house, through our bedroom to the dining-room. H. O. saw
the rope and pulled it while he was washing his hands for supper, and
Dicky and I let him, and the bell tolled solemnly. Father shouted to him
not to, and we went down to supper.

But presently there were many feet trampling on the gravel, and Father
went out to see. When he came back he said--'The whole village, or half
of it, has come up to see why the bell rang. It's only rung for fire or
burglars. Why can't you kids let things alone?'

Albert's uncle said--

'Bed follows supper as the fruit follows the flower. They'll do no more
mischief to-night, sir. To-morrow I will point out a few of the things
to be avoided in this bucolic retreat.'

So it was bed directly after supper, and that was why we did not see
much that night.

But in the morning we were all up rather early, and we seemed to have
awakened in a new world rich in surprises beyond the dreams of anybody,
as it says in the quotation.

We went everywhere we could in the time, but when it was breakfast-time
we felt we had not seen half or a quarter. The room we had breakfast
in was exactly like in a story--black oak panels and china in corner
cupboards with glass doors. These doors were locked. There were green
curtains, and honeycomb for breakfast. After brekker my father went back
to town, and Albert's uncle went too, to see publishers. We saw them to
the station, and Father gave us a long list of what we weren't to do. It
began with 'Don't pull ropes unless you're quite sure what will happen
at the other end,' and it finished with 'For goodness sake, try to keep
out of mischief till I come down on Saturday'. There were lots of other
things in between.

We all promised we would. And we saw them off and waved till the train
was quite out of sight. Then we started to walk home. Daisy was tired so
Oswald carried her home on his back. When we got home she said--

'I do like you, Oswald.'

She is not a bad little kid; and Oswald felt it was his duty to be nice
to her because she was a visitor. Then we looked all over everything.
It was a glorious place. You did not know where to begin. We were all
a little tired before we found the hayloft, but we pulled ourselves
together to make a fort with the trusses of hay--great square
things--and we were having a jolly good time, all of us, when suddenly a
trap-door opened and a head bobbed up with a straw in its mouth. We knew
nothing about the country then, and the head really did scare us rather,
though, of course, we found out directly that the feet belonging to it
were standing on the bar of the loose-box underneath. The head said--

'Don't you let the governor catch you a-spoiling of that there hay,
that's all.' And it spoke thickly because of the straw.

It is strange to think how ignorant you were in the past. We can hardly
believe now that once we really did not know that it spoiled hay to mess
about with it. Horses don't like to eat it afterwards.

Always remember this.

When the head had explained a little more it went away, and we turned
the handle of the chaff-cutting machine, and nobody got hurt, though the
head HAD said we should cut our fingers off if we touched it.

And then we sat down on the floor, which is dirty with the nice clean
dirt that is more than half chopped hay, and those there was room for
hung their legs down out of the top door, and we looked down at the
farmyard, which is very slushy when you get down into it, but most
interesting.

Then Alice said--

'Now we're all here, and the boys are tired enough to sit still for a
minute, I want to have a council.'

We said what about? And she said, 'I'll tell you.' H. O., don't wriggle
so; sit on my frock if the straws tickle your legs.'

You see he wears socks, and so he can never be quite as comfortable as
anyone else.

'Promise not to laugh' Alice said, getting very red, and looking at
Dora, who got red too.

We did, and then she said:

'Dora and I have talked this over, and Daisy too, and we have written it
down because it is easier than saying it. Shall I read it? or will you,
Dora?'

Dora said it didn't matter; Alice might. So Alice read it, and though
she gabbled a bit we all heard it. I copied it afterwards. This is what
she read:


     NEW SOCIETY FOR BEING GOOD IN

'I, Dora Bastable, and Alice Bastable, my sister, being of sound mind
and body, when we were shut up with bread and water on that jungle day,
we thought a great deal about our naughty sins, and we made our minds up
to be good for ever after. And we talked to Daisy about it, and she had
an idea. So we want to start a society for being good in. It is Daisy's
idea, but we think so too.'

'You know,' Dora interrupted, 'when people want to do good things they
always make a society. There are thousands--there's the Missionary
Society.'

'Yes,' Alice said, 'and the Society for the Prevention of something or
other, and the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Society, and the S.P.G.'

'What's S.P.G.?' Oswald asked.

'Society for the Propagation of the Jews, of course,' said Noel, who
cannot always spell.

'No, it isn't; but do let me go on.'

Alice did go on.

'We propose to get up a society, with a chairman and a treasurer and
secretary, and keep a journal-book saying what we've done. If that
doesn't make us good it won't be my fault.

'The aim of the society is nobleness and goodness, and great and
unselfish deeds. We wish not to be such a nuisance to grown-up people
and to perform prodigies of real goodness. We wish to spread our
wings'--here Alice read very fast. She told me afterwards Daisy had
helped her with that part, and she thought when she came to the wings
they sounded rather silly--'to spread our wings and rise above the kind
of interesting things that you ought not to do, but to do kindnesses to
all, however low and mean.'


Denny was listening carefully. Now he nodded three or four times.

     'Little words of kindness' (he said),
     'Little deeds of love,
     Make this earth an eagle
     Like the one above.'

This did not sound right, but we let it pass, because an eagle does have
wings, and we wanted to hear the rest of what the girls had written. But
there was no rest.

'That's all,' said Alice, and Daisy said--'Don't you think it's a good
idea?'

'That depends,' Oswald answered, 'who is president and what you mean by
being good.'

Oswald did not care very much for the idea himself, because being
good is not the sort of thing he thinks it is proper to talk about,
especially before strangers. But the girls and Denny seemed to like
it, so Oswald did not say exactly what he thought, especially as it was
Daisy's idea. This was true politeness.

'I think it would be nice,' Noel said, 'if we made it a sort of play.
Let's do the Pilgrim's Progress.'

We talked about that for some time, but it did not come to anything,
because we all wanted to be Mr Greatheart, except H. O., who wanted to
be the lions, and you could not have lions in a Society for Goodness.

Dicky said he did not wish to play if it meant reading books about
children who die; he really felt just as Oswald did about it, he told me
afterwards. But the girls were looking as if they were in Sunday school,
and we did not wish to be unkind.

At last Oswald said, 'Well, let's draw up the rules of the society, and
choose the president and settle the name.'

Dora said Oswald should be president, and he modestly consented. She was
secretary, and Denny treasurer if we ever had any money.

Making the rules took us all the afternoon. They were these:


               RULES

1. Every member is to be as good as possible.

2. There is to be no more jaw than necessary about being good.
(Oswald and Dicky put that rule in.)

3. No day must pass without our doing some kind action to a suffering
fellow-creature.

4. We are to meet every day, or as often as we like.

5. We are to do good to people we don't like as often as we can.

6. No one is to leave the Society without the consent of all the
rest of us.

7. The Society is to be kept a profound secret from all the world
except us.

8. The name of our Society is--

And when we got as far as that we all began to talk at once. Dora wanted
it called the Society for Humane Improvement; Denny said the Society for
Reformed Outcast Children; but Dicky said, No, we really were not so bad
as all that.

Then H. O. said, 'Call it the Good Society.'

'Or the Society for Being Good In,' said Daisy.

'Or the Society of Goods,' said Noel.

'That's priggish,' said Oswald; 'besides, we don't know whether we shall
be so very.'

'You see,' Alice explained, 'we only said if we COULD we would be good.'

'Well, then,' Dicky said, getting up and beginning to dust the chopped
hay off himself, 'call it the Society of the Wouldbegoods and have done
with it.'

Oswald thinks Dicky was getting sick of it and wanted to make himself
a little disagreeable. If so, he was doomed to disappointment. For
everyone else clapped hands and called out, 'That's the very thing!'
Then the girls went off to write out the rules, and took H. O. with
them, and Noel went to write some poetry to put in the minute book.
That's what you call the book that a society's secretary writes what it
does in. Denny went with him to help. He knows a lot of poetry. I think
he went to a lady's school where they taught nothing but that. He was
rather shy of us, but he took to Noel. I can't think why. Dicky and
Oswald walked round the garden and told each other what they thought of
the new society.

'I'm not sure we oughtn't to have put our foot down at the beginning,'
Dicky said. 'I don't see much in it, anyhow.'

'It pleases the girls,' Oswald said, for he is a kind brother.

'But we're not going to stand jaw, and "words in season", and "loving
sisterly warnings". I tell you what it is, Oswald, we'll have to run
this thing our way, or it'll be jolly beastly for everybody.'

Oswald saw this plainly.

'We must do something,' Dicky said; it's very very hard, though. Still,
there must be SOME interesting things that are not wrong.'

'I suppose so,' Oswald said, 'but being good is so much like being a
muff, generally. Anyhow I'm not going to smooth the pillows of the sick,
or read to the aged poor, or any rot out of Ministering Children.'

'No more am I,' Dicky said. He was chewing a straw like the head had
in its mouth, 'but I suppose we must play the game fair. Let's begin by
looking out for something useful to do--something like mending things or
cleaning them, not just showing off.'

'The boys in books chop kindling wood and save their pennies to buy tea
and tracts.'

'Little beasts!' said Dick. 'I say, let's talk about something
else.' And Oswald was glad to, for he was beginning to feel jolly
uncomfortable.

We were all rather quiet at tea, and afterwards Oswald played draughts
with Daisy and the others yawned. I don't know when we've had such a
gloomy evening. And everyone was horribly polite, and said 'Please' and
'Thank you' far more than requisite.

Albert's uncle came home after tea. He was jolly, and told us stories,
but he noticed us being a little dull, and asked what blight had fallen
on our young lives. Oswald could have answered and said, 'It is the
Society of the Wouldbegoods that is the blight,' but of course he didn't
and Albert's uncle said no more, but he went up and kissed the girls
when they were in bed, and asked them if there was anything wrong. And
they told him no, on their honour.

The next morning Oswald awoke early. The refreshing beams of the morning
sun shone on his narrow white bed and on the sleeping forms of his dear
little brothers and Denny, who had got the pillow on top of his head and
was snoring like a kettle when it sings. Oswald could not remember
at first what was the matter with him, and then he remembered the
Wouldbegoods, and wished he hadn't. He felt at first as if there was
nothing you could do, and even hesitated to buzz a pillow at Denny's
head. But he soon saw that this could not be. So he chucked his boot and
caught Denny right in the waistcoat part, and thus the day began more
brightly than he had expected.

Oswald had not done anything out of the way good the night before,
except that when no one was looking he polished the brass candlestick in
the girls' bedroom with one of his socks. And he might just as well have
let it alone, for the servants cleaned it again with the other things in
the morning, and he could never find the sock afterwards. There were two
servants. One of them had to be called Mrs Pettigrew instead of Jane and
Eliza like others. She was cook and managed things.

After breakfast Albert's uncle said--

