Shif'less Sol saw the face of his young comrade, and he was startled.
He had never before beheld it so stern, so resolute, and so pitiless. He
seemed to remember as one single, fearful picture all the ruthless and
terrible scenes of the last year. Henry uttered again that cry which was
at once a defiance and a signal, and from the forest ahead of him it was
answered, signal for signal. The riflemen were coming, Paul, Long Jim,
and Heemskerk at their head. They uttered a mighty cheer as they saw the
flying three, and their ranks opened to receive them. From the Indians
and Tories came the long whoop of challenge, and every one in either
band knew that the issue was now about to be settled by battle, and
by battle alone. They used all the tactics of the forest. Both sides
instantly dropped down among the trees and undergrowth, three or four
hundred yards apart, and for a few moments there was no sound save heavy
breathing, heard only by those who lay close by. Not a single human
being would have been visible to an ordinary eye there in the moonlight,
which tipped boughs and bushes with ghostly silver. Yet no area so small
ever held a greater store of resolution and deadly animosity. On one
side were the riflemen, nearly every one of whom had slaughtered kin to
mourn, often wives and little children, and on the other the Tories and
Iroquois, about to lose their country, and swayed by the utmost passions
of hate and revenge.

"Spread out," whispered Henry. "Don't give them a chance to flank us.
You, Sol, take ten men and go to the right, and you, Heemskerk, take ten
and go to the left."

"It is well," whispered Heemskerk. "You have a great head, Mynheer
Henry."

Each promptly obeyed, but the larger number of the riflemen remained
in the center, where Henry knelt, with Paul and Long Jim on one side of
him, and Silent Tom on the other. When he thought that the two flanking
parties had reached the right position, he uttered a low whistle, and
back came two low whistles, signals that all was ready. Then the line
began its slow advance, creeping forward from tree to tree and from
bush to bush. Henry raised himself up a little, but he could not yet see
anything where the hostile force lay hidden. They went a little farther,
and then all lay down again to look.

Tom Ross had not spoken a word, but none was more eager than he. He was
almost flat upon the ground, and he had been pulling himself along by a
sort of muscular action of his whole body. Now he was so still that
he did not seem to breathe. Yet his eyes, uncommonly eager now, were
searching the thickets ahead. They rested at last on a spot of brown
showing through some bushes, and, raising his rifle, he fired with sure
aim. The Iroquois uttered his death cry, sprang up convulsively, and
then fell back prone. Shots were fired in return, and a dozen riflemen
replied to them. The battle was joined.

They heard Braxton Wyatt's whistle, the challenging war cry of the
Iroquois, and then they fought in silence, save for the crack of the
rifles. The riflemen continued to advance in slow, creeping fashion,
always pressing the enemy. Every time they caught sight of a hostile
face or body they sent a bullet at it, and Wyatt's men did the same. The
two lines came closer, and all along each there were many sharp little
jets of fire and smoke. Some of the riflemen were wounded, and two
were slain, dying quietly and without interrupting their comrades, who
continued to press the combat, Henry always leading in the center, and
Shif'less Sol and Heemskerk on the flanks.

This battle so strange, in which faces were seen only for a moment, and
which was now without the sound of voices, continued without a moment's
cessation in the dark forest. The fury of the combatants increased as
the time went on, and neither side was yet victorious. Closer and closer
came the lines. Meanwhile dark clouds were piling in a bank in the
southwest. Slow thunder rumbled far away, and the sky was cut at
intervals by lightning. But the combatants did not notice the heralds of
storm. Their attention was only for each other.

It seemed to Henry that emotions and impulses in him had culminated.
Before him were the worst of all their foes, and his pitiless resolve
was not relaxed a particle. The thunder and the lightning, although he
did not notice them, seemed to act upon him as an incitement, and with
low words he continually urged those about him to push the battle.

Drops of rain fell, showing in the moonshine like beads of silver on
boughs and twigs, but by and by the smoke from the rifle fire, pressed
down by the heavy atmosphere, gathered among the trees, and the moon was
partly hidden. But file combat did not relax because of the obscurity.
Wandering Indians, hearing the firing, came to Wyatt's relief, but,
despite their aid, he was compelled to give ground. His were the most
desperate and hardened men, red and white, in all the allied forces, but
they were faced by sharpshooters better than themselves. Many of them
were already killed, others were wounded, and, although Wyatt and
Coleman raged and strove to hold them, they began to give back, and so
hard pressed were they that the Iroquois could not perform the sacred
duty of carrying off their dead. No one sought to carry away the Tories,
who lay with the rain, that had now begun to fall, beating upon them.

So much had the riflemen advanced that they came to the point where
bodies of their enemies lay. Again that fierce joy surged up in Henry's
heart. His friends and he were winning. But he wished to do more than
win. This band, if left alone, would merely flee from the Seneca Castle
before the advance of the army, and would still exist to ravage and slay
elsewhere.

"Keep on, Tom! Keep on!" he cried to Ross and the others. "Never let
them rest!"

"We won't! We ain't dreamin' o' doin' sech a thing," replied the
redoubtable one as he loaded and fired. "Thar, I got another!"

The Iroquois, yielding slowly at first, began now to give way faster.
Some sought to dart away to right or left, and bury themselves in the
forest, but they were caught by the flanking parties of Shif'less Sol
and Heemskerk, and driven back on the center. They could not retreat
except straight on the town, and the riflemen followed them step for
step. The moan of the distant thunder went on, and the soft rain fell,
but the deadly crackle of the rifles formed a sharper, insistent note
that claimed the whole attention of both combatants.

It was now the turn of the riflemen to receive help. Twenty or more
scouts and others abroad in the forest were called by the rifle fire,
and went at once into the battle. Then Wyatt was helped a second time by
a band of Senecas and Mohawks, but, despite all the aid, they could not
withstand the riflemen. Wyatt, black with fury and despair, shouted to
them and sometimes cursed or even struck at them, but the retreat
could not be stopped. Men fell fast. Every one of the riflemen was a
sharpshooter, and few bullets missed.

Wyatt was driven out of the forest and into the very corn field through
which Henry had passed. Here the retreat became faster, and, with shouts
of triumph, the riflemen followed after. Wyatt lost some men in the
flight through the field, but when he came to the orchard, having the
advantage of cover, he made another desperate stand.

But Shif'less Sol and Heemskerk took the band on the flanks, pouring in
a destructive fire, and Wyatt, Coleman, and a fourth of his band, all
that survived, broke into a run for the town.

The riflemen uttered shout after shout of triumph, and it was impossible
to restrain their pursuit. Henry would have stopped here, knowing the
danger of following into the town, especially when the army was near at
band with an irresistible force, but he could not stay them. He decided
then that if they would charge it must be done with the utmost fire and
spirit.

"On, men! On!" he cried. "Give them no chance to take cover."

Shif'less Sol and Heemskerk wheeled in with the flanking parties, and
the riflemen, a solid mass now, increased the speed of pursuit. Wyatt
and his men had no chance to turn and fire, or even to reload. Bullets
beat upon them as they fled, and here perished nearly all of that savage
band. Wyatt, Coleman, and only a half dozen made good the town, where
a portion of the Iroquois who had not yet fled received them. But the
exultant riflemen did not stop even there. They were hot on the heels of
Wyatt and the fugitives, and attacked at once the Iroquois who came to
their relief. So fierce was their rush that these new forces were driven
back at once. Braxton Wyatt, Coleman, and a dozen more, seeing no other
escape, fled to a large log house used as a granary, threw themselves
into it, barred the doors heavily, and began to fire from the upper
windows, small openings usually closed with boards. Other Indians from
the covert of house, tepee, or tree, fired upon the assailants, and a
fresh battle began in the town.

The riflemen, directed by their leaders, met the new situation promptly.
Fired upon from all sides, at least twenty rushed into a house some
forty yards from that of Braxton Wyatt. Others seized another house,
while the rest remained outside, sheltered by little outhouses, trees,
or inequalities of the earth, and maintained rapid sharpshooting in
reply to the Iroquois in the town or to Braxton Wyatt's men in the
house. Now the combat became fiercer than ever. The warriors uttered
yells, and Wyatt's men in the house sent forth defiant shouts. From
another part of the town came shrill cries of old squaws, urging on
their fighting men.

It was now about four o'clock in the morning. The thunder and lightning
had ceased, but the soft rain was still falling. The Indians had lighted
fires some distance away. Several carried torches. Helped by these, and,
used so long to the night, the combatants saw distinctly. The five lay
behind a low embankment, and they paid their whole attention to the big
house that sheltered Wyatt and his men. On the sides and behind they
were protected by Heemskerk and others, who faced a coming swarm.

"Keep low, Paul," said Henry, restraining his eager comrade. "Those
fellows in the house can shoot, and we don't want to lose you. There,
didn't I tell you!"

A bullet fired from the window passed through the top of Paul's cap, but
clipped only his hair. Before the flash from the window passed, Long Jim
fired in return, and something fell back inside. Bullets came from other
windows. Shif'less Sol fired, and a Seneca fell forward banging half out
of the window, his naked body a glistening brown in the firelight. But
he hung only a few seconds. Then he fell to the ground and lay still.
The five crouched low again, waiting a new opportunity. Behind them, and
on either side, they heard the crash of the new battle and challenging
cries.

Braxton Wyatt, Coleman, four more Tories, and six Indians were still
alive in the strong log house. Two or three were wounded, but they
scarcely noticed it in the passion of conflict. The house was a
veritable fortress, and the renegade's hopes rose high as he heard
the rifle fire from different parts of the town. His own band had been
annihilated by the riflemen, led by Henry Ware, but he had a sanguine
hope now that his enemies had rushed into a trap. The Iroquois would
turn back and destroy them.

Wyatt and his comrades presented a repellent sight as they crouched in
the room and fired from the two little windows. His clothes and those
of the white men had been torn by bushes and briars in their flight, and
their faces had been raked, too, until they bled, but they had paid
no attention to such wounds, and the blood was mingled with sweat and
powder smoke. The Indians, naked to the waist, daubed with vermilion,
and streaked, too, with blood, crouched upon the floor, with the
muz'zles of their rifles at the windows, seeking something human to
kill. One and all, red and white, they were now raging savages, There
was not one among them who did not have some foul murder of woman or
child to his credit.

Wyatt himself was mad for revenge. Every evil passion in him was up and
leaping. His eyes, more like those of a wild animal than a human being,
blazed out of a face, a mottled red and black. By the side of him the
dark Tory, Coleman, was driven by impulses fully as fierce.

"To think of it!" exclaimed Wyatt. "He led us directly into a trap, that
Ware! And here our band is destroyed! All the good men that we gathered
together, except these few, are killed!"

"But we may pay them back," said Coleman. "We were in their trap, but
now they are in ours! Listen to that firing and the war whoop! There are
enough Iroquois yet in the town to kill every one of those rebels!"

"I hope so! I believe so!" exclaimed Wyatt. "Look out, Coleman! Ah, he's
pinked you! That's the one they call Shif'less Sol, and he's the best
sharpshooter of them all except Ware!"

Coleman had leaned forward a little in his anxiety to secure a good
aim at something. He had disclosed only a little of his face, but in an
instant a bullet had seared his forehead like the flaming stroke of a
sword, passing on and burying itself in the wall. Fresh blood dripped
down over his face. He tore a strip from the inside of his coat, bound
it about his head, and went on with the defense.

A Mohawk, frightfully painted, fired from the other window. Like a flash
came the return shot, and the Indian fell back in the room, stone dead,
with a bullet through his bead.

"That was Ware himself," said Wyatt. "I told you he was the best shot of
them all. I give him that credit. But they're all good. Look out!
There goes another of our men! It was Ross who did that! I tell you, be
careful! Be careful!"

It was an Onondaga who fell this time, and he lay with his head on the
window sill until another Indian pulled him inside. A minute later a
Tory, who peeped guardedly for a shot, received a bullet through his
head, and sank down on the floor. A sort of terror spread among the
others. What could they do in the face of such terrible sharpshooting?
It was uncanny, almost superhuman, and they looked stupidly at one
another. Smoke from their own firing had gathered in the room, and it
formed a ghastly veil about their faces. They heard the crash of the
rifles outside from every point, but no help came to them.

"We're bound to do something!" exclaimed Wyatt. "Here you, Jones, stick
up the edge of your cap, and when they fire at it I'll put a bullet in
the man who pulls the trigger."

Jones thrust up his cap, but they knew too much out there to be taken
in by an old trick. The cap remained unhurt, but when Jones in his
eagerness thrust it higher until he exposed his arm, his wrist was
smashed in an instant by a bullet, and he fell back with a howl of pain.
Wyatt swore and bit his lips savagely. He and all of them began to fear
that they were in another and tighter trap, one from which there was no
escape unless the Iroquois outside drove off the riflemen, and of that
they could as yet see no sign. The sharpshooters held their place behind
the embankment and the little outhouse, and so little as a finger, even,
at the windows became a sure mark for their terrible bullets. A Seneca,
seeking a new trial for a shot, received a bullet through the shoulder,
and a Tory who followed him in the effort was slain outright.

The light hitherto had been from the fires, but now the dawn was coming.
Pale gray beams fell over the town, and then deepened into red and
yellow. The beams reached the room where the beleaguered remains of
Wyatt's band fought, but, mingling with the smoke, they gave a new and
more ghastly tint to the desperate faces.

"We've got to fight!" exclaimed Wyatt. "We can't sit here and be taken
like beasts in a trap! Suppose we unbar the doors below and make a rush
for it?"

Coleman shook his head. "Every one of us would be killed within twenty
yards," he said.

"Then the Iroquois must come back," cried Wyatt. "Where is Joe Brant?
Where is Timmendiquas, and where is that coward, Sir John Johnson? Will
they come?"

"They won't come," said Coleman.

They lay still awhile, listening to the firing in the town, which swayed
hither and thither. The smoke in the room thinned somewhat, and the
daylight broadened and deepened. As a desperate resort they resumed fire
from the windows, but three more of their number were slain, and, bitter
with chagrin, they crouched once more on the floor out of range. Wyatt
looked at the figures of the living and the dead. Savage despair tore at
his heart again, and his hatred of those who bad done this increased.
It was being served out to him and his band as they had served it out
to many a defenseless family in the beautiful valleys of the border.
Despite the sharpshooters, he took another look at the window, but kept
so far back that there was no chance for a shot.

"Two of them are slipping away," he exclaimed. "They are Ross and the
one they call Long Jim! I wish I dared a shot! Now they're gone!"

They lay again in silence for a time. There was still firing in
the town, and now and then they heard shouts. Wyatt looked at his
lieutenant, and his lieutenant looked at him.

"Yours is the ugliest face I ever saw," said Wyatt.

"I can say the same of yours-as I can't see mine," said Coleman.

The two gazed once more at the hideous, streaked, and grimed faces of
each other, and then laughed wildly. A wounded Seneca sitting with his
back against the wall began to chant a low, wailing death song.

"Shut up! Stop that infernal noise!" exclaimed Wyatt savagely.

The Seneca stared at him with fixed, glassy eyes and continued his
chant. Wyatt turned away, but that song was upon his nerves. He knew
that everything was lost. The main force of the Iroquois would not
come back to his help, and Henry Ware would triumph. He sat down on the
floor, and muttered fierce words under his breath.

"Hark!" suddenly exclaimed Coleman. "What is that?"

A low crackling sound came to their ears, and both recognized it
instantly. It was the sound of flames eating rapidly into wood, and of
that wood was built the house they now held. Even as they listened they
could hear the flames leap and roar into new and larger life.

"This is, what those two, Ross and Hart, were up to!" exclaimed Wyatt.
"We're not only trapped, but we're to be burned alive in our trap!"

"Not I," said Coleman, "I'm goin' to make a rush for it."

"It's the only thing to be done," said Wyatt. "Come, all of you that are
left!"

The scanty survivors gathered around him, all but the wounded Seneca,
who sat unmoved against the wall and continued to chant his death chant.
Wyatt glanced at him, but said nothing. Then he and the others rushed
down the stairs.

The lower room was filled with smoke, and outside the flames were
roaring. They unbarred the door and sprang into the open air. A shower
of bullets met them. The Tory, Coleman, uttered a choking cry, threw up
his arms, and fell back in the doorway. Braxton Wyatt seized one of the
smaller men, and, holding him a moment or two before him to receive the
fire of his foe, dashed for the corner of the blazing building. The man
whom he held was slain, and his own shoulder was grazed twice, but he
made the corner. In an instant he put the burning building between him
and his pursuers, and ran as he had never run before in all his life,
deadly fear putting wings on his heels. As he ran he heard the dull boom
of a cannon, and he knew that the American army was entering the Seneca
Castle. Ahead of him he saw the last of the Indians fleeing for the
woods, and behind him the burning house crashed and fell in amid leaping
flames and sparks in myriads. He alone had escaped from the house.




CHAPTER XXIV. DOWN THE OHIO


"We didn't get Wyatt," said Henry, "but we did pretty well,
nevertheless."

"That's so," said Shif'less Sol. "Thar's nothin' left o' his band but
hisself, an' I ain't feelin' any sorrow 'cause I helped to do it. I
guess we've saved the lives of a good many innocent people with this
morning's work."

"Never a doubt of it," said Henry, "and here's the army now finishing up
the task."

The soldiers were setting fire to the town in many places, and in two
hours the great Seneca Castle was wholly destroyed. The five took no
part in this, but rested after their battles and labors. One or two had
been grazed by bullets, but the wounds were too trifling to be noticed.
As they rested, they watched the fire, which was an immense one, fed by
so much material. The blaze could be seen for many miles, and the ashes
drifted over all the forest beyond the fields.

All the while the Iroquois were fleeing through the wilderness to the
British posts and the country beyond the lakes, whence their allies had
already preceded them. The coals of Little Beard's Town smoldered for
two or three days, and then the army turned back, retracing its steps
down the Genesee.
