
"I've always had an idea that Horace wasn't as gay as he pretended to
be, else he wouldn't have written so much about Chloe and her comrades.
I imagine that an old Roman boy would keep pretty quiet about his
dancing and singing, and not publish it to the public."

"Well, let him be.  He's dead and the Romans are dead, and the
Americans are doing their best to kill off one another, but let's
forget it for a few minutes.  That pool there is about four feet deep,
the water is clear and the bottom is firm ground; now do you know what
I'm going to do?"

"Yes, and I'm going to do the same.  Bet you even that I beat you into
the water."

"Taken."

They threw off their clothes rapidly, but the splashes were
simultaneous as their bodies struck the water.  Although the limits of
the pool were narrow they splashed and paddled there for a while, and
it was a long time since they had known such a luxury.  Then they
walked out, dried themselves and spread the good news.  All night long
the pool was filled with the bathers, following one another in turn.

The water taken internally and externally soothed Harry's nerves. His
excitement was gone.  A great army with which they were sure to fight
on the morrow was not far away, but for the time he was indifferent.
The morrow could take care of itself.  It was night, and he had
permission to go to sleep.  Hence he slumbered fifteen minutes later.

He slept almost through the night, and, when he was awakened shortly
before dawn, he found that his strength and elasticity had returned. He
and Dalton went down to the spring again, drank many times, and then
ate breakfast with the older members of the staff, a breakfast that
differed very little from that of the common soldiers.

Then a day or two of waiting, and watching, and of confused but
terrible fighting ensued.  The forests were again set on fire by the
bursting shells and they were not able to rescue many of the wounded
from the flames.  Vast clouds again floated over the whole region,
drawing a veil of dusk between the soldiers and the sun.  But neither
army was willing to attack the other in full force.

Grant commanding all the armies of the East was moving meanwhile. A
powerful cavalry division, he heard, had got behind Beauregard, who was
to protect Richmond, and was tearing up an important railway line used
by the Confederacy.  The daring Sheridan with another great division of
cavalry had gone around Lee's left and was wrecking another railway,
and with it the rations and medical supplies so necessary to the
Confederates.  Grant, recognizing his antagonist's skill and courage
and knowing that to succeed he must destroy the main Southern army,
resolved to attack again with his whole force.

The day had been comparatively quiet and the Army of Northern Virginia
had devoted nearly the whole time to fortifying with earthworks and
breastworks of logs.  The young aides, as they rode on their missions,
could easily see the Northern lines through their glasses.  Harry's
heart sank as he observed their extent.  The Southern army was sadly
reduced in numbers, and Grant could get reinforcement continually.

But such is the saving grace of human nature that even in these moments
of suspense, with one terrible battle just over and another about to
begin, soldiers of the Blue and Gray would speak to one another in
friendly fashion in the bushes or across the Po.  It was on the banks
of this narrow river that Harry at last saw Shepard once more.  He
happened to be on foot that time, the slope being too densely wooded
for his horse, and Shepard hailed him from the other side.

"Good day, Mr. Kenton.  Don't fire!  I want to talk," he said, holding
up both hands as a sign of peace.

"A curious place for talking," Harry could not keep from saying.

"So it is, but we're not observed here.  It was almost inevitable while
the armies remained face to face that we should meet in time.  I want
to tell you that I've met your cousin, Richard Mason, here, and his
commanding officer, Colonel Winchester.  Oh, I know much more about you
and your relationships than you think."

"How is Dick?"

"He has not been hurt, nor has Colonel Winchester.  Mr. Mason has
received a letter from his home and your home in Pendleton in Kentucky.
The outlaws to the eastward are troublesome, but the town is occupied
by an efficient Union garrison and is in no danger.  His mother and all
of his and your old friends, who did not go to the war, are in good
health. He thought that in my various capacities as ranger, scout and
spy I might meet you, and he asked me, if it so happened, to tell these
things to you."

"I thank you," said Harry very earnestly, "and I'm truly sorry, Mr.
Shepard, that you and I are on different sides."

"I suppose it's too late for you to come over to the Union and the true
cause."

Harry laughed.

"You know, Mr. Shepard, there are no traitors in this war."

"I know it.  I was merely jesting."

He slipped into the underbrush and disappeared.  Harry confessed to
himself once more that he liked Shepard, but he felt more strongly than
ever that it had become a personal duel between them, and they would
meet yet again in violence.

That night he had little to do.  It was a typical May night in
Virginia, clear and beautiful with an air that would have been a tonic
to the nerves, had it not been for the bitter smoke and odors that yet
lingered from the battle of the Wilderness.

Before dawn the scouts brought in a rumor that there was a heavy
movement of Federal troops, although they did not know its meaning.  It
might portend another flank march by Grant, but a mist that had begun
to rise after midnight hid much from them.  The mist deepened into a
fog, which made it harder for the Southern leaders to learn the meaning
of the Northern movement.

Just as the dawn was beginning to show a little through the fog,
Hancock and Burnside, with many more generals, led a tremendous attack
upon the Southern right center.  They had come so silently through the
thickets that for once the Southern leaders were surprised.  The Union
veterans, rushing forward in dense columns, stormed and took the
breastworks with the bayonet.

Many of the Southern troops, sound asleep, awoke to find themselves in
the enemy's hands.  Others, having no time to fire them, fought with
clubbed rifles.

Harry, dozing, was awakened by the terrific uproar.  Even before the
dawn had fairly come the battle was raging on a long front.  The center
of Lee's army was broken, and the Union troops were pouring into the
gap. Grant had already taken many guns and thousands of prisoners, and
the bulldog of Shiloh and Vicksburg and Chattanooga was hurrying fresh
divisions into the combat to extend and insure his victory.  Through
the forests swelled the deep Northern cry of triumph.

Harry had never before seen the Southern army in such danger, and he
looked at General Lee, who had now mounted Traveller.  The turmoil and
confusion in front of them was frightful and indescribable.  The Union
troops had occupied an entire Confederate salient, and their generals,
feeling that the moment was theirs, led them on, reckless of life, and
swept everything before them.

Harry never took his eyes from Lee.  The rising sun shot golden beams
through the smoke and disclosed him clearly.  His face was calm and his
voice did not shake as he issued his orders with rapidity and
precision. The lion at bay was never more the lion.

A new line of battle was formed, and the fugitives formed up with it.
Then the Southern troops, uttering once more the fierce rebel yell,
charged directly upon their enemy and under the eye of the great chief
whom they almost worshiped.

Now Harry for the first time saw his general show excitement.  Lee
galloped to the head of one of the Virginia regiments, and ranging his
horse beside the colors snatched off his hat and pointed it at the
enemy. It was a picture which with all the hero worship of youth he
never forgot.  It did not even grow dim in his memory--the great leader
on horseback, his hat in his hand, his eyes fiery, his face flushed,
his hand pointing the way to victory or death.

It was an occasion, too, when the personal presence of a leader meant
everything.  Every man knew Lee and tremendous rolling cheers greeted
his arrival, cheers that could be heard above the thunder of cannon and
rifles.  It infused new courage into them and they gathered themselves
for the rush upon their victorious foe.

Gordon of Georgia, spurring through the smoke, seized Lee's horse by
the bridle.  He did not mean to have their commander-in-chief
sacrificed in a charge.

"This is no place for you, General Lee!" he cried.  "Go to the rear!"

Lee did not yet turn, and Gordon shouted:

"These men are Virginians and Georgians who have never failed.  Go
back, I entreat you!"

Then Gordon turned to the troops and cried, as he rose on his toes in
his stirrups:

"Men, you will not fail now!"

Back came the answering shout:

"No!  No!" and the whole mass of troops burst into one thunderous,
echoing cry:

"Lee to the rear!  Lee to the rear!  Lee to the rear!"

Nor would they move until Lee turned and rode back.  Then, led by
Gordon, they charged straight upon their foe, who met them with an
equal valor. All day long the battle of Spottsylvania, equal in
fierceness and desperation to that of the Wilderness, swayed to and
fro.  To Harry as he remembered them they were much alike.  Charge and
defense, defense and charge.  Here they gained a little, and there they
lost a little. Now they were stumbling through sanguinary thickets, and
then they rushed across little streams that ran red.

The firing was rapid and furious to an extraordinary degree.  The air
rained shell and bullets.  Areas of forest between the two armies were
mowed down.  More than one large tree was cut through entirely by rifle
bullets.  Other trees here, as in the Wilderness, caught fire and
flamed high.

Midnight put an end to the battle, with neither gaining the victory and
both claiming it.  Harry had lost another horse, killed under him, and
now he walked almost dazed over the terrible field of Spottsylvania,
where nearly thirty thousand men had fallen, and nothing had yet been
decided.

Yet in Harry's heart the fear of the grim and silent Grant was growing.
The Northern general had fought within a few days two battles, each the
equal of Waterloo, and Harry felt sure that he was preparing for a
third. The combat of the giants was not over, and with an anxious soul
he waited the next dawn.  They remained some days longer in the
Wilderness, or the country adjacent to it, and there was much
skirmishing and firing of heavy artillery, but the third great pitched
battle did not come quite as soon as Harry expected.  Even Grant,
appalled by the slaughter, hesitated and began to maneuver again by the
flank to get past Lee.  Then the fighting between the skirmishers and
heavy detached parties became continuous.

During the days that immediately followed Harry was much with
Sherburne. The brave colonel was one of Stuart's most trusted officers.
Despite the forests and thickets there was much work for the cavalry to
do, while the two armies circled and circled, each seeking to get the
advantage of the other.

Sheridan, they heard, was trying to curve about with his horsemen and
reach Richmond, and Stuart, with his cavalry, including Sherburne's,
was sent to intercept him, Harry riding by Sherburne's side.  It was
near the close of May, but the air was cool and pleasant, a delight to
breathe after the awful Wilderness.

Stuart, despite his small numbers, was in his gayest spirits, and when
he overtook the enemy at a little place called Yellow Tavern he
attacked with all his customary fire and vigor.  In the height of the
charge, Harry saw him sink suddenly from his horse, shot through the
body. He died not long afterward and the greatest and most brilliant
horseman of the South passed away to join Jackson and so many who had
gone before. Harry was one of the little group who carried the news to
Lee, and he saw how deeply the great leader was affected.  So many of
his brave generals had fallen that he was like the head of a family,
bereft.

Nevertheless the lion still at bay was great and terrible to strike. It
was barely two weeks after Spottsylvania when Lee took up a strong
position at Cold Harbor, and Grant, confident in his numbers and
powerful artillery, attacked straightaway at dawn.

Harry was in front during that half-hour, the most terrible ever seen
on the American continent, when Northern brigade after brigade charged
to certain death.  Lee's men, behind their earthworks, swept the field
with a fire in which nothing could live.  The charging columns fairly
melted away before them and when the half-hour was over more than
twelve thousand men in blue lay upon the red field.

Grant himself was appalled, and the North, which had begun to
anticipate a quick and victorious end of the war, concealed its
disappointment as best it could, and prepared for another campaign.

Grant and Lee, facing each other, went into trenches along the lines of
Cold Harbor, and the hopes of the young Southern soldiers after the
victory there rose anew.  But Harry was not too sanguine, although he
kept his thoughts to himself.

The officers of the Invincibles had recovered from their wounds, and
Colonel Leonidas Talbot and Lieutenant-Colonel Hector St. Hilaire,
sitting in a trench, resumed their game of chess.

Colonel Talbot took a pawn, the first man captured by either since
early spring.

"That was quite a victory," he said.

"Not important!  Not important, Leonidas!"

"And why not, Hector?"

"Because you've left the way to your king easier.  I shall promptly
move along that road."

"As Grant moved through the Wilderness."

"Don't depreciate Grant, Leonidas.  He never stops pounding.  We've
fought two great battles with him in the Wilderness and a third at Cold
Harbor, but he's still out there facing us.  Can't you see the Yankees
with your glasses, Harry?"

"Yes, sir, quite clearly.  They're about to fire a shot from a big gun
in a wood.  There it goes!"

The deep note of the cannon came to them, passed on, and then rolled
back in echoes like a threat.




Appendix: Transcription notes:

The following modifications were applied while transcribing the printed
book to etext:

 Chapter 1
   Page 6, para 1, change "criticise" to "criticize", for consistency
   Page 20, para 6, fix typo, "calvaryman"
   Page 21, para 8, change "things" to "thing"

 Chapter 2
   Page 35, para 2, add missing hyphen in "commander-in-chief"

 Chapter 3
   Page 48, para 1, change "where-ever" to "wherever"
   Page 49, para 2, fix typo, period should be comma
   Page 49, para 2, change "gaints" to "giants", which is my best guess
     as to what it should be

 Chapter 4
   Page 74, para 7, add missing period

 Chapter 7
   Page 124, para 6, fix typo "qouth"
   Page 132, para 14, "Pleasonton" should be "Pleasanton"

 Chapter 10
   Page 182, para 5, add missing close-quotes

 Chapter 11
   Page 208, para 6, add missing close-quotes

 Chapter 12
   Page 229, para 3, fix typo, "dulplicate"

 Chapter 13
   Page 245, para 3, change "with" to "was"

 Chapter 14
   Page 260, para 2, removed a badly-misplaced comma

 Chapter 16
   Page 301, para 4, moved a badly-misplaced comma

Chapter 2, page 34, para 3 contains the phrase "rest and realization".
Probably should be "relaxation", but maybe not, so I left it as is.

The following words were printed with accented vowels or with the "ae"
ligature, but these few occurrences hardly warrant an 8-bit version of
the text:
  cooperation  fete  reentered  Plataea  Thermopylae

As with all the books in this series, there are many instances where
commas seem to be missing or misplaced, but, except as noted above, I
refrained from "fixing" these.






