
"Father Drouillard!" he exclaimed. "I believed you to be in Canada! I
did not think there was any duty that could call you to the vale of
Onondaga!"

The stern face of the priest relaxed into a slight smile. This youth,
though of the hostile race, was handsome and winning, and as Father
Drouillard knew, he had a good heart.

"Holy Church sends us, its servants, poor and weak though we may be, on
far and different errands," he said. "We seek the wheat even among the
stones, and there are those, here in the vale of Onondaga itself, who
watch for my coming."

Robert recalled that there were Catholic converts among the Onondagas, a
fact that he had forgotten for the time, and he realized at once what a
powerful factor Father Drouillard would be in the fight against him.

"The Chevalier de St. Luc has been here for some time," he said,
"waiting until the fifty sachems are ready to hear him in council, when
he will speak for France. Mr. Willet and I are also waiting to speak for
England. But the Chevalier de St. Luc and I are the best of friends, and
I hope, Father Drouillard, that you, who have come also to uphold the
cause of France, will not look upon me as an enemy, but as one,
unfitting though he may be, who wishes to do what he can for his
country."

Father Drouillard smiled again.

"Ah, my son," he said, "you are a good lad. You bore yourself well in
Quebec, and I have naught against you, save that you are not of our
race."

"And for that, reverend sir, you cannot blame me."

Father Drouillard smiled for the third time. It was not often that he
smiled three times in one day, and again he reflected that this was a
handsome and most winning lad.

"Peace, my son!" he said. "Protestant you are and Catholic am I, English
you are and French am I, but no ill wind can ever blow between you and
me. We are but little children in the hands of the Omnipotent and we can
only await His decree."

Robert told Willet a little later that Father Drouillard had come, and
the hunter looked very grave.

"Our task has doubled," he said. "Now we fight both St. Luc and Father
Drouillard, the army and the church."




CHAPTER XVI

THE GREAT TEST


While Robert and Willet had been glad hitherto that the council of the
fifty sachems had delayed its meeting, they were anxious, now that
Father Drouillard had come, to hasten it. That the army and the church,
that is the French army and the French church, were in close alliance,
they soon had full proof. The priest and the chevalier were much
together, and Robert caught an occasional flash of exultation in St.
Luc's eyes.

The new influence was visible also among a minority of the Onondagas.
The faith of the converts was very strong, and Father Drouillard was to
them not only a teacher but an emblem also, and through him, a
Frenchman, they looked upon France as the chosen country of the new God
whom they worshiped. And Father Drouillard never worked harder than in
those fateful days. His thin face grew thinner, and his lean figure
leaner, but the fire in his eyes burned brighter. The fifty sachems said
nothing. Whether they were for the priest or against him, they never
interfered with his energies, because without exception they respected
one who they knew sought nothing for himself, who could endure hardship,
privation and even torture as well as they, and who also had the gift
of powerful and persuasive speech.

The other nations too, except one, listened to him, though less than the
Onondagas. The fierce and warlike Mohawks would have none of him, nor
would they allow St. Luc to speak to them. Never could a single Mohawk
warrior forget that Stadacona was theirs, though generations ago it had
become French Quebec. They recalled with delight the numerous raids they
had made into Canada, and their many wars with the French. Robert saw
that one nation, and it was the one standing on an equality with the
Onondagas, was irreconcilable. When the council met the nine sachems of
the Mohawks, and their names would be called first, would prove
themselves to the last man the bitter and implacable enemies of the
French. So, feeling that he was right and loving his own country as much
as the priest and the chevalier loved theirs, he deftly worked upon the
minds of the Mohawks. He talked to the fiery young chief, Daganoweda, of
lost Stadacona that he had seen with his own eyes. He spoke of its great
situation on the lofty cliffs above the grandest of rivers, and he
described it as the strongest fortress in America. The spirit of the
young Mohawk responded readily. Robert's appeal was not made to
prejudice. He felt that truth and right were back of it. As he saw it,
the future of the Hodenosaunee lay with the English, the French could
never be their real friends, the long breach between Quebec and the vale
of Onondaga could not be healed.

He had an able and efficient assistant in Tayoga, who was devoted to
the alliance with the English and the Americans, and who was constantly
talking with the sachems and chiefs. Willet, too, who had a long
acquaintance with all the nations of the Hodenosaunee, and who had many
friends among them, used all his arts of persuasion, which were by no
means small, and thus the battle for the favor of the Iroquois went on.
The night before the council was to be held, Tayoga, his black eyes
flashing, came to Robert and the hunter and they talked together for a
long time.

The great council was held the next day in the grove devoted to that
purpose, the entire ceremony being Greek in its simplicity and dignity,
and in its surroundings. The fifty sachems, arrayed in their finest
robes, sat once more in a half circle, save that Tododaho, the Onondaga,
was slightly in front of the others, with Tonessaah at his elbow. The
nine Mohawk chiefs, fierce and implacable, sat close together, and long
before the appeals of England and France were begun Robert knew how they
would vote.

The effort that he would make had already taken definite shape in his
mind. He would be moderate, he would not ask the Hodenosaunee to fight
for the English and Americans, he would merely ask the great nations to
refuse the alliance of the French, and if they could not find it in
their hearts to take up the tomahawk for their old friends then to
remain at peace in their villages, while English and French fought for
the continent.

Spring was now far advanced. Robert had never seen the forest in deeper
green and he had never looked up to a bluer sky than the one that bent
over them, as they walked toward the council grove. His heart was
beating hard, but it was with excitement, not with fear. He knew that a
great test was before him, but his mind responded to it, in truth sprang
forward to meet it. The breeze that came down from the hills seemed to
whisper encouragement in his ears, and the words that he would speak
were already leaping to his lips.

A great crowd, men, women and children, was gathered about the grove,
and like the sachems they were clothed in their best. Brilliant red,
blue or yellow blankets gleamed in the sun's rays, and the beads on
leggings and moccasins of the softest tanned deerskin, flashed and
glittered. Robert, with his memories of the Albany school still fresh,
thought once more of the great Greek and Roman assemblies, where all the
people came to hear their orators discuss the causes that meant most.
And then his pulse leaped again and his confidence grew.

Tododaho spoke first, and when he rose there was a respectful silence
broken only by the murmurs of the wind or the heavy breathing of the
multitude. In a spirit of love and exhortation he addressed his people,
all of the six great nations. He told them that the mighty powers beyond
the sea, England and France, who with their children divided nearly the
whole world between them, were about to begin war with each other. The
lands occupied by both bordered upon the lands of the Hodenosaunee, and
the storm of battle would hover over all their castles and over the vale
of Onondaga. It was well for them to take long and anxious thought, and
to listen with attention to what the orators of the English and the
French would have to say.

Then Father Drouillard spoke for France. He made an impressive figure,
wrapped in his black robe, his eyes burning like coals of fire in his
thin, dead white face. Near him on the right, his Onondaga converts were
gathered, and he frequently looked at them as he told the fifty sachems
that France, the greatest and strongest son of Holy Church, was their
best friend, and their fitting ally. Such was the thread of his
discourse. He struck throughout the priestly note. He appealed not alone
to their sense of right in this world, but to the deeds they must do to
insure their entrance into the world to come. France alone could lead
them in the right path, she alone thought of their souls.

The priest spoke with intense fervor, using the tongue of the Indians
with the greatest clearness and purity. His sincerity was obvious.
Neither Robert nor Willet could doubt it for an instant, and they saw,
too, that it was making an impression. Deep murmurs of approval came
often from the converts, and now and then the whole multitude stirred in
agreement. But the fifty sachems, all except the nine Mohawks, sat as
expressionless as stones. The Mohawks did not move, but the stern,
accusing gaze they bent upon the priest never relaxed. As Robert had
foreseen, the most eloquent orator might talk a thousand years, and he
could never bring them a single inch toward France.

Willet followed the priest. He attempted no flights. He left the future
to itself and emphasized the present and the past. He recalled the
facts, so well known, that the English had always been their friends,
and the French always their enemies. The English had kept their treaties
with the Hodenosaunee, the French could not be trusted.

The hunter, too, received applause, much of it, and when he finished he
took his position in the audience beside Tayoga. Then the Chevalier de
St. Luc stood before the fifty sachems, as gallant and as handsome a
figure as one could find in either the Old World or the New, clothed in
a white uniform faced with gold, his hair powdered and tied in a knot,
his small sword, gold hilted, by his side.

The chevalier knew the children of the forest, and Robert recognized at
once in him an antagonist even more formidable than he had expected. His
appeal was to the lore of the woods and to valor. The French adapted
themselves to the ways of the forest. They practiced the customs of the
Indians, lived with them and often married their women. They could grow
and flourish together, while the Englishmen and the Bostonnais held
themselves aloof from the red men, and pretended to be their superiors.
The French soldier and the Indian warrior had much in common, side by
side they were invincible, and together they could drive the English
into the sea, giving back to the red races the lands they had lost.

He was a graceful and impassioned speaker, and he, too, made his
impression. The principal point of his theme, that the French alone
fraternized with the Indians, was good and all were familiar with the
fact. He returned to it continually, and when he sat down the applause
was louder than it had been for either Willet or the priest. It was
evident that he had made a strong appeal, and the Onondaga and Seneca
sachems regarded him with a certain degree of favor, but the nine fierce
and implacable Mohawk sachems did not unbend a particle.

Then Robert rose. Despite the fewness of his years, the times and hard
circumstance had given him wisdom. He was surcharged, too, with emotion.
He was yet an Iroquois for the time being, despite his white face. He
still saw as they saw, and felt as they felt, and while he wished them
to take the side of Britain and the British colonies, or at least not
join the side of France and the French colonies, he was moved, too, by a
deep personal sympathy. The fortunes of the Hodenosaunee were dear to
him. He had been adopted into the great League. Tayoga, as the red
people saw it, was his brother in more than blood.

He trembled a little with emotion as he looked upon the grave
half-circle of the fifty sachems, and the clustering chiefs behind them,
and then upon the people, the old men, the warriors, the women and the
children. As he saw them, they were friendly. They knew him to be one of
them by all the sacred rites of adoption, they knew that he had fought
by the side of the great young warrior Tayoga of the clan of the Bear,
of the nation Onondaga, of the mighty League of the Hodenosaunee, and
after the momentary silence a deep murmur of admiration for the lithe,
athletic young figure, and the frank, open face, ran through the
multitude.

He spoke with glowing zeal and in a clear, beautiful voice that carried
like a trumpet. After the first minute, all embarrassment and hesitation
passed away, and his gift shone, resplendent. The freshness and fervor
of youth were added to the logic and power of maturer years, and golden
words flowed from his lips. The Indians, always susceptible to oratory,
leaned forward, attentive and eager. The eyes of the fifty sachems began
to shine and the fierce and implacable Mohawks, who would not relax a
particle for any of the others, nodded with approval, as the speaker
played upon the strings of their hearts.

He dwelled less upon the friendship of the English than upon the
hostility of the French. He knew that Champlain and Frontenac were far
away in time, but near in the feelings of the Hodenosaunee, especially
the Mohawks, the warlike Keepers of the Eastern Gate. He said that while
the French had often lived with the Indians, and sometimes had married
Indian women, it was not with the nations of the Hodenosaunee, but with
their enemies, Huron, Caughnawaga, St. Regis, Ojibway and other savages
of the far west. Onontio could not be the friend of their foes and their
friends also. Manitou had never given to any man the power to carry
water on both shoulders in such a manner.

The promises of the French to the great nations of the League had never
been kept. He and Willet, the hunter whom they called the Great Bear,
and the brave young warrior, Tayoga, whom they all knew, had just
returned from the Stadacona of the Mohawks, which the French had seized,
and where they had built their capital, calling it Quebec. They had
covered it with stone buildings, palaces, fortresses and churches, but,
in truth and right, it was still the Stadacona of the Mohawks. When
Tayoga and Willet and he walked there, they saw the shades of the great
Mohawk sachems of long ago, come down from the great shining stars on
which they now lived, to confound the French, and to tell the children
of the Ganeagaono never to trust them.

Stirred beyond control, a fierce shout burst from the nine Mohawk
sachems. It was the first time within the memory of the council that any
of its members had given evidence of feeling, while a question lay
before it, but their cry touched a common chord of sympathy. Applause
swept the crowd, and then, deep silence coming again, the orator
continued, his fervor and power increasing as he knew now that all the
nations of the Hodenosaunee were with him.

He enlarged upon his theme. He showed to them what a victorious France
would do. If Quebec prevailed, the fair promises the priest and the
chevalier had made to the Hodenosaunee would be forgotten. Even as the
Mohawks had lost Quebec and other villages they would lose now their
castles, the Upper, the Lower and the Middle, the Cayugas and the
Oneidas would be crushed, and with them their new brethren the
Tuscaroras. The French would burst with fire and sword into the sacred
vale of Onondaga itself, they would cut down the council grove and burn
the Long House, then their armies would go forth to destroy the Senecas,
the Keepers of the Western Gate.

The thousands, swayed by uncontrollable emotion, sprang to their feet
and a tremendous shout burst from them all. St. Luc, seeing the
Hodenosaunee slipping from his hands and from those of France, leaped
up, unable to contain himself, and cried:

"Do not listen to him! Do not listen to him! What he says cannot come to
pass!"

The people were in a turmoil, and the council strove in vain for order,
but the young speaker raised his hand and silence came again.

"The Chevalier de St. Luc and Father Drouillard, who have spoken to you
in behalf of France, are brave and good men," he said, "but they cannot
control the acts of their country. They tell you what I say cannot come
to pass, but I tell you that it can come to pass, and what is more it
has come to pass. Behold!"

He took from beneath his deerskin tunic a tomahawk, large and keen, and
held it up. Its shining blade was stained red with the blood of a human
being. The silence was now so intense that it became heavy and
oppressive. Everyone in the crowd expected something startling to
follow, and they were right.

He swung the tomahawk about in a circle that all might see it, and the
blood upon its blade. His feeling for the dramatic was strong upon him,
and he knew that the right moment had come.

"Do you know whose tomahawk this is?" he cried.

The crowd was silent and waiting.

"It is the tomahawk of Tandakora, the Ojibway, the friend and ally of
the French."

A fierce shout like a peal of thunder from the crowd, and then the same
intense, waiting silence.

"Do you know whose blood stains the tomahawk of Tandakora, the Ojibway,
the friend and ally of the French?"

A deep breath from the crowd.

"It is the blood of Hosahaho, the Onondaga. You knew him well, one of
your swiftest runners, a skillful hunter, a great warrior, one who lived
a truthful and upright life before the face of Manitou. But he is gone.
Three nights ago, Tandakora, the Ojibway, the friend and ally of the
French, with a band of his treacherous men, foully murdered him in
ambush. But other Onondagas came, and Tandakora and his band had to flee
so fast that he could not regain his tomahawk. It has been brought to
the vale of Onondaga by those who saw Tandakora, but who could not
overtake him. It was given by them to Tayoga, whom all of you know and
honor, and he has given it to me as proof of the faith of Onontio.
Tandakora and Onontio are brothers. What Tandakora does Onontio does
also, and the bright blood of Hosahaho, the Onondaga, that stains the
tomahawk of Tandakora, the Ojibway, was shed by Onontio as well as
Tandakora. Behold! Here are the promises of Onontio, written red in the
blood of your brother!"

An immense tumult followed, but presently Tododaho, first among the
sachems, rose and stilled it with uplifted hands. Turning his eyes upon
Robert, he said:

"You have spoken well, O Dagaeoga, and you have shown the proof of your
words. Never will the great nations of the Hodenosaunee be the friends
of the French. There is too much blood between us."

Then, turning to Chevalier de St. Luc and Father Drouillard, he said:

"Go you back to Quebec and tell Onontio that he cannot come to us with
promises in one hand and murder in the other. Our young men will guard
you and see that you are safe, until you pass out of our lands. Go!
Through me the fifty sachems speak for the great League of the
