"That's true. We must hang together."

"I hope not," replied Pelham, laughing. "We have got into this scrape,
and we must get out of it."

"Suppose the captain or the second lieutenant should make the signs to
one of our fellows, and he should tell what we were going to do."

"I told all my recruits not to answer any signs now, whoever made
them."

"I did the same, when I found the captain knew them."

"Then we are safe; but the silver pitcher must be forthcoming."

"The fellows will all be glad enough to get out of this scrape by paying
ten shillings."

"Very well; then every one of them must sign an order on Mr. Lowington
for ten shillings, payable to Dr. Winstock," added Pelham.

"They will do it. Are you sure nothing has leaked out?"

"Very sure; there would have been a tremendous commotion before this
time, if our real object had been even suspected."

"No doubt of that."

"After all, Shuffles, do you really think we intended to take the ship?"

"I did; I know that."

"I don't believe I did," said the fourth lieutenant. "Nothing seemed
exactly real to me, until I went overboard."

"It was more real to me then than ever before," replied Shuffles. "What
shall we do with the Chain now?"

"Nothing; we may want to use it again, some time. Let every fellow keep
still. When the principal gets his silver pitcher, which the doctor will
procure as soon as he can go up to Cork, he will think the members of
the Chain are the best fellows on board."

"I think you have sold the whole of us, Pelham," continued Shuffles,
with a sheepish smile. "Here's the end of the Chain----"

"Yes, and we may be thankful that it isn't the end of a rope instead of
a chain," laughed Pelham. "The penalty of mutiny is death."

"I have had no fear of that; it would have been regarded only as a lark.
But it is really amusing to think where we have come out," added
Shuffles. "We formed the 'Chain' because Lowington was tyrannical; most
of the fellows joined it because he took their money from them."

"Precisely so."

"And we are going to end it by giving Lowington a silver pitcher, in
token of our respect and esteem!"

"In other words, Shuffles, we have played this game, and whipped out
each other, without any help from the principal. It was mean business--I
really think so; and while we were trying to overreach each other, the
game slipped through our fingers. I am really grateful when I think what
an awful scrape we have avoided."

"Perhaps you are right," replied Shuffles, thoughtfully; "but there was
fun in the scheme."

"There might have been, if we had succeeded; but it would have been
anything but fun if we had failed. Some of us would have found quarters
in the brig, and we should not have been allowed to go on shore when we
reached Queenstown."

"A fellow won't want to go on shore without any money," growled
Shuffles, who was not wholly cured of his discontent.

"Since I went overboard I have been thinking a great deal of this
matter. I have come to the conclusion that Mr. Lowington is not the
worst man in the world."

"He is harsh and tyrannical."

"I don't think he ought to have taken our money from us; but I judge him
from all his acts, not by one alone."

Pelham seemed to have turned over a new leaf, and to be sincerely sorry
for his attitude of rebellion. Shuffles was not to be convinced; he was
to be overwhelmed in another manner.

The rivals separated, with their differences removed and with full
confidence in each other. Pelham wrote thirty-one orders on the
principal for ten shillings each, in favor of the surgeon, during his
off-time on that day, which were to be signed and handed to Paul
Kendall. As opportunity occurred, the "situation" was explained to the
members of the League; and though many of them growled at the idea of
giving a present to Mr. Lowington for taking their money from them, not
one of them refused to sign the orders; none of them dared to refuse.

In due time Dr. Winstock had possession of all these little drafts,
amounting in the aggregate to fifteen pounds, ten shillings, which would
purchase quite a respectable piece of plate. Paul Kendall was the
happiest student on board, for the presentation heralded the era of good
feeling. The League was virtually dead for the present, if not forever.
The inherent evil of the organization, with the bickerings and bad
passions of its members, had killed it--the turtle had swallowed his own
head.

The weather continued fine; the routine of ship's duty and the studies
went on without interruption. On the twenty-fourth day out, at three
bells in the afternoon watch, a tremendous excitement was created on
board.

"Land on the port bow!" shouted one of the crew, who had been stationed
on the fore yard-arm as a lookout.

All on deck sprang into the rigging, to get a sight of the welcome
shore. It looked like a fog bank in the distance; there was really
nothing to be seen, but the fact that the ship was in sight of land was
enough to create an excitement among the boys.

At three bells, in the first dog watch, the land was distinctly visible.
It was the Island of Dursey, and was now seen on the beam, while other
land appeared in sight ahead. It was Sunday, and all hands were at
liberty to enjoy this first view of the new continent. The boys thought
the land looked just like that they had last seen on the shore of the
western continent, and perhaps some of them were disappointed because
everything looked so natural.

The officers and crew were impatient to make their destined port; but
the wind subsided as the sun went down on that quiet Sabbath day on the
ocean. The ship hardly made twenty miles before daylight in the morning.

At eight o'clock, on Monday, when Paul Kendall had the deck, the Young
America was off Fastnet Rock, and not more than half a mile from it. It
is about ten miles from Cape Clear, and is a solitary rock rising out of
the sea, on which a lighthouse is located. The water around it was
covered with small boats engaged in fishing. The port watch were all on
deck, and the scene was full of interest to them. The people whom they
saw belonged to another continent than that in which they lived. All was
new and strange to them, and all were interested in observing the
distant shore, and the objects near the ship.

At one bell in the afternoon watch, when the Young America was off Gally
Head, all hands were piped to muster. Mr. Lowington, on taking the
rostrum, said that he had received a petition signed by a majority of
the officers and crew.

"A petition to go ashore, I suppose," said Shuffles to Pelham.

"I think not," laughed the fourth lieutenant, who appeared to know what
was coming.

"Young gentlemen," continued the principal, whose face wore an unusually
pleasant smile, "a few days since you were all filled with admiration at
the noble conduct of one of your number, who saved the life of another
at the peril of his own."

"Want to go ashore, Shuffles?" whispered Pelham.

Shuffles was too much confused to make any reply; he did not know
whether he was to be praised or blamed.

"I have received a petition, requesting me to appoint Robert Shuffles
second lieutenant of the ship, in place of Paul Kendall, resigned,"
added Mr. Lowington.

Shuffles was overwhelmed with astonishment, and a large proportion of
the students received the announcement with hearty applause.

"Young gentlemen, I have only to say that the petition is granted. I
ought to add, however, that no officer will lose his rank, except Mr.
Kendall, who, at his own desire, will take the vacant number in the
steerage, now belonging to Robert Shuffles, promoted. I take great
pleasure in granting this petition, because the request is honorable to
you, and shows a proper appreciation of the noble conduct of your
shipmate. But let me add, that you should divide your admiration between
the one who rescued his friend from death, and him who voluntarily
resigned his honorable position in the after cabin, in order to make a
place in which merit could be acknowledged and rewarded. Nothing but a
matter of life and death could have induced me to vary the discipline of
the ship. Young gentlemen, you are dismissed from muster."

"Three cheers for Paul Kendall!" shouted one of the boys.

They were given.

"Three cheers for Robert Shuffles!" added Paul; and they were given.

"Mr. Shuffles will repair to the after cabin, where he will be
qualified, and take his position at once."

"Mr. Lowington, I must decline Mr. Kendall's generous offer," interposed
Shuffles, who was actually choking with emotion.

"This matter has been well considered, Shuffles," replied the principal;
"and as it is the desire of a large majority of your shipmates that you
should accept the position, I think you had better do so."

"There isn't a student in the ship who desires it so much as I do,"
added Paul, with generous enthusiasm "You know I told you I would like
to be in the steerage, for I have always been an officer."

"Allow me till to-night, if you please, to consider it, Mr. Lowington,"
replied Shuffles, as he grasped the hand of Paul.

"Certainly, if you desire it."

Shuffles was overwhelmed by the magnanimity of Paul and the kindness of
the principal. At that moment he would have given everything to be such
a young man as the second lieutenant; to be as good and true, as free
from evil thoughts and evil purposes, as he was. A light had dawned upon
the rebel and the plotter which he had never seen before. Goodness and
truth had vindicated themselves, and overwhelmed the guilty one.

"Mr. Shuffles, I congratulate you on your promotion," said the chaplain,
extending his hand.

"I cannot accept it, sir," replied the repentant malcontent "I would
like to speak with you alone, Mr. Agneau."

The chaplain took him to his state room in the main cabin? and there,
Shuffles, conquered and subdued by the kindness of his friends,
confessed the terrible crime he had committed--that he had pushed Pelham
overboard.

The chaplain was confounded at this confession, but still more so when
the self-convicted conspirator revealed all the secrets of "The Chain."
Shuffles mentioned no names; he took all the guilt upon himself.

"I am astonished, my dear young friend," said the chaplain. "Is it
possible the life you saved was imperilled by your own violent
passions?"

"It is true, sir," replied Shuffles, hardly able to control his
feelings.

"Then I think you had better not accept the promotion that has been
offered to you."

"I will not; I would jump overboard first. I am willing to be punished;
I deserve it."

"Shuffles, you have almost atoned for your errors by confessing them;
and your courageous conduct, after you had pushed Pelham into the sea,
proves that you sincerely repented that act. Shall I tell Mr. Lowington
what you have said?"

"Yes, sir; let him know me as I am; let him despise me as I deserve,"
replied Shuffles, wiping away a genuine tear of repentance.

Mr. Agneau talked to the penitent for two hours; and finally he prayed
with him and for him. If never before, the moral condition of the
culprit was now hopeful, and the chaplain labored earnestly and
faithfully to give him right views of his relations to God and his
fellow-beings.

"Paul," said Shuffles, when he met his generous and self-sacrificing
friend in the waist, after the conference in the state room, "I am the
meanest and vilest fellow on board."

"No, you are not!" exclaimed Paul.

"I would give the world to be like you."

"No, no! You wrong yourself, and overdo me."

"I have confessed all to the chaplain, and you will soon know me as I
am, Paul. I will not take your place in the cabin. Your kindness and
generosity have overcome me. You have convinced me that doing right is
always the best way."

Paul did not know what to make of this remarkable confession; but, after
supper, all hands were piped to muster again, the ship being off Kinsale
Head, nearly becalmed. The chaplain had informed the principal of the
substance of Shuffles' confession. Mr. Lowington laughed at "The Chain
League," the signs and the passwords, and regarded the mutiny as a
matter of little consequence. He did not believe that Shuffles or his
followers, had really intended to take the ship. The project was too
monstrous to be credible. The fact that the conspirator had attempted
the life of his companion was a grave matter, and it was treated as
such. Mr. Agneau was entirely confident of the sincerity of the
culprit's repentance. Shuffles had refused to take the proffered
promotion, which was abundant evidence that he was in earnest.

The penitent was sent for, and repeated his confession to the principal.
He did not ask to be exempted from punishment; but he did ask to be
forgiven. He was forgiven; but when the crew were piped to muster all
the particulars of the intended mutiny were exposed to the astonished
"outsiders." Paul understood it now. Mr. Lowington ridiculed the mutiny;
but he spoke very seriously of the consequences of insubordination.

"Young gentlemen, Shuffles has not mentioned the name of a single
student in connection with this silly conspiracy; he has asked to be
excused from doing so. I grant his request, and I hope that all who have
engaged in the affair are as sincerely sorry for their connection with
it as he is. Under the circumstances, Shuffles will not be promoted.
Young gentlemen, you are dismissed."

"Shuffles was a good fellow to keep us in the dark," whispered Sanborn
to Wilton.

"Keep still," replied Wilton. "We are lucky to get out of the scrape on
any terms."

So thought all of them; and it was certainly magnanimous on the part of
the chief conspirator to be willing to assume all the guilt, and suffer
all the punishment. There was enough of good in Shuffles to save him
from the evil of his nature.

"Paul, there is one more thing I must tell you," said Shuffles, that
evening, while the ship lay becalmed off Kinsale. "You remember when I
told you about the gambling in the steerage?"

"I do."

"I was deceiving you then. I only exposed the fellows in order to make
trouble. I knew that the students would be closely watched, and the
rules more strictly enforced, which would make them mad."

"What did you want to make them mad for?"

"So that they would join the League."

"Well, you did a good thing for the ship and for the fellows, if your
motives were not good," replied Paul. "It was good out of evil, any
way."

"I don't think half so many fellows would have joined if Mr. Lowington
hadn't taken their money from them."

"Have you seen any gambling since?"

"Not a bit of it, Paul."

"I am glad to know that."

"One thing more; you know all the members of the League, Paul."

"I?"

"Yes? you have their names on the orders, for ten shillings each."

"So I have; but we will make a general affair of the presentation, and
that will cover up the whole of them."

"Thank you, Paul. You despise me as much as I like and respect you."

"I don't despise you, Shuffles. You have done wrong, but I respect you
for undoing the evil you had meditated. We are all weak and erring, and
we can't afford to despise any one. On the contrary I like you," replied
Paul, giving Shuffles his hand.

"You treat me better than I deserve, Paul; but if you are my friend, I
shall be all the better for it; and I hope you will not be worse."

The end of the conspiracy had been reached. Before the ship came to
anchor in the Cove, every boy on board had drawn his order on the
principal for ten shillings, and the members of the League were veiled
beneath the mass of names.

At sunrise, on Tuesday morning, the ship had a gentle breeze; and at
three bells in the forenoon watch, she was off Roches Point, with the
Union Jack at the foremast-head, as a signal for a pilot. On this
exciting occasion, the studies and recitations were suspended to enable
all the students to see the shores, and enjoy the scene. The pilot made
his appearance, gave Mr. Lowington the latest Cork papers, and took
charge of the ship. The honest Irishman was not a little surprised to
find the vessel manned "wid nothing in the wide wurld but by's;" but he
found they were good seamen.

The Young America ran into the beautiful bay through the narrow opening,
