Mr. Barker glanced at his wife, as Kate used the young officer's
Christian name; but she was not thinking of Captain Whitney of the
police, but of the boy Reuben, who had been accused of poisoning
her father's dog, and of committing a burglary from his house.

"You had better get up in front, with the constable, Miss Ellison,"
the settler said, when the two wounded men had been placed in the
cart. "You certainly are not fit to ride.

"Or, look here, the constable shall take my horse, and I will
drive; and then I can look after you, and you can use me for a
prop, if you feel weak; but before we start, I must insist on your
taking a sip of brandy and water.

"It is no use your saying no," he persisted, as the girl shook her
head. "We shall have you fainting before you get home, if you
don't."

Kate did as she was ordered. Mr. Barker then helped her up to her
seat. As she got up, her eyes fell upon Reuben's face.

"Oh, Mr. Barker!" she said. "He looks dead. You are not deceiving
me, are you?"

"Bless me, no!" the settler said, cheerfully. "My opinion is that
he's dead asleep. The loss of blood, the sudden reaction after the
long excitement, and the exhaustion of his ride have completely
overcome him; and my opinion is that he is sound asleep.

"Jim, do you lead your master's horse, while the constable takes
the other; and then you two had better ride on, and help Mrs.
Donald get things ready. Get a bed up at once, for Captain Whitney;
and get some clean straw in the outhouse, with one of the rugs over
it, for the other."

So saying, he touched the horse with the whip, and the cart moved
slowly on, with Mrs. Barker riding beside it. She would have gone
on ahead, to have assisted in the preparations; but she expected,
momentarily, to see Kate faint, and thought it better to remain
with her, in case her assistance should be required.

The journey occupied some time, for Mr. Barker picked the way
carefully, so as not to jolt the cart. Mrs. Barker endeavoured to
keep Kate's attention fixed, by asking her questions as to what she
had heard about the expedition, wondering when it would return, and
whether any of the settlers were hurt. When they got within half a
mile of home, she said:

"I think, dear, you are looking a little better now. I will ride
on. Fortunately there is the beef tea we made, last night, for Mr.
Donald. I will get it made hot, and I will get a cup of strong tea
ready for you. That will do wonders."

When the cart arrived Mrs. Donald ran out and, as Kate descended,
clasped her in a long embrace.

"Come straight in here, my dear," Mrs. Barker said. "I have got a
basin of cold water, and a cup of strong tea, and the two together
will do marvels. We will attend to your wounded hero."

Reuben remained perfectly quiet and inert, as he was lifted out and
carried into the house, where a bed had been made up for him in a
room on the ground floor.

"Just lay him down. Throw a blanket over him, and let him lie
perfectly quiet."

"Do you think he is really asleep?" Mrs. Barker asked, as she
looked at the quiet face.

"I do, really," her husband replied. "Put your ear close to his
mouth. He is breathing as quietly as a child.

"And," he added, placing his fingers on Reuben's wrist, "his pulse
is a little fast, but regular and quiet. Twenty-four hours of sleep
will set him up again, unless I am greatly mistaken. I don't expect
that his wound will turn out anything very serious.

"Let me think. Was it not this afternoon that Ruskin said he would
be back again?"

"Yes, either yesterday or today."

"That is lucky. He will be surprised at finding two new patients on
his hands, now.

"I will go and have a look at that poor wretch in the shed. Give me
a cupful of beef tea. I will pour a spoonful or two between his
lips. You had better go and look after Kate. You will not be needed
here, at present.

"If your master wakes, Jim, let us know directly," he said to the
black, who had seated himself on the ground by the side of Reuben's
bed.

"I can't call the poor fellow away from his master," he added to
his wife, as he closed the door behind them; "but I am really
anxious to know what has taken place, out in the bush; and whether
many of our fellows have been killed. If, as Kate said, she heard
the captain tell the bush ranger that all his band had been killed,
except one who is a prisoner, it has indeed been a most successful
expedition; and we colonists can hardly be sufficiently grateful,
to Whitney, for having rid us of these pests. What with that, and
the thrashing the blacks have had, we shall be able to sleep
quietly for months; which is more than we have done for a long
time."

Kate came out of the room, with Mrs. Donald, a minute later. The
basin of cold water and the tea had had the effect Mrs. Barker
predicted. A little colour had returned into her cheeks, and she
looked altogether more like herself.

"How is he?" Mrs. Donald asked.

"In my opinion, he's doing capitally, Mrs. Donald. His pulse is
quiet and even, and he's breathing as quietly as a child; and I
believe he is simply in a state of exhaustion, from which he is not
likely to wake till tomorrow morning; and I predict that, in a few
days, he will be up and about. Indeed, if that bullet hasn't
misbehaved itself, I see no reason why he shouldn't be up
tomorrow."

"That is indeed a relief, to us both," Mrs. Donald said, while Kate
could only clasp her hands in silent thankfulness.

"And now, how is your husband? I hope he is none the worse, for all
this exertion."

"He was terribly agitated, at first," Mrs. Donald said. "I fainted,
you know, and he got out of bed to help me up; and it was as much
as I could do, when I recovered, to get him to lie down; for he
wanted to mount and ride after Kate, although, of course, he is as
weak as a child, and even with my help he could scarcely get into
bed again.

"Fortunately Mrs. Barker ran in, before she started on horseback to
fetch you, to say that the constable was off in pursuit, and that
quieted him. Then I think he was occupied in trying to cheer me,
for as soon as he was in bed I broke down and cried; till the
constable came back to say that Captain Whitney had overtaken, and
shot, the bush ranger."

Three hours later, to the great relief of all, the surgeon arrived.
He was first taken in to look at Reuben, having been told all the
circumstances of the case; and he confirmed Mr. Barker's opinion
that he was really in a deep sleep.

"I would not wake him, on any account," he said. "It is a great
effort of nature, and he will, I hope, awake quite himself. Of
course, I can't say anything about the wound, till he does.

"Now for his antagonist."

The bush ranger was still unconscious, though occasionally broken
words came from his lips. The surgeon examined his wound.

"He is shot through the lungs," he said, "and is bleeding
internally. I do not think that there is the shadow of a chance for
him, and no one can wish it otherwise. It will only save the colony
the expense of his trial.

"And now for my original patient."

He was some time in Mr. Donald's room and, when he came out,
proceeded at once to mix him a soothing draught, from the case of
medicines he carried behind the saddle.

"We must get him off to sleep, if we can," he said; "or we shall
have him in a high state of fever, before morning. A man in his
state can't go through such excitement as he has done, without
paying the penalty.

"And now, I suppose, I have done," he said with a smile, as Mrs.
Donald left the room with the medicine.

"Yes, I think so," Mrs. Barker said. "If you had come an hour
earlier, I should have put this young lady under your charge; but I
think that the assurance of my husband, that Captain Whitney was
doing well, has been a better medicine than you could give her."

"No wonder she is shaken," Mr. Ruskin remarked.

"Mrs. Barker tells me you had a heavy fall, too, Miss Ellison."

"Yes," she replied. "I was stunned for a time but, beyond being
stiff and bruised, I am none the worse for it."

"Look here, Miss Ellison," the doctor said, after putting his
fingers on her wrist, "I suppose you will want to be about,
tomorrow, when our brave army returns. Now, there is nothing you
can do here. Mrs. Donald can nurse her husband. The other two
require no nursing. Mrs. Barker, I am sure, will take charge of the
house; and therefore, seriously, I would ask you to take this
draught I am about to mix for you, and to go upstairs and go to
bed, and sleep till morning."

"I could not sleep," Kate protested.

"Very well, then, lie quiet without sleeping; and if, in the
evening, you find you are restless, you can come down for an hour
or two; but I really must insist on your lying down for a bit.

"Now, Mrs. Barker, will you take this medicine up, and put this
young lady to bed."

"I hope she will get off to sleep," Mrs. Barker said, when she came
downstairs again.

"I have no doubt whatever about it," Mr. Ruskin replied. "I have
given her a very strong sleeping draught, far stronger than I
should think of giving, at any other time; but after the tension
that the poor girl must have gone through, it would need a strong
dose to take effect. I think you will hear nothing more of her,
till the morning."

Indeed, it was not until the sun was well up, the next morning,
that Kate Ellison woke. She could hardly believe that she had slept
all night; but the eastern sun, coming in through her window,
showed her that she had done so. She still felt bruised and shaken
all over, but was otherwise herself again. She dressed hastily, and
went downstairs.

"That's right, my dear," Mrs. Barker, who was already busy in the
kitchen, said. "You look bonny, and like yourself."

"How are my brother and Captain Whitney?" Kate asked.

"I don't think Mr. Donald is awake, yet," Mrs. Barker replied; "but
Captain Whitney has just gone out to the shed, with my husband and
the surgeon."

"Gone out to the shed!" Kate repeated, in astonishment.

"Yes, my dear. That poor wretch out there is going fast. He
recovered consciousness about two hours ago. The constable was
sitting up with him. He asked for water, and then lay for some
time, quite quiet.

"Then he said, 'Am I dreaming, or was it Reuben Whitney I fought
with?'

"'Yes, it was Captain Reuben Whitney, our inspector,' the constable
replied.

"For a time he lay quiet again, and then said: 'I want to see him.'

"The constable told him he was asleep, and couldn't be woke.

"'Is he badly wounded?' the man asked. 'I know I hit him.'

"'Not very badly, I hope,' the constable answered.

"'When he wakes ask him to come to me,' the man said. 'I know I am
dying, but I want to see him first. If he can't come, let somebody
else come.'

"The constable came in and roused the doctor, who went out and saw
him, and said he might live three or four hours yet.

"Soon afterwards, just as the sun rose, Jim came out, to say that
his master was awake. Mr. Ruskin went in to him and examined his
wound, and probed the course of the bullet. It had lodged down just
at the bottom of the shoulder bone. I am glad to say he was able to
get it out. When he had done, he told his patient what the bush
ranger had said; and Captain Whitney insisted upon going out to
him."

"It won't do him any harm, will it?" Kate asked anxiously.

"No, my dear, or Mr. Ruskin would not have let him go. I saw him as
he went out, and shook hands with him and, except that nasty
bandage over his face, he looked quite himself again. As I told
you, a broken collarbone is a mere nothing and, now we know where
the bullet went and have got it out, there is no occasion for the
slightest anxiety.

"Here they come again, so you can judge for yourself."

A very few words passed between Reuben and Kate; for Mrs. Barker,
who saw how nervous the girl was, at once began to ask him
questions about what the bush ranger had said.

"He has made a confession, Mrs. Barker, which your husband has
written down, and Mr. Ruskin and Smithson have signed. It is about
a very old story, in which I was concerned when a boy; but it is a
great gratification for me to have it cleared up, at last. I was
accused of poisoning a dog, belonging to Miss Ellison's father; and
was tried for a burglary, committed on the premises, and was
acquitted, thanks only to Miss Ellison's influence, exerted on my
behalf--

"I fear," he said with a slight smile, "somewhat illegally.

"However, the imputation would have rested on me all my life, if it
had not been for Thorne's confession. I thought that he did the
first affair. I knew that he was concerned in the second, although
I could not prove it; but he has now made a full confession, saying
that he himself poisoned the dog, and confirming the story I told
at the trial."

"Oh, I am glad!" Kate exclaimed. "You know, Captain Whitney, that I
was sure of your innocence; but I know how you must have longed for
it to be proved to the world.

"What will you do, Mr. Barker, to make it public?"

"I shall send a copy of the confession, properly attested, to the
magistrates of Lewes; and another copy to the paper which, Captain
Whitney tells me, is published there weekly.

"It is curious," he went on, "that the sight of Whitney should have
recalled those past recollections; while, so far as I could see,
everything that has happened afterwards, his career of crime and
the blood that he has shed, seem altogether forgotten."

"I suppose there is no hope for him?" Kate asked, in a low voice.

"He is dying now," Mr. Barker said. "Ruskin is with him. He was
fast becoming unconscious when we left him, and Ruskin said that
the end was at hand."

A quarter of an hour later the surgeon came in, with the news that
all was over.

"Now, Captain Whitney, you must come into your room, and let me
bandage up your shoulder properly. I hadn't half time to do it,
before."

"But you won't want me to lie in bed, or any nonsense of that
sort?" Reuben asked.

"I would, if I thought you would obey my orders; but as I see no
chance of that, I shall not trouble to give them. Seriously, I do
not think there is any necessity for it, providing always that you
will keep yourself very quiet. I shall bandage your arm across your
chest, so there can be no movement of the shoulder; and when that
is done, I think you will be all right."

There was only one more question which Reuben had to ask, with
regard to the event of the preceding day--why it was that Smithson
did not go to his comrade's assistance. He then learned that Thorne
rode quietly up to the back of the house and dismounted, then went
to the stable, where Smithson was asleep--having been on guard
during the night--and pushed a piece of wood under the latch of the
door, so that it could not be raised. Having thus securely fastened
Smithson in, he had gone to the front of the house, and had
apparently shot down the constable there before the latter was
aware of his presence.

Smithson, awakened by the shot, tried in vain to get out; and was
only released by Mrs. Barker, when she recovered from the effect of
the stunning blow which the bush ranger had struck her. He had then
mounted at once, and followed in pursuit.

In the afternoon the party returned from the bush, having
experienced no further molestation from the natives. Nothing
occurred to interfere with the progress of Reuben's wound and, in
the course of a fortnight, he was again able to resume his duties.

The complete destruction of the gang of bush rangers, and the
energy with which they had been pursued into the very heart of the
bush country, made a vast sensation in the colony; and Reuben
gained great credit, and instant promotion for his conduct.

A month after the return of the party from the bush, Mr. Donald was
about again and, as the danger was now past, he abandoned his idea
of selling his property. The course which events took can be judged
by the following conversation, between Mrs. Donald and her sister,
three months later.

"Well, Kate, after all he has done for us, of course I have nothing
to say against it; and I don't suppose you would mind, if I had.
Still, I do think you might have done better."

"I could not have done better," Kate said hotly, "not if I had had
the pick of the whole colony."

"Well, not in one way, my dear; for you know that, personally, I
like him almost as well as you do. Still, I do think it is a little
unfortunate that we ever knew him before."

"And I think it's extremely fortunate," Kate said stoutly. "If it
hadn't been that he had known us before, and cared for me--he says
worshipped, but that's nonsense--ever since I was a child, he would
never have made that terrible ride, and I--"

"Oh, don't talk about it, Kate; it's too dreadful even to think of
now.

"Well, my dear, no doubt it's all for the best," Alice said
philosophically. "At any rate, you are quite happy, and he is a
noble fellow. But I hope, for your sake, that he won't stay in the
police. It would be dreadful for you when he was riding about,
hunting after bush rangers and blacks; for you know, my dear, there
are plenty of others left in the colony."

