
The election was over, and Freckleton was about to disperse the meeting,
when it was noticed Pledge was on his legs, trying to speak.

A low hiss and groan went round the Hall, but curiosity to hear what the
deposed monitor had to say at such a time restored order.

Three boys alone knew what it all meant, and their faces blanched, and
their limbs shook, as they looked out from their retreat and awaited
their fate.

"Perhaps," said Pledge, "as this is a public meeting, you will allow me,
though I have not the proud honour of being a 'Sociable,' and although I
believe I am not a monitor either, to ask a question.  I assure you I do
it in the interests of Templeton, and of your immaculate Club.  I don't
suppose any one will thank me for doing it, and I am glad to say I have
ceased to expect thanks.  You may attribute any motive you like to me;
the worse it is, probably, the better you will be satisfied.  I
certainly shall not trouble to tell you my motive, except that it is for
your good.  All I want to ask is, whether this meeting is aware that
three members of the new Club are at this moment under the eyes of the
police, for a disgraceful act of theft committed in the town; and, if
so, whether you think that fact increases their claims to become members
of a Club which is to be a credit to Templeton?"

The speech was heard in dead silence.  But as it closed, a storm broke
forth from all quarters of the Hall.

"Name!  Sneak!  Cad!  Name!"

The angry spots blazed out in Pledge's cheeks as he faced the storm and
heard the cries.

"You want the names, do you?  You think, perhaps, I do not dare to give
them.  I do dare, though I stand here single-handed.  The three boys are
Richardson, Heathcote, and Coote, and if you don't believe me, ask
them."

Another dead silence followed this announcement, and all eyes turned to
where the "Firm" sat, pale and quivering.

Before, however, they could say a word, Mansfield rose, and stepped up
on to the platform.

"Pledge has, for reasons best known to himself, charged three boys here
with theft.  Unlike his usual manner, he makes the charge in public
before the whole school; and that being so, it is only fair the whole
school should hear from him and his witnesses, if he has any, what the
theft is."

The Captain's words were greeted with cries of approval from the
meeting, and every one turned now to Pledge.

He stood a moment irresolute, scowling at his arch-enemy, and longing to
be able to include him in the accusation he brought against his
_proteges_.  Then, with a half-swagger, he stepped on to the platform.

"If the Captain thinks I'm afraid to do what he asks, he's mistaken.  I
don't believe in hole-and-corner business.  And as he has challenged me
to accuse his three young friends in public and bring my witness, I will
do both."

"What witness?" groaned Heathcote, in a whisper to Dick.

"Don't talk to me," hissed Dick, between his teeth.

"Go on," said Mansfield, to the accuser.

"Thank you.  So I will.  A fortnight ago, gentlemen, a small boy went
down to Templeton--"

"Wait!" interposed Mansfield, "we must have names.  What boy?"

"A small boy named Coote," began Pledge.

Coote, at the sound of his name, half-bounded from his seat.  He knew he
was "in it."  But what on earth had any proceedings of his a fortnight
ago to do with the loss of the _Martha_?

"Went down to Templeton to a shop--"

"What shop?" demanded Mansfield.

"To Webster's shop," replied Pledge, beginning to be ruffled by the
Captain's determined manner.

The "Firm" started suddenly.  Whatever was coming?

"While spending his time in the shop, the young gentleman, as young
gentlemen sometimes do, stole a silver pencil."

There was a pause, and every eye turned towards Coote, who gaped at the
announcement and stared at his partners as if he had been confronted
with a ghost.

On Dick's countenance a curious change was taking place.  Horror had
already given way to bewilderment, and bewilderment was in turn giving
way to something which actually looked like a grin.

"The young gentleman," proceeded Pledge, "had two dear friends, called
Richardson and Heathcote, to whom he confided his stroke of business,
and who joined him in concealing or disposing of the stolen article."

Dick could remain silent no longer.  To the horror of his Firm, and the
bewilderment of every one else--most of all, Pledge--he burst into a
laugh, which sounded weird in the dead silence.

"Order!" cried Mansfield, sternly.  "Go on, Pledge."

"I heard of the theft from the--from Webster immediately after it
occurred, and for the last fortnight have been watching the culprits--"

Here he was interrupted by a hiss, which the Captain immediately
suppressed.

"And they have actually admitted their guilt in begging me not to tell
of them to you."

At this point Dick started up excitedly, and began--

"I should like to say--"

But the Captain stopped him.

"You will be heard shortly.  First of all we must hear Pledge's
witness."

"Certainly.  I told Webster to call up at half-past four.  He doesn't
know what for.  You'd better have him in.  I'll go and fetch him."

"No," said the Captain.  "Aspinall, will you ask him to come in?"



CHAPTER TWENTY NINE.

HOW TEMPLETON TURNS A CORNER.

Aspinall was not absent three minutes altogether, but the interval
seemed interminable.

Our heroes, as they sat huddled together, pale, defiant, but bewildered,
dividing the attention of the meeting with their accuser, thought it a
century.  More than once Dick, boiling over, started to his feet and
attempted to speak, but every time Mansfield quietly suppressed him, and
told him to wait till the proper time came.

Coote was once more racked by doubts as to whether he had really taken
the pencil after all.  He was morally certain he had not, but Coote was
a youth always open to conviction.

The door opened at last, and Aspinall appeared ushering in the
bookseller, who looked like a man who suspected a trap and was prepared
to defend himself at the first sign of attack.

He had received a note in the morning from Pledge--of whom he had seen
or heard nothing since his visit to the shop a fortnight ago--asking him
to be sure to call at the school at 4:30 on a matter of business.

When Aspinall summoned him, he concluded it was to go to Pledge's study.
But when, instead of that, he found himself suddenly ushered into a
congregation of the whole school, it was small wonder if he felt
bewildered and sniffed treachery.

"Mr Webster," said Mansfield, "Pledge, here, has just been publicly
accusing three boys of theft.  He says they have robbed you, and we want
you to hear his statement and tell us if it is true.  Please repeat what
you have to say, Pledge, in Mr Webster's hearing."

The stationer, with inquiring face, turned to Pledge, who, despite some
vague doubts which were beginning to disturb his confidence, smiled
affably and said--

"Oh, sorry to bring you up, Mr Webster, just at your busy time, but I
was telling my friends here about that little affair of the pencil-case,
you know, which was stolen from you; and as they don't seem inclined to
believe me, I thought the best thing would be for you to tell them about
it yourself."

The countenance of the bookseller underwent a marvellous transformation
as the speech proceeded.  When Pledge had ceased, he exclaimed--

"Pencil-case!  Why, bless you, Mr Pledge, I found that a fortnight
ago!"

This announcement was the signal for a howl such as Templeton had rarely
heard.  The pent-up scorn of an afternoon broke out against the accuser
as he stood there, pale and stupefied, staring at Webster.

It was all Mansfield could do to restore order.  The gust had to blow
itself more than half out before even he was heeded.

"Look here, you fellows," said he, "don't let us lose our heads.  We
want to hear the rights and wrongs of the case fairly.  Hadn't you
better wait till that's done before you turn the place into a bear-
garden?"

The rebuke told, and the meeting relapsed into silence.

"You never told me that," snarled Pledge.  "You've been fooling me."

"You never asked me.  Mr Richardson knew; he was in the shop just after
I found it."

"Of course he was," sneered Pledge.

"He needn't have been, if that's what you mean.  He'd nothing to do with
it.  Bless you, it's an old story now; I'd almost forgotten it."

"You forgot, too, that you asked me to recover it for you; and you let
me go on while all the time you had it."

"You offered to get it back.  I never asked you.  You said you had an
interest in the young gentlemen."

"And you never thought it worth while to tell me the thing had turned
up?"

"I told Mr Richardson, and said I was sorry for the fright he and his
two friends had had.  It never struck me you'd go on bothering about it,
or I'd have told you.  Fact of the matter is, I've never seen you from
that day to this."

"Is that all you want to say?" said Mansfield, turning to Pledge.

"I can only say this," said Pledge: "that I never saw three boys imitate
guilt better.  If they hadn't done it, I should like to ask them why
they quaked in their shoes whenever they met me, and why they sent me a
round robin, asking me not to tell about them?"

"I can tell you that!" shouted Dick, springing up.

"You needn't wait, Mr Webster," said Mansfield.  "Thank you for coming
up."

"Thank you, gentlemen," said the tradesman.

"I'm sorry to be mixed up in the matter.  Mr Pledge can go somewhere
else for his books.  Good day, gentlemen."

"Good day," said several voices.

When order was restored, Dick was discovered, red in the face, mounted
on a form, propped up on either side by his faithful allies.

"I can tell him that," he cried, "and all of you, too.  We thought he
knew about another row of ours--about Tom White's boat, you know.  It
was us let her go; at least I did, and Georgie was there, too, and
Coote's been in it since he came up.  Tom White robbed us coming back
from Grandcourt, and we were awfully wild, and were cads enough to slip
his boat on the beach.  There's been a regular row, and we expected to
be transported.  We backed Tom White up all we could, and tried to get
him off.  I told the magistrate it was us did it, and he said I'd put
him in a jolly fix.  Pledge was always talking to us about the police,
and the county gaol, and that sort of thing, and we made sure he'd found
out all about it, and was going to do us over it.  We never guessed he
was running his head against that pencil business, or we could easily
have put him right.  We're awfully sorry about the boat, you know.  My
governor came down and squared most of the fellows, and it's all right
now, and Tom's got let off.  Pledge has got a spite against all our
'Firm,' because we're not going to let Georgie be made a cad of by him,
and we told him so; didn't we, you chaps?"

"Yes, we did," shouted the "chaps."

"Yes, he thought," continued Dick, warming up, "he'd make Georgie go and
fag for him again, by threatening him about this row; but we backed
Georgie up, and wouldn't let him; and then he promised to show us up at
the 'Sociables,' and so he has."

Dick's oration was too much for the feelings of his audience.  They
laughed and cheered at every sentence; and when finally he subsided
between his two supporters, quite short of breath, and wondering at the
length of his own speech, they forgot the Captain's rebuke, and finished
their howl against Pledge to the bitter end.

"Does Pledge want to ask any more questions?" asked Mansfield.

Pledge laughed bitterly.

"No, thank you; I'm not quite clever enough for them."

"Perhaps you are right," said the Captain, drily.  "And if you have
nothing more to say, perhaps you would like to go."

Pledge hesitated a moment, amid the howls which followed the Captain's
words.  Then he coolly rose, and ascended the platform.  His face was
flushed, and his eyes uneasy; but otherwise impudence befriended him,
and he stood there to all appearances neither humiliated nor dismayed.

"Gentlemen," he began; but a fresh storm arose, and drowned his voice.

The uproar continued till Mansfield called for order, and said--

"I think in ordinary decency you ought to treat everybody fairly on a
day like this.  It will do you no harm, and it will be more worthy of
Templeton."

"Gentlemen," said Pledge, "thank you for being ordinarily decent,
although it wouldn't break my heart if you didn't hear me.  It's not as
easy as you may suppose to stand up single-handed against a school full
of howling enemies.  It's easy for you to howl when everybody howls on
your side.  Suppose you change places with me, and try to speak when
everybody's howling against you.  However, I don't complain.  Somebody
must be on the losing side, and as all of you take care to be on the
winning.  I'll do without you."

Pledge certainly knew his audience.  He had hit them cleverly on a weak
point--the point of chivalry; and had he been content to rest where he
was, he might even yet have saved a following for himself in Templeton.
But he went on--

"Our three young friends have told you a pretty story, which has highly
amused you.  It amused me too.  They told you I had a spite against
them.  I must say it's the first I've heard of it.  As a rule Sixth-form
fellows don't waste much time in plotting against boys in the Third; but
Richardson evidently thinks he and his friends are considerably more
important than other boys of their age and brains.  Suppose I were to
tell you that, instead of my having a spite against any one, somebody
has, for the last year, had a spite against me, and that somebody is the
holy Captain of Templeton?  Suppose I told you that he dared not show it
openly, but made use of my wretched fag and his friends to tell tales,
and trump up stories about me?  Suppose I told you he and his fellow-
monitors resorted to a mean dodge to get me to resign my monitorship,
and then got up this precious Club in order to soft-soap their own
toadies for helping them to do it?  What has Mansfield done for
Templeton, I should like to know?  Hasn't he done more harm than good by
his hectoring manner and his favouritism and fussiness?  Isn't he one of
the most unpopular fellows in Templeton?  Didn't he all but get
ignominiously left out of his own wonderful Club?  And what do you think
of him when he gets up here and tries to pass as a model of justice,
when as likely as not, he has pre-arranged the whole affair, and told
every one what part he is to play in the farce?"

He sat down amid a dead silence, conscious he had overdone it.  A little
less, and he might have convinced some that what he said was true; but
when he talked such palpable nonsense as that of the Captain having
arranged the whole scene which Pledge himself had got up, the meeting
took his whole tirade for what it was worth, and received it in mocking
silence.

Freckleton, to the relief of everybody, got up and said--

"I did think we might be spared quite such a ridiculous speech as that
to which we have just listened.  However, I have nothing to say about
its comic side.  What I want to say is this.  It is perfectly true
Mansfield had a spite against Pledge.  So had I; _so_ had Cresswell.  So
had eleven out of twelve of all the other monitors.  And I'll tell you
why.  When a fellow deliberately sets himself to corrupt juniors
entrusted to his care, as he corrupted young Forbes (howls), when he
sets himself to upset every vestige of order and good form in Templeton;
when he tells lies of everybody, and never tells the same lie correctly
twice running (laughter); when he cudgels his brains how he may make
mischief between friends (cheers from the 'Firm'), and get the credit of
being the only friend of the very fellows he tries to ruin; then, I say,
it's no wonder if Mansfield, and you, and everybody has a spite against
him.  I don't say much for the Templetonian that hasn't.  I don't mean
the spite which would lead any one to kick him.  Thank goodness, we can
let him know what we think without wearing out our shoe-leather
(laughter).  He talks in noble strain about being single-handed, and on
the losing side.  Thank goodness he is single-handed, and on the losing
side!  Thank goodness, too, he is lonely, and finds no one ready to keep
him company in his low ways!  He talks about Mansfield," continued the
speaker, waxing unexpectedly warm.  "Gentlemen, if you knew Mansfield as
well as I do, you would be as angry as I am to hear the lies this
miserable cad tells.  Mansfield, gentlemen, would, I know, risk his life
for the good of Templeton.  He may not be popular.  He's told me, often
and often, he knows he isn't.  But, I say to him, and I think you will
say too, 'Go on, old man,' (cheers).  'You've done more good to
Templeton in a term than other Captains have done in a year; and if the
only thing you had ever done had been to rid us of the cad, Pledge, you
would have done the school a service that any one might be proud of,'
(loud cheers).  There, I've used hard words, I know, and almost lost my
temper, but it's best to speak out sometimes.  Pledge has heard what
I've said, and I shouldn't say anything different behind his back."

The Hermit sat down amidst a roar of applause, in which the Sixth joined
as heartily as any.  The effect of his simple, straightforward speech
was immediately apparent when Mansfield rose to dismiss the assembly.

For a moment he stood there, unable to speak for the cheers which
greeted him.  The honest indignation of his friend had touched a
keynote, which suddenly awakened Templeton to the conviction that its
Captain was a hero after all; and the almost pathetic reference to his
unpopularity roused them to an enthusiasm of repentance which was almost
startling.

At length silence reigned, and the Captain said, with the faintest
suspicion of a tremble in his voice--

"I think we've all had enough of this, you fellows.  There's the Chapel
bell.  This meeting is over."

By a curious sort of instinct, the meeting, instead of immediately
dispersing, remained seated, while Pledge rose, and moved to the door.
He had got half-way there before he noticed his isolation, and a sudden
flush of scarlet in his cheeks betrayed his emotion at the discovery.
It was too late to retreat to his seat, and too late to pretend not to
notice his position.  With a pitiful attempt at a swagger, he completed
his passage to the door, and left the Hall.

As he reached the door, a low hiss rose from the middle of the assembly,
but a sudden gesture of appeal from the Captain stifled it before it
could spread, and the door closed behind the retreating figure amid a
silence which spoke volumes.

The meeting waited a minute or two, and then quietly rose and dispersed,
every one feeling that from that afternoon a new era in the history of
Templeton had been inaugurated.

Our heroes, who in the midst of later excitements had half-forgotten
their own share in the afternoon's proceedings, were among the first to
get out into the Quadrangle; and once there, their manner changed from
one of dignified solemnity to one of agitated expectancy.

In a quarter of an hour their guest was due in Cresswell's study, and
between now and then, what had they not to do?

Who shall describe that wondrous spread, or the heroes that partook of
it?  How, when Mr Richardson arrived, punctual and hungry, he found a
table groaning under every delicacy the ingenuity and pocket-money of
three juniors could provide; how the kidneys were done to a turn and the
tea-cake to a shade; how jam-pots stood like forts at each corner of the
snowy cloth; how hot rolls and bath buns lorded it over white loaf and
brown; how eggs, boiled three minutes and five seconds by Heathcote's
watch, peeped out among watercress and lettuces; how rosy apples and
luscious pears jostled one another in the centre dish; and how tea and
coffee breathed forth threatenings at one another from rival pots on the
same tray?

It was a spread to make the mouths in Olympus water, and drive Hebe and
Ganymede to despair.  Mr Richardson, who, in the guilelessness of his
heart, had brought a small plum-cake as a contribution to the feast,
positively blushed as he saw that table, and hid his poor mite back in
his pocket for very shame.

The "Firm," when they did go in for a thing, did it well, and no
mistake; and, if Mr Richardson had paid up royally for them during the
day, he should find that more than one could play at that game, and that
they would pay up royally at night.

Like a brave man, the good father expanded his appetite, and, regardless
of consequences, took a little of everything.  The "Firm" took a great
