"_La Garde recule_!" rose here and there from the battlefield.  "_La
Garde recule_!"  Men caught up the cry in wonder and despair.  Could it
be true?  Yes.  Back they came out of the smoke.  Now was the supreme
opportunity for the allies.  The Duke, recklessly exposing himself on
the crest of the hill, bullets flying about him, as they flew about
Napoleon, yet leading apparently a charmed life, closed his field-glass
and turned to the red line that had made good its defense.

"Up!" he cried, waving his hand and not finishing his sentence.

They needed no other signal.  Their time to attack had come.  Down the
hill they rushed, yelling, followed by Belgians, Netherlanders, and all
the rest, pressing hard upon their heels.  La Haye Sainte was
recaptured in the twinkling of an eye.  The shattered broken remains of
the Guard were driven in headlong rout.  The assailers of Hougomont
were themselves assaulted.  At last numbers had overwhelmed Lobau.  The
survivors of an army of a hundred and thirty thousand flushed with
victory fell on the survivors of an army of seventy thousand already
defeated.

At half-past seven the battle was lost.  At eight the withdrawal became
a retreat, the retreat a rout.  At set of sun lost was the Emperor,
lost was the Empire.  Ended was the age-long struggle which had begun
with the fall of the Bastile more than a score of years before.  Once
again from France, with the downfall of Napoleon, had been snatched the
hegemony of the world.

There was no reserve.  There was nothing to cover a retreat.  Someone
raised the wild cry not often heard on battlefields overlooked by
Napoleon, and it was echoed everywhere:

"_Sauve qui peut._"

The army as an army was gone.  Thousands of men in mad terror fled in
every direction.  Still, there were left a few battalions of the Guard
which had not been in action.  They formed three squares to receive the
English and Prussians.  Into the nearest square Napoleon, bewildered,
overwhelmed, stricken by the catastrophe, was led on his horse.  His
sword was out.  He would fain have died on that field.  Doubtless, many
a bullet marked him, but none struck him.  For a little while these
squares of the Guard, Napoleon in the center one, another square on
either side of the center one, stayed the British and Prussian advance,
but it was not to be.  "The stars in their courses fought against
Sisera!"  The Emperor gave no order.  Bertrand and Soult turned his
horse about and the squares retreated.

It was night.  They were the sole organized body left.  Well, they
upheld their ancient fame and glorious reputation and untarnished
honor.  Through the calm and moonlit night pursuers and pursued could
hear the rolling of the brass drums far and wide over the countryside
as the Guard marched away from that field back to stricken France, to
that famous grenadier march, "_La Grenadiere._"

Again and again they stopped to beat off the furious attack of the
cavalry.  Again and again the Prussian pursuers hurled themselves
unavailingly on quadrangles of steel, worked up to a terrible pitch of
excitement by the possibility that they might seize the Emperor at
whose behest and for whose purpose fifty thousand men lay dead or
wounded on that fatal hill, in that dreadful valley.  Happy the fate of
those who were dead--horrible the condition of those who were wounded.
English, Prussians, Germans, Bavarians, Hollanders, French, trampled
together in indistinguishable masses.  Horses, guns, weapons,
equipment--everything in hopeless confusion.  Every horror, every
anguish, every agony was there--incense burned about the altar of one
devouring ambition.




CHAPTER XXXII

AT LAST THE EAGLE AND THE WOMAN

Nearest the crest of the hill immortalized by the great conflict, in
advance of but in touch with the regular dead lines of the Guard, a
little group, friend and foe, lay intermingled.  There was a young
officer of the Fifty-second infantry, one of Colborne's.  He was
conscious but suffering frightfully from mortal wounds.  One side of
his face where he had been thrown into the mud was covered with a red
compound of earth and blood; his bright head was dabbled with the same
hideous mixture.  Blood frothed out of his mouth as he breathed.  He
murmured from time to time a woman's name.  "Water," was sometimes the
sputtering syllable that came from him.

His left hand clutched uneasily at his breast, where his torn uniform
showed a gaping wound.  But his right hand was still.  The arm was
broken, paralyzed, but the fingers of his right hand were tightly
closed around a broken blue staff and next to his cheek, the
blood-stained one, and cold against it, was a French Eagle.  He had
seized that staff in the heat of battle and in the article of death he
held it.

At the feet of the English officer lay a French officer wearing the
insignia of a Colonel of the Guard.  He was covered with wounds,
bayonet thrusts, a saber-slash, and was delirious.  Although helpless,
he was really in much better case than the young Englishman.  He, too,
in his delirium muttered a woman's name.

They spoke different tongues, these two.  They were born in different
lands.  They were children of the same God, although one might have
doubted it, but no one could mistake the woman's name.  For there Frank
Yeovil and Jean Marteau, incapable of doing each other any further
harm, each thought of the same woman.

Did Laure d'Aumenier back in England waiting anxiously for news of
battle, fearing for one of those men, hear those piteous, broken
murmurs of a woman's name--her own?

Around these two were piled the dead.  Marteau had seized the Eagle.
Yes, he and a few brave men had stayed on the field when the great Ney,
raging like a madman, and seeking in vain the happy fortune of a bullet
or sword-thrust, had been swept away, and on him had fallen Yeovil with
another group of resolute English, and together they had fought their
little battle for the Eagle.  And Marteau had proved the Englishman's
master.  He had beaten him down.  He had shortened his sword to strike
when he recognized him.  Well, the battle was over, the Eagle was lost,
the Emperor was a fugitive, hope died with the retreating Guard, the
Empire was ended.  Marteau might have killed him, but to what end?

"For your wife's sake," he cried, lowering his sword, and the next
minute he paid for his mercy, for the other English threw themselves
upon him.

But Frank Yeovil did not get off scot free.  There was one lad who had
followed Marteau, who had marched with the Guard, who had no
compunctions of conscience whatever, and with his last pistol Pierre
gave the reeling Englishman the fatal shot.  Yes, Pierre paid too.
They would certainly have spared him, since he was only a boy, but
maddened by the death of their officer, half a dozen bayonets were
plunged into his breast.

Thither the next day came Sir Gervaise Yeovil, who had been with the
Duke at the Duchess of Richmond's famous ball in Brussels.  Young Frank
had left that ball at four o'clock in the morning, according to order,
only to find that later orders had directed the army to march at two
and that his baggage had gone.  He had fought that day in pumps and
silk stockings which he had worn at the ball; dabbled, gory, muddy,
they were now.

Sir Gervaise Yeovil was an old friend of the Duke of Wellington.  The
Iron Duke, as they called him, was nevertheless very tender-hearted
that morning.  He told the Baronet that his son was somewhere on the
field.  Colonel Colborne of the Fifty-second had marked him in the
charge, but that was all.  Neither Vivian nor Vandeleur could throw any
light on the situation.  There were twenty thousand of the allied
armies on that field and thirty thousand French.

"My God," said Sir Gervaise, staring along the line of the French
retreat, "what is so terrible as a defeat?"

"Nothing," said the Duke gravely.  Then looking at the nearer hillside
he added those tremendous words which epitomized war in a way in which
no one save a great modern captain has ever epitomized it.  "Nothing,"
he said slowly, "unless it be a victory."

They found the Guard.  That was easy.  There they lay in lines where
they had fallen; the tall bearskins on their heads, the muskets still
clasped in their hands.  There, too, they found young Yeovil at last.
They revived him.  Someone sought to take the Eagle from him, but with
a sudden accession of strength he protested against it.

"Father," he whispered to the old man bending over him, his red face
pale and working, "mine."

"True," said the Duke.  "He captured it.  Let him keep it."

"O God!" broke out the Baronet.  "Frank!  Can nothing be done?"

"Nothing.  Stop."  His lips moved, his father bent nearer.  "Laure----"
he whispered.

"Yes, yes, what of her?"

"That Frenchman she loved----"

"Marteau?"

The young Englishman closed his eyes in assent.

"He could have killed me but spared--for her--he--is there," he
faltered presently.

"There is life in this Frenchman yet," said one of the surgeons,
looking up at the moment.

"My Lord!" said old Sir Gervaise Yeovil, starting up, choking down a
sob and endeavoring to keep his voice steady.  "My boy yonder----"

"Yes," said the Duke, "a brave lad."

"He's----  It is all up with him.  You will let me take him back to
England, and--the Frenchman and the Eagle?"

"Certainly.  I wish to God it had never happened, Yeovil," went on the
soldier.  "But it had to be.  Bonaparte had to be put down, the world
freed.  And somebody had to pay."

"I thank God," said the old man, "that my boy dies for his King and his
country and for human liberty."

"Nor shall he die in vain," said the soldier.

Frank Yeovil died on the vessel Sir Gervaise chartered to carry him and
Marteau and some other wounded officers of his acquaintance back to
England.  They did not bury him at sea.  At his earnest request they
took him back to his own land to be laid with his ancestors, none of
whom had spent themselves more gloriously or for a greater cause than
he.

Marteau, frightfully weak, heart-broken and helpless, by Sir Gervaise
Yeovil's command was taken to the Baronet's own house.

"I did my best," he said brokenly from the bed on which he lay as Laure
d'Aumenier bent over him, Sir Gervaise standing grim and silent with
folded arms in the background.

"For France and the Emperor," whispered the woman.

"Yes, that, but for your husband as well.  He fell upon me.  I was
trying to rally the Guard--the Eagle--he was beaten down--but I
recognized him.  I would not have harmed him."

"He told me," said the Baronet, "what you said.  'For your wife's
sake,'" he quoted in his deep voice, looking curiously at the girl.

"Sir Gervaise," said the Countess, looking up at him entreatingly, "I
am alone in this world but for you.  I was to have been your daughter.
May I speak?"

"I wish it."

"Marteau--Jean," she said softly, "I was not his wife.  Perhaps now
that he is dead it would have been better if I had been, but----"

"And you are free?"

Again the Countess looked at the Englishman.  Simple and homely though
he was, he showed the qualities of his birth and rank.

"Mademoiselle," he began gravely, almost tenderly.  He looked a long
time at her.  "Little Laure," he continued at last, taking her slender
hand in his own great one, "I had hoped that you might some day call me
father but that hope is gone--since Waterloo.  If I were your real
father now I should say----"

"Monsieur!" whispered the woman, her eyes brightening, her hand
tightening in the clasp of the other.

"And I think the old Marquis would say that it is the will of God,
now----"  He bit his lip.  It was all so different from what he
imagined.

"Go on, if you please," whispered Marteau.  "I am ill.  I cannot
bear----"

"If she be guided by me she will be your wife, young sir," said Sir
Gervaise decisively.

He dropped the woman's hand.  He turned and walked heavily out of the
room without a backward glance.  He could do no more.

"And will you stoop to me?" pleaded Marteau.

For answer the woman knelt by his bed and slipped her arm tenderly
under his head.  She bent and kissed him.

"When you are stronger," she replied, "you shall raise me up to your
own high level of courage and devotion and self-sacrifice, but
meanwhile it is upon my bosom that your head must lie."

"Alas," said Marteau, after a little, "the Emperor is taken, the Empire
is lost, my poor France!"

"I will go back with you and we will help to build it up again," said
the woman.

That was the best medicine that could be given to the young man.  His
recovery was slow but it was sure and it was the more rapid because of
the gracious care of the woman he loved, who lavished upon him all the
pent-up passion of her fond adoring heart.

Sir Gervaise Yeovil, whose interest at court was great, exerted himself
to secure a reconfirmation of Marteau's patent of nobility and to see
that no difficulties were placed in the way of the young couple in
obtaining repossession of their estates.  So that once more there
should be a d'Aumenier and perhaps a renewal of the ancient house in
the old chateau in Champagne.  This was easier since Marteau had never
taken oath to King Louis and therefore had broken no faith.

At the quiet wedding that took place as soon as Marteau recovered his
strength a little, Sir Gervaise continued to act the father's part to
the poor woman.  After the ceremony he delighted the heart of the
soldier by giving to him what he loved after the woman, the Eagle which
had been Frank Yeovil's prize.

"You will think of the lad, sometimes," said the old Baronet to the
girl.  "He was not lucky enough to win you, but he loved you and he
died with your name on his lips."

"I shall remember him always," said the new-made wife.

"His name shall be held in highest honor in my house as a brave
soldier, a true lover and a most gallant gentleman," added the new-made
husband.

Marteau would never forget the picture of the Emperor sitting on his
horse at La Belle Alliance that June evening, stern, terrific, almost
sublime, watching the Guard go by to death.  He was glad he had not
seen him in the retreat of which he afterward heard from old Bal-Arret.
But that was not the last picture of the Emperor that he had.  Although
he was scarcely strong enough to be moved, he insisted on being taken
to Portsmouth with his young wife.  Sir Gervaise went with him.  He had
no other object in life it seemed but to provide happiness for these
young people.  He could scarcely bear them out of his sight.

One day, a bright and sunny morning late in July, they put the
convalescing soldier into a boat with his wife and the old Baronet and
the three were rowed out into the harbor as near as the cordon of
guard-boats allowed them to approach to a great English
ship-of-the-line, across the stern of which in gold letters they read
the name, "_Bellerophon_."

"Bonaparte gener'ly comes out 'n the quarter-gal'ry of the ship, 'bout
this hour in the mornin'," said one of the boatmen.  "An' if he does we
can see him quite plain from yere."

There were other boats there whose occupants were moved by curiosity
and various emotions, but when the figure of the little man with the
three-cornered cocked hat on his head, still wearing the green uniform
of the chasseurs of the Guard stepped out on the quarter-gallery, his
eyes, as it were instinctively, sought that particular boat.

"Help me up," said Marteau brokenly.

The boat was a large one and moving carefully they got the young
officer to his feet.  He was wearing his own battle-stained uniform.
He lifted his trembling hand to his head in salute.  The little Emperor
bent over the rail and stared hard at the trio.  Did he recognize
Marteau?  Ah, yes!  He straightened up presently, his own hand returned
the salute and then he took off that same cocked hat and bared his brow
and bent his head low and, with a gesture of farewell, he turned and
reentered his cabin--Prometheus on the way to his chains at St. Helena!




THE END






