treble according to taste.

"Now, Mister Chairman," said the bold Jerry MacGowl, when the cheers had
subsided, "it's my turn to call for a song, so I ax Mr Queeker to
favour the company wid--" Thunders of applause drowned the remainder of
the sentence.

Poor Queeker was thrown into great confusion, and sought to explain that
he could not sing, even in private--much less in public.

"Oh yes, you can, sir.  Try it, sir, no fear of 'ee.  Sure it's yourself
as can do it, an' no mistake," were the remarks with which his
explanation was interrupted.

"I assure you honestly," cried Queeker, "that I cannot sing, _but_"
(here breathless silence ensued) "if the chairman will kindly permit me,
I will give you a toast."

Loud cheers from all sides, and a good-humoured nod from the chairman
greeted this announcement.

"Mr Chairman and Friends," said Queeker, "the ladies have--" A perfect
storm of laughter and cheers interrupted him for at least two minutes.

"Yes," resumed Queeker, suddenly blazing up with enthusiasm, "I repeat--
the ladies--"

"That's the girls, blissin's on the swate darlints," murmured Jerry in a
tone which set the whole table again in a roar.

"I echo the sentiment; blessings on them," said Queeker, with a
good-humoured glance at Jerry.  "Yes, as I was going to say, I propose
the Ladies, who are, always were, and ever will be, the solace of man's
life, the sweet drops in his otherwise bitter cup, the lights in his
otherwise dark dwelling, the jewels in his--in his--crown, and the
bright stars that glitter in the otherwise dark firmament of his destiny
(vociferous cheering).  Yes," continued Queeker, waxing more and more
energetic, and striking the table with his fist, whereby he overturned
his neighbour's glass of grog, "yes, I re-assert it--the ladies are all
that, and _much more_!  (Hear, hear.)  I propose their health--and,
after all, I may be said to have some sort of claim to do so, having
already unintentionally poured a whole bottle of wine on the tablecloth
as a libation to them!  (Laughter and applause.)  What, I ask,"
continued Queeker, raising his voice and hand at the same moment, and
setting his hair straight upon end, "what, I ask, would man be _without_
the ladies?"  ("What indeed?" said a voice near the foot of the table,
which called forth another burst of laughter.) "Just try to think, my
friends, what would be the hideous gloom of this terrestrial ball if
there were no girls!  Oh woman! softener of man's rugged nature!  What--
in the words of the poet."  He carefully refrained from saying what
poet!

  "What were earth and all its joys;
  what were wealth with all its toys;
  what the life of men and boys
  But for lovely woman?

  "What if mothers were no more;
  If wives and sisters fled our shore,
  And left no sweethearts to the fore--
  No sign of darling woman?

  "What dreary darkness would ensue--
  what moral wastes devoid of dew--
  If no strong hearts of men like you
  Beat for charming woman?

  "Who would rise at duty's call;
  Who would fight to win or fall;
  Who would care to live at all,
  Were it not for woman?"

Prolonged and rapturous cheers greeted this effusion, in the midst of
which the enthusiastic Jerry MacGowl sprang to his feet, waved his glass
above his head--spilling half of its contents on the pate of a bald
skipper who sat next to him--and cheered lustily.

"Men of the Ramsgate lifeboat," shouted Queeker, "I call on you to
pledge the ladies--with all the honours!"

It is unnecessary to say that the call was responded to with a degree of
enthusiasm that threatened, as Dick Moy said to Jack Shales, "to smash
all the glasses an' blow the roof off."  In the midst of the noise and
confusion Queeker left the hall, ascended to the gallery, and sat
himself down beside Fanny Hennings, with an air of intense decision.

"Oh, Mr Queeker!" exclaimed Fanny.

"Listen, Fanny," said the tall uncle at that moment, "they are giving
one of the most important toasts of the evening--The Royal National
Lifeboat Institution."

Fanny tried to listen, and had caught a few words, when she felt her
hand suddenly seized and held fast.  Turning her head quickly, she
beheld the face of Queeker turned to bright scarlet.

What more she heard or saw after that it would be extremely difficult to
tell.  Perhaps the best way of conveying an idea of it is to lay before
the reader the short epistle which Fanny penned that same night to her
old friend Katie Hall.  It ran thus:--

"RAMSGATE.

"OH, KATIE!  DARLING KATIE!--He has done it _at last_!  Dear fellow!
And so like himself too--so romantically, so poetically!  They were
toasting the Lifeboat Institution at the time.  He seized my hand.
`Fanny,' he said, in the deep manly tones in which he had just made the
most brilliant speech of the evening, `Fanny, my love--my life--my
_lifeboat_--will you have me? will you _save_ me?'  There was a dreadful
noise at the time--a very storm of cheering.  The whole room seemed in a
whirl.  My head was in a whirl too; and oh! _how_ my heart beat!  I
don't know what I said.  I fear I burst into a fit of laughter, and then
cried, and dear uncle carried me out--but it's all over now.  That
_darling_ Lifeboat Institution, I shall never forget it; for they were
sounding its praises at the very moment when my Queeker and I got into
the same boat--for life!--Your happy FANNY."

To this the next post brought the following reply:--

"YARMOUTH."

"MY DEAREST FANNY,--Is it necessary for me to say that your last short
letter has filled my heart with joy?  It has cleared up a mystery too!
On Tuesday last, in the forenoon, Mr Queeker came by appointment to
take lunch with us, and Stanley happened to mention that a supper was to
be given to the Ramsgate lifeboat-men, and that he had heard _you_ were
to be there.  During lunch, Mr Queeker was very absent and restless,
and appeared to be unhappy.  At last he started up, made some hurried
apology about the train for the south, and having urgent business to
transact, looked at his watch, and rushed out of the house!  We could
not understand it at the time, but I knew that he had only a few minutes
left to catch the train for the south, and I _now_ know that he caught
it--and why!  Ah, Fanny, did I not always assure you that he would do it
in desperation at last!  My earnest prayer is, that your wedded life may
be as happy as mine has hitherto been.

"When your honeymoon is over, you must promise to pay us a visit.  You
know that our villa is sufficiently far out of town to warrant your
regarding us in the light of country friends; and Stanley bids me say
that he will take no denial.  Papa--who is at present romping round the
room with my eldest boy on his shoulders, so that I scarce know what I
write--bids me tell you, with his kind love and hearty congratulations,
that he thinks you are `not throwing yourself away, for that Queeker is
a first-rate little fellow, and a rising man!'  Observe, please, that I
quote papa's own words.

"I _must_ stop abruptly, because a tiny cry from the nursery informs me
that King Baby is awake, and demands instant attention!--With kindest
love and congratulations, your ever affectionate, KATIE HALL."



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

CONCLUSION.

Once again, and for the last time, we visit the floating light.

It was a calm sunny evening, about the end of autumn, when the Trinity
tender, having effected "the relief" of the old Gull, left her in order
to perform the same service for her sister light-vessels.

"Good-bye, Welton, good-bye, lads," cried the superintendent, waving his
hand as the tender's boat pushed off and left them, for another period
of duty, in their floating home.

"Good-bye, sir," replied the mate and men, touching their caps.

"Now, sir," said Dick Moy to the mate, shortly after, when they were
all, except the watch, assembled below round the galley stove, "are you
goin' to let us 'ave a bit o' that there letter, accordin' to promise?"

"What letter?" inquired Jack Shales, who having only accomplished half
of his period of service on board--one month--had not come off with his
comrades, and knew little or nothing of what had occurred on shore.

"A letter from the lighthouse from Jim," said the mate, lighting his
pipe, "received it this forenoon just as we were gettin' ready to come
off."

"All well and hearty, I hope?" asked Jerry MacGowl, seating himself on a
bench, and rolling some tobacco between his palms, preparatory to
filling his pipe.

"All well," replied the mate, pulling out the letter in question, and
regarding the address with much interest; "an' strange news in it."

"Well, then, let's 'ear wot it's all about," said Dick Moy; "there's
time to read it afore sunset, an it ain't fair to keep fellers in all
the hagonies of hexpectation."

"That's true enough," said Jerry with a grin.  "Arrah! it's bustin I am
already wid kooriosity.  Heave ahead, sir, an' be marciful."

Thus entreated, Mr Welton glanced at his watch, sat down, and, opening
his letter, read as follows:--

"DEAR FATHER,--Here we are, thank God, comfortably settled in the new
lighthouse, and Nora and I both agree that although it is more
outlandish, it is much more cheerful in every way than our last abode,
although it _is_ very wild-like, and far from the mainland.  Billy
Towler, my assistant,--who has become such a strapping fellow that you'd
scarce know him,--is also much pleased with it.  The children, too, give
a decided opinion in favour of the place, and even the baby, little
Morley, seems to know that he has made a change for the better!

"Baby's name brings me to the news that I've got to tell you.  Morley
Jones has come back!  You'll be surprised to hear that, I daresay, but
it's a fact.  He got a ticket-of-leave, and never rested till he found
out where Nora was.  He came to us one evening some time ago, and fell
down in a sort of fit close to the lighthouse-door, while Nora was
sitting in front of it, and the children were romping with Neptune
beside her.  Poor fellow! he was so changed, so old, and so white-haired
and worn, that we did not know him at first; but after we had washed the
blood off his face--for he had cut himself when he fell--I recognised
the old features.

"But he is changed in other respects too, in a way that has filled my
dear wife's heart with joy.  Of course you are aware that he got no
drink during the seven years of his imprisonment.  Now that he is free
he refuses to let a drop of anything stronger than water pass his lips.
He thinks it is his only chance, and I believe he is right.  He says
that nothing but the thought of Nora, and the hope of one day being
permitted to return to ask her forgiveness on his knees, enabled him to
endure his long captivity with resignation.  I do assure you, father,
that it almost brings tears to my eyes to see the way in which that man
humbles himself before his daughter.  Nora's joy is far too deep for
words, but it is written plainly in her face.  She spent all her spare
time with him at first, reading the Bible to him, and trying to convince
him that it was not the thought of _her_, but God's mercy and love that
had put it into his heart to repent, and desire to reform.  He does not
seem quite inclined to take that view of it, but he will come to it,
sooner or later, for we have the sure promise that the Lord will finish
the good work He has begun.  We have hired a room for him in a little
village within half a mile of us.  It is small, but comfortable enough,
and he seems to be quite content with it--as well he may be, with Nora
and the children going constantly about him!

"I tell you what, father, the longer I live with Nora, the more I feel
that I have got the truest-hearted and most loveable wife in all the
wide world!  The people of the village would go any length to serve her;
and as to their children, I believe they worship the ground she walks
on, as Jerry MacGowl used to say."

"Och, the idolatrous haythens!" growled Jerry.

"And the way she manages our dear youngsters," continued the mate,
reading on, without noticing Jerry's interruption, "would do your heart
good to see.  It reminds me of Dick Moy's wife, who is about the best
mother I ever met with--next to Nora, of course!"

"Humph!" said Dick, with a grim smile; "wery complimentary.  I wonder
wot my old ooman will say to that?"

"She'll say, no doubt, that she'll expect you to take example by Jim
Welton when speaking of your wife," observed Jack Shales.  "I wonder,
Dick, what ever could have induced Mrs Moy to marry such a fellow as
you?"

"I s'pose," retorted Dick, lighting his pipe, "that it was to escape the
chance o' bein' tempted, in a moment of weakness, to marry the likes o'
_you_."

"Hear, hear," cried MacGowl, "that's not unlikely, Dick.  An', sure, she
might have gone farther an' fared worse.  You're a good lump of a man,
anyhow; though you haven't much to boast of in the way of looks.
Howsever, it seems to me that looks don't go far wid sensible girls.
Faix, the uglier a man is, it's the better chance he has o' gittin' a
purty wife.  I have a brother, myself, who's a dale uglier than the
figurhead of an owld Dutch galliot, an' he's married the purtiest little
girl in Ireland, he has."

"If ye want to hear the end of Jim's letter, boys, you'd better shut up
your potato-traps," interposed Mr Welton.

"That's true--fire away," said Shales.

The mate continued to read.

"You'll be glad to hear that the old dog Neptune is well and hearty.  He
is a great favourite here, especially with the children.  Billy Towler
has taught him a number of tricks--among other things he can dive like a
seal, and has no objection whatever to let little Morley choke him or
half punch out his eyes.  Tell mother not to be uneasy on that point,
for though Neptune has the heart of a lion he has the temper of a lamb.

"There is an excellent preacher, belonging to the Wesleyan body, who
comes here occasionally on Sundays, and has worship in the village.  He
is not much of a preacher, but he's an earnest, God-fearing man, and has
made the name of Jesus dear to some of the people here, who, not long
ago, were quite careless about their souls.  Careless about their souls!
Oh, father, how often I think of that, now.  How strange it seems that
we should ever be thus careless!  What should we say of the jeweller who
would devote all his time and care to the case that held his largest
diamond, and neglect the gem itself?  Nora has got up a Sunday school at
the village, and Billy helps her with it.  The Grotto did wonders for
him--so he says himself.

"I must close this letter sooner than I intended, for I hear Nora's
voice, like sweet music in the distance, singing out that dinner is
ready; and if I keep the youngsters waiting long, they'll sing out in a
sharper strain of melody!

"So now, father, good-bye for the present.  We all unite in sending our
warmest love to dear mother and yourself.  Kindest remembrances also to
my friends in the floating light.  As much of my heart as Nora and the
children can spare is on board of the old Gull.  May God bless you
all.--Your affectionate son, JAMES WELTON."

"The sun will be down in a few minutes, sir," said the watch, looking
down the hatchway, while the men were engaged in commenting on Jim's
letter.

"I know that," replied the mate, glancing at his timepiece, as he went
on deck.

The upper edge of the sun was just visible above the horizon, gleaming
through the haze like a speck of ruddy fire.  The shipping in the Downs
rested on a sea so calm that each rope and mast and yard was faithfully
reflected.  Ramsgate--with the exception of its highest spires--was
overshadowed by the wing of approaching night.  The Goodwin Sands were
partially uncovered; looking calm and harmless enough, with only a snowy
ripple on their northern extremity, where they were gently kissed by the
swell of the North Sea, and with nothing, save a riven stump or a
half-buried stem-post, to tell of the storms and wrecks with which their
name is so sadly associated.

All around breathed of peace and tranquillity when the mate, having cast
a searching glance round the horizon, leaned over the hatchway and
shouted--"Lights up!"

The customary "Ay, ay, sir," was followed by the prompt appearance of
the crew.  The winch was manned, the signal given, and, just as the sun
went down, the floating light went up, to scatter its guiding and
warning beams far and wide across the darkening waste of water.

May our little volume prove a truthful reflector to catch up a few of
those beams, and, diverting them from their legitimate direction, turn
them in upon the shore to enlighten the mind and tickle the fancy of
those who dwell upon the land--and thus, perchance, add another thread
to the bond of sympathy already existing between them and those whose
lot it is to battle with the winds, and live upon the sea.
