
As he walked slowly along the crowded thoroughfare, where every brick
seemed familiar and every human being strange, he could not help saying
to himself mentally, "Can it be possible! was it here that I used to
wander in rags?  Thank God for the rescue and for the rescuers!"

"Shine yer boots, sir?" said a facsimile of his former self.

"Certainly, my boy," said Bob, at once submitting himself to the
operator, although, his boots having already been well "shined," the
operation was an obvious absurdity.

The boy must have felt something of this, for, when finished, he looked
up at his employer with a comical expression.  Bob looked at him
sternly.

"They were about as bright before you began on 'em," he said.

"They was, sir," admitted the boy, candidly.

"How much?" demanded the old street boy.  "On'y one ha'penny, sir,"
replied the young street boy, "but ven the day's fine, an' the boots
don't want much shinin', we gin'rally expecs a penny.  Gen'l'min _'ave_
bin known to go the length of tuppence."

Bob pulled out half-a-crown and offered it.

The boy grinned, but did not attempt to take it.

"Why don't you take it, my boy?"

"You _don't_ mean it, do you?" asked the boy, as the grin faded and the
eyes opened.

"Yes, I do.  Here, catch.  I was once like you.  Christ and Canada have
made me what you see.  Here is a little book that will tell you more
about that."

He chanced to have one of Miss Macpherson's _Canadian Homes for London
Wanderers_ in his pocket, and gave it to the little shoe-black,--who was
one of the fluttering free-lances of the metropolis, not one of the
"Brigade."

Bob could not have said another word to have saved his life.  He turned
quickly on his heel and walked away, followed by a fixed gaze and a
prolonged whistle of astonishment.

"How hungry I used to be here," he muttered as he walked along, "so
uncommon hungry!  The smell of roasts and pies had something to do with
it, I think.  Why, there's the shop--yes, the very shop, where I stood
once gazing at the victuals for a full hour before I could tear myself
away.  I do think that, for the sake of starving boys, to say nothing of
men, women, and girls, these grub-shops should be compelled to keep the
victuals out o' the windows and send their enticing smells up their
chimneys!"

Presently he came to a dead stop in front of a shop where a large mirror
presented him with a full-length portrait of himself, and again he said
mentally, "Can it be possible!" for, since quitting London he had never
seen himself as others saw him, having been too hurried, on both
occasions of passing through Canadian cities, to note the mirrors there.
In the backwoods, of course, there was nothing large enough in the way
of mirror to show more than his good-looking face.

The portrait now presented to him was that of a broad-chested,
well-made, gentlemanly young man of middle height, in a grey Tweed suit.

"Not _exactly_ tip-top, A1, superfine, you know, Bobby," he muttered to
himself with the memory of former days strong upon him, "but--but--
perhaps not altogether unworthy of--of--a thought or two from little
Martha Mild."

Bob Frog increased in stature, it is said, by full half an inch on that
occasion, and thereafter he walked more rapidly in the direction of
Whitechapel.

With sad and strangely mingled memories he went to the court where his
early years had been spent.  It was much the same in disreputableness of
aspect as when he left it.  Time had been gnawing at it so long that a
few years more or less made little difference on it, and its inhabitants
had not improved much.

Passing rapidly on he went straight to the Beehive, which he had for
long regarded as his real home, and there, once again, received a hearty
welcome from its ever busy superintendent and her earnest workers; but
how different his circumstances now from those attending his first
reception!  His chief object, however, was to inquire the way to the
hospital in which his father lay, and he was glad to learn that the case
of Ned Frog was well-known, and that he was convalescent.

It chanced that a tea-meeting was "on" when he arrived, so he had little
more at the time than a warm shake of the hand from his friends in the
Home, but he had the ineffable satisfaction of leaving behind him a sum
sufficient to give a sixpence to each of the miserable beings who were
that night receiving a plentiful meal for their bodies as well as food
for their souls--those of them, at least, who chose to take the latter.
None refused the former.

On his way to the hospital he saw a remarkably tall policeman
approaching.

"Well, you _are_ a long-legged copper," he muttered to himself, with an
irrepressible laugh as he thought of old times.  The old spirit seemed
to revive with the old associations, for he felt a strong temptation to
make a face at the policeman, execute the old double-shuffle, stick his
thumb to the end of his nose, and bolt!  As the man drew nearer he did
actually make a face in spite of himself--a face of surprise--which
caused the man to stop.

"Excuse me," said Bob, with much of his old bluntness, "are not you
Number 666?"

"That is not my number now, sir, though I confess it was once," answered
the policeman, with a humorous twinkle of the eye.

Bobby noticed the word "sir," and felt elated.  It was almost more than
waif-and-stray human nature could stand to be respectfully "sirred" by a
London policeman--his old foe, whom, in days gone by and on occasions
innumerable, he had scorned, scouted, and insulted, with all the
ingenuity of his fertile brain.

"Your name is Giles Scott, is it not?" he asked.

"It is, sir."

"Do you remember a little ragged boy who once had his leg broken by a
runaway pony at the West-end--long ago?"

"Yes, as well as if I'd seen him yesterday.  His name was Bobby Frog,
and a sad scamp he was, though it is said he's doing well in Canada."

"He must 'ave changed considerable," returned Bob, reverting to his old
language with wonderful facility, "w'en Number 666 don't know 'im.  Yes,
in me, Robert Frog, Esquire, of Chikopow Farm, Canada Vest, you be'old
your ancient henemy, who is on'y too 'appy to 'ave the chance of axin
your parding for all the trouble he gave you, an' all the 'ard names he
called you in days gone by."

Bobby held out his hand as he spoke, and you may be sure our huge
policeman was not slow to grasp it, and congratulate the stray on his
improved circumstances.

We have not time or space to devote to the conversation which ensued.
It was brief, but rapid and to the point, and in the course of it Bob
learned that Molly was as well, and as bright and cheery as ever--also
somewhat stouter; that Monty was in a fair way to become a real
policeman, having just received encouragement to expect admission to the
force when old enough, and that he was in a fair way to become as
sedate, wise, zealous, and big as his father; also, that little Jo aimed
at the same honourable and responsible position, and was no longer
little.

Being anxious, however, to see his father, Bob cut the conversation
short, and, having promised to visit his old enemy, hastened away.

The ward of the hospital in which Bob soon found himself was a sad
place.  Clean and fresh, no doubt, but very still, save when a weary
sigh or a groan told of suffering.  Among the beds, which stood in a
row, each with its head against the wall, one was pointed out on which a
living skeleton lay.  The face was very very pale, and it seemed as if
the angel of death were already brooding over it.  Yet, though so
changed, there was no mistaking the aspect and the once powerful frame
of Ned Frog.

"I'd rather not see any one," whispered Ned, as the nurse went forward
and spoke to him in a low voice, "I'll soon be home--I think."

"Father, _dear_ father," said Bob, in a trembling, almost choking voice,
as he knelt by the bedside and took one of his father's hands.

The prostrate man sprang up as if he had received an electric shock, and
gazed eagerly into the face of his son.  Then, turning his gaze on the
nurse, he said--

"I'm not dreaming, am I?  It's true, is it?  Is this Bobby?"

"Whether he's Bobby or not I can't say," replied the nurse, in the tone
with which people sometimes address children, "but you're not dreaming--
it _is_ a gentleman."

"Ah! then I _am_ dreaming," replied the sick man, with inexpressible
sadness, "for Bobby is no gentleman."

"But it _is_ me, daddy," cried the poor youth, almost sobbing aloud as
he kissed the hand he held, "why, you old curmudgeon, I thought you'd
'ave know'd the voice o' yer own son!  I've grow'd a bit, no doubt, but
it's me for all that.  Look at me!"

Ned did look, with all the intensity of which he was capable, and then
fell back on his pillow with a great sigh, while a death-like pallor
overspread his face, almost inducing the belief that he was really dead.

"No, Bobby, I ain't dead yet," he said in a low whisper, as his
terrified son bent over him.  "Thank God for sendin' you back to me."

He stopped, but, gradually, strength returned, and he again looked
earnestly at his son.

"Bobby," he said, in stronger tones, "I thought the end was drawin'
near--or, rather, the beginnin'--the beginnin' o' the New Life.  But I
don't feel like that now.  I feel, some'ow, as I used to feel in the
ring when they sponged my face arter a leveller.  I did think I was done
for this mornin'.  The nurse thought so too, for I 'eerd her say so; an'
the doctor said as much.  Indeed I'm not sure that my own 'art didn't
say so--but I'll cheat 'em all yet, Bobby, my boy.  You've put new life
into my old carcase, an' I'll come up to the scratch yet--see if I
don't."

But Ned Frog did not "come up to the scratch."  His work for the Master
on earth was finished--the battle fought out and the victory gained.

"Gi' them all my love in Canada, Bobby, an' say to your dear mother that
I _know_ she forgives me--but I'll tell her all about that when we
meet--in the better land."

Thus he died with his rugged head resting on the bosom of his loved and
loving son.



CHAPTER THIRTY.

THE NEW HOME.

Once again, and for the last time, we shift our scene to Canada--to the
real backwoods now--the Brandon Settlement.

Sir Richard, you see, had been a noted sportsman in his youth.  He had
chased the kangaroo in Australia, the springbok in Africa, and the tiger
in India, and had fished salmon in Norway, so that his objections to the
civilised parts of Canada were as strong as those of the Red Indians
themselves.  He therefore resolved, when making arrangements to found a
colony, to push as far into the backwoods as was compatible with comfort
and safety.  Hence we now find him in the _very_ far West.

We decline to indicate the exact spot, because idlers, on hearing of its
fertility and beauty and the felicity of its inhabitants, might be
tempted to crowd to it in rather inconvenient numbers.  Let it suffice
to say, in the language of the aborigines, that it lies towards the
setting sun.

Around Brandon Settlement there are rolling prairies, illimitable
pasture-land, ocean-like lakes, grand forests, and numerous rivers and
rivulets, with flat-lands, low-lands, high-lands, undulating lands,
wood-lands, and, in the far-away distance, glimpses of the back-bone of
America--peaked, and blue, and snow-topped.

The population of this happy region consists largely of waifs with a
considerable sprinkling of strays.  There are also several families of
"haristocrats," who, however, are not "bloated"--very much the reverse.

The occupation of the people is, as might be expected, agricultural;
but, as the colony is very active and thriving and growing fast, many
other branches of industry have sprung up, so that the hiss of the saw
and the ring of the anvil, the clatter of the water-mill, and the clack
of the loom, may be heard in all parts of it.

There is a rumour that a branch of the Great Pacific Railway is to be
run within a mile of the Brandon Settlement; but that is not yet
certain.  The rumour, however, has caused much joyful hope to some, and
rather sorrowful anxiety to others.  Mercantile men rejoice at the
prospect.  Those who are fond of sport tremble, for it is generally
supposed, though on insufficient grounds, that the railway-whistle
frightens away game.  Any one who has travelled in the Scottish
Highlands and seen grouse close to the line regarding your clanking
train with supreme indifference, must doubt the evil influence of
railways on game.  Meanwhile, the sportsmen of Brandon Settlement pursue
the buffalo and stalk the deer, and hunt the brown and the grizzly bear,
and ply rod, net, gun, and rifle, to their hearts' content.

There is even a bank in this thriving settlement--a branch, if we
mistake not, of the flourishing Bank of Montreal--of which a certain Mr
Welland is manager, and a certain Thomas Balls is hall-porter, as well
as general superintendent, when not asleep in the hall-chair.  Mrs
Welland, known familiarly as Di, is regarded as the mother of the
settlement--or, more correctly, the guardian angel--for she is not yet
much past the prime of life.  She is looked upon as a sort of goddess by
many people; indeed she resembles one in mind, face, figure, and
capacity.  We use the last word advisedly, for she knows and sympathises
with every one, and does so much for the good of the community, that the
bare record of her deeds would fill a large volume.  Amongst other
things she trains, in the way that they should go, a family of ten
children, whose adoration of her is said to be perilously near to
idolatry.  She also finds time to visit an immense circle of friends.
There are no poor in Brandon Settlement yet, though there are a few sick
and a good many aged, to whom she ministers.  She also attends on Sir
Richard, who is part of the Bank family, as well as a director.

The good knight wears well.  His time is divided between the children of
Di, the affairs of the settlement, and a neighbouring stream in which
the trout are large and pleasantly active.  Mrs Screwbury, who spent
her mature years in nursing little Di, is renewing her youth by nursing
little Di's little ones, among whom there is, of course, another little
Di whom her father styles Di-licious.  Jessie Summers assists in the
nursery, and the old cook reigns in the Canadian kitchen with as much
grace as she formerly reigned in the kitchen at the "West-End."

Quite close to the Bank buildings there is a charming villa, with a view
of a lake in front and a peep through the woods at the mountains behind,
in which dwells the cashier of the Bank with his wife and family.  His
name is Robert Frog, Esquire.  His wife's name is Martha.  His eldest
son, Bobby--a boy of about nine or ten--is said to be the most larky boy
in the settlement.  We know not as to that, but any one with half an eye
can see that he is singularly devoted to his mild little brown-eyed
mother.

There is a picturesque little hut at the foot of the garden of Beehive
Villa, which is inhabited by an old woman.  To this hut Bobby the second
is very partial, for the old woman _is_ exceedingly fond of Bobby--quite
spoils him in fact--and often entertains him with strange stories about
a certain lion of her acquaintance which was turned into a lamb.  Need
we say that this old woman is Mrs Frog?  The Bank Cashier offered her a
home in Beehive Villa, but she prefers the little hut at the foot of the
garden, where she sits in state to receive visitors and is tenderly
cared for by a very handsome young woman named Matty, who calls her
"mother".  Matty is the superintendent of a neighbouring school, and it
is said that one of the best of the masters of that school is anxious to
make Matty and the school his own.  If so, that master must be a greedy
fellow--all things considered.

There is a civil engineer--often styled by Bob Frog an uncivil
engineer--who has planned all the public works of the settlement, and is
said to have a good prospect of being engaged in an important capacity
on the projected railway.  But of this we cannot speak authoritatively.
His name is T Lampay, Esquire.  Ill-natured people assert that when he
first came to the colony his name was Tim Lumpy, and at times his wife
Hetty calls him Lumpy to his face, but, as wives do sometimes call their
husbands improper names, the fact proves nothing except the perversity
of woman.  There is a blind old woman in his establishment, however, who
has grown amiably childish in her old age, who invariably calls him Tim.
Whatever may be the truth as to this, there is no question that he is a
thriving man and an office-bearer in the Congregational church, whose
best Sabbath-school teacher is his wife Hetty, and whose pastor is the
Reverend John Seaward--a man of singular good fortune, for, besides
having such men as Robert Frog, T. Lampay, and Sir Richard Brandon to
back him up and sympathise with him on all occasions, he is further
supported by the aid and countenance of Samuel Twitter, senior, Samuel
Twitter, junior, Mrs Twitter, and all the other Twitters, some of whom
are married and have twitterers of their own.

Samuel Twitter and his sons are now farmers!  Yes, reader, you may look
and feel surprised to hear it, but your astonishment will never equal
that of old Twitter himself at finding himself in that position.  He
never gets over it, and has been known, while at the tail of the plough,
to stop work, clap a hand on each knee, and roar with laughter at the
mere idea of his having taken to agriculture late in life!  He tried to
milk the cows when he first began, but, after having frightened two or
three animals into fits, overturned half a dozen milk-pails, and been
partially gored, he gave it up.  Sammy is his right-hand man, and the
hope of his declining years.  True, this right-hand has got the name of
being slow, but he is considered as pre-eminently sure.

Mrs Twitter has taken earnestly to the sick, since there are no poor to
befriend.  She is also devoted to the young--and there is no lack of
them.  She is likewise strong in the tea-party line, and among her most
favoured guests are two ladies named respectively Loper and Larrabel,
and two gentlemen named Crackaby and Stickler.  It is not absolutely
certain whether these four are a blessing to the new settlement or the
reverse.  Some hold that things in general would progress more smoothly
if they were gone; others that their presence affords excellent and
needful opportunity for the exercise of forbearance and charity.  At all
events Mrs Twitter holds that she could not live without them, and
George Brisbane, Esquire, who owns a lovely mansion on the outskirts of
the settlement, which he has named Lively Hall, vows that the departure
of that quartette would be a distinct and irreparable loss to society in
Brandon Settlement.

One more old friend we have to mention, namely, Reggie North, who has
become a colporteur, and wanders far and near over the beautiful face of
Canada, scattering the seed of Life with more vigour and greater success
than her sons scatter the golden grain.  His periodical visits to the
settlement are always hailed with delight, because North has a genial
way of relating his adventures and describing his travels, which renders
it necessary for him to hold forth as a public lecturer at times in the
little chapel, for the benefit of the entire community.  On these
occasions North never fails, you may be quite sure, to advance his
