the jetty, it _is_ wiser!"

A crowd of men pushed between them at this moment.  Immediately after, a
female shout was heard, followed by the words, "There he is!  Och, it's
himsilf--the darlint!"

Mrs Flynn had discovered the little corporal, and her trooper son,
Terence, who had come down with her, stood by to see fair-play while the
two embraced.

Drifting with a rather rapid tide of mingled human beings, Miles and his
mother soon found themselves stranded beside the coffee-shed.  Retiring
behind this they continued their conference there, disturbed only by
wind and weather, while the distribution of hot coffee was going on in
front.

Meanwhile, when leave was obtained, Armstrong made his way to the
Institute, where the old scene of bustle and hilarity on the arrival of
a troop-ship was going on.  Here, in a private room, he discovered Emmy
and the _cause_ of her not appearing on the jetty.

"Look at him--Willie the second!" cried the little woman, holding up a
bundle of some sort.  The soldier was staggered for a moment--the only
infantry that had ever staggered him!--for his wife had said nothing
about this bundle in her letters.  He recovered, however, and striding
across the room embraced the wife and the bundle in one tremendous hug!

The wife did not object, but the bundle did, and instantly set up a howl
that quite alarmed the father, and was sweetest music in the mother's
ears!

"Now tell me," said the little woman, after calming the baby and putting
it in a crib; "have you brought Miles Milton home all safe?"

"Yes, all right, Emmy."

"And is he married to that dear girl you wrote about?"

"No, not yet--of course."

"But are they engaged?"

"No.  Miles told me that he would not presume to ask her while he had no
home to offer her."

"Pooh!  He's a goose!  He ought to make sure of _her_, and let the home
look after itself.  He may lose her.  Girls, you know, are changeable,
giddy things!"

"I know nothing of the sort, Emmy."

The young wife laughed, and--well, there is no need to say what else she
did.

About the same time, Mrs Milton and her son were seated in another
private room of the Institute finishing off that interchange of
confidences which had begun in such confusion.  As it happened, they
were conversing on the same subject that occupied Emmy and her husband.

"You have acted rightly, Miles," said the mother, "for it would have
been unfair and selfish to have induced the poor girl to accept you
until you had some prospect of a home to give her.  God will bless you
for doing _the right_, and trusting to Him.  And now, dear boy, are you
prepared for bad news?"

"Prepared for anything!" answered Miles, pressing his mother's hand,
"but I hope the bad news does not affect you, mother."

"It does.  Your dear father died a bankrupt.  I shrank from telling you
this when you were wounded and ill.  So you have to begin again the
battle of life with only one hand, my poor boy, for the annuity I have
of twenty pounds a year will not go far to keep us both."

Mrs Milton tried to speak lightly on this point, by way of breaking it
to her son, but she nearly broke down, for she had already begun to feel
the pinch of extreme poverty, and knew it to be very, very different
from what "well-off" people fancy.  The grave manner in which her son
received this news filled her with anxiety.

"Mother," he said, after pondering in silence for a few moments, and
taking her hand in his while he slipped the handless arm round her
waist, "the news is indeed serious, but our Father whom you have trusted
so long will not fail us now.  Happily it is my right hand that has been
spared, and wonders, you know, may be wrought with a strong right hand,
especially if assisted by a strong left stump, into which spoons, forks,
hooks, and all manner of ingenious contrivances can be fitted.  Now,
cheer up, little mother, and I'll tell you what we will do.  But first,
is there _nothing_ left?  Do the creditors take everything?"

"All, I believe, except some of the furniture which has been kindly left
for us to start afresh with.  But we must quit the old home next month.
At least, so I am told by my kind little lawyer, who looks after
everything, for _I_ understand nothing."

"Your mention of a lawyer reminds me, mother, that a poor sergeant, who
died a short time ago in Egypt, made me his executor, and as I am
painfully ignorant of the duties of an executor I'll go and see this
`kind little lawyer' if you will give me his address."

Leaving Miles to consult his lawyer, we will now turn to a meeting--a
grand tea-fight--in the great hall of the Institute, that took place a
few days after the return of the troop-ship which brought our hero and
his friends to England.  Some telling incidents occurred at this fight
which render it worthy of notice.

First, Miss Robinson herself presided and gave a stirring address,
which, if not of much interest to readers who did not hear it, was a
point of immense attraction to the hundreds of soldiers, sailors, and
civilians to whom it was delivered, for it was full of sympathy, and
information, and humour, and encouragement, and, above all, of the
Gospel.

Everybody worth mentioning was there--that is, everybody connected with
our tale who was in England at the time.  Miles and his mother of course
were there, and Armstrong with Emmy--ay, and with Willie the second
too--who was pronounced on all hands to be the born image of his father.
Alas for his father, if that had been true!  A round piece of dough
with three holes punched in it and a little knot in the midst would have
borne as strong a resemblance to Miles as that baby did.  Nevertheless,
it was a "magnificent" baby! and "_so_ good," undeniably good, for it
slept soundly in its little mother's lap the whole evening!

Stevenson was also there, you may be sure; and so were Moses and
Sutherland, and Rattling Bill Simkin and Corporal Flynn, with his mother
and Terence the Irish trooper, who fraternised with Johnson the English
trooper, who was also home on the sick-list--though he seemed to have a
marvellous colour and appetite for a sick man.

"Is that the `Soldiers Friend?'" asked Simkin, in a whisper, of a man
who stood near him, as a lady came on the platform and took the chair.

"Ay, that's her," answered the man--and the speaker was Thomas Tufnell,
the ex-trooper of the Queen's Bays, and the present manager of the
Institute--"Ay, that's the `Soldier's Friend.'"

"Well, I might have guessed it," returned Simkin, "from the kindly way
in which she shook hands with a lot of soldiers just now."

"Yes, she has shook hands with a good many red-coats in her day, has the
`Soldier's Friend,'" returned the manager.  "Why, I remember on one
occasion when she was giving a lecture to soldiers, and so many men came
forward to shake hands with her that, as she told me herself, her hand
was stiff and swelled all night after it!"

"But it's not so much for what she has done for ourselves that we're
grateful to her," remarked a corporal, who sat on Simkin's right, "as
for what she has done for our wives, widows, and children, through the
_Soldiers' and Sailors' Wives' Aid Association_.  Lookin' arter them
when we're away fightin' our country's battles has endeared her to us
more than anything else."

Thus favourably predisposed, Simkin was open to good impressions that
night.  But, indeed, there was an atmosphere--a spirit of good-will--in
the hall that night which rendered many others besides Simkin open to
good impressions.  Among the civilians there was a man named Sloper, who
had for some time past been carefully fished for by an enthusiastic
young red-coat whom he had basely misled and swindled.  He had been at
last hooked by the young red-coat, played, and finally landed in the
hall, with his captor beside him to keep him there--for Sloper was a
slippery fish, with much of the eel in his nature.

Perhaps the most unexpected visitors to the hall were two ladies in
mourning, who had just arrived from Egypt by way of Brindisi.  Mrs and
Miss Drew, having occasion to pass through Portsmouth on their way home,
learned that there was to be a tea-fight at the Institute, and Marion
immediately said, "I should like _so_ much to see it!"

However much "_so_ much" was, Mrs Drew said she would like to see it
_as_ much, so away they went, and were conducted to the front row.
There Miles saw them!  With his heart in his mouth, and his head in
confusion, he quietly rose, bade his wondering mother get up; conducted
her to the front seat, and, setting her down beside the Drews,
introduced them.  Then, sitting down beside Marion, he went in for a
pleasant evening.

And it _was_ a pleasant evening!  Besides preliminary tea and buns,
there were speeches, songs, recitations, etcetera,--all being received
with immense satisfaction by a crowded house, which had not yet risen to
the unenviable heights of classical taste and _blaseism_.  As for Miles
and Marion, nothing came amiss to them!  If a singer had put B flat in
the place of A natural they would have accepted it as quite natural.  If
a humourist had said the circle was a square, they would have believed
it--in a sense--and tried to square their reason accordingly.

But nothing is without alloy in this life.  To the surprise of Miles and
his mother, their "kind little lawyer" also made his appearance in the
hall.  More than that, he insisted, by signs, that Miles should go out
and speak with him.  But Miles was obdurate.  He was anchored, and
nothing but cutting the cable could move him from his anchorage.

At last the "kind little man" pushed his way through the crowd.

"I _must_ have a word with you, my dear sir.  It is of importance," he
said.

Thus adjured, Miles unwillingly cut the cable, and drifted into a
passage.

"My dear sir," said the little man, seizing his hand, "I congratulate
you."

"You're very kind, but pray, explain why."

"I find that you are heir to a considerable fortune."

Miles was somewhat interested in this, and asked, "How's that?"

"Well, you remember Hardy's will, which you put into my hands a few days
ago?"

"Yes; what then?  _That_ can't be the fortune!"

"Indeed it is.  Hardy, you remember, made you his residuary legatee.  I
find, on inquiry, that the old cousin you told me about, who meant to
leave all his money to build a hospital, changed his mind at the last
and made out a will in favour of Hardy, who was his only relative.  So,
you see, you, being Hardy's heir, have come into possession of something
like two thousand a year."

To this Miles replied by a whistle of surprise, and then said, "Is that
all?"

"Upon my word, sir," said the `kind little lawyer,' in a blaze of
astonishment, "you appear to take this communication in a peculiar
manner!"

"You mistake me," returned Miles, with a laugh.  "I don't mean `is that
all the fortune?' but `is that all you have to say?'"

"It is, and to my mind I have said a good deal."

"You certainly have.  And, believe me, I am not indifferent or
unthankful, but--but--the fact is, that at present I am _particularly_
engaged.  Good-bye, and thank you."

So saying, Miles shook the puzzled old gentleman heartily by the hand,
and hurried back to his anchorage in the hall.

"I've done it, mother!" whispered Miles, two days thereafter, in the
privacy of the Institute reading-room.

"Miles!" said the startled lady, with a reproachful look, "I thought you
said that nothing would induce you--"

"Circumstances have altered, mother.  I have had a long consultation
with your `kind little lawyer,' and he has related some interesting
facts to me."

Here followed a detailed account of the facts.

"So, you see, I went and proposed at once--not to the lawyer--to
Marion."

"And was accepted?"

"Well--yes.  I could hardly believe it at the time.  I scarcely believe
it now, so I'm going back this afternoon to make quite sure."

"I congratulate you, my darling boy, for a good wife is God's best gift
to man."

"How do you know she is good, mother?"

"I know it, because--I know it!  Anybody looking in her face can _see_
it.  And with two thousand a year, why--"

"One thousand, mother."

"I thought you said two, my son."

"So I did.  That is the amount of the fortune left by the eccentric old
hospital-for-incurables founder.  When poor Hardy made out his will he
made me residuary legatee because the trifle he had to leave--his kit,
etcetera,--was not worth dividing between me and Armstrong.  If it had
been worth much he would have divided it.  It is therefore my duty now
to divide it with my friend."

But in our anxiety to tell you these interesting facts, dear reader, we
have run ahead of the tea-fight!  To detail all its incidents, all its
bearings, all its grand issues and blessed influences, would require a
whole volume.  We return to it only to mention one or two gratifying
facts.

It was essentially a temperance--that is, a total-abstinence, a
blue-ribbon--meeting, and, at the end, the "Soldiers' Friend" earnestly
invited all who felt so disposed to come forward and sign the pledge.
At the same time, medals and prizes were presented to those among the
civilians who had loyally kept their pledge intact for certain periods
of time.  On an average, over a thousand pledges a year are taken at the
Institute, and we cannot help thinking that the year we are writing of
must have exceeded the average--to judge from the numbers that pressed
forward on this particular night.

There were soldiers, sailors, and civilians; men, women, and children.
Amongst the first, Rattling Bill Simkin walked to the front--his moral
courage restored to an equality with his physical heroism--and put down
his name.  So did Johnson and Sutherland--the former as timid before the
audience as he had been plucky before the Soudanese, but walking erect,
nevertheless, as men do when conscious that they are in the right; the
latter "as bold as brass"--as if to defy the world in arms to make him
ever again drink another drop of anything stronger than tea.

Moses Pyne also "put on the blue," although, to do him justice, he
required no protection of that sort, and so did Corporal Flynn and
Terence and their mother--which last, if truth must be told, stood more
in need of the pledge than her stout sons.

Among the civilians several noted personages were influenced in the
right direction.  Chief among these was sodden, blear-eyed, disreputable
Sloper, whose trembling hand scrawled a hieroglyphic, supposed to
represent his name, which began indeed with an S, but ended in a
mysterious prolongation, and was further rendered indecipherable by a
penitent tear which fell upon it from the point of his red, red nose!

Some people laughed, and said that there was no use in getting Sloper to
put on the blue-ribbon, that he was an utterly demoralised man, that he
had no strength of character, that no power on earth could save _him_!
They were right.  No power on earth could save him--or them!  These
people forgot that it is not the righteous but sinners who are called to
repentance.

Time passed away and wrought its wonted changes.  Among other things, it
brought back to Portsmouth big, burly Jack Molloy, as hearty and
vigorous as he was when being half-hanged in the Soudan, but--_minus_ a
leg!  Poor Jack! a spent cannon-ball--would that it had been spent in
vain!--removed it, below the knee, much more promptly than it could have
been taken off by the surgeon's knife.  But what was loss to the Royal
Navy was gain to Portsmouth, for Jack Molloy came home and devoted
himself, heart and soul, to the lending of "a helping hand" to his
fellow-creatures in distress--devoting his attentions chiefly to the
region lying round Nobbs Lane, and causing himself to be adored
principally by old women and children.  And there and thus he probably
works to this day--at least, some very like him do.

When not thus engaged he is prone to take a cruise to a certain rural
district in the south of England, where he finds congenial company in
two very tall, erect, moustached, dignified gentlemen, who have a
tendency to keep step as they walk, one of whom has lost his left hand,
and who dwell in two farm-houses close together.

These two gentlemen have remarkably pretty wives, and wonderfully
boisterous children, and the uproar which these children make when
Molloy comes to cast anchor among them, is stupendous!  As for the
appearance of the brood, and of Jack after a spree among the hay, the
word has yet to be invented which will correctly describe it.

The two military-looking farmers are spoken of by the people around as
philanthropists.  Like true philanthropists, whose foundation-motive is
love to God, they do not limit their attentions to their own little
neighbourhood, but allow their sympathies and their benefactions to run
riot round the world--wheresoever there is anything that is true,
honourable, just, pure, lovely, or of good report to be thought of, or
done, or assisted.

Only one of these acts of sympathy and benefaction we will mention.
Every Christmas there is received by Miss Robinson at the Soldiers'
Institute, Portsmouth, a huge hamper full of old and new garments of all
kinds--shoes, boots, gowns, frocks, trousers, shawls, comforters,
etcetera,--with the words written inside the lid--"Blessed are they that
consider the poor."  And on the same day come two cheques in a letter.
We refuse, for the best of all reasons, to divulge the amount of those
cheques, but we consider it no breach of confidence to reveal the fact
that the letter containing them is signed by two old and grateful Blue
Lights.
