lowered it carefully down, and then, when it was all out, swung himself
out over the parapet, and slid down the rope. The height was over
eighty feet; but the descent was a mere nothing for Dick, accustomed to
lark about in the rigging of a man-o'-war.

He stood perfectly quiet for a minute or two after his feet touched the
ground, but outside everything was still. Through the open-carved
stonework of a window he could hear voices inside the tomb, and had no
doubt that the leaders of the enemy's force were there.

From the parapet, in the afternoon, he had gained an accurate idea of
the position of the cavalry, and toward this he at once made his way.
He took off his boots and walked lightly until he approached the
enemy's bivouac. Then he went cautiously. The ground was covered with
sleeping figures, all wrapped like mummies in their clothes; and
although the night was dusk, it was easy in the starlight to see the
white figures. Even had one been awake, Dick had little fear, as,
except near a fire, his figure would have been indistinguishable. There
was no difficulty, when he neared the spot, in finding the horses, as
the sound of their pawing the ground, eating, and the occasional short
neigh of two quarreling, was clearly distinguishable.

Their position once clear, Dick moved round them. He had noticed that
four officers' horses were picketed further away, beyond the general
mass of the men's, and these could therefore be more easily removed,
and would, moreover, be more likely to be fast and sound. They had,
too, the advantage of being placed close to the road by which the
English force had marched on the day before.

Dick was some time in finding the horses he was on the lookout for; but
at last he heard a snorting at a short distance off, and on reaching
the spot found the horses he was in search of. They were all saddled,
but none had bridles. It would be, Dick knew, useless to look for them,
and he felt sure that the halter would be sufficient for well-trained
horses.

Before proceeding to work he reconnoitered the ground around. He found
the way to the road, which was but twenty yards distant, and discovered
also that the syces, or grooms, were asleep close by the horses; a
little further off were a party of sleeping troopers. Dick now cut off
the heel ropes by which two of the horses were picketed, and then,
leading them by the halters, moved quietly toward the road. To get upon
this, however, there was a ditch first to be passed, and in crossing it
one of the horses stumbled.

"What is that?" exclaimed one of the syces, sitting up. "Halloo!" he
continued, leaping up; "two of the horses have got loose."

The others leaped to their feet and ran in the direction whence came
the noise which had awakened them, thinking that the horses had drawn
their picket pegs.

By this time Dick was in the saddle, and giving a kick with his heels
to the horse he was on, and striking the other with the halter which he
held in his hand, dashed off into a gallop.

A shout burst from the syces, and several of the troopers, springing to
their feet and seizing their arms, ran up to know what was the matter.

"Some thief has stolen the colonel's horse," exclaimed one of the syces.

The troopers did not like to fire, as it would have alarmed the camp;
besides, which a random fire in the darkness would be of no avail; so,
grumbling that the syces would have to answer for it in the morning,
they went off to sleep again; while the men in charge of the two horses
which had been taken after some consultation decided that it would be
unsafe to remain to meet the anger of the officers in the morning, and
so stole off in the darkness and made for their native villages.

Dick, hearing that he was not pursued, pulled up in a half a mile, and
gave a loud, shrill "cooey," the Australian call. He knew that this
would be heard by his father, sitting listening at the top of the dome,
and that he would learn that so far he had succeeded. Then he set the
horses off again in a hand gallop and rode steadily down the road.
Every hour or so he changed from horse to horse, thus giving them a
comparative rest by turns. Occasionally he allowed them to walk for a
bit to get their wind, and then again rode on at a gallop. It was about
eleven o'clock when he started on his ride. By four in the morning he
was at the spot where the party had separated from the column, having
thus made forty miles. After that he went more slowly; but it was a
little past nine when, with his two exhausted horses, he rode into the
camp at Lucknow, where his appearance created quite an excitement.

Dick's story was briefly told; and the two horses, which were both
splendid animals, were taken off to be fed and rubbed down; while Dick,
accompanied by the colonel of the cavalry regiment where he had halted,
went at once to the camp of the commander-in-chief.

Sir Colin listened to Dick's story in silence.

"This will be the band," he said, "that Colonel Lawson's column went to
attack; they must have altered their course. Something must be done at
once. There shall be no delay, my lad; a force shall be ready to start
in an hour. I suppose you will want to go with them. I advise you to go
back to Colonel Harper's tent, get into a bath, and get a couple of
natives to shampoo you. That will take away all your stiffness. By the
time that's over, and you have had some breakfast, the troops will be
in readiness."

Dick left Sir Colin, but delighted at the readiness and promptness of
the fine old soldier; while Sir Colin called his military secretary,
and at once arranged for the dispatch of a body of troops.

"There must be no delay," the commander-in-chief said. "If
possible--and it is possible--these scoundrels must be attacked at
daylight to-morrow morning. They will see the rope the lad escaped by,
but they will not dream of an attack so early, and may be caught
napping. Besides, it is all important to rescue those officers, whom
they will have been making a target of all day, especially as one is
badly wounded, and will be in the full blaze of the sun. See that a
wagon and an ambulance accompany the column. Send a regiment of Punjaub
horse, three field guns, and three hundred infantry in light marching
order. Let gharries be got together at once to take the infantry forty
miles, then they will start fresh for a thirty-mile march. The cavalry
and guns can go on at once; let them march halfway, then, unsaddle and
rest. If they are off by half-past ten, they can get to their
halting-place by five. Then if they have five hours' rest they will
catch the infantry up before daybreak, and attack just as it gets
light. Those light Punjaub horse can do it. Now, which regiments shall
we send?"

A quarter of an hour later bugles were blowing, and by ten o'clock
three hundred British infantry were packed in light carts, and the
cavalry and guns were drawn up in readiness. Dick took his place in the
ambulance carriage, as, although greatly refreshed, he had had plenty
of riding for a time, and in the ambulance he could lie down, and get
through the journey without fatigue. Sir Colin himself rode up just as
they were starting, and shook hands with Dick, and expressed his warm
hope that he would find his friends safe at the end of the journey, and
then the cavalry started.

Dick has always asserted that never in his life did he make such a
short journey as that. Worn out by the excitement and fatigue of the
preceding thirty hours, he fell fast asleep in the ambulance before he
had gone a mile, and did not awake until the surgeon shook him by the
shoulder.

"Halloo!" he cried, leaping up; "where are we?"

"We are, as far as we can tell, about half a mile from the tomb. I
would not wake you when we halted, Warrener. I thought you wanted sleep
more than food. We have been halting half an hour here, and the cavalry
have just come up. It is about an hour before daybreak. The colonel
wants you to act as guide."

"All right," Dick said, leaping out; "just to think that I have been
asleep for eighteen hours!"

A hasty council was held, and it was determined that as the country was
somewhat wooded beyond the tomb, but perfectly open on that side, the
cavalry and artillery should remain where they were; that the infantry
should make a _detour_, and attack at daybreak from the other side; and
that as the enemy fell back, the artillery and cavalry should deal with
them:

Not a moment was lost. The infantry, who were sitting down after their
long tramp, got cheerily on to their feet again, for they knew that
they were going to attack the enemy; and Dick led them off the road by
a considerable _detour_, to come upon the enemy from the other side. By
the moonlight the tomb was visible, and served as a center round which
to march; but they were too far off to enable Dick to see whether any
damage had been done to the dome.

Day was just breaking when the infantry gained the desired position;
then throwing out two hundred men in skirmishing order, while the other
one hundred were kept in hand as a reserve, the advance began. It was
not until they were within three hundred yards of the enemy that they
were perceived by the sentries. The challenge was answered by a musket
shot, and as the rebels sprang to their feet a heavy fire was poured in
upon them. In an instant all was wild confusion. Taken completely by
surprise, and entirely ignorant of the strength of the enemy, the
natives, after a wild fire in the direction of the advancing foe, fled
precipitately. Their officers tried to rally them, and as the smallness
of the force attacking them became visible, the Sepoys with their old
habit of discipline began to draw together. But at this moment the
guns, loaded with grape, poured into their rear, and with a cheer the
Punjaub cavalry burst into their midst.

Thenceforth there was no longer any idea of fighting; it was simply a
rout any a pursuit. The rebels' own guns fell at once into the hands of
the infantry, and were quickly turned upon the masses of fugitives,
who, mown down by the fire of the nine guns, and cut up by the cavalry
who charged hither and thither among them, while volleys of musketry
swept through them, threw away their arms and fled wildly. Over a
thousand of them were left dead on the plain, and had not the horses of
the cavalry been too exhausted to continue the pursuit, a far greater
number would have fallen.

Dick took no part in their fighting; a company, fifty strong, with an
officer, had been told off to attack and carry the tomb, under his
guidance. Disregarding all else, this party with leveled bayonets had
burst through the throng, and made straight for the door of the tomb.
Many of the enemy's troops had run in there, and for a minute or two
there was a fierce fight in the great hall; then, when the last foe had
fallen, Dick led the men to the stairs, up which many of the enemy had
fled.

"Quick," he shouted, "follow them close up!"

Some of them were but a few steps ahead, and Dick, closely followed by
his men, burst on to the terrace at their very heels. It was well that
he did so; for the guard upon the terrace, seeing that all was lost
below, were preparing to sell their lives dearly, and to make a long
resistance at the top of the stairs. Dick and his men, however, rushed
so closely upon the heels of their own comrades from below that they
were taken completely by surprise. Some turned at once to fly, others
made an effort to oppose their enemy; but it was useless. Two or three
of the Sepoy leaders, calling to their men to follow them, made a rush
at the British, and Dick found himself engaged in a hand-to-hand
contest with Aboo Raab, the rebel leader. He was a powerful and
desperate man, and with a swinging blow he beat down Dick's guard and
inflicted a severe wound on his head; but Dick leaped forward and ran
him through the body, just as the bayonet of one of the British
soldiers pierced him in the side.

For a minute or two the fight was fierce, but every moment added to the
avenging force, and with a cheer the soldiers rushed at them with the
bayonet. In five minutes all was over. Many of the Sepoys leaped over
the parapet, and were dashed to pieces, preferring that death to the
bayonet; while on the terrace no single Sepoy at the end of that time
remained alive.

When all was over Dick gave a shout, which was answered from above.

"Are you all right, Dunlop?"

"Yes, thank God; but Ned is delirious. Send some water up at once."

Dick was too much shaken by the severe cut he had received in the head
to attempt to climb the ladder, but the officer in command of the
company at once offered to ascend. Several of the men had a little
water left in their water-bottles, and from them one was filled, and
slung over the officer's neck.

"I have some brandy in my flask," he said, and started up the steps.

In a few minutes he descended again.

"Your brother is wildly delirious," he said; "they have bound his
injured arm to his side with a sash, but they cannot leave him. How is
he to be got down?"

"There is plenty of rope and sacking down below," Dick said, after a
moment's thought. "I think that they had better wrap him up in sacking,
so that he cannot move his arms, tie a rope round him, and lower him
down close by the side of the steps, my father coming down side by side
with him, so as to speak to him and tranquillize him."

A soldier was sent below for the articles required, and with them the
officer, accompanied by a sergeant to assist him in lowering Ned from
above, again mounted. In a few minutes Dick's plan was carried out, and
Ned was lowered safely to the terrace. Then four soldiers carried him
below, and he was soon laid on a bed of sacks in the great hall, under
the care of the surgeon, with cold-water bandages round his head.

Then Dick had time to ask his father how the preceding day had passed.

"First tell me, Dick, by what miracle you got back so soon. To-morrow
morning was the very earliest time I thought that relief was possible!"

Dick told his story briefly; and then Colonel Warrener related what had
happened to them on the dome during the day.

"As soon as day broke, Dick, they opened a heavy musketry fire at us,
but they were obliged to go so far off to get a fair view of us that
the smooth-bore would hardly carry up, and even had we been hit, I
question if the balls would have penetrated, though they might have
given a sharp knock. Half an hour later the artillery fire began. We
agreed that Dunlop and I should by turns lie so as to command the
stairs, while the other kept with Ned on the other side of the dome.
The enemy divided their guns, and put them on each side also. Lying
down, we presented the smallest possible mark for them; but for some
hours it was very hot. Nine out of ten of their shot, just went over
the dome altogether. The spike was hit twenty or thirty times, and
lower down a good many holes were knocked in the dome; but the shots
that struck near us all glanced and flew over. They fired a couple of
hundred shot altogether, and at midday they stopped--for dinner, I
suppose--and did not begin again. I suspect they were running short of
ammunition. Once, when the firing was hottest, thinking, I suppose, to
catch us napping, an attempt was made to climb the ladder; but Dunlop,
who was on watch, put a bullet through the first fellow's head, and by
the yell that followed I suspect that in his fall he swept all the
others off the ladder. Anyhow, there was no repetition of the trial.
The heat was fearful, and Dunlop and I suffered a good deal from
thirst, for there was not much water left in the bottle, and we wanted
that to pour down Ned's throat from time to time, and to sop his
bandages with. Ned got delirious about eleven o'clock, and we had great
trouble in holding him down. The last drop of water was finished in the
night, and we should have had a terrible day of it if you had not
arrived. And now let us hear what the surgeon says about poor Ned."

The doctor's report was not consoling; the wound was a very severe one,
the collar-bone had been smashed in fragments; but the high state of
fever was even a more serious matter than the wound.

"What will you do, father?"

"I must carry out my orders, Dick. Dunlop and I must go on to Agra, and
then on to join our regiment. Ned will, of course, be taken back to
Lucknow, and you must give up your trip, and stay and nurse him. Of
course, if he gets over it, poor boy, he will be invalided home, and
you can travel with him down to Calcutta. I shall send the girls home
by the first opportunity. India will be no place for ladies for some
time. We shall have months of marching and fighting before we finally
stamp out the mutiny. There will be sure to be convoys of sick and
wounded going down, and a number of ladies at Meerut who will be
leaving at the first opportunity. It is very sad, old boy, leaving you
and Ned at such a time; but I must do my duty, whatever happens." The
British force encamped for that day and the next around the tomb which
had been the scene of so much fierce fighting; for the animals were so
much exhausted by their tremendous march that it was thought better to
give them rest. Ned continued delirious; but he was more quiet now, as
his strength diminished. Fortunately, the ambulance was well supplied;
and cooling drinks were given to him, and all was done that care and
attention could suggest. There were three other wounded in addition to
Dick, all men who had taken part in the fight on the terrace; none had
been killed. Elsewhere no casualty had happened in the force.

Early on the third morning the column was again in motion. The forty
miles to the crossroads were done in two days, and here Colonel
Warrener and Major Dunlop parted from Dick, going on with a small
escort of cavalry to Agra.

It was a sad parting; and it is doing no injustice to Dick's manhood to
say that he shed many tears. But his father promised that if the
Lucknow jewels turned out to be real, he would leave the service, and
come back to England at the end of the war.

The gharries were all in waiting at the crossroad, and another day
brought them to Lucknow, where the news of the defeat and dispersion of
the rebel force had already been sent on by a mounted orderly.

For a week Ned lay between life and death; then the fever left him, and
the most critical point of his illness was reached. It was for days a
question whether he had strength left to rally from his exhaustion. But
youth and a good constitution triumphed at last, and six weeks from the
day on which he was brought in, he started in a litter for Calcutta.

Dick had telegraphed to Captain Peel, and had obtained leave to remain
with his brother, and he now started for the coast with Ned. He himself
had had a sharp attack of fever--the result of his wound on the head
and the exertion he had undergone; but he was now well and strong
again, and happy in Ned's convalescence.

The journey was easy and pleasant. At Benares they went on board a
steamer, and were taken down to Calcutta. By the time they reached the
capital, Ned was sufficiently recovered to walk about with his arm in
Dick's. The use of his left arm was gone, and it was a question whether
he could ever recover it.

At Calcutta the Warreners had the delight of meeting their sister and
cousin, who had arrived there the week previous. The next four days
were happy ones indeed, and then there was another parting, for the
girls and Ned sailed in a Peninsular and Oriental steamer for England.
Dick remained a fortnight at Calcutta, until a sloop-of-war sailed to
join the China fleet, to which his ship was now attached.

It was two years later when the whole party who had been together in
the bungalow at Sandynuggher when the mutiny broke out met in London,
on the return of Dick's ship from the East. The Lucknow jewels had
turned out to be of immense value; and Messrs. Garrard, to whom they
had been sent, had offered one hundred and thirty thousand pounds for
them. The offer had been at once accepted; and the question of the
division had, after an endless exchange of letters, been finally left
by Colonel Warrener to the boys. They had insisted that Colonel
Warrener should take fifty thousand pounds, and the remainder they had
divided in four equal shares between themselves, their sister and
cousin, whom they regarded as one of themselves. This had enabled the
latter to marry, without delay, Captain Manners, whose wound had
compelled him to leave the service; while Miss Warrener had a few
months later married Major Dunlop.

Ned, too, was no longer a soldier. He had, when he arrived in England,
found that his name had been included in the brevet rank bestowed upon
all the captains of his regiment for distinguished service. He had a
year's leave given him; but at the end of that time a medical board
decided that, although greatly recovered, it would be years before he
thoroughly regained his strength; and he therefore sold his commission
and left the service.

Dick had passed as a lieutenant, and had immediately been appointed to
that rank, with a fair prospect of getting his commander's step at the
earliest possible date, as a reward for the distinguished services for
which he had been several times mentioned in dispatches at the time of
