
"May I ask why?" the Doctor said sarcastically.

"I mean, Doctor, it would be foolish of other people, but I don't think
it is foolish of him. Of course he could have done no good staying in
the boat--he would have simply thrown away his life; and yet I think,
I feel sure, that there are many men who would have thrown away their
lives in such a case. Even at that moment of terror I felt a pang, when,
without a word, he sprang overboard. I thought of it many times that
long night, in spite of my grief for my uncle and the others, and my
horror of being a prisoner in the hands of the Sepoys. I did not blame
him, because I knew how he must have felt, and that it was done in a
moment of panic. I was not so sorry for myself as for him, for I knew
that if he escaped, the thought of that moment would be terrible for
him. I need not say that in my mind the feeling that he should not
have left me so has been wiped out a thousand times by what he did
afterwards, by the risk he ran for me, and the infinite service he
rendered me by saving me from a fate worse than death. But I can enter
into his feelings. Most men would have jumped over just as he did, and
would never have blamed themselves even if they had at once started away
down the country to save their own lives, much less if they had stopped
to save mine as he has done.

"But who can wonder that he is more sensitive than others? Did he not
hear from you that I said that a coward was contemptible? Did not all
the men except you and my uncle turn their backs upon him and treat him
with contempt, in spite of his effort to meet his death by standing up
on the roof? Think how awfully he must have suffered, and then, when it
seemed that his intervention, which saved our lives, had to some extent
won him back the esteem of the men around him, that he should so fail
again, as he considers, and that with me beside him. No wonder that he
takes the view he does, and that he refuses to consider that even the
devotion and courage he afterwards showed can redeem what he considers
is a disgrace. You always said that he was brave, Doctor, and I believe
now there is no braver man living; but that makes it so much the worse
for him. A coward would be more than satisfied with himself for what he
did afterwards, and would regard it as having completely wiped out any
failing, while he magnifies the failing, such as it was, and places but
small weight on what he afterwards did. I like him all the better for
it. I know the fault, if fault it was, and I thought it so at the time,
was one for which he was not responsible, and yet I like him all the
better that he feels it so deeply."

"Well, my dear, you had better tell him so," the Doctor said dryly. "I
really agree with what you say, and you make an excellent advocate. I
cannot do better than leave the matter in your hands. You know, child,"
he said, changing his tone, "I have from the first wished for Bathurst
and you to come together, and if you don't do so I shall say you are
the most wrong headed young people I ever met. He loves you, and I don't
think there is any question about your feelings, and you ought to make
matters right somehow. Unfortunately, he is a singularly pig headed man
when he gets an idea in his mind. However, I hope that it will come all
right. By the way, he asked were you well enough to see him today?"

"I would rather not see him till tomorrow," the girl said.

"And I think too that you had better not see him until tomorrow, Isobel.
Your cheeks are flushed now, and your hands are trembling, and I do not
want you laid up again, so I order you to keep yourself perfectly quiet
for the rest of the day."

But it was not till two days later that Bathurst came up to see her.

The spies brought in, late that evening, the news that a small party of
the Sepoy cavalry, with two guns, were at a village three miles on the
other side of the town, and were in communication with the disaffected.
It was decided at once by the officer who had succeeded General Neil
in the command of the fort that a small party of fifty infantry,
accompanied by ten or twelve mounted volunteers, should go out and
attack them. Bathurst sent in his name to form one of the party as soon
as he learned the news, borrowing the horse of an officer who was laid
up ill.

The expedition started two hours before daybreak, and, making a long
detour, fell upon the Sepoys at seven o'clock. The latter, who had
received news half an hour before of their approach, made a stand,
relying on their cannon. The infantry, however, moved forward in
skirmishing order, their fire quickly silenced the guns, and they then
rushed forward while the little troop of volunteers charged.

The fight lasted but a few minutes, at the end of which time the enemy
galloped off in all directions, leaving their guns in the hands of the
victors. Four of the infantry had been killed by the explosion of a well
aimed shell, and five of the volunteers were wounded in the hand to hand
fight with the sowars. The Sepoys' guns and artillery horses had been
captured.

The party at once set out on their return. On their way they had some
skirmishing with the rabble of the town, who had heard the firing, but
they were beaten off without much difficulty, and the victors re-entered
the fort in triumph. The Doctor was at the gate as they came in.
Bathurst sprang from his horse and held out his hand. His radiant face
told its own story.

"Thank God, Doctor, it has passed. I don't think my pulse went a beat
faster when the guns opened on us, and the crackle of our own musketry
had no more effect. I think it has gone forever."

"I am glad indeed, Bathurst," the Doctor said, warmly grasping his hand.
"I hoped that it might be so."

"No words can express how grateful I feel," Bathurst said. "The cloud
that shadowed my life seems lifted, and henceforth I shall be able to
look a man in the face."

"You are wounded, I see," the Doctor said.

"Yes, I had a pistol ball through my left arm. I fancy the bone is
broken, but that is of no consequence."

"A broken arm is no trifle," the Doctor said, "especially in a climate
like this. Come into the hospital at once and let me see to it."

One of the bones of the forearm was indeed broken, and the Doctor,
having applied splints and bandages, peremptorily ordered him to lie
down. Bathurst protested that he was perfectly able to get up with his
arm in a sling.

"I know you are able," the Doctor said testily; "but if you were to go
about in this oven, we should very likely have you in a high fever by
tomorrow morning. Keep yourself perfectly quiet for today; by tomorrow,
if you have no signs of fever, and the wound is doing well, we will see
about it."

Upon leaving him Dr. Wade went out and heard the details of the fight.

"Your friend Bathurst particularly distinguished himself," the officer
who commanded the volunteers said. "He cut down the ressaldar who
commanded the Sepoys, and was in the thick of it. I saw him run one
sowar through and shoot another. I am not surprised at his fighting
so well after what you have gone through in Deennugghur and in that
Cawnpore business."

The Doctor then went up to see Isobel. She looked flushed and excited.

"Is it true, Doctor, that Mr. Bathurst went out with the volunteers, and
that he is wounded?"

"Both items are true, my dear. Fortunately the wound is not serious. A
ball has broken the small bone of the left forearm, but I don't think it
will lay him up for long; in fact, he objects strongly to go to bed."

"But how did he--how is it he went out to fight, Doctor? I could hardly
believe it when I was told, though of course I did not say so."

"My dear, it was an experiment. He told me that he did not feel at all
nervous when the Sepoys rushed in at the gate firing when he was walking
off with you, and it struck me that possibly the sudden shock and the
jump into the water when they attacked the boats, and that rap on the
head with a musket ball, might have affected his nervous system, and
that he was altogether cured, so he was determined on the first occasion
to try."

"And did it, Doctor?" Isobel asked eagerly. "I don't care, you know, one
bit whether he is nervous when there is a noise or not, but for his sake
I should be glad to know that he has got over it; it has made him so
unhappy."

"He has got over it, my dear; he went through the fight without feeling
the least nervous, and distinguished himself very much in the charge, as
the officer who commanded his troop has just told me."

"Oh, I am glad--I am thankful, Doctor; no words can say how pleased I
am; I know that it would have made his whole life unhappy, and I should
have always had the thought that he remembered those hateful words of
mine."

"I am as glad as you are, Isobel, though I fancy it will change our
plans."

"How change our plans, Doctor? I did not know that I had any plans."

"I think you had, child, though you might not acknowledge them even
to yourself. My plan was that you should somehow convince him that, in
spite of what you said, and in spite of his leaving you in that boat,
you were quite content to take him for better or for worse."

"How could I tell him that?" the girl said, coloring.

"Well, I think you would have had to do so somehow, my dear, but that is
not the question now. My plan was that when you had succeeded in doing
this you should marry him and go home with him."

"But why, Doctor," she asked, coloring even more hotly than before, "is
the plan changed?"

"Because, my dear, I don't think Bathurst will go home with you."

"Why not, Doctor?" she asked, in surprise.

"Because, my dear, he will want, in the first place, to rehabilitate
himself."

"But no one knows, Doctor, about the siege and what happened there,
except you and me and Mr. Wilson; all the rest have gone."

"That is true, my dear, but he will want to rehabilitate himself in his
own eyes; and besides, that former affair which first set you against
him, might crop up at any time. Other civilians, many of them, have
volunteered in the service, and no man of courage would like to go away
as long as things are in their present state. You will see Bathurst will
stay."

Isobel was silent.

"I think he will be right," she said at last gravely; "if he wishes to
do so, I should not try to dissuade him; it would be very hard to know
that he is in danger, but no harder for me than for others."

"That is right, my dear," the Doctor said affectionately; "I should not
wish my little girl--and now the Major has gone I feel that you are my
little girl--to think otherwise. I think," he went on, smiling, "that
the first part of that plan we spoke of will not be as difficult as
I fancied it would be; the sting has gone, and he will get rid of his
morbid fancies."

"When shall I be able to see him?"

"Well, if I had any authority over him you would not see him for a week;
as I have not, I think it likely enough that you will see him tomorrow."

"I would rather wait if it would do him any harm, Doctor."

"I don't think it will do him any harm. Beyond the fact that he will
have to carry his arm in a sling for the next fortnight, I don't think
he will have any trouble with it."



CHAPTER XXIII.


The next morning Bathurst found Isobel Hannay sitting in a shady court
that had been converted into a sort of general room for the ladies in
the fort.

"How are you, Miss Hannay? I am glad to see you down."

"I might repeat your words, Mr. Bathurst, for you see we have changed
places. You are the invalid, and not I."

"There is very little of the invalid about me," he said. "I am glad to
see that your face is much better than it was."

"Yes, it is healing fast. I am a dreadful figure still; and the Doctor
says that there will be red scars for months, and that probably my face
will be always marked."

"The Doctor is a croaker, Miss Hannay; there is no occasion to trust
him too implicitly. I predict that there will not be any serious scars
left."

He took a seat beside her. There were two or three others in the court,
but these were upon the other side, quite out of hearing.

"I congratulate you, Mr. Bathurst," she said quietly, "on yesterday. The
Doctor has, of course, told me all about it. It can make no difference
to us who knew you, but I am heartily glad for your sake. I can
understand how great a difference it must make to you."

"It has made all the difference in the world," he replied. "No one can
tell the load it has lifted from my mind. I only wish it had taken place
earlier."

"I know what you mean, Mr. Bathurst; the Doctor has told me about that
too. You may wish that you had remained in the boat, but it was well for
me that you did not. You would have lost your life without benefiting
me. I should be now in the well of Cawnpore, or worse, at Bithoor."

"That may be," he said gravely, "but it does not alter the fact."

"I have no reason to know why you consider you should have stopped in
the boat, Mr. Bathurst," she went on quietly, but with a slight flush
on her cheek. "I can perhaps guess by what you afterwards did for me, by
the risks you ran to save me; but I cannot go by guesses, I think I have
a right to know."

"You are making me say what I did not mean to say," he exclaimed
passionately, "at least not now; but you do more than guess, you
know--you know that I love you."

"And what do you know?" she asked softly.

"I know that you ought not to love me." he said. "No woman should love a
coward."

"I quite agree with you, but then I know that you are not a coward."

"Not when I jumped over and left you alone? It was the act of a cur."

"It was an act for which you were not really responsible. Had you been
able to think, you would not have done so. I do not take the view the
Doctor does, and I agree with you that a man loving a woman should first
of all think of her and of her safety. So you thought when you could
think, but you were no more responsible for your action than a madman
for a murder committed when in a state of frenzy. It was an impulse
you could not control. Had you, after the impulse had passed, come down
here, believing, as you might well have believed, that it was absolutely
impossible to rescue me from my fate, it would have been different. But
the moment you came to yourself you deliberately took every risk
and showed how brave you were when master of yourself. I am speaking
plainly, perhaps more plainly than I ought to. But I should despise
myself had I not the courage to speak out now when so much is at stake,
and after all you have done for me.

"You love me?"

"You know that I love you."

"And I love you," the girl said; "more than that, I honor and esteem
you. I am proud of your love. I am jealous for your honor as for my own,
and I hold that honor to be spotless. Even now, even with my happiness
at stake, I could not speak so plainly had I not spoken so cruelly and
wrongly before. I did not know you then as I know you now, but having
said what I thought then, I am bound to say what I think now, if only as
a penance. Did I hesitate to do so, I should be less grateful than that
poor Indian girl who was ready as she said, to give her life for the
life you had saved."

"Had you spoken so bravely but two days since," Bathurst said, taking
her hand, "I would have said. 'I love you too well, Isobel, to link
your fate to that of a disgraced man.' but now I have it in my power to
retrieve myself, to wipe out the unhappy memory of my first failure,
and still more, to restore the self respect which I have lost during
the last month. But to do so I must stay here: I must bear part in the
terrible struggle there will be before this mutiny is put down, India
conquered, and Cawnpore revenged."

"I will not try to prevent you," Isobel said. "I feel it would be wrong
to do so. I could not honor you as I do, if for my sake you turned away
now. Even though I knew I should never see you again, I would that you
had died so, than lived with even the shadow of dishonor on your name.
I shall suffer, but there are hundreds of other women whose husbands,
lovers, or sons are in the fray, and I shall not flinch more than they
do from giving my dearest to the work of avenging our murdered friends
and winning back India."

So quietly had they been talking that no thought of how momentous
their conversation had been had entered the minds of the ladies sitting
working but a few paces away. One, indeed, had remarked to another, "I
thought when Dr. Wade was telling us how Mr. Bathurst had rescued that
unfortunate girl with the disfigured face at Cawnpore, that there was
a romance in the case, but I don't see any signs of it. They are goods
friends, of course, but there is nothing lover-like in their way of
talking."

So thought Dr. Wade when he came in and saw them sitting there, and gave
vent to his feeling in a grunt of dissatisfaction.

"It is like driving two pigs to market," he muttered; "they won't go the
way I want them to, out of pure contrariness."

"It is all settled, Doctor," Bathurst said, rising. "Come, shake hands;
it is to you I owe my happiness chiefly."

"Isobel, my dear, give me a kiss," the Doctor exclaimed. "I am glad,
my dear, I am glad with all my heart. And what have you settled besides
that?"

"We have settled that I am to go home as soon as I can go down country,
and he is going up with you and the others to Cawnpore."

"That is right," the Doctor said heartily. "I told you that was what
he would decide upon; it is right that he should do so. No man ought
to turn his face to the coast till Lucknow is relieved and Delhi is
captured. I thank God it has all come right at last. I began to be
afraid that Bathurst's wrong headedness was going to mar both your
lives."

The news had already come down that Havelock had found that it would be
absolutely impossible with the small force at his command to fight his
way into Lucknow through the multitude of foes that surrounded it, and
that he must wait until reinforcements arrived. There was, therefore, no
urgent hurry, and it was not until ten days later that a second troop
of volunteer horse, composed of civilians unable to resume their duties,
and officers whose regiments had mutinied, started for Cawnpore.

Half an hour before they mounted, Isobel Hannay and Ralph Bathurst were
married by the chaplain in the fort. This was at Bathurst's earnest
wish.

"I may not return, Isobel," he had urged: "it is of no use to blink the
fact that we have desperate fighting before us, and I should go into
battle with my mind much more easy in the knowledge that, come what
might, you were provided for. The Doctor tells me that he considers you
his adopted daughter, and that he has already drawn up a will leaving
his savings to you; but I should like your future to come from me, dear,
even if I am not to share it with you. As you know, I have a fine estate
at home, and I should like to think of you as its mistress."

And Isobel of course had given way, though not without protest.

"You don't know what I may be like yet," she said, half laughing, half
in earnest. "I may carry these red blotches to my grave."

"They are honorable scars, dear, as honorable as any gained in battle. I
hope, for your sake, that they will get better in time, but it makes
no difference to me. I know what you were, and how you sacrificed your
beauty. I suppose if I came back short of an arm or leg you would not
make that an excuse for throwing me over?"

"You ought to be ashamed of even thinking of such a thing, Ralph."

"Well, dear, I don't know that I did think it, but I am only putting a
parallel case to your own. No, you must consent: it is in all ways best.
We will be married on the morning I start, so as just to give time for
our wedding breakfast before I mount."

"It shall be as you wish," she said softly. "You know the estate without
you would be nothing to me, but I should like to bear your name, and
should you never come back to me, Ralph, to mourn for you all my life
as my husband. But I believe you will return to me. I think I am getting
superstitious, and believe in all sorts of things since so many strange
events have happened. Those pictures on the smoke that came true, Rujub
sending you messages at Deennugghur, and Rabda making me hear her voice
and giving me hope in prison. I do not feel so miserable at the thought
of your going into danger as I should do, if I had not a sort of
conviction that we shall meet again. People believe in presentiments of
evil, why should they not believe in presentiments of good? At any rate,
it is a comfort to me that I do feel so, and I mean to go on believing
it."

"Do so, Isobel. Of course there will be danger, but the danger will
be nothing to that we have passed through together. The Sepoys will
no doubt fight hard, but already they must have begun to doubt; their
confidence in victory must be shaken, and they begin to fear retribution
for their crimes. The fighting will, I think, be less severe as the
struggle goes on, and at any rate the danger to us, fighting as the
assailants, is as nothing to that run when we were little groups
surrounded by a country in arms.

"The news that has come through from Lucknow is that, for some time at
any rate, the garrison are confident they can hold out, while at
Delhi we know that our position is becoming stronger every day; the
reinforcements are beginning to arrive from England, and though the
work may be slow at first, our army will grow, while their strength will
diminish, until we sweep them before us. I need not stop until the
end, only till the peril is over, till Lucknow is relieved, and Delhi
captured.

"As we agreed, I have already sent in my resignation in the service,
and shall fight as a volunteer only. If we have to fight our way into
Lucknow, cavalry will be useless, and I shall apply to be attached to
one of the infantry regiments; having served before, there will be no
difficulty about that. I think there are sure to be plenty of vacancies.
Six months will assuredly see the backbone of the rebellion altogether
broken. No doubt it will take much longer crushing it out altogether,
for they will break up into scattered bodies, and it may be a long work
before these are all hunted down; but when the strength of the rebellion
is broken, I can leave with honor."

There were but few preparations to be made for the wedding. Great
interest was felt in the fort in the event, for Isobel's rescue from
Bithoor and Cawnpore, when all others who had fallen into the power of
the Nana had perished, had been the one bright spot in the gloom; and
there would have been a general feeling of disappointment had not the
romance had the usual termination.

Isobel's presents were numerous and of a most useful character, for they
took the form of articles of clothing, and her trousseau was a varied
and extensive one.

The Doctor said to her the evening before the event, "You ought to have
a certificate from the authorities, Isobel, saying how you came into
possession of your wardrobe, otherwise when you get back to England you
will very soon come to be looked upon as a most suspicious character."

"How do you mean, Doctor?"

"Well, my dear, if the washerwoman to whom you send your assortment
at the end of the voyage is an honest woman, she will probably give
information to the police that you must be a receiver of stolen
property, as your garments are all marked with different names."

"It will look suspicious, Doctor, but I must run the risk of that till
I can remark them again. I can do a good deal that way before I sail. It
is likely we shall be another fortnight at least before we can start
for Calcutta. I don't mean to take the old names out, but shall mark my
initials over them and the word 'from.' Then they will always serve as
mementoes of the kindness of everyone here."

Early on the morning of the wedding a native presented himself at the
gate of the fort, and on being allowed to enter with a letter for Miss
Hannay of which he was the bearer, handed her a parcel, which proved
to contain a very handsome and valuable set of jewelry, with a slip of
paper on which were the words, "From Rabda."

The Doctor was in high spirits at the breakfast to which everybody sat
down directly after the wedding. In the first place, his greatest wish
was gratified; and, in the second, he was about to start to take part in
the work of retribution.

"One would think you were just starting on a pleasure party, Doctor,"
Isobel said.

"It is worth all the pleasure parties in the world, my dear. I have
always been a hunter, and this time it is human 'tigers' I am going in
pursuit of--besides which," he said, in a quieter tone, "I hope I am
going to cure as well as kill. I shall only be a soldier when I am not
wanted as a doctor. A man who really loves his profession, as I do, is
always glad to exercise it, and I fear I shall have ample opportunities
that way; besides, dear there is nothing like being cheerful upon an
occasion of this kind. The longer we laugh, the less time there is for
tears."

And so the party did not break up until it was nearly time for the
little troop to start. Then there was a brief passionate parting, and
the volunteer horse rode away to Cawnpore. Almost the first person they
met as they rode into the British lines was Wilson, who gave a shout of
joy at seeing the Doctor and Bathurst.

"My dear Bathurst!" he exclaimed. "Then you got safely down. Did you
rescue Miss Hannay?"

"I had that good fortune, Wilson."

"I am glad. I am glad," the young fellow said, shaking his hand
violently, while the tears stood in his eyes. "I know you were right
in sending me away, but I have regretted it ever since. I know I should
have been no good, but it seemed such a mean thing for me to go off by
myself. Well, Doctor, and so you got off too," he went on, turning from
Bathurst and wringing the Doctor's hand; "I never even hoped that you
escaped. I made sure that it was only we two. I have had an awful time
of it since we heard the news, on the way up, of the massacre of the
women. I had great faith in Bathurst, and knew that if anything could be
done he would do it, but when I saw the place they had been shut up in,
it did not seem really possible that he could have got anyone out of
such a hole. And where did you leave Miss Hannay?"

