of a confidential scribe to Harold. The other wore the garb of a
soldier. He was clothed from head to foot in a tight fitting leather
suit, upon which were sewn iron rings overlapping each other, and
strongly resembling in appearance the chain-armour of later days.
His casque, with a curtain of leather similarly covered and affording
a protection to the neck, cheeks, and throat, hung from his saddle-bow,
and he wore a cap with a long projecting peak, while a cloak was
thrown over his shoulders and fell almost to his feet.

"I am afraid you will find it but dull time with me, Leof," Wulf
said as they came up abreast of him, "for the earl says that he has
charged you to remain with me at Steyning."

"I shall not be sorry for that," the soldier said bluntly, "for I
shall be right glad to be away from these Normans who fill every
place at court and swagger there as if Englishmen were but dirt
under their feet. Moreover, I love not London nor its ways, and
shall be glad to be down again among honest country folk, though I
would still rather be following my lord the earl in the field."

"And you, Master Gurth, will your stay down at Steyning be a long
one?"

"No, indeed. I have but to bear my master's wishes and instructions
to the steward, and to stay for a few days to see that they are
carried out according to his desires. I am not like Leof, for I
prefer life in London, where one meets with learned monks and others,
can obtain sometimes the use of a choice manuscript, and can hear
the news from beyond the seas, whereas in the country there is
nought to talk about save beeves and sheep. I like the journey well
enough, though I would that the animal I bestrode were more gentle
in his paces. He has for the last half-hour been fretting on the
rein to place himself by the side of yours. Horses are well enough
for nobles and fighting men, but for a peaceful scrivener like
myself a chair makes a far more comfortable seat."

The soldier gave a contemptuous grunt, and Wulf laughed. "It is
well that we have not all the same tastes, but for my part a seat
in a chair tires me more than one in a saddle, and I am never more
happy than when galloping briskly along," and he shook the reins,
a signal which the horse had been expecting for a considerable time,
and at once responded to by breaking into a canter.

"Stay you, I pray, Master Wulf," the scrivener cried in great
tribulation as his horse followed the example of its companion.
"Even if the animal does not break my neck he will jolt the life
out of me. I pray you curb him in if you would not see me prone in
the dust; and if I am disabled, who is to carry the earl's message
to the steward?"

Wulf reined in his horse. "Pardon me, good Gurth. I had forgotten
that you are not accustomed to journey on horseback. I was scarce
conscious, indeed, that I touched my horse, but he is used to travel
more rapidly, and was so eager to be off at the slightest hint that
I was willing that he should do so. We will try and journey soberly
for the rest of the distance."

Osgod was overtaken, plodding steadily along the road, fifteen miles
from town. Leof took him up on his horse, and they reached Guildford
just as the sun was setting. The inn, which stood in the principal
street of the town, was a low building built with a massive framework
filled in with bricks. The ground-floor was occupied by a single
room. At one end was the great fireplace where, over a pile of
blazing logs, were hung many cauldrons and pots. Round the room ran
a raised bench some six feet wide on which the guests disposed
themselves for sleep at night; rough tables and benches occupied
the rest of the room. Some twenty or thirty travellers were seated
at these. Few were eating, but the greater portion had horns of
beer or mead before them. As Wulf and his companions entered, after
giving over their horses to one of the helpers, the host, seeing
by his attire that he was of condition above the ordinary, came
forward and led him to the end of the room nearest the fire, where
the floor was raised a foot and a half above the general level,
forming a sort of dais where travellers of distinction could take
their meals apart from the rest of the guests. Leof was now spokesman.

"We will have supper, and of your best, master host, for we have
ridden from London. We are in the service of Earl Harold, and are
riding with this young thane, Wulf of Steyning."

The name of Earl Harold was sufficient to gain for them the best
attentions of their host, and in twenty minutes supper was served,
consisting of trout broiled over the fire, swine's flesh, and a
stew of fowls and smoked bacon flavoured with herbs. Wulf took the
head of the table, and the other three sat a short distance below
him. The dishes were handed round, and each with his dagger cut off
his portion and ate it on his wooden platter with the assistance
of dagger and fingers only, for the utility of forks was at that
time a matter undreamt of. After the meal was over, the host brought
a ewer of water with a napkin, and each dipped his fingers into the
water, an operation necessary even for the most dainty feeder.
Presently a glee singer came in, and for an hour amused the guests
with songs, for the most part of a patriotic character.

Wulf was then conducted by the host to a small chamber upstairs,
where there was the luxury of a bed stuffed with straw. The rest
of the travellers, including Wulf's companions, merely wrapped
themselves in their cloaks and lay down on the raised bench which
ran round the room.

On the afternoon of the third day the party arrived at Steyning.
It was four years since Wulf had been at home, and he gave a shout
of pleasure as his eye fell on the long low house with its background
of trees, and touching his horse with his heel he left his companions
behind and galloped towards the door. An old servitor came out.

"Why, Cedric, do you not know me? I am Wulf, whom you first taught
to play single-stick and to draw a bow."

"Why, surely it is my young master," Cedric said, taking the hand
that Wulf held out to him and placing it to his lips; "this is a
glad day indeed for us all. We have longed sorely for a sight of
you, for though I say nought against Master Egbert the steward, who
is well liked by all, it is not the same as having our lord with
us. You have come to stay, I trust."

"For a time at any rate, Cedric. Earl Harold wishes me to learn my
duties as a thane and to fit myself to lead my people in the field
if it be necessary."

"I trust that it never will be so," Cedric said, "but as we fought
under your father so will we all be ready to fight under you should
it be needful. The men of Steyning were never backward when there
was fighting to be done, and in my young days there was no lack of
that, though we have had quiet times since King Edward came to the
throne."

The house was not built for the purpose of resistance, for, unlike
the Normans, the Saxons did not deem it necessary to convert their
houses into castles. It was, however, massively framed, the windows
on the ground-floor were barred, the door was strong and solid, and
after nightfall none could come in or go out without the knowledge
and consent of the master. Wulf's companions came up just as the
steward himself appeared at the door. He knew both Gurth and Leof,
having himself been in the service of Harold before being deputed
by him to manage the estates of Steyning during the earl's guardianship
of its thane.

"The earl sends his greetings to you, Egbert," Gurth said, "and he
has sent us hither with the young thane, who, as the letter I bring
from the earl will inform you, has come down to take up his position
as lord here, and to learn from you all things connected with his
estate."

"Welcome to Steyning, thane," the steward said, doffing his cap;
"it is well that you should be here. I have done my best to carry
out the earl's commands to keep all things in readiness for your
coming, and to be just and fair to the tenants, seeing that they
pay their dues, and yet not pressing too hardly upon them if things
go not well with them; but it is always best that the master should
be in his own place, and right willingly do I give over my authority
to you."

"The authority has been in good hands, I know well," Wulf said,
"and right heartily do I thank you for having so well filled my
place; but I would not take up my thaneship as yet I am but a boy,
and have to learn my duties from you, and shall account myself but
as your pupil. I know something of the ways of court, but nothing
at all of those of the country, and it will be long before I am fit
to take the control of things into my own hands."

They had by this time entered the great hall which formed the common
room of the establishment. Its arrangement was similar to that of
the room at the inn, with its raised dais for the master, his family,
and guests, while the rest of the room was devoted to the retainers
and servants. The cooking, however, was carried on in a room apart.
There were two fireplaces, one upon the dais and the other in the
body of the hall. On the walls hung trophies of the chase and arms
of all sorts. The wooden roof was supported by massive beams, and
with the exception of the trophies on the walls there was no attempt
at decoration of any kind. During the residence of the family at
the house, however, the hangings of tapestry, the work of generations
of dames of Steyning, their daughters and maids, hung upon the walls
round the dais.

The news quickly spread of the arrival of the young thane, and a
score of men and eight or ten women and maids flocked into the hall
to welcome him, and as he stood on the dais each in turn came forward
to kiss his hand and salute him.

"I think my first order must be," he said to the steward, "that a
cask of your best ale be broached."

"That shall be done at once," Egbert replied; "there is never a
lack of drink here, but the best is none too good for the occasion.
And who is this youth with you?" he went on when he had given the
necessary orders, pointing to Osgod, who was standing somewhat shyly
apart.

"He is my friend, and is going to be my body attendant and squire,"
Wulf said. "He, like myself, knows nothing as yet of his duties,
but that he will be faithful and trusty I know full well, and the
earl himself said that I did wisely to bring him with me."

"I will myself instruct him in his duties," Egbert said, "which
indeed are not hard to learn by one of willing mind. He will stand
behind you at table, will hand you your cup and take your orders.
In the old times it would have been his duty to see that you were
not struck down by a traitorous blow while you drank, but those
days are passed. When in the field he will carry your helmet till
you need to put it on; will keep close to you in the fight and guard
you with his shield from arrows, and with his sword from attacks
from behind; he will carry your banner, and see that as long as he
has strength to hold it, it floats fairly out as a rallying point
for your men. In the field indeed his duties are numerous, but at
home in peace, beyond seeing that your arms are bright and clean,
and that your orders are carried out properly, he will have but
little to do. It is well that you brought him with you, for otherwise
you would have had to choose one of the sons of your tenants, and
the choice would have been a difficult one, for each would have
desired the honour, and whichever you chose there would have been
sore jealousy among the others."

The next day there was a great gathering in the hall. The whole of
the tenants attended, and took the oath to be Wulf's men, as they
had been those of his father, to obey his orders, and to follow him
in the field with the due number of men according to the size of
their holdings; while Wulf on his part swore to protect them from
all wrong and oppression, to be a just master, calling upon them
only for such service as he was entitled to demand, and exacting
no feus or payments beyond those customary. A bullock had been
killed, and after the ceremony was over all present sat down to a
banquet at which much ale was drunk and feasting went on till
nightfall.

The next morning Wulf, accompanied by Leof and Egbert, rode round
the estate, choosing among the sons of the tenants thirty stout
young men willing to enrol themselves as house-carls, receiving a
regular rate of pay, and ready at all times to give service under
arms, and to remain in the field as long as they might be required,
whereas the general levy could only be kept under arms for a limited
time. He had already gone into the matter with Leof, who pointed
out that, as at present he had no wish to keep up any show or to
have a body of armed men in the house, it would suffice if the men
were exercised every day for a month, and after that merely practised
with sword and battle-axe for two or three hours once a week. On
these terms he had no difficulty in obtaining considerably more
than the number he asked for, and finally fifty men were enrolled.

For those carls helmets were bought and coats of ringed armour made,
and for a month they exercised daily. Of manoeuvring there was
little indeed. The Saxons and Danes alike fought in line, with but
room enough between them to swing their battle-axes. Each carried
a spear as well as an axe, and when repelling the assault of an
enemy closed up so that their shields well-nigh touched each other.
Their exercise was generally either to engage in combats between
chosen pairs, or, dividing into two parties, to fight line against
line with blunted poles for spears and with stout cudgels for axes.
Leof in these combats acted as judge, decided which side had gained
the victory, praised the skilful, and chided the careless and
sluggish. He gave lessons in the use of the sword and battle-axe
to Wulf and Osgod, sometimes pitting them against each other,
sometimes fighting himself against Wulf, and teaching Osgod how to
assist his master by covering him with his shield.

Sometimes he would order three or four of the men to shoot with
blunted arrows at Wulf, whom he taught to catch them on his shield
or to sever the shafts with a blow of his sword, while Osgod standing
by helped to cover him when two or three arrows flew at him together.
This was a daily exercise, and even after the month's regular work
was over some of the men came up every day to shoot, until Wulf had
attained such coolness and skill that he could in the great majority
of cases cut the shafts in two with his sword.

But the whole day was by no means given up to warlike exercises.
Wulf rode out with the steward inspecting the houses and farms,
learning what there was to be learned of the rude processes of
agriculture, investigating the complaints of the depredations
committed by errant herds of swine or by neighbours' cattle and
sheep, seeing what was required in the repairs of farmhouses, and
learning from Egbert to discriminate between those who were unable
to pay their dues owing to misfortune, illness, or murrain among
the animals, and those whose losses were due to their own sloth or
carelessness. Upon these visits, too, the arms of the tenants were
inspected to ascertain that they could properly fulfil their service
if summoned to take the field.

The lands embraced by Wulf's feof were of considerable extent,
reaching down to the sea, where they were some eight miles broad,
and running back twelve miles beyond Steyning. Several small hamlets
lay within it, and in case of war he could summon more than three
hundred men to his banner. Several of the neighbouring thanes rode
in as soon as they heard that Wulf had returned to fill his father's
place at Steyning, and these visits were duly returned. But accustomed
as Wulf had been to the orderliness of the court of the ascetic
King Edward the rude manners and nightly revelry of these rough
thanes by no means pleased him, so that he was glad when the visits
were over, and he could remain quietly at home, where he was not
without frequent guests.

The most regular of his visitors was the prior of the monastery at
Bramber, which had been founded by the piety of one of Wulf's
ancestors. The prior had, though Wulf was ignorant of it, received
a letter from Earl Harold asking him to befriend Wulf, to encourage
him to keep up the studies he had followed at Waltham, and to see
that he did not fall into the drinking habit so common among the
Saxons. The priest was well fitted for the mission. He was by no
means a strict disciplinarian, but the monastery had the reputation
of being one of the best managed in Sussex, and among the monks
were many of good blood. He was passionately fond of art, and
encouraged its exercise among the monks, so that the illuminated
missals of Bramber were highly prized, and added largely to the
revenues of the monastery.

The prior had been one of the monks at Waltham, and owed his elevation
to the influence of Earl Harold with the late thane of Steyning.
He was well taught in all the learning of the day, and having been
for a time at Westminster, knew more of court life than the majority
of the priors of isolated monasteries, and could suit his conversation
to his hearer. Harold had said in his letter, "The lad has good
parts. He is somewhat full of mischief, and has got into a scrape
here by a quarrel with a Norman page, and by failing somewhat in
the respect due to William of London, who took his compatriot's
part with too much zeal. But Wulf is shrewd, and benefited greatly
by his stay at Waltham, and both for the lad's own sake and for my
friendship with the good thane, his father, I would fain that he
grew up not only a sturdy Englishman, as to which I have no manner
of doubt, but one who may some day play his part at court, and be
a worthy friend and counsellor of an English king. Therefore I pray
you, father, to keep an eye on the lad, and spare him what time you
can from your duties. Tell him not that I have written to you, for
it is the nature of youth to be averse to anything that looks like
guardianship."

Such a request from Earl Harold was regarded by the prior as an
order, and a few days after Wulf was installed at Steyning the prior
rode over on his palfrey, accompanied only by the almoner of the
convent.

"Peace to you, my son," he said, as Wulf bowed respectfully to him,
"I have called not only as the prior of the monastery founded by the
piety of one of the thanes of Steyning, but to welcome one who was
a pupil at Earl Harold's college of Waltham, in which I at one time
was a preceptor. Not when you were there, for I was installed here
just before your good father's death."

"I left there two years since," Wulf said, "in order to be one of
Earl Harold's pages; but I have not forgotten my reading, for the
earl insists that his pages give two hours a day to study."

"Tis a good rule," the prior said, "for learning is like a weapon,
it soon becomes rusted when thrown aside. You will, I hope, continue
the habit."

"I should wish to do so, father, but there are no manuscripts here."

"In that at least I can supply your wants," the prior said. "My
monastery has a good library, and it will be quite at your service,
and also my advice in any matters that may concern you. My almoner
here, brother John, knows pretty well the circumstances of most of
your people, and may be able to tell you where your alms may be
well bestowed, and where they would do more harm than good. The
worthless are ever the most importunate, and for every honest man
in need there are twenty rogues abegging."

The ice once broken, the prior came over frequently. His conversation
was bright and interesting. He himself was engaged in writing a
history of the Saxon and Danish monarchs from the times of Alfred,
and had stores of anecdotes of people and events of whom Wulf had
before heard only vague traditions from the wandering singers and
story-tellers who travelled the country, and were welcome guests
in every household. As Wulf was urged by the prior to come over
whenever time hung on his hands, his visits to the monastery were
naturally very much more frequent than those of the prior to Steyning.
Sometimes he would sit in the private apartment of the prior, but
more often he spent his time studying the rare manuscripts, or
watching the monks at their work of copying and illuminating. If
he went in the evening he generally sat in the refectory, where the
monks for the most part spent their evening in talk and harmless
amusement, for the strict rules and discipline that prevailed in
monastic establishments on the Continent had been unknown up to
that time in England, although some of the Norman bishops were doing
their best to introduce them into the establishments in their
dioceses,--a proceeding that caused great discontent, and was
strongly opposed by the English monks. These had, hitherto, regarded
monastic life as one of work for the good of the poor, and as
affording for those who wished it a tranquil retirement from the
trials of the world. Moreover, it offered special attractions to
those of quiet and studious tastes, since the monasteries provided
the architects and the painters, the teachers and the writers, and
it was here alone that learning was maintained and fostered.
Consequently, at Bramber there was none of that monastic asceticism
that prevailed abroad, and later became the rule in England also.

During the day the monks had their pursuits according to their
tastes. There were those who worked in the copying and painting
room. There were some who drew plans for churches or the dwellings
of the wealthy, and who sometimes went out and superintended the
carrying out of their designs. Some were in charge of the garden,
where the work was chiefly done by the lay servitors, and where the
herbs and simples were grown that were used in the concoction of
the medicines distributed among the sick, and highly prized throughout
the country round. Two or three were skilled in music, and these
taught and conducted the choir, while two acted as teachers to
youths, the sons of thanes and others, who, moved by the ardour
with which their earl advocated learning, intrusted their sons to
the monks for education. Then when the day's work was done, and
vespers sung in the chapel, the monks gathered in the refectory.
The conversation was of a bright and varied description, and as
Wulf moved about from group to group he listened to the talk with
far greater pleasure than he had ever derived from that at court,
and largely increased his knowledge in many respects.

National matters were discussed with keen interest, for the monks
were all English, and viewed with bitter hostility the elevation
of foreigners to the chief dignities of the church, not only because
they were foreigners, but because they introduced innovations of
all kinds, and sought to reduce the Church of England to subjection
to Rome, whereas previously it had been wholly independent of Papal
authority. In secular matters, too, there were dangers that threatened
the tranquillity of the country. Chief among these were the turbulence
and ambition of Tostig, and the menace to the kingdom by his extensive
earldom of Northumbria with its alien Danish population, which was
rendered more serious by his alliance with the kings of Norway.

Then, too, it was doubtful whether the great central earldom of
Mercia could be relied upon to act cordially with the West Saxons;
Griffith of Wales was still restless and turbulent; and lastly,
there was the ever-present menace of the Norman duke. Had England
been united it could have laughed at the pretensions of the Duke
of Normandy; but with Northumbria ready at any moment to break into
civil war, and with Mercia doubtful, the claim of Normandy, however
shadowy and indefensible, could not but be considered as a grave
element of danger.

Listening to the talk of the monks Wulf learned much more as to the
actual situation than he had done in the court of the Normanized
king, and his feelings of patriotism became more and more developed
and strengthened, while he applied himself with even greater ardour
to his military exercises, as he recognized more fully the necessity
