her even as she had loved him. It is a grief, a terrible grief, but one
without bitterness. But see, Lord de Burg is coming this way, and as there
is a litter behind him I suppose all is ready for our departure."

"I am ready, young thanes," De Burg said as he came up. "We ride at once
for Pevensey, whither an order was sent some hours ago for a ship to be in
readiness to sail for Normandy."

Three horses were led up and mounted. They rode away, followed by an armed
party and the litter on which Osgod was laid.

"You have done your last duty to your king," the Norman said. "It is a fit
grave for a hero, and assuredly Harold was one. Maybe that it is not his
last resting-place. The duke at present doubtless felt constrained at first
to refuse him Christian burial, for had he granted Gytha's request, it
would have been an acknowledgment that the charges brought against him were
unfounded, and the excommunication of no avail; but I doubt not that in
time he will allow his body to be taken to his abbey at Waltham. Now," he
said less gravely, in order to turn their thoughts from the sad scenes they
had witnessed, "what think you of the future, will the Northern earls head
a national movement against us?"

"They are foul traitors!" Beorn exclaimed passionately; "and I would that
Wulf and I could meet them in fair lists and fight them."

"They will do nothing," Wulf said more quietly. "They will hasten to make
the best terms they can for themselves, and will ask to be permitted to
hold their earldoms as his vassals. But they will not long enjoy their
treachery; they are ever intriguers, and as soon as they see their
opportunity will conspire against William as they conspired against Harold.
Thank heaven they will receive scantier mercy at his hands than they
received at the king's. As for the South and East, who is to lead them?
There is no one left to whom they can look for guidance; doubtless in some
places they will resist, but such resistance can only bring ruin upon those
who attempt it. Maybe some will take to the forests or the great eastern
marshes, and may perhaps hold out for months, or even years. But what can
it avail in the end? Had Harold escaped alive there would have been many a
battle as obstinate as that of yesterday to fight before England was
conquered. Had any of the greater thanes escaped men would have flocked to
them, but they are all gone, save the few that were found well-nigh
lifeless this morning. Perhaps it is better as it is; for now that William
is victorious he will soon receive large bodies of reinforcements, and as
resistance would be vain, it were best that no resistance were made. Duke
William has shown himself a wise and just ruler in Normandy, and will
doubtless prove himself the same in England if he be not angered by revolts
and risings. It is hard that Englishmen should be ruled by a foreigner, but
it is no new thing for us. We Saxons conquered the Britons, and in turn
Danish kings have ruled over us; but Saxon and Dane have become almost one,
and the old grudges have died out. Maybe in time you Normans also may
become English."

"You would take the oath of allegiance to William then, Wulf?"

"Not now, my lord, but when England accepts him as her king I should be
willing to hold my lands from him as I have held them before from our
kings, that is, if the lands remain mine."

"They will remain yours," Lord de Burg said confidently. "The duke's
promise was publicly made, and he will certainly adhere to it; even if he
wished it, he could not, after charging Harold with perjury, break his own
promise."

The sun was sinking when they reached Pevensey, for the search for Harold's
body and the building of his cairn had occupied many hours. They went at
once on board one of the ships De Burg had himself furnished for the
expedition, and two days later landed at Rouen. They had brought horses
with them, and the two young thanes at once rode with the baron to his
chateau, leaving Osgod to be brought after them in his litter. Lord de Burg
was received with the greatest joy by his wife, Guy, and Agnes. They had
been in a state of terrible anxiety for the last twenty-four hours, for a
swift ship had been despatched by the duke with the news of the victory, at
daybreak after the battle, and it was known that the fight had been long
and desperately contested, and that a great number of barons and knights
had fallen. As soon as the first outburst of delight was over the baron
called in Wulf and Beorn, who had not followed him into the room, feeling
that he would prefer to greet his family alone. Guy gave an exclamation of
surprise and pleasure as they came forward.

"These are my prisoners," the baron said with a smile, "if I can call
prisoners those who have never surrendered. The duke has intrusted them to
my keeping, and has ordered that you shall hold them in safe custody."

"Lord de Burg does not tell you, lady, that he saved our lives, which but
for him were assuredly lost. We were well-nigh spent, and were surrounded
by a ring of foes when he broke in and stood beside us proclaiming that the
duke himself had given a pledge for our safety."

"I have paid part of the debt we owe," the baron said, "though I saved them
at no cost to myself, while Wulf defended Guy at the risk of his life."

"How long do you stay with us, my lord?"

"As long as I can, wife. I went, as you know, unwillingly to the war, but
when all the Norman barons followed the duke I could not hold back. But I
trust to have no more of it; so terrible a field no man living has seen,
and in truth until twilight fell it seemed that we should be beaten, with
such obstinacy and endurance did the English fight. We won, but it was a
victory over the dead rather than the living. Of Harold's regular troops no
man turned, no man asked for quarter, they fell where they stood; and even
the irregulars, who had fought with equal bravery, when, as night fell and
all was lost, they fled, inflicted well-nigh as heavy a blow upon us as had
been dealt during the day. I have no animosity against them, they are
valiant men, and were in their right in defending their country, and I
would that I could stay peacefully here until the last blow has been
struck. I am well content with my estates, and need no foot of English
land, no share in English spoil I must fight for my liege lord as long as
fighting goes on, but that over I hope to return here and live in peace.
At any rate I can tarry quietly here for a week. Certainly no force can be
raised in time to oppose the duke's advance on London, and my sword
therefore may well rest in its scabbard. I suppose, thanes, you will not
object to give me your parole to attempt no escape?"

"Willingly, my lord," Beorn said. "If, contrary to our opinion, England
should rise and fight one more battle for freedom, we will give you due
notice that we shall if possible escape and cross the sea to join our
countrymen."

"That is fair enough," De Burg said with a smile, "and the moment you give
me notice I will clap you into so firm a cage that I warrant you will not
escape from it; but I trust the necessity will not arise. Now, Guy, take
your friends to their chambers and see to their comfort. I will not tell
the story of the battle until you return, for doubtless you are burning to
hear it, and in truth it will be famous in all times, both as one of the
sturdiest fights ever heard of, and because such great issues depended on
its results."

When Guy returned with his friends and a meal had been eaten, De Burg told
the story of the battle of Senlac.

"Such is the story as far as I know it," he added in conclusion, "but in
truth beyond the beginning and the end, and the fact that we twice fell
back and at one time were flying in headlong rout to our ships, I know
nothing. All day I was striving to break through a living wall, and
striving in vain. I can see now the close line of shields, the helmet
covered faces above them, and the terrible axes rising and falling,
cleaving through helmet and hauberk as if they had been pasteboard. It may
well-nigh be said that we have no wounded, for each man struck fell in his
track as if smitten by lightning. Can you add more, thanes?"

Beorn shook his head.

"It is like a dream," Wulf said. "We never moved through the long day. At
times there was a short lull, and then each man was fighting as best he
could. I know that my arms grew tired and that my axe seemed to grow
heavier, that horse and foot swept up to us, and there was occasionally
breathing time; that the royal brothers' voices rose ever cheeringly and
encouragingly until Gurth and Leofwin fell, and after that Harold's alone
was heard, though I think it came to my ears as from a distance, so great
was the tumult, so great our exertions. When Harold died I knew that all
was lost, but even that did not seem to affect me. I had become a sort of
machine, and fought almost mechanically, with a dim consciousness that the
end was close at hand. It was only at the last, when Beorn and I stood back
to back, that I seemed myself again, and was animated with new strength
that came, I suppose, from despair."

"It was an awful day," De Burg said. "I have fought in many battles under
the duke's banner, but the sternest of them were but paltry skirmishes in
comparison to this. Half of the nobles of Normandy lie dead, half the army
that filled the mighty fleet that sailed from St. Valery have fallen.
William is King of England, but whether that will in the end repay Normandy
for the loss she has suffered seems to me very doubtful. And now let us to
bed. I sleep not well on shipboard, and in truth I had such dreams of death
and slaughter that I ever awoke bathed with sweat, and in such fear that I
dared not go to sleep again."

At the end of a week the baron sailed again for England. To the two young
Englishmen the following weeks passed pleasantly. Ships came frequently
from England with news of what was doing there. William had tarried for
some time at his camp at Hastings, expecting to receive the submission of
all England. But not an Englishman came to bow before him. The Northern
earls had hurried to London as soon as they heard of the defeat at Senlac
and the death of the king and his brothers, and a Witan was instantly
summoned to choose his successor to the throne.

Edwin and Morcar thought that the choice of the nation would surely fall
upon one or other of them, as in rank and position they were now the first
men in the realm. They exerted themselves to the utmost to bring this
about, but no true-hearted Englishman could forgive either their acceptance
of Harold Hardrada as their king, or the long and treacherous delay that
had left Southern England to stand alone on the day of battle. The choice
of the Witan fell on the young Edgar, the grandson of Edmund Ironside, the
last male survivor of the royal blood. Edgar, however, was never crowned,
as that ceremony could only take place at one of the festivals of the
church, and it was therefore postponed until Christmas. London was eager
for resistance. Alfred had fought battle after battle against the Danes,
and though without their natural leaders, the people throughout Southern
England looked forward to a long and determined struggle. With the army of
the North as a rallying centre a force more numerous than that which Harold
had led might soon be gathered. But these hopes were dashed to the ground
by the treacherous Northern earls. Had one of them been chosen to sit on
the vacant throne they would doubtless have done their best to maintain
that throne, but they had been passed over, and oblivious of the fact that
it was to the South they owed the rescue of their earldoms from the sway of
the King of Norway and Tostig, they sullenly marched away with their army
and left the South to its fate.

While the cause of England was thus being betrayed and ruined, William was
advancing eastward along the coast ravaging and destroying. Romney was
levelled to the ground and its inhabitants slain. Dover opened its gates.
It is probable that most of the male population had joined Harold, and had
fallen at Senlac; and that the terrible fate of Romney had struck such
terror into the hearts of the inhabitants, who knew there was no army that
could advance to their assistance, that they surrendered at the Conqueror's
approach. To them William behaved with lenity and kindness. His severity at
Romney and his lenity at Dover had their effect. There being no central
authority, no army in the field, each town and district was left to shift
for itself; and assuredly none of them unaided could hope to offer
prolonged resistance to the Normans. As, after eight days' stay at Dover,
William advanced towards Canterbury, he was met by a deputation of the
citizens offering their submission, and soon from all parts of Kent similar
messages came in.

Kent had done its full share in the national defence on the hill near
Hastings, and was not to be blamed if, when all England remained supine and
inactive, its villagers refused to throw away their lives uselessly. The
duke was detained by sickness for a month near Canterbury, and there
received the submission of Kent and Sussex, and also that of the great
ecclesiastical city of Winchester; but the spirit of resistance in London
still burned brightly, and William was indisposed to risk the loss that
would be incurred by an assault upon its walls. He, therefore, moved round
in a wide circle, wasting the land, plundering and destroying, till the
citizens, convinced that resistance could only bring destruction upon
themselves and their city, and in spite of the efforts of their wounded
sheriff, sent an embassy to the duke at Berkhampstead to submit and do
homage to him.

Not London alone was represented by this embassy. The young king, elected
but uncrowned, was with it; two archbishops, two bishops, and many of the
chief men in England accompanied it, and although they were not the
spokesmen of any Witan, they might be said fairly to represent London and
Southern England.

Deserted by the North, without a leader, and seeing their land exposed to
wholesale ravages, the South and West Saxons were scarcely to be blamed for
preferring submission to destruction. They doubtless thought that William,
the wise ruler of Normandy, would make a far better king than the boy they
had chosen, who was himself almost as much a foreigner as William, save
that there was a strain of English royal blood in his veins. So had England
accepted Canute the Dane as her king, and he had ruled as an English
monarch wisely and well.

The embassy offered William the crown. The Norman prelates and priests, who
held so many of the dignities in the English Church, had worked hard to
incline men's minds to this end. Silent while England stood united under
its king to oppose the invader, their tongues were loosed as soon as the
strength of England was broken and its king dead, and they pointed out that
God had clearly designated William as their king by giving him victory and
by destroying alike Harold and his brothers.

William went through the farce of hesitating to accept the offer of the
crown, and held a consultation with his officers as to the answer he should
give. They of course replied that he should accept the offer. William,
therefore, marched with his army to London, where on Christmas-day the same
prelate who had anointed Harold King of England crowned William as his
successor.

A few days later Beorn and Wulf with Osgod, who had now completely
recovered from his wounds, set sail for England. There was no longer any
reason why they should not take their oaths to serve William. He was the
crowned king of England, the accepted of the people, as Harold had been,
and when all Southern England had submitted it was not for them, who had
received special favours at William's hand, to hold back. With them went
Lady de Burg, Guy, and Agnes, with many other Norman ladies on their way to
rejoin their lords in London. Baron de Burg, on the day after their
arrival at Westminster, led the two young thanes to the private apartment
of the king. He received them graciously.

"There are none of your nation," he said, "whose homage I more gladly
accept. You fought valiantly before under my banner, and will, I am sure,
be ready to do so again should occasion arise. I am thankful to my Lord de
Burg that he interposed in my name and saved your lives. I have not
forgotten the other part of my promise, and have this morning ordered my
justiciar to add to your estates forfeited lands adjoining."

Beorn and Wulf had previously talked the matter over. Their own
inclinations would have led them to refuse the offer, but as it was certain
that all the land forfeited to the crown by the death of its holders in
battle would be apportioned among William's Norman followers, they thought
that it would be wholly for the benefit both of the families of the late
thanes and for their tenants and people that they should accept any estate
William might bestow on them. They, therefore, thanked the duke in
suitable terms, and at once took the oaths for the lands he might be
pleased to bestow on them. A week later they received the formal deeds,
which in both cases more than doubled the estates they before possessed.

The same evening Lord de Burg said to Wulf, who had tarried in London,
while Beorn had at once set out for Fareham: "I think the time has come,
Wulf, when I can speak of a subject that has been in my thoughts for a long
time, and which, although you have not spoken, has, as my wife and I have
both seen, been dear to you. Normandy and England are now one, and we are
vassals of the same king. As long as there was a probability that
Englishmen and Normans might again be ranged in battle against each other,
it was not expedient that aught should be done in the matter, but, now this
obstacle is removed, I can offer you the alliance on which I am sure your
heart is set, and give you the hand of my daughter in marriage."

"It is the greatest wish of my life," Wulf replied gratefully. "I should
have asked you for her hand before had it not been for the position of
public affairs. I love her dearly, though I have until now abstained from
speaking; and yet I would not wed her unless her heart went freely with her
hand."

"I think not that she will be disobedient to my wishes," De Burg said
smiling. "She has proved deaf to all her Norman suitors, and although among
them were some whom few maidens would have said no to, her mother and I had
no wish to force her inclinations, especially as we both shrewdly suspected
where her heart had been bestowed. This alliance, too, has long been the
dearest wish of Guy. On the bed of sickness where he lay so long, and from
which it seemed at one time that he would never rise, he often spoke to me
of it. He was fondly attached to his sister, and again and again said that
he wished of all things that you should some day become her husband, as he
was sure her happiness would be safe with you, and that you would worthily
fill his place to us, and would, when the time came, rule nobly over the
lands of De Burg."

"God forbid that that should ever be the case," Wulf said earnestly. "I
trust that Guy will live long, and that he will marry and leave descendants
to follow him."

The baron shook his head sadly. "Guy is better," he said, "but he is still
weak and fragile, and the leeches tell me that a rough winter or an illness
that would be nought to others might carry him off. I have small hopes that
he will ever marry. I am sure that no such thought is in his mind. He is as
eager now as he was four years ago that you should be a son to us, and a
husband to Agnes. He has also earnestly expressed the wish, in which I also
join, that you should take our name. You English have no family names, but
that will come with other Norman customs, and marrying a De Burg it would
seem natural that you should yourself become Wulf de Burg."

"I should feel it a high honour. There is no more noble name in Normandy,
and I trust I may prove worthy of bearing it."

"That I have no fear of, Wulf, else I should not have offered you the hand
of my daughter. I will bring my wife and Guy in. I have offered you the
hand of Agnes, but it is right that you should ask her mother's consent,
although beforehand assured of it."

He left the room, and soon returned with Lady de Burg and Guy.

"My lord has told me," she said, before Wulf could speak, "that you would
ask my consent to your marriage with Agnes. I give it you unasked, freely
and gladly. I have but one regret--that the seas will divide us."

"Not so," the baron said; "William's court will be held in London, and for
years he will reside here far more than in Normandy, and will expect his
nobles to be frequently with him. I certainly shall not come alone, and you
will therefore have as many opportunities of seeing Agnes as if she were
married to a Norman whose estates did not lie near our own."

"I thank you most deeply, Lady de Burg, for the confidence which you show
in intrusting your daughter's happiness to me. I swear that with all my
might and power I will strive to make her happy, and will spare her to
visit you in Normandy whensoever you may wish it."

Guy came forward now and grasped Wulf's hand.

"How I have longed for this time, my brother," he said. "How I have hoped
that I might at least live long enough to know that the dearest wish of my
heart would be gratified. I can go hence now right willingly when God calls
me, knowing that my father and mother have another son to fill my place,
and that the happiness of my sister is secured."

"And now, wife, will you fetch Agnes from her chamber," the baron said.

In two or three minutes the baroness returned, leading Agnes, to whom she
had told the reason of her summons. The baron stepped forward and took her
hand.

"My daughter," he said, "the Thane of Steyning has asked for your hand in
marriage, and your mother and I have given our free and full consent, but
he would fain know from your own lips that you will come to him willingly."

"I have loved you, Agnes, since while still but a boy I first saw you, and
my love has grown ever since. The happiness of my life depends upon your
answer, but unless your heart goes with your hand I would rather remain
unmarried to my dying day."

The girl had stood with downcast eyes and with flushed face until now. When
Wulf ceased speaking she looked up into his face:

"I love you, Wulf; I have always loved you. It is for your sake that I have
said no to the suitors of my own race who have sought my hand. I will be a
true wife and loving to you."

"Then take her, Wulf," the baron said, placing her hand in his. "You are
now her betrothed husband and our adopted son."

Wulf stooped and kissed the girl's lips, and the betrothal was completed.
After some talk it was arranged that Wulf should at once journey down to
Steyning, assume possession of his new estates, set the house in order, and
prepare for their coming. Guy was to accompany him, and as soon as all was
in readiness Wulf would come up to London and return with Lord and Lady de
Burg and Agnes, who would pay a short visit and all would then cross to
Normandy, for the marriage was to take place at their chateau there.

"I was sure how it would be," Osgod said when Wulf told him the news that
night. "I should have been blind indeed if I had not seen it long ago. I
love not the Normans, but I make exception in the case of Lord de Burg and
his family. And truly it will in all respects be a good thing for your
tenants. Although the duke, or I suppose I ought to say the king, promises
greatly at present, there is no saying what he may do later on; and he has
all these locusts to provide for. 'Tis well indeed, then, that there should
be a Norman lady as well as an English thane at Steyning."

Wulf's return home gave rise to demonstrations of the greatest joy among
his tenants. They had heard nothing of him since the battle, and had deemed
him to have fallen with the rest of the defenders of the standard, and had
been living in fear of the arrival of some Norman baron to be their lord.
Wulf was greatly pleased to find that, although not one of his housecarls
had returned from Hastings, the greater portion of his irregular levies had
escaped at nightfall with the party who had inflicted so heavy a blow upon
their pursuers. For the next few days Wulf was thoroughly occupied. The
tenants of his new estates received him almost as joyfully as his own had
done, for, like them, they had expected the advent of a Norman master. In
one of the two estates that had fallen to him the thane he had succeeded
had left no heirs; while the other thane had left a widow and a young
family. Wulf arranged that these should remain in their home, receiving for
their maintenance half the rents of the estate.

Guy was greatly pleased with the fair country in which his sister's lot was
to be cast, but he owned frankly that the house seemed unworthy now of the
large estate, and was indeed but a poor place in comparison with the noble
chateau in which she had been brought up.

"That shall be remedied, Guy, as soon as matters settle down. I have laid
by none of my revenues, for the keeping up of a hundred housecarls has
taxed them to the utmost, but now that my income is more than doubled, and
this expense has altogether ceased, I shall have funds with which I can
soon begin to build. When I was young, Steyning seemed to me a fine house,
but after your Norman castles it is indeed but a poor place."
