they would be exposed on its retreat to the most cruel persecutions
by the enemy.

Three days after the battle Lord Cornwallis retired, leaving 70 of
the wounded, who were unable to move, under the protection of a flag
of truce. From Guilford Court House he moved his troops to
Wilmington, in North Carolina, a seaport where he hoped to obtain
provisions and stores, especially clothing and shoes.

General Greene, left unmolested after his defeat, reassembled his
army, and receiving re-enforcements, marched at full speed to attack
Lord Rawdon at Camden, thinking that he would, with his greatly
superior force, be able to destroy him in his isolated situation. The
English commander fortified his position and the American general
drew back and encamped on Hobkirk Hill, two miles distant, to await
the coming of his heavy baggage and cannon, together with some
re-enforcements. Lord Rawdon determined to take the initiative, and
marching out with his whole force of 900 men, advanced to the attack.
The hill was covered at its foot by a deep swamp, but the English
marched round this and stormed the position. The Americans made an
obstinate resistance, but the English climbed the hill with such
impetuosity, in spite of the musketry and grape-shot of the enemy,
that they were forced to give way. Several times they returned to the
attack, but were finally driven off in confusion. One hundred
prisoners were taken, and Lord Rawdon estimated that 400 of the enemy
were killed and wounded. The American estimate was considerably
lower, and as the Americans fought with all the advantage of
position, while the English were exposed during their ascent to a
terrible fire, which they were unable to return effectively, it is
probable that the American loss, including the wounded, was inferior
to that of the English, whose casualties amounted to 258.

Harold and his companions did not take part either in the battle of
Guilford Court House or in that of Hobkirk Hill, having been attached
to the fort known as Ninety-six, because a milestone with these
figures upon it stood in the village. The force here was under the
command of Lieutenant Colonel Cruger, who had with him 150 men of a
provincial corps known as Delancey's, 200 of the second battalion of
the New Jersey volunteers, and 200 local loyalists. The post was far
advanced, but so long as Lord Rawdon remained at Camden its position
was not considered to be dangerous. The English general, however,
after winning the battle of Hobkirk Hill, received news of the
retirement of Lord Cornwallis toward Wilmington, and seeing that he
would thereby be exposed to the whole of the American forces in South
Carolina and would infallibly be cut off from Charleston, he
determined to retire upon that port. Before falling back he sent
several messengers to Colonel Cruger, acquainting him of his
intention. But so well were the roads guarded by the enemy that none
of the messengers reached Ninety-six.

Colonel Cruger, being uneasy at the length of time which had elapsed
since he had received any communication, sent Harold and the two
scouts out with instructions to make their way toward the enemy's
lines and, if possible, to bring in a prisoner. This they had not
much difficulty in doing. Finding out the position of two parties of
the Americans, they placed themselves on the road between them. No
long time elapsed before an American officer came along. A shot from
Peter's rifle killed his horse, and before the officer could recover
his feet, he was seized by the scouts. They remained hidden in the
wood during the day and at night returned with their prisoner to
Ninety-six, thirty miles distant, avoiding all villages where
resistance could be offered by hostile inhabitants.

From the prisoner Colonel Cruger learned that Lord Rawdon had
retreated from Camden and that he was therefore entirely isolated.
The position was desperate, but he determined to defend the post to
the last, confident that Lord Rawdon would, as soon as possible,
undertake an expedition for his release.

The whole garrison was at once set to work, stockades were erected,
earthworks thrown up, a redoubt--formed of casks filled with
earth--constructed, and the whole strengthened by ditches and
abattis. Blockhouses were erected in the village to enable the troops
to fire over the stockades, and covered communications made between
various works. The right of the village was defended by a regular
work called the Star. To the left was a work commanding a rivulet
from which the place drew its supply of water.

Colonel Cruger offered the volunteers, who were a mounted corps,
permission to return to Charleston, but they refused to accept the
offer, and, turning their horses into the woods, determined to share
the fate of the garrison. In making this offer the colonel was
influenced partly by motives of policy, as the stock of provisions
was exceedingly scanty, and he feared that they would not last if the
siege should be a long one. Besides this, he feared that, as had
already too often happened, should the place fall, even the solemn
engagement of the terms of the surrender would not be sufficient to
protect the loyalists against the vengeance of their countrymen.

On May 21 General Greene, with his army, appeared in sight of the
place and encamped in a wood within cannon-shot of the village. He
lost no time, and in the course of the night threw up two works
within seventy paces of the fortifications. The English commander did
not suffer so rash and disdainful a step to pass unpunished. The
scouts, who were outside the works, brought in news of what was being
done, and also that the working parties were protected by a strong
force.

The three guns which constituted the entire artillery of the
defenders were moved noiselessly to the salient angle of the Star
opposite the works, and at eleven o'clock in the morning these
suddenly opened fire, aided by musketry from the parapets. The
covering force precipitately retreated, and 30 men sallied out from
the fort, carried the intrenchments, and bayoneted their defenders.
Other troops followed, the works were destroyed, and the intrenching
tools carried into the fort. General Greene, advancing with his whole
army, arrived only in time to see the last of the sallying party
re-enter the village.

"I call that a right-down good beginning," Peter Lambton said, in
great exultation. "There's nothing like hitting a hard blow at the
beginning of the fight. It raises your spirits and makes t'other chap
mighty cautious. You'll see next time they'll begin their works at a
much more respectful distance."

Peter was right. The blow checked the impetuosity of the American
general, and on the night of the 23d he opened his trenches at a
distance of four hundred yards. Having so large a force, he was able
to push forward with great rapidity, although the garrison made
several gallant sorties to interfere with the work.

On June 3 the second parallel was completed. A formal summons was
sent to the British commander to surrender. This document was couched
in the most insolent language and contained the most unsoldierlike
threats of the consequences which would befall the garrison and its
commander if he offered further resistance. Colonel Cruger sent back
a verbal answer that he was not frightened by General Greene's
menaces and that he should defend the post until the last.

The American batteries now opened with a heavy cross-fire, which
enfiladed several of the works. They also pushed forward a sap
against the Star fort and erected a battery, composed of gabions,
thirty-six yards only from the abattis and raised forty feet high so
as to overlook the works of the garrison. The riflemen posted on its
top did considerable execution and prevented the British guns being
worked during the day.

The garrison tried to burn the battery by firing heated shot into it,
but from want of proper furnaces they were unable to heat the shot
sufficiently, and the attempt failed. They then protected their
parapets as well as they could by sand-bags with loop-holes, through
which the defenders did considerable execution with their rifles.

Harold and his two comrades, whose skill with their weapons was
notorious, had their post behind some sand-bags immediately facing
the battery, and were able completely to silence the fire of its
riflemen, as it was certain death to show a head above its parapet.

The enemy attempted to set fire to the houses of the village by
shooting blazing arrows into them, a heavy musketry and artillery
fire being kept up to prevent the defenders from quenching the
flames. These succeeded, however, in preventing any serious
conflagration, but Colonel Cruger ordered at once that the whole of
the houses should be unroofed. Thus the garrison were for the rest of
the siege without protection from the rain and night air, but all
risk of a fire, which might have caused the consumption of their
stores, was avoided.

While the siege had been going on the town of Augusta had fallen, and
Lieutenant Colonel Lee, marching thence to re-enforce General Greene,
brought with him the British prisoners taken there. With a scandalous
want of honorable feeling he marched these prisoners along in full
sight of the garrison, with all the parade of martial music, and
preceded by a British standard reversed.

If the intention was to discourage the garrison it failed entirely in
its effect. Fired with indignation at so shameful a sight, they
determined to encounter every danger and endure every hardship rather
than fall into the hands of an enemy capable of disgracing their
success by so wanton an insult to their prisoners.

The Americans, strengthened by the junction of the troops who had
reduced Augusta, began to make approaches against the stockaded fort
on the left of the village, which kept open the communication of the
garrison with their water supply. The operations on this side were
intrusted to Colonel Lee, while General Greene continued to direct
those against the Star.

On the night of June 9 a sortie was made by two strong parties of the
defenders. That to the right entered the enemy's trenches and
penetrated to a battery of four guns, which nothing but the want of
spikes and hammers prevented them from destroying. Here they
discovered the mouth of a mine intended to be carried under one of
the defenses of the Star.

The division on the left fell in with the covering party of the
Americans, killed a number of them, and made their commanding officer
a prisoner.

On the 12th Colonel Lee determined to attempt a storm of the stockade
on the left, and sent forward a sergeant and six men, with lighted
combustibles, to set fire to the abattis. The whole of them were
killed before effecting their purpose. A number of additional cannon
now arrived from Augusta, and so heavy and incessant a fire was
opened upon the stockade from three batteries that on the 17th it was
no longer tenable, and the garrison evacuated it in the night.

The suffering of the garrison for want of water now became extreme.
With great labor a well had been dug in the fort, but no water was
found, and none could be procured except from the rivulet within
pistol-shot of the enemy. In the day nothing could be done, but at
night negroes, whose bodies in the darkness were not easily
distinguished from the tree-stumps which surrounded them, went out
and at great risk brought in a scanty supply. The position of the
garrison became desperate. Colonel Cruger, however, was not
discouraged, and did his best to sustain the spirits of his troops by
assurances that Lord Rawdon was certain to attempt to relieve the
place as soon as he possibly could do so.

At length one day, to the delight of the garrison, an American
royalist rode right through the pickets under the fire of the enemy
and delivered a verbal message from Lord Rawdon to the effect that he
had passed Orangeburg and was on his march to raise the siege.

Lord Rawdon had been forced to remain at Charleston until the arrival
of three fresh regiments from Ireland enabled him to leave that place
in safety and march to the relief of Ninety-six. His force amounted
to 1800 infantry and 150 cavalry. General Greene had also received
news of Lord Rawdon's movements, and, finding from his progress that
it would be impossible to reduce the fort by regular approaches
before his arrival, he determined to hazard an assault.

The American works had been pushed up close to the forts, and the
third parallel had been completed, and a mine and two trenches
extended within a few feet of the ditch. On the morning of June 18 a
heavy cannonade was begun from all the American batteries. The Whole
of the batteries and trenches were lined with riflemen, whose fire
prevented the British from showing their heads, above the parapets.
At noon two parties of the enemy advanced under cover of their
trenches and made a lodgment in the ditch. These were followed by
other parties with hooks to drag down the sand-bags and tools to
overthrow the parapet. They were exposed to the fire of the
block-houses in the village, and Major Green, the English officer who
commanded the Star fort, had his detachment in readiness behind the
parapet to receive the enemy when they attempted to storm.

As the main body of Americans did not advance beyond the third
parallel and contented themselves with supporting the parties in the
ditch with their fire, the commander of the fort resolved to inflict
a heavy blow. Two parties, each 30 strong, under the command of
Captains Campbell and French, issued from the sally-port in the rear,
entered the ditch, and, taking opposite directions, charged the
Americans who had made the lodgment with such impetuosity that they
drove everything before them until they met. The bayonet alone was
used and the carnage was great--two-thirds of those who entered the
trenches were either killed or wounded.

General Greene, finding it useless any longer to continue the
attempt, called off his troops, and on the following day raised the
siege and marched away with all speed, having lost at least 300 men
in the siege. Of the garrison 27 were killed and 58 wounded.

On the 21st Lord Rawdon arrived at Ninety-six and, finding that it
would be hopeless for him to attempt to overtake the retreating
enemy, who were marching with great speed, he drew off the garrison
of Ninety-six and fell back toward the coast.

A short time afterward a sharp fight ensued between a force under
Colonel Stewart and the army of General Greene. The English were
taken by surprise and were at first driven back, but they recovered
from their confusion and renewed the fight with great spirit, and
after a desperate conflict the Americans were repulsed. Two cannon
and 60 prisoners were taken; among the latter Colonel Washington, who
commanded the reserve. The loss on both sides was about equal, as 250
of the British troops were taken prisoners at the first outset. The
American killed considerably exceeded our own. Both, parties claimed
the victory; the Americans because they had forced the British to
retreat; the British because they had ultimately driven the Americans
from the field and obliged them to retire to a strong position seven
miles in the rear This was the last action of the war in South
Carolina.




CHAPTER XXI.


THE END OF THE STRUGGLE.

Being unable to obtain any supplies at Wilmington, Lord Cornwallis
determined to march on into Virginia and to effect a junction with
the British force under General Arnold operating there. Arnold
advanced to Petersburg and Cornwallis effected a junction with him on
May 20. The Marquis de la Fayette, who commanded the colonial forces
here, fell back. Just at this time the Count de Grasse, with a large
French fleet, arrived off the coast, and, after some consultation
with General Washington, determined that the French fleet and the
whole American army should operate together to crush the forces under
Lord Cornwallis.

The English were hoodwinked by reports that the French fleet was
intended to operate against New York, and it was not until they
learned that the Count de Grasse had arrived with twenty-eight ships
of the line at the mouth of the Chesapeake Bay that the true object
of the expedition was seen. A portion of the English fleet
encountered them, but after irregular actions, lasting over five
days, the English drew off and retired to New York. The
commander-in-chief then attempted to effect a diversion, in order to
draw off some of the enemy who were surrounding Cornwallis. The fort
of New London was stormed after some desperate fighting, and great
quantities of ammunition and stores and fifty pieces of cannon taken.
General Washington did not allow his attention to be distracted.
Matters were in a most critical condition, for although to the
English the prospect of ultimate success appeared slight indeed, the
Americans were in a desperate condition. Their immense and
long-continued efforts had been unattended with any material success.
It was true that the British troops held no more ground now than they
did at the end of the first year of the war, but no efforts of the
colonists had succeeded in wresting that ground from them. The people
were exhausted and utterly disheartened. Business of all sorts was at
a standstill. Money had ceased to circulate, and the credit of
Congress stood so low that its bonds had ceased to have any value
whatever. The soldiers were unpaid, ill fed, and mutinous. If on the
English side it seemed that the task of conquering was beyond them,
the Americans were ready to abandon the defense from sheer
exhaustion. It was then of paramount necessity to General Washington
that a great and striking success should be obtained to animate the
spirits of the people.

Cornwallis, seeing the formidable combination which the French and
Americans were making to crush him, sent message after message to New
York to ask for aid from the commander-in-chief, and received
assurances from him that he would at once sail with 4000 troops to
join him. Accordingly, in obedience to his orders, Lord Cornwallis
fortified himself at Yorktown.

On September 28 the combined army of French and Americans, consisting
of 7000 of the former and 12,000 of the latter, appeared before
Yorktown and the post at Gloucester. Lord Cornwallis had 5960 men,
but so great had been the effects of the deadly climate in the autumn
months that only 4017 men were reported as fit for duty.

The enemy at once invested the town and opened their trenches against
it. From their fleet they had drawn an abundance of heavy artillery,
and on October 9 their batteries opened a tremendous fire upon the
works. Each day they pushed their trenches closer, and the British
force was too weak, in comparison with the number of its assailants,
to venture upon sorties. The fire from the works was completely
overpowered by that of the enemy, and the ammunition was nearly
exhausted. Day after day passed and still the promised re-enforcements
did not arrive. Lord Cornwallis was told positively that the fleet
would set sail on October 8, but it came not, nor did it leave port
until the 19th, the day on which Lord Cornwallis surrendered.

On the 16th, finding that he must either surrender or break through,
he determined to cross the river and fall on the French rear with his
whole force and then turn northward and force his way through
Maryland, Pennsylvania, and the Jerseys. In the night the light
infantry, the greater part of the guards, and part of the
Twenty-third were embarked in boats and crossed to the Gloucester
side of the river before midnight. At this critical moment a violent
storm arose which prevented the boats returning. The enemy's fire
reopened at daybreak, and the engineer and principal officers of the
army gave it as their opinion that it was impossible to resist
longer. Only one eight-inch shell and a hundred small ones remained.
The defenses had in many places tumbled to ruins, and no effectual
resistance could be opposed to an assault.

Accordingly Lord Cornwallis sent out a flag of truce and arranged
terms of surrender. On the 24th the fleet and re-enforcements arrived
off the mouth of the Chesapeake. Had they left New York at the time
promised, the result of the campaign would have been different.

The army surrendered as prisoners of war until exchanged, the
officers with liberty to proceed on parole to Europe and not to serve
until exchanged. The loyal Americans were embarked on the _Bonito_,
sloop of war, and sent to New York in safety, Lord Cornwallis having
obtained permission to send off the ship without her being searched,
with as many soldiers on board as he should think fit, so that they
were accounted for in any further exchange. He was thus enabled to
send off such of the inhabitants and loyalist troops as would have
suffered from the vengeance of the Americans.

The surrender of Lord Cornwallis' army virtually ended the war. The
burden entailed on the people in England by the great struggle
against France, Spain, Holland, and America, united in arms against
her, was enormous. So long as there appeared any chance of recovering
the colony the English people made the sacrifices required of them,
but the conviction that it was impossible for them to wage a war with
half of Europe and at the same time to conquer a continent had been
gaining more and more in strength. Even the most sanguine were
silenced by the surrender of Yorktown, and a cry arose throughout the
country that peace should at once be made.

As usual under the circumstances, a change of ministry took place.
Negotiations for peace were at once commenced, and the war terminated
in the acknowledgment of the entire independence of the United States
of America.
