   AR RAY', dress; attire.
   MAN' TLED, spread; rushed.
   DE VO' TION, attachment.
   I DOL A TROUS, excessive.
   SEV' ER ED, rent; sundered.
   EN CIR' CLED, inclosed; surrounded.
   SA' BLES, mourning clothes.
   GIFT' ED, talented.
   FOUND ED, established.
   AL LURE', (AL, _to_; LURE, _draw_;) draw to; entice.


PASSING UNDER THE ROD.

[Footnote: These lines are founded on the following passage of Jewish
history:--"It was the custom of the Jews to select the tenth of their
sheep after this manner: The lambs were separated from their dams, and
inclosed in a sheep-cot, with only one narrow way out; the lambs
hastened to join the dams, and a man, placed at the entrance, with a rod
dipped in ocher, touched every tenth lamb, and so marked it with his
rod, saying, 'LET THIS BE HOLY.' Hence, God says by his prophet, '_I
will cause you to pass under the rod_.'"]

MARY S.B. DANA.

1. I saw the young bride, in her beauty and pride,
     Bedecked in her snowy array;
   And the bright flush of joy mantled high on her cheek,
     And the future looked blooming and gay:
   And with a woman's devotion she laid her fond heart
     At the shrine of idolatrous love;
   And she anchored her hopes to this perishing earth,
     By the chain which her tenderness wove.
   But I saw, when those heartstrings were bleeding and torn,
     And the chain had been severed in two,
   She had changed her white robes for the sables of grief,
     And her bloom for the paleness of woe!
   But the Healer was there, pouring balm on her heart,
     And wiping the tears from her eyes;
   And He strengthened the chain He had broken in twain,
     And fastened it firm to the skies!
   There had whispered a voice,--'twas the voice of her God:
   "I love thee--I love thee--_pass under the rod!_"

2. I saw the young mother in tenderness bend
     O'er the couch of her slumbering boy;
   And she kissed the soft lips as they murmured her name,
     While the dreamer lay smiling in joy.
   Oh, sweet as the rose-bud encircled with dew,
     When its fragrance is flung on the air,
   So fresh and so bright to that mother he seemed,
     As he lay in his innocence there.
   But I saw when she gazed on the same lovely form,
     Pale as marble, and silent, and cold,
   But paler and colder her beautiful boy,
     And the tale of her sorrow was told!
   But the Healer was there, who had stricken her heart,
     And taken her treasure away;
   To allure her to heaven, He has placed it on high,
     And the mourner will sweetly obey.
   There had whispered a voice,--'twas the voice of her God:
   "I love thee--I love thee--_pass under the rod!_"

3. I saw, too, a father and mother who leaned
     On the arms of a dear gifted son;
   And the star in the future grew bright to their gaze,
     As they saw the proud place he had won;
   And the fast coming evening of life promised fair,
     And its pathway grew smooth to their feet,
   And the starlight of love glimmered bright at the end,
     And the whispers of fancy were sweet.
   And I saw them again, bending low o'er the grave,
     Where their hearts' dearest hope had been laid;
   And the star had gone down in the darkness of night,
     And the joy from their bosoms had fled.
   But the Healer was there, and His arms were around,
     And He led them with tenderest care;
   And He showed them a star in the bright upper world,
     'Twas their star shining brilliantly there!
   They had each heard a voice,--'twas the voice of their God:
   "I love thee--I love thee--_pass under the rod_!"

QUESTIONS.--1. What custom is alluded to, in the passage "_I will cause
you to pass under the rod?_" See note. 2. Where is that passage found in
the Scriptures? Ans. Ezekiel, 20th chap., 37th verse. 3. What instances
are mentioned of individuals "_passing under the rod_?"

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON CXV.

   PET' U LANT, cross; fretful.
   CA LAM' I TY, misfortune.
   SA TIR' IC AL, keenly severe; cutting.
   NUI' SANCE, annoyance.
   JUST' I FY, give a right to.
   STU PID' I TY, extreme dullness.
   CUL' PABLE, blamable; censurable.
   IR RI TA BIL' I TY, excitableness.
   AP PEL LA' TION, name; title.
   VE' HE MENT, violent; furious.
   VO CIF ER A' TIONS, loud outcries.
   MEN' A CES, threats.
   CEN' SUR ED, blamed.
   VIN DI CA' TION, justification.
   LON GEV' I TY, length of life.
   CON TEMPT' I BLE, despicable.


THE PETULANT MAN.

OSBORNE.


MR. GRIM--MICHAEL--COUSIN MARY.

_Cousin Mary_. More breezes? What terrible thing has happened now,
Cousin Grim? What's the matter?

_Grim_. Matter enough, I should think! I sent this stupid fellow to
bring me a pair of boots from the closet; and he has brought me two
rights, instead of a right and left.

_Cousin_. What a serious calamity! But, perhaps, he thought it was but
_right_ to leave the _left_.

_Grim_. None of your jokes, if you please. This is nothing to laugh at.

_Cousin_. So it would seem, from the expression on your face,--rather
something to storm at, roar at, and fall into a frenzy about.

_Michael_. That's right, Miss; give him a piece of your mind! He's the
crossest little man I have met with in the new country. You might scrape
old Ireland with a fine-tooth comb, and not find such another.

_Grim_. How dare you talk to me in that style? I'll discharge you this
very day!

_Michael_. I'm thinking of discharging _you_, if you don't take better
care of that _sweet temper_ of yours.

_Grim_. Leave the room, sir!

_Michael_. That I will, in search of better company, saving the lady's
presence. [_Exit._

_Grim_. There, cousin! there is a specimen of my provocations! Can you
wonder at my losing my temper?

_Cousin_. Cousin Grim, that would be the most _fortunate_ thing that
could befall you.

_Grim_. What do you mean?

_Cousin_. I mean, if you could only _lose that temper_ of yours, it
would be a blessed thing for you; though I should pity the poor fellow
who _found it._ _Grim_. You are growing satirical in your old age,
Cousin Mary.

_Cousin_. Cousin Grim, hear the plain truth; your ill temper makes you a
nuisance to yourself and every body about you.

_Grim_. Really, Miss Mary Somerville, you are getting to be
complimentary!

_Cousin_. No; I am getting to be _candid_. I have passed a week in your
house, on your invitation. I leave you this afternoon; but, before I go,
I mean to speak my mind.

_Grim_. It seems to me that you have spoken it rather freely already.

_Cousin_. What was there, in the circumstance of poor Michael's bringing
you the wrong boots, to justify your flying into a rage, and bellowing
as if your life had been threatened?

_Grim_. That fellow is perpetually making just such provoking blunders!

_Cousin_. And do you never make provoking blunders'? Didn't you send me
five pounds of Hyson tea, when I wrote for Souchong'? Didn't you send a
carriage for me to the cars, half an hour too late, so that I had to
hire one myself, after great trouble'? And did I roar at you, when we
met, because you had done these things'?

_Grim_. On the contrary, this is the first time you have alluded to
them. I am sorry they should have happened. But surely you should make a
_distinction_ between any such little oversight of mine, and the
stupidity of a servant, hired to attend to your orders.

_Cousin_. I do not admit that there should be a distinction. You are
both human; only, as you have had the better education, and the greater
advantages, stupidity or neglect on your part, is much the more
culpable.

_Grim_. Thank you! Go on.

_Cousin_. I mean to; so don't be impatient. If an uncooked potato, or a
burnt mutton-chop, happens to fall to your lot at the dinner-table, what
a tempest follows! One would think you had been wronged, insulted,
trampled on, driven to despair. Your face is like a thunder-cloud, all
the rest of the meal. Your poor wife endeavors to hide her tears. Your
children feel timid and miserable. Your guest feels as if she would like
to see you held under the nose of the pump, and thoroughly ducked.

_Grim_. The carriage is waiting for you, Miss Somerville, and the driver
has put on your baggage.

_Cousin_. I have hired that carriage by the hour, and so am in no hurry.
Your excuse for your irritability will be, I suppose, that it is
_constitutional_, and not to be controlled. A selfish, paltry, miserable
excuse! I have turned down a leaf in Dr. Johnson's works, and will read
what he says in regard to tempers like yours.

_Grim_. You are always quoting Dr. Johnson! Cousin, I can not endure it!
Dr. Johnson is a bore!

_Cousin_. Oh, yes! to _evil-doers_,--but to none else. Hear him: "There
is in the world a class of mortals known, and contentedly known, by the
appellation of _passionate men_, who imagine themselves entitled, by
this distinction, to be provoked on every slight occasion, and to vent
their rage in vehement and fierce vociferations, in furious menaces, and
licentious reproaches."

_Grim_. That will do.

_Cousin_. "Men of this kind," he tells us, "are often pitied rather than
censured, and are not treated with the severity which their neglect of
the ease of all about them, might justly provoke." But he adds: "It is
surely not to be observed without indignation, that men may be found of
minds mean enough to be satisfied with this treatment; wretches who are
proud to obtain the privilege of madmen, and----"

_Grim_. I will hear no more! Have done!

_Cousin_. So the shaft went home! I am not sorry.

_Grim_. No one but a meddlesome old maid would think of insulting a man
in his own house.

_Cousin_. So, when, at a loss for a vindication, you reproach me with
being an old maid! Cousin, it does not distress me, either to be an old
maid, or to be called one. I must, however, remark, that the manhood
that can charge against a woman her single state, either as a matter of
ridicule or reproach, is not quite up to my standard.

_Grim_. Cousin Mary, I ask your pardon! But am I, indeed, the petulant,
disagreeable fellow, you would make me out?

_Cousin_. My dear Caspar, you are generous enough in large things; but,
oh! consider that _trifles make up a good portion of the sum of life_;
and so "_a small unkindness is a great offense_." Why not be cheerful,
sunny, genial, in little things? Why not look on the bright side? Why
not present an unruffled front to petty annoyances? Why not labor,--ay,
labor,--to have those around you happy and contented, by reflecting from
yourself such a frame of mind upon them?

Life is short, at the best; why not make it cheerful? Do you know that
longevity is promoted by a tranquil, happy habit of thought and temper'?
Do you know that cheerfulness, like mercy, is twice blessed; blessing
"him that gives, and him that takes'?" Do you know that good manners, as
well as good sense, demand that we should look at objects on their
bright side'? Do you know that it is contemptible selfishness in you to
shed gloom and sorrow over a whole family by your moroseness and
ill-humor'?

_Grim_. Cousin Mary, the patience with which I have listened to your
cutting remarks, will prove to you, I hope, that, notwithstanding my
angry retorts, I am convinced there is much truth in what you have said
of me. I have a favor to ask. Send away your carriage; stay a week
longer,--a month,--a year, if you will. Hold the lash over this ugly
temper of mine,--and I give you my word that I will set about the cure
of it in earnest.

_Cousin_. You should have begun earlier,--in youth, when the temper is
pliable, and strong impressions can work great changes. But we will not
despair. I will tarry with you a while, just to see if you are serious
in your wish for a reformation, and to help you bring it about.

_Grim_. Thank you. We hear of reformed drunkards, and reformed thieves;
and _why may not a petulant temper be reformed_, but a system of total
abstinence from all harsh, unkind moods and expressions? Come, we will
try.

QUESTIONS.--1. At what was Mr. Grim offended? 2. What did Cousin Mary
say would be fortunate for him? 3. What blunder had Mr. Grim made? 4.
How did he often behave at the table? 5. What does Dr. Johnson say of
such men? 6. What did Cousin Mary finally say to him? 7. Of what was he
convinced? 8. What did he resolve to do?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON CXVI.

   SAC' RI FICE, religious offering.
   STRAIGHT, immediately.
   SCUR' VY, low; mean.
   SCRU' PLE, hesitate.
   EN DURE', suffer'; tolerate.
   IM PURE, filthy; unclean.
   UT TER LY, entirely; completely.
   BLEM' ISH, defect; deformity.
   WA' VER ED, hesitated.
   IM PAR' TIAL, just; free from bias.
   RE FER', leave to another.
   PAR' DON, forgive.
   GHEE, kind of butter used in India.
   DIS TRUST' ING, suspecting.
   PAL PA BLE, obvious; evident.
   LAUD' ING, praising.


THE BRAHMIN AND THE ROGUES.

[Footnote: The fable, here thrown into verse, is related in English
prose by Macaulay, who says:--"Thus, or nearly thus, if we remember
rightly, runs the story of the Sanscrit Aesop."]

AN EASTERN FABLE.

VERSIFIED BY J.N. McELLIGOTT.

 1. A Brahmin went out, the legends say,
    To buy him a sheep a certain day;
    For he had solemnly vowed to slay,
    In sacrifice, a sheep that day,
    And wanted a sheep his vow to pay.
        Three neighboring rogues
        (The cunning dogs!)
        Finding this out,
        Went straight about
    (Moved, I ween, by the very Old Nick,)
    To play the Brahmin a scurvy trick.

 2. So one of them met him with the cry:--
    "O Brahmin! O Brahmin! won't you buy
    A beautiful sheep? for here have I
    A beautiful sheep for sacrifice,
    As ever was seen by mortal eyes."

 3. "Where is your sheep?" replied the Brahmin;
    "Bring him out here, and let me examine."
        With that the wag
        Opened a bag,
        And out he drew
        To public view
    An ugly, dirty, horrible dog!
    Blind as a bat, and lame as a frog;
    With a broken leg, climbing a log.
    Or limping slowly over a bog.

 4. "Wretch!" said the Brahmin indignant, "who
    Shamelessly utterest things untrue,
    And dost without a scruple endure
    To handle creatures the most impure,
    How darest thou call that cur a sheep?
    Do you think, foul knave, that I'm asleep?"

 5. "_Cur'!_" said the fellow with steady tone;
    "A _sheep_ it is, and a sheep alone;
    A sheep (see here, what a splendid fleece!)
    With flesh the sweetest, and fat as grease;
        And such a prize
        For sacrifice,
    As neither gods nor men can despise,
    Unless they both have dust in their eyes!"
    "Sir," said the Brahmin, surprised to find
    A person so utterly out of his mind,
    "'Tis certain that _you_ or _I_ am blind."

 6.     Then stepping up,
        Patting the pup,
    Rogue the second, as if amazed,
    While on the dog he steadily gazed,
    Exclaims aloud:--"The gods be praised!
    Since I've no need to market to go
    To buy me a sheep; for here's one so
    From spot and blemish perfectly free,
    That better could not possibly be.
        Isn't it nice?
        What's your price?"

 7. The Brahmin, seeing this singular thing,
    Wavered in mind, like one in a swing;
    Yet answered the stranger, firmly,--"Sir,
    This isn't a sheep, but only a cur."
    "_Cur_?" with disdain, the new-comer said;
    "Why, man, you're surely out of your head!"

 8.     As this occurred,
        Came rogue the third,
    To whom, as being a witness new,
    And likely to take impartial view,
    Brahmin proposed at once to refer,
    Whether the creature was _sheep_ or _cur_.
    All being agreed, the eager priest
    Said:--"Stranger, what do you call this beast?"
    "A _sheep_, to be sure!" the knave replied;
    "As fine a sheep as ever you spied."

 9. "Well," said the Brahmin, "the gods this day
    Have surely taken my senses away!"
        Then begging the rogue
        That carried the dog,
    To pardon him for doubting his word,
    He, with a readiness most absurd,
    Purchased the creature with rice and ghee,
    Which went, of course, to the worthless three,
    And which they shared with wonderful glee.

10.     Thus taken in,
        The poor Brahmin
        Offered it up,
        The filthy pup,
    Which so offended the gods, that they
    Sent sore disease his folly to pay:
    Thinking it right the man to chastise
    For so distrusting his natural eyes,
    And being led by palpable lies
    To offer a dog as a sacrifice.

MORAL.

    Look out for the arts of the puffing tribe,--
    People that praise for the sake of a bribe;
    Lavishly lauding a book or a pill,
    Or any thing else the pocket to fill;
    Singing Simplicity fast asleep,
    And making her dream a dog's a sheep.

QUESTIONS.--1. What trick did the three rogues play off on the Brahmin?
2. In what way did they do this? 3. What moral is taught in this fable?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON CXVII.

   E LAS TIC' I TY, returning vigor.
   MIN' I FIES, lessens; makes small.
   DEG RA DA' TION, abasement.
   ES TRANGED, alienates.
   UN ALMS' ED, not having received alms.
   HA BIT' U AL, accustomed.
   EX TRAV' A GANCE, superfluous expense.
   IM PER' TI NENCE, that which is not pertinent.
   SUS PI' CIOUS, distrustful.
   E CON' O MY, frugality.
   TRAN' QUIL, calm; undisturbed.
   BE NUMB' ING, dull; stupefying.
   IM PROV' I DENCE, wastefulness.


LIVING WITHIN OUR MEANS.

S.W. PARTRIDGE.

1.                   _Oh, beware of debt_!
   It crushes out the manhood of a man,
   Robs his bright eye of boldness, cheats his limbs
   Of elasticity, unnerves his hand,
   Beclouds his judgment, dulls his intellect,
   Perils his uprightness, and stains his name,
   And minifies him to his fellow-men;
   Yea, far worse degradation, to himself.

2. Who hath the hurried step, the anxious eye,
   Avoids the public haunt and open street,
   And anxious waits for evening? Restlessly
   Tosses upon his bed, and dreads the approach
   Of the tell-tale morning sunlight? Who, unmanned,
   Starts at the sudden knock, and shrinks with dread
   E'en at his own shadow; shuns with care
   The stranger's look, skulks from his fellow's glance,
   And sees in every man a creditor?

3. The _debtor_;--he is only half a man;
   He saddens and estranges his chief friends,
   Burdens his dearest relatives; he hears
   In vain the stranger's tale, the widow's prayer,
   And sends away the orphan all unalmsed.
   None dare to place him in a post of trust,
   And business men regard him with a shrug.

4. "Owe no man aught." Stand in the world erect,
   And lean alone upon thyself and God.
   The habitual borrower will be ever found
   Wicked, or weak, or both. Sweat, study, stint,
   Yea, rather _any thing_ than meanly owe.
   Let thine own honest hands feed thee and thine,
   And, if not thy friend's purse, at least, respect
   Thine own sweet independence.

5. Have fewest wants: the book, however good,
   Thou shouldst not purchase, let it go unbought;
   And fashion's vests by thee be all unworn.
   Soon luxuries become necessities,
   But self-denying thrift more joy affords
   Than all the pleasures of extravagance.
   A cottage, free from clamorous creditors,
   Is better than a mansion dunned; a coat,
   However darned, if paid for, hath an ease,
   And a respectability beside:
   Gay, ill-afforded vests can never boast.

6.                           However cheap,
   Whatever thou want'st not, buy not. That is dear,
   A mere extravagant impertinence,
   For which thou hast no need. Feel first the want
   Ere it be satisfied; bargains full oft
   Are money-wasting things, that prudent men
   Will keep afar from with suspicious eye;
   Perchance to any but of little use,
   And to themselves, most likely, none at all.

7. The habit of economy once formed,
   'Tis easy to attain to prosperous things.
   Thou then shalt lend, not borrow: shalt not want
   A helping trifle when thy friend hath need,
   Or means to seize an opportunity,--
   Seed-coin, to ensure a harvest. Thou shalt then
   Want not an alms for pinching poverty;
   And, though a sudden sickness dam the stream,
   And cut off thy supplies, thou shalt lie down
   And view thy morrows with a tranquil eye;
   Even benumbing age shall scare thee not,
   But find thee unindebted, and secure
   From all the penury and wretchedness
   That dog the footsteps of improvidence.

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON CXVIII.

   OM NIP' O TENT, all-powerful.
   IN TER' MI NA BLE, endless.
   MILK Y-WAY, galaxy; luminous circle in the heavens.
   AS' TRAL, starry.
   IN FIN' I TUDE, unlimited extent.
   IM PET' U OUS, rushing.
   AS TRON O MER, one skilled in the science of the stars.
   AP PROX' I MATE LY, nearly.
   OM NIS' CIENCE, knowledge of all things.
   PER TUR BA' TIONS, irregularities of motion.
   AB' SO LUTE, entire.
   PRE CIS' ION, exactness.
   AD JUST' MENTS, arrangements.
   RET' I NUE, company.
   SAT' EL LITES, small planets revolving round others.


GRANDEUR OF THE UNIVERSE.

O.M. MITCHEL.

1. If you would know the _glory_ of the Omnipotent Ruler of the
universe, examine the interminable range of suns and systems which crowd
the Milky-Way. Multiply the hundred millions of stars which belong to
