flee away to some pleasant country village, or shaded lake in the forest,
or wild and cool seabeach.  I see vessels unlading at the wharf, and
precious merchandise strewn upon the ground, abundantly as at the bottom
of the sea, that market whence no goods return, and where there is no
captain nor supercargo to render an account of sales.  Here, the clerks
are diligent with their paper and pencils, and sailors ply the block and
tackle that hang over the hold, accompanying their toil with cries, long
drawn and roughly melodious, till the bales and puncheons ascend to upper
air.  At a little distance, a group of gentlemen are assembled round the
door of a warehouse.  Grave seniors be they, and I would wager--if it
were safe, in these times, to be responsible for any one--that the least
eminent among them might vie with old Vicentio, that incomparable
trafficker of Pisa.  I can even select the wealthiest of the company.
It is the elderly personage, in somewhat rusty black, with powdered hair,
the superfluous whiteness of which is visible upon the cape of his coat.
His twenty ships are wafted on some of their many courses by every breeze
that blows, and his name--I will venture to say, though I know it not--is
a familiar sound among the far-separated merchants of Europe and the
Indies.

But I bestow too much of my attention in this quarter.  On looking again
to the long and shady walk, I perceive that the two fair girls have
encountered the young man.  After a sort of shyness in the recognition,
he turns back with them.  Moreover, he has sanctioned my taste in regard
to his companions by placing himself on the inner side of the pavement,
nearest the Venus to whom I--enacting on a steeple-top, the part of Paris
on the top of Ida--adjudged the golden apple.

In two streets, converging at right angles towards my watchtower,
I distinguish three different processions.  One is a proud array of
voluntary soldiers, in bright uniform, resembling, from the height whence
I look down, the painted veterans that garrison the windows of a toyshop.
And yet, it stirs my heart; their regular advance, their nodding plumes,
the sunflash on their bayonets and musket-barrels, the roll of their
drums ascending past me, and the fife ever and anon piercing
through,--these things have wakened a warlike fire, peaceful though I be.
Close to their rear marches a battalion of schoolboys, ranged in crooked
and irregular platoons, shouldering sticks, thumping a harsh and unripe
clatter from an instrument of tin, and ridiculously aping the intricate
manoeuvres of the foremost band.  Nevertheless, as slight differences are
scarcely perceptible from a church-spire, one might be tempted to ask,
"Which are the boys?" or, rather, "Which the men?" But, leaving these,
let us turn to the third procession, which, though sadder in outward
show, may excite identical reflections in the thoughtful mind.  It is a
funeral.  A hearse, drawn by a black and bony steed, and covered by a
dusty pall; two or three coaches rumbling over the stones, their drivers
half asleep; a dozen couple of careless mourners in their every-day
attire; such was not the fashion of our fathers, when they carried a
friend to his grave.  There is now no doleful clang of the bell to
proclaim sorrow to the town.  Was the King of Terrors more awful in those
days than in our own, that wisdom and philosophy have been able to
produce this change?  Not so.  Here is a proof that he retains his proper
majesty.  The military men, and the military boys, are wheeling round the
corner, and meet the funeral full in the face.  Immediately the drum is
silent, all but the tap that regulates each simultaneous footfall.  The
soldiers yield the path to the dusty hearse and unpretending train, and
the children quit their ranks, and cluster on the sidewalks, with
timorous and instinctive curiosity.  The mourners enter the churchyard at
the base of the steeple, and pause by an open grave among the
burial-stones; the lightning glimmers on them as they lower down the
coffin, and the thunder rattles heavily while they throw the earth upon
its lid.  Verily, the shower is near, and I tremble for the young man and
