even exceeded by that in his brain.

Thus happily would he traverse the land; sometimes a herald before the
march of Mind; sometimes walking arm in arm with awful Literature; and
reaping everywhere a harvest of real and sensible popularity, which
the secluded bookworms, by whose toil he lived, could never hope for.

"If ever I meddle with literature," thought I, fixing myself in
adamantine resolution, "it shall be as a travelling bookseller."

Though it was still mid-afternoon, the air had now grown dark about
us, and a few drops of rain came down upon the roof of our vehicle,
pattering like the feet of birds that had flown thither to rest.  A
sound of pleasant voices made us listen, and there soon appeared half-way
up the ladder the pretty person of a young damsel, whose rosy face
was so cheerful, that even amid the gloomy light it seemed as if the
sunbeams were peeping under her bonnet.  We next saw the dark and
handsome features of a young man, who, with easier gallantry than
might have been expected in the heart of Yankee-land, was assisting
her into the wagon.  It became immediately evident to us, when the two
strangers stood within the door, that they were of a profession
kindred to those of my companions; and I was delighted with the more
than hospitable, the even paternal kindness, of the old showman's
manner, as he welcomed them; while the man of literature hastened to
lead the merry-eyed girl to a seat on the long bench.

"You are housed but just in time, my young friends," said the master
of the wagon.  "The sky would have been down upon you within five
minutes."

The young man's reply marked him as a foreigner, not by any variation
from the idiom and accent of good English, but because he spoke with
more caution and accuracy, than if perfectly familiar with the
language.

"We knew that a shower was hanging over us," said he, "and consulted
whether it were best to enter the house on the top of yonder hill, but
seeing your wagon in the road--"

"We agreed to come hither," interrupted the girl, with a smile,
"because we should be more at home in a wandering house like this."

I, meanwhile, with many a wild and undetermined fantasy, was narrowly
inspecting these two doves that had flown into our ark. The young man,
tall, agile, and athletic, wore a mass of black shining curls
clustering round a dark and vivacious countenance, which, if it had
not greater expression, was at least more active, and attracted
readier notice, than the quiet faces of our countrymen.  At his first
appearance, he had been laden with a neat mahogany box, of about two
feet square, but very light in proportion to its size, which he had
immediately unstrapped from his shoulders and deposited on the floor
of the wagon.

The girl had nearly as fair a complexion as our own beauties, and a
brighter one than most of them; the lightness of her figure, which
seemed calculated to traverse the whole world without weariness,
suited well with the glowing cheerfulness of her face; and her gay
attire, combining the rainbow hues of crimson, green, and a deep
orange, was as proper to her lightsome aspect as if she had been born
in it.  This gay stranger was appropriately burdened with that
mirth-inspiring instrument, the fiddle, which her companion took from
her hands, and shortly began the process of tuning.  Neither of us--the
previous company of the wagon-needed to inquire their trade; for this
could be no mystery to frequenters of brigade-musters, ordinations,
cattle-shows, commencements, and other festal meetings in our sober
land; and there is a dear friend of mine, who will smile when this
page recalls to his memory a chivalrous deed performed by us, in
rescuing the show-box of such a couple from a mob of great
double-fisted countrymen.

"Come," said I to the damsel of gay attire, "shall we visit all the
wonders of the world together?"

She understood the metaphor at once; though indeed it would not much
have troubled me, if she had assented to the literal meaning of my
words.  The mahogany box was placed in a proper position, and I peeped
in through its small round magnifying window, while the girl sat by my
side, and gave short descriptive sketches, as one after another the
pictures were unfolded to my view.  We visited together, at least our
imaginations did, full many a famous city, in the streets of which I
had long yearned to tread; once, I remember, we were in the harbor of
Barcelona, gazing townwards; next, she bore me through the air to
Sicily, and bade me look up at blazing AEtna; then we took wing to
Venice, and sat in a gondola beneath the arch of the Rialto; and anon
she sat me down among the thronged spectators at the coronation of
Napoleon. But there was one scene, its locality she could not tell,
which charmed my attention longer than all those gorgeous palaces and
churches, because the fancy hammed me, that I myself, the preceding
summer, had beheld just such a humble meeting-house, in just such a
pine-surrounded nook, among our own green mountains. All these
pictures were tolerably executed, though far inferior to the girl's
touches of description; nor was it easy to comprehend, how in so few
sentences, and these, as I supposed, in a language foreign to her, she
contrived to present an airy copy of each varied scene.  When we had
travelled through the vast extent of the mahogany box, I looked into
my guide's face.

"Where are you going, my pretty maid?"  inquired I, in the words of an
old song.

"Ah," said the gay damsel, "you might as well ask where the summer
wind is going.  We are wanderers here, and there, and everywhere.
Wherever there is mirth, our merry hearts are drawn to it.  To-day,
indeed, the people have told us of a great frolic and festival in
these parts; so perhaps we may be needed at what you call the
