antiquated little town, full of old maids, and aged elms, and
moss-grown dwellings.  Few seemed to be the changes here.  The drooping
elms, indeed, had a more majestic spread; the weather-blackened houses
were adorned with a denser thatch of verdant moss; and doubtless there
were a few more gravestones in the burial-ground, inscribed with names
that had once been familiar in the village street.  Yet, summing up
all the mischief that ten years had wrought, it seemed scarcely more
than if Ralph Cranfield had gone forth that very morning, and dreamed
a daydream till the twilight, and then turned back again.  But his
heart grew cold, because the village did not remember him as he
remembered the village.

"Here is the change!" sighed he, striking his hand upon his breast.
"Who is this man of thought and care, weary with world-wandering, and
heavy with disappointed hopes?  The youth returns not, who went forth
so joyously!"

And now Ralph Cranfield was at his mother's gate, in front of the
small house where the old lady, with slender but sufficient means, had
kept herself comfortable during her son's long absence.  Admitting
himself within the enclosure, he leaned against a great, old tree,
trifling with his own impatience, as people often do in those
intervals when years are summed into a moment.  He took a minute
survey of the dwelling,--its windows, brightened with the sky-gleans,
its doorway, with the half of a mill-stone for a step, and the faintly
traced path waving thence to the gate.  He made friends again with his
childhood's friend, the old tree against which he leaned; and glancing
his eye a-down its trunk, beheld something that excited a melancholy
smile.  It was a half-obliterated inscription--the Latin word
EFFODE--which he remembered to have carved in the bark of the tree, with
a whole day's toil, when he had first begun to muse about his exalted
destiny.  It might be accounted a rather singular coincidence, that
the bark, just above the inscription, had put forth an excrescence,
shaped not unlike a hand, with the forefinger pointing obliquely at
the word of fate.  Such, at least, was its appearance in the dusky
light.

"Now a credulous man," said Ralph Cranfield carelessly to himself,
"might suppose that the treasure which I have sought round the world
lies buried, after all, at the very door of my mother's dwelling.
That would be a jest indeed!"

More he thought not about the matter; for now the door was opened, and
an elderly woman appeared on the threshold, peering into the dusk to
discover who it might be that had intruded on her premises, and was
standing in the shadow of her tree.  It was Ralph Cranfield's mother.
Pass we over their greeting, and leave the one to her joy and the
other to his rest,--if quiet rest he found.

But when morning broke, he arose with a troubled brow; for his sleep
and his wakefulness had alike been full of dreams.  All the fervor was
rekindled with which he had burned of yore to unravel the threefold
mystery of his fate.  The crowd of his early visions seemed to have
awaited him beneath his mother's roof, and thronged riotously around
to welcome his return.  In the well-remembered chamber--on the pillow
where his infancy had slumbered--he had passed a wilder night than
ever in an Arab tent, or when he had reposed his head in the ghastly
shades of a haunted forest.  A shadowy maid had stolen to his bedside,
and laid her finger on the scintillating heart; a hand of flame had
glowed amid the darkness, pointing downward to a mystery within the
earth; a hoary sage had waved his prophetic wand, and beckoned the
dreamer onward to a chair of state.  The same phantoms, though fainter
in the daylight, still flitted about the cottage, and mingled among
the crowd of familiar faces that were drawn thither by the news of
Ralph Cranfield's return, to bid him welcome for his mother's sake.
There they found him, a tall, dark, stately man, of foreign aspect,
courteous in demeanor and mild of speech, yet with an abstracted eye,
which seemed often to snatch a glance at the invisible.

Meantime the Widow Cranfield went bustling about the house full of joy
that she again had somebody to love, and be careful of, and for whom
she might vex and tease herself with the petty troubles of daily life.
It was nearly noon, when she looked forth from the door, and descried
three personages of note coming along the street, through the hot
