fast as they please; they never think that a pony can get tired, or have
any feelings; so as the one who was whipping me could not understand, I
just rose up on my hind legs and let him slip off behind--that was all;
he mounted me again, and I did the same. Then the other boy got up, and
as soon as he began to use his stick, I laid him on the grass, and so
on, till they were able to understand, that was all. They were not bad
boys; they don't wish to be cruel. I like them very well; but you see I
had to give them a lesson. When they brought me to James and told him, I
think he was very angry to see such big sticks. He said they were not
for young gentlemen."

"If I had been you," said Ginger, "I would have given those boys a good
kick, and that would have given them a lesson."

"No doubt you would," said Merrylegs; "but then I am not quite such a
fool as to anger our master or make James ashamed of me; besides, those
children are under my charge when they are riding; I tell you they are
entrusted to me. Why, only the other day I heard our master say to Mrs.
Blomefield, 'My dear madam, you need not be anxious about the children;
my old Merrylegs will take as much care of them as you or I could; I
assure you I would not sell that pony for any money, he is so perfectly
good-tempered and trustworthy'; and do you think I am such an ungrateful
brute as to forget all the kind treatment I have had here for five
years, and all the trust they place in me, and turn vicious, because a
couple of ignorant boys used me badly? No, no! you never had a good
place where they were kind to you, and so you don't know, and I am sorry
for you; but I can tell you good places make good horses. I wouldn't
vex our people for anything; I love them, I do," said Merrylegs, and he
gave a low "ho, ho, ho," through his nose, as he used to do in the
morning when he heard James' footstep at the door.




CHAPTER VII


GOING FOR THE DOCTOR

One night I was lying down in my straw fast asleep, when I was suddenly
roused by the stable bell ringing very loud. I heard the door of John's
house open, and his feet running up to the Hall. He was back again in no
time; he unlocked the stable door, and came in, calling out, "Wake up,
Beauty! you must go well now, if ever you did"; and almost before I
could think, he had got the saddle on my back and the bridle on my head.
He just ran around for his coat, and then took me at a quick trot up to
the Hall door. The Squire stood there, with a lamp in his hand. "Now,
John," he said, "ride for your life--that is, for your mistress' life;
there is not a moment to lose. Give this note to Dr. White; give your
horse a rest at the inn, and be back as soon as you can."

John said, "Yes, sir," and was on my back in a minute. The gardener who
lived at the lodge had heard the bell ring, and was ready with the gate
open, and away we went through the park, and through the village, and
down the hill till we came to the toll-gate. John called very loud and
thumped upon the door; the man was soon out and flung open the gate.

"Now," said John, "do you keep the gate open for the doctor; here's the
money," and off we went again.

[Illustration]

There was before us a long piece of level road by the river-side; John
said to me, "Now, Beauty, do your best," and so I did; I wanted no whip
nor spur, and for two miles I galloped as fast I could lay my feet to
the ground; I don't believe that my old grandfather, who won the race at
Newmarket, could have gone faster. When we came to the bridge, John
pulled me up a little and patted my neck. "Well done, Beauty! good old
fellow," he said. He would have let me go slower, but my spirit was up,
and I was off again as fast as before. The air was frosty, the moon was
bright; it was very pleasant. We came through a village, then through a
dark wood, then uphill, then downhill, till after an eight miles' run,
we came to the town, through the streets and into the market-place. It
was all quite still except the clatter of my feet on the
stones--everybody was asleep. The church clock struck three as we drew
up at Dr. White's door. John rang the bell twice, and then knocked at
the door like thunder. A window was thrown up, and the doctor, in his
night-cap, put his head out and said, "What do you want?"

"Mrs. Gordon is very ill, sir; master wants you to go at once; he thinks
she will die if you cannot get there. Here is a note."

"Wait," he said, "I will come."

He shut the window and was soon at the door. "The worst of it is," he
said, "that my horse has been out all day, and is quite done up; my son
has just been sent for, and he has taken the other. What is to be done?
Can I have your horse?"

"He has come at a gallop nearly all the way, sir, and I was to give him
a rest here; but I think my master would not be against it, if you think
fit, sir."

"All right," he said; "I will soon be ready."

John stood by me and stroked my neck. I was very hot. The doctor came
out with his riding-whip. "You need not take that, sir," said John;
"Black Beauty will go till he drops. Take care of him, sir, if you can;
I should not like any harm to come to him."

"No, no, John," said the doctor, "I hope not," and in a minute we had
left John far behind.

[Illustration]

I will not tell about our way back. The doctor was a heavier man than
John, and not so good a rider; however, I did my very best. The man at
the toll-gate had it open. When we came to the hill, the doctor drew me
up. "Now, my good fellow," he said, "take some breath." I was glad he
did, for I was nearly spent, but that breathing helped me on, and soon
we were in the park. Joe was at the lodge gate; my master was at the
Hall door, for he had heard us coming. He spoke not a word; the doctor
went into the house with him, and Joe led me to the stable. I was glad
to get home; my legs shook under me, and I could only stand and pant. I
had not a dry hair on my body, the water ran down my legs, and I steamed
all over--Joe used to say, like a pot on the fire. Poor Joe! he was
young and small, and as yet he knew very little, and his father, who
would have helped him, had been sent to the next village; but I am sure
he did the very best he knew. He rubbed my legs and my chest, but he did
not put my warm cloth on me; he thought I was so hot I should not like
it. Then he gave me a pail full of water to drink; it was cold and very
good, and I drank it all; then he gave me some hay and some corn, and,
thinking he had done right, he went away. Soon I began to shake and
tremble, and turned deadly cold; my legs ached, my loins ached, and my
chest ached, and I felt sore all over. This developed into a strong
inflammation, and I could not draw my breath without pain. John nursed
me night and day. My master, too, often came to see me. "My poor
Beauty," he said one day, "my good horse, you saved your mistress' life,
Beauty; yes, you saved her life." I was very glad to hear that, for it
seems the doctor had said if we had been a little longer it would have
been too late. John told my master he never saw a horse go so fast in
his life. It seems as if the horse knew what was the matter. Of course I
did, though John thought not; at least I knew as much as this--that John
and I must go at the top of our speed, and that it was for the sake of
the mistress.




CHAPTER VIII


THE PARTING

I had lived in this happy place three years, but sad changes were about
to come over us. We heard that our mistress was ill. The doctor was
often at the house, and the master looked grave and anxious. Then we
heard that she must go to a warm country for two or three years. The
news fell upon the household like the tolling of a death-bell. Everybody
was sorry. The master arranged for breaking up his establishment and
leaving England. We used to hear it talked about in our stable; indeed,
nothing else was talked about. John went about his work silent and sad,
and Joe scarcely whistled. There was a great deal of coming and going;
Ginger and I had full work.

The first of the party who went were Miss Jessie and Flora with their
governess. They came to bid us good-bye. They hugged poor Merrylegs
like an old friend, and so indeed he was. Then we heard what had been
arranged for us. Master had sold Ginger and me to an old friend.
Merrylegs he had given to the vicar, who was wanting a pony for Mrs.
Blomefield, but it was on the condition that he should never be sold,
and that when he was past work he should be shot and buried. Joe was
engaged to take care of him and to help in the house, so I thought that
Merrylegs was well off.

[Illustration]

"Have you decided what to do, John?" he said.

"No, sir; I have made up my mind that if I could get a situation with
some first-rate colt-breaker and horse-trainer, it would be the right
thing for me. Many young animals are frightened and spoiled by wrong
treatment, which need not be if the right man took them in hand. I
always get on well with horses, and if I could help some of them to a
fair start I should feel as if I was doing some good. What do you think
of it, sir?"

"I don't know a man anywhere," said master, "that I should think so
suitable for it as yourself. You understand horses, and somehow they
understand you, and I think you could not do better."

The last sad day had come; the footman and the heavy luggage had gone
off the day before, and there were only master and mistress, and her
maid. Ginger and I brought the carriage up to the Hall door, for the
last time. The servants brought out cushions and rugs, and when all were
arranged, master came down the steps carrying the mistress in his arms
(I was on the side next the house, and could see all that went on); he
placed her carefully in the carriage, while the house servants stood
round crying.

"Good-bye, again," he said; "we shall not forget any of you," and he got
in. "Drive on, John." Joe jumped up and we trotted slowly through the
park and through the village, where the people were standing at their
doors to have a last look and to say, "God bless them."

When we reached the railway station, I think mistress walked from the
carriage to the waiting-room. I heard her say in her own sweet voice,
"Good-bye, John; God bless you." I felt the rein twitch, but John made
no answer; perhaps he could not speak. As soon as Joe had taken the
things out of the carriage, John called him to stand by the horses,
while he went on the platform. Poor Joe! He stood close up to our heads
to hide his tears. Very soon the train came puffing into the station;
then two or three minutes, and the doors were slammed to; the guard
