homeliest things in th' world."

Old Mr. Toad grew indignant. "Those are not Grandfather Frog's children;
they're mine!" he sputtered. "And I'll have you know that they are the most
beautiful babies in th' world!"

Peter drew a hand across his mouth to hide a smile. "I beg your pardon, Mr.
Toad," said he. "I--I thought all tadpoles were Frog babies. They all look
alike to me."

"Well, they're not," declared Old Mr. Toad. "How any one can mistake my
babies for their cousins I cannot understand. Now mine are beautiful,
while--"

"Chug-arum!" interrupted the great deep voice of Grandfather Frog. "What
are you talking about? Why, your babies are no more to be compared with my
babies for real beauty than nothing at all! I'll leave it to Peter if they
are."

But Peter wisely held his tongue. To tell the truth, he couldn't see beauty
in any of them. To him they were all just wriggling pollywogs. They were
more interesting now, because he had found out that some of them were Toads
and some were Frogs, and he hadn't known before that baby Toads begin life
as tadpoles, but he had no intention of being drawn into the dispute now
waxing furious between Grandfather Frog and Old Mr. Toad.




IX


THE SMILING POOL KINDERGARTEN

  Play a little, learn a little, grow a little too;
  That's what every pollywoggy tries his best to do.

Of course. That's what a kindergarten is for. And you may be sure that the
babies of Grandfather Frog and Old Mr. Toad and Stickytoes the Tree Toad
did all of these things in the kindergarten of the Smiling Pool. They
looked considerably alike, did these little cousins, for they were all
pollywogs to begin with. Peter Rabbit came over every day to watch them.
Always he had thought pollywogs just homely, wriggling things, not the
least bit interesting, but since he had discovered how proud of them were
Grandfather Frog and Old Mr. Toad, he had begun to wonder about them and
then to watch them.

"There's one thing about them, and that is they are not in danger the way
any babies are," said Peter, talking to himself as is his way when there is
no one else to talk to. Just then a funny little black pollywog wriggled
into sight, and while Peter was watching him, a stout-jawed water-beetle
suddenly rushed from among the water grass, seized the pollywog by his
tail, and dragged him down. Peter stared. Could it be that that
ugly-looking bug was as dangerous an enemy to the baby Toad as Reddy Fox is
to a baby Rabbit? He began to suspect so, and a little later he knew so,
for there was that same little pollywog trying hard to swim and making bad
work of it, because he had lost half of his long tail.

That set Peter to watching sharper than ever, and presently he discovered
that pollywogs have to keep their eyes open quite as much as do baby
Rabbits, if they would live to grow up. There were several kinds of queer,
ugly-looking bugs forever darting out at the wriggling pollywogs.
Hungry-looking fish lay in wait for them, and Longlegs the Blue Heron
seemed to have a special liking for them. But the pollywogs were spry, and
seemed to have learned to watch out. They seemed to Peter to spend all
their time swimming and eating and growing. They grew so fast that it
seemed to him that he could almost _see_ them grow. And just imagine how
surprised Peter was to discover one day that that very pollywog which he
had seen lose his tail had grown a _new_ one. That puzzled Peter more than
anything he had seen in a long time.

"Why, I couldn't do that!" he exclaimed right out loud.

"Do what?" demanded Jerry Muskrat, who happened along just then.

"Why, grow a new tail like that pollywog," replied Peter, and told Jerry
all that he had seen. Jerry laughed.

"You'll see queerer things than that if you watch those pollywogs long
enough," said he. "They are a queer lot of babies, and very interesting to
watch if you've got the time for it. I haven't. This Smiling Pool is a
great kindergarten, and there's something happening here every minute.
There's no place like it."

"Are those great big fat pollywogs Grandfather Frog's children, or Old Mr.
Toad's?" asked Peter.

"Grandfather Frog's last year's children," replied Jerry. "They'll grow
into real Frogs this summer, if nothing happens to them."

"Where are Old Mr. Toad's last year's children?" asked Peter.

"Don't ask me," replied Jerry. "They hopped away last summer. Never saw
anything like the way those Toad youngsters grow. Those Toad pollywogs you
see now will turn into real Toads, and be leaving the Smiling Pool in a few
weeks. People think Old Mr. Toad is slow, but there is nothing slow about
his children. Look at that little fellow over there; he's begun to grow
legs already."

Peter looked, and sure enough there was a pollywog with a pair of legs
sprouting out. They were his fore legs, and they certainly did make him
look funny. And only a few days before there hadn't been a sign of legs.

"My gracious!" exclaimed Peter. "What a funny sight! I thought my babies
grew fast, but these beat them."




X


THE LITTLE TOADS START OUT TO SEE THE WORLD

  The world is a wonderful great big place
    And in it the young must roam
  To learn what their elders have long since learned--
    There's never a place like home.

It had been some time since Peter Rabbit had visited the Smiling Pool to
watch the pollywogs. But one cloudy morning he happened to think of them,
and decided that he would run over there and see how they were getting
along. So off he started, lipperty-lipperty-lip. He wondered if those
pollywog children of Old Mr. Toad would be much changed. The last time he
saw them some of them had just begun to grow legs, although they still had
long tails.

He had almost reached the Smiling Pool when great big drops of rain began
to splash down. And with those first raindrops something funny happened.
Anyway, it seemed funny to Peter. Right away he was surrounded by tiny
little Toads. Everywhere he looked he saw Toads, tiny little Toads just
like Old Mr. Toad, only so tiny that one could have sat comfortably on a
ten-cent piece and still had plenty of room.

Peter's big eyes grew round with surprise as he stared. Where had they all
come from so suddenly? A minute before he hadn't seen a single one, and now
he could hardly move without stepping on one. It seemed, it really seemed,
as if each raindrop turned into a tiny Toad the instant it struck the
ground. Of course Peter knew that that couldn't be, but it was very
puzzling. And all those little Toads were bravely hopping along as if they
were bound for some particular place.

Peter watched them for a few minutes, then he once more started for the
Smiling Pool. On the very bank whom should he meet but Old Mr. Toad. He
looked rather thin, and his back was to the Smiling Pool. Yes, Sir, he was
hopping away from the Smiling Pool where he had been all the spring,
singing in the great chorus. Peter was almost as surprised to see him as he
had been to see the little Toads, but just then he was most interested in
those little Toads.

"Good morning, Old Mr. Toad," said Peter in his most polite manner. "Can
you tell me where all these little Toads came from?"

[Illustration: "Can you tell me where all these little Toads came from?"]

"Certainly," replied Old Mr. Toad. "They came from the Smiling Pool, of
course. Where did you suppose they came from?"

"I--I didn't know. There wasn't one to be seen, and then it began to rain,
and right away they were everywhere. It--it almost seemed as if they had
rained down out of the sky."

Old Mr. Toad chuckled. "They've got good sense, if I must say it about my
own children," said he. "They know that wet weather is the only weather for
Toads to travel in. They left the Smiling Pool in the night while it was
damp and comfortable, and then, when the sun came up, they hid, like
sensible children, under anything they could find, sticks, stones, pieces
of bark, grass. The minute this shower came up, they knew it was good
traveling weather and out they popped."

"But what did they leave the Smiling Pool for?" Peter asked.

"To see the Great World," replied Old Mr. Toad. "Foolish, very foolish of
them, but they would do it. I did the same thing myself when I was their
age. Couldn't stop me any more than I could stop them. They don't know when
they're well off, but young folks never do. Fine weather, isn't it?"




XI


OLD MR. TOAD'S QUEER TONGUE

  Old Mother Nature doth provide
    For all her children, large or small.
  Her wisdom foresees all their needs
    And makes provision for them all.

If you don't believe it, just you go ask Old Mr. Toad, as Peter Rabbit did,
how such a slow-moving fellow as he is can catch enough bugs and insects to
keep him alive. Perhaps you'll learn something just as Peter did. Peter and
Old Mr. Toad sat in the rain watching the tiny Toads, who, you know, were
Mr. Toad's children, leaving their kindergarten in the Smiling Pool and
starting out to see the Great World. When the last little Toad had passed
them, Old Mr. Toad suddenly remembered that he was hungry, very hungry
indeed.

"Didn't have time to eat much while I was in the Smiling Pool," he
explained. "Couldn't eat and sing too, and while I was down there, I was
supposed to sing. Now that it is time to quit singing, I begin to realize
that I've got a stomach to look out for as well as a voice. See that bug
over there on that leaf? Watch him."

Peter looked, and sure enough there was a fat bug crawling along on an old
leaf. He was about two inches from Old Mr. Toad, and he was crawling very
fast. And right while Peter was looking at him he disappeared. Peter turned
to look at Old Mr. Toad. He hadn't budged. He was sitting exactly where he
had been sitting all the time, but he was smacking his lips, and there was
a twinkle of satisfaction in his eyes. Peter opened his eyes very wide.

"Wha--what--" he began.

"Nice bug," interrupted Old Mr. Toad. "Nicest bug I've eaten for a
longtime."
