Jupiter, and asked him to send them something more like a King.

This time he sent them a Stork, who tossed them about and gobbled them
up without mercy.  They lost no time, therefore, in beseeching the god
to give them again their former state.

"No, no," replied he, "a King that did you no harm did not please you.
Make the best of the one you have, or you may chance to get a worse in
his place."



The Porcupine and the Snakes

A Porcupine, seeking for shelter, desired some Snakes to give him
admittance into their cave.  They accordingly let him in, but were
afterward so annoyed by his sharp, prickly quills that they repented of
their easy compliance, and entreated him to withdraw and leave them
their hole to themselves.

"No, no," said he, "let them quit the place that don't like it; for my
part, I am very well satisfied as I am."



The Lark and Her Young Ones

A Lark, who had Young Ones in a field of grain which was almost ripe,
was afraid that the reapers would come before her young brood was
fledged.  Every day, therefore, when she flew off to look for food, she
charged them to take note of what they heard in her absence, and to
tell her of it when she came home.

One day, when she was gone, they heard the owner of the field say to
his son that the grain seemed ripe enough to be cut, and tell him to go
early the next day and ask their friends and neighbours to come and
help reap it.

When the old Lark came home, the Little Ones quivered and chirped
around her, and told her what had happened, begging her to take them
away as fast as she could.  The mother bade them to be easy; "for,"
said she, "if he depends on his friends and his neighbours, I am sure
the grain will not be reaped tomorrow."

Next day, she went out again, and left the same orders as before.  The
owner came, and waited.  The sun grew hot, but nothing was done, for
not a soul came.  "You see," said the owner to his son, "these friends
of ours are not to be depended upon; so run off at once to your uncles
and cousins, and say I wish them to come early to-morrow morning and
help us reap."

This the Young Ones, in a great fright, told also to their mother.  "Do
not fear, children," said she; "kindred and relations are not always
very forward in helping one another; but keep your ears open, and let
me know what you hear to-morrow."

The owner came the next day, and, finding his relations as backward as
his neighbours, said to his son: "Now listen to me.  Get two good
sickles ready for to-morrow morning, for it seems we must reap the
grain by ourselves."  The Young Ones told this to their mother.

"Then, my dears," said she, "it is time for us to go; for when a man
undertakes to do his work himself, it is not so likely that he will be
disappointed."  She took them away at once, and the grain was reaped
the next day by the old man and his son.



The Fox and the Stork

A Fox one day invited a Stork to dine with him, and, wishing to be
amused at his guest's expense, put the soup which he had for dinner in
a large flat dish, so that, while he himself could lap it up quite
well, the Stork could only dip in the tip of his long bill.

Some time after, the Stork, bearing his treatment in mind, invited the
Fox to take dinner with him.  He, in his turn, put some minced meat in
a long and narrow-necked vessel, into which he could easily put his
bill, while Master Fox was forced to be content with licking what ran
down the sides of the vessel.

The Fox then remembered his old trick, and could not but admit that the
Stork had well paid him off.  "I will not apologize for the dinner,"
said the Stork, "nor for the manner of serving it, for one ill turn
deserves another."



The Gnat and the Bull

A sturdy Bull was once driven by the heat of the weather to wade up to
his knees in a cool and swift-running stream.  He had not been there
long when a Gnat that had been disporting itself in the air pitched
upon one of his horns.

"My dear fellow," said the Gnat, with as great a buzz as he could
manage, "pray excuse the liberty I take.  If I am too heavy only say so
and I will go at once and rest upon the poplar which grows hard by the
edge of the stream.

"Stay or go, it makes no matter to me," replied the Bull.  "Had it not
been for your buzz I should not even have known you were there."



The Deer and the Lion

One warm day a Deer went down to a brook to get a drink.  The stream
was smooth and clear, and he could see himself in the water.  He looked
at his horns and was very proud of them, for they were large and long
and had many branches, but when he saw his feet he was ashamed to own
them, they were so slim and small.

While he stood knee-deep in the water, and was thinking only of his
fine horns, a Lion saw him and came leaping out from the tall grass to
get him.  The Deer would have been caught at once if he had not jumped
quickly out of the brook.  He ran as fast as he could, and his feet
were so light and swift that he soon left the Lion far behind.  But by
and by he had to pass through some woods, and, as he was running, his
horns were caught in some vines that grew among the trees.  Before he
could get loose the Lion was upon him.

"Ah me!" cried the Deer, "the things which pleased me most will now
cause my death; while the things which I thought so mean and poor would
have carried me safe out of danger."



The Fox and the Grapes

There was a time when a Fox would have ventured as far for a Bunch of
Grapes as for a shoulder of mutton, and it was a Fox of those days and
that palate that stood gaping under a vine and licking his lips at a
most delicious Cluster of Grapes that he had spied out there.

He fetched a hundred and a hundred leaps at it, till, at last, when he
was as weary as a dog, and found that there was no good to be done:

"Hang 'em," says he, "they are as sour as crabs"; and so away he went,
turning off the disappointment with a jest.



The Farmer and the Stork

A Farmer placed nets on his newly sown plough lands, and caught a
quantity of Cranes, which came to pick up his seed.  With them he
trapped a Stork also.

The Stork, having his leg fractured by the net, earnestly besought the
Farmer to spare his life.  "Pray, save me, master," he said, "and let
me go free this once.  My broken limb should excite your pity.
Besides, I am no Crane.  I am a Stork, a bird of excellent character;
and see how I love and slave for my father and mother.  Look, too, at
my feathers, they are not the least like to those of a Crane."

The Farmer laughed aloud, and said: "It may all be as you say, I only
know this, I have taken you with those robbers, the Cranes, and you
must die in their company."



The Hare and the Tortoise

The Hare, one day, laughing at the Tortoise for his slowness and
general unwieldiness, was challenged by the latter to run a race.  The
Hare, looking on the whole affair as a great joke, consented, and the
Fox was selected to act as umpire and hold the stakes.

The rivals started, and the Hare, of course, soon left the Tortoise far
behind.  Having come midway to the goal, she began to play about,
nibble the young herbage, and amuse herself in many ways.  The day
being warm, she even thought she would take a little nap in a shady
spot, as, if the Tortoise should pass her while she slept, she could
easily overtake him again before he reached the end.

The Tortoise meanwhile plodded on, unwavering and unresting, straight
toward the goal.

The Hare, having overslept herself, started up from her nap, and was
surprised to find that the Tortoise was nowhere in sight.  Off she went
at full speed, but on reaching the winning-post found that the Tortoise
was already there, waiting for her arrival!



The Old Woman and the Doctor

An old Woman who had bad eyes called in a clever Doctor, who agreed for
a certain sum to cure them.  He was a very clever physician, but he was
also a very great rogue; and when he called each day and bound up the
Old Woman's eyes he took advantage of her blindness to carry away with
him some article of her furniture.  This went on until he pronounced
his patient cured and her room was nearly bare.

He claimed his reward, but the Old Woman protested that, so far from
being cured, her sight was worse than ever.

"We will soon see about that, my good dame," said he; and she was
shortly after summoned to appear in court.

"May it please Your Honour," said she to the Judge, "before I called in
this Doctor I could see a score of things in my room that now, when he
says I am cured, I cannot see at all."

This opened the eyes of the court to the knavery of the Doctor, who was
forced to give the Old Woman her property back again, and was not
allowed to claim a penny of his fee.



The Boy and the Wolf

A mischievous Lad, who was set to mind some Sheep, often used, in jest,
to cry "Wolf!  Wolf!" and when the people at work in the neighbouring
fields came running to the spot he would laugh at them for their pains.

One day the beast came in reality, and the Boy, this time, called
"Wolf! Wolf!" in earnest; but the men, having been so often deceived,
disregarded his cries, and he and his Sheep were left at the mercy of
the Wolf.



The Blackamoor

A certain Man who had bought a Blackamoor said he was convinced that it
was all nonsense about black being the natural colour of his skin.  "He
has been dirty in his habits," said he, "and neglected by his former
masters.  Bring me some hot water, soap, and scrubbing-brushes, and a
little sand, and we shall soon see what his colour is."

So he scrubbed, and his servants scrubbed till they were all tired.
They made no difference in the colour of the Blackamoor; but the end of
it all was that the poor fellow caught cold and died.



The Wolf in Sheep's Clothing

A Wolf, wrapping himself in the skin of a Sheep, by that means got
admission into a sheepfold, where he devoured several of the young
Lambs.  The Shepherd, however, soon found him out and hung him up to a
tree, still in his assumed disguise.

Some other Shepherds, passing that way, thought it was a sheep hanging
and cried to their friend: "What, brother! is that the way you serve
Sheep in this part of the country?"

"No, friends," cried he, giving at the same time the carcass a swing
around, so that they might see what it was; "but it is the way to serve
Wolves, even though they be dressed in Sheep's clothing."



The Two Travellers

As two men were travelling through a wood, one of them took up an axe
which he saw lying upon the ground.  "Look here," said he to his
companion, "I have found an axe."

"Don't say, 'I have found it,'" said the other, "but 'We have found
it.'  As we are companions, we ought to share it between us."  The
first would not agree to this idea, however.

They had not gone far when they heard the owner of the axe calling
after them in a great passion.  "We are in for it!" cried he who had
the axe.

"Nay," answered the other, "say 'I'm in for it!'--not we.  You would
not let me share the prize, and I am not going to share the danger."



The Fox in the Well

An unlucky Fox, having fallen into a well, was able, by dint of great
efforts, just to keep his head above water.

While he was struggling there and sticking his claws into the side of
the Well, a Wolf came and looked in.  "What! my dear brother," cried
he, with affected concern, "can it really be you that I see down there?
How cold you must feel!  How long have you been in the water?  How came
you to fall in?  I am so pained to see you.  Do tell me all about it!"

"The end of a rope would be of more use to me than all your pity,"
answered the Fox.

"Just help me to get my foot on solid ground once more, and you shall
have the whole story."



The Hen and the Fox

A Fox, having crept into an outhouse, looked up and down for something
to eat, and at last espied a Hen sitting upon a perch so high that he
could be no means come at her.  He therefore had recourse to an old
stratagem.

"Dear cousin," said he to her, "how do you do?  I heard that you were
ill and kept at home; I could not rest, therefore, till I had come to
see you.  Pray let me feel your pulse.  Indeed, you do not look well at
all."

He was running on in this impudent manner, when the Hen answered him
from the roost: "Truly, dear Reynard, you are in the right.  I was
seldom in more danger than I am now.  Pray excuse my coming down; I am
sure I should catch my death."

The Fox, finding himself foiled by the Hen's cleverness, made off and
tried his luck elsewhere.



The Ass and His Shadow

A Man, one hot day, hired an Ass, with his Driver, to carry some
merchandise across a sandy plain.  The sun's rays were overpowering,
and unable to advance farther without a temporary rest he called upon
the Driver to stop, and proceeded to sit down in the shadow of the Ass.

The Driver, however, a lusty fellow, rudely pushed him away, and sat
down on the spot himself.

"Nay, friend," said the Driver, "when you hired this Ass of me you said
nothing about the shadow.  If now you want that, too, you must pay for
it."



The Ass in the Lion's Skin

An Ass, finding a Lion's skin, put it on, and ranged about the forest.
The beasts fled in terror, and he was delighted at the success of his
disguise.  Meeting a Fox, he rushed upon him, and this time he tried to
imitate as well the roaring of the Lion.

"Ah," said the Fox, "if you had held your tongue I should have been
deceived like the rest; but now you bray I know who you are!"



The Wolf and the Sheep

A Wolf, sorely wounded and bitten by dogs, lay sick and maimed in his
lair.  Parched with thirst, he called to a Sheep who was passing and
