
The Workman


In the mean squalid room back of the saloon half a score of men were
assembled. They were all young in years, in other things not youthful.
Some of them lounged against the wall. Some sat at tables. All were
drinking. The air was foul with smoke and reeked with the odor of vile
liquor.

"We've got two jobs on hand to-night," said the leader of the gang.
"There's a crib to be cracked an' a guy to be croaked. Red, you an'
Gypsie an' the Gunney will crack the crib. It's dead easy. Only an old
man an' his wife. The servants are out except one an' he's fixed. I'll
give you the layout presently. The other job's harder. Kid, I'll put you
in charge, an' as it's got to be done early to-night I'll give you the
orders now. He'll be at The Montmorency at ten o'clock. Someone will
call him out to the street."

"Who?"

"Never mind who. You'll be there in the car."

"Whose car?"

"Never mind whose. Why're you askin' so many questions? It'll take you
an' the four to The Montmorency at ten o'clock. When he comes out every
one of you let go, the whole bunch, understand. If they don't find five
bullets in him there'll be trouble to-morrow."

"What do we get out of it?"

"A hundred apiece fer you an' a hundred an' fifty fer me fer engineerin'
the job. Christmas money! You get me?"

"Of course. How'll we know who we've got to shoot?"

"I'll be there myself on the sidewalk. I'll point him out to you."

"The police?"

"They're fixed."

"Easy enough," said the Kid, the youngest of the gang.

"Well, you guys," said the leader pointing out four of the men, "will go
with the Kid. The car'll be at the door in half an hour."

"Now, gimme my orders," said Red.

The gang leader scribbled something on a bit of paper.

"You go to that number with these two guys between midnight an' two in
the mornin'. You'll find a back winder open. Here's the combination of
the safe. The silver'll be in that."

"Jewels?"

"In a wall cabinet upstairs. It'll be unlocked."

"An' if they make any noise?"

"Croak 'em, of course. But don't make no noise doin' it. Better use a
blackjack. We're not sure about the cop on that beat."

"I understand."

"Well, git your gats and make ready. Before we go, the drinks'll be on
me. Fill up, men," he added, first pouring himself a liberal glassful,
"an' here's to bringin' it off easy."

With deep relish the toast was drunk by all save Red and the Kid. Red
set his glass down on the table. The Kid dropped his to the floor.

"There's somebody else in the room," whispered Red.

"Yes, yonder by the door," said the Kid. "You c'n jest see him."

"Don't be a fool," said the gang leader. "There's nobody here but us."

"He's wearin' strange clothes," said Red.

"He looks like a carpenter by his kit o' tools," said the Kid.

"Here, pull yourselves together, men," said the gang leader; "you're
dippy, there's nobody here. Where's your nerve?"

But Red made no move to obey. He thrust his glass from him and rose and
leaned over the table staring. The other men shrank back glancing at the
two figures, for the Kid had also dashed the proffered glass aside.

"I see him," he said, "he's lookin' at me, he's lookin' through me."

In his excitement he took a step forward and the table went over with a
crash. The two men passed their hands over their eyes in bewilderment.

"Why, there ain't nobody here," said the Kid.

"But I seen him I tell you," persisted Red.

"And so did I."

"Well, he's gone, whoever he was, accordin' to your own showin'," said
the gang leader contemptuously. "Now brace up. Take your liquor. Get a
move on youse."

"Not me," exclaimed Red suddenly.

"Nor me," said the Kid.

"What d'ye mean?"

"I won't do it."

"Neither will I."

Both men moved to the door. The gang leader sprang to intercept them,
his arms upraised, his hands clenched.

"Lemme pass," said Red.

"Are you goin' to give us away?"

"No," answered Red. "But you don't rob no house, an' you don't kill no
man to-night."

"You all know what that means," cried the leader. "Here you men grab
'em."

But the rest of the gang hung back.

"Mebbe they did see somethin'," said one.

"You cowardly dogs," cried the leader.

"We won't mention no names to nobody," said the Kid, "but you can't
pull them jobs off. We'll jest warn 'em."

"You swore you'd be true to the gang, that you'd obey orders an' follow
directions."

"We won't give ye away but I'm goin' to quit the gang an' go to work,"
said Red.

"Me too," said the Kid.

"Work! Hell!" exclaimed the gang leader, but they shoved him out of the
way and went out of the door.




V

Comforter




"NEITHER DO I CONDEMN THEE"




V

The Comforter


She was a daughter of shame. Even inexperience could see that as she
wandered up and down the streets of the town, desperate, impelled to go
on by a force too strong for her to resist. She trod the pavement, yet
loathed the necessity and hated herself for her compliance. She had only
to look forward to the jail or the hospital; yet there was always the
river. Had it come to that? Was there nothing else?

She lifted her eyes from the stone walk as hard as the heart of the
world, and found herself opposite a brightly lighted building. She
leaned against the door. From within came the sound of music, the
