
3. They are very wise and busy little creatures. They all join together to
build cells of wax for their honey.

4. Each bee takes its proper place, and does its own work. Some go out and
gather honey from the flowers; others stay at home and work inside the
hive.

5. The cells which they build, are all of one shape and size, and no room
is left between them.

6. The cells are not round, but have six sides. 7. Did you ever look into
a glass hive to see the bees while at work? It is pleasant to see how busy
they always are.

8. But the drones do not work. Before winter comes, all the drones are
driven from the hive or killed, that they may not eat the honey which they
did not gather.

9. It is not quite safe for children to handle bees. They have sharp
stings that they know well how to use in their defense.



SLATE WORK.

[Illustration: Script Exercise:

How doth the little busy bee
  Improve each shining hour.
And gather honey all the day
  From every opening flower!
]



LESSON XXII.

blos'soms    drear'y    wea'ry       pinks       smell'ing    toil'ing

lev'ies      buzz       fra'grant    this'tle    weeds        scent

treas'ure    yel'low    mead'ow      tax         sum'mer      clo'ver

cloud'y      dai'sy     daf'fo dil lies          columbine    humming

[Illustration: Flowers]

THE SONG OF THE BEE.

1. Buzz! buzz! buzz!
     This is the song of the bee.
   His legs are of yellow;
   A jolly, good fellow,
     And yet a great worker is he.

2. In days that are sunny
   He's getting his honey;
   In days that are cloudy
     He's making his wax:
   On pinks and on lilies,
   And gay daffodillies,
   And columbine blossoms,
     He levies a tax!

3. Buzz! buzz! buzz!
   The sweet-smelling clover,
   He, humming, hangs over;
   The scent of the roses
     Makes fragrant his wings:
   He never gets lazy;
   From thistle and daisy,
   And weeds of the meadow,
     Some treasure he brings.

4. Buzz! buzz! buzz!
   From morning's first light
   Till the coming of night,
   He's singing and toiling
     The summer day through.
   Oh! we may get weary,
   And think work is dreary;
   'Tis harder by far
     To have nothing to do.
                               Marian Douglas.



LESSON XXIII.

un hap'py    prom'ised    heed'less    be came'    grow'ing

care'less    harsh'ly     leav'ing     eas'i ly    ef fects'

an noy'      ma'am        blame        worse       torn

hard'ly      nic'est      spend        hab'it      e'vil

[Illustration: Mother and daughter sitting under a tree.]

THE TORN DOLL.

1. Mary Armstrong was a pretty little girl, but she was heedless about
some things.

2. Her way of leaving her books and playthings just where she had used
them last, gave her mother much trouble in picking them up and putting
them in their proper places.

3. She had often told Mary the evil effects of being so careless. Her
books became spoiled, and her toys broken.

4. But worse than this was the growing habit of carelessness, which would
be of great harm to her all her life. It would make her unhappy, and would
annoy her friends.

5. One day Mary and her mother went out into their pleasant yard, to spend
an hour in the open air. Mrs. Armstrong took her work with her.

6. Mary ran about and played with Dash, her pet dog, and was having a
happy time.

7. But in a corner of the yard she found her nicest doll all torn and
broken, and its dress covered with mud.

8. She knew, at once, that Dash had done this, and she scolded him
harshly.

9. Carrying the broken doll to her mamma. she showed it to her, and could
hardly keep from crying.

10. Mrs. Armstrong asked Mary if she had not left the doll on the porch
where Dash could easily get it; and Mary had to answer, "Yes, ma'am."

11. "Then you must not blame the dog, Mary, for he does not know it is
wrong for him to play with your doll. I hope this will be a lesson to you
hereafter, to put your things away when you are through playing."

12. "I will try," said Mary. And her mother promised to mend the doll as
well as she could.



LESSON XXIV.

thor'ough ly    month    dried    dyed    cuts     shear'er    sheep

those   spun    dirt     oth'er wise      wov'en   cloth    wool    rub


[Illustration: Two men shearing sheep.]


SHEEP-SHEARING.

1. Sheep are washed and sheared some time in the month of June. This
should be done quite early in the month, before the hot days begin.

2. It is fine sport for those who look on, hut not much fun for the sheep.


3. It is best for the sheep to have the wool taken off; otherwise they
would suffer in the summer time.

4. When the time comes for washing the sheep, they are driven to a pond or
a little river.

5. Then they are thrown into the water, one at a time. The men who are in
the water catch them, and squeeze the wet wool with their hands to get the
dirt all out of it.

6. Then the wool is thoroughly dried, the sheep are taken to the shearer;
and he cuts off the wool with a large pair of shears.

7. It is then dyed, spun, and woven into cloth.

8. In a short time, before the cold winter comes, new wool grows out on
the sheep. By the corning of spring there is so much, that it must be cut
off again.



LESSON XXV.

bear'ers    earth    warm     sul'try    wan'der

rays        grain    clouds   o'er       we're


THE CLOUDS

                  1.
"Clouds that wander through the sky, Sometimes
low and sometimes high;
In the darkness of the night,
In the sunshine warm and bright.
Ah! I wonder much if you
Have any useful work to do."

                  2.
"Yes, we're busy night and day,
As o'er the earth we take our way.
We are bearers of the rain
To the grasses, and flowers, and grain;
We guard you from the sun's bright rays,
In the sultry summer days."



LESSON XXVI.

peo'ple    for'est    squir'rel    cool    near'est   tame     hol'low

snug       shoul'der    miles    sticks    gen'tly    though   Pat'ty


[Illustration: Girl sitting under tree, play with squirrel.]


PATTY AND THE SQUIRREL.

1. Little Patty lives in a log house near a great forest. She has no
sisters, and her big brothers are away all day helping their father.

2. But Patty is never lonely; for, though the nearest house is miles away,
she has many little friends. Here are two of them that live in the woods.

3. But how did Patty teach them to be so tame? Patty came to the woods
often, and was always so quiet and gentle that the squirrels soon found
they need not be afraid of her.

4. She brought her bread and milk to eat under the trees, and was sure to
leave crumbs for the squirrels.

5. When they came near, she sat very still and watched them. So, little by
little, she made them her friends, till, at last, they would sit on her
shoulder, and eat from her hand.

6. Squirrels build for themselves summer houses. Those are made of leaves,
and sticks, and moss. They are nice and cool for summer, but would never
do for the winter cold and snow.

7. So these wise little people find a hollow in an old tree. They make it
warm and snug with soft moss and leaves; and here the squirrels live all
through the long winter.



LESSON XXVII.

fright'ened   int end'    wheat       Thom'as    com plains'    plums

choose        shock'ing   spar'row    rip'est    rob'bing

break'fast    plen'ty     share       treat      tales          wait


[Illustration: Sparrow perched on snow-covered branch.]


THE SPARROW.

1. Glad to see you, little bird;
   'Twas your little chirp I heard:
   What did you intend to say?
   "Give me something this cold day"?

2. That I will, and plenty, too;
   All the crumbs I saved for you.
   Don't be frightened--here's a treat:
   I will wait and see you eat.

3. Shocking tales I hear of you;
   Chirp, and tell me, are they true?
   Robbing all the summer long;
   Don't you think it very wrong?

4. Thomas says you steal his wheat;
   John complains, his plums you eat--
   Choose the ripest for your share,
   Never asking whose they are.

5. But I will not try to know
   What you did so long ago:
   There's your breakfast, eat away;
   Come to see me every day.



LESSON XXVIII.

aft'er noon    sup'per    deep      length    car'riage    threw
hedge          stood      tru'ly    road      few          sad

[Illustration: Woman and boy riding in carriage pulled by horse.
Man in foreground holding gate open for carriage.]


SAM AND HARRY.

1. One fine summer afternoon, Sam was walking home from school. He went
along slowly, reading a book.

2. Sam had spent all his money for the book, but he was a happy boy.

3. At length he came into the highroad, where there was a gate. A blind
man stood, holding it open.

4. The poor man said, "Please give me a few cents to buy some bread!" But
Sam gave him nothing.

5. What! did Sam give the poor blind man nothing? Yes; for, as I told you,
he had spent all his money.

6. So Sam walked on, very sad. Soon after, a fine carriage came up, and in
it were Harry and his mother.

7. The blind man stood, and held out his hat. "Let us give the poor man
something," said Harry to his mother.

8. His mother gave him some cents. Harry took them, but did not put them
into the man's hat.

9. He threw them into the hedge as far as he could. The poor man could not
find them, for, you know, ho was blind.

10. Sam had turned back to look at the fine carriage. He saw Harry throw
the cents into the hedge; so he came back at once, and looked for the
money until he found it all for the blind man.

11. This took so long a time, that he almost lost his supper.

12. Which of the boys do you think was truly kind to the poor man?

13. I know which he thanked most in his heart.



LESSON XXIX.

rip'pling    fringe    stray    thou    mill

vil'lage     brink    clear     wild    hill

course       bathe     tiny     pool    rill


THE LITTLE HILL.

1. Run, run, thou tiny rill;
   Run, and turn the village mill;
   Run, and fill the deep, clear pool
   In the woodland's shade so cool,
   Where the sheep love best to stray
   In the sultry summer day;
   Where the wild birds bathe and drink,
   And the wild flowers fringe the brink.

[Illustration: Mill, with mill pond in foreground.]

2. Run, run, thou tiny rill,
   Round the rocks, and down the hill;
   Sing to every child like me;
   The birds will join you, full of glee:
   And we will listen to the song
   You sing, your rippling course along.



LESSON XXX.

has'tened    pos'si ble    bal'ance    Ed'gar    save

boat'man     dan'ger       quick'ly    move      trip

stretched    sev'er al     start'ed    folks     fell


THE BOAT UPSET.

1. "Sit still, children. Do not move about in the boat," said Mr. Rose to
