

Bess and Robert are very happy; papa and mamma have gone to the woods with
them.

Robert has a big tent and a flag, and Bess has a little bed for her doll.

Jip is with them. Robert will make him draw Bess and her doll in the cart.



LESSON XXV.

James    Ma'ry   made    sang    my        lay

sport    spade   lap     dig     doll's    sand

said (sed)       y


[Illustration: Boy talking to girl sitting on steps with a doll.]


"Kate, will you play with me?" said James. "We will dig in the sand with
this little spade. That will be fine sport."

"Not now James" said Kate; "for I must make my doll's bed. Get Mary to
play with you."

James went to get Mary to play with him. Then Kate made the doll's bed.

She sang a song to her doll, and the doll lay very still in her lap.

Did the doll hear Kate sing?



LESSON XXVI.

its    shade    brook     picks    all

by     help     stones    glad     soft


[Illustration: Two girls and boy in the woods.]


Kate has left her doll in its little bed, and has gone to play with Mary
and James. They are all in the shade, now, by the brook.

James digs in the soft sand with his spade, and Mary picks up little
stones and puts them in her lap.

James and Mary are glad to see Kate. She will help them pick up stones and
dig, by the little brook.


1,3.


LESSON XXVII. REVIEW

"What shall we do?" said Fanny to John. "I do not like to sit still. Shall
we hunt for eggs in the barn?"

"No" said John; "I like to play on the grass. Will not papa let us catch
Prince, and go to the big woods?"

"We can put the tent in the cart, and go to some nice spot where the grass
is soft and sweet."

"That will be fine," said Fanny. "I will get my doll, and give her a ride
with us."

"Yes," said John, "and we will get mamma to go, too. She will hang up a
swing for us in the shade."



LESSON XXVIII.

peep    while    take    sleep    tuck    safe

oh      wet      feet    chick    can't   feels    wing


[Illustration: Girl kneeling by small chicken coop.]


Peep, peep! Where have you gone, little chick? Are you lost? Can't you get
back to the hen?

Oh, here you are! I will take you back. Here, hen, take this little chick
under your wing.

Now, chick, tuck your little, wet feet under you, and go to sleep for a
while.

Peep, peep! How safe the little chick feels now!



LESSON XXIX.

wind    time      there    fence    kite    high

eyes    bright    flies    why      day     shines


[Illustration: Boys playing with kite. A dog stand by the boys.]


This is a fine day. The sun shines bright. There is a good wind, and my
kite flies high. I can just see it.

The sun shines in my eyes; I will stand in the shade of this high fence.

Why, here comes my dog! He was under the cart. Did you see him there?

What a good time we have had! Are you not glad that we did not go to the
woods with John?


SLATE WORK.

[Illustration: Script Exercise:

The pond is still. How it
shines in the hot sun! Let
us go into the woods where
we can sit in the shade.
]



LESSON XXX.

wish    float    tie      know

rope    boat     try      shore

give    pole     don't    push

drag    won't    oar      fun'ny


[Illustration: Two girls standing by fence, one is pulling
a small wooden tub with a rope along the path.]


"Kate, I wish we had a boat to put the dolls in. Don't you?"

"I know what we can do. We can get the little tub, and tie a rope to it,
and drag it to the pond. This will float with the dolls in it, and we can
get a pole to push it from the shore."

"What a funny boat, Kate! A tub for a boat, and a pole for an oar! Won't
it upset?"

"We can try it, Nell, and see."

"Well you get the tub, and I will get a pole and a rope. We will put both
dolls in the tub, and give them a ride."


SLATE WORK.

[Illustration: Script Exercise:

The dolls had a nice ride
to the pond. A soft wind
made the tub float out.
Nell let the pole fall on
the tub, and upset it.
]



LESSON XXXI.

bound     Rose       called     got       drown      found       brave

came      Pon'to     jumped     mouth     a round'    brought    wa'ter


[Illustration: Two girls standing by pond. One girl is using a
pole to push a small wooden tub containing dolls. ]


"Here, Ponto! Here, Ponto!" Kate called to her dog. "Come, and get the
dolls out of the pond."

Rose went under, but she did not drown. Bess was still on the top of the
water.

Ponto came with a bound, and jumped into the pond. He swam around, and got
Bess in his mouth, and brought her to the shore.

Ponto then found Rose, and brought her out, too.

Kate said, "Good, old Ponto! Brave old dog!"

What do you think of Ponto?



LESSON XXXII.

June    Lu'cy's    air           kind    trees     sing'ing    blue

when    pure       says (sez)    sky     pic'nic   u           a


[Illustration: Woman and girl sitting under a tree.]


"What a bright June day! The air is pure. The sky is as blue as it can be.

Lucy and her mamma are in the woods. They have found a nice spot, where
there is some grass.

They sit in the shade of the trees, and Lucy is singing.

The trees are not large, but they make a good shade.

