very straight. There was a dead silence, and, for the first time since he
had been captain, Phil walked down the steps without a friendly cheer. I
think even now the old school behaved itself very well--the fellows were
not behind the scenes, and didn't see more than was before their eyes, but
there was not a single word thrown out at Phil. Acton came out with
Worcester, and the pity was that he didn't deserve the cheers he got.

[Illustration: PHIL WALKED DOWN THE STEPS WITHOUT A FRIENDLY CHEER.]

The week before the Carthusian match there was but one solitary player to
be promoted. The position was back, and every fellow in the place knew
that, bar Bourne himself, there wasn't another man that could hold a
candle to Acton there. The committee doggedly, and with meaning, elected
the only player there was to elect, and Acton signified that he was
willing to play. Bourne, as usual, was there, and no one felt more than he
the air of distrust and constraint which hung over the meeting. When Acton
was unanimously elected for back Phil stolidly wrote out the list of the
team and had it pinned up on the notice-board. He had carefully drawn the
line in red ink above the last name--Acton's--which showed that the
pride of Biffen's was not in the eleven yet.

Probably Acton on the next day played as well as even he had ever played
in his life, for he was almost impassable, and the crowd of fellows
cheered him till they were hoarse. The minute the whistle blew, like one
man the whole school swarmed round the pavilion. The question each asked
himself and his chum was, "Would Acton get the last cap?" And the answer
was, "Why, of course! Who else should have it?"

That afternoon to most of the fellows the eleven seemed an age getting
into their sweaters and coats. When Acton appeared first, and it was seen
that he was wearing the pink cap of Biffen's on his head there was more
than astonishment, there was consternation. Whatever did it mean? Acton
smiled good-naturedly at the school as they cheered him to the echo, and
hurried unconcernedly along. The others of the eleven came out dejectedly,
and filed up the hill in gloomy little groups. The whole school waited for
Phil, and when he came out, pale and worried, they received him in icy
silence. As he was coming down the steps one of Biffen's fags shouted
shrilly, "Three cheers for Acton!"

Phil stalked through the shouting school, and as I joined him and we
walked up together, he said, through his clenched teeth--

"I wish, old man, I had never seen that brute."

That evening Bourne wrote to Worcester offering him the remaining cap.

Worcester flew across to Acton's room, and said, "Bourne has offered me
the place--the last cap. He must be stark, staring mad!"

"Take it," said Acton, coolly.

"No fear," said Worcester. "We have a stupid kind of prejudice here for
having the best eleven we can get, and it isn't the best if you're out of
it. Bourne has always been a most impartial fellow up to this date, so
this little occurrence has thrown us off the rails. Before I go to
protest, though, have you any idea what is the matter?"

"He does not consider me fit for the eleven," said Acton with a light
laugh, but also with perfect truth.

"Rot!" said Dick, hurrying away.

He hunted up the other nine fellows, and said bluntly his business.

"I vote we all protest to Bourne. A round robin should meet the case."

"Good," said Mivart. "Draw one up, Dicky dear."

Dick in time produced the following:--

"We, the undersigned, think that the St. Amory eleven is incomplete
without John Acton, of Biffen's house, and, consequently, that he ought to
have the last cap; and we would beg the captain to offer it him unless
there be very good reasons for not doing so. We would suggest that if John
Acton isn't to have the cap he be told the reason. The undersigned do not
wish in the smallest degree to prejudice the right of the captain to
select members for the eleven, but think that in the present case the
withholding of a cap from John Acton inexplicable."

"You're a ready scribe, Dick," said Chalmers. "We may all sign that, eh?"

"Yes," said Worcester. "I first, because I am undeservedly offered the
cap, and the rest of you in order of membership."

No one saw any objection to signing Dick's memorandum, and forthwith, with
all legal formality, the round robin was signed by the ten, and sent to
Phil by Dick's fag with orders to wait for an answer.

It came within five minutes.


     "DEAR WORCESTER,
       I have no intention of offering John Acton a place in the St.
     Amory's football eleven. There are good reasons for not doing
     so, and I have already told Acton the reasons. Please let me
     know whether you accept the vacant place I had the pleasure of
     offering you.
                       Yours sincerely,
                             PHILIP BOURNE."

This was a thunderbolt among the fellows. Then Acton knew!

Worcester posted back to Acton, lost in amazement.

"Look at this, Acton!"

Acton carefully read Bourne's letter, and Dick, who was watching him
anxiously, saw him bite his lips with rage; for Phil's icy contempt stood
out in every word of the letter.

"He says you know why you are not in the eleven."

Acton knew that he would have to explain something, or else Bourne would
win the day yet. So he said--

"That is true. He told me so at the beginning of the season, but, of
course, I never bargained for his keeping his word; and when you hear the
reason he gave me--if this is his reason--you'll gasp."

"Well," said Dick, "although I've no right to ask you, I'd like to hear
the plain, unvarnished tale, for, speaking out, Phil Bourne has always
passed for a decent, level fellow. This business, somehow, doesn't seem
his form at all, and it is only fair to him to say it."

"Did you see the match we had with Shannon's scratch team when the term
began?"

"I did."

"Did you notice anything about my play?"

"You opened our eyes a bit, I remember."

"Did I play roughly?"

"No. Not quite that! You were not gentle; but you aren't that as a rule,
though your game is fair enough."

"Not for Bourne. He doesn't like my game. I'm too rough. It's bad form,
_pace_ Bourne, therefore I'm barred my place in the eleven."

"Is that the explanation?"

"Yes. Honour bright! Except"--Acton paused diplomatically for a
moment--"except, I don't think he likes me."

"Then Phil is a fool, and he'll find out pretty speedily that we can't
stand rot of this quality. I, of course, can't take the cap."

"My dear fellow, why in the world not? If you don't, some other house will
get it. Biffen's deserves two fellows in the eleven this year."

"They do, by Jove!"

"Then let us have the satisfaction of keeping out another Corker fellow."

Dick told the other fellows plainly and without any gilding, his
conversation with Acton, and they pressed him to go and see Phil
personally; so Dick marched heavily to Bourne's quarters.

"Sorry, Worcester, but I cannot explain anything. Not even to you. But I
do hope you'll come into the eleven."

Dick said shortly, "I think I shall, for Biffen's deserves the other cap,
though the right fellow isn't getting it. By the way, Bourne, you'll not
be very sweet to the school generally after this. They--the fellows--to a
man, are no end cut up over Acton's treatment."

"I supposed they would be. I knew it would be so."

"Look here, Phil. You always did the square thing. Let us have the reason
for this," said Dick, earnestly.

"Sorry, Worcester, I can't."

"Good night, then."

"Good night."

The rage and consternation of the Biffenites when they found that Bourne
was immovable in his decision can be imagined. Some were inclined to take
the matter up to Corker's throne, but they were a miserable minority.

"Let Corker have a finger in our own private affairs!" said Dick, with
intense disgust. "What next, gentlemen? We won't be able to blow our own
noses without his permission. Keep the masters out of this, whatever we
do. Can't we see the thing through ourselves? I vote we try, anyhow."

Some were inclined to blame Dick for accepting the cap; but pretty
generally it was agreed that, if Acton was not to have it, Dick was the
next best man, but at what a distance! The honour of having two men in the
eleven was no _solatium_ for the wounded pride of Biffen's, when they
considered their great injury. The reason, though, was, naturally, what
puzzled them--and, for the matter of that, the whole school. Did Bourne
expect his team to play footer as though it were a game of croquet? Were
drawing-room manners to be introduced on to the Acres' clay? Were the
famous eleven of St. Amory's to amble about, like a swarm of
bread-and-butter misses? One wit suggested wadded coats and respirators.
Acton rough, indeed! Phil Bourne must be an embodiment of his grandmother,
then! Most of the fags in Biffen's house sent Phil elaborate instructions
for "a nice drawing-room game to take the place of 'Socker'
football--nasty, rough 'Socker' footer--for one-and-six, and guaranteed
to do no injury to the most delicate constitution. A child can play it!"
These letters were anonymous, of course; but Biffen's house-paper was
freely used. "Anyhow," said Phil, with a gentle smile to me, "the spelling
is obviously Biffen's."

Acton went on his own way, serenely indifferent to his house, which would
have made a god of him on the smallest provocation. He cheerfully ignored
Bourne, and he had the art of never seeing Phil when they met, in school
or out, though, of course, Phil minded this not at all. When the
Carthusians were played, Acton spent the afternoon reading with Raven,
whose exam, was now very near; and, whilst the two were grinding out all
the absurd details of Horace and his patron, "and the poet's little farm,
and the other rot which gains Perry Exhibitions," the shouts and cheers
of the school down at the Acres came floating up the hill to their room.

The school lost their match with the Carthusians--the match which a good
St. Amorian would rather win than any two others--and it was plain that
Dick, though a useful fellow, could not bottle up the forwards in the
Actonian style. This defeat was the last straw to break the back of the
school's patience.

It was customary, after the Carthusian match, for the footer captain to
give his eleven a formal tea, Phil arranged the usual preliminaries, sick
at heart, and wearily certain as to the result. Three put in an
appearance--Vercoe, Baines, and Roberts--and in place of the burly forms
of the rest of the St. Amory's eleven, the sylph-like figures of their
fags flitted to Phil's hall of entertainment with curt little notes.
Worcester and the rest "regretted they were unable to avail themselves of
the captain's invitation."

The tea was not a success.

The school followed the plain lead of the eleven, and as Phil hurried
along to chapel the next day no one hooked in with him, as had been done
"the day before yesterday!" He was left severely alone.

In plain words, St Amory's School consigned Phil Bourne to Coventry.




CHAPTER VII

THANKS TO ACTON


After the Carthusian match there was but one topic, or to be strictly
accurate, perhaps, two topics of interest in the school--who would be
cock-house at footer and who would get the Perry Exhibition.

The rest of the houses knew that Biffen's house was not now the
unconsidered article it was once; that it wasn't the door-mat upon which
any one might wipe his feet before proceeding into the inner circles of
the housers' competition, and there was more than a little curiosity to
see how far the "resurrected" house would mount.

But not a single soul dreamt that it would reach the final. The whole
school gasped for a fortnight on end as Biffen's annihilated Dover's,
Hargen's, Sharpe's, and Merishall's _seriatim_, and at last faced
Corker's house in the final. This was a resurrected house with a
vengeance! Corker's had had a bye in the first round and had been drawn
against rather rickety houses since, but they were generally fancied to
pull off the final as usual, for Bourne was captain, and they had Hodgson
and Roberts of the eleven as well. The wonderful progress of Biffen's had
thrown an awful lot of excitement into the game.

The match was fixed for the last Saturday in the term, and the result of
the Perry Exhibition was to be announced on the evening of the same day,
so the last Saturday was going to be the memorable day of the Michaelmas
stretch.

If you want a full account of the match you had better write to the editor
of _The Amorian_. He will send you the magazine with a page or so of
description and account, but all I'm going to say is that Bourne and Acton
played as they had never played before--I think I've said that before
about Acton, but he really was superlative in the housers' final--and that
five minutes from time the score was "one all." Then Acton showed the
school a stroke of genius. He brought Raven out from centre-forward, where
he was quite unable to cope with Bourne, whispered him to go "back" with
Worcester, and before any one could realize what was happening he was
playing forward himself. He' was a "lambent flame along the ground" if you
like. In a second Biffen's were swarming round Roberts in goal, Acton
passed out to Chalmers, who was ready for the pass, and in a twinkling the
ball was in the net. From the row you might have imagined the school had
gone mad.

[Illustration: ACTON JUST REACHED IT WITH HIS HEAD.]

The ball was kicked off again. Almost immediately Acton secured near the
centre. He dribbled through the ruck of his opponents until he saw Bourne
upon him. With a smile of triumph upon his lips he gently rolled the
leather to Chalmers, who was hungrily waiting for the pass out on the
touch-line. Chalmers waltzed beautifully for the short run almost to the
corner flag. He steadied himself for one instant after his run, and then
lifted the ball magnificently into the goal mouth. As the leather was
skimming past, Acton just reached it with his head and deflected it high
and dry out of Roberts' reach into the net. It was the supreme effort
of his splendid game.

Biffen's had won by three goals to one!

They carried Acton off the field in ecstasy, and nearly scared Dame Biffen
out of her wits by the "whisper" of "cock-house." Well, it certainly was
unusual.

After tea the whole of St. Amory's crowded into the Speech Room to hear
the result of the Perry Exhibition. There would not be a fellow away, I
should fancy, bar the cripples in the hospital, for there was no end of
excitement. Was this to be another Biffen's triumph? Was Raven of the
Fifth to beat Hodgson, the chosen of the Sixth, for the Perry? It was not
to be expected that he would, but when the whisper circled round that
Acton had '"coached" him in classics it was agreed that perhaps there
would be another feather in Acton's cap.

The masters were there on the platform in serried ranks, the whole fifty
of them, from Corker to Pfenning who "does" the music.

Corker, as usual, went straight to the mark, whilst the entire mass of
fellows kept a death-like silence. "The result of the examination for the
Perry Exhibition is as follows:--

    1st. Arthur Raven, 672 marks.
    2nd. Theodore Hodgson, 591 marks.
    3rd. Augustus Vernon Robert Todd, 114 marks."

Then out broke the usual uproar, "shivering the silence," as some one
says, "into clamour." We all cheered for Raven, who scored a popular and
unexpected victory, for why should a Fifth Form fellow beat one of the
Sixth? Biffen's crowd kept up the cheering until Corker rose again.

"I can heartily congratulate Raven on his success, for his classical
knowledge was distinctly good. Hodgson I can also congratulate, for his
papers too were good. As for Augustus Vernon Robert Todd"--we all yelled
with laughter as Dr. Moore scrambled in hot haste through Todd's awful
list of names, but were again quiet when he dropped his eye-glasses from
his eagle's beak, a sure sign he was going to "savage" somebody--"as for
_his_ performance in this _examination_, I can only regard it as
a very bad practical joke, or as his _ballon d'essai_ for some
kindergarten scholarship."

Raven got up from his seat near the door. He was pale to the lips, but his
voice was clear and unhesitating. "If you please, sir, may I say a word?"

"Eh, what?" said Corker. "Say a word? Oh, certainly."

"I am very glad indeed to hear that I have won the Perry Exhibition. I
know in my own mind that I could never have beaten my friend Hodgson if I
had not had Acton's help. I owe the winning of the Exhibition entirely to
him, for he has read the whole of the classics with me and helped me in
every way in his power. I cannot thank him enough for all he has done, but
at least I owe him this open acknowledgment."

Corker looked no end pleased, and turned round and beamed on Biffen, whose
good-natured easy face shone with pleasure and delight.

"Biffen," said good old Corker, audibly, "your house is fortunate in
having Acton, and St. Amory such a good amateur coach in classics.
Cock-house, too, bless me!"

And can you wonder that Biffen's, frenzied with delight, carried Raven and
Acton shoulder high through the gas-lit streets?

Whilst the Biffenites were thus shouting their way home, one unhappy youth
hurried to his room feeling as though the moon had fallen out of heaven
and crushed him--Todd. After that night when he had made the bet with
Cotton, he had neither worked for the Perry nor yet left it alone, but
loafed about with Cotton as usual, and piffled with the work for the
Exhibition. As a last-lap spurt, he had, in the last week or so,
desperately stuffed himself with cunning tips leading twistingly to
nowhere. Never had any one faced a serious examination with such a rag-bag
of tips as Todd, and the examination had found him out with a vengeance.
As he slunk along to his quarters, Corker's words were buzzing in his ears
unendingly. "As for Augustus Vernon Robert Todd"--"_ballon
d'essai_"--"Kindergarten!" Oh! it was a sickener, and how the fellows had
laughed!

As for his bet with Cotton about cock-house, why, he had, when he saw
those goals put on at the last moment, felt a cold shiver run down his
back. He had crawled off the Acres a sick and sorry and miserable wretch.
Cotton had, being rather riled at his chum's temper for the last month,
hinted, in unmistakable terms, that the debt was to be paid on return
after holidays. Todd contemplated the ravishing prospect of the future
with unmixed feelings. Between the upper and nether millstones of the lost
Exhibition and the lost bet he had been crashed, annihilated!

When he had shut the study door, in sheer despair of spirit, he laid his
head on the table and--Well, did he blub? All I know is, the Rev. E.
Taylor knocked at the door once, twice, thrice, and Todd heard him not.
The house master came in and surveyed the bowed form of poor Gus with a
good-natured smile, tempered with some scorn. He took the liberty of
loudly poking Gus's decaying fire, whereat the young gentleman sprang up
instanter.

"I knocked, Todd, but I suppose you were thinking too deeply to hear me."

"Sorry, sir," said Gus, hurriedly getting the master a chair, "and, as a
matter of fact, I was thinking."

"Yes!"

