that had been so full of comfort for both.

"We'll go toward the south now," said Henry, "and on your life, Paul,
don't stumble!"

Paul knew the worth of this advice, and he was woodsman enough to avoid
tripping on the vines and bushes, despite the darkness. One mile dropped
behind them, then two, then three, and Henry suddenly put his hand upon
the shoulder of Paul, who, understanding the signal, sank down at once
beside his comrade.

The bushes were thick there, but Paul soon saw the danger, of which
Henry's ear had already warned him. A dozen warriors marched in a silent
file through the undergrowth. Well for the two that they were some
distance away, and that the bushes grew thick and long! And well for them,
too, that it was night! The warriors looked keenly on every side as they
passed, apparently seeking out the last little leaf and twig; but, acute
as were their eyes, they did not see the boys in the bushes. And perhaps
it was well for some of them that they did not find what they sought, as
the wilderness furnished no more formidable antagonist than Henry Ware,
and Paul Cotter, too, was both brave and skillful.

But the warriors passed, and the black wilderness hid them. Henry watched
a little bush that one had brushed against, swinging in the moonlight
with short jerks that became shorter until it grew quite still again. But
he did not yet go. He and Paul knew that they must not move for many
minutes. A warrior might turn on his track, see their risen forms, and
with his cry bring the whole band back again. They yet lay motionless and
still, while the moonlight filtered through the leaves and the silence of
the forest endured. Henry rose at last, and led the way again.

"They are certainly beating up the woods for us," said he, "and I think
that party will stumble right upon the little hollow where we rested. It
was well we moved."

They increased their southward pace, and when it was scarcely two hours to
the dawn Henry said:

"I know of a good place in which to rest, and a still better place in
which to fight if they should find us."

"Where?"

"Holt's lone cabin. It's less than half a mile from here. I've had it in
mind."

Paul did not know what he meant by Holt's lone cabin, but he was always
willing to trust Henry without questions. His imagination, flowering at
once into splendor, depicted it as some kind of an impregnable fortress.

"Come, we mustn't lose time!" said Henry, and he suddenly increased his
speed, running so fast that Paul had much to do to keep pace with him.
Paul looked up, and he saw why Henry hastened. The black curtain was
rolled back a little in the east, and a splendid bar of gray appeared just
at the horizon's edge. As Paul looked, it broadened and turned to silver,
and then gold. Paul thought it a very phantasy of fate that the coming of
day, which is like life, should bring such terrors.

They reached a clearing--a high, stony piece of ground--and in its center
Paul saw a little old log cabin, with a heavy open door that sagged on
rude wooden hinges.

"Come," said Henry, and they crossed the clearing to the cabin, pushing
open the door. Paul looked around at the narrow place, and the protecting
walls gave him much comfort. Evidently it had been abandoned in great
haste. In one corner lay a tiny moccasin that had been a baby's shoe, and
no one had disturbed it. On a hook on the wall hung a woman's apron, and
two or three rude domestic utensils lay on the floor. The sight had Its
pathos for Paul, but he was glad that the Holts had gone in time. He was
glad, too, that they had left their house behind that he and Henry might
use it when they needed it most, because he began to be conscious now of
a great weakness, both of body and spirit.

Hooks and a stout wooden bar still remained, and as Henry closed the door
and dropped the bar into place, he exclaimed exultantly:

"They may get us, Paul, but they'll pay a full price before they do it."

"I'd rather they wouldn't get us at all," said Paul.

Nevertheless his imagination, leaping back to the other extreme, made the
lone cabin the great fortress that he wished. And a fortress it was in
more senses than one. Built of heavy logs, securely chinked, the single
window and the single door closed with heavy oaken shutters, no bullet
could reach them there. Paul sat down on a puncheon bench, and breathed
laboriously, but joyously. Then he looked with inquiry at Henry.

"It was built by a man named Holt," said Henry. "He was either a great
fool or a very brave man to come out here and settle alone. But a month
ago, after the Indian wars began, he either became wiser or less brave,
and he went into Marlowe with his family, leaving the place just as it
is."

"He left in time," said Paul.




CHAPTER III

THE LONE CABIN


Henry was deeply thankful for this shelter because he knew how badly it
was needed. He went to the single little window, which sagged half open on
hinges made of the skin of the buffalo. He pushed it back in place, and
fastened it, too, with a smaller bar, which he was lucky enough to find
lying on the floor.

"Well, Paul, we are here," he said.

As he spoke he looked keenly and anxiously at his comrade.

"Yes, Henry," Paul replied. "Here we are, and mighty glad am I. It's good
to be in a house again after that river."

Henry noticed at once that his voice was thinner and weaker than usual,
and he saw also that the color on Paul's face was high--the rest and the
little fire in the forest had not been enough. Again he was deeply
grateful for the presence of the cabin. He looked around, with inquiring
eyes that could see everything. It was dusky in the cabin with both door
and window closed, but he observed with especial pleasure, among the
abandoned articles, a small iron pot, suitable for cooking purposes, and a
large water bowl. When he summed up all, it seemed to this resourceful son
of the wilderness that Fortune had been very kind to them. Then he looked
at Paul and distinctly saw a tremor pass over his frame.

"Paul," he said, "are you cold?"

"A little," replied Paul reluctantly. It hurt his pride to confess that he
felt on the verge of physical collapse.

"Then we must have a fire, and I'm going to build it now."

"Won't it be dangerous?" asked Paul. "Won't it be seen?"

"Oh, no," replied Henry lightly. "We are alone in the forest now."

His tone was convincing to Paul, but Henry himself was aware that they
were taking great risks. Yet they must be taken.

"Now, Paul," he said cheerfully, "you keep a good watch while I bring in
deadwood. But first we will rake clean the welcoming hearth of our good
friends who departed so quickly."

Ashes and dead coals were lying in the fireplace, and he raked them
carefully to one side. Then he unbarred the door. The crisp October air
rushed into the close, confined space, and it felt very welcome to Henry,
but Paul shivered again.

"Sit down in one of those chairs and rest, Paul," he said, as he pointed
to two homemade chairs that stood by the wall. "I'll be back in a minute
or two."

Then he shut the door behind him.

"I must take the risk," he murmured. It was characteristic of Henry Ware,
that in this emergency not even a vague thought of deserting his comrade
entered his mind. And faithful as he was to Paul, Paul would have been as
faithful to him. Both meant to finish together their great errand.

Henry looked around. The settler had made but little impression upon the
surrounding forest. The trees had been cut away for a distance of fifteen
or twenty paces on every side, but the wilderness still curved in solid
array about the lone cabin, as if it would soon reclaim its own and blot
out the sole sign of man's intrusion. Everywhere the foliage glowed with
the deep reds and yellows and browns of October, and afar hung a faint
bluish haze, like an early sign of Indian summer. The slight wind among
the leaves had a soothing note, and breathed of nothing but peace. Peace
Henry Ware devoutly hoped that it would be.

His task was easy. The forest all about was littered with the fallen and
dead wood of preceding years, and in a few moments he gathered up an
armful, with which he returned to the house. Then he brought in dry
leaves, and heaped leaves and wood together in the chimney-place. He
glanced at Paul and saw him trembling. As if by chance he touched his
comrade's hand, and it felt ice-cold. But he did not depart one jot from
his cheerful manner, all his words showing confidence.

"Now, Paul," he said, "In less than a minute you'll see burning before you
the finest, warmest, glowingest and most comfortable fire in all the
West."

Paul's eyes glistened.

Henry drew forth flint and steel, and with a few strokes sent out the
vivifying spark. The dry leaves caught, a light flame formed, the wood
caught in its turn, and then the blaze, leaping high, roared up the
chimney. In a moment the hearth was glowing, and presently a bed of deep
red coals began to grow.

Paul uttered a low laugh of joy, and spread out his hands to the flames.
The red light glowed across the delicately cut but strong face of the boy,
and Henry noticed now that all his color was gone, leaving his features
white and drawn.

"Sit a little closer, Paul, a little closer," he said, still in tones of
high, good cheer. "Isn't it the most beautiful fire you ever saw?"

"Yes," said Paul, "it is. It looks mighty good, but it's curious that it
doesn't warm me more."

Henry had closed the door, and it was already very hot in the cabin; but
he decided now on another step--one that would take more time, but it must
be taken.

"Paul," he said, "I'm going out in the woods to look for something, and I
may be gone at least half an hour. Take good care of our house while I'm
away."

"All right," said Paul. But as he spoke his teeth struck together.

Henry closed the door once more, with himself on the outside. Then he
walked to the edge of the clearing, and looked back at the cabin. He had
been careful to choose the kind of wood that would give out the least
smoke, and only a thin column rose from the chimney. The wind caught it
before it rose far, and it was lost among the great trees of the
wilderness. It seemed again to Henry Ware that Fortune was kind to them.

The single look sufficed, and then, drawing his long-bladed hunting knife
from its sheath, he began to search the forest. Henry Ware had been long a
captive among the Northwestern Indians, and he had learned their lore. He
had gained from the medicine men and old squaws a knowledge of herbs, and
now he was to put it to use. He sought first for the bitter root called
Indian turnip, and after looking more than twenty minutes found it. He dug
it up with his sharp knife, and then, with another search of a quarter of
an hour, he found the leaves of wild sage, already dried in the autumn
air. A third quarter of an hour and he added to his collection two more
herbs, only the Indian names of which were known to him. Then he returned
to the house, to find that the icy torrent in Paul's blood had now become
hot.

"I can't stand this, Henry," he said. "We've got the door and window
closed and a big fire burning, and I'm just roasting hot."

"Only a little while longer," said Henry. "The truth is, Paul, you've had
a big chill, and now the fever's come on you. But I'm Dr. Ware, and I'm
going to cure you. When I was up there among the Indians, I learned their
herb remedies, and mighty good some of 'em are, too. They're particularly
strong with chills and fever, and I'm going to make you a tea that'll just
lay hold of you and drive all the fever out of your veins. What you want
to do, Paul, is to sweat, and to sweat gallons."

He spoke in rapid, cheerful tones, wishing to keep up Paul's spirits, in
which effort he succeeded, as Paul's eyes sparkled, and a gleam of humor
lighted up his face.

"Well, Dr. Ware," he said, "I'm mighty glad to know what's the matter with
me. Somehow you always feel better when you know, and I'll trust to your
tea."

He meant what he said. He knew Henry too well to doubt him. Any assertion
of his inspired him with supreme confidence.

"Now, Paul," Henry resumed, "you keep house again, and I'll find where our
unknown friend got his drinking water."

He took the iron pot that he had noticed and went forth into the forest.
It was an instinctive matter with one bred in the wilderness like Henry
Ware to go straight to the spring. The slope of the land led him, and he
found it under the lee of a little hill, near the base of a great oak.
Here a stream, six inches broad, an inch deep, but as clear as burnished
silver, flowed from beneath a stony outcrop in the soil, and then trickled
away, in a baby stream, down a little ravine. There was a strain of
primitive poetry, the love of the wild, in Henry's nature, and he paused
to admire.

He saw that human hands had scraped out at the source a little fountain,
where one might dip up pails of water, and looking down into the clear
depths he beheld his own face reflected back in every detail. It seemed to
Henry Ware, who knew and loved only the wilderness, that the cabin, with
its spring and game at its very doors, would have made a wonderfully snug
home in the forest. Had it been his own, he certainly would have
undertaken to defend it against any foe who might come.

But all these thoughts passed in a second, treading upon one another's
heels. Henry was at the fountain scarcely a moment before he had filled
the pot and was on the way back to the cabin. Then he cast in the herbs,
put it upon a bed of red coals, and soon a steam arose. He found an old,
broken-sided gourd among the abandoned utensils, and was able to dip up
with it a half dozen drinks of the powerful decoction. He induced his
comrade to swallow these one after another, although they were very
bitter, and Paul made a wry face. Then he drew from the corner the rude
bedstead of the departed settler, and made Paul lie upon it beside the
fire.

"Now go to sleep," he said, "while I watch here."

Paul was a boy of great sense, and he obeyed without question, although it
was very hot before the fire. But it was not a dry, burning heat that
seemed to be in the blood; it was a moist, heavy heat that filled the
pores. He began to feel languid and drowsy, and a singular peace stole
over him. It did not matter to him what happened. He was at rest, and
there was his faithful comrade on guard, the comrade who never failed. The
coals glowed deep red, and the sportive flames danced before him. Happy
visions passed through his brain, and then his eyes closed. The red coals
passed away and the sportive flames ceased to dance. Paul was asleep.

Henry Ware sat in silence on one of the chairs at the corner of the
hearth, and when Paul's breathing became long, deep, and regular, he saw
that he had achieved the happy result. He rose soundlessly, and put his
hand upon Paul's forehead. It came back damp. Paul was in a profuse
perspiration, and his fever was sinking rapidly. Henry knew now that it
was only a matter of time, but he knew equally well that in the
Indian-haunted wilderness time was perhaps the most difficult of all
things to obtain.
