begins in the booths; and though Willum, and Rachel in her new ribbons,
and many another good lad and lass don't come away just yet, but have
a good step out, and enjoy it, and get no harm thereby, yet we, being
sober folk, will just stroll away up through the churchyard, and by the
old yew-tree, and get a quiet dish of tea and a parley with our gossips,
as the steady ones of our village do, and so to bed.

That's the fair, true sketch, as far as it goes, of one of the larger
village feasts in the Vale of Berks, when I was a little boy. They
are much altered for the worse, I am told. I haven't been at one these
twenty years, but I have been at the statute fairs in some west-country
towns, where servants are hired, and greater abominations cannot be
found. What village feasts have come to, I fear, in many cases, may
be read in the pages of "Yeast" (though I never saw one so bad--thank
God!).

Do you want to know why? It is because, as I said before, gentlefolk and
farmers have left off joining or taking an interest in them. They don't
either subscribe to the prizes, or go down and enjoy the fun.

Is this a good or a bad sign? I hardly know. Bad, sure enough, if it
only arises from the further separation of classes consequent on twenty
years of buying cheap and selling dear, and its accompanying overwork;
or because our sons and daughters have their hearts in London club-life,
or so-called "society," instead of in the old English home-duties;
because farmers' sons are apeing fine gentlemen, and farmers' daughters
caring more to make bad foreign music than good English cheeses. Good,
perhaps, if it be that the time for the old "veast" has gone by; that
it is no longer the healthy, sound expression of English country
holiday-making; that, in fact, we, as a nation, have got beyond it,
and are in a transition state, feeling for and soon likely to find some
better substitute.

Only I have just got this to say before I quit the text. Don't let
reformers of any sort think that they are going really to lay hold of
the working boys and young men of England by any educational grapnel
whatever, which isn't some bona fide equivalent for the games of the
old country "veast" in it; something to put in the place of the
back-swording and wrestling and racing; something to try the muscles
of men's bodies, and the endurance of their hearts, and to make them
rejoice in their strength. In all the new-fangled comprehensive plans
which I see, this is all left out; and the consequence is, that your
great mechanics' institutes end in intellectual priggism, and your
Christian young men's societies in religious Pharisaism.

Well, well, we must bide our time. Life isn't all beer and skittles;
but beer and skittles, or something better of the same sort, must form
a good part of every Englishman's education. If I could only drive this
into the heads of you rising parliamentary lords, and young swells
who "have your ways made for you," as the saying is, you, who frequent
palaver houses and West-end clubs, waiting always ready to strap
yourselves on to the back of poor dear old John, as soon as the present
used-up lot (your fathers and uncles), who sit there on the great
parliamentary-majorities' pack-saddle, and make believe they're guiding
him with their red-tape bridle, tumble, or have to be lifted off!

I don't think much of you yet--I wish I could--though you do go talking
and lecturing up and down the country to crowded audiences, and are
busy with all sorts of philanthropic intellectualism, and circulating
libraries and museums, and Heaven only knows what besides, and try to
make us think, through newspaper reports, that you are, even as we, of
the working classes. But bless your hearts, we "ain't so green," though
lots of us of all sorts toady you enough certainly, and try to make you
think so.

I'll tell you what to do now: instead of all this trumpeting and fuss,
which is only the old parliamentary-majority dodge over again, just you
go, each of you (you've plenty of time for it, if you'll only give
up t'other line), and quietly make three or four friends--real
friends--among us. You'll find a little trouble in getting at the right
sort, because such birds don't come lightly to your lure; but found
they may be. Take, say, two out of the professions, lawyer, parson,
doctor--which you will; one out of trade; and three or four out of the
working classes--tailors, engineers, carpenters, engravers. There's
plenty of choice. Let them be men of your own ages, mind, and ask
them to your homes; introduce them to your wives and sisters, and get
introduced to theirs; give them good dinners, and talk to them about
what is really at the bottom of your hearts; and box, and run, and row
with them, when you have a chance. Do all this honestly as man to
man, and by the time you come to ride old John, you'll be able to do
something more than sit on his back, and may feel his mouth with some
stronger bridle than a red-tape one.

Ah, if you only would! But you have got too far out of the right rut, I
fear. Too much over-civilization, and the deceitfulness of riches. It is
easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle. More's the pity. I
never came across but two of you who could value a man wholly and solely
for what was in him--who thought themselves verily and indeed of the
same flesh and blood as John Jones the attorney's clerk, and Bill Smith
the costermonger, and could act as if they thought so.



CHAPTER III--SUNDRY WARS AND ALLIANCES.


Poor old Benjy! The "rheumatiz" has much to answer for all through
English country-sides, but it never played a scurvier trick than in
laying thee by the heels, when thou wast yet in a green old age. The
enemy, which had long been carrying on a sort of border warfare, and
trying his strength against Benjy's on the battlefield of his hands and
legs, now, mustering all his forces, began laying siege to the citadel,
and overrunning the whole country. Benjy was seized in the back and
loins; and though he made strong and brave fight, it was soon clear
enough that all which could be beaten of poor old Benjy would have to
give in before long.

It was as much as he could do now, with the help of his big stick and
frequent stops, to hobble down to the canal with Master Tom, and bait
his hook for him, and sit and watch his angling, telling him quaint old
country stories; and when Tom had no sport, and detecting a rat some
hundred yards or so off along the bank, would rush off with Toby the
turnspit terrier, his other faithful companion, in bootless pursuit, he
might have tumbled in and been drowned twenty times over before Benjy
could have got near him.

Cheery and unmindful of himself, as Benjy was, this loss of locomotive
power bothered him greatly. He had got a new object in his old age, and
was just beginning to think himself useful again in the world. He feared
much, too, lest Master Tom should fall back again into the hands of
Charity and the women. So he tried everything he could think of to get
set up. He even went an expedition to the dwelling of one of those queer
mortals, who--say what we will, and reason how we will--do cure simple
people of diseases of one kind or another without the aid of physic,
and so get to themselves the reputation of using charms, and inspire for
themselves and their dwellings great respect, not to say fear, amongst a
simple folk such as the dwellers in the Vale of White Horse. Where this
power, or whatever else it may be, descends upon the shoulders of a
man whose ways are not straight, he becomes a nuisance to the
neighbourhood--a receiver of stolen goods, giver of love-potions, and
deceiver of silly women--the avowed enemy of law and order, of justices
of the peace, head-boroughs, and gamekeepers,--such a man, in fact, as
was recently caught tripping, and deservedly dealt with by the Leeds
justices, for seducing a girl who had come to him to get back a
faithless lover, and has been convicted of bigamy since then. Sometimes,
however, they are of quite a different stamp--men who pretend to
nothing, and are with difficulty persuaded to exercise their occult arts
in the simplest cases.

Of this latter sort was old Farmer Ives, as he was called, the "wise
man" to whom Benjy resorted (taking Tom with him as usual), in the early
spring of the year next after the feast described in the last chapter.
Why he was called "farmer" I cannot say, unless it be that he was the
owner of a cow, a pig or two, and some poultry, which he maintained
on about an acre of land inclosed from the middle of a wild common, on
which probably his father had squatted before lords of manors looked as
keenly after their rights as they do now. Here he had lived no one knew
how long, a solitary man. It was often rumoured that he was to be turned
out and his cottage pulled down, but somehow it never came to pass; and
his pigs and cow went grazing on the common, and his geese hissed at the
passing children and at the heels of the horse of my lord's steward, who
often rode by with a covetous eye on the inclosure still unmolested. His
dwelling was some miles from our village; so Benjy, who was half ashamed
of his errand, and wholly unable to walk there, had to exercise much
ingenuity to get the means of transporting himself and Tom thither
without exciting suspicion. However, one fine May morning he managed to
borrow the old blind pony of our friend the publican, and Tom persuaded
Madam Brown to give him a holiday to spend with old Benjy, and to lend
them the Squire's light cart, stored with bread and cold meat and a
bottle of ale. And so the two in high glee started behind old Dobbin,
and jogged along the deep-rutted plashy roads, which had not been mended
after their winter's wear, towards the dwelling of the wizard. About
noon they passed the gate which opened on to the large common, and old
Dobbin toiled slowly up the hill, while Benjy pointed out a little deep
dingle on the left, out of which welled a tiny stream. As they crept
up the hill the tops of a few birch-trees came in sight, and blue smoke
curling up through their delicate light boughs; and then the little
white thatched home and inclosed ground of Farmer Ives, lying cradled in
the dingle, with the gay gorse common rising behind and on both sides;
while in front, after traversing a gentle slope, the eye might travel
for miles and miles over the rich vale. They now left the main road and
struck into a green track over the common marked lightly with wheel and
horse-shoe, which led down into the dingle and stopped at the rough gate
of Farmer Ives. Here they found the farmer, an iron-gray old man, with a
bushy eyebrow and strong aquiline nose, busied in one of his vocations.
He was a horse and cow doctor, and was tending a sick beast which had
been sent up to be cured. Benjy hailed him as an old friend, and he
returned the greeting cordially enough, looking however hard for a
moment both at Benjy and Tom, to see whether there was more in their
visit than appeared at first sight. It was a work of some difficulty and
danger for Benjy to reach the ground, which, however, he managed to do
without mishap; and then he devoted himself to unharnessing Dobbin and
turning him out for a graze ("a run" one could not say of that virtuous
steed) on the common. This done, he extricated the cold provisions from
the cart, and they entered the farmer's wicket; and he, shutting up the
knife with which he was taking maggots out of the cow's back and sides,
accompanied them towards the cottage. A big old lurcher got up slowly
from the door-stone, stretching first one hind leg and then the other,
and taking Tom's caresses and the presence of Toby, who kept, however,
at a respectful distance, with equal indifference.

"Us be cum to pay 'ee a visit. I've a been long minded to do't for old
sake's sake, only I vinds I dwon't get about now as I'd used to't. I be
so plaguy bad wi' th' rheumatiz in my back." Benjy paused, in hopes
of drawing the farmer at once on the subject of his ailments without
further direct application.

"Ah, I see as you bean't quite so lissom as you was," replied the
farmer, with a grim smile, as he lifted the latch of his door; "we
bean't so young as we was, nother on us, wuss luck."

The farmer's cottage was very like those of the better class of
peasantry in general. A snug chimney corner with two seats, and a small
carpet on the hearth, an old flint gun and a pair of spurs over the
fireplace, a dresser with shelves on which some bright pewter plates
and crockeryware were arranged, an old walnut table, a few chairs and
settles, some framed samplers, and an old print or two, and a bookcase
with some dozen volumes on the walls, a rack with flitches of bacon, and
other stores fastened to the ceiling, and you have the best part of the
furniture. No sign of occult art is to be seen, unless the bundles of
dried herbs hanging to the rack and in the ingle and the row of labelled
phials on one of the shelves betoken it.

Tom played about with some kittens who occupied the hearth, and with a
goat who walked demurely in at the open door--while their host and Benjy
spread the table for dinner--and was soon engaged in conflict with the
cold meat, to which he did much honour. The two old men's talk was of
old comrades and their deeds, mute inglorious Miltons of the Vale, and
of the doings thirty years back, which didn't interest him much, except
when they spoke of the making of the canal; and then indeed he began to
listen with all his ears, and learned, to his no small wonder, that his
dear and wonderful canal had not been there always--was not, in fact,
so old as Benjy or Farmer Ives, which caused a strange commotion in his
small brain.

After dinner Benjy called attention to a wart which Tom had on the
knuckles of his hand, and which the family doctor had been trying his
skill on without success, and begged the farmer to charm it away. Farmer
Ives looked at it, muttered something or another over it, and cut
some notches in a short stick, which he handed to Benjy, giving him
instructions for cutting it down on certain days, and cautioning Tom not
to meddle with the wart for a fortnight. And then they strolled out and
sat on a bench in the sun with their pipes, and the pigs came up and
grunted sociably and let Tom scratch them; and the farmer, seeing how he
liked animals, stood up and held his arms in the air, and gave a call,
which brought a flock of pigeons wheeling and dashing through the
birch-trees. They settled down in clusters on the farmer's arms and
shoulders, making love to him and scrambling over one another's backs
to get to his face; and then he threw them all off, and they fluttered
about close by, and lighted on him again and again when he held up his
arms. All the creatures about the place were clean and fearless, quite
unlike their relations elsewhere; and Tom begged to be taught how to
make all the pigs and cows and poultry in our village tame, at which the
farmer only gave one of his grim chuckles.

It wasn't till they were just ready to go, and old Dobbin was harnessed,
that Benjy broached the subject of his rheumatism again, detailing his
symptoms one by one. Poor old boy! He hoped the farmer could charm it
away as easily as he could Tom's wart, and was ready with equal faith to
put another notched stick into his other pocket, for the cure of his
own ailments. The physician shook his head, but nevertheless produced a
bottle, and handed it to Benjy, with instructions for use. "Not as 't'll
do 'ee much good--leastways I be afeard not," shading his eyes with his
hand, and looking up at them in the cart. "There's only one thing as I
knows on as'll cure old folks like you and I o' th' rheumatiz."

"Wot be that then, farmer?" inquired Benjy.

"Churchyard mould," said the old iron-gray man, with another chuckle.
And so they said their good-byes and went their ways home. Tom's wart
was gone in a fortnight, but not so Benjy's rheumatism, which laid him
by the heels more and more. And though Tom still spent many an hour with
him, as he sat on a bench in the sunshine, or by the chimney corner when
it was cold, he soon had to seek elsewhere for his regular companions.

Tom had been accustomed often to accompany his mother in her visits to
the cottages, and had thereby made acquaintance with many of the village
boys of his own age. There was Job Rudkin, son of widow Rudkin, the most
bustling woman in the parish. How she could ever have had such a stolid
boy as Job for a child must always remain a mystery. The first time
Tom went to their cottage with his mother, Job was not indoors; but he
entered soon after, and stood with both hands in his pockets, staring
at Tom. Widow Rudkin, who would have had to cross madam to get at
young Hopeful--a breach of good manners of which she was wholly
incapable--began a series of pantomime signs, which only puzzled him;
and at last, unable to contain herself longer, burst out with, "Job!
Job! where's thy cap?"

"What! bean't 'ee on ma head, mother?" replied Job, slowly extricating
one hand from a pocket, and feeling for the article in question; which
he found on his head sure enough, and left there, to his mother's horror
and Tom's great delight.

Then there was poor Jacob Dodson, the half-witted boy, who ambled about
cheerfully, undertaking messages and little helpful odds and ends for
every one, which, however, poor Jacob managed always hopelessly to
imbrangle. Everything came to pieces in his hands, and nothing would
stop in his head. They nicknamed him Jacob Doodle-calf.

But above all there was Harry Winburn, the quickest and best boy in the
parish. He might be a year older than Tom, but was very little bigger,
and he was the Crichton of our village boys. He could wrestle and climb
and run better than all the rest, and learned all that the schoolmaster
could teach him faster than that worthy at all liked. He was a boy to
be proud of, with his curly brown hair, keen gray eye, straight active
figure, and little ears and hands and feet, "as fine as a lord's," as
Charity remarked to Tom one day, talking, as usual, great nonsense.
Lords' hands and ears and feet are just as ugly as other folk's when
they are children, as any one may convince himself if he likes to look.
Tight boots and gloves, and doing nothing with them, I allow make a
difference by the time they are twenty.

Now that Benjy was laid on the shelf, and his young brothers were still
under petticoat government, Tom, in search of companions, began to
cultivate the village boys generally more and more. Squire Brown, be it
said, was a true-blue Tory to the backbone, and believed honestly that
the powers which be were ordained of God, and that loyalty and steadfast
obedience were men's first duties. Whether it were in consequence or in
spite of his political creed, I do not mean to give an opinion, though
I have one; but certain it is that he held therewith divers social
principles not generally supposed to be true blue in colour. Foremost of
these, and the one which the Squire loved to propound above all others,
was the belief that a man is to be valued wholly and solely for that
which he is in himself, for that which stands up in the four fleshly
walls of him, apart from clothes, rank, fortune, and all externals
whatsoever. Which belief I take to be a wholesome corrective of all
political opinions, and, if held sincerely, to make all opinions equally
harmless, whether they be blue, red, or green. As a necessary corollary
to this belief, Squire Brown held further that it didn't matter a
straw whether his son associated with lords' sons or ploughmen's sons,
provided they were brave and honest. He himself had played football
and gone bird-nesting with the farmers whom he met at vestry and
the labourers who tilled their fields, and so had his father and
grandfather, with their progenitors. So he encouraged Tom in his
intimacy with the boys of the village, and forwarded it by all means
in his power, and gave them the run of a close for a playground, and
provided bats and balls and a football for their sports.

Our village was blessed amongst other things with a well-endowed school.
The building stood by itself, apart from the master's house, on an angle
of ground where three roads met--an old gray stone building with a steep
roof and mullioned windows. On one of the opposite angles stood Squire
Brown's stables and kennel, with their backs to the road, over which
towered a great elm-tree; on the third stood the village carpenter and
wheelwright's large open shop, and his house and the schoolmaster's,
with long low eaves, under which the swallows built by scores.

The moment Tom's lessons were over, he would now get him down to this
corner by the stables, and watch till the boys came out of school. He
prevailed on the groom to cut notches for him in the bark of the elm
so that he could climb into the lower branches; and there he would sit
watching the school door, and speculating on the possibility of turning
the elm into a dwelling-place for himself and friends, after the manner
of the Swiss Family Robinson. But the school hours were long and Tom's
patience short, so that he soon began to descend into the street, and go
and peep in at the school door and the wheelwright's shop, and look out
for something to while away the time. Now the wheelwright was a choleric
man, and one fine afternoon, returning from a short absence, found Tom
occupied with one of his pet adzes, the edge of which was fast vanishing
under our hero's care. A speedy flight saved Tom from all but one sound
cuff on the ears; but he resented this unjustifiable interruption of his
first essays at carpentering, and still more the further proceedings
of the wheelwright, who cut a switch, and hung it over the door of his
workshop, threatening to use it upon Tom if he came within twenty yards
of his gate. So Tom, to retaliate, commenced a war upon the swallows who
dwelt under the wheelwright's eaves, whom he harassed with sticks
and stones; and being fleeter of foot than his enemy, escaped all
