      I tell thee thou 'rt defied!
  And if thou said'st I am not peer
  To any lord in Scotland here,
  Lowland or Highland, far or near,
  Lord Angus, thou hast lied '"


REMARK 1.--In our attempt to imitate nature it is important to avoid
affectation, for to this fault even perfect monotony is preferable.

REMARK 2.--The strength of the voice may be increased by practicing with
different degrees of loudness, from a whisper to full rotundity, taking
care to keep the voice on the same key. The same note in music may be
sounded loud or soft. So also a sentence may be pronounced on the same
pitch with different degrees of loudness. Having practiced with different
degrees of loudness on one key, make the same experiment on another, and
then on another, and so on. This will also give the learner practice in
compass,



VII. POETIC PAUSES.

In poetry we have, in addition to other pauses, poetic pauses. The object
of these is simply to promote the melody.

At the end of each line a slight pause is proper, whatever be the
grammatical construction or the sense. The purpose of this pause is to
make prominent the melody of the measure, and in rhyme to allow the ear to
appreciate the harmony of the similar sounds.

There is, also, another important pause, somewhere near the middle of each
line, which is called the caesura or caesural pause. In the following
lines it is marked thus (||):

EXAMPLES.

  There are hours long departed || which memory brings,
    Like blossoms of Eden || to twine round the heart,
  And as time rushes by || on the might of his wings,
    They may darken awhile || but they never depart.

REMARK.--The caesural pause should never be so placed as to injure the
sense. The following lines, if melody alone were consulted, would be read
thus:

  With fruitless la || bor Clara bound,
  And strove to stanch || the gushing wound;
  The Monk with un || availing cares,
  Exhausted all || the church's prayers.

This manner of reading, however, would very much interfere with the proper
expression of the idea. This is to be corrected by making the caesural
pause yield to the sense. The above lines should be read thus:

  With fruitless labor || Clara bound,
  And strove || to stanch the gushing wound;
  The Monk || with unavailing cares,
  Exhausted || all the church's prayers,



EXERCISES.

I. DEATH OF FRANKLIN.
(To be read in a solemn tone.)

Franklin is dead. The genius who freed America', and poured a
copious stream of knowledge throughout Europe', is returned unto the bosom
of the Divinity'. The sage to whom two worlds' lay claim, the man for whom
science' and politics' are disputing, indisputably enjoyed au elevated
rank in human nature.

The cabinets of princes have been long in the habit of notifying the death
of those who were great', only in their funeral orations'. Long hath the
etiquette of courts', proclaimed the mourning of hypocrisy'. Nations'
should wear mourning for none but their benefactors'. The representatives'
of nations should recommend to public homage' only those who have been the
heroes of humanity'.


II. BONAPARTE.

He knew no motive' but interst'; acknowledged no criterion' but success';
he worshiped no God' but ambition'; and with an eastern devotion', he
knelt at the shrine of his idolatry'. Subsidiary to this, there was no
creed' that he did not profess'; there was no opinion' that he did not
promulgate': in the hope of a dynasty', he upheld the crescent'; for the
sake of a divorce', he bowed before the cross'; the orphan of St. Louis',
he became the adopted child of the republic'; and, with a parricidal
ingrati-tude', on the ruins both of the throne and the tribune, he reared
the throne of his despotism'.

At his touch crowns' crumbled'; beggars' reigned'; systems' van-ished';
the wildest theories' took the color of his whim'; and all that was
venerable' and all that was novel', changed places with the rapidity of a
drama'. Nature had no obstacle' that he did not surmount'; space, no
opposition' he did not spurn'; and whether amid Alpine rocks',--Arabian
sands',--or Polar snows',---he seemed proof' against peril', and empowered
with ubiquity'.



III. HAMLET ON SEEING THE SKULL OF YORICK.

Alas, poor Yorick'! I knew him', Horatio'; a fellow of infinite jest', of
most excellent fancy'. He hath borne me on his back' a thousand times';
and now', how abhorred my imagination is'! My gorge rises' at it. Here
hung those lips that I have kissed', I know not how oft', Where be your
gibes' now? your gambols'? your songs'? your flashes of merriment', that
were wont to set the table on a roar'? Not one', now, to mock your own
grinning'? quite chopfallen'? Now get you to my lady's chamber' and tell
her', let her paint an inch thick' to this favor' she must come'; make her
laugh at that'.



IV. DESCRIPTION OF A BATTLE.

Yet still Lord Marmion's falcon flew'
With wavering flight', while fiercer grew
  Around, the battle yell.
The border slogan rent the sky',
A Home'! a Gordon'! was the cry';
  Loud' were the clanging blows';
Advanced',--forced back',--now low',--now high',
  The pennon sunk'--and rose';
As bends the bark's mast in the gale',
When rent are rigging', shrouds', and sail',
  It wavered 'mid the foes'.
The war, that for a space did fail',
Now trebly thundering swelled the gale',
  And Stanley'! was the cry;
A light on Marmion's visage spread',
  And fired his glazing eye':--
With dying' hand', above his head',
He shook the fragment of his blade',
  And shouted',--"Victory'!
Charge', Chester', charge'! On' Stanley', on'!"--
  Were the last words of Marmion.



V. LORD ULLIN'S DAUGHTER.

For the inflections and emphasis in this selection, let the pupil be
guided by his own judgment.

A chieftain to the Highlands bound,
  Cries, "Boatman, do not tarry!
And I'll give thee a silver pound,
  To row us o'er the ferry."

"Now, who be ye would cross Loch-Gyle
  This dark and stormy water?"
"Oh! I'm the chief of Ulva's isle,
  And this, Lord Ullin's daughter.

"And fast before her father's men
  Three days we've fled together,
For should he find us in the glen,
  My blood would stain the heather.

"His horsemen hard behind us ride;
  Should they our steps discover,
Then who will cheer my bonny bride,
  When they have slain her lover?"

Out spoke the hardy Highland wight
  "I'll go, my chief--I'm ready:
It is not for your silver bright,
  But for your winsome lady:

"And, by my word! the bonny bird
  In danger shall not tarry;
So, though the waves are raging white,
  I'll row you o'er the ferry."

By this, the storm grew loud apace,
  The water wraith was shrieking;
And, in the scowl of heaven, each face
  Grew dark as they were speaking.

But still, as wilder grew the wind,
  And as the night grew drearer,
Adown the glen rode armed men,
  Their trampling sounded nearer.

"Oh I haste thee, haste!" the lady cries
  "Though tempest round us gather,
I'll meet the raging of the skies,
  But not an angry father."

The boat has left the stormy land,
  A stormy sea before her;
When, oh I too strong for human hand,
  The tempest gathered o'er her.

And still they rowed, amid the roar
  Of waters fast prevailing;
Lord Ullin reached that fatal shore,
  His wrath was changed to wailing.

For sore dismay through storm and shade
  His child he did discover;
One lovely hand she stretched for aid,
  And one was round her lover.

"Come back! come back!" he cried, in grief,
  "Across this stormy water;
And I'll forgive your Highland chief,
  My daughter! O, my daughter!"

'T was vain: the loud waves lashed the shore,
  Return or aid preventing;
The waters wild went o'er his child,
  And he was left lamenting.

                             --Thomas Campbell



ALPHABETICAL LIST OF AUTHORS.

    Name.                       Name.
1.  ALCOTT, LOUISA M.        45. LAMB, CHARLES
2.  ALLEN, Mrs. E. A.        46. LONDON TIMES
3.  ALLINGHAM, W.            47. LONGFELLOW
4.  ARNOLD, GEORGE           48. LOWELL
5.  ARTHUR, T. S.            49. MARTINEAU, HARRIET
6.  AUDUBON                  50. MITCHELL, DONALD G.
7.  BANCROFT                 51. MONTGOMERY, JAMES
8.  BIBLE, THE               52. MOORE
9.  BLACK, WILLIAM           53. MORRIS. G. P.
10.  BRIGGS, C. F.           54. NOBLE, L. L.
11.  BROOKS, C. T.           55. NORTON, MRS. C. E. S.
12.  BRYANT                  56. O'BRIEN, FITZ-JAMES
13.  BUCKINGHAM, J. T.       57. PIATT, J. J.
14. BURRITT, ELIHU           58. PIATT, MRS. S. M. B.
15. CAMPBELL, THOMAS         59. PROCTER, ADELAIDE ANNE
16. CHANNING, WILLIAM ELLERY 60. READ, T. B.
17. COLLINS, WILLIAM         61. RUSSELL, JOHN
18. COOK, ELIZA              62. SANGSTER, MRS. M. E.
19. COOPER, JAMES FENIMORE   63. SAXE, J. G.
20.  COWPER                  64. SHAKESPEARE
21.  DICKENS                 65. SHEPHERD
22.  DIMOND, WILLIAM         66. SOUTHEY, MRS. C. A.
23.  EASTMAN, C. G.          67. SOUTHEY, ROBERT
24.  EDGEWORTH, MARIA        68. SPRAGUE, CHARLES
25.  FINCH, F. M.            69. STODDARD. R. H.
26.  FOLLEN, MRS. E. L.      70. TAYLOR, B. F.
27.  GOLDSMITH.              71. TAYLOR, JANE
28.  GOODRICH, S. G.         72. TENNYSON
29.  GRIMKE', THOMAS S.      73. THACKERAY
30.  HALE, Mrs. S. J,        74. THACKER, CELIA
31. HARTE. FRANCIS BRET      75. THOMPSON, D. P.
32. HAWES, W. P.             76. THOMSON, JAMES
33. HAWTHORNE                77. THOREAU, H. D.
34. HELPS, ARTHUR            78. TOOD, JOHN
35. HEMANS, FELICIA D.       79. WARNER, CHARLES DUDLEY
36. HOOD, THOMAS             80. "CAPITAL" (WASHINGTON)
37. HUNT, LEIGH              81. WEBSTER
38. INGELOW, JEAN            82. WEEMS, MASON L.
39. IRVING                   83. WHITTIER
40. JERROLD, DOUGLAS         84. WILSON, JOHN
41. JOHNSON, SAMUEL          85. WIRT, WILLIAM
42. KEBLE, JOHN              86. WOLFE, CHARLES
43. KINGSLEY, CHARLES        87. WOTTON, SIR HENRY
44. KNOWLES, SHERIDAN



McGuffey's Fifth Reader



1. THE GOOD READER.

1. It is told of Frederick the Great, King of Prussia, that, as he was
seated one day in his private room, a written petition was brought to him
with the request that it should be immediately read.  The King had just
returned from hunting, and the glare of the sun, or some other cause, had
so dazzled his eyes that he found it difficult to make out a single word
of the writing.

2. His private secretary happened to be absent; and the soldier who
brought the petition could not read. There was a page, or favorite boy
servant, waiting in the hall, and upon him the King called. The page was a
son of one of the noblemen of the court, but proved to be a very poor
reader.

3. In the first place, he did not articulate distinctly. He huddled his
words together in the utterance, as if they were syllables of one long
word, which he must get through with as speedily as possible. His
pronunciation was bad, and he did not modulate his voice so as to bring
out the meaning of what he read. Every sentence was uttered with a dismal
monotony of voice, as if it did not differ in any respect from that which
preceded it.

4. "Stop!" said the King, impatiently. "Is it an auctioneer's list of
goods to be sold that you are hurrying over? Send your companion to me."
Another page who stood at the door now entered, and to him the King gave
the petition. The second page began by hemming and clearing his throat in
such an affected manner that the King jokingly asked him whether he had
not slept in the public garden, with the gate open, the night before.

5. The second page had a good share of self-conceit, however, and so was
not greatly confused by the King's jest. He determined that he would avoid
the mistake which his comrade had made. So he commenced reading the
petition slowly and with great formality, emphasizing every word, and
prolonging the articulation of every syllable. But his manner was so
tedious that the King cried out, "Stop! are you reciting a lesson in the
elementary sounds? Out of the room! But no: stay! Send me that little girl
who is sitting there by the fountain."

6. The girl thus pointed out by the King was a daughter of one of the
laborers employed by the royal gardener; and she had come to help her
father weed the flower beds. It chanced that, like many of the poor people
in Prussia, she had received a good education. She was somewhat alarmed
when she found herself in the King's presence, but took courage when the
King told her that he only wanted her to read for him, as his eyes were
weak.

7. Now, Ernestine (for this was the name of the little girl) was fond of
reading aloud, and often many of the neighbors would assemble at her
father's house to hear her; those who could not read themselves would come
to her, also, with their letters from distant friends or children, and she
thus formed the habit of reading various sorts of handwriting promptly and
well.

8. The King gave her the petition, and she rapidly glanced through the
opening lines to get some idea of what it was about. As she read, her eyes
began to glisten, and her breast to heave. "What is the matter?" asked the
King; "don't you know how to read?" "Oh, yes! sire," she replied,
addressing him with the title usually applied to him: "I will now read it,
if you please."

9. The two pages wore about to leave the room. "Remain," said the King.
The little girl began to read the petition. It was from a poor widow,
whose only son had been drafted to serve in the army, although his health
was delicate and his pursuits had been such as to unfit him for military
life. His father had been killed in battle, and the son had a strong
desire to become a portrait painter.

10. The writer told her story in a simple, concise manner, that carried to
the heart a belief of its truth; and Ernestine read it with so much
feeling, and with an articulation so just, in tones so pure and distinct,
that when she had finished, the King, into whose eyes the tears had
started, exclaimed, "Oh! now I understand what it is all about; but I
might never have known, certainly I never should have felt, its meaning
had I trusted to these young gentlemen, whom I now dismiss from my service
for one year, advising them to occupy their time in learning to read."

11. "As for you, my young lady," continued the King, "I know you will ask
no better reward for your trouble than the pleasure of carrying to this
poor widow my order for her son's immediate discharge. Let me see whether
you can write as well as you can read. Take this pen, and write as I
dictate." He then dictated an order, which Ernestine wrote, and he signed.
Calling one of his guards, he bade him go with the girl and see that the
order was obeyed.

12. How much happiness was Ernestine the means of bestowing through her
good elocution, united to the happy circumstance that brought it to the
knowledge of the King! First, there were her poor neighbors, to whom she
could give instruction and entertainment. Then, there was the poor widow
who sent the petition, and who not only regained her son, but received
through Ernestine an order for him to paint the King's likeness; so that
the poor boy soon rose to great distinction, and had more orders than he
could attend to. Words could not express his gratitude, and that of his
mother, to the little girl.

13. And Ernestine had, moreover, the satisfaction of aiding her father to
rise in the world, so that he became the King's chief gardener. The King
did not forget her, but had her well educated at his own expense. As for
the two pages, she was indirectly the means of doing them good, also; for,
ashamed of their bad reading, they commenced studying in earnest, till
they overcame the faults that had offended the King. Both finally rose to
distinction, one as a lawyer, and the other as a statesman; and they owed
their advancement in life chiefly to their good elocution.


DEFINITIONS.--1. Pe-ti'tion, a formal request. 3. Ar-tic'u-late, to utter
the elementary sounds. Mod'u-late, to vary or inflect. Mo-not'o-ny, lack
of variety. 4. Af-fect'ed, unnatural and silly. 9. Draft'ed, selected by
lot. 10. Con-cise', brief and full of meaning. 11. Dis-charge', release.
Dic'tate, to utter so that another may write it down. 12. Dis-tinc'tion,
honorable and notable position. Ex-press', to make known the feelings of.


NOTES.--Frederick II. of Prussia (b. 1712, d. 1788), or Frederick the
Great, as he was called, was one of the greatest of German rulers. He was
distinguished for his military exploits, for his wise and just government,
and for his literary attainments. He wrote many able works in the French
language. Many pleasant anecdotes are told of this king, of which the one
given in the lesson is a fair sample.



II. THE BLUEBELL.

1.  There is a story I have heard--
    A poet learned it of a bird,
    And kept its music every word--

2.  A story of a dim ravine,
    O'er which the towering tree tops lean,
    With one blue rift of sky between;

3.  And there, two thousand years ago,
    A little flower as white as snow
    Swayed in the silence to and fro.

4.  Day after day, with longing eye,
    The floweret watched the narrow sky,
    And fleecy clouds that floated by.

5.  And through the darkness, night by night,
    One gleaming star would climb the height,
    And cheer the lonely floweret's sight.

6.  Thus, watching the blue heavens afar,
    And the rising of its favorite star,
    A slow change came--but not to mar;

7.  For softly o'er its petals white
    There crept a blueness, like the light
    Of skies upon a summer night;

8.  And in its chalice, I am told,
    The bonny bell was formed to hold
    A tiny star that gleamed like gold.

9.  Now, little people, sweet and true,
    I find a lesson here for you
    Writ in the floweret's hell of blue:

10. The patient child whose watchful eye
    Strives after all things pure and high,
    Shall take their image by and by.


 DEFINITIONS.--2. Rift, a narrow opening, a cleft. 3. Swayed, swung. 5.
 Height (pro. hite), an elevated place. 7. Pet'als, the colored leaves of
 a flower. 8. Chal'ice, a cup or bowl. Bon'ny, beautiful.
