
"Cock-a-doodle-doo!

Our sticky lady has come home, too."

The pitch stuck so fast to the girl that, as long as she lived, it never
came off.

WILLIAM AND JACOB GRIMM




    IF EVER I SEE

        If ever I see,
        On bush or tree,
    Young birds in their pretty nest;
        I must not, in play,
        Steal the birds away,
    To grieve their mother's breast.

        My mother, I know,
        Would sorrow so,
    Should I be stolen away;
        So I'll speak to the birds
        In my softest words,
    Nor hurt them in my play.

        And when they can fly
        In the bright blue sky,
    They'll warble a song to me;
        And then if I'm sad
        It will make me glad
    To think they are happy and free.

    LYDIA MARIA CHILD





[Illustration]

WHY THE BEAR'S TAIL IS SHORT


Did you ever go to a circus where there was a bear in a cage?

Did you notice how short his tail was?

I will tell you how the bear's tail came to be short.

One very cold day in winter, a fox saw some men taking home a load of
fish.

The fox jumped upon the wagon while the men were not looking.

He threw off some of the best fish until he had enough for his dinner.

Then Mr. Fox jumped from the wagon and began to eat the fish.

While he was eating the fish, Mr. Bear came along.

"Good morning," said Mr. Bear, "you have had good luck fishing to-day.
Those are very fine fish. How did you catch them?"

"They are fine fish," said Mr. Fox.

"If you will go fishing with me to-night, I will show you how to catch
even better fish than these."

"I will go with you gladly," said the bear. "I will bring my hook and
line too."

"You don't need a hook and line," said the fox.

"I always catch fish with my tail. You have a much longer tail than I,
and can fish so much the better."

At sunset the bear met the fox.

They went across the frozen river until they came to a small hole in
the ice.

"Now, Mr. Bear," said the fox, "sit down here on the ice and put your
tail through the hole. You must keep still for a long while. That is the
best way to catch fish.

Wait until a great many fish take hold of your tail. Then pull with all
your might."

The bear sat very still for a long time.

At last he began to feel cold and he moved a little.

"Ow!" he cried, for his tail had begun freeze in the ice.

"Is it not time to pull out the fish?" said the bear.

"No, no," cried the fox.

"Wait until more fish have taken hold of your tail. You are very strong.
You can wait a little longer."

So the poor bear waited until it was almost morning.

[Illustration]

Just then some dogs began to bark on the bank of the river.

The bear was so afraid that he jumped up quickly and pulled with all his
might, but his tail was frozen fast in the ice.

He pulled and pulled until at length the tail was broken short off.

Mr. Fox ran away laughing and laughing at the trick he had played upon
Mr. Bear.

Bears' tails have been short ever since.

_German Folk Tale_




[Illustration]

RUMPELSTILTSKIN--I

glistened  guess  mourn  chamber


Once upon a time there lived a miller who had a beautiful daughter.

Now the miller had to visit the king's castle and, while there, he
happened to meet the king face to face.

The king stopped and spoke to the miller. The miller, wishing the king
to think that he was very rich, told him that he had a daughter who
could spin straw into gold.

"Ah," said the king, "that is indeed a wonderful gift. To-morrow you
must bring your daughter to my castle, that she may spin some gold for
me."

Then the miller was afraid and wished he had not spoken, but he had to
do as the king ordered.

The next day he brought his daughter to the castle.

Now it happened that the king loved gold above all things. So taking the
poor girl by the hand, he led her into one of the great rooms of the
castle.

There, in the middle of the room, stood a spinning wheel, and near it
was a great heap of straw.

The king turned to the miller's daughter, and said:

"There is your spinning wheel, and here is the straw. If you do not spin
all of it into gold by morning, your head shall be cut off."

Then the king left the room and locked the door behind him.

The poor girl could only sit and weep, for she had not the least idea
how to spin straw into gold.

While she was crying, the door flew open and a little old man stepped
into the room.

He had bandy legs, a long red nose, and wore a tall, peaked cap. Bowing
low to the maiden he said:

"Good evening, my dear young lady. Why are you crying?"

"Alas," said the girl, "the king has ordered me to spin all this straw
into gold, and I do not know how."

Then the little man said, "What will you give me if I will spin it for
you?"

"This string of gold beads from my neck," said the girl.

The little man took the beads, and, sitting down, began to spin.

Whir! whir! went the wheel; round and round it whirled.

Lo, as the maiden looked, she saw the coarse straw turn into beautiful
golden threads.

The little man kept so busily at work that soon all the straw was gone,
and in its place lay a heap of the finest gold.

The next morning the king unlocked the door. How his eyes sparkled at
the sight of the gold!

These riches made the king even more greedy than before.

He led the maiden to a still larger chamber, which was full of straw.

Turning to the trembling girl, he said, "There is your spinning wheel,
and here is the straw. If you do not spin all of it into gold by
morning, your head shall be cut off."

The maiden's eyes filled with tears at the sight of that huge heap of
straw. Sitting down, she began to cry.

All at once the door opened and in jumped the little old man. He took
off his pointed cap and said to the miller's daughter, "What will you
give me if I help you again, and spin this straw into gold?"

"This ring from my finger," said the maiden.

The little man took the ring, and seating himself before the spinning
wheel, began to spin.

Whir! whir! went the wheel. Faster and faster it whirled.

In the morning the straw had all been turned into finest gold.

When the king opened the door, how his eyes glistened at the sight of
the gold! Still, it only made him greedy for more, so taking the poor
girl by the hand, he led her to a much larger chamber.

This was so full of straw that there was hardly room for her to sit at
the spinning wheel.

Turning to the maiden, the king said:

"There is your spinning wheel, and here is the straw. If you do not spin
all of it into gold by morning, your head shall be cut off. But if you
do spin the gold, I will marry you and make you my queen."

"For," thought the king, "though she is only a miller's daughter, yet
she can make me the richest king in the world."

Hardly had the door closed behind the king, when the little old man came
hopping and skipping into the room.

Taking off his pointed cap, he said to the girl, "What will you give me
if I will again spin this straw for you?"

"Ah!" said the maiden, "I have nothing more to give."

"Then you must make me a promise," said the little man. "You must
promise to give me your first child, after you have become queen."

[Illustration]

The poor girl saw no other way to save her life, so she gave her promise
to the little man.

Then he sat down and began to spin.

Whir! whir! went the wheel. Faster and faster he spun.

Soon the great roomful of straw was all turned into gold.

When the king opened the door the next morning, he saw the maiden
sitting beside a large heap of shining gold.

The king kept his promise, and made the poor miller's daughter his
queen.


RUMPELSTILTSKIN--II

About a year later the queen had a lovely child, but she forgot all
about her promise.

One day the little old man came hopping into the queen's room and said,
"Now give me what you have promised."

The queen was filled with terror, and offered the little man all the
riches of the kingdom if he would leave her the child.

"No, I do not care for riches; you must keep your promise."

Then the queen began to mourn and to weep, until the little man had pity
for her.

"I will give you three days," he said, "and if, in that time, you can
guess my name, you shall keep the child."

The queen lay awake that night, thinking of all the names she had ever
heard. In the morning men were sent to every part of the kingdom to find
strange names.

The next day the little man came again. The queen began to call off to
him all the names that she had found--Caspar, Melchior, and many, many
others.

At each one the little man shook his head, and said, "No, that is not my
name."

Then the queen had her men go from house to house through the town. They
took down the name of every man, woman, and child.

When the little man came again, the queen had a long list of names to
give him.

"Is your name Cowribs, or Sheepshanks, or Bandy legs?" she said to him
at last.

He answered to each one, "No, that is not my name."

On the third day the queen's men began to come back from all parts of
the kingdom. They had been far and wide to find new names.

One of these men said, "I could not find any new names, but going by
some deep woods, I heard a fox wish good-night to a rabbit.

[Illustration]

Soon I came upon a little house, in front of which a fire was burning.
Around this fire danced a little man. He wore a pointed cap, and had a
long nose and bandy legs. As he went hopping and jumping about, first on
one leg and then on the other, he sang:

    My baking and brewing I will do to-day,
    The queen's son to-morrow I will take away,
    No wise man can show the queen where to begin,
    For my name, to be sure, is Rumpelstiltskin."

The queen clapped her hands for joy. She knew that at last she had found
the name.

She sent the servant away with a bag of gold, and waited for the queer
little man to come to her. At sunset the little fellow came hopping and
skipping up to the queen.

"Now, O queen," he said, "this is your last chance. Tell me my name."

The queen asked, "Is your name Conrad?"

"No."

"Henry?"

"No."

"Then your name is Rumpelstiltskin."

"The fairies have told you!" shouted the little man dancing about.

He became so angry that, in his rage, he stamped his right foot into the
ground.

This made him more angry still, and taking hold of his left foot with
both hands, he pulled so hard that he tore himself quite in two.


WILLIAM AND JACOB GRIMM




[Illustration]

    BED IN SUMMER

    In winter I get up at night
    And dress by yellow candle-light.
    In summer, quite the other way,
    I have to go to bed by day.

    I have to go to bed and see
    The birds still hopping on the tree,
    Or hear the grown-up people's feet
    Still going past me in the street.

    And does it not seem hard to you,
    When all the sky is clear and blue,
    And I should like so much to play,
    To have to go to bed by day?

    ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON




[Illustration]

THE GOLDEN TOUCH--I

touch  slightest  creature  statue


Many years ago there lived a king named Midas.

King Midas had one little daughter, whose name was Marigold.

King Midas was very, very rich. It was said that he had more gold than
any other king in the world.

One room of his great castle was almost filled with yellow gold pieces.

At last the king grew so fond of his gold that he loved it better than
anything else in all the world.

He even loved it better than his own little daughter, dear little
rosy-cheeked Marigold. His one great wish seemed to be for more and more
gold.

One day while he was in his gold room counting his money, a beautiful
fairy boy stood before him.

The boy's face shone with a wonderful light, and he had wings on his cap
and wings on his feet. In his hand he carried a strange-looking wand,
and the wand also had wings.

"Midas, you are the richest man in the world," said the fairy. "There is
no king who has so much gold as you."

"That may be," said the king. "As you see, I have this room full of
gold, but I should like much more; for gold is the best and the most
wonderful thing in the world."

"Are you sure?" asked the fairy.

"I am very sure," answered the king.

"If I should grant you one wish," said the fairy, "would you ask for
more gold?"

"If I could have but one wish," said the king, "I would ask that
everything I touched should turn to beautiful yellow gold."

"Your wish shall be granted," said the fairy "At sunrise to-morrow
morning your slightest touch will turn everything into gold. But warn
you that your gift will not make you happy."

"I will take the risk," said the king.


THE GOLDEN TOUCH--II

The next morning King Midas awoke very early. He was eager to see if the
fairy's promise had come true.

As soon as the sun arose he tried the gift by touching the bed lightly
with his hand.

The bed turned to gold.

[Illustration]

He touched the chair and table.
