the elm-tree and read what he says, May."

The girls seated themselves together on a rustic bench, tore open the
thick letter, and acquainted themselves with its contents.


  "Dearest,--I'm coming home to-morrow night. _Must_ see the mater.
  Have got into a fresh scrape. Don't tell anyone but May--I mean about
  the scrape.

  "Your devoted brother,

  "LOFTUS."


Catherine read this letter twice, once to herself, then aloud for
Mabel's benefit.

"Now, what's up?" exclaimed Mabel. "It must be very bad. He never calls
you 'dearest;' unless it's awfully bad. Does he, Kitty?"

"No," said Catherine. "Poor mother," she added then, and she gave a
profound and most ungirlish sigh.

"Why, Catherine, you have been grumbling at mother all day! You have
been feeling so cross about her."

"You never will understand, Mabel! I grumble at mother for her
frettiness, but I love her, I pity her for her sorrows."

Mabel looked full into her sister's face.

"I confess I don't understand you," she said. "I can't love one side of
a person, and hate the other side; I don't know that I love or hate
anybody very much. It's more comfortable not to do things very much,
isn't it, Kitty?"

"I suppose so," replied Catherine, "but I can't say. That isn't my
fashion. I do everything very much. I love, I hate, I joy or sorrow, all
in extremes. Perhaps it isn't a good way, but it's the only way I've
got. Now let us talk about Loftus. I wonder if he is going to stay long,
and if he will make himself pleasant."

"No fear of that," responded Mabel. "He'll be as selfish and exacting as
ever he can be. He'll keep mother in a state of fret, and you in a state
of excitement, and he'll insist on smoking a cigarette close to the new
cretonne curtains in the drawing-room, and he'll make me go out in the
hot part of the day to gather fresh strawberries for him. Oh, I do think
brothers are worries! I wish he wasn't coming. We are very peaceful and
snug here. And mother's face doesn't looked harassed as it often did
when we were in town. I do wish Loftus wasn't coming to upset
everything. It was he turned us away from our nice, sprightly, jolly
London, and now, surely he need not follow us into the country. Yes,
Catherine, what words of wisdom or reproof are going to drop from your
lips?"

"Not any," replied Catherine. "I can't make blind people see, and I
can't bring love when there is no love to bring. Of course, it is
different for me."

"How is it different for you?"

"I love Loftus. He gives me pain, but that can be borne, for I love
him."

At this moment Mrs. Bertram's tall figure was seen standing on the steps
of the house. It was getting dark; a heavy dew was falling, and the air
was slightly, pleasantly chill after the intense heat of the day. Mrs.
Bertram had wrapped a white fleecy cloud over her head. She descended
the steps, stood on the broad gravel sweep, and looked around her.

"We are here, mother," said May, jumping up. "Do you want us?"

"I want Catherine. Don't you come, Mabel. I want Catherine alone."

"Keep Loftus's letter," said Catherine, tossing it into her sister's
lap. "I know by mother's tone she is troubled. Don't let us show her the
letter to-night. Put it in your pocket, May."

Aloud she said,--

"Yes, mother, I'm coming. I'll be with you directly." She ran across the
grass, looking slim and pale in her white muslin dress, her face full of
intense feeling, her manner so hurried and eager that her mother felt
irritated by it.

"You need not dash at me as if you meant to knock me down, Kate," she
said.

"You said you wanted me, mother."

"So I did, Catherine. I do want you. Come into the house with me."

Mrs. Bertram turned and walked up the steps. She entered the wide hall
which was lit by a ghostly, and not too carefully-trimmed, paraffin
lamp. Catherine followed her. They went into the drawing-room. Here also
a paraffin lamp gave an uncertain light; very feeble, yellow, and
uncertain it was, but even by it Catherine could catch a glimpse of her
mother's face. It was drawn and white, it was not only changed from the
prosperous, handsome face which the girl had last looked at, but it had
lost its likeness to the haughty, the proud, the satisfied Mrs. Bertram
of Catherine's knowledge. Its expression now betokened a kind of inward
scare or fright.

"Mother, you have something to worry you," said Kate, "I see that by
your face. I am sorry. I am truly sorry. Sit down, mother. What can I do
for you?"

"Nothing, my dear, except to be an attentive daughter--attentive and
affectionate and obedient. Sometimes, Catherine, you are not that."

"Oh, never mind now, when you are in trouble, I'd do anything in the
world for you when you are in trouble. You know that."

Mrs. Bertram had seated herself. Catherine knelt now, and took one of
her mother's hands between her own. Insensibly the cold hand was
comforted by the warm steadfast clasp.

"You are a good child, Kate," said her mother in an unwonted and gentle
voice. "You are full of whims and fancies; but when you like you can be
a great support to one. Do you remember long ago when your father died
how only little Kitty's hand could cure mother's headaches?"

"I would cure your heartache now."

"You can't, child, you can't. And besides, who said anything about a
heartache? We have no time, Kate, to talk any more sentimentalities. I
have had a letter, my dear, and it obliges me to go to town to-night."

"To-night? Surely there is no train?"

"There is. One stops at Northbury to take up the mails at a quarter to
twelve. I shall go by it."

"Do you want me to go with you?"

"By no means. Of what use would you be?"

"I don't know. Perhaps not of any use, and yet long ago when you had
headaches, Kitty could cure them."

There was something so pathetic and so unwonted in Catherine's tone that
Mrs. Bertram was quite touched. She bent forward, placed her hand under
the young chin, raised the handsome face, and printed a kiss on the
brow.

"Kitty shall help her mother best by staying at home," she said.
"Seriously, my love. I must leave you in charge here. Not only in charge
of the house, of the servants, of Mabel--but--of my secret."

"What secret, mother?"

"I don't want any one here to know that I have gone to London."

Catherine thought a moment.

"I know you are not going to give me your reasons," she said, after a
pause. "But why do you tell me there is a secret?"

"Because you are trustworthy."

"Why do tell _me_ that you are going to London?"

"Because you must be prepared to act in an emergency."

"Mother, what do you mean?"

"I will tell you enough of my meaning to guide you, my love. I have had
some news that troubles me. I am going to London to try and put some
wrong things right. You need not look so horrified, Kate; I shall
certainly put them right. It might complicate matters in certain
quarters if it were known that I had gone to London, therefore I do it
secretly. It is necessary, however, that one person should know where to
write to me. I choose you to be that person, Catherine, but you are only
to send me a letter in case of need."

"If we are ill, or anything of that sort, mother?"

"Nothing of that sort. You and Mabel are in superb health. I am not
going to prepare for any such unlikely contingency as your sudden
illness. Catherine, these are the _only_ circumstances under which
you are to communicate with your mother. Listen, my dear daughter.
Listen attentively. A good deal depends on your discretion. A stranger
may call. The stranger may be either a man or a woman. He or she will
ask to see me. Finding I am away this person, whether man or woman, will
try to have an interview with either you or Mabel, and will endeavor by
every means to get my address. Mabel, knowing nothing, can reveal
nothing, and you, Kate, you are to put the stranger on the wrong scent,
to get rid of the stranger by some means, and immediately to telegraph
to me. My address is in this closed-up envelope. Lock the envelope in
your desk; open it if the contingency to which I have alluded occurs,
not otherwise. And now, my dear child, I must go upstairs and pack."

Catherine roused herself from her kneeling position with difficulty. She
felt cold and stiff, queer and old.

"Shall I help you, mother," she asked.

"No, my dear, I shall ring for Clara. I shall tell Clara that I am going
to Manchester. A train to Manchester can be taken from Fleet-hill
Junction, so it will all sound quite natural. Go out to Mabel, dear.
Tell her any story you like."

"I don't tell stories, mother. I shall have nothing to say to Mabel."

"Tell her nothing, then; only run away. What is the matter now?"

"One thing before you go, mother. I too had a letter to-night."

"Had you, my dear? I cannot be worried about your correspondence now."

"My letter was from Loftie."

"Loftus! What did he write about?"

"He is coming here to-morrow night."

Catherine glanced eagerly into her mother's face as she spoke. It did
not grow any whiter or any more careworn.

She stood still for a moment in the middle of the drawing-room,
evidently thinking deeply. When she spoke her brow had cleared and her
voice was cheerful.

"This may be for the best," she said.

Catherine stamped her foot impatiently.

"Mother," she said, "you quite frighten me with your innuendoes and your
half-confidences. I don't understand you. It is very difficult to act
when one only half understands."

"I cannot make things plainer for you, my dear. I am glad Loftie is
coming. You girls must entertain him as well as you can. This is
Wednesday evening. I hope to be back at the latest on Monday. It is
possible even that I may transact my business sooner. Keep Loftus in a
good temper, Kate. Don't let him quarrel with Mabel, and, above all
things, do not breathe to a soul that your mother has gone to London.
Now, kiss me, dear. It is a comfort to have a grown-up daughter to lean
on."




CHAPTER V.

THE USUAL SORT OF SCRAPE.


On the following evening Loftus Bertram made his appearance at Rosendale
Manor. Catherine and Mabel were both waiting for him under the shade of
the great oak tree which commanded a view of the gate. His train was due
at Northbury at seven o'clock. He was to come by express from London,
and the girls concluded that the express would not be more than five
minutes late. Allowing for this, and allowing also for the probability
that Loftus would be extremely discontented with the style of hackney
coach which alone would await him at the little station and might in
consequence prefer to walk to the Manor, the girls calculated he might
put in an appearance on the scene at about twenty minutes past seven.
They had arranged to have dinner at a quarter to eight, and sat side by
side now, looking a little forlorn in the frocks they had grown out of,
and a little lonely, like half-fledged chicks, without their mother's
august protection.

"Loftie will wonder," said Mabel, "at mother going off to Manchester in
such a hurry."

It was the cook who had told Mabel about Manchester, Clara having
informed her.

"There's Loftus!" suddenly exclaimed Catherine. "I knew he'd walk. I
said so. There's the old shandrydan crawling after him with the luggage.
Come, Mabel. Let's fly to meet the dear old boy."

She was off and away herself before Mabel had time to scramble to her
feet. Her running was swift as a fawn's--in an instant she had reached
her brother--threw herself panting with laughter and joy against him,
and flung one arm round his neck.

"Here you are!" she said, her words coming out in gasps. "Isn't it
jolly? Such a fresh old place! Lots of strawberries--glad you'll see it
in the long days--give me a kiss, Loftie--I'm hungry for a kiss!"

"You're as wild an imp as ever," said Loftus, pinching her cheek, but
stooping and kissing her, nevertheless, with decided affection. "Why did
you put yourself out of breath, Kitty? Catch May setting her precious
little heart a-beating too fast for any fellow! Ah, here you come, lazy
Mabel. Where is the mater? In the house, I suppose? I say, Kate, what a
hole you have pitched upon for living in? I positively couldn't ride
down upon the thing they offered me at the station. It wasn't even
_clean_. Look at it, my dear girls! It holds my respectable
belongings, and not me. It's the scarecrow or ghost of the ordinary
station-fly. Could you have imagined the station-fly could have a
ghost?"

"No," retorted Mabel, "being so scarecrowy and ghost-like already.
Please, driver, take Captain Bertram's things up to the house. He heard
you speak, Loftie. These Northbury people are as touchy as if they were
somebodies. Oh, Loftus, you will be disappointed. Mother has gone to
Manchester."

"To Manchester?" retorted Loftus. "My mother away from home! Did she
know that I was coming?"

"Yes," answered Kate, "I told her about your letter last night."

"Did you show her my letter?"

"No."

"Why didn't you? If she had read it she wouldn't have gone. I said I was
in a scrape. I was coming down on purpose to see the mater. You might
have sent me a wire to say she would not be at home, or you might have
kept her at home by showing her my letter. You certainly did not act
with discretion."

"I said you'd begin to scold the minute you came here, Loftie," remarked
Mabel. "It's a way you have. I told Kitty so. See, you have made poor
Kitty quite grave."

Loftus Bertram was a tall, slim, young fellow. He was well-made,
athletic, and neat in appearance, and had that upright carriage and
bearing which is most approved of in her Majesty's army. His face was
thin and dark; he had a look of Kate, but his eyes were neither so large
nor so full; his mouth was weak, not firm, and his expression wanted the
openness which characterized Catherine's features.

He was a selfish man, but he was not unkind or ill-natured. The news
which the girls gave him of their mother's absence undoubtedly worried
and annoyed him a good deal, but like most people who are popular, and
Loftus Bertram was undoubtedly very popular, he had the power of
instantly adapting himself to the exigencies of the moment.

He laughed lightly, therefore, at Mabel's words, put his arm round his
younger sister's unformed waist, and said, in a gay voice:

"I won't scold either of you any more until I have had something to
eat."

"We live very quietly at the Manor," remarked Mabel, "Mother wants to
save, you know. She says we must keep up our refinement at any cost, but
our meals are very--" she glanced with a gay laugh at Catherine.

"Oh, by Jove! I hope you don't stint in the matter of food," exclaimed
the brother. "You'll have to drop it while I'm here, I can tell you. I
thought the mater would be up to some little game of this kind when she
buried you alive in such an out-of-the-way corner. She makes a great
mistake though, and so I shall tell her. Young girls of your age ought
to be fed up. You'll develop properly then, you won't otherwise. That's
the new dodge. All the doctors go upon it. Feed up the young to any
extent, and they'll pay for it by-and-bye. Plenty of good English beef
and mutton. What's the matter, Kate? What are you laughing in that
immoderate manner for?"

"Oh, nothing, Loftie. I may laugh, I suppose, without saying why. I wish
you would not put on that killing air, though. And you know perfectly
there is no use in laying down the law in mother's house."

The three young people were now standing in the hall, and Clara tripped
timidly forward.
