
"It is true, mother."

John glanced covertly at Julie, and saw her face pale. But she did not
tremble.

"Is it true also that the German army is near?" asked Madame Lannes,
with just the faintest quiver in her voice.

"Yes, mother. John, standing in the lantern of the Basilique du
Sacre-Coeur, saw through his glasses the flash of sunlight on the lances
of their Uhlans. A shell from one of their great guns could fall in the
suburbs of Paris."

John's covert glance was now for Madame Lannes. How would the matron who
was cast in the antique mold of Rome take such news? But she veiled her
eyes a little with her long lashes, and he could not catch the
expression there.

"I believe it is not generally known in Paris that the enemy is so very
near," said Philip, "and while I have not hesitated to tell you the full
truth, mother, I ask you and Julie not to speak of it to others."

"Of course, Philip, we would add nothing to the general alarm, which is
great enough already, and with cause. But what do you wish us to do?
Shall we remain here, or go while it is yet time to our cousins, the
Menards, at Lyons?"

Now it was the mother who, in this question of physical peril, was
showing deference to her son, the masculine head of the family. John
liked it. He remembered an old saying, and he felt it to be true, that
they did many things well in France.

Lannes glanced at young Scott before replying.

"Mother," he said, "the danger is great. I do not try to conceal it from
you. It was my intention this morning to see you and Julie safe on the
Lyons train, but John and I have beheld signs, not military, perhaps,
but of the soul, and we are firm in the belief that at the eleventh hour
we shall be saved. The German host will not enter Paris."

Madame Lannes looked fixedly at John and he felt her gaze resting like a
weight upon his face. But he responded. His faith had merely grown
stronger with the hours.

"I cannot tell why, Madame," he said, "but I believe as surely as I am
sitting here that the enemy will not enter the capital."

Then she said decisively, "Julie and I remain in our own home in Paris."




CHAPTER II

THE MESSENGER


There was little more talk. The dignified quiet of the Lannes family
remained unchanged, and John imitated it. If they could be so calm in
the face of overwhelming disaster it should be no effort for him to
remain unmoved. Yet he glanced often, though covertly, at Julie Lannes,
admiring her lovely color.

When dinner was over they returned to the room in which Madame Lannes
had received them. The dark had come already, and Suzanne had lighted
four tall candles. There was neither gas nor electricity.

"Mr. Scott will be our guest tonight, mother," said Lannes, "and
tomorrow he and I go together to the army."

John raised his hand in protest. It had not been his intention when he
came to remain until morning, but Lannes would listen to no objection;
nor would his mother.

"Since you fight for our country," she said, "you must let us give you
shelter for at least one night."

He acquiesced, and they sat a little while, talking of the things
furthest from their hearts. Julie Lannes withdrew presently, and before
long her mother followed. Lannes went to the window, and looked out over
Paris, where the diminished lights twinkled. John stood at the other
window and saw the great blur of the capital. All sounds were fused into
one steady murmur, rather soothing, like the flowing of a river.

He seemed to hear presently the distant thunder of German guns, but
reason told him it was only a trick of the imagination. Nerves keyed
high often created the illusion of reality.

"What are you thinking about, Lannes?" he asked.

"Of my mother and sister. Only the French know the French. The family
tie is powerful with us."

"I know that, Phil."

"So you do. You're an adopted child of France. Madame Lannes is a woman
of great heart, John. I am proud to be her son. I have read of your
civil war. I have read how the mothers of your young soldiers suffered
and yet were brave. None can know how much Madame, my mother, has
suffered tonight, with the Germans at the gates of Paris, and yet she
has shown no sign of it."

John was silent. He did not know what to say, but Lannes did not pursue
the subject, remaining a full five minutes at the window, and not
speaking again, until he turned away.

"John," he said then, "let's go outside and take a look about the
quarter. It's important now to watch for everything."

John was full willing. He recognized the truth of Lannes' words and he
wanted air and exercise also. A fortress was a fortress, whether one
called it a home or not, Lannes led the way and they descended to the
lower hall, where the gigantic porter was on watch.

"My friend and I are going to take a look in the streets, Antoine," said
Lannes. "Guard the house well while we are gone."

"I will," replied the man, "but will you tell me one thing, Monsieur
Philip? Do Madame Lannes and Mademoiselle Julie remain in Paris?"

"They do, Antoine, and since I leave tomorrow it will be the duty of you
and Suzanne to protect them."

"I am gratified, sir, that they do not leave the capital. I have never
known a Lannes to flee at the mere rumor of the enemy's coming."

"And I hope you never will, Antoine. I think we'll be back in an hour."

"I shall be here, sir."

He unbolted the door and Lannes and John stepped out, the cool night air
pouring in a grateful flood upon their faces. Antoine fastened the door
behind them, and John again heard the massive bolt sink into its place.

"The quarter is uncommonly quiet," said Lannes. "I suppose it has a
right to be after such a day."

Then be looked up, scanning the heavens, after the manner that had
become natural to him, a flying man.

"What do you see, Philip?" asked John.

"A sky of dark blue, plenty of stars, but no aeroplanes, Taubes or other
machines of man's making."

"I fancy that some of them are on the horizon, but too far away to be
seen by us."

"Likely as not. The Germans are daring enough and we can expect more
bombs to be dropped on Paris. Our flying corps must organize to meet
theirs. I feel the call of the air, John."

Young Scott laughed.

"I believe the earth has ceased to be your natural element," he said.
"You're happiest when you're in the _Arrow_ about a mile above our
planet."

Lannes laughed also, and with appreciation. The friendship between the
two young men was very strong, and it had in it all the quality of
permanence. Their very unlikeness in character and temperament made them
all the better comrades. What one could not do the other could.

As they walked along now they said but little. Each was striving to read
what he could in that great book, the streets of Paris. John believed
Lannes had not yet told him his whole mission. He knew that in their
short stay in Paris Philip had spent an hour in the office of the
military governor of the city, and his business must be of great
importance to require an hour from a man who carried such a fearful
weight of responsibility. But whatever Lannes' secret might be, it was
his own and he had no right to pry into it. If the time came for his
comrade to tell it he would do so.

When they reached the Seine the city did not seem so quiet. They heard
the continuous sound of marching troops and people were still departing
through the streets toward the country or the provincial cities. The
flight went on by night as well as day, and John again felt the
overwhelming pity of it.

He wondered what the French generals and their English allies would do?
Did they have any possible way of averting this terrible crisis? They
had met nothing but defeat, and the vast German army had crashed,
unchecked, through everything from the border almost to the suburbs of
Paris.

They stood in the Place Valhubert at the entrance to the Pont
d'Austerlitz, and watched a regiment crossing the river, the long blue
coats and red trousers of the men outlined against the white body of the
bridge. The soldiers were short, they looked little to John, but they
were broad of chest and they marched splendidly with a powerful swinging
stride.

"From the Midi," said Lannes. "Look how dark they are! France is called
a Latin nation, but I doubt whether the term is correct. These men of
the Midi though are the real Latins. We of northern France, I suspect,
are more Teutonic than anything else, but we are all knitted together in
one race, heart and soul, which are stronger ties than blood."

"We are to go early in the morning, are we not, Philip?"

"Yes, early. The _Arrow_ is at the hangar, all primed and eager for a
flight, fearful of growing rusty from a long rest."

"I believe you actually look upon your plane as a human being."

"A human being, yes, and more. No human being could carry me above the
clouds. No human being could obey absolutely and without question the
simplest touch of my hand. The _Arrow_ is not human, John, it is
superhuman. You have seen its exploits."

The dark emitted a figure that advanced toward them, and took the shape
of a man with black hair, a short close beard and an intelligent face.
He approached John and Lannes and looked at them closely.

"Mr. Scott!" he exclaimed, with eagerness, "I did not know what had
become of you. I was afraid you were lost in one of the battles!"

"Why, it's Weber!" said John, "our comrade of the flight in the
automobile! And I was afraid that you too, were dead!"

The two shook hands with great heartiness and Lannes joined in the
reunion. He too at once liked Weber, who always made the impression of
courage and quickness. He wore a new uniform, olive in color with dark
blue threads through it, and it became him, setting off his trim,
compact figure.

"How did you get here, Mr. Weber?" asked John.

"I scarcely know," he replied. "My duties are to a certain extent those
of a messenger, but I was caught in the last battle, wounded slightly,
and separated from the main French force. The little company which I had
formed tried to break through the German columns, but they were all
killed or captured except myself, and maybe two or three others. I hid
in a wood, slept a night there, and then reached Paris to see what is
going to happen. Ah, it is terrible! terrible! my comrades! The Germans
are advancing in five great armies, a million and a half strong, and no
troops were ever before equipped so magnificently."

"Do you know positively that they have a million and a half?" asked
Lannes.

"I did not count them," replied Weber, smiling a little, "but I have
heard from many certain sources that such are their numbers. I fear,
gentlemen, that Paris is doomed."

"Scott and I don't think so," said Lannes firmly. "We've gained new
courage today."

Weber was silent for a few moments. Then he said, giving Lannes his
title as an officer:

"I've heard of you, Lieutenant Lannes. Who does not know the name of
France's most daring aviator? And doubtless you have information which
is unknown to me. It is altogether likely that one who pierces the air
like an eagle should bear messages between generals of the first rank."

Lannes did not answer, but looked at Weber, who smiled.

"Perhaps our trades are not so very different," said the Alsatian, "but
you shoot through clouds while I crawl on the ground. You have a great
advantage of me in method."

Lannes smiled back. The little tribute was pleasing to the dramatic
instinct so strong in him.

"You and I, Mr. Weber," he said, "know enough never to speak of what
we're going to do. Now, we'll bid you good night and wish you good luck.
I'd like to be a prophet, even for a day only, and tell what the morrow
would bring."

"So do I," said Weber, "and I must hurry on my own errand. It may not
be of great importance, but is vital to me that I do it."

He slid away in the darkness and both John and Lannes spoke well of him
as they returned to the house. Picard admitted them.

"May I ask, sir, if there is any news that favors France?" he said to
Philip.

"Not yet, my good Antoine, but it is surely coming."

John heard the giant Frenchman smother a sigh, but he made no comment,
and walked softly with Lannes to the little room high up that had been
assigned to him. Here when he was alone with his candle he looked around
curiously.

The room was quite simple, not containing much furniture, in truth,
nothing of any note save on the wall a fine picture of the great Marshal
Lannes, Napoleon's dauntless fighter, and stern republican, despite the
ducal title that he took. It was a good portrait, painted perhaps by
some great artist, and John holding up the candle, looked at it a long
time.

He thought he could trace some likeness to Philip. Lannes' face was
always stern, in repose, far beyond his years, although when he became
animated it had all the sunniness of youth. But he noticed now that he
had the same tight lips of the Marshal, and the same unfaltering eyes.

"Duke of Montebello!" said John to himself. "Well, you won that title
grandly, and while the younger Lannes may do as well, if the chance
comes to him, the new heroes of France will be neither dukes nor
princes."

Then, after removing all the stiff pillows, inclines, foot pieces and
head pieces that make European beds so uncomfortable, he slipped between
the covers, and slid quickly into a long and soothing sleep, from which
he was awakened apparently about a minute later by Lannes himself, who
stood over him, dressed fully, tall and serious.

"Why, I just got into bed!" exclaimed John.

"You came in here a full seven hours ago. Open your window and you'll
see the dawn creeping over Paris."

"Thank you, but you can open it yourself. I never fool with a European
window. I haven't time to master all the mechanism, inside, outside and
between, to say nothing of the various layers of curtains, full length,
half length and otherwise. Nothing that I can conceive of is better
fitted than the European window to keep out light and air."

Lannes smiled.

"I see that you're in fine feather this morning," he said, "I'll open it
for you."

John jumped up and dressed quickly, while Lannes, with accustomed hand,
laid back shutters and curtains.

"Now, shove up the window," exclaimed John as he wielded towel and
brush. "A little fresh air in a house won't hurt you; it won't hurt
