that rested upon all.  The remarkable part of it was how Miss Marlowe
could believe she had left her revolver in her home when it was in the
pocket of her dress, where, it would seem, she ought to have felt it
while walking across the lawn to the boat, even if she had forgotten to
examine that most natural receptacle for it when she first missed the
weapon.

"It is the most stupid thing I ever did," she declared.  "I meant to
keep it in my hand while coming from the house, and, awaking to the
fact that it was not there, did not stop to examine my pocket.  It is
too bad."

"We have gained an additional means of defense," observed Mr. Turner,
"and that may be decisive before we are through with this business."

Now that all were together again each was impatient to be on the move.
Wharton and Turner began using the poles with the skill shown some time
before, and once more the unwieldy craft swung slowly down the Ganges,
with all on board alert for the first sign of their enemies.  The women
were advised to remain in the small cabin, where they would be safe
against stealthy shots.

As the boat crept under the shadows along shore the spirits of all
improved, for it seemed that with every rod placed behind, them the
danger was diminished, and by and by would vanish altogether.

"That, however, cannot be," said the doctor to Jack Everson, as they
sat a little apart from the rest, near the bow of the craft.  "In
truth, I see but one possible escape for this party."

"What is that?"

"I have already referred to it.  It will take us weeks to reach
Calcutta on the east or Bombay on the west, and between us and each of
these points the hell fire will rage for months to come.  To go south
is equally suicidal, since it would take us into the heart of the
insurrection.  I repeat that there is but one thing to be done: that is
to push northward, as I said, until we reach a people too far removed
to be affected by this deviltry."

"To find a simple people where our knowledge of medicine will cause us
to be looked upon as superior beings.  I have discovered a remedy for
the bite of a cobra which will stand one in good stead, should a native
be bitten.  They believe, you know, as does the rest of the world, that
the bite of this serpent is certain death.  But I have discovered a
remedy, the necessary drugs of which I carry in this case," touching
the leather case strapped to his back.

"Beyond all doubt.  You have tested this remedy of yours?"

"I have, twice."

"Upon man or brute?"

"Upon both."




CHAPTER XI.

A COLLISION.

Although the two physicians were deeply interested in the question of
toxicology they could not forget their situation and its perils.  The
craft had nearly completed its half mile to the mouth of the tributary
which it was intended to ascend, when the polemen, pausing for a
moment's rest, whispered that they heard the sound of paddles again.

"_There they are_!"

It was Jack Everson who uttered the exclamation, loud enough for all to
hear.  He pointed down stream as he spoke, and every one perceived the
dreaded boat returning.

Although nearer at hand than before, it seemed to be following the
course of the river, and there was hope that it would again pass
without discovering the shrinking ones so near land.

When first observed the other boat was fifty yards out and not quite so
far down stream.  Moving against the current its progress was slower
than before, but its advance was plainly perceptible.  The craft of the
white people had lost the momentum imparted by the poling, and was now
controlled only by the current, which was so sluggish close to the land
that the motion was hardly noticeable.

The hopes of our friends steadily rose until the other boat was almost
directly abreast.  It would seem that if the occupants intended
attacking they would have veered inward before this, but there could be
no assurance so long as they remained visible.

Every one started when the gaunt, sloping figure suddenly became
upright at the prow of the boat and stood motionless.  He had ceased
using the pole that he had been plying with so much vigor.  At the same
moment the noise of the paddles ceased, proving that the men
controlling them had also stopped work.  What could it mean?

No one of the white people stirred or whispered.  Could they have done
so they would have checked the beating of their hearts through fear of
being betrayed.  Surely something had awakened the suspicion of the
natives.

Suddenly some one spoke on board the craft.  The voice was audible, but
the doctor, who was a master of Hindoostanee, could not catch what was
said.  At the same instant a splash was heard, and the lank form bent
over, as he pressed the long pole against the bottom of the river and
resumed his slow walking toward the stern.  The noise of paddles, too,
was heard again.  The craft had resumed its progress, and for an
instant every one believed it was about to pass by.  Then Jack Everson
said:

"By heaven! they're coming for us!"

All saw that the boat was swinging around so as to head toward them.

"Into the cabin, quick!" commanded the doctor, and the women quickly
scrambled out of sight, while the men lay down, so as to screen their
bodies as much as possible.

"It won't do to let them come too near," added the physician.  "Try to
make every shot tell."

As he spoke he took the best aim he could and fired.  Jack Everson was
but a moment behind him, and Anderson discharged his gun almost
simultaneously.




CHAPTER XII.

A WHITE MAN'S VICTORY.

It was clear that the reception was a stunning surprise to the Asiatics
in the other boat.  In times of confusion and terror strong men often
sit dazed and meekly submit to massacre when sturdy resistance would
leave a far different tale to tell.  Such was the case at Meerut, at
Delhi, at Cawnpore, at Lucknow and scores of places where the human
fiends revelled in massacre and crime.

But here, where evidently the same submissiveness was expected, the
miscreants were fired upon before they had discharged a single shot
themselves.  Not only that, but the Caucasians kept the thing up.  This
was contrary to all rule and precedent.

If, however, the white men did not wait to be slain, neither did the
dusky barbarians sit still and allow themselves to be shot down.  They
ceased paddling and appealed to their guns, whose bullets began
whistling about the heads of the defenders in the other boat.

Who of our friends did it will never be known, but one of them
perforated the gaunt scoundrel who, with his form bent over, was
pushing the pole while he stalked the length of the boat, returning
again to the prow to repeat the performance.  The fellow emitted a
screech like a wounded tiger and leaped several feet in air, coming
down on the gunwale, over which he toppled into the water and was seen
no more.  It was the spirited defiance of the white men that told.
Screening themselves as best they could they continued firing, Jack
Everson occasionally adding a shot from his revolver by way of variety.
The conformation of the other boat and its crowded condition prevented
the natives from sheltering themselves as did those who were using them
as targets.  In short, the wretches were getting the worst of the
business, and it did not take them long to learn the fact.  Left
without control, their boat began drifting with the current, which
being stronger than along shore gradually carried it down stream and
out of sight.  So long, however, as it was visible its occupants
continued firing, while the white people did still better, for they
sent several shots after their enemies when they could see nothing and
fired wholly by guess.

There could be no question that the promptness of Dr. Marlowe and the
vigor of the resistance threw their foes into a sort of panic from
which they did not recover until beyond range.  They had been taught a
lesson that they were sure to remember for a long time; though, when
our friends came to think the matter over, after finding no one of them
had been hurt, they could not escape the belief that the consequences
were certain to be of the most serious nature to themselves, and in
this conclusion, sad to say, they were not mistaken.




CHAPTER XIII.

UNDER THE BANK.

A few minutes later an open space appeared in front of the boat.  It
was the month of the tributary flowing into the Ganges from the left or
north, and was more than a hundred yards across.  Since it was
necessary to stem the current in order to take advantage of this
refuge, the doctor contemplated it with misgiving, for the work of
poling it up stream promised to be laborious.  He had not forgotten his
original plan of abandoning the boat and striking across the country on
foot, taking advantage of the less-frequented roads and paths that were
well known to him.  He was relieved, however, to find the flow so
languid that it was easy to make headway against it.

"I have never followed this stream far," he remarked, "and, therefore,
have less knowledge of it than the rest of the country, but my
impression is that it cannot serve us long."

"It will be time enough to leave the boat and take to the woods when we
can go no further," said Jack Everson; "but we cannot get away from the
main stream too soon."

This was self-evident.  It was not likely that the natives after their
decisive repulse would abandon their purpose of massacring the party,
but they would be more guarded in what they did and probably secure
reinforcements, an easy thing to do when the sanguinary wretches
everywhere were thirsting for victims.

Jack had seized one of the poles, and he and young Wharton plied them
with so much sturdiness that the heavy craft made better progress than
at any time since it was used as a vehicle of safety.  The course of
the tributary was winding, and our friends had not gone far when they
were shut out from the sight of any persons passing up and down the
main river, even if close to the northern bank.

Would the natives suspect the course taken by the whites?  That was the
all-important question that must soon be answered.  After searching up
and down the Ganges without success, it was likely they would penetrate
the stratagem and follow them, in which event the fugitives would be in
a critical situation, since the straightness of the stream and the
wooded shores would place them at much greater disadvantage than if
they remained upon the Ganges.

When the boat had ascended the tributary for perhaps an eighth of a
mile it was deemed safe to lessen the work of poling.  Careful
listening failed to detect any sound of pursuit, and there was ground
for hoping that their enemies neither knew nor suspected what had been
done.

Several facts had become apparent.  The densely wooded shores offered
excellent concealment.  By running the boat beneath the dense branches
and among the heavy vegetation the keenest-eyed Asiatics might pass up
or down stream almost within arm's length without suspecting its
presence.  But the tributary had perceptibly narrowed and its current
was swifter than at the mouth.  All this pointed to the truth of what
Dr. Marlowe suspected--the stream could not serve them much further.

The night was now so far advanced that the women took the advice of
their friends and withdrew to the cabin for slumber.  Their quarters
were cramped, but they made themselves fairly comfortable.  The night
was cooler than the day, but only sufficiently so to be pleasant.  It
was not deemed probable that anything would be seen of their enemies
before the morrow, and perhaps not even then.

Dr. Marlowe insisted upon taking his turn in poling, but since there
were four vigorous men without him, they would not consent.  When two
had toiled for an hour or more, they gave way to the other couple, and
the progress thus continued without interruption, while the time slowly
dragged along.  The resting spells gave each the opportunity for sleep,
thus husbanding their vigor for the morrow.  Finding that there was
nothing to which he could turn his hand, the physician reclined at the
bow and soon joined the others in dreamland.

It was probably one o'clock when Jack Everson, who had been sleeping
for nearly an hour, was awakened by a gentle shaking of his shoulder.
Opening his eyes and looking up he saw Wharton bending over him.

"All right," remarked the American; "I'm ready for my turn," and he
rose, yawning, to his feet.

"I think we had better rest until morning."

"Why?"

"The current has become so rapid that it is hard to make progress; this
stream can't be of much further use to us."

It needed but a glance around in the gloom to see that it was as his
friend had declared.  The boat was so close to the left-hand shore that
it was held motionless by Anderson at the bow, who gripped an
overhanging branch, with one hand.  The water rippled around the front
of the craft, and when Jack dipped the end of one of the poles into the
current it swept downward at a rate that astonished him.

"I esteem your advice good," he said, "but it will not do to leave the
boat in sight."

With the help of the limbs and the use of the poles it was easy to
force the craft under the bank, where it was screened from observation.
Then it was secured in place against drifting and all work for the time
was over.

Wharton and Jack Everson were the only persons awake.  The women had
been sleeping for several hours, while Anderson and Turner had long
since joined the venerable doctor in the realms of unconsciousness.
The two young men sat down where they could speak in low tones without
being overheard.

"It won't do for all of us to sleep at the same time," remarked Jack;
"the scoundrels may be creeping up stream after us."

"That is hardly possible; I am sure that for the present we are as safe
as if in the heart of London."

"I cannot believe as you do; since I have just enjoyed an hour's sleep
I will act as sentinel until daybreak.  I can easily keep awake for the
few hours that remain."

"As you think best, though I am sure it is an unnecessary precaution."

"We must not forget that there are perils from the jungle as well as
from the river.  There is no saying what wild beast may pay us a visit."

Inasmuch as Jack could not be dissuaded from his purpose, and Wharton
began to suspect his friend was half right, the question was decided.
Wharton stretched out on the deck, falling asleep almost immediately,
and Jack thus found himself the only one with his senses at command and
with the safety of the others dependent upon him.

He took his place near the cabin, where the women were slumbering, with
his breechloader in hand.  He was never more wide awake and was sure he
would remain so for hours to come.  Wharton had offered to divide the
duty with him in acting as sentinel, but our hero preferred to keep the
matter in his own hands.  He was sure his friend did not realize the
full peril of their situation.

The stillness was broken only by the peculiar cries in the jungle,
which it may be said were never wholly silent.  First on the right,
then on the left, then from the front, and again from different points
on both sides of the stream he heard the sounds, some faint and far
away, with others alarmingly close.  The hoarse snarl of the tiger, the
finer cry of the leopard, the squawking of night birds, with other
noises that he could not identify, were continually in the air.  Had
they been heard for the first time he would have been in a tremor of
fear and nervousness; but man soon becomes accustomed to danger, and
the nearest must come still nearer to cause his pulse an additional
throb.

Jack Everson was sensible that through this medley of strange noises
there was one sound that was continuous and never changing.  So faint
that at first he and Wharton failed to notice it, it now impressed
itself too distinctly upon his consciousness for him to be mistaken.
It was a low, steady hum or moaning, such as the traveller hears when
miles inland from the ocean.  He could not identify it, though he made
several guesses, and was still speculating unsatisfactorily, when he
received a startling reminder that there was a new peril at his very
feet.

The first notice was a faint purring sound, as if made by a gigantic
cat, accompanied by a rustling of the vegetation scarcely a dozen feet
away.  He instantly grasped his rifle with both hands and was alert.
It was impossible to distinguish ordinary objects in the gloom, but
suddenly two small circles glittered with a greenish light and the
purring was succeeded by a low, cavernous growl.  Then it all became
clear to him: a royal Bengal tiger was stealing upon the boat and was
probably gathering himself for a leap at that very moment.

Had all the occupants been asleep the frightful terror would have
played sad havoc with them before they could defend themselves.  As it
was, it looked as if more than one fatality must follow his attack.

But for that phosphorescent gleam of the brute's eyes Jack Everson
would not have been able to locate him, but the glow of the two objects
defined the outlines and locality of the horrible thing as unmistakably
as if the sun were overhead.  The occasion was one in which everything
depended upon promptness.  The tiger was likely to shift his position
and turn his head so that the eyes would fail to show.

Jack reflected that there probably were a number of spots in the
anatomy of the jungle terror that were more vulnerable than others;
that a well-aimed bullet might be instantly fatal in one, while able to
inflict only a partial wound in another.  Be that as it may, he was
sure that a conical bullet driven between the eyes and through bone,
muscle and brain by a rifle that could kill a man at the distance of a
mile must do effective work when that brain was not a dozen feet
distant from the muzzle of the weapon.  At any rate, there was no time
for inquiry and he did not hesitate.

Aiming for a point midway between the gleaming orbs he pressed the
trigger.  It takes a well-aimed weapon to kill a royal Bengal tiger,
even at a short distance, but Jack's rifle was well aimed.  The tiny
sphere of lead darted through the brain and along the spinal marrow as
if fired with the vicious energy of a charge of dynamite.

It so happened that the tiger was in the act of making his graceful but
fearful leap that was to land him upon the breast of the young man, who
had risen to his feet just before firing.  The check at that instant
produced a queer result, the like of which is not often seen.  The
shock of the bullet crashing into the head of the muscular beast at the
instant he was calling into play his prodigious strength intensified
that strength to a sudden and astonishing degree.  The consequence was
that the tiger, instead of making the leap he intended, made one twice
as great and overshot the mark.  From out the gloom the beautiful
sinewy body, of which only a glimpse could be caught, emerged as if
fired from the throat of a Columbiad and, curving over the shoulders of
the man and the boat, dropped into the stream with a splash that sent
the water flying in every direction.

Beyond the line of shadow, where the faint moonlight fell upon him, the
tiger was seen to be a beast of extraordinary size.  He emitted one
rasping snarl while sailing through the air, but was already dead when
he fell into the water, where it could not be seen he had made a
struggle.  The sinewy body dipped out of sight, bobbed up again and the
next minute was swept beyond view by the rapid current.

Rather strangely, not one of the women was awakened by the report of
the rifle so near them, and of the men Dr. Marlowe and Anderson were
the only ones who rose to a sitting posture and anxiously inquired the
cause of the firing.

"I discovered an animal prowling near the boat," replied Jack, who
thought it well not to disturb them with the whole truth, "and I winged
him."

"You are sure you killed him?" asked the doctor; "most likely it was a
tiger."

"I am quite sure of that, and am just as sure that, considered strictly
as a tiger, he is of no further account.  I made another bull's-eye in
his case."

"How many is that?" asked the physician, entering into the spirit of
the jest.

"My fifth, counting only those that I am sure of."

"You are doing well; keep it up; let the good work go on," replied the
elder, again adjusting himself for slumber, quite content to leave the
valiant young American in charge of the boat and its occupants.  Jack
had it in mind to question him about that distant murmuring sound that
puzzled him, but when ready to do so he discovered that the doctor was
again asleep and he did not disturb him.

The fact that one denizen of the jungle had paid the boat a visit was
ground for looking for a call from another.  Jack remained, therefore,
on the alert, and though under ordinary circumstances he would have
fallen asleep he kept wide awake until the growing light in the sky
told of the coming day.  Before the sun was fairly above the horizon
all were astir.  They bathed faces and hands in the roiled water and
