animal did not chastise them in the manner he might have done, and
seemed to think they were too contemptible to be angry with them. But he
took other means to punish them for their cruelty. He filled his trunk
with water of a dirty quality, and advancing towards them in his
ordinary manner, spouted the whole of the puddle over them. The
punishment was highly applauded by those who witnessed it, and the poor
cobblers were laughed at for their pains."

[Illustration: THE ELEPHANT AND THE COBBLERS--Page 68.]

"Ha! ha! ha! He must have been a very knowing animal, Uncle Thomas. I
dare say, the cobblers behaved better in future."

"I dare say they would, Boys. Here is another story of the same
description, but the trickster did not escape so easily."

"A person in the island of Ceylon, who lived near a place where
elephants were daily led to water, and often sat at the door of his
house, used occasionally to give one of these animals some fig leaves, a
food to which elephants are very partial. Once he took it into his head
to play one of the elephants a trick. He wrapped a stone round with fig
leaves, and said to the carnac, 'This time I will give him a stone to
eat, and see how it will agree with him.' The carnac answered, 'that the
elephant would not be such a fool as to swallow a stone.' The man,
however, reached the stone to the elephant, who, taking it with his
trunk, immediately let it fall to the ground. 'You see,' said the
keeper, 'that I was right;' and without further words, drove away his
elephants. After they were watered, he was conducting them again to
their stable. The man who had played the elephant the trick was still
sitting at his door, when, before he was aware, the animal ran at him,
threw his trunk around his body, and, dashing him to the ground,
trampled him immediately to death."




CHAPTER IV.

     Uncle Thomas introduces to the Notice of the Young Folks the
     Ettrick Shepherd's Stories about Sheep; and tells them some
     Interesting Stories about the Goat, and its Peculiarities.


"I dare say, Boys, you have not forgotten the Ettrick Shepherd's
wonderful stories about his dogs. Some of those which he relates about
sheep are equally remarkable, and as he tells them in the same pleasing
style, I think I cannot do better than read to you the chapter in 'The
Shepherd's Calendar' which he devotes to this animal."

"Thank you, Uncle Thomas. We remember very well his stories about Sirrah
and Hector and Chieftain, and the old Shepherd's grief at parting with
his dog."

"That's right, Boys; I am pleased to think that you do not forget what I
tell you. But listen to the Ettrick Shepherd."

"The sheep has scarcely any marked character save that of natural
affection, of which it possesses a very great share. It is otherwise a
stupid indifferent animal, having few wants, and fewer expedients. The
old black-faced, or forest breed, have far more powerful capabilities
than any of the finer breeds that have been introduced into Scotland,
and, therefore, the few anecdotes that I have to relate shall be
confined to them.

"So strong is the attachment of the sheep to the place where they have
been bred, that I have heard of their returning from Yorkshire to the
Highlands. I was always somewhat inclined to suspect that they might
have been lost by the way, but it is certain, however, that when once
one or a few sheep get away from the rest of their acquaintances, they
return homeward with great eagerness and perseverance. I have lived
beside a drove-road the better part of my life, and many stragglers have
I seen bending their steps northward in the spring of the year. A
shepherd rarely sees these journeyers twice; if he sees them, and stops
them in the morning, they are gone long before night; and if he sees
them at night they will be gone many miles before morning. This strong
attachment to the place of their nativity is much more predominant in
our old aboriginal breed than in any of the other kinds with which I am
acquainted.

"The most singular instance that I know of, to be quite well
authenticated, is that of a black ewe, that returned with her lamb from
a farm in the head of Glen-Lyon, to the farm of Harehope, in Tweeddale,
and accomplished the journey in nine days. She was soon missed by her
owner, and a shepherd was despatched in pursuit of her, who followed her
all the way to Crieff, where he turned, and gave her up. He got
intelligence of her all the way, and every one told him that she
absolutely persisted in travelling on,--she would not be turned,
regarding neither sheep nor shepherd by the way. Her lamb was often far
behind, and she had constantly to urge it on by impatient bleating. She
unluckily came to Stirling on the morning of a great annual fair, about
the end of May, and judging it imprudent to venture through the crowd
with her lamb, she halted on the north side of the town the whole day,
where she was seen by hundreds, lying close by the road-side. But next
morning, when all became quiet, a little after the break of day, she was
observed stealing quietly through the town, in apparent terror of the
dogs that were prowling about the street. The last time she was seen on
the road was at a toll-bar near St. Ninian's; the man stopped her,
thinking she was a strayed animal, and that some one would claim her.
She tried several times to break through by force when he opened the
gate, but he always prevented her, and at length she turned patiently
back. She had found some means of eluding him, however, for home she
came on a Sabbath morning, early in June; and she left the farm of
Lochs, in Glen-Lyon, either on the Thursday afternoon, or Friday
morning, a week and two days before. The farmer of Harehope paid the
Highland farmer the price of her, and she remained on her native farm
till she died of old age, in her seventeenth year.

"With regard to the natural affection of this animal, the instances that
might be mentioned are without number. When one loses its sight in a
flock of sheep, it is rarely abandoned to itself in that hapless and
helpless state. Some one always attaches itself to it, and by bleating
calls it back from the precipice, the lake, the pool, and all dangers
whatever. There is a disease among sheep, called by shepherds the
Breakshugh, a deadly sort of dysentery, which is as infectious as fire,
in a flock. Whenever a sheep feels itself seized by this, it instantly
withdraws from all the rest, shunning their society with the greatest
care; it even hides itself, and is often very hard to be found. Though
this propensity can hardly be attributed to natural instinct, it is, at
all events, a provision of nature of the greatest kindness and
beneficence.

"Another manifest provision of nature with regard to these animals is,
that the more inhospitable the land is on which they feed, the greater
their kindness and attention to their young. I once herded two years on
a wild and bare farm called Willenslee, on the border of Mid-Lothian,
and of all the sheep I ever saw, these were the kindest and most
affectionate to their lambs. I was often deeply affected at scenes which
I witnessed. We had one very hard winter, so that our sheep grew lean in
the spring, and the thwarter-ill (a sort of paralytic affection) came
among them, and carried off a number. Often have I seen these poor
victims, when fallen down to rise no more, even when unable to lift
their heads from the ground, holding up the leg, to invite the starving
lamb to the miserable pittance that the udder still could supply. I had
never seen aught more painfully affecting.

"It is well known that it is a custom with shepherds, when a lamb dies,
if the mother have a sufficiency of milk, to bring her from the hill,
and put another lamb to her. This is done by putting the skin of the
dead lamb upon the living one; the ewe immediately acknowledges the
relationship, and after the skin has warmed on it, so as to give it
something of the smell of her own progeny, and it has sucked her two or
three times, she accepts and nourishes it as her own ever after. Whether
it is from joy at this apparent reanimation of her young one, or because
a little doubt remains on her mind which she would fain dispel, I cannot
decide; but, for a number of days, she shows far more fondness, by
bleating and caressing over this one, than she did formerly over the one
that was really her own. But this is not what I wanted to explain; it
was, that such sheep as thus lose their lambs must be driven to a house
with dogs, so that the lamb may be put to them; for they will only take
it in a dark confined place. But at Willenslee, I never needed to drive
home a sheep by force, with dogs, or in any other way than the
following: I found every ewe, of course, standing hanging her head over
her dead lamb; and having a piece of twine with me for the purpose, I
tied that to the lamb's neck or foot, and trailing it along, the ewe
followed me into any house or fold that I choose to lead her. Any of
them would have followed me in that way for miles, with her nose close
on the lamb, which she never quitted for a moment, except to chase my
dog, which she would not suffer to walk near me. I often, out of
curiosity, led them in to the side of the kitchen fire by this means,
into the midst of servants and dogs; but the more that dangers
multiplied around the ewe, she clung the closer to her dead offspring,
and thought of nothing whatever but protecting it. One of the two years,
while I remained on this farm, a severe blast of snow came on by night,
about the latter end of April, which destroyed several scores of our
lambs; and as we had not enow of twins and odd lambs for the mothers
that had lost theirs, of course we selected the best ewes, and put lambs
to them. As we were making the distribution, I requested of my master
to spare me a lamb for a hawked ewe which he knew, and which was
standing over a dead lamb in the head of the Hope, about four miles from
the house. He would not do it, but bid me let her stand over her lamb
for a day or two, and perhaps a twin would be forthcoming. I did so, and
faithfully she did stand to her charge; so faithfully, that I think the
like never was equalled by any of the woolly race. I visited her every
morning and evening, and for the first eight days never found her above
two or three yards from the lamb; and always, as I went my rounds, she
eyed me long ere I came near her, and kept tramping with her feet, and
whistling through her nose, to frighten away the dog; he got a regular
chase twice a day as I passed by: but, however excited and fierce a ewe
may be, she never offers any resistance to mankind, being perfectly and
meekly passive to them. The weather grew fine and warm, and the dead
lamb soon decayed, which the body of a dead lamb does particularly
soon: but still this affectionate and desolate creature kept hanging
over the poor remains with an attachment that seemed to be nourished by
hopelessness. It often drew the tears from my eyes to see her hanging
with such fondness over a few bones, mixed with a small portion of wool.
For the first fortnight she never quitted the spot, and for another week
she visited it every morning and evening, uttering a few kindly and
heart-piercing bleats each time; till at length every remnant of her
offspring vanished, mixing with the soil, or wafted away by the winds."

"Poor creature! Uncle Thomas, that was very affecting."

"So much for the Ettrick Shepherd. I will now tell you a story about a
remarkable instance of sagacity in a sheep, of which I myself was an
eye-witness.

"One evening, as I was enjoying a walk through some verdant pastures,
which were plentifully dotted with sheep, my attention was attracted by
the motions of one which repeatedly came close up to me, bleating in a
piteous manner, and after looking expressively in my face, ran off
towards a brook which meandered through the midst of the pastures. At
first I took little notice of the creature, but as her entreaties became
importunate, I followed her. Delighted at having at length attracted my
notice, she ran with all her speed, frequently looking back. When I
reached the spot, I discovered the cause of all her anxiety; her lamb
had unfortunately fallen into the brook, whose steep banks prevented it
from making its escape. Fortunately the water, though up to the little
creature's back, was not sufficient to drown it. I rescued it with much
pleasure, and to the great gratification of its affectionate mother, who
licked it with her tongue to dry it, now and then skipping about, and
giving vent to her joy and gratitude in most expressive gambols.

"Though differing in many respects from the sheep, the goat bears so
strong a resemblance to that animal, that, now that I am speaking of it,
I may as well tell you a story or two about the goat. It will save my
returning to it afterwards."

"Very well, Uncle Thomas."

"The goat is in every respect more fitted for a life of savage liberty
than the sheep. It is of a more lively disposition, and is possessed of
a greater degree of instinct. It readily attaches itself to man, and
seems sensible of his caresses. It delights in climbing precipices, and
going to the very edge of danger, and it is often seen suspended upon an
eminence overhanging the sea, upon a very little base, and sometimes
even sleeps there in security. Nature has in some measure fitted it for
traversing these declivities with ease; the hoof is hollow underneath,
with sharp edges, so that it walks as securely on the ridge of a house
as on the level ground.

"When once reduced to a state of domestication, the goat seldom resumes
its original wildness. A good many years ago, an English vessel
happening to touch at the island of Bonavista, two negroes came and
offered the sailors as many goats as they chose to take away. Upon the
captain expressing his surprise at this offer, the negroes assured him
that there were but twelve persons on the island, and that the goats had
multiplied in such a manner as even to become a nuisance: they added,
that far from giving any trouble to capture them, they followed the few
inhabitants that were left with a sort of obstinacy, and became even
troublesome by their tameness. The celebrated traveller Dr. Clarke gives
a very curious account of a goat, which was trained to exhibit various
amusing feats of dexterity.

"We met, (says he,) an Arab with a goat which he led about the country
to exhibit, in order to gain a livelihood for itself and its owner. He
had taught this animal, while he accompanied its movements with a song,
to mount upon little cylindrical blocks of wood, placed successively one
above another, and in shape resembling the dice-box belonging to a
backgammon table. In this manner the goat stood, first, on the top of
two; afterwards, of three, four, five, and six, until it remained
balanced upon the summit of them all, elevated several feet above the
ground, and with its four feet collected upon a single point, without
throwing down the disjointed fabric on which it stood. The diameter of
the upper cylinder, on which its four feet alternately remained until
the Arab had ended his ditty, was only two inches, and the length of
each six inches. The most curious part of the performance occurred
afterwards; for the Arab, to convince us of the animal's attention to
the turn of the air, interrupted the _Da Capo_; and, as often as he did
this, the goat tottered, appeared uneasy, and, upon his becoming
suddenly silent, in the middle of his song, it fell to the ground.

[Illustration: THE ARAB AND HIS GOAT--Page 84.]

"Like the sheep, the goat possesses great natural affection for its
young. In its defence it boldly repels the attacks of the most
formidable opponents. I remember a little story which finely illustrates
this instinctive courage.

"A person having missed one of his goats when his flock was taken home
at night, being afraid the wanderer would get among the young trees in
his nursery, two boys, wrapped in their plaids, were ordered to watch
all night. The morning had but faintly dawned, when they set out in
search of her. They at length discovered her on a pointed rock at a
considerable distance, and hastening to the spot perceived her standing
watching her kid with the greatest anxiety, and defending it from a fox.
The enemy turned round and round to lay hold of his prey, but the goat
presented her horns in every direction. The youngest boy was despatched
for assistance to attack the fox, and the eldest, hallooing and throwing
up stones, sought to intimidate it as he climbed to rescue his charge.
The fox seemed well aware that the child could not execute his threats;
he looked at him one instant, and then renewed the assault, till, quite
impatient, he made a sudden effort to seize the kid. The whole three
suddenly disappeared, and were found at the bottom of the precipice.
The goat's horns were darted into the back of the fox; the kid lay
stretched beside her. It is supposed that the fox had fixed his teeth in
the kid, for its neck was lacerated; but that when the faithful mother
inflicted a death wound upon her mortal enemy he probably staggered, and
brought his victims with him over the rock.

"There is another story of the goat, which places its gratitude and
affection in such an interesting light, that I am sure it will delight
you:--

"After the final suppression of the Scottish Rebellion of 1715, by the
decisive Battle of Preston, a gentleman who had taken a very active
share in it escaped to the West Highlands to the residence of a female
relative, who afforded him an asylum. As in consequence of the strict
search which was made after the ringleaders, it was soon judged unsafe
for him to remain in the house of his friend, he was conducted to a
cavern in a sequestered situation, and furnished with a supply of food.
The approach to this lonely abode consisted of a small aperture,
through which he crept, dragging his provisions along with him. A little
way from the mouth of the cave the roof became elevated, but on
advancing, an obstacle obstructed his progress. He soon perceived that,
whatever it might be, the object was a living one, but unwilling to
strike at a venture with his dirk, he stooped down, and discovered a
goat and her kid lying on the ground. The animal was evidently in great
pain, and feeling her body and limbs, he ascertained that one of her
legs had been fractured. He bound it up with his garter, and offered her
some of his bread; but she refused to eat, and stretched out her tongue,
as if intimating that her mouth was parched with thirst. He gave her
water, which she drank greedily, and then she ate the bread. At midnight
he ventured from the cave, pulled a quantity of grass and the tender
branches of trees, and carried them to the poor sufferer, which received
them with demonstrations of gratitude.

"The only thing which this fugitive had to arrest his attention in his
dreary abode, was administering comfort to the goat; and he was indeed
thankful to have any living creature beside him. It quickly recovered,
and became tenderly attached to him. It happened that the servant who
was intrusted with the secret of his retreat fell sick, when it became
necessary to send another with provisions. The goat, on this occasion,
happening to be lying near the mouth of the cavern, opposed his entrance
with all her might, butting him furiously; the fugitive, hearing a
disturbance, went forward, and receiving the watchword from his new
attendant, interposed, and the faithful goat permitted him to pass. So
resolute was the animal on this occasion, that the gentleman was
convinced she would have died in his defence."




CHAPTER V.

     Uncle Thomas relates some Very Remarkable Stories about the Cat;
     points out to the Boys the Connexion subsisting between the
     Domestic Cat and the Lion, Tiger, &c., and tells them some Stories
     about the Gentleness, as well as the Ferocity of these Animals.


"Though far from being so general a favourite as the dog, the domestic
cat has many qualities to recommend it to attention and regard, and some
of the stories which I am going to tell you exhibit instances of
instinctive attachment and gentleness which cannot be surpassed.

"Here is one of attachment, which will match with the best of those of
the dog.

"A cat which had been brought up in a family became extremely attached
to the eldest child, a little boy, who was very fond of playing with
her. She bore with the most exemplary patience any maltreatment which
she received from him--which even good-natured children seldom fail,
occasionally, to give to animals in their sports with them--without ever
making any attempt at resistance. As the cat grew up, however, she daily
quitted her playfellow for a time, from whom she had formerly been
inseparable, in order to follow her natural propensity to catch mice;
but even when engaged in this employment, she did not forget her friend;
for, as soon as she had caught a mouse, she brought it alive to him. If
he showed an inclination to take her prey from her, she anticipated him,
by letting it run, and waited to see whether he was able to catch it. If
he did not, the cat darted at, seized it, and laid it again before him;
and in this manner the sport continued as long as the child showed any
inclination for the amusement.

"At length the boy was attacked by smallpox, and, during the early
stages of his disorder, the cat never quitted his bed-side; but, as his
danger increased, it was found necessary to remove the cat and lock it
up. The child died. On the following day, the cat having escaped from
her confinement, immediately ran to the apartment where she hoped to
find her playmate. Disappointed in her expectation, she sought for him
with symptoms of great uneasiness and loud lamentation, all over the
house, till she came to the door of the room in which the corpse lay.
Here she lay down in silent melancholy, till she was again locked up. As
soon as the child was interred, and the cat set at liberty, she
disappeared; and it was not till a fortnight after that event, that she
returned to the well-known apartment, quite emaciated. She would not,
however, take any nourishment, and soon ran away again with dismal
cries. At length, compelled by hunger, she made her appearance every day
at dinner-time, but always left the house as soon as she had eaten the
food that was given her. No one knew where she spent the rest of her
time, till she was found one day under the wall of the burying-ground,
close to the grave of her favourite; and so indelible was the attachment
of the cat to her deceased friend, that till his parents removed to
