Green Mountain Boy, who has proven himself the born gentleman and
fighter, the thorough patriot and statesman and the Chevalier Bayard of
the American navy.




THE REVOLUTIONARY BATTLES.




CHAPTER IV.


Birth of the American Navy--The Privateers--Capture of New Providence,
in the Bahamas--Paul Jones--A Clever Exploit--A Skilful Escape--Fine
Seamanship--An Audacious Scheme.



When, on April 19, 1775, the battle of Lexington opened the Revolution
the Colonies did not possess a single ship with which to form the
beginning of a navy. They had for many years been actively engaged in
the coasting trade and some of their vessels did valiant service on the
side of England in the wars against France and Spain. We had a good many
hardy, skilled seamen, who formed the best material from which to man a
navy, and before long Congress undertook the work of building one. That
body ordered the construction of thirteen frigates--one for each
State--and some of these did noble work, but by the close of the war few
of them were left; nearly all had been captured or destroyed.

[Illustration: CAPTAIN JOHN PAUL JONES.]

It was far different with the privateers, which were vessels fitted out
by private parties, under the authority of Congress, to cruise the seas
wherever they chose and capture English vessels wherever they could.
When a prize was taken the lucky officers and crews divided the plunder.
It was a very tempting field for the brave and enterprising Americans
and when, in March, 1776, Congress gave them permission to fit out and
sail privateers, they were quick to use the chance of securing prize
money as it was called. Those swift sailing vessels and their daring
crews sailed out of Salem, Cape Ann, Newburyport, Bristol and other
seacoast towns, and they did not have to hunt long before they found the
richest sort of prizes. In the single year 1776 these privateers
captured 342 British vessels and wrought great havoc among the English
shipping.

In January, 1778, one of these privateers entered the harbor of New
Providence, in the Bahamas, and captured the fort and a sixteen-gun
man-of-war. Many other valiant exploits were performed and before long
some of the more daring privateers boldly crossed the Atlantic and by
their deeds threw the coast of Great Britain into consternation.

Among the most remarkable of these naval heroes was a young Scotchman,
not quite thirty years old.

[Illustration]

He had been trained in the merchant service and had become a skilful
sailor before he removed to Virginia, where he made his home. He
devotedly loved his adopted country, and, when the war broke out between
the colonies and Great Britain, and the long, hard struggle for
independence began, he was among the very first to offer his services on
the side of liberty. His character was so well known and appreciated
that he was appointed a first lieutenant. I am sure you have all heard
of him, for his name was John Paul Jones, though since, for some reason
or other, he dropped his first name and is generally referred to simply
as Paul Jones.

His first service was on the _Alfred_, which helped in the capture of
the fort at New Providence, already spoken of. Jones with his own hands
hoisted the first flag displayed on an American man-of-war. It was of
yellow silk, with the device of a rattlesnake, and bore the motto,
"Don't tread on me."

Jones attracted such favorable attention during this enterprise that on
his return he was made commander of the twelve-ton brig _Providence_ and
was employed for a time in carrying troops from Rhode Island to New
York. Since he was by birth a citizen of Great Britain, which then
insisted that "once a British subject always a British subject," the
English cruisers made determined efforts to capture him. Many of the
officers declared that if they could lay hands on the audacious
freebooter, as they called him, they would hang him at the yard arm.
But, before doing so, they had to catch him, and that proved a harder
task than they suspected. He was chased many times and often fired into,
but the _Providence_ was always swift enough to show a clean pair of
heels to her pursuers and Jones himself was such a fine sailor that he
laughed at their efforts to take him prisoner.

One of the cleverest exploits of Jones was performed in the autumn of
1776. He saw an American brig returning from the West Indies, heavily
laden with supplies for Washington's army, which was badly in need of
them. A British frigate was in hot pursuit of the American, which was
straining every nerve to escape, but would not have been able to do so
except for Jones, who ran in between the two, and, firing into the
frigate, induced her to let the American go and chase him. Taking
advantage of the chance thus offered, the brig got safely away and then
Jones himself dodged away from the frigate, which thus lost both.

In the month of October, 1776, Jones was promoted to the rank of captain
and ordered to cruise between Boston and the Delaware. I must tell you
an anecdote which illustrates his wonderful seamanship.

Some weeks before he was made a captain, and while cruising off Bermuda,
he saw five sail far to the windward and he beat up, doing so carefully
and with the purpose of finding out whether there was a chance for him
to strike an effective blow. He picked out what looked like a large
merchant ship and gave chase. He gained fast, but to his dismay, when he
was quite close, he discovered that instead of a merchant ship he had
almost run into a twenty-eight gun frigate of the enemy.

Finding he had caught a Tartar, Jones did the only thing left to him. He
hauled off and put on every stitch of sail and the frigate did the same.
She proved the better sailer, and, though she gained slowly, it was
surely, and in the course of a few hours she had approached within
musket shot of the brig's lee quarter. There seemed no possible escape
for Jones, knowing which, he did a remarkable thing. He veered off until
the frigate was almost astern, when he put about dead before the wind,
with every yard of canvas set.

The Englishman was dumfounded by the daring manoeuvre, which brought
the American within pistol shot, for he did not fire a gun until Jones
was beyond reach of his grape. The pursuit was continued hour after
hour, but the brig was now at her best and finally left her pursuer
hopelessly astern. When the _Providence_ ran into Newport in October she
had captured or destroyed fifteen prizes.

Jones's bold and skilful seamanship drew attention to him and he was now
given command of the 24-gun ship _Alfred_, while Captain Hacker took
charge of the _Providence_. The two vessels started on a cruise in
company and some days later the _Alfred_ fell in with three British
vessels, and, after a brisk action, captured them all. One proved to be
a transport with 150 men and a large amount of supplies for Burgoyne's
army, which was at that time organizing in Montreal for its notable
campaign through New York, where it was captured by General Gates, at
Saratoga.

This transport was so valuable that Jones, instead of putting a prize
crew on board, determined to take her into port, and, if in danger of
capture from pursuit, he meant to sink her. It began snowing the
following night and the _Providence_ and _Alfred_ were obliged to
separate.

Jones was making for Boston when he was discovered by the frigate that
he had outwitted two months before, when the _Providence_ narrowly
escaped capture. Night was closing in and the frigate being to windward,
her outlines were indistinct. Captain Jones ordered his prizes to steer
southward and to pay no attention to the signals displayed on his own
vessel. At midnight he hoisted a toplight and tacked to the west,
knowing the others would continue to the southward as he had directed.
The strategem was successful, for at daylight the frigate was pressing
hard after the _Alfred_, while the prizes had disappeared. The _Alfred_
eluded her enemy as before, and, upon reaching Boston, Jones found his
captives awaiting him.

An idea of the effectiveness of the privateers may be gained by the
statement that during the year 1777 nearly 500 vessels were captured by
them. By that time Paul Jones had proven himself to be the finest
officer in the American Navy. He had every quality to make him such. No
one could surpass him in seamanship. He was cool and daring and was
animated by the highest patriotism for his adopted country. Such a man
was sure to be heard of again, as Great Britain learned to her cost.

France had shown a strong liking for the American colonies from the
first. No doubt this liking was influenced by her hatred of England, for
the nations had been bitter rivals for years. We had sent several
commissioners to Paris, and they did a good deal for our country. The
commissioners had a heavy, single-decked frigate built in Holland, which
was named the _South Carolinian_ and was intended for Paul Jones, but
some difficulties occurred and he was sent to sea in the 18-gun ship
_Ranger_, which left Portsmouth, N.H., at the beginning of November. She
was so poorly equipped that Jones complained, though he did not hesitate
on that account.

On the way to Nantes, in France, the _Ranger_ captured two prizes,
refitted at Brest, and in April, 1778, sailed for the British coast.
Having made several captures, Captain Jones headed for the Isle of Man,
his intention being to make a descent upon Whitehaven. A violent wind
that night baffled him, and, hoping to prevent his presence in the
section from being discovered, he kept his vessel disguised as a
merchantman. Sailing hither and thither, generally capturing all vessels
that he sighted, he finally turned across to the Irish coast and in the
latter part of the month was off Carrickfergus, where he learned from
some fishermen that the British sloop-of-war _Drake_ was at anchor in
the roads. Jones was exceedingly anxious to attack her, and planned a
night surprise, but again the violent wind interfered and he was forced
to give up the scheme, so well suited to his daring nature.

This brave man now set out to execute one of the most startling schemes
that can be imagined. Whitehaven at that time was a city of 50,000
inhabitants and the harbor was filled with shipping. His plan was to
sail in among the craft and burn them all. It seemed like the idea of a
man bereft of his senses, but there was not the slightest hesitation on
his part. Such enterprises often succeed through their very boldness,
and his belief was that by acting quickly he could accomplish his
purpose and strike a blow at England that would carry consternation to
the people and the government.

Captain Jones had in mind the many outrages committed by British vessels
along our seacoast, for, describing his purpose in a memorial to
Congress, he said his intention was, by one good fire in England of
British shipping, "to put an end to all burnings in America."




CHAPTER V.


A Daring Attempt by Captain Paul Jones--Why It Failed--A Bold
Scheme--Why It Did Not Succeed--The Fight Between the _Ranger_ and
_Drake_.



Paul Jones waited until midnight. Then, when no one was dreaming of
danger, his men silently pulled away from the _Ranger_ in two boats, one
commanded by himself and the other by Lieutenant Wallingford. It was a
long pull, and when they reached the outer pier of the harbor it was
beginning to grow light in the east. They now parted company, and Jones
directed his men to row for the south side of the harbor, while the
Lieutenant was to make for the north shore. The object of the two was
the same: the burning of the shipping.

Wallingford reached the north side, and then, strangely enough, gave up
the attempt, his reason being that the candle on which he counted to
start the fire was blown out. The reader must remember that in those
days matches were unknown and the task of relighting had to be done with
the steel, flint and tinder. Though the contrivance is an awkward one,
we cannot help thinking the excuse of the Lieutenant was weak, but the
result was a failure on his part to carry out the important work
assigned to him.

Captain Jones was a different kind of man. Although day had fully
dawned, he kept his men rowing rapidly. Reaching the south side of the
harbor, he came upon a small fort garrisoned by a few soldiers. Leaping
out of the boat, the American dashed forward, bounded over the walls and
captured the sentinels before they knew their danger. The guns were
spiked and the garrison made prisoners.

"Set fire to the shipping!" he commanded to his men, while he, with only
a single companion, ran for a second fort some distance away and spiked
the guns in that. Then he hurried back to the first fort and found to
his surprise that the fire had not been started.

"The candles have given out," was the reply to his angry inquiry.

It being broad daylight, his men expected him to jump into the boat and
order them to return with all haste to the ship; but, instead of doing
so, he darted into one of the nearest houses, procured some tinder and
candles and began himself the work of destruction. Fixing his attention
upon a large vessel, he climbed quickly aboard and started a fire in her
steerage. To help matters, he flung a barrel of tar over the flames and
in a few minutes they were roaring fiercely. It meant prodigious damage,
for the vessel was surrounded by more than a hundred others, none of
which could move, since they were aground and the tide was out.

As may be supposed, there was great excitement by that time. The alarm
had been given. Men were running to and fro, and a number hurried toward
the burning ship with the purpose of extinguishing the flames. All the
Americans had entered the small boat and were impatiently awaiting their
commander. Instead of joining them, Jones drew his pistol, and, standing
alone in front of the crowd, kept them back until the fire burst out of
the steerage and began running up the rigging. Backing slowly with drawn
pistol, he stepped into the boat and told his men to row with might and
main for the vessel.

The instant this was done the crowd rushed forward and by desperate
efforts succeeded in putting out the blaze before it had done much
damage. Then the forts attempted to fire on the Americans, but their
guns were spiked. Some cannon on the ships were discharged at the boats,
but their shots went wild. When the _Ranger_ was reached Captain Jones
made the discovery that one of his men was missing. The reason was
clear. He was a deserter and had been seen by his former comrades
running from house to house and giving the alarm. Such was the narrow
chance by which one of the most destructive conflagrations of British
shipping was averted.

As may be supposed, this daring act caused alarm throughout England.
Jones was denounced as a freebooter and pirate, and every effort was
made to capture him. Had his enemies succeeded, little mercy would have
been shown the dauntless hero.

England was very cruel to many of her American prisoners, and Captain
Jones fixed upon a bold and novel plan for compelling her to show more
mercy toward those unfortunate enough to fall into her power. It was to
capture some prominent nobleman and hold him as a hostage for the better
treatment of our countrymen. It must be remembered that Jones was
cruising near his birthplace and when a sailor boy had become familiar
with the Scottish and the English coasts. The _Ranger_ was a fast
vessel, and, as I have shown, Jones himself was a master of seamanship.
It would seem, therefore, that all he had to do was to be alert, and it
need not be said that he and his crew were vigilant at all times.

The Earl of Selkirk was a Scottish nobleman who had his country seat at
the mouth of the Dee, and Jones made up his mind that he was just the
man to serve for a hostage. At any rate, he could not be put to a
better use and certainly would not suspect the purpose of the American
vessel which, as night was closing in, anchored offshore. Indeed, no one
dreamed that the vessel was the terrible American "pirate," which had
thrown the whole country into terror.

Fortunately the night was dark and the men rowed to land without being
noticed. The task was an easy one, for there was no one to resist them.
They walked silently through the darkness to the fine grounds, and,
having surrounded the handsome building, the officer in charge of the
party presented himself at the door and made known his startling errand.
He was informed that the Earl was absent. A careful search revealed that
such was the fact, and all the trouble of the Americans went for naught.

It was a keen disappointment and the party decided to compensate
themselves so far as they could. The Earl was wealthy and the house
contained a great deal of valuable silver plate. A quantity of this was
carried to the _Ranger_.

Captain Jones was angered when he learned what had been done. He knew
the Earl and Lady Selkirk well and personally liked them both. The
singular scheme he had in mind was solely for the benefit of his adopted
countrymen.

"I am accused of being a pirate, robber and thief," he exclaimed, "and
you are doing all you can to justify the charges. Every ounce of plate
shall be returned."

He kept his word. The messengers who took back the silver carried a note
from Captain Jones apologizing to Lady Selkirk for the misconduct of his
men.

Now, if there was anything which Paul Jones loved it was to fight. It
was simply diversion for him to capture merchantmen or vessels that
could make only a weak resistance, and he longed to give the enemy a
taste of his mettle. It may be said that his situation grew more
dangerous with every hour. His presence was known and a score of
cruisers were hunting for him.

The British sloop of war _Drake_, which the gale prevented him from
attacking, was still at Carrickfergus, and Jones sailed thither in the
hope of inducing her to come out and fight him. Being uncertain of his
identity, the captain of the _Drake_ sent an officer in a boat to learn
the truth. Captain Jones suspected the errand and skilfully kept his
broadsides turned away until the officer, determined to know his
identity, went aboard. As soon as he stepped on deck he was made a
prisoner and sent below.

Captain Jones reasoned that the captain of the _Drake_ would miss his
officer after awhile and come out to learn what had become of him. He,
therefore, headed toward the North Channel, the _Drake_ following, with
the tide against her and the wind unfavorable until the mid-channel was
reached, when, to quote Maclay, Paul Jones "in plain view of three
kingdoms, hove to, ran up the flag of the new Republic and awaited the
enemy."

In reply to the demand of the _Drake's_ captain, Jones gave the name of
his vessel and expressed the pleasure it would give him to engage him in
battle. The American was astern of the _Drake_, and, to show his
earnestness, Captain Jones ordered his helm put up and let fly with a
broadside. The _Drake_ replied and then the battle was on. There was
little manoeuvring, the contest being what is known as a square
yardarm and yardarm fight.

The comparative strength of the two vessels was as follows: The _Ranger_
carried 18 guns and 123 men, the _Drake_ 20 guns and 160 men, a number
of the latter being volunteers for the fight, which lasted one hour and
four minutes, at the end of which time the _Ranger_ had lost two killed
and six wounded and the _Drake_ forty-two killed. The latter was so
badly damaged by the well directed fire of the American that the captain
called for quarter. Ceasing her firing, Captain Jones lowered a boat
and sent it to the _Drake_ to take possession.

As an evidence of the effect of the fire of the _Ranger_, the following
words may be quoted from Jones's official report: "Her fore and
maintopsail yards being cut away and down on the caps, the topgallant
yard and mizzen gaff both hanging up and down along the mast, the second
ensign which they had hoisted shot away and hanging on the quarter
gallery in the water, the jib shot away and hanging in the water, her
sails and rigging cut entirely to pieces, her masts and yards all
wounded and her hull very much galled."

The damages to the _Ranger_ were so slight they were repaired by the
close of the following day, when she got under sail with her prize.
Despite the swarm of cruisers that were hunting for him, Jones passed
unscathed through North Channel, along the western coast of Ireland and
arrived at Brest, in France, within a month of the day he left the port,
his cruise having been one of the most remarkable in naval history.




CHAPTER VI.


One of the Most Memorable Sea Fights Ever Known--The Wonderful Exploit
of Captain Paul Jones.


