luncheon in one of your pockets; see that your camera is in perfect
order, ready to use at a moment's notice; that your water-proof
match-box is in your pocket filled with safety matches, your
pocket-knife safe with you, also watch and compass, and that the tin cup
is on your belt. Your whistle being always hung around your neck will,
of course, be there as usual.

When you are ready, stand still and look about you once more to make
sure of your bearings; close your eyes and tell yourself exactly what
you have seen. After leaving camp and arriving at the foot of the
mountain, take your bearings anew; then look up ahead and select a
certain spot which you wish to reach on the upward trail. Having this
definite object in view will help in making better progress and save
your walking around in a circle, which is always the tendency when in a
strange place and intervening trees or elevations obstruct the view, or
when not sure of the way and trying to find it.

Begin blazing the trail at your first step up the mountain side. Even
though there may be a trail already, you cannot be sure that it will
continue; it is much safer to depend upon your own blazing.

Often in trailing along the mountain you will find huge rocks and steep
depressions, or small lakes which you cannot cross over but must go
around, and in so doing change your direction, perhaps strike off at an
angle. Before making the detour, search out some large landmark, readily
recognized after reaching the other side of the obstruction, a tall,
peculiarly shaped tree or other natural feature. Now is the time to try
earnestly to keep the landmark in sight as long as possible and to be
able to recognize it when you see it again. Watch your compass and the
sun that you may continue in the right direction after circling the
obstruction. Go slow in climbing, take your time and don't get out of
breath.

On many mountains the possibility of unexpected fogs exists, and safety
requires that the party be linked together with a soft rope; the same
precaution should be taken when the trail is very rough, steep, and
rocky. The camper at the head of the line should tie the rope in a
bow-line around her waist, with knot on left side, and eight or ten feet
from her the next girl should link herself to the rope in the same
manner; then another girl, and another, until the entire party is on the
rope.

The leader starts on the trail and the others, holding fast to their
staffs, carefully follow, each one cautious to keep the rope stretching
out in front of her rather taut; then if one girl stumbles the others
brace themselves and keep her from falling.

When descending the mountain, be careful to get a firm footing. Instead
of facing the trail, it is safer to turn sideways, so that you can place
the entire foot down and not risk the toes only, or the heels. Often
coming down either a steep hill or a mountain is more difficult than
going up.


=Lost in the Woods=

It is not at all probable that you will lose your way while on the
trail, but if you should find yourself lost in the woods or in the open,
the first thing to do is to remember that a brave girl does not get into
a panic and so rob herself of judgment and the power to think clearly
and act quickly. Believe firmly that you are _safe_, then sit down
quietly and think out a plan of finding your way. Try to remember from
which direction you have come and to recall landmarks. If you cannot do
this, do not be frightened and do not allow any thought of possible harm
to get a foothold in your mind. If there is a hill near, from which you
can see any distance, climb that and get an outlook. You may be able to
see the smoke of your camp-fire, which, after all, cannot be so far
away. You may find a landmark that you do remember. If you see nothing
which you can recognize, make a signal flag of your handkerchief and put
it up high, as high as you can. Your friends will be looking for that.
Then give the lost signal, one long blast with your whistle, and after a
short pause follow with two more blasts in quick succession. If you have
no whistle shout, loud and long, then wait a while, keeping eyes and
ears open to see and hear answering signals. If there is none, again
shout the lost signal and continue the calls every little while for
quite a time. Another call for help is the ascending smoke of three
fires. This, of course, is for daylight. Build your fires some distance
apart, twenty-five feet or more, that the smoke from each may be clearly
seen alone, not mingled with the rest. Aim to create _smoke_ rather than
flame; a slender column of smoke can be seen a long distance, therefore
the fire need not be large. Choose for your fires as clear a space and
as high an elevation as can be found, and in the relief and excitement
of rescue _do not forget to extinguish every spark_ before leaving the
ground.

If you decide to keep moving, blaze your trail as you go, so that it may
be followed and also that you may know if you cross it again yourself.
You can blaze the trail by breaking or bending small branches on trees
and bushes, or by small strips torn from your handkerchief and tied
conspicuously on twigs. If you are where there are no trees or
undergrowth, build small piles of stones or little hills of earth at
intervals to mark your trail.

If night overtakes you, look for the _North Star_. That will help if you
know at what point of the compass your camp lies, and if you remember
whether your course in leaving camp was to the north, south, east, or
west, you can calculate pretty accurately whether the camp is to the
north, south, east, or west of you.

In case the night must be spent where you are, go about making a
shelter, prepare as comfortable a bed as possible, and do _not_ be
afraid. You will probably be found before morning, and you must be found
in good physical condition.

If you can kindle a fire, do it; that will help to guide your friends
and will ward off wild creatures that might startle you. Keep your fire
going all night and take care that it does not spread.

It is better to remain quietly in one spot all night than to wander
about in the dark and perhaps stumble upon dangerous places. If, when
you find the points of the compass by the _North Star_, you mark them
plainly on a stone or fallen log, they will be a ready guide for you as
soon as daylight breaks.

The last word on this subject is: _Do not be afraid_.


=To Find Your Way by the North Star=

At night you will have the same reliable guide that has ever been the
mariner's friend, and if you do not know this star guide, lose no time
in finding it.

Polaris or pole-star is known generally as North Star, and this star is
most important to the outdoor girl. At all times the North Star marks
the north, its position never changes, and seeing that star and _knowing
it_, you will always know the points of the compass. Face the North
Star and you face the north. At your right hand is the east, at your
left hand is the west, and at your back is the south.

The North Star does not look very important because it is not very
bright or very large, and were it not for the help of the Big Dipper,
which every one knows, the North Star would not be easy to find. The
diagram given on page 37 shows the relative position of the stars and
will help you to find the North Star. The two stars forming the front
side of the bowl of the Great Dipper point almost in a direct line to
the North Star, which is the last one in the handle of the Little
Dipper, or the tail of the Little Bear, which means the same thing.




CHAPTER III

CAMPING

=Camp Sites. Water. Wood. Tents. Shelters. Lean-Tos. Fires. Cooking.
Safety and Protection. Sanitation. Camp Spirit.=


=Information=

Whether your camp is to be for one day, one week, or a longer period of
time, the first question to be decided is: "Where shall we go?" If you
know of no suitable spot, inquire of friends, and even if they have not
personally enjoyed the delights of camping and sleeping in the open, one
or more of them will probably know of some acquaintance who will be glad
to give the information. Write to the various newspapers, magazines,
railroads, and outdoor societies for suggestions. The Geological Survey
of the United States at Washington, D. C., will furnish maps giving
location and extent of forests and water-ways, also location and
character of roads; you can obtain the maps for almost any part of every
State. Most public automobile houses supply maps of any desired region.
Send letters of inquiry to these sources of information, and in this way
you will probably learn of many "just the right place" localities.
Select a number of desirable addresses, investigate them, and make your
own choice of location, remembering that the first three essentials for
a camp are good ground, water, and wood; the rest is easy, for these
three form the foundation for camping.


=Location=

Wherever you go, choose a dry spot, preferably in an open space near
wooded land. Avoid hollows where the water will run into your shelters
in wet weather; let your camp be so located that in case of rain the
water will drain down away from it. Remember this or you may find your
camp afloat upon a temporary lake or swamp should a storm arise.


=Water=

Pure drinking water you _must_ have, it is of _vital_ importance, so be
sure to pitch your camp within near walking distance of a good spring, a
securely covered well, or other supply of pure water.

Henry David Thoreau's method of obtaining clear water from a pond whose
surface was covered with leaves, etc., was to push his pail, without
tipping it in the least, straight down under the water until the top
edge was below the surface several inches, then quickly lift it out; in
doing this the overflow would carry off all leaves and twigs, leaving
the remaining water in the pail clear and good. But you must first be
sure that the pond contains pure water under the floating debris.

Always be cautious about drinking water from rivers, streams, ponds, and
lakes though they may appear ever so clear and tempting, for the purity
is by no means assured, and to drink from these sources may cause
serious illness. Unless you are absolutely sure that water is free from
impurities, _boil it_; then it will be safe to use for drinking and
cooking.

Next in importance to good water is good fire-wood and woodsy material
for shelters and beds. Bear this in mind when deciding upon the site for
your camp.


=Companions=

Because your companions can make or mar the happiness in camp, it is
safer to have in your party only those girls who will take kindly to the
camp spirit of friendly helpfulness, those always ready to laugh and
treat discomforts as jokes. This means that though fun-loving and full
of buoyancy and life, each girl will willingly do her part and assume
her share of responsibilities.


=Safeguarding=

You should also count among your companions two or more camp
directors--possibly mothers of the girls, teachers, or older friends of
whom the parents approve--who will enter heartily into all phases of
outdoor life and while really being one with you in sport and work, will
at the same time keep careful oversight and assure protection.

Avoid localities where there is a possibility of tramps or undesirable
characters of any description, and do not wander from camp alone or
unaccompanied by one of the directors. If your camp is in the forest it
will be the part of wisdom to secure also a reliable guide who knows the
forest ways.


=The Start=

The day before you leave for your camping-ground, have everything in
readiness that there may be no delay when it is time to go. Be prompt,
for you want to play fair and not keep the other girls waiting, causing
them to lose valuable time.

The stimulating exhilaration which comes with trailing through the
forests to camp, the keen delight of adventure, the charm of the
wilderness, the freedom and wonder of living in the woods, all make for
the health and happiness of the girl camper, and once experienced, ever
after with the advent of spring comes the call of the untrammelled life
in the big outdoors.


=The One-Day Camp=

Even a one-day camp fills the hours with more genuine lasting enjoyment
than girls can find in other ways; there is a charm about it which
clings in your memory, making a joy, later, of the mere thought and
telling of the event.

That every moment of the day may be filled full of enjoyment for all,
have a good programme, some definite, well-thought-out plan of
activities and sports previously prepared, and if possible let every
girl know beforehand just what she is to do when all arrive at camp.

With an older person in charge, the party could be divided, according to
its size, into different groups, and as soon as the grounds are reached
the groups should begin the fun of preparing for the camp dinner.

If the party consists of eight, two can gather fire-wood, two build the
fireplace, two unpack the outfits, placing the provisions and cooking
utensils in order conveniently near the fire, and two can bring the
drinking water and cooking water.

Provisions and cooking utensils should be divided into as many packs as
there are campers, and every camper carry a pack. Count in the outfit
for each one a tin cup, preferably with open handle for wearing over
belt.

In the one-day camp very few cooking utensils are needed; they may
consist of two tin pails, one for drinking water, the other for boiling
water, one coffee-pot for cocoa, one frying-pan for flapjacks or eggs,
one large kitchen knife for general use, and one large spoon for
stirring batter and cocoa.


=Camp Dinner=

Counting on a keen outdoor appetite for wholesome substantials, the
provision list includes only plain fare, such as: Lamb chops, or thinly
sliced bacon packed in oil-paper. Dry cocoa to which sugar has been
added, carried in can or stout paper bag. One can of condensed milk,
unsweetened, to be diluted with water according to directions on can.
Butter in baking-powder can. Dry flour mixed with salt and baking-powder
in required proportions for flapjacks, packed in strong paper bag and
carried in one of the tin pails. Bread in loaf wrapped in wax-paper.
Potatoes washed and dried ready to cook, packed in paper bag or carried
in second tin pail. Pepper and salt each sealed in separate marked
envelopes; when needed, perforate paper with big pin and use envelopes
as shakers. One egg for batter, buried in the flour to prevent breaking,
and one small can of creamy maple sugar, soft enough to spread on hot
cakes, or a can of ordinary maple syrup.


=The Clean-Up=

While resting after dinner is the time for story-telling; then, before
taking part in sports of any kind, every particle of debris, even small
bits of egg-shell and paper, should be gathered up and burned until not
a vestige remains. To be "good sports," thought must be taken for the
next comers and the camping-ground left in perfect order, absolutely
free from litter or debris of any kind.

When breaking camp be _sure_ to soak the fire with water again and
again. It is criminal to leave any coals or even a spark of the fire
smouldering.

Be _positive_ that the _fire is out_.

[Illustration: A permanent camp.]


=Shelters and Tents. Lean-To=

For a fixed camp of longer or shorter duration your home will be under
the shelter of boughs, logs, or canvas. The home of green boughs is
considered by many the ideal of camp shelters. This you can make for
yourself. It is a simple little two-sided, slanting roof and back and
open-front shed, made of the material of the woods and generally known
as a lean-to, sometimes as Baker tent when of canvas.

There are three ways of erecting the front framework.

The first is to find two trees standing about seven feet apart with
convenient branches down low enough to support the horizontal top cross
pole when laid in the crotches. Lacking the proper trees, the second
method is to get two strong, straight, forked poles of green wood and
drive them down into the ground deep enough to make them stand firm and
upright by themselves the required distance apart. The third way is to
reinforce the uprights by shorter forked stakes driven firmly into the
ground and braced against the uprights, but this is not often necessary.

Having your uprights in place, extending above ground five feet or more,
lay a top pole across, fitting its ends into the forked tops of the
uprights. Against this top pole rest five or six slender poles at
regular distances apart, one end of each against the top pole and the
other end on the ground slanting outward and backward sufficiently to
give a good slope and allow sleeping space beneath. At right angles to
the slanting poles, lay across them other poles, using the natural pegs
or stumps left on the slanting poles by lopped-off branches, as braces
to hold the cross poles in place (Fig. 18).

[Illustration: 18

21 19

20

Outdoor shelters.]

When building the frame be sure to place the slanting poles so that
the little stumps left on them will turn _up_ and not down, that they
may hold the cross poles. Try to have spaces between cross poles as
regular as possible. A log may be rolled up against the ground ends of
the slanting poles to prevent their slipping, though this is rarely
necessary, for they stand firm as a rule.

You can cover the frame with bark and then thatch it, which will render
the shelter better able to withstand a storm, or you may omit the bark,
using only the thatch as a covering. Put on very thick, this should make
the lean-to rain-proof.

With small tips of branches from trees, preferably balsam, hemlock, or
other evergreens, begin thatching your shelter. Commence at the bottom
of the lean-to, and hook on the thatch branches close together all the
way across the lowest cross pole, using the stumps of these thatch
branches as hooks to hold the thatch in place on the cross pole (Fig.
19). Overlap the lower thatches as you work along the next higher cross
pole, like shingles on a house, and continue in this way, overlapping
each succeeding cross pole with an upper row of thatch until the top is
reached. Fill in the sides thick with branches, boughs, or even small,
thick trees.

The lean-to frame can be covered with your poncho in case of necessity,
but boughs are much better.


=Permanent Camp. Lean-To. Open Camp=
