of one another while they were in Albany, Grosvenor and the
Pennsylvanians continuing to the camp, Cabell and Stuart turning back to
the George for quarters, and Robert and Tayoga going toward the house of
Mynheer Jacobus Huysman. But before they reached it young Lennox
suggested that they turn toward the river.

"It is well to do so," said the Onondaga. "I think that Dagaeoga wishes
to look there for a ship."

"That's in my mind, Tayoga, and yet I wouldn't know the vessel I'm
looking for if I saw her."

"She will be commanded by the man whom we saw in the inn, the one with
whom Dagaeoga talked."

"I've no doubt of it, Tayoga. Nothing escapes your notice."

"What are eyes for if not to see! And it is a time for all to watch;
especially, it is a time for Dagaeoga to watch with his eyes, his ears
and all his senses."

"I've that feeling myself."

"Something is plotting against you. The slaver did not meet the spy for
nothing."

"Why should men bother about one as insignificant as I am, when the
world is plunged into a great war?"

"It is because Dagaeoga is in the way of somebody. He is very much in
the way or so much trouble and risk would not be taken to remove him."

"I wonder what it is Tayoga. I know that Mr. Hardy and Mr. Huysman and
doubtless others hold the key to this lock, but I feel quite sure they
are not going to put it in my hand just at present."

"No, they will not, but it must be for very good reasons. No one ever
had better friends than Dagaeoga has in them. If they do not choose to
tell him anything it will be wise for him not to ask questions."

"That's just the way I feel about it, and so I'm going to ask no
questions."

A hulking figure barred their way, a red face glowed at them, and a
rough voice demanded satisfaction.

"You fellow with the slick tongue, you had 'em laughing at me in the
tavern," said Dobbs, the teamster. "You just the same as told 'em I was
a liar when I said the French were coming."

The man was full of unreasoning anger, and he handled the butt end of a
heavy whip. Yet Robert felt quite cool. His pistol was in his belt, and
Tayoga was at his elbow.

"You are mistaken, my good Mr. Dobbs," he said gaily. "I would never
tell a man he was a liar, particularly one to whom I had not been
introduced. I try to be choice in my language. I was trained to be so by
Mr. Alexander McLean, a most competent schoolmaster of this city, and I
merely tried to disseminate a thought in the minds of the numerous
audience gathered in the George Inn. My thought was unlike your thought,
and so I was compelled to use words that did not resemble the words used
by you. I was not responsible for the results flowing from them."

"I don't know what you mean," growled Dobbs. "You string a lot of big
words together, and I think you're laughing at me again."

"Impossible, Mr. Dobbs. I could not be so impolite. My risibilities may
be agitated to a certain extent, but laugh in the face of a stranger,
never! Now will you kindly let us pass? The street here is narrow and we
do not wish to crowd."

Dobbs did not move and his manner became more threatening than ever, the
loaded whip swaying in his hand. Robert's light and frolicsome humor did
not depart. He felt himself wholly master of the situation.

"Now, good Mr. Dobbs, kind Mr. Dobbs, I ask you once more to move," he
said in his most wheedling manner. "The day is too bright and pleasant
to be disturbed by angry feelings. My own temper is always even. Nothing
disturbs me. I was never known to give way to wrath, but my friend whom
you see by my side is a great Onondaga chieftain. His disposition is
haughty and fierce. He belongs to a race that can never bear the
slightest suspicion of an insult. It is almost certain death to speak to
him in an angry or threatening manner. Friends as we have been for
years, I am always very careful how I address him."

The teamster's face fell and he stepped back. The heavy whip ceased to
move in a menacing manner in his hand.

"Prudence is always a good thing," continued Robert. "When a great
Indian chieftain is a friend to a man, any insult to that man is a
double insult to the chieftain. It is usually avenged with the utmost
promptitude, and place is no bar. An angry glance even may invite a
fatal blow."

Dobbs stepped to one side, and Robert and Tayoga walked haughtily on.
The Onondaga laughed low, but with intense amusement.

"Verily it is well to have the gift of words," he said, "when with their
use one, leaving weapons undrawn, can turn an enemy aside."

"I could not enter into a street fight with such a man, Tayoga, and
diplomacy was needed. You'll pardon my use of you as a menace?"

"I'm at Dagaeoga's service."

"That being the case we'll now continue the search for our slaver."

They hunted carefully along the shores of the Hudson. Albany was a busy
river port at all times, but it was now busier than ever, the pressure
of war driving new traffic upon it from every side. Many boats were
bringing supplies from further south, and others were being loaded with
the goods of timid people, ready to flee from Montcalm and the French.
Albany caught new trade both coming and going. The thrifty burghers
profited by it and rejoiced.

"We've nothing to go on," said Robert, "and perhaps we couldn't tell the
slaver's ship if we were looking squarely at it. Still, it seems to me
it ought to be a small craft, slim and low, built for speed and with a
sneaky look."

"Then we will seek such a vessel," said Tayoga.

Nothing answered the description. The river people were quite willing to
talk and, the two falling into conversation with them, as if by chance,
were able to account for every craft of any size. There was no strange
ship that could be on any mysterious errand.

"It is in my mind, Dagaeoga," said Tayoga, "that this lies deeper than
we had thought. The slaver would not have shown himself and he would not
have talked with you so freely if he had not known that he would leave a
hidden trail."

"It looks that way to me, Tayoga," said Robert, "and I think Garay must
be in some kind of disguise. He would not venture so boldly among us if
he did not have a way of concealing himself."

"It is in my mind, too, that we have underestimated the spy. He has
perhaps more courage and resolution than we thought, or these qualities
may have come to him recently. The trade of a spy is very useful to
Montcalm just now. After his victory at Ticonderoga he will be anxious
to know what we are doing here at Albany, and it will be the duty of
Garay to learn. Besides, we put a great humiliation upon him that time
we took his letter from him in the forest, and he is burning for
vengeance upon us. It is not in the nature of Dagaeoga to wish revenge,
but he must not blind himself on that account to the fact that others
cherish it."

"It was the fortune of war. We have our disasters and our enemies have
theirs."

"Yet we must beware of Garay. I know it, Dagaeoga."

"At any rate we can't find out anything about him and the slaver along
the river, and that being the case I suggest that we go on to the house
of Mynheer Jacobus, where we're pretty sure of a welcome."

Their greetings at the burgher's home were as warm as anybody could
wish. Master McLean had left, and the rest were talking casually in the
large front room, but the keen eyes of the Onondaga read the signs
infallibly. This was a trail that could not be hidden from him.

"Other men have been here," he said a little later to Robert, when they
were alone in the room. "There has been a council."

"How do you know, Tayoga?"

"How do I know, Dagaeoga? Because I have eyes and I use them. It is
printed all over the room in letters of the largest type and in words of
one syllable. The floor is of polished wood, Dagaeoga, and there is a
great table in the center of the chamber. The chairs have been moved
back, but eight men sat around it. I can count the faint traces made by
the chairs in the polish of the floor. They were heavy men--most of the
men of Albany are heavy, and now and then they moved restlessly, as they
talked. That was why they ground the chair legs against the polish,
leaving there little traces which will be gone in another hour, but
which are enough while they last to tell their tale.

"They moved so, now and then because their talk was of great importance.
They smoked also that they might think better over what they were
saying. A child could tell that, because smoke yet lingers in the room,
although Caterina has opened the windows to let it out. Some of it is
left low down in the corners, and under the chairs now against the wall.
A little of the ash from their pipes has fallen on the table, showing
that although Caterina has opened the windows she has not yet had time
to clean the room. You and I know, Dagaeoga, that she would never miss
any ash on the table. Master McLean smoked much, perhaps more than any
of the others. He uses the strongest Virginia tobacco that he can
obtain, and I know its odor of old. I smell it everywhere in the room. I
also know the odor of the tobacco that Mynheer Jacobus uses, and it is
strongest here by the mantel, showing that in the course of the council
he frequently got up and stood here. Ah, there is ash on the mantel
itself! He tapped it now and then with his pipe to enforce what he was
saying. Mynheer Jacobus was much stirred, or he would not have risen to
his feet to make speeches to the others."

"Can you locate Master Hardy also?"

"I think I can, Dagaeoga."

He ran around the room like a hound on the scent, and, at last, he
stopped before a large massive locked chest of drawers that stood in the
corner, a heavy mahogany piece that looked as if it had been imported
from France or Italy.

"Master Jacobus came here," said the Onondaga. "I smell his tobacco. Ah,
and Master Hardy came, too! I now smell his tobacco also. I remember
that when we were in New York he smoked a peculiar, bitter West India
compound which doubtless is brought to him regularly in his ships--men
nearly always have a favorite tobacco and will take every trouble to get
it. I recognize the odor perfectly. There are traces of the ash of both
tobaccos on the chest of drawers, and Master Huysman and Master Hardy
came here, because there are papers in this piece of furniture which
Master Huysman wished to show to Master Hardy. They are in the third
drawer from the top, because there is a little dust on the others, but
none on the third. It fell off when it was opened, and was then shut
again strongly after they were through."

Robert gazed with intense curiosity at the third drawer. The papers in
it might concern himself--he believed Tayoga implicitly--but it was not
for him to pry into the affairs of two such good friends. If they wished
to keep their secret a while longer, then they had good reasons for
doing so.

"Did the others come to the chest of drawers also, and look at the
papers?" he asked.

The Onondaga knelt down and examined the polished floor.

"I do not think so," he replied at length. "It is wholly likely that
Master Jacobus and Master Hardy came to the chest of drawers after the
others had gone, and that the papers had no bearing on the matters they
talked over in the council. Yes, it is so! It is bound to be so! The
odor of their two tobaccos is stronger than any of the other odors in
the room, showing that they were in here much longer than the others. It
may be that the papers in the third drawer relate to Dagaeoga."

"I had that thought myself, Tayoga."

"Does Dagaeoga wish me to go further with it?"

"No, Tayoga. What those men desire to hide from us must remain hidden."

"I am glad Dagaeoga has answered that way, because if he had not I
should have refused to go on, and yet I knew that was the way in which
he would answer."

They went to another room in which they found Mr. Huysman, Mr. Hardy and
the clerk, and Robert told of his meeting with the slaver. The face of
Benjamin Hardy darkened.

"Tayoga is right," he said. "That man's presence here bodes ill for you,
Robert."

"I'm not afraid. Besides I've too many friends," said Robert quietly.

"Both your statements are true, but you must be careful just the same,"
interjected Master Jacobus. "Nevertheless, we'll not be apprehensive.
Master McLean iss coming back for supper, and we're going to make it a
great affair, a real reunion for all of us. Caterina, helped by two
stout colored women, has been cooking all the afternoon, and I hope that
you two boys have had enough exercise and excitement to whet your
appetites. How iss it?"

"We have, sir!" they replied together, and with emphasis.

"And now to your old room. You'll find there in a closet clothes for
both of you, Tayoga's of his own kind, that Caterina has preserved
carefully, and at six o'clock come in to supper, which to-day iss to be
our chief meal. I would not have Benjamin Hardy to come all the way from
New York and say that I failed to set for him as good a meal as he would
set for me if I were his guest in his city. Not only my hospitality but
the hospitality of Albany iss at stake."

"I know, sir, that your reputation will not suffer," said Robert with
great confidence.

He and Tayoga in their room found their clothes preserved in camphor and
quickly made the change. Then they stood by the window, looking out on
the pleasant domain, in which they had spent so many happy hours. Both
felt a glow.

"Master Jacobus Huysman is a good man," said Robert.

"A wise, fat chief," said the Onondaga. "A kind heart and a strong head.
He is worthy to rule. If he belonged to the league of the Hodenosaunee
we would put him in a high place."

"Though he holds no office, I think he sits in a high place here. It is
likely that the men who were around the table to-day came to him for
counsel."

"It seems a good guess to me, Dagaeoga. Perhaps they take measures to
meet the threat of Montcalm."

"They're our elders, and we'll let them do the thinking on that point
just now. Somehow, I feel light of heart, Tayoga, and I want to enjoy
myself."

"Even though the slaver and the spy are here, and we all believe that
they threaten you?"

"Even so. My heart is light, nevertheless. My mind tells me that I ought
to be apprehensive and sad, but my heart has taken control and I am
hopeful and gay?"

"It is the nature of Dagaeoga, and he should give thanks to Manitou that
he has been made that way. It is worth much more to him than the white
man's gold."

"I _am_ thankful, Tayoga. I'm thankful for a lot of things. How does
this coat look on me?"

"It is small. You have grown much in the last year or two. Your frame is
filling out and you are bigger every way. Still, it is a fine coat, and
the knee breeches, stockings and buckled shoes are very splendid. If
Dagaeoga does not look like a chief it is only because he is not old
enough, and he at least looks like the son of a chief."

Robert contemplated himself in a small mirror with much satisfaction.

"I'm frightfully tanned," he said. "Perhaps they wouldn't take me for a
model of fashion in Paris or London, but here nearly everybody else is
tanned also, and, after all, it's healthy."

The Onondaga regarded him with an amused smile.

"If Dagaeoga had the time and money he would spend much of both on
dress," he said. "He loves to make a fine appearance."

"You say nothing but the truth," said Robert frankly. "I hope some day
to have the very best clothes that are made. A man who respects his
clothes respects himself. I know no sin in trying to please the eyes of
others and incidentally myself. I note, Tayoga, that on occasion you
array yourself with great splendor, and that, at all times, you're very
particular about your attire."

"It is so, Dagaeoga. I spoke in terms of approval, not of criticism. Are
you satisfied with yourself?"

"As much as possible under the circumstances. If I could achieve the
change merely by making a wish I'd have the coat and breeches of a
somewhat richer hue, and the buckles on the shoes considerably larger,
but they'll do. Shall we sit here and rest until Caterina calls us for
supper?"

"I think so, Dagaeoga."

But it was not long until the summons came, and they went into the great
dining-room, where the elder company was already gathered. Besides Mr.
Huysman, Benjamin Hardy, Jonathan Pillsbury, and Alexander McLean, there
were Nicholas Ten Broeck and Oliver Suydam, two of Albany's most solid
burghers, and Alan Hervey, another visitor from New York, a thin man of
middle years and shrewd looks, whom Robert took to be a figure in
finance and trade. All the elders seemed to know one another well, and
to be on the best of terms.

Robert and Tayoga were presented duly, and made their modest
acknowledgments, sitting together near the end of the table.

"These lads, young as they are," said Master Jacobus Huysman, "have had
much experience of the present war. One of them was a prisoner of the
French at Ticonderoga and saw the whole battle, while the other fought
in it. Before that they were in innumerable encounters and other perils,
usually with the great hunter, David Willet, of whom you all know, and
who, I regret, is not here."

"It is no more than thousands of others have done," said Robert,
blushing under his tan.

Hervey regarded him and Tayoga with interest. The Onondaga was in full
Indian dress, but Albany was used to the Iroquois, and that fact was not
at all exceptional.

"War is a terrible thing," he said, "and whether a nation is or is not
to endure depends very much upon its youth."

"We always think that present youth is inferior to what our own youth
was," said Mr. Hardy. "That, I believe, is a common human failing. But
