his malady."

"I cannot so far, though that does not prove that he is not sick; but I
will venture to say he could not get his discharge from the navy on his
present symptoms. He may have drunk too much wine or whiskey recently,
though he certainly was not in liquor when he came on board."

"How is your patient, Dr. Connelly?" asked Captain Battleton, joining
them at this moment.

"About the same the last time I saw him. He ate all the toast I sent
to him, and seemed to enjoy it. I don't think he is in a dangerous
condition," replied the surgeon.

"I am glad to hear it. Have you informed him that we have another
lieutenant on board of the Vernon?" continued the commander.

"No, captain: I have not. That is not my affair, and I don't meddle with
what does not concern me."

"An excellent rule. Is he aware of the fact that there is another
Richmond in the field?"

"If he is, he has said nothing to me about the matter."

"Do you think he could go out into the cabin, doctor?" asked the
captain. "I wish to see him on a matter of the utmost importance.
Is he dressed?"

"He is; he dressed himself this morning, and sits up part of the time."

"Then you will oblige me by getting him into the cabin; I mean my cabin.
I will be there in ten minutes."

The surgeon went below, leaving the commander and Christy together.

"Can you make anything of this affair yet, Mr. Passford?" asked Captain
Battleton.

"I can come to no conclusion in regard to it, though I may be able to
do so when I have seen my double," replied Christy, whose curiosity
in regard to the sick officer was strongly excited. "It looks like a
conspiracy of some kind, but I can go no farther in the direction of a
solution."

The commander looked at his watch after they had conversed a little
while longer, and then invited Christy to visit his cabin with him.
The other Lieutenant Passford was seated in an arm-chair at the table.
Christy looked at him with the deepest interest, but the back of the
other was turned to him, and he did not get a full view of his face. The
sick man was dressed in the naval uniform with the shoulder straps of a
lieutenant.

"I wish to introduce a gentleman to you; Lieutenant Passford, let me
make you acquainted with Lieutenant Passford," said the commander as he
led the way into the captain's cabin.

"Thank you, Captain Battleton; I shall be very happy to make the
acquaintance of Lieutenant Passford," said the occupant of the cabin,
rising as he spoke, and approaching Christy. "Corny Passford!" exclaimed
the sick officer. "I did not expect to see you here. This gentleman is
my own cousin, Captain Battleton, though I am sorry to say that he is
a rebel; but for all that he is one of the finest fellows in the known
world, and you will appreciate everything about him except his politics,
which I do not admire myself."

Christy was not stunned or overwhelmed by this impudent speech. He
looked at the speaker, and promptly recognized his cousin Corny. He was
astonished at the brazen assurance of the other, for he had always
seemed to him to be a fairly modest young man. Corny extended his hand
to Christy, and it was accepted.

"I am very glad to see you, Corny," said he of the South, "and not the
less glad because the meeting is so unexpected."

"It is certainly very unexpected on my part, Corny," replied Christy,
who began to comprehend the object of his cousin; but there was
something so ludicrous in the situation that he was more disposed
to laugh than to look upon it seriously.

"I am very glad to see you, Corny," continued he who bore that name in
reality. "I did not expect to find you on board of the Vernon. How are
uncle Homer, aunt Lydia, and Gerty?"

"I have not seen _my_ uncle Homer for several months; but I had not the
remotest idea that you had an uncle Homer," replied Christy, laughing
heartily, for the situation seemed so amusing to him that the serious
part of his cousin's obvious plan had so far hardly dawned upon him.
"I should like to inquire of you, as one good turn deserves another,
in regard to the health of your father and mother and Gerty."

"My father is quite well, but he left Bonnydale last Tuesday to go to
Washington, and had not returned when I left home. My mother is quite
well, and so is Florry," replied the sick officer, who did not appear
to be suffering from a very severe headache just then, for he was quite
cheerful and animated.

"This appears to be a family party," interposed Captain Battleton, who
was very much amused to hear each of the young officers call the other
by the same name, and both of them appeared to be Corny Passford.

"It is a family party, captain," replied the sick officer, smiling as
cheerfully as though he had never had any practical knowledge of
headache and pains in the bones, which was the description of his malady
given to the surgeon. "As I have hinted before, my cousin Corny is a
rebel of the first order; and you can imagine my astonishment at finding
him in the uniform of a lieutenant on board a United States naval
vessel."

"Good, Corny!" exclaimed Christy, dropping upon the divan of the cabin
and laughing heartily.

"I can easily imagine your astonishment, Mr. Passford, for it seems to
me to be a very remarkable state of things," added the captain, as he
looked from one to the other of the claimants. "One thing seems to be
admitted by both of you, that you are both Passfords, and that you are
cousins."

"So far we do not disagree by the breadth of a hair. My cousin Corny was
_raised_ in the South, while I was raised in the North," continued the
sick passenger.

"I don't like to contradict my cousin, but I was _brought up_ in the
North," said Christy, hoping Captain Battleton would notice the
difference in the phraseology.

"Then you were both brought up in the North," suggested the captain.

"Not at all, for, as I said, my cousin Corny was brought up in the
South, at Glenfield, near Mobile," protested the ailing officer, who
was careful this time not to use the word "raised."

"Where were you yesterday, Corny?" asked Christy, suddenly suppressing
his mirth.

"I was in New York, preparing to come on board of the Vernon."

"Then you were not at Bonnydale?" demanded Christy sharply.

"Of course I was there; but it was a pretty day, and I went to the city
to attend to some affairs of mine," replied the sick man, with the first
signs of embarrassment he had exhibited.

"In spite of the fact that it was a pretty day, I should think you would
have spent your last day on shore with your mother and sister as I did,"
replied Christy.

"I was sick, and I wished to be as near the Vernon as possible. I felt
better in the afternoon and attended to my affairs; but I got bad again
in the afternoon, and I came on board in the evening, for I was afraid I
should not be able to do so in the morning," answered the invalid,
becoming as lively as before.

"Gentlemen, this seems to be a strange muddle," said the captain,
who was not disposed to listen any longer to the sparring between the
cousins. "At the suggestion of the lieutenant who came on board this
forenoon, I have taken the earliest opportunity to settle the question
as to which is the original and genuine Mr. Passford who was ordered on
board of the Vernon as a passenger for the Gulf, and who, I am informed,
is appointed to the command of the Bronx. I have not much time to spare,
and if you do not object, I shall call in the first lieutenant and the
surgeon to take part in this conference. I am perplexed, and I desire
witnesses if not assistants in these proceedings."

"I have not the slightest objection to the presence of as many officers
as you may choose to call in," added the invalid.

"I shall be equally reasonable," said Christy. "The more witnesses there
are the better it will suit me."

Captain Battleton struck a bell on his table, and sent the steward who
answered it to procure the attendance of the officers indicated, and
they soon presented themselves.

"Gentlemen, Lieutenant Salisbury, the executive officer of the Vernon,"
said the captain. "Both of these gentlemen are Lieutenant Christopher
Passford," he added, with a twinkle of the eye. "Dr. Connelly, you have
both met."

"Are we to understand that one of these officers is the double of the
other?" asked the first lieutenant, who seemed to be disposed to take in
the situation as a pleasantry of the commander.

"Hardly; both of them claim to be the same officer, and I have invited
you to assist me in deciding which is the real Mr. Passford."

The entire party then seated themselves at the table.




CHAPTER VI

THE CONFERENCE IN THE CAPTAIN'S CABIN


Captain Horatio Passford lived at Bonnydale on the Hudson. He was rich
in several millions of dollars, but he was richer in the possession of
a noble character, one of the most prominent traits of which was his
patriotism. He had presented his large and fast-sailing steam yacht to
the government of the nation at the beginning of the struggle. His motto
was, "Stand by the Union," and from the first he had done everything in
his power to sustain his country against the assaults of dissolution.

  [Illustration: The Conference in the Captain's Cabin.--Page 70.]

He had a wife, a daughter, and a son, and his family were as patriotic
as he was himself. At sixteen Christy, the son, had gone into the navy.
He had learned to be a sailor and an engineer in his repeated cruises in
the Bellevite, his father's large steam yacht, now a man-of-war in the
navy. In two years the young man had worked his way up to the rank of
lieutenant. He was very large for his age, and his nautical and
mechanical education had prepared him for service to a degree which
made him almost a prodigy, though his courage and skill had been fully
equalled, if not surpassed, by other naval officers not older than
himself.

Homer Passford, the only brother of his father, had early in life
settled in Alabama, and become a planter, where he had made a
respectable fortune, though he was a poor man compared with the northern
brother. He had a wife, a son, and a daughter. At the beginning of the
war of the Rebellion he had promptly espoused the cause of the South,
and from his point of view, he was fully as patriotic as his brother on
the other side. He was ready to give himself, his son, and his fortune
to the independence of the South. His character was quite as noble as
that of his brother, and he had done all he could in person and with his
wealth to insure the success of the Southern cause.

His son Cornelius followed the lead of his father, and was faithful
to the teachings given him in his southern home. He had enlisted as a
soldier; but when it was found that he could be more serviceable to the
Confederacy in certain irregular enterprizes, he was detached for this
service. He had been engaged in an attempt to capture the Bellevite in
connection with older and more skilful persons. The plan had failed,
Corny had been severely wounded, and while on parole had lived at
Bonnydale. From there he had been sent to a military prison, and had
been exchanged. From that time, Christy knew nothing about him until he
met him on board of the Vernon.

Corny was two years older than Christy; but the latter looked even more
mature than the former. The resemblance between them had hardly been
noticed by the two families, though Christy had spent several months
at different times at the plantation of his uncle. But the resemblance
was noted and often spoken of by persons outside of the families,
the members of which, being in the habit of seeing them often together,
did not notice the similarity of features and expression. Both of them
resembled their fathers, who were often mistaken the one for the other
in their early years.

After he found that the sick officer was his cousin Corny Passford,
Christy began to apprehend the object of his southern relative in
presenting himself as the bearer of his name and rank in the navy,
though he had no time to consider the subject. Corny had given him no
opportunity to look the matter over, for he had talked most of the time
as opportunity was presented.

Captain Battleton seated himself in the armchair which Corny had
abandoned, and placed a quire of paper before him as though he intended
to take notes of the proceedings. Christy was not at all disturbed
by the formal aspect the affair was assuming, for he felt entirely
confident that poor Corny would be a prisoner of war at its conclusion.
He had his commission and his orders in his pocket, and he was positive
that they would vindicate him.

"I reported to the department that I had only a single vacant stateroom
in the ward room of the Vernon, and I was ordered to receive Lieutenant
Christopher Passford as a passenger, as I could not take another
officer," said the captain. "It is not a serious question compared
with others at issue, but the occupation of the single room, now in
possession of the gentleman who came on board last evening, depends
upon the result of our present inquiry."

"I should say there would be no difficulty in settling this question,"
said Mr. Salisbury.

"These gentlemen are cousins, and both of them bear the name of
Passford," added the captain, as he raised his finger, pointing to
Corny. "Will you give us your name in full, if you please?"

"Christopher Passford," replied the invalid officer, with the most
unblushing effrontery.

"Your father's name?"

"Horatio Passford."

"Where does he live?"

"At Bonnydale, on the Hudson," replied Corny confidently.

"Excuse me, Captain Battleton; may I ask a question?" interposed the
first lieutenant.

"Certainly, Mr. Salisbury. This is not a court-martial, but an informal
investigation, and I shall be glad to have you and Dr. Connelly entirely
free to ask any questions you please," replied the captain, who was
anything but a martinet.

"Where did you say your father lived, Mr. Passford?" asked the executive
officer.

"At Bonnydale, on the Hudson," answered Corny, as we may call him now
that the reader knows who he is.

"Is Bonnydale the name of the town or city in which your father lives?"

"It is the name of my father's place," replied Corny; and Christy, who
was observing him very closely, saw that he was a little disturbed.

"Bonnydale sounds like a fancy name, such as any gentleman might give to
his estate, as Sunnyside was the home of Washington Irving. Is this the
fact?" asked Mr. Salisbury.

"I suppose it is," answered Corny, with increasing confusion.

"Don't you know?"

"We always called it Bonnydale; and I know no other name for it."

"But Bonnydale is not an incorporated town. In what city or town is your
father's place situated?"

"I know no name but Bonnydale," replied Corny; and the flush of fever or
something else was on his cheeks now.

"Nothing more, captain," said the first lieutenant; and the stock of the
other claimant mounted a little.

"Mr. Passford," continued the captain, indicating Christy with his
finger, "your father's name, if you please."

"Horatio Passford," replied Christy with a smile.

"Where does he live?"

"At Bonnydale, on the Hudson."

"Permit me, Captain Battleton," interposed Mr. Salisbury; and the
commander nodded his acquiescence. "Is Bonnydale the name of the town
or city in which your father lives, Mr. Passford?"

"It is the name of my father's place," answered Christy, using the same
words that Corny had.

"Bonnydale sounds like a fancy name, such as any gentleman might give
to his estate," continued Mr. Salisbury, smiling, as he repeated the
phrases he had used before. "Is this the fact?"

"It is; the name was given to the estate by my mother," replied Christy,
unable to follow Corny any farther.

"In what town or city is your father's estate situated?"

"It is within the limits of the town of Montgomery."

"Nothing further, captain," said the executive officer; and the stock of
this particular Lieutenant Passford mounted another trifle.

"Your cousin, who, according to your statement, was raised in the South,
seems to be better informed in regard to the geography of Bonnydale than
you do," added Captain Battleton.

"He is always inquiring into things that I don't care a straw about,"
replied Corny, vexed that he had been tripped up in a matter so simple.

The commander was disposed to carry the investigation a little farther
in the same direction, and he sent Christy into the ward room, where
he was instructed to remain until he was sent for. Captain Passford,
senior, was well known to all the officers present by reputation, and
he had assisted Dr. Connelly in procuring his appointment, so that the
latter had had occasion to visit Bonnydale three times.

The captain asked Corny a hundred questions in regard to the estate,
making memoranda of his answers. Once he suggested to the surgeon that
he had better examine the pulse of his patient, for he did not wish to
overtask him in the investigation. The subject of the inquiry declared
that his headache had almost disappeared, and he needed no indulgence on
account of his health.

After half an hour of questioning, Corny was sent to the ward room, and
Christy was called to the captain's cabin. About the same questions were
put to him as to his cousin; but both of them were prompt in their
answers. In the last two years, Corny had been more at Bonnydale than
Christy, and he was quite as much at home there, so that there was no
reason why he should not be able to describe the mansion and its
surroundings as accurately as the genuine Lieutenant Passford.

So far, Corny, with the single exception of his failure to give the
geography of the estate, stood quite as well as his cousin. Then the
first lieutenant questioned them both, as they were seated at the table,
in a very general way. In their answers, Corny used the word "raised,"
while Christy was "brought up." Several phrases in more common use at
the South than at the North were noted in his answers, which did not
appear in the diction of Christy.

When the questioning was finished, the leaning of the trio of officers
was in favor of Christy; but not one of them said anything in the
presence of the two Passfords. The captain declared that he had already
used up too much time in the inquiry, and he must close the conference
very soon. Then he asked if either of the gentlemen had any papers they
wished to present in support of his identity.

"I have my commission as a lieutenant, and my orders to take passage
in the Vernon, and to take command of the Bronx on my arrival at the
station of the Eastern Gulf squadron," said Corny, as he pulled a huge
envelope from his breast pocket; and Christy could not but notice the
perfect confidence with which he spoke.

"I have precisely the same papers," added Christy, with as much
assurance as his cousin.

"I had nearly forgotten the most important evidence that can be
presented in this matter," said the captain with a smile. "I dare say
that each of the gentlemen will produce his commission, his orders, and
his appointment to the command of the Bronx; and I don't know how we can
decide between the papers. It looks as though the Bronx was likely to
have two commanders."

"Here are my papers, captain," added Corny, as he passed his envelope
across the table to the commander.

"This is not an official envelope," said the captain, as he took the
package, and then fixed his gaze on the owner of the documents.

"No, sir; it is not. I had the misfortune to leave it on the table at
Bonnydale, and Walsh, the man-servant, supposing it to be of no value,
threw it into the fire," replied Corny promptly.

The commission and other papers were all right in every respect. Christy
handed his envelope to the commander, and he broke it open. It contained
nothing but a lot of blank paper.


