working up the exposure of the treason of Davis, who might have been a
relative of the distinguished gentleman at the head of the Southern
Confederacy, though there was no evidence to this effect.

"If the captain of this steamer manages his affair well with the Ionian,
I expect to find letters on board of her signed by Davis," continued Mr.
Gilfleur. "From the information I obtained, your father put American
detectives on the scent of Davis, who dogged him day and night till they
found the Ionian, and ascertained in what manner she obtained her cargo;
but she had been partly loaded before they reached a conclusion, and it
is suspected that she has arms under the pieces of machinery, perhaps
cannon and ammunition."

The detective continued to explain his operations at greater length than
it is necessary to report them. Christy listened till nearly midnight,
and then he went on deck to ascertain the position of the chase before
he turned in. He found the captain on the quarter-deck, vigilant and
faithful to his duty, and evidently determined that the Ionian should
not elude him.

"You are up late, Mr. Passford," said the captain, when he recognized
his passenger in the gloom of the night.

"I have been busy, and I came on deck to see where the Ionian was before
I turned in," replied Christy.

"I think the rascal has a suspicion that we have some business with him,
for at four bells he turned his head in for the shore," added the
commander. "If you go forward you will see that we have dowsed every
glim on board, even to our mast-head and side lights."

"You are carrying no starboard and port light?"

"None; but we have a strong lookout aloft, and in every other available
place. When the chase headed for the shore, we kept on our course for
half an hour, and then put out the lights. We came about and went off to
the eastward for another half-hour. Coming about, we went to the
westward till we made her out, for she has not extinguished her lights.
It is dark enough to conceal the ship from her, and no doubt she thinks
we are still far to the southward of her. At any rate, she has resumed
her former course, which was about south, half west."

Christy was satisfied with this explanation, for the Ionian was doing
just what she was expected to do. She was not inclined to be overhauled
by a gunboat, and she had attempted to dodge the Chateaugay. Besides, if
she were bound to Wilmington, as her clearance stated, she would turn to
the south-west two or three points by this time. The young officer
seated himself in his room, and figured on the situation. If the steamer
were making an honest voyage she would not be more than twenty miles off
Absecum light at this time, and ought to be within ten of the coast.

At two bells Christy was still in his chair, and when he heard the bells
he decided to go on deck again, for he felt that the time would soon
come to settle every doubt in regard to the character of the Ionian. He
found the commander still at his post, and he looked out for the chase.
It was not more than a mile distant, and hardly to be seen in the gloom
of a dark night.

"On deck again, Mr. Passford?" said Captain Chantor.

"Yes, sir; I am too much interested in this affair to sleep; besides,
I feel as though I had slept at home enough to last me six months,"
replied the passenger. "It seems to me that the question of that
vessel's destination is to be decided about this time, or at least
within an hour or two."

Christy explained the calculation he had been making, in which the
captain agreed with him, and declared that he had been over the same
course of reasoning. Both of them thought the Ionian would not wait till
daylight to change her course, as it would be more perilous to do so
then than in the darkness.

"I am confident that she has not seen the Chateaugay since we put out
the lights," said the captain. "At the present moment we must be off
Absecum; but we cannot see the light. She is far off her course for
Wilmington."

"That is plain enough."

"What she will do depends upon whether or not she suspects that a
man-of-war is near her. We shall soon know, for she is already in a
position to justify her capture."

"Better make sure of her course before that is done," suggested Christy,
who felt that he was permitted to say as much as this.

"I don't intend to act till we are south of Cape Henlopen," added the
commander promptly. "Before we do anything, I shall formally consult
you, Mr. Passford, as I am advised to do."

"I shall be happy to serve as a volunteer, and I will obey your orders
without question, and as strictly as any officer on board."

"That is handsome, considering the position in which you have been
placed on board, Mr. Passford, and I appreciate the delicacy of your
conduct."

Christy remained on deck another hour, and at the end of that time a
quartermaster came aft to report that the chase had changed her course
farther to the eastward. This proved to be the fact on examination by
the officers on the quarter-deck, and as nearly as could be made out she
was now headed to the south-east.

"But that will not take her to the Bahama Islands," suggested Christy.

"Certainly not; and she may not be bound to Nassau, as stated in those
letters. But it is useless to speculate on her destination, for we shall
be in condition in the morning to form an opinion," replied the captain.
"I shall keep well astern of her till morning; and if there should be
any change in her movements, I will have you called, Mr. Passford."

Christy considered this a sage conclusion, and he turned in on the
strength of it. He was not disturbed during the remaining hours of the
night. He had taken more exercise than usual that day, and he slept
soundly, as he was in the habit of doing. The bell forward indicated
eight o'clock when he turned out. Breakfast was all ready, but he
hastened on deck to ascertain the position of the chase. The captain was
not on the quarter-deck, but the first lieutenant was planking the deck
for his morning "constitutional."

"Good-morning, Mr. Birdwing," said Christy.

"Good-morning, Mr. Passford; I hope you are very well this morning,"
replied the executive officer.

"Quite well, I thank you, sir. But what has become of the chase?" asked
the passenger, for the Ionian did not appear to be in sight, and he
began to be anxious about her.

"Still ahead of us, sir; but she cannot be seen without a glass. I was
called with the morning watch, when the captain turned in. His policy is
to keep the Ionian so that we may know just where she is, and also to
give her the idea that she is running away from us," replied Mr.
Birdwing, as he took a glass from the brackets and handed it to Christy.

The young officer could just make out the steamer with the aid of the
glass. The Chateaugay was following her; and a glance at the compass
gave her course as south-east, half south. Christy had sailed the Bronx
over this course, and he knew where it would bring up.

"It is plain enough, Mr. Birdwing, that the Ionian is not bound to
Nassau," said he.

"So Captain Chantor said when I came on deck," replied the first
lieutenant.

"And it is equally plain where she is bound," added Christy. "That
course means the Bermuda Islands, and doubtless that is her
destination."

"So the captain said."

The passenger was satisfied, and went below for his breakfast. He found
Mr. Gilfleur at the table; and as the fact that the Chateaugay was
chasing the Ionian was well understood in the ward room, Christy did not
hesitate to tell him the news. The Frenchman bestowed one of his
penetrating glances upon his associate, and said nothing. After the meal
was finished they retired to the detective's room. Mr. Gilfleur looked
over his papers very industriously for a few minutes.

"This affair is not working exactly as it should," said he, as he
selected a letter from his files. "I supposed this steamer would proceed
directly to Nassau. Read this letter, Mr. Passford."

"Colonel Richard Pierson!" exclaimed Christy, as he saw to whom the
letter was addressed.

"Anything strange about the address?" asked the detective.

"Perhaps nothing strange; but I saw this gentleman in Nassau two years
ago," replied Christy, as he recalled the events of his first trip to
Mobile in the Bellevite. "I can say of my own knowledge that he is a
Confederate agent, and was trying to purchase vessels there. This letter
is signed by Hillman Davis."

"The American traitor," added Mr. Gilfleur; and both of them were using
the French language.

"He says he shall send the machinery and other merchandise to Nassau to
be reshipped to Mobile," continued Christy, reading the letter. "He adds
that he has bought the steamer Ionian for this purpose, and he expects
to be paid in full for her. I think that is quite enough to condemn the
steamer."

"Undoubtedly; but what is the Ionian to do in the Bermudas? That is what
perplexes me," said the detective.

"Possibly Captain Chantor can solve the problem, for I am sure I
cannot," answered the young officer, as he rose from his seat.

He was as much perplexed as his companion, and he went on deck to wait
the appearance of the commander. About nine o'clock he came upon the
quarter-deck. The Ionian remained at the same relative distance from the
Chateaugay, for the captain had given an order to this effect before he
turned in.

"I am glad to see you, Captain Chantor," said Christy. "Can you explain
why the Ionian is headed for the Bermudas, for you have later
information than any in my possession?"

"I think I can," replied the captain, taking a letter from his pocket.
"This is the contents of the last envelope brought off from the shore.
The writer of it says he has just addressed a letter to 'our friend in
New York,' directing him, if it is not too late, to send the steamer
with the machinery and other merchandise to the Bermudas, where the
cargo will be transferred to the Dornoch; for the Ovidio had been
obliged to sail without her armament, and the cargo was too valuable to
be risked without protection."

"That is the reason why the reinforcement was sent off at the last
moment," Christy remarked.

"The Dornoch carries six guns and fifty men," added the captain, reading
from the letter. "I think we need not wait any longer to take possession
of the Ionian, Mr. Passford. What is your opinion?"

"I concur entirely with you," replied Christy.

"Quartermaster, strike four bells," continued the captain to the man who
was conning the wheel.

"Four bells," repeated the quartermaster; and the gong could be heard on
deck as he did so.

In the course of half an hour, for the steam had been kept rather low
for the slow progress the ship was obliged to make in order not to alarm
the chase, the Chateaugay began to show what she could do in the matter
of speed, and before noon she had overhauled the Ionian.




CHAPTER VI

THE BOARDING OF THE IONIAN


The Chateaugay, with her colors flying, ran abreast of the Ionian and by
her; but the latter did not show her flag. A blank cartridge was then
fired, but the steamer took no notice of it. A shot was then discharged
across her fore foot, and this brought her to her senses, so that she
hoisted the British flag, and stopped her screw. All the preparations
had been made for boarding her, and two boats were in readiness to
discharge this duty.

The first cutter, in charge of Mr. Birdwing, was the first to leave the
ship. The sea was quite smooth, so that there was no difficulty in
getting the boats off. The first lieutenant's boat went from the
starboard side, and the second cutter was lowered on the port in charge
of the third lieutenant. Christy went in the first boat, and Mr.
Gilfleur in the second. The officers and crews of both boats were
especially directed to see that nothing was thrown overboard from the
Ionian; for if her captain found that he was in a "tight place," he
would be likely to heave his papers into the sea.

The first cutter had not made half the distance to the Ionian before she
pulled down the British flag and hoisted the American in its place. Her
commander evidently believed that he was getting into hot water, and
well he might. He must have been selected for this enterprise on account
of his fitness for it, and as the steamer had not sailed on an honest
voyage, he could not be an honest man, and the officers of the boats
despised him. They were determined to discharge their duty faithfully,
even if they were obliged to treat him with the utmost rigor.

"She has corrected her first blunder," said Mr. Birdwing, as the
American flag went up to her peak. "The skipper of that craft don't
exactly know what he is about."

"It must be a surprise to him to be brought to by a United States
man-of-war," added Christy.

"But why did the fool hoist the British flag when he has no papers to
back it up? That would have done very well among the blockaders,"
continued the officer of the boat. "I don't know very much about this
business, and the captain ordered me to let you and the French gentleman
in the other boat have your own way on board of her, and to do all you
required. Have you any directions for me?"

"We desire to have the steamer thoroughly searched, and I have little
doubt that we shall ask you to take possession of her," replied Christy.

"Then we are to make a capture of it?" asked the first lieutenant,
manifesting no little surprise.

"Under certain circumstances, yes."

"Is she a Confederate vessel?"

"No; she is an American vessel."

"All right; but I shall obey my orders to the very letter," added Mr.
Birdwing. "How many men shall I put on board of her?"

"Twelve, if you please," replied Christy, who had arranged the plan with
the detective.

"Six from each boat," said the executive officer; and then he hailed the
second cutter, and directed Mr. Carlin to send this number on board of
the Ionian.

"And, if you please, direct him to board the steamer on the starboard
side, for I take it you will board on the port," added Christy. "We fear
that she will throw certain papers overboard, and we must prevent that
if possible."

The order was given to the third lieutenant, and in a few minutes more
the first cutter came alongside the steamer. Mr. Birdwing ordered those
on board to drop the accommodation ladder over the side; and for so mild
a gentleman he did it in a very imperative tone. The order was obeyed,
though it appeared to be done very reluctantly. The first lieutenant was
the first to mount the ladder, and was closely followed by his
passenger.

"Where is the captain?" demanded Mr. Birdwing, as the six men detailed
for the purpose were coming over the side.

"I am the captain," replied an ill-favored looking man, stepping forward
with very ill grace.

"What steamer is this?"

"The Ionian, of New York, bound to St. George's, Bermuda," replied the
captain in a crusty tone.

"The captain's name?" demanded the officer, becoming more imperative as
the commander of the Ionian manifested more of his crabbed disposition.

"Captain Sawlock," growled the ill-favored master of the steamer, who
was a rather short man, thick-set, with a face badly pitted by the
small-pox, but nearly covered with a grizzly and tangled beard.

"You will oblige me by producing your papers, Captain Sawlock,"
continued Mr. Birdwing.

"For a good reason, my papers are not regular," answered the captain of
the Ionian, with an attempt to be more affable, though it did not seem
to be in his nature to be anything but a brute in his manners.

"Regular or not, you will oblige me by exhibiting them," the officer
insisted.

"It is not my fault that a change was made in my orders after I got
under way," pleaded Captain Sawlock.

"Will you produce your clearance and other papers?" demanded the
lieutenant very decidedly.

"This is an American vessel, and you have no right to overhaul me in
this manner," growled the captain of the steamer.

"You are in command of a steamer, and you cannot be so ignorant as to
believe that an officer of a man-of-war has not the right to require you
to show your papers," added Mr. Birdwing with a palpable sneer.

"This is an American vessel," repeated Captain Sawlock.

"Then why did you hoist the British flag?"

"That's my business!"

"But it is mine also. Do you decline to show your papers? You are
trifling with me," said Mr. Birdwing impatiently.

At this moment there was a scuffle in the waist of the steamer, which
attracted the attention of all on the deck. Mr. Gilfleur had suddenly
thrown himself on the first officer of the Ionian; and when his second
officer and several sailors had gone to his assistance, the third
lieutenant of the Chateaugay had rushed in to the support of the
Frenchman. The man-of-war's men were all armed with cutlasses and
revolvers; but they did not use their weapons, and it looked like a
rough-and-tumble fight on the deck.

Mr. Birdwing and Christy rushed over to the starboard side of the
steamer; but Mr. Carlin and his men had so effectively sustained the
detective that the affray had reached a conclusion before they could
interfere. Mr. Gilfleur was crawling out from under two or three men who
had thrown themselves upon him when he brought the first officer to the
deck by jumping suddenly upon him. The Frenchman had in his hand a tin
case about a foot in length, and three inches in diameter, such as are
sometimes used to contain charters, or similar valuable papers.

The contest had plainly been for the possession of this case, which the
quick eye of the detective had discovered as the mate was carrying it
forward; for Mr. Carlin had sent two of his men to the stern at the
request of the Frenchman, charged to allow no one to throw anything
overboard. The first officer of the Ionian had listened to the
conversation between Captain Sawlock and the first lieutenant, and had
gone below into the cabin when it began to be a little stormy.

"What does all this mean, Mr. Carlin?" inquired Mr. Birdwing.

"I simply obeyed my orders to support Mr. Gilfleur; and he can explain
his action better than I can," replied the third lieutenant.

"I have requested the officers, through Captain Chantor, to see that
nothing was thrown overboard, either before or after we boarded the
steamer," interposed Christy.

"And the captain's order has been obeyed," added the first lieutenant.
"Will you explain the cause of this affray, Mr. Gilfleur?"

"With the greatest pleasure," answered the detective with one of his
politest bows. "While you were talking with the captain of the Ionian,
I saw the first officer of this steamer go into the cabin. I was told by
a sailor that he was the mate. In a minute or two he came on deck again,
and I saw that he had something under his coat. He moved forward, and
was going to the side when I jumped upon him. After a struggle I took
this tin case from him."

The detective stepped forward, and handed the tin case to the executive
officer as gracefully as though he had been figuring in a ballroom.
Captain Sawlock had followed the officers over from the port side. He
appeared to be confounded, and listened in silence to the explanation of
Mr. Gilfleur. But he looked decidedly ugly.

"That case is my personal, private property," said he, as soon as it was
in the hands of the chief officer of the boarding-party.

"I don't dispute it, Captain Sawlock; but at the same time I intend to
examine its contents," replied Mr. Birdwing mildly, but firmly.

"This is an outrage, Mr. Officer!" exclaimed the discomfited master.

"If it is, I am responsible for it," added the executive officer, as he
removed the cover from the end of the case.

"I protest against this outrage! I will not submit to it!" howled
Captain Sawlock, carried away by his wrath.

"Perhaps you will," said Mr. Birdwing quietly.

"But I will not!"
