was real water,--a real pond where there never had been a pond before.
It was very still there in the heart of the Green Forest. It was always
very still there, but it seemed stiller than usual as he tramped around
the edge of this strange pond. He felt as if it were all a dream. He
wondered if pretty soon he wouldn't wake up and find it all untrue. But
he didn't, and so he kept on tramping until presently he came to a
dam,--a splendid dam of logs and sticks and mud. Over the top of it the
water was running, and down in the Green Forest below he could hear the
Laughing Brook just beginning to laugh once more. Farmer Brown's boy sat
down with his elbows on his knees and his chin in his hands. He was
almost too much surprised to even think.

[Illustration]




VIII

PETER RABBIT GETS A DUCKING


Farmer Brown's boy sat with his chin in his hands staring at the new
pond in the Green Forest and at the dam which had made it. That dam
puzzled him. Who could have built it? What did they build it for? Why
hadn't he heard them chopping? He looked carelessly at the stump of one
of the trees, and then a still more puzzled look made deep furrows
between his eyes. It looked--yes, it looked very much as if teeth, and
not an axe, had cut down that tree. Farmer Brown's boy stared and
stared, his mouth gaping wide open. He looked so funny that Peter
Rabbit, who was hiding under an old pile of brush close by, nearly
laughed right out.

But Peter didn't laugh. No, Sir, Peter didn't laugh, for just that very
minute something happened. Sniff! Sniff! That was right behind him at
the very edge of the old brush-pile, and every hair on Peter stood on
end with fright.

"Bow, wow, wow!" It seemed to Peter that the great voice was right in
his very ears. It frightened him so that he just _had_ to jump. He
didn't have time to think. And so he jumped right out from under the
pile of brush and of course right into plain sight. And the very instant
he jumped there came another great roar behind him. Of course it was
from Bowser the Hound. You see, Bowser had been following the trail of
his master, but as he always stops to sniff at everything he passes, he
had been some distance behind. When he came to the pile of brush under
which Peter was hiding he had sniffed at that, and of course he had
smelled Peter right away.

Now when Peter jumped out so suddenly, he had landed right at one end
of the dam. The second roar of Bowser's great voice frightened him still
more, and he jumped right up on the dam. There was nothing for him to do
now but go across, and it wasn't the best of going. No, indeed, it
wasn't the best of going. You see, it was mostly a tangle of sticks.
Happy Jack Squirrel or Chatterer the Red Squirrel or Striped Chipmunk
would have skipped across it without the least trouble. But Peter Rabbit
has no sharp little claws with which to cling to logs and sticks, and
right away he was in a peck of trouble. He slipped down between the
sticks, scrambled out, slipped again, and then, trying to make a long
jump, he lost his balance and--tumbled heels over head into the water!

Poor Peter Rabbit! He gave himself up for lost this time. He could swim,
but at best he is a poor swimmer and doesn't like the water. He couldn't
dive and keep out of sight like Jerry Muskrat or Billy Mink. All he
could do was to paddle as fast as his legs would go. The water had gone
up his nose and down his throat so that he choked, and all the time he
felt sure that Bowser the Hound would plunge in after him and catch him.
And if he shouldn't, why Farmer Brown's Boy would simply wait for him to
come ashore and then catch him.

But Farmer Brown's boy didn't do anything of the kind. No, Sir, he
didn't. Instead he shouted to Bowser and called him away. Bowser didn't
want to come, but he long ago learned to obey, and very slowly he walked
over to where his master was sitting.

"You know it wouldn't be fair, old fellow, to try to catch Peter now. It
wouldn't be fair at all, and we never want to do anything unfair, do
we?" said he. Perhaps Bowser didn't agree, but he wagged his tail as if
he did, and sat down beside his master to watch Peter swim.

It seemed to Peter as if he never, never would reach the shore,
though really it was only a very little distance that he had to
swim. When he did scramble out, he was a sorry looking Rabbit.
He didn't waste any time, but started for home as fast as he could
go, lipperty--lipperty--lip. And Farmer Brown's boy and Bowser the
Hound just laughed and didn't try to catch him at all.

"Well, I never!" exclaimed Sammy Jay, who had seen it all from the
top of a pine-tree. "Well, I never! I guess Farmer Brown's boy isn't
so bad, after all."

[Illustration]




IX

PADDY PLANS A HOUSE


Paddy the Beaver sat on his dam, and his eyes shone with happiness as he
looked out over the shining water of the pond he had made. All around
the edge of it grew the tall trees of the Green Forest. It was very
beautiful and very still and very lonesome. That is, it would have
seemed lonesome to almost any one but Paddy the Beaver. But Paddy never
is lonesome. You see, he finds company in the trees and flowers and all
the little plants.

It was still, very, very still. Over on one side was a beautiful rosy
glow in the water. It was the reflection from jolly, round, red Mr. Sun.
Paddy couldn't see him because of the tall trees, but he knew exactly
what Mr. Sun was doing. He was going to bed behind the Purple Hills.
Pretty soon the little stars would come out and twinkle down at him. He
loves the little stars and always watches for the first one.

Yes, Paddy the Beaver was very happy. He would have been perfectly
happy but for one thing: Farmer Brown's boy had found his dam and pond
that very afternoon, and Paddy wasn't quite sure what Farmer Brown's boy
might do. He had kept himself snugly hidden while Farmer Brown's boy was
there, and he felt quite sure that Farmer Brown's boy didn't know who
had built the dam. But for this very reason he might, he just _might_,
try to find out all about it, and that would mean that Paddy would have
to be always on the watch.

"But what's the use of worrying over troubles that haven't come yet, and
may never come? Time enough to worry when they do come," said Paddy to
himself, which shows that Paddy has a great deal of wisdom in his little
brown head. "The thing for me to do now is to get ready for winter, and
that means a great deal of work," he continued. "Let me see, I've got to
build a house, a big, stout, warm house, where I will be warm and safe
when my pond is frozen over. And I've got to lay in a supply of food,
enough to last me until gentle Sister South Wind comes to prepare the
way for lovely Mistress Spring. My, my, I can't afford to be sitting
here dreaming, when there is such a lot to be done!"

With that Paddy slipped into the water and swam all around his new pond
to make sure of just the best place to build his house. Now placing
one's house in just the right place is a very important matter. Some
people are dreadfully careless about this. Jimmy Skunk, for instance,
often makes the mistake of digging his house (you know Jimmy makes his
house underground) right where every one who happens along that way will
see it. Perhaps that is because Jimmy is so independent that he doesn't
care who knows where he lives.

But Paddy the Beaver never is careless. He always chooses just the very
best place. He makes sure that it is best before he begins. So now,
although he was quite positive just where his house should be, he swam
around the pond to make doubly sure. Then, when he was quite satisfied,
he swam over to the place he had chosen. It was where the water was
quite deep.

"There mustn't be the least chance that the ice will ever get thick
enough to close up my doorway," said he, "and I'm sure it never will
here. I must make the foundations strong and the walls thick. I must
have plenty of mud to plaster with, and inside, up above the water, I
must have the snuggest, warmest room where I can sleep in comfort. This
is the place to build it, and it is high time I was at work."

With that Paddy swam over to the place where he had cut the trees for
his dam, and his heart was light, for he had long ago learned that the
surest way to be happy is to be busy.




X

PADDY STARTS HIS HOUSE


Jerry Muskrat was very much interested when he found that Paddy the
Beaver, who, you know, is his cousin, was building a house. Jerry is a
house-builder himself, and down deep in his heart he very much doubted
if Paddy could build as good a house as he could. His house was down in
the Smiling Pool, and Jerry thought it a very wonderful house indeed,
and was very proud of it. It was built of mud and sod and little alder
and willow twigs and bulrushes. Jerry had spent one winter in it, and he
had decided to spend another there after he had fixed it up a little.
So, as long as he didn't have to build a brand new house, he could
afford the time to watch his cousin Paddy. Perhaps he hoped that Paddy
would ask his advice.

But Paddy did nothing of the kind. He had seen Jerry Muskrat's house,
and he had smiled. But he had taken great pains not to let Jerry see
that smile. He wouldn't have hurt Jerry's feelings for the world. He is
too polite and good-natured to do anything like that. So Jerry sat on
the end of an old log and watched Paddy work. The first thing to build
was the foundation. This was of mud and grass with sticks worked into it
to hold it together. Paddy dug the mud from the bottom of his new pond.
And because the pond was new, there was a great deal of grassy sod
there, which was just what Paddy needed. It was very convenient.

Jerry watched a little while and then, because Jerry is a worker
himself, he just had to get busy and help. Rather timidly he told his
big cousin that he would like to have a share in building the new house.

"All right," replied Paddy, "that will be fine. You can bring mud while
I am getting the sticks and grass."

So Jerry dived down to the bottom of the pond and dug up mud and piled
it on the foundation and was happy. The little stars looked down and
twinkled merrily as they watched the two workers. So the foundation grew
and grew down under the water. Jerry was very much surprised at the size
of it. It was ever and ever so much bigger than the foundation for his
own house. You see, he had forgotten how much bigger Paddy is.

Each night Jerry and Paddy worked, resting during the daytime.
Occasionally Bobby Coon or Reddy Fox or Unc' Billy Possum or Jimmy Skunk
would come to the edge of the pond to see what was going on. Peter
Rabbit came every night. But they couldn't see much because, you know,
Paddy and Jerry were working under water.

But at last Peter was rewarded. There, just above the water, was a
splendid platform of mud and grass and sticks. A great many sticks were
carefully laid as soon as the platform was above the water, for Paddy
was very particular about this. You see, it was to be the floor for the
splendid room he was planning to build. When it suited him, he began to
pile mud in the very middle.
