back to that. We all know pretty well what Mrs. Seymour's made of, now.
Let's go to the children. I'm as good a sick-nurse as most people, and
if you keep up your heart we'll pull them all through before we get to
the Cape."

But with all her zeal (and it did not stop short of a quarrel with the
surgeon) and all her devotion, which never slackened, Mrs. Minchin did
not "pull them all through."

We were just off the Cape when Arthur Curling died. He was my own age,
and in the beginning of the voyage we had been playfellows. Of all the
children who swarmed on deck to the distraction of (at least) the
unmarried officers of the regiment, he had been the noisiest and the
merriest. He made fancy ships in corners, to which he admitted the other
children as fancy passengers, or fancy ship's officers of various
grades. Once he employed a dozen of us to haul at a rope as if we were
"heaving the log." Owing to an unexpected coil, it slackened suddenly,
and we all fell over one another at the feet of two young officers who
were marching up and down, arm-in-arm, absorbed in conversation. Their
anger was loud as well as deep, but it did not deter Arthur Curling from
further exploits, or stop his ceaseless chatter about what he would do
when he was a man and the captain of a vessel.

He did not live to be either the one or the other. Some very rough
weather off the Cape was fatal to him at a critical point in his
illness. How Mrs. Minchin contrived to keep her own feet and to nurse
the poor boy as she did was a marvel. He died on her knees.

The weather had been rough up to the time of his death, but it was a
calm lovely morning on which his body was committed to the deep. The
ship's bell tolled at daybreak, and all the ladies but the bride were
with poor Mrs. Curling at the funeral. Mrs. Seymour lay in her berth,
and whined complaints of "that horrid bell." She displayed something
between an interesting terror and a shrewish anger because there was "a
body on board." When she said that the Curlings ought to be thankful to
have one child less to provide for, the other ladies hurried indignantly
from the cabin.

The early morning air was fresh and mild. The sea and sky were grey, but
peaceful. The decks were freshly washed. The sailors in various parts of
the ship uncovered their heads. The Colonel and several officers were
present. I had earnestly begged to be there also, and finding Mr.
George, I stood with my hand in his.

Mrs. Curling's grief had passed the point of tears. She had not shed one
since the boy died, though Mrs. Minchin had tried hard to move her to
the natural relief of weeping. She only stood in silent agony, though
the Quartermaster's cheeks were wet, and most of the ladies sobbed
aloud.

As the little coffin slid over the hatchway into the quiet sea, the sun
rose, and a long level beam covered the place where the body had gone
down.

Then, with a sudden cry, the mother burst into tears.




CHAPTER V.

A HOME STATION--WHAT MRS. BULLER THOUGHT OF IT--WHAT MAJOR BULLER
THOUGHT OF IT.


Riflebury, in the south of England--our next station--was a very lively
place. "There was always something going on." "Somebody was always
dropping in." "People called and stayed to lunch in a friendly way."
"One was sure of some one at afternoon tea." "What with croquet and
archery in the Gardens, meeting friends on the Esplanade, concerts at
the Rooms, shopping, and changing one's novels at the circulating
library, one really never had a dull hour." So said "everybody;" and one
or two people, including Major Buller, added that "One never had an hour
to one's self."

"If you had any one occupation, you'd know how maddening it is," he
exclaimed, one day, in a fit of desperation.

"Any one occupation!" cried Mrs. Buller, to whom he had spoken. "I'm
sure, Edward, I'm always busy. I never have a quiet moment from morning
to night, it seems to me. But it is so like you men! You can stick to
one thing all along, and your meals come to you as if they dropped out
of the skies, and your clothes come ready-made from the tailor's (and
very dearly they have to be paid for, too!); and when one is ordering
dinner and luncheon, and keeping one's clothes decent, and looking after
the children and the servants, and taking your card, and contriving
excuses that are not fibs for you to the people you ought to call on,
from week's end to week's end--you say one has no occupation."

"Well, well, my dear," said the Major, "I know you have all the trouble
of the household, but I meant to say that if you had any pursuit, any
study----"

"And as to visitors," continued Aunt Theresa, who always pursued her own
train of ideas, irrespective of replies, "I'm sure society's no pleasure
to me; I only call on the people you ought to call on, and keep up a few
acquaintances for the children's sake. You wouldn't have us without a
friend in the world when the girls come out; and really, what with
regimental duties in the morning, and insects afterwards, Edward, you
are so absorbed, that if it wasn't for a lady friend coming in now and
then, I should hardly have a soul to speak to."

The Major was melted in a moment.

"I am afraid I am a very inattentive husband," he said. "You must
forgive me, my dear. And this sprained ankle keeping me in makes me
cross, too. And I had so reckoned on these days at home to finish my
list of Coleoptera, and get some dissecting and mounting done. But
to-day, Mrs. Minchin brought her work directly after breakfast, and that
empty-headed fellow Elliott dropped in for lunch, and we had callers all
the afternoon, and a _coterie_ for tea, and Mrs. St. John (who seems to
get through life somehow without the most indefinite notion of how time
passes) came in just when tea was over, and you had to order a fresh
supply when we should have been dressing for dinner, and the dinner was
spoilt by waiting till she discovered that she had no idea (whoever did
know her have an idea?) how late it was, and that Mr. St. John would be
so angry. And now you want me to go in a cab to a concert at the Rooms
to meet all these people over again!"

"I'm sure I don't care for Mrs. St. John a bit more than you do," said
Mrs. Buller. "And really she does repeat such things sometimes--without
ever looking round to see if the girls are in the room. She told me a
thing to-day that old Lady Watford had told her."

"My dear, her ladyship's stories are well known. Cremorne's wife hears
them from her, and tells them to her husband, and he tells them to the
other fellows. I can always hear them if I wish. But I do not care to.
But if you don't like Mrs. St. John, Theresa, what on earth made you
ask her to come and sit with you in the morning?"

"Well, my dear, what can I do?" said Mrs. Buller. "She's always saying
that everybody is so unsociable, and that she is so dull, she doesn't
know what to do with herself, and begging me to take my work and go and
sit with her in a morning. How can I go and leave the children and the
servants, just at the time of day when everything wants to be set going?
So I thought I'd better ask her to come here instead. It's a great bore,
but I can keep an eye over the house, and if any one else drops in I can
leave them together. It's not me that she wants, it's something to amuse
her.

"You talk about my having nothing to do," Aunt Theresa plaintively
continued. "But I'm sure I can hardly sleep at night sometimes for
thinking of all I ought to do and haven't done. Mrs. Jerrold, you know,
made me promise faithfully when we were coming away to write to her
every mail, and I never find time. Every week, as it comes round, I
think I will, and can't. I used to think that one good thing about
coming home would be the no more writing for the English mail; but the
Indian mail is quite as bad. And I'm sure mail-day seems to come round
quicker than any other day of the week. I quite dread Fridays. And then
your mother and sisters are always saying I never write. And I heard
from Mrs. Pryce Smith only this morning, telling me I owed her two
letters; and I don't know what to say to her when I do write, for she
knows nobody _here_, and I know nobody _there_. And we've never returned
the Ridgeways' call, my dear. And we've never called on the Mercers
since we dined there. And Mrs. Kirkshaw is always begging me to drive
out and spend the day at the Abbey. I know she is getting offended, I've
put her off so often; and Mrs. Minchin says she is very touchy. And Mrs.
Taylor looks quite reproachfully at me because I've not been near the
Dorcas meetings for so long. But it's all very well for people who have
no children to work at these things. A mother's time is not her own, and
charity begins at home. I'm sure I never seem to be at rest, and yet
people are never satisfied. Lady Burchett says she's certain I am never
at home, for she always misses me when she calls; and Mrs. Graham says I
never go out, she's sure, for she never meets me anywhere."

"Isn't all that just what I say?" said Major Buller, laying down his
knife and fork. (The discussion took place at dinner.) "It's the tyranny
of the idle over the busy; and why, in the name of common sense, should
it be yielded to? Why should friends be obliged, at the peril of
disparagement of their affection or good manners, to visit each other
when they do not want to go--to receive each other when it is not
convenient, and to write to each other when there is nothing to say? You
women, my dear, I must say, are more foolish in this respect than men.
Men simply won't write long letters to their friends when they've
nothing to say, and I don't think their friendships suffer by it. And
though there are heaps of idle gossiping fellows, as well as ladies with
the same qualities, a man who was busy would never tolerate them to his
own inconvenience, much less invite them to persecute him. We are more
straightforward with each other, and that is, after all, the firmest
foundation for friendship. It is partly a misplaced amiability, a phase
of the unselfishness in which you excel us, and partly also, I think, a
want of some measuring quality that makes you women exact unreasonable
things, make impossible promises, and after blandly undertaking a
multiplicity of small matters that would tax the method of a man of
business to accomplish punctually, put your whole time at the disposal
of every fool who is pleased to waste it."

"It's all very well talking, Edward," said Aunt Theresa. "But what is
one to do?"

"Make a stand," said the Major. "When you're busy, and can't
conveniently see people, let your servant tell them so in as many words.
The friendship that can't survive that is hardly worth keeping, I
think. Eh, my dear?"

But I suppose the stand was to be made further on, for Major Buller took
Aunt Theresa to the concert at "the Rooms."




CHAPTER VI.

DRESS AND MANNER--I EXAMINE MYSELF--MY GREAT-GRANDMOTHER.


When we began our biographies we resolved that neither of us should read
the other's till both were finished. This was partly because we thought
it would be more satisfactory to be able to go straight through them,
partly as a check on a propensity for beginning things and not finishing
them, to which we are liable, and partly from the childish habit of
"saving up the treat for the last," as we used--in "old times"--to pick
the raisins out of the puddings and lay them by for a _bonne bouche_
when we should have done our duty by the more solid portion.

But our resolve has given way. We began by very much wishing to break
it, and we have ended by finding excellent reasons for doing so.

We both wish to read the biographies--why should we tease ourselves by
sticking obstinately to our first opinion?

No doubt it would be nice to read them "straight through." But we are
rather apt to devour books at a pace unfavourable to book-digestion, so
perhaps it will be better still to read them by bits, as one reads a
thing that "comes out in numbers."

And in short, at this point Eleanor took mine, and has read it, and I
have read hers. She lays down mine, saying, "But, my dear, you don't
remember all this?"

Which is true. What I have recorded of my first English home is more
what I know of it from other sources than what I positively remember.
And yet I have positive memories of my own about it, too.

I have hinted that my poor young mother did not look after me much. Also
that the Ayah, who had a mother's love and care for me, paid very little
attention to my being tidy in person or dress, except when I was
exhibited to "company."

But my mother was dead. Ayah (after a terrible parting) was left behind
in India. And from the time that I passed into Aunt Theresa's charge,
matters were quite changed.

I do remember the dresses I had then, and the keen interest I took in
the subject of dress at a very early age. A very keen interest was taken
in it by Aunt Theresa herself, by Aunt Theresa's daughters, and by the
ladies of Aunt Theresa's acquaintance. I think I may say that it formed
(at least one of) the principal subjects of conversation during all
those working hours of the day which the ladies so freely sacrificed to
each other. Mrs. Buller was truly kind, and I am sure that if I had
depended in every way upon her, she would have given to my costume as
much care as she bestowed upon that of her own daughters. But my parents
had not been poor; there was no lack of money for my maintenance, and
thus "no reason," as Aunt Theresa said, why my clothes should not be
"decent," and "decent" with Aunt Theresa and her friends was a synonym
for "fashionable."

Thus my first black frock was such an improvement (in fashion) upon the
pink silk one, as to deprive my deep mourning of much of its gloom. Mrs.
(Colonel) St. Quentin could not refuse to lend one of her youngest
little girl's frocks as a copy, for "the poor little orphan"; and a bevy
of ladies sat in consultation over it, for all Mrs. St. Quentin's things
were well worth copying.

"Keep a paper pattern, dear," said Mrs. Minchin; "it will come in for
the girls. Her things are always good."

And Mrs. Buller kept a paper pattern.

I remember the dress quite clearly. It is fixed in my mind by an
incident connected with it. It had six crape tucks, of which fact I was
very proud, having heard a good deal said about it. The first time Mr.
George came to our bungalow, after I had begun to wear it, I strutted up
to him holding my skirt out, and my head up.

"Look at my black frock, Mr. George," said I; "it has got six crape
tucks."

Matilda was most precocious in--at least--one way: she could repeat
grown-up observations of wonderful length.

"It's the best crape," she said; "it won't spot. Cut on the bias.
They're not real tucks though, Margery. They're laid on; Mrs. Minchin
said so."

"They are real tucks," I stoutly asserted.

"No, they're not. They're cut on the bias, and laid on to imitate
tucks," Matilda repeated. I think she was not sorry there should be some
weak point in the fashionable mourning in which she did not share.

I turned to Mr. George, as usual.

"Aren't they real tucks, Mr. George?"

But Mr. George had a strange look on his face which puzzled and
disconcerted me. He only said, "Good heavens!" And all my after efforts
were vain to find out what he meant, and why he looked in that strange
manner.

Little things that puzzle one in childhood remain long in one's memory.
For years I puzzled over that look of Mr. George's, and the remembrance
never was a pleasant one. It chilled my enthusiasm for my new dress at
the time, and made me feel inclined to cry. I think I have lived to
understand it.

But I was not insensible of my great loss, though I took pride in my
fashionable mourning. I do not think I much connected the two in my
mind. I did not talk about my father to any one but Mr. George, but at
night I often lay awake and cried about him. This habit certainly
affected my health, and I had become a very thin, weak child when the
home voyage came to restore my strength.

By the time we reached Riflebury, my fashionable new dress was neither
new nor fashionable. It was then that Mrs. Minchin ferreted out a
dressmaker whom Mrs. St. Quentin employed, and I was put under her
hands.

The little Bullers' things were "made in the house," after the pattern
of mine.

"And one sees the fashion-book, and gets a few hints," said Mrs. Buller.

If Mr. George was not duly impressed by my fashionable mourning, I could
(young as I was) trace the effect of Aunt Theresa's care for my
appearance on other friends in the regiment. They openly remarked on it,
and did not scruple to do so in my hearing. Callers from the
neighbourhood patronized me also. Pretty ladies in fashionably pitched
bonnets smiled, and said, "One of your little ones, Mrs. Buller? What a
pretty little thing!" and duly sympathized over the sad story which Aunt
Theresa seemed almost to enjoy relating. Sometimes it was agony to me to
hear the oft-repeated tale of my parents' death, and then again I
enjoyed a sort of gloomy importance which gave me satisfaction. I even
rehearsed such scenes in my mind when I was in bed, shedding real tears
as (in the person of Aunt Theresa) I related the sad circumstances of my
own grief to an imaginary acquaintance; and then, with dry eyes,
prolonging the "fancy" with compliments and consolations of the most
flattering nature. I always took care to fancy some circumstances that
led to my being in my best dress on the occasion.

Gentleman company did not haunt my new home as was the case with the
Indian one. But now and then officers of the regiment called on Mrs.
Buller, and would say, "Is that poor Vandaleur's child? Dear me! Very
interesting little thing;" and speculate in my hearing on the
possibility of my growing up like my mother.

"'Pon my soul, she _is_ like her!" said one of the "middle ones" one
day, examining me through his eyeglass, "Th' same expressive eyes, you
know, and just that graceful gracious little manner poor Mrs. Vandaleur
had. By Jove, it was a shocking thing! She was an uncommonly pretty
woman."

"You never saw _her_ mother, my good fellow," said one of the "old ones"
who was present. "She _had_ a graceful gracious manner, if you like, and
Mrs. Vandaleur was not to be named in the same day with her. Mrs.
Vandaleur knew how to dress, I grant you----"

"You may go and play, Margery dear," said Aunt Theresa, with kindly
delicacy.

The "old one" had lowered his voice, but still I could hear what he
said, as Mrs. Buller saw.

When my father was not spoken of, my feelings were very little hurt. On
this occasion my mind was engaged simply with the question whether I did
or did not inherit my mother's graces. I ran to a little looking-glass
in the nursery and examined my eyes; but when I tried to make them
"expressive," I either frowned so unpleasantly, or stared so absurdly,
that I could not flatter myself on the point.

The girls were out; I had nothing to do; the nursery was empty. I walked
about, shaking out my skirts, and thinking of my gracious and graceful
manner. I felt a pardonable curiosity to see this for myself, and,
remembering the big glass in Aunt Theresa's room, I stole out to see if
I could make use of it unobserved. But the gentlemen had gone, and I
feared that Mrs. Buller might come up-stairs. In a few minutes, however,
the door-bell rang, and I heard the sound of a visitor being ushered
into the drawing-room.

I seized the chance, and ran to Aunt Theresa's room.

The mirror was "full length," and no one could see me better than I now
