
The Gray Colt was too polite to say anything about his wearing the poke,
and she talked about the grass, the sky, the trees, and everything else
she could think of. Once she was about to speak of the fence, and then
she remembered and stopped short. The Bay Colt noticed this. "You might
just as well go on," said he. "You are very kind, but I know how foolish
I have been, and there's no use in keeping still. You were right, and it
doesn't pay to jump fences for a few minutes of what you think will be
fun. I feel sick all over when I think about it."

"It's too bad," whinnied the Gray Colt. "I'm very sorry for you."

"And what do you think?" said the Bay Colt. "I heard the Dappled Gray
say this morning that I was like a Pig! Imagine a Colt being like a Pig!
He said that it didn't make any difference on which side of a fence Pigs
were, they always wanted to be on the other side, and that I was just as
stupid."

This was all in the fall, before the cold weather had sent them to live
in the barn, and while the Bay Colt was wearing the poke he could not
well forget the lesson he had learned about jumping and running away.
His mother grew quite proud of him, and the Dappled Gray had been heard
to say that he might amount to something yet. That was a great deal for
the Dappled Gray to say, for although he had a very kind heart, he did
not often praise people, and hardly ever said such things about
two-year-olds. That made it all the harder for him when the Bay Colt
became cross over being told to stop cribbing.

You know there are some Colts who learn obedience easily, and there are
others who have one hard struggle to stop jumping, and another to stop
cribbing, and another to stop kicking, and so on, all through their
Colthood. The older Horses are sorry for them and try to help them, for
they know that neither Colt nor Horse can really enjoy life until he is
trying to do right. To be sure, people sometimes do wrong even then, but
if they will take advice and keep on trying they are certain to turn out
well.

And now, when the Bay Colt seemed to have forgotten the lesson he had in
the fall, and after he had told the other Horses to let him alone, very
strange things began to happen. The farmer took him from his stall and
made him open his mouth. Then a piece of iron was slipped into it, which
lay on top of his tongue and fitted into the place on each side of his
jaw where there were no teeth. Long lines were fastened to this iron on
either side, and when he tossed his head and sidled around, these lines
were gently pulled by the farmer and the iron bit pressed down his
tongue.

The farmer was very kind, but the Bay Colt did not want the bit in his
mouth, so he acted as ugly as he knew how, and kicked, and snapped with
his jaws open, and tried to run. The farmer did not grow angry or cross,
yet whenever the Bay Colt showed his temper, the bit would press down
his tongue and stretch the corners of his mouth until he had to stop.
Once in a while the farmer would try to pat him and show him that it was
all right, but the Bay Colt would not have this, and he was a very cross
and sweaty two-year-old when he was taken back to his stall.

He missed the Gray Colt from her usual place, but soon she came in with
one of the farmer's men. She had been driven for the first time also.

"Hallo!" said he. "Have you had a bit in your mouth too? Wasn't it
dreadful? I am so angry that my hoofs fairly tingle to hit that farmer."

"It was hard," said the Gray Colt, "but the man who drove me was very
kind and let me rest often. He patted me, too, and that helped me to be
brave. My mother says we won't mind the bit at all after we are used to
it."

"Well," said the Bay Colt, "I'm never going to be used to it. I won't
stand it, and that's all there is about it." He stamped his hoofs and
looked very important. Two-year-olds often look quite as important as
ten-year-olds, and they feel much more so. The Bay Colt was rather proud
of his feet, and thought it much nicer to have solid hoofs than to have
them split, like those of the Cows, the Hogs, and the Sheep.

[Illustration: HAD A SORE MOUTH FROM JERKING ON THE LINES.]

When he said that he would not stand it to be driven, a queer little
sound ran through the stalls. It was like the wind passing over a
wheatfield, and was caused by the older Horses taking a long breath and
whispering to themselves. The Bay Colt's mother was saying, "Poor child!
What hard work he does make of life!"

The next day both Colts were driven again, and the next day, and the
next, and the next. By this time the Gray Colt was quite used to it. She
said she rather enjoyed knowing what the man was thinking, and that she
could tell his thoughts by the feeling of the lines, much as she used to
understand her mother by rubbing noses when she was a tiny Colt. Her
cousin had a sore mouth from jerking on the lines, and he could not
enjoy eating at all. That made it even harder for him, because he got
very hungry, and it is not so easy to be sensible when one is hungry.

When the Gray Colt learned to walk steadily and turn as her driver
wished, she was allowed to draw a light log through the furrows of a
field. This tired her, but it made her very proud, and she arched her
neck and took the daintiest of steps. It was not necessary that the log
should be drawn over the field; still, she did not know this, and
thought it was real work, when it was done only to teach her to pull.
The man who was driving her patted her neck and held her nose in his
hand. When he stopped to eat an apple, he gave her the core, and she
thought she had never tasted anything so good. As she went back to her
stall, she called to the Horses near, "I have been working. I have drawn
a log all around a field."

The Blind Horse spoke softly to her. "You will have a happy life, my
dear, because you are a willing worker."

Although the Bay Colt didn't say anything, he thought a great deal, and
about many things. While he was thinking he began to crib, but the
noise of his biting teeth on the wood startled him, and he shook his
head and whispered to himself, "I will never crib again." When he ate
his supper, his sore mouth hurt him, but he didn't whimper. "You deserve
it," he said to himself. "It wouldn't have been sore if you had been
steady like your cousin." The Bay Colt was growing sensible very fast.

The Dappled Gray had noticed how suddenly he stopped cribbing, and so
watched him for a few days. He saw that the Bay Colt was in earnest,
that he drew the log up and down without making any fuss, and was soon
hitched with his mother to a plow. The Dappled Gray and the Blind Horse
were also plowing that day, and they called across from their field.
"Fine day for plowing," they said.

"Perfect," answered the Bay Colt. "Did you notice the last furrow we
turned? Can you do any better than that? If I had jumped, it would have
been crooked instead of straight; and if I had stopped, it would not be
done yet."

"Good furrow! Wonderful furrow!" answered the Dappled Gray. "Always knew
you'd be a good worker when you got down to it. You are one of us now,
one of the working Horses. Glad of it. Good-bye!" And he turned away to
start his plow across the field again.

"Do you like being grown up?" said the Bay Colt's mother to him.

"Like it?" he answered with a laugh. "I'm so proud that I don't know
what to do. I wouldn't go back to the old life of all play for anything
in the world. And my little cousin made me see my mistakes. Was there
ever another Colt as foolish as I?"

"A great many of them," said his mother. "More than you would guess.
They kick and bite and try to run because they cannot always have their
own way; and then, when they have tried the farmer's way, and begin to
pay for his care of them, they find it very much better than the life of
all play. Colts will be Colts."




THE TWIN LAMBS


There was a Lamb, a bright, frisky young fellow, who had a twin sister.
Their mother loved them both and was as kind to one as to the other, but
the brother wanted to have the best of everything, and sometimes he even
bunted his sister with his hard little forehead. His mother had to speak
to him many times about this, for he was one of those trying children
who will not mind when first spoken to.

He did not really mean to be naughty--he was only strong and frisky and
thoughtless. Sometimes he was even rude to his mother. She felt very sad
when this was so, yet she loved him dearly and found many excuses for
him in her own heart.

There were three other pairs of twins in the flock that year, and as
their mothers were not strong enough to care for two Lambs apiece, the
farmer had taken one twin from each pair to a little pen near the house.
Here they stayed, playing happily together, and drinking milk from a
bottle which the farmer's wife brought to them. They were hungry very
often, like all young children, and when their stomachs began to feel
empty, or even to feel as if they might feel empty, they crowded against
the side of the pen, pushed their pinkish-white noses through the
openings between the boards, and bleated and bleated and bleated to the
farmer's wife.

Soon she would come from the kitchen door and in her hand would bring
the big bottle full of milk for them. There was a soft rubber top to
this bottle, through which the Lambs could draw the milk into their
mouths. Of course they all wanted to drink at once, though there was
only a chance for one, and the others always became impatient while they
were waiting. The farmer's wife was patient, even when the Lambs, in
their hurry to get the milk, took her fingers into their mouths and bit
them instead of the top of the bottle.

Our twin Lamb wanted to have his sister taken into the pen with the
other three, and he spoke about it to his mother. "I know how you can
manage," said he. "Whenever she comes near you, just walk away from her,
and then the farmer will take her up to the pen."

"You selfish fellow!" answered his mother. "Do you want your dear little
twin sister to leave us?"

He hung his head for a minute, but replied, "She'd have just as good a
time. They have all they can eat up there, and they have lots of fun."

[Illustration: FEEDING THE LAMBS.]

"If you think it is so pleasant in the pen," said his mother, "suppose I
begin to walk away from you, and let the farmer take you away. I think
your sister would rather stay with me."

"Oh, no!" cried her son. "I don't want to leave my own dear woolly
mother! I want to cuddle up to you every night and have you tell me
stories about the stars."

"Do you think you love me very much?" said she. "You don't know how to
really love yet, for you are selfish, and there is not room in a selfish
heart for the best kind of love."

That made the Lamb feel very badly. "I do love her dearly," he cried, as
he stood alone. "I believe I love her ever so much more than my sister
does."

That was where the little fellow was mistaken, for although his sister
did not talk so much about it, she showed her love in many other ways.
If she had been taken from her mother for even a few days, they could
never again have had such sweet and happy days together. Sheep look
much alike, and they cannot remember each other's faces very long. If a
Lamb is taken away from his mother for even a short time, they do not
know each other when they meet afterward. Perhaps this is one reason why
they keep together so much, for it would be sad indeed not to know one's
mother or one's child.

His sister never knew that he had wanted her taken away. She thought he
acted queerly sometimes, but she was so loving and unselfish herself
that she did not dream of his selfishness. Instead of putting the idea
out of his woolly little head, as he could have done by thinking more of
other things, the brother let himself think of it more and more. That
made him impatient with even his mother, and he often answered her quite
crossly. Sometimes, when she spoke to him, he did not answer at all, and
that was just as bad.

His mother would sigh and say to herself, "My child is not a comfort to
me after all, yet when I looked for the first time into his dear little
face, I thought that as long as I had him beside me I should always be
happy."

One night, when the weather was fair and warm, the farmer drove all the
Sheep and Lambs into the Sheep-shed. They had been lying out under the
beautiful blue sky at night, and they did not like this nearly so well.
They did not understand it either, so they were frightened and
bewildered, and bleated often to each other, "What is this for? What is
this for?"

The Lambs did not mind it so much, for they were not warmly dressed, but
the Sheep, whose wool had been growing for a year and was long and
heavy, found it very close and uncomfortable. They did not know that the
farmer had a reason for keeping them dry that night while the heavy dew
was falling outside. The same thing was done every year, but they could
not remember so long as that, and having a poor memory is always hard.

"Stay close to me, children," said the mother of the twins. "I may
forget how you look if you are away long."

"It seems to me," said the brother, "that we always have to stay close
to you. I never have a bit of fun!"

When they had cuddled down for the night, the twin Lambs slept soundly.
Their mother lay awake for a long, long time in the dark, and she was
not happy. A few careless words from a selfish little Lamb had made her
heart ache. They were not true words either, for during the daytime her
children ran with their playmates and had fine frolics. Still, we know
that when people are out of patience they often say things that are not
really so.

In the morning, men came into the barn, which opened off the
Sheep-shed. They had on coarse, old clothing, and carried queer-looking
shears in their hands. The Sheep could see them now and then when the
door was open. Once the farmer stood in the doorway and seemed to be
counting them. This made them huddle together more closely than ever.
They could see the men carrying clean yellow straw into the barn and
spreading it on the floor. On top of this was stretched a great sheet of
clean cloth.

Then the men began to come into the shed and catch the Sheep and carry
them into the barn. They were frightened and bleated a good deal, but
when one was caught and carried away, although he might struggle hard to
free himself, he did not open his mouth. The old Wether Sheep was the
first to be taken, and then the young ones who had been Lambs the year
before. For a long time not one of the mothers was chosen. Still, nobody
knew what would happen next, and so, the fewer Sheep there were left,
the more closely they huddled together.

At last, when the young Sheep had all been taken, one of the men caught
the mother of the twins and carried her away. She turned her face toward
her children, but the door swung shut after her, and they were left with
the other Lambs and their mothers. From the barn came the sound of
snip-snip-snipping and the murmur of men's voices. Once the twins
thought they saw their mother lying on the floor and a man kneeling
beside her, holding her head and forelegs under his arm, yet they were
not sure of this.

The brother ran to the corner of the shed and put his head against the
boards. He suddenly felt very young and helpless. "My dear woolly
mother!" he said to himself, over and over, and he wondered if he would
ever see her again. He remembered what he had said to her the night
before. It seemed to him that he could even now hear his own voice
saying crossly, "Seems to me we always have to stay close to you. I
never have a bit of fun!" He wished he had not said it. He knew she was
a dear mother, and he would have given anything in the world for a
chance to stay close to her again.

His sister felt as lonely and frightened as he, but she did not act in
the same way. She stood close to a younger Lamb whose mother had just
been taken away, and tried to comfort her. One by one the mothers were
taken until only the Lambs remained. They were very hungry now, and
bleated pitifully. Still the twin brother stood with his head in the
corner. He had closed his eyes, but now he opened them, and through a
crack in the wall of the shed, he saw some very slender and
white-looking Sheep turned into the meadow. At first they acted dizzy,
and staggered instead of walking straight; then they stopped staggering
and began to frisk. "Can it be?" said he. "It surely is!" For, although
he had never in his short life seen a newly shorn Sheep, he began to
understand what had happened.

He knew that the men had only been clipping the long wool from the
Sheep, and that they were now ready for warm weather. No wonder they
frisked when their heavy burdens of wool were carefully taken off.

Now the farmer opened the door into the barn again, and let the Lambs
walk through it to the gate of the meadow. They had never before been
inside this barn, and the twin brother looked quickly around as he
scampered across the floor. He saw some great ragged bundles of wool,
and a man was just rolling up the last fleece. He wondered if that had
been taken from his mother and was the very one against which he had
cuddled when he was cold or frightened.

When they first reached the pasture, the Lambs could not tell which
were their mothers. Shearing off their long and dingy fleeces had made
such a difference in their looks! The twin brother knew his mother by
her way of walking and by her voice, but he could see that his sister
did not know her at all. He saw his mother wandering around as though
she did not know where to find her children, and a naughty plan came
into his head. If he could keep his sister from finding their mother for
even a short time, he knew that the farmer would take her up to the pen.
He thought he knew just how to do it, and he started to run to her. Then
he stopped and remembered how sad and lonely he had been without his
mother only a little while before, and he began to pity the Lambs in the
pen.

Now his selfishness and his goodness were fighting hard in him. One
said, "Send your sister away," and the other, "Take her to your mother."
At last he ran as fast as he could toward his sister. "I am good now,"
he said to himself, "but it may not last long. I will tell her before I
am naughty again."

"Oh sister!" cried he. "Come with me to our mother. She doesn't know
where to find us."

He saw a happy look on his sister's sad little face, and he was glad
that he had done the right thing. They skipped away together, kicking up
their heels as they went, and it seemed to the brother that he had never
been so happy in his life. He was soon to be happier, though, for when
they reached his "new, white mother," as he called her, and his sister
told her how he had shown her the way, his mother said, "Now you are a
comfort to me. You will be a happier Lamb, too, for you know that a
mother's heart is large enough for all her children, and that the more
one loves, the better he loves."

"Why, of course," said the twin sister. "What do you mean?"

But the mother never told her, and the brother never told her, and it is
hoped that you will keep the secret.




THE VERY SHORT STORY OF THE FOOLISH LITTLE MOUSE


The Mice who lived in the barn and around the granaries had many cousins
living on the farm who were pleasant people to know. Any one could tell
by looking at them that they were related, yet there were differences in
size, in the coloring of their fur, in their voices, and most of all in
their ways of living. Some of these cousins would come to visit at the
barn in winter, when there was little to eat in the fields. The Meadow
Mice never did this. They were friendly with the people who came from
the farmyard to graze in the meadow, yet when they were asked to return
the call, they said, "No, thank you. We are an out-of-door family, and
we never enter houses. We do not often go to the farmyard, but we are
always glad to see you here. Come again."

When the Cows are in the meadow, they watch for these tiny people, and
stop short if they hear their voices from the grass near by. Of course
the Horses are careful, for Horses will never step on any person, large
or small, if they can help it. They are very particular about this.

All through the meadow you can see, if you look sharply, shallow winding
paths among the grasses, and these paths are worn by the running to and
fro of the Meadow Mice. Their homes are in stumps of trees or in the
higher ground near the ditches. In these homes the baby Meadow Mice stay
until they are large enough to go out into the great world and eat
roots, grasses, and seeds with their fathers and mothers. Sometimes they
do go out a little way with their mother before this, and they go in a
very funny fashion. Of course, when they are babies, they drink warm
milk from her body as the children of most four-legged people do.
Sometimes a young Meadow Mouse does not want to stop drinking his milk
when it is time for his mother to leave the nest, so he just hangs on to
her with his tiny, toothless mouth, and when she goes she drags him
along on the ground beside her. The ground is rather rough for such soft
little babies, and they do not go far in this way, but are glad enough
to snuggle down again with their brothers and sisters.

There is no danger of their being lonely, even when their mother is
away, for the Meadow Mice have large families, and where there are ten
babies of the same age, or even only six, which is thought a small
family among their people, it is not possible for one to feel alone.

There were two fine Meadow Mice who built their nest in the bank of a
ditch and were much liked by all their relatives. They had raised many
children to full-grown Mousehood, and were kind and wise parents. When
their children were married and had homes of their own, they still liked
to come back to visit. The father and mother were gentle and kindly, as
all Mice are, and were almost as handsome as when they first began to
gnaw. Nobody could say that he ever saw a bit of dust on either of them.

The brown fur of the upper part of their bodies and the grayish-white
fur underneath always lay sleek and tidy, and from their long whiskers
to the tips of their hairless tails, they were as dainty as possible.
That was one reason why they were so fine-looking, for you know it makes
no difference how beautiful one may be in the first place, if he does
not try to keep clean he is not pleasant to look at, while many quite
plain people are charming because they look well and happy and clean.

Now this pair of Mice had eight Mouse babies in their nest. The babies
were no larger than Bumble Bees at first and very pink. This was not
because their fur was pink, but only because it was so very short that
through it and their thin skin one saw the glow of the red blood in
their veins.

"Did you ever see such beautiful babies?" said their mother proudly to
her neighbors. "They are certainly the finest I ever had." Her friends
smiled, for she always said the same thing whenever she had little ones.
Yet they understood, for they had children of their own, and knew that
although mothers love all alike, there is always a time when the
youngest seems the most promising. That is before they are old enough to
be naughty.

The days passed, and the eight baby Meadow Mice ate and slept and pushed
each other around, and talked in their sweet, squeaky little voices.
They were less pink every day and more the color of their father and
mother. They grew, too, so fast that the nest was hardly large enough
for them, and the teeth were showing in their tiny pink mouths. Their
mother saw that they would soon be ready to go out into the world, and
she began to teach them the things they needed to know. She took them
outside the nest each pleasant day and gave them lessons in running and
gnawing, and showed them how to crouch down on the brown earth and lie
still until danger was past. After she had told them many things, she
would ask them short questions to make sure that they remembered.

"How many great dangers are there?" she said.

"Five," answered the little Mice.

"What are they?"

"Hawks, Owls, Weasels, Cats, and men."

"Tell me about Hawks."

"Hawks are big birds who seem to float in the air. They have very sharp
