
This statement, which was not only plausible but true, gave a new
direction to Sis's anger.

"Well, I don't see how anybody that thinks anything of himself could be
a mail-carrier for _Sue Fraley!_" she exclaimed scornfully; whereupon
she flounced out, leaving Woodward in a state of bewilderment.

He had not made love to the girl, principally because her moods were
elusive and her methods unique. She was dangerously like other women of
his acquaintance, and dangerously unlike them. The principal of the
academy in Gullettsville--a scholarly old gentleman from Middle
Georgia, who had been driven to teaching by dire necessity--had once
loftily informed Woodward that Miss Poteet was superior to her books,
and the young man had verified the statement to his own discomfiture.
She possessed that feminine gift which is of more importance to a woman
in this world than scholarly acquirements--aptitude. Even her
frankness--perfectly discreet--charmed and puzzled Woodward; but the
most attractive of her traits were such as mark the difference between
the bird that sings in the tree and the bird that sings in the
cage--delightful, but indescribable.

When Sis Poteet began to question him about Sue Fraley, the thought
that she was moved by jealousy gave him a thrill that was new to his
experience; but when she flounced angrily out of the room because he
had confessed to carrying a note from Miss Fraley to Tip Watson, it
occurred to him that he might be mistaken. Indeed, so cunning does
masculine stupidity become when it is played upon by a woman, that he
frightened himself with the suggestion that perhaps, after all, this
perfectly original young lady was in love with Tip Watson.

During the rest of the day Woodward had ample time to nurse and develop
his new theory, and the more he thought it over the more plausible it
seemed to be. It was a great blow to his vanity; but the more
uncomfortable it made him the more earnestly he clung to it.

Without appearing to avoid him, Sis managed to make the presence of
Mrs. Parmalee and Mrs. Hightower an excuse for neglecting him. She
entertained these worthy ladies with such eager hospitality that when
they aroused themselves to the necessity of going home, they found to
their dismay that it would be impossible, in the language of Mrs.
Poteet, to "git half way acrost Pullium's Summit 'fore night 'ud ketch
'em." Sis was so delighted, apparently, that she became almost
hilarious; and her gaiety affected all around her except Woodward, who
barely managed to conceal his disgust.

After supper, however, Mrs. Poteet and her two guests betook themselves
to the kitchen, where they rubbed snuff and smoked their pipes, and
gossiped, and related reminiscences of that good time which, with old
people, is always in the past. Thus Woodward had ample opportunity to
talk with Sis. He endeavoured, by the exercise of every art of manner
and conversation of which he was master, to place their relations upon
the old familiar footing, but he failed most signally. He found it
impossible to fathom the gentle dignity with which he was constantly
repulsed. In the midst of his perplexity, which would have been either
pathetic or ridiculous if it had not been so artfully concealed, he
managed for the first time to measure the depth of his love for this
exasperating but charming creature whom he had been patronising. She
was no longer amusing; and Woodward, with the savage inconsistency of a
man moved by a genuine passion, felt a tragic desire to humble himself
before her.

"I'm going home to-morrow, Miss Sis," he said finally, in sheer
desperation.

"Well, you've had a heap of fun--I mean," she added, "that you have had
a nice time."

"I have been a fool!" he exclaimed bitterly. Seeing that she made no
response, he continued: "I've been a terrible fool all through. I came
here to hunt up blockade whisky----"

"_What!_"

Sis's voice was sharp and eager, full of doubt, surprise, and
consternation.

"I came to Gullettsville," he went on, "to hunt up blockade whisky, and
failed, and three weeks ago I sent in my resignation. I thought I might
find a gold mine on my land-lot, but I have failed, and now I am going
to sell it. I have failed in everything."

Gloating over his alleged misfortunes, Woodward, without looking at Sis
Poteet, drew from his pocket a formidable-looking envelope, unfolded
its contents leisurely, and continued--

"Even my resignation was a failure. Hog Mountain will be raided
to-morrow or next day."

Sis rose from her chair, pale and furious, and advanced toward him as
if to annihilate him with her blazing eyes. Such rage, such contempt,
he had never before beheld in a woman's face. He sat transfixed. With a
gesture almost tragic in its vehemence, the girl struck the papers from
his hands.

"O you mean, sneaking wretch! You----"

And then, as if realising the weakness of mere words, she turned and
passed swiftly from the room. Woodward was thoroughly aroused. He was
not used to the spectacle of a woman controlled by violent emotions,
and he recognised, with a mixture of surprise and alarm, the great gulf
that lay between the rage of Sis Poteet and the little platitudes and
pretences of anger which he had seen the other women of his
acquaintance manage with such pretty daintiness.

As the girl passed through the kitchen, she seized a horn that hung
upon the wall, and went out into the darkness. The old women continued
their smoking, their snuff-rubbing, and their gossiping. Mrs.
High-tower was giving the details of a local legend showing how and why
Edny Favers had "conjured" Tabithy Cozby, when suddenly Mrs. Poteet raised
her hands--

"_Sh-h-h!_"

The notes of a horn--short, sharp, and strenuous--broke in upon the
stillness of the night. Once, twice, thrice! once, twice, thrice! once,
twice, thrice! It was an alarm that did not need to be interpreted to
the sensitive ear of Hog Mountain. The faces of the old women became
curiously impassive. The firelight carried their shadows from the floor
to the rafters, where they seemed to engage in a wild dance,--whirling,
bowing, jumping, quivering; but the women themselves sat as still as
statues. They were evidently waiting for something. They did not wait
long. In a little while the sharp notes of the horn made themselves
heard again--once, twice, thrice! once, twice, thrice! once, twice,
thrice!

Then the old women arose from their low chairs, shook out their frocks,
and filed into the room where Mr. Philip Woodward, late of the revenue
service, was sitting. There would have been a good deal of constraint
on both sides, but before there could be any manifestation of this
sort, Sis came in. She seemed to be crushed and helpless, nay, even
humiliated.

"Why, my goodness, Sis!" exclaimed Mrs. Hightower, "you look natchully
fagged out. A body 'ud think you'd bin an' taken a run up the mountain.
We all 'lowed you wuz in here lookin' airter your comp'ny. Wher'd you
git the news?"

"From this gentleman here," Sis replied, indicating Woodward without
looking at him. She was pale as death, and her voice was low and
gentle.

Woodward would have explained, but the apparent unconcern of the women
gave him no opportunity.

"I declare, Sis," exclaimed her mother, with a fond, apologetic little
laugh; "ef you hain't a plum sight, I hain't never seed none."

"She's thes es much like her Gran'pap Poteet," said Mrs. Hightower, "ez
ef he'd 'a' spit'er right out'n his mouth--that she is."

This led to a series of reminiscences more or less entertaining, until
after a while, Sis, who had been growing more and more restless, rose
and said--

"Good night, folks; I'm tired and sleepy. The clock has struck
eleven."

"Yes," said Mrs. Poteet, "an' the clock's too fast, bekaze it hain't
skacely bin more'u a minnit sence the chickens crowed for ten."

This remark contained the essence of hospitality, for it was intended
to convey to Mrs. Poteet's guests the information that if they were not
ready to retire, she was prepared to discredit her clock in their
interests. But there was not much delay on the part of the guests. The
women were dying to question Sis, and Woodward was anxious to be alone;
and so they said "Good night," the earnestness and quaint simplicity of
the old women carrying Woodward back to the days of his childhood, when
his grandmother leaned tenderly over his little bed, and whispered:
"Good night, dear heart, and pleasant dreams."

Shortly afterward the lights were put out, and, presumably, those under
Teague Poteet's roof addressed themselves to slumber. But what of the
news that Sis had given to the winds? There was no slumber for it until
it had fulfilled its mission. Where did it go, and what was its burden?
Three sharp blasts upon a horn, thrice repeated; then an interval; then
three more thrice repeated. Up, up the mountain the signal climbed; now
faltering, now falling, but always climbing; sending echoes before it,
and leaving echoes behind it, but climbing, climbing; now fainting and
dying away, but climbing, climbing, until it reached Pullium's Summit,
the smallest thread of sound. Two men were sitting talking in front of
a cabin. The eldest placed one hand upon the shoulder of his companion,
and flung the other to his ear. Faint and far, but clear and strenuous,
came the signal. The men listened even after it had died away. The
leaves of the tall chestnuts whipped each other gently, and the breeze
that had borne the signal seemed to stay in the tops of the mountain
pines as if awaiting further orders; and it had not long to wait.

The man who had held his hand to his ear slapped his companion on the
back, and cried, "Poteet's!" and that was news enough for the other,
who rose, stretched himself lazily, and passed into the cabin. He came
out with a horn--an exaggerated trumpet made of tin,--and with this to
his lips he repeated to the waiting breeze, and to the echoes that were
glad to be aroused, the news that had come from Poteet's. Across the
broad plateau of Pullium's Summit the wild tidings flew, until,
reaching the western verge of the mountain, they dived down into
Prather's Mill Road--a vast gorge which takes its name from the freak
of a drunken mountaineer, who declared he would follow the stream that
rushed through it until he found a mill, and was never heard of again.

The news from Poteet's was not so easily lost. It dropped over the
sheer walls of the chasm, three hundred feet down, and refused to be
drowned out by the rush and roar of the waters, as they leaped over the
boulders, until it had accomplished its mission. For here in Prather's
Mill Road burned the slow fires that kept the Government officials in
Atlanta at a white heat. They were burning now. If one of the officials
could have crawled to the edge of the gorge, where everything seemed
dwarfed by the towering walls of rook and the black abyss from which
they sprang, he would have seen small fitful sparks of flame glowing at
intervals upon the bosom of the deeper and blacker night below. These
were the fires that all the power and ingenuity of the Government
failed to smother, but they were now blown out one after another by the
blasts from Sis Poteet's horn.

The news that was wafted down into the depths of Prather's Mill Road
upon the wings of the wind was not at all alarming. On the contrary, it
was received by the grimy watchers at the stills with considerable
hilarity. To the most of them it merely furnished an excuse for a
week's holiday, including trips to both Gullettsville and Villa Ray.
Freely interpreted, it ran thus: "Friends and fellow-citizens: this is
to inform you that Hog Mountain is to be raided by the revenue men by
way of Teague Poteet's. Let us hear from you at once." There was
neither alarm nor hurry, but the fires were put out quickly, because
that was the first thing to be done.

Teague Poteet owned and managed two stills. He was looking after some
"doublings" when the notes of the horn dropped down into the gorge. He
paused, and listened, and smiled. Uncle Jake Norris, who had come to
have his jug filled, was in the act of taking a dram, but he waited,
balancing the tin cup in the palm of his hand. Tip Watson was telling
one of his stories to the two little boys who accompanied Uncle Jake,
but he never ended it.

"Sis talks right out in meetin'," said Teague, after waiting to be sure
there was no postscript to the message.

"What's the row, Teague?" asked Uncle Jake, swallowing his dram.

"'Nother raid comin' right in front er my door," Teague explained, "an'
I reckon in reason I oughter be home when they go past. They use to be
a kinder coolness betweenst me an' them revenue fellers, but we went to
work an' patched it up."

Tip Watson appeared to be so overjoyed that he went through all the
forms of a cotillon dance, imitating a fiddle, calling the figures, and
giving his hand to imaginary partners. The boys fairly screamed with
laughter at this exhibition, and Uncle Jake was so overcome that he
felt called upon to take another dram--a contingency that was renewed
when Tip swung from the measure of a cotillon to that of a breakdown,
singing--

"I hain't bin a-wantin' no mo' wines--mo' wines--
Sence daddy got drunk on low wines--low wines."

"Come, Tip," said Teague, "yess shet up shop. Ef Sis ain't a caution,"
he said, after a while, as he moved around putting things to rights.
"Ef Sis ain't a caution, you kin shoot me. They hain't no mo' tellin'
wher' Sis picked up 'bout thish 'ere raid than nothin' in the worl'.
Dang me ef I don't b'lieve the gal's glad when a raid's a-comin'. Wi'
Sis, hit's move_ment_, move_ment_, day in an' day out. They hain't
nobody knows that gal less'n it's me. She knows how to keep things
a-gwine. Sometimes she runs an' meets me, an' says, se' she: 'Pap,
mammy's in the dumps; yess you an' me make out we er quollin'. Hit'll
sorter stir 'er up;' an' then Sis, she'll light in, an' by the time we
git in the house, she's a-scoldin' an' a-sassin' an' I'm a-cussin', en'
airter a while hit gits so hot an' natchul-like that I thes has ter
drag Sis out behin' the chimbly and buss 'er for to make certain an'
shore that she ain't accidentally flew off the han'le. Bliss your soul
an' body! she's a caution!"

"An' what's 'er maw a-doin' all that time?" inquired Uncle Jake, as he
took another dram with an indifferent air.

Teague laughed aloud as he packed the fresh earth over his fire.

"Oh, Puss! Puss, she thes sets thar a-chawin' away at 'er snuff, an'
a-knittin' away at 'er socks tell she thinks I'm a-pushin' Sis too
clost, an' then she blazes out an' blows me up. Airter that," Teague
continued, "things gits more homelike. Ef 'twan't fer me an' Sis, I
reckon Puss 'nd teetotally fret 'erself away."

"St. Paul," said Uncle Jake, looking confidentially at another dram
which he had poured into the tin cup,--"St. Paul says ther' er divers
an' many wimmin, an' I reckon he know'd. Ther' er some you kin fret an
some you can't. Ther's my ole 'oman: the livin' human bein' that stirs
_her_ up'll have ter frail 'er out, er she'll frail _him_."

"Well," said Teague, by way of condolence, "the man what's stabbed by a
pitchfork hain't much better off 'n the man that walks bar'footed in a
treadsaft patch."

The suggestion in regard to Mistress Norris seemed to remind Uncle Jake
of something important. He called to his boys, took another modest
dram, and disappeared in the undergrowth. Teague Poteet and his friends
were soon ready to follow this worthy example, so that in another hour
Prather's Mill Road was a very dull and uninteresting place from a
revenue point of view.


Woodward was aroused during the night by the loud barking of dogs, the
tramp of horses, and the confused murmur of suppressed conversation.
Looking from the window, he judged by the position of the stars that it
was three or four o'clock in the morning. He sat upon the side of the
bed, and sought, by listening intently, to penetrate the mystery of
this untimely commotion. He thought he recognised the voice of Tip
Watson, and he was sure he heard Sid Parmalee's peculiar cough and
chuckle. The conversation soon lifted itself out of the apparent
confusion, and became comparatively distinct. The voices were those of
Teague and Sis.

"Come now, pap, you must promise."

"Why, Sis, how _kin_ I?"

"You shall, you shall, you _shall!_"

"Why, Sis, hon, he mought be a spy. Sid Pannalee he 'lows that the
whole dad-blamed business is a put-up job. He wants to bet right now
that we'll all be in jail in Atlanty 'fore the moon changes. I lay they
don't none of 'em fool Sid."

"You don't love me any more," said Sis, taking a new tack.

"Good Lord, Sis! Why, honey, what put that idee in your head?"

"I know you don't--I know it! Its always Dave Hightower this, and Sid
Par-malee that, and old drunken Jake Norris the other. I just _know_
you don't love me."

Teague also took a new tack, but there was a quiver in his voice born
of deadly earnestness.

"I tell you, Sis, they er houndin' airter us; they er runnin' us down;
they er closin' in on us; they er hemmin' us up. Airter they git your
pore ole pappy an' slam 'im in jail, an' chain 'im down, who's
a-gwineter promise to take keer er _him?_ Hain't ole man Joshway
Blasingame bin sent away off to Al_benny?_ Hain't ole man Cajy Shannon
a-sarvin' out his time, humpback an' cripple ez he is? Who took keer
_them_? Who ast anybody to let up on 'em? But don't you fret, honey; ef
they hain't no trap sot, nobody ain't a-gwineter pester _him_."

"I wouldn't trust that Sid Parmalee out of my sight!" exclaimed Sis,
beginning to cry. "I know him, and I know all of you."

"But ef they is a trap sot," continued Teague, ignoring Sis's tears,
"_ef_ they is, I tell you, honey, a thousau' folks like me can't hol'
the boys down. The time 'a done come when they er teetotally wore out
with thish 'ere sneakin' aroun' an' hidin'-out bizness."

This appeared to end the conversation, but it left Woodward
considerably puzzled. Shortly afterward he heard a rap at his door, and
before he could respond to the summons by inquiry or invitation, Teague
Poteet entered with a lighted candle in his hand.

"I 'lowed the stirrin' 'roun' mought 'a' sorter rousted you," said
Teague, by way of apology, as he placed the light on a small table and
seated himself on a wooden chest.

"Yes. What's up?" Woodward inquired.

"Oh, the boys--thes the boys," Teague replied, chuckling and rubbing
his chin with an embarrassed air; "hit's thes the boys cuttin' up some
er ther capers. They er mighty quare, the boys is," he continued, his
embarrassment evidently increasing, "mighty quare. They uv up'd an' tuk
a notion for to go on a little frolic, an' they uv come by airter me,
an' nothin' won't do 'em but I mus' fetch you. S' I, 'Genter_men_, they
hain't no manners in astin' a man on a marchin' frolic this time er
night,' s' I; but Sid Parmalee, he chipped in an' 'lowed that you wuz
ez high up for fun ez the next man."

Woodward thought he understood the drift of things, but he was
desperately uncertain. He reflected a moment, and then faced the
situation squarely.

"If you were in my place, Mr. Poteet, what would you do?" he asked.

This seemed to relieve Teague, His embarrassment disappeared. His eyes,
which had been wandering uneasily around the room, sought Woodward's
face and rested there. He took off his wide-brimmed wool hat, placed it
carefully upon the floor, and ran his fingers through his iron-grey
hair.

"I don't mind sayin'," he remarked grimly, "that I uv seed the time
when I'd uv ast you to drap out'n that winder an' make for the bushes,
knowin' that you'd tote a han'ful er bullets in thar wi' you. But on
account er me an' Sis, I'm willin' to extracise my bes' judg_ment_. It
mayn't be satisfactual, but me an' Sis is mighty long-headed when we
pulls tergether. Ef I was you, I'd thes slip on my duds, an' I'd go out
thar whar the boys is, an' I'd be high up for the'r frolic, an' I'd
jine in wi' 'em, an' I'd raise any chune they give out."

With this Poteet gravely bowed himself out, and in a very few minutes
Woodward was dressed and ready for adventure. He was young and bold,
but he felt strangely ill at ease. He realised that, with all his
address, he had never been able to gain the confidence of these
mountaineers, and he felt sure they connected him with the revenue raid
that was about to be made, and of which they had received information.
He appreciated to the fullest extent the fact that the situation called
for the display of all the courage and coolness and nerve he could
command; but, in the midst of it all, he longed for an opportunity to
show Sis Poteet the difference between a real man and a feebleminded,
jocular rascal like Tip Watson.

His spirits rose as he stepped from the low piazza into the darkness
and made his way to where he heard the rattle of stirrups and spurs.
Some one hailed him--

"Hello, Cap!"

"Ah-yi!" he responded. "It's here we go, gals, to the wedding."

"I knowed we could count on 'im," said the voice of Tip Watson.

"Yes," said Sid Parmalee, "I knowed it so well that I fotch a extry
hoss."

"Where are we going?" Woodward asked.

"Well," said Parmalee, "the boys laid off for to have some fun, an'
it's done got so these times that when a feller wants fun he's got to
git furder up the mounting."

If the words were evasive, the tone was far more so, but Woodward paid
little attention to either. He had the air of a man accustomed to being
called up in the early hours of the morning to go forth on mysterious
expeditions.

A bright fire was blazing in Poteet's kitchen, and the light, streaming
through the wide doorway, illuminated the tops of the trees on the edge
of the clearing. Upon this background the shadows of the women, black
and vast--Titanic indeed,--were projected as they passed to and fro.
From within there came a sound as of the escape of steam from some huge
engine; but the men waiting on the outside knew that the frying-pan was
doing its perfect work.

The meat sizzled and fried; the shadows in the tops of the trees kept
up what seemed to be a perpetual promenade, and the men outside waited
patiently and silently. This silence oppressed Woodward. He knew that
but for his presence the mountaineers would be consulting together and
cracking their dry jokes. In spite of the fact that he recognised in
the curious impassiveness of these people the fundamental qualities of
courage and endurance, he resented it as a barrier which he had never
been able to break down. He would have preferred violence of some sort.
He could meet rage with rage, and give blow for blow, but how was he to
deal with the reserve by which he was surrounded? He was not physically
helpless, by any means, but the fact that he had no remedy against the
attitude of the men of Hog Mountain chafed him almost beyond endurance.
He was emphatically a man of action--full of the enterprises usually
set in motion by a bright mind, a quick temper, and ready courage; but,
measured by the impassiveness which these men had apparently borrowed
from the vast aggressive silences that give strength and grandeur to
their mountains, how trivial, how contemptible all his activities
seemed to be!

But the frying was over after a while. The Titanic shadows went to
roost in the tops of the trees, and Teague Poteet and his friends,
including ex-Deputy Woodward, took themselves and their fried meat off
up the mountain, and the raid followed shortly after. It was a
carefully-planned raid, and deserved to be called a formidable one.
Like many another similar enterprise it was a failure, so far as the
purposes of the Government were concerned, but fate or circumstance
made it famous in the political annals of that period. Fifteen men,
armed with carbines, rode up the mountain. They were full of the spirit
of adventure. They felt the strong arm of the law behind them. They
knew they were depended upon to make some sort of demonstration, and
this, together with a dram too much here and there, made them a trifle
reckless and noisy. They had been taught to believe that they were in
search of outlaws. They caught from the officers who organised them
something of the irritation which was the natural result of so many
fruitless attempts to bring Hog Mountain to terms. They betrayed a sad
lack of discretion. They brandished their weapons in the frightened
faces of women and children, and made many foolish mistakes which need
not be detailed here.

They rode noisily over the mountain, making a circle of Pullium's
Summit, and found nothing. They peered over the precipitous verge of
Prather's Mill Road, and saw nothing. They paused occasionally to
listen, and heard nothing. They pounced upon a lonely pedlar who was
toiling across the mountain with his pack upon his back, and plied him
with questions concerning the Moonshiners. This pedlar appeared to be a
very ignorant fellow indeed. He knew his name was Jake Cohen, and that
was about all. He had never crossed Hog Mountain before, and, so help
his gracious, he would never cross it again. The roads were all rough
and the ladies were all queer. As for the latter--well, great Jingo!
they would scarcely look at his most beautiful collection of shawls and
ribbons and laces, let alone buy them. In Villa Bay (or, as Cohen
called it, "Feel Hooray") he had heard that Teague Poteet had been
arrested and carried to Atlanta by a man named Woodward. No one had
told him this, but he heard people talking about it wherever he went in
Villa Ray, and there seemed to be a good deal of excitement in the
settlement.

Cohen was a droll customer, the revenue officers thought, and the
longer they chatted with him the droller he became. First and last they
drew from him what they considered to be some very important
information. But most important of all was the report of the arrest of
Teague Poteet. The deputies congratulated themselves. They understood
the situation thoroughly, and their course was perfectly plain. Poteet,
in endeavouring to escape from them, had fallen into the clutches of
Woodward, and their best plan was to overtake the latter before he
reached Atlanta with his prize, and thus share in the honour of the
capture. With this purpose in view, they took a dram all round and
turned their horses' heads down the mountain.

Cohen certainly was a droll fellow. He stood in the road until the
revenue men had disappeared. Then he unbuckled the straps of his pack,
dropped it upon the ground, and sat down upon a boulder. With his head
between his hands, he appeared to be lost in thought, but he was only
listening. He remained listening until after the sounds of the horses'
feet had died away.

Then he carried his precious pack a little distance from the roadside,
covered it with leaves, listened a moment to be sure that the deputies
were not returning, and then proceeded to a. little ravine in the side
of the mountain where the Moonshiners lay. He had been waiting nearly
two days where the revenue men found him, and his story of the capture
of Teague Poteet was concocted for the purpose of sending the posse
back down the mountain the way they came. If they had gone on a mile
further they would have discovered signs of the Moonshiners, and this
discovery would have led to a bloody encounter, if not to the capture
of the leaders.

The deputies rode down the mountain in the best of spirits. They had
accomplished more than any other posse; they had frightened the
Moonshiners of Hog Mountain to their hiding-places, and not a deputy
had been killed, or even wounded. The clatter they made as they
