miserable country place, without any amusements or anything to do;
and as at that time there did not seem the most remote chance of
active service, it was a dog's life. Everyone was surly and ill
tempered, and I had to fight two duels."

"What about?"

"About nothing, as far as I could see. A man said something about
Scotch officers, in a tone I did not like. I was out of temper, and
instead of turning it off with a laugh I took it up seriously, and
threw a glass at his head. So of course we fought. We wounded each
other twice, and then the others stopped it. The second affair was
just as absurd, except that there I got the best of it, and sliced
the man's sword arm so deeply that he was on the sick list for two
months--the result of an accident, as the surgeon put it down. So
although I don't say but that there is a much better class of men
in the 3rd than there was in my regiment, I should not be in any
hurry to join.

"If there is a row, you will see ten times as much as an
aide-de-camp as you would in your regiment, while during peacetime
there is no comparison at all between our lives as aides-de-camp
and that of regimental officers.

"I fancy you have rather a treasure in the man they have told off
to you. He was the colonel's servant at one time, but he got drunk
one day, and of course the colonel had to send him back to the
ranks. One of the officers told me about him when he came in, and
said that he was one of the best riders and swordsmen in the
regiment. The adjutant told me that he has specially chosen him for
you, because he had a particularly good mount, and that as your
orderly it would be of great importance that he should be able to
keep up with you. Of course, he got the horse when he was the
colonel's orderly; and though he was sent back to the ranks six
months ago, the colonel, who was really fond of the man, allowed
him to keep it."

"I thought it seemed an uncommonly good animal, when he led it into
the stable," Fergus said. "Plenty of bone, and splendid quarters. I
hope he was not unwilling to come to me. It is a great fall from
being a colonel's servant to become a cornet's."

"I don't suppose he will mind that; and at any rate, while he is
here the berth will be such an easy one that I have no doubt he
will be well content with it, and I daresay that he and Donald will
get on well together.

"Donald is a Cuirassier. After Keith appointed me as one of his
aides, he got me transferred to the Cuirassiers, who are stationed
at Potsdam. That was how I came to get hold of Donald as a
servant."

A few minutes after they had done dinner, there was a knock at the
door. The orderly entered and saluted.

"You will find my man in there," Lindsay said. "At present, Mr.
Drummond and I are living together. I daresay you and he will get
on very comfortably."

For the next fortnight, Fergus spent the whole day in barracks. He
was not put through the usual preliminary work, but the colonel,
understanding what would be most useful to him, had him instructed
in the words of command necessary for carrying out simple
movements, his place as cornet with a troop when in line or column;
and being quick, intelligent, and anxious to learn, Fergus soon
began to feel himself at home.



Chapter 3: The Outbreak Of War.


As Lindsay had predicted, the marshal had, on the evening of the
day Fergus joined his regiment, said to him:

"I generally have half an hour's fencing the first thing of a
morning, Fergus. It is good exercise, and keeps one's muscles
lissome. Come round to my room at six. I should like to see what
the instructors at home have done for you, and I may be able to put
you up to a few tricks of the sword that may be of use to you, if
you are ever called upon to break his majesty's edicts against
duelling."

Fergus, of course, kept the appointment.

"Very good. Very good, indeed," the marshal said, after the first
rally. "You have made the most of your opportunities. Your wrist is
strong and supple, your eye quick. You are a match, now, for most
men who have not worked hard in a school of arms. Like almost all
our countrymen, you lack precision. Now, let us try again."

For a few minutes Fergus exerted himself to the utmost, but failed
to get his point past the marshal's guard. He had never seen
fencing like this. Keith's point seemed to be ever threatening him.
The circles that were described were so small that the blade seemed
scarcely to move; and yet every thrust was put aside by a slight
movement of the wrist, and he felt that he was at his opponent's
mercy the whole time. Presently there was a slight jerk and, on the
instant, his weapon was twisted from his hand and sent flying
across the room.

Keith smiled at his look of bewilderment.

"You see, you have much to learn, Fergus."

"I have indeed, sir. I thought that I knew something about fencing,
but I see that I know nothing at all."

"That is going too far the other way, lad. You know, for example, a
vast deal more than Lindsay did when he came to me, six months ago.
I fancy you know more than he does now, or ever will know; for he
still pins his faith on the utility of a slashing blow, as if the
sabre had a chance against a rapier, in the hands of a skilful man.
However, I will give you a lesson every morning, and I should
advise you to go to Van Bruff every evening.

"I will give you a note to him. He is by far the best master we
have. Indeed, he is the best in Europe. I will tell him that the
time at your disposal is too short for you to attempt to become a
thorough swordsman; but that you wish to devote yourself to
learning a few thrusts and parries, such as will be useful in a
duel, thoroughly and perfectly. I myself will teach you that trick
I played on you just now, and two others like it; and I think it
possible that in a short time you will be able to hold your own,
even against men who may know a good deal more of the principles
and general practice of the art than yourself."

Armed with a note from the marshal, Fergus went the next day to the
famous professor. The latter read the letter through carefully, and
then said:

"I should be very glad to oblige the marshal, for whom I have the
highest respect, and whom I regard as the best swordsman in Europe.
I often practise with him, and always come away having learned
something. Moreover, the terms he offers, for me to give you an
hour and a half's instruction every evening, are more than liberal.
But every moment of my time in the evening is occupied, from five
to ten. Could you come at that hour?"

"Certainly I could, professor."

"Then so be it. Come at ten, punctually. My school is closed at
that hour, but you will find me ready for you."

Accordingly, during the next three weeks Fergus worked, from ten
till half-past eleven, with Herr Van Bruff; and from six till half
past with the marshal. His mountain training was useful indeed to
him now; for the day's work in the barrack was in itself hard and
fatiguing and, tough as his muscles were, his wrist at first ached
so at nights that he had to hold it, for some time, under a tap of
cold water to allay the pain. At the end of a week, however, it
hardened again; and he was sustained by the commendations of his
two teachers, and the satisfaction he felt in the skill he was
acquiring.

"Where is your new aide-de-camp, marshal?" the king asked, one
evening.

It was the close of one of his receptions.

"As a rule, these young fellows are fond of showing off in their
uniforms, at first."

"He is better employed, sire. He has the makings of a very fine
swordsman and, having some reputation myself that way, I should be
glad that my young cousin should be able to hold his own well, when
we get to blows with the enemy. So I and Van Bruff have taken him
in hand, and for the last three weeks he has made such progress
that this morning, when we had open play, it put me on my mettle to
hold my own. So, what with that and his regimental work, his hands
are more than full; and indeed, he could not get through it, had he
to attend here in the evening; and I know that as soon as he has
finished his supper he turns in for a sound sleep, till he is woke
in time to dress and get to the fencing school, at ten. Had there
been a longer time to spare, I would not have suffered him to work
so hard; but seeing that in a few days we may be on the march to
the frontier, we have to make the most of the time."

"He has done well, Keith, and his zeal shows that he will make a
good soldier. Yes, another three days, and our messenger should
return from Vienna; and the next morning, unless the reply is
satisfactory, the troops will be on the move. After that, who
knows?"

During the last few days, the vague rumours that had been
circulating had gained strength and consistency. Every day fresh
regiments arrived and encamped near the city; and there were
reports that a great concentration of troops was taking place, at
Halle, under the command of Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick; and
another, under the Duke of Bevern, at Frankfort-on-the-Oder.

Nevertheless, the public announcement that war was declared with
Austria, and that the army would march for the frontier, in three
days' time, came as a sudden shock. The proclamation stated that,
it having been discovered that Austria had entered into a secret
confederacy with other powers to attack Prussia; and the king
having, after long and fruitless negotiations, tried to obtain
satisfaction from that power; no resource remained but to declare
war, at once, before the confederates could combine their forces
for the destruction of the kingdom.

Something like dismay was, at first, excited by the proclamation. A
war with Austria was, in itself, a serious undertaking; but if the
latter had powerful allies, such as Russia, France, and Saxony--and
it was well known that all three looked with jealousy on the
growing power of the kingdom--the position seemed well-nigh
desperate.

Among the troops, however, the news was received with enthusiasm.
Confident in their strength and discipline, the question of the
odds that might be assembled against them in no way troubled them.
The conquest of Silesia had raised the prestige of the army, and
the troops felt proud that they should have the opportunity of
proving their valour in an even more serious struggle.

Never was there a more brilliant assembly than that at the palace,
the evening before the troops marched. All the general officers and
their staffs were assembled, together with the ladies of the court,
and those of the nobility and army. The king was in high good
humour, and moved about the rooms, chatting freely with all.

"So you have come to see us at last, young sir," he said to Fergus.
"I should scold you, but I hear that you have been utilizing your
time well.

"Remember that your sword is to be used against the enemies of the
country, only," and nodding, he walked on.

The Princess Amelia was the centre of a group of ladies. She was a
charming princess, but at times her face bore an expression of deep
melancholy; and all knew that she had never ceased to mourn the
fate of the man she would have chosen, Baron Trench, who had been
thrown into prison by her angry father, for his insolence in
aspiring to his daughter's hand.

"You must be glad that your hard work is over, Drummond," Lindsay
said, as they stood together watching the scene.

"I am glad that the drill is over," Fergus replied, "but I should
have liked my work with the professor to have gone on for another
six months."

"Ah, well! You will have opportunities to take it up again, when we
return, after thrashing the Austrians."

"How long will that be, Lindsay?"

The latter shrugged his shoulders.

"Six months or six years; who can tell?" he said. "If it be true
that Russia and France, to say nothing of Saxony, are with her, it
is more likely to be years than months, and we may both come out
colonels by the time it is over."

"That is, if we come out at all," Fergus said, with a smile at the
other's confidence.

"Oh! Of course, there is that contingency, but it is one never
worth reckoning with. At any rate, it is pretty certain that, if we
do fall, it will be with odds against us; but of course, as
aides-de-camp our chance is a good deal better than that of
regimental officers.

"At any rate, you have had good preparation for the campaign, for
your work will be child's play in comparison to what you have been
going through. How you stood it, I cannot make out. I worked pretty
hard when I first arrived; but the drill for the first six months
was tremendous, and I used to be glad to crawl into bed, as soon as
I had had my supper.

"Well, you have been a poor companion so far, Drummond."

"I am afraid I have been, but will try and make up for it, in the
future.

"I suppose there is no doubt that we shall march, in the first
place, on Dresden."

"I think that there is no doubt of that. There is no Saxon army to
speak of, certainly nothing that can offer any serious opposition.
From there there are three or four passes by which we could pour
into Bohemia. Saxony is a rich country, too, and will afford us a
fine base for supplies, as we move on. I suppose the Austrians will
collect an army to oppose us, in Bohemia. When we have thrashed
them, I expect we shall go on straight to Vienna."

Fergus laughed.

"It all sounds easy enough, Lindsay. I only hope that it will come
off just as you prophesy."

"That is one advantage of fighting in a foreign service, Fergus.
One fights just as stoutly for victory as if one were fighting for
home, but if one is beaten it does not affect one so much. It is
sad to see the country overrun, and pillaged; but the houses are
not the houses of our own people, the people massacred are not
one's own relations and friends. One's military vanity may be hurt
by defeat; otherwise, one can bear it philosophically."

"I never looked at it in that light before, Lindsay, but no doubt
there is a great deal in what you say. If my father had fallen on a
German battlefield, instead of at Culloden, our estates would not
have been confiscated, our glens harried, and our clansmen hunted
down and massacred. No, I see there is a great difference. I
suppose I should fight just as hard, against the Austrians, as I
should have done against the English at Culloden, had I been there;
but defeat would have none of the same consequences. No, putting it
as you do, I must own that there is a distinct advantage in foreign
service, that I never appreciated before.

"But I see people are leaving, and I am not sorry. As we are going
to be up before daybreak, the sooner one turns in the better."

Karl had received the order to call his master at three, to have
breakfast ready at half past, and the horses at the door at four,
with somewhat less than his usual stolidity.

"You will have harder work in the future, Karl," Fergus said.

"I shall be glad of it, sir. Never have I had such a lazy time as I
have had for the last month. The first three or four days were very
pleasant; then I began to think that I should like a little to do,
so as to remind me that there was such a thing as work. But the
last fortnight has been terrible. A man cannot sleep for
twenty-four hours, and if it had not been that Donald and I have
had an occasional quarrel, as to our respective regiments and over
the native land he is so fond of bragging about, I should have been
ready to hang myself.

"Ah, sir, how often have I to thank my stars that I did not take my
discharge!--which I could have asked for, as I have served my time.
I had thought of it, many times; and had said to myself how
delightful it would be to hear the morning call sound, at a
barracks near, and to turn over in my bed and go to sleep again; to
have no guard to keep, no sergeant to bully or provost guard to
arrest one, if one has taken a cup too much. This fortnight has
shown me the folly of such ideas. It has taught me when I am well
off, and what misery it is to be one's own master, and to be always
wondering how the day is to be got through."

"Well, you are not likely to have to complain that you have nothing
to do, for some time now, Karl."

"No, cornet. I have felt a new man, since I heard the great news.
There is always plenty to do, on a campaign. There are the horses
to be cleaned, food to be cooked, forage and rations to be fetched.
Then, too, on a campaign every one is merry and good tempered, and
one sings as one marches and sits round the campfire. One may be
cold and wet and hungry, but who cares? One swears at the moment,
but one laughs again, as soon as the sun shines."

"Well, Karl, you had best turn in at once, for at three o'clock we
shall want to be called."

"You can rely upon my waking, sir. Does my officer wish to take a
full-dress suit with him?"

"No; the order is that all are to start in marching order, and that
all baggage is to be cut down to the smallest proportions. No
officer is to take more than can be carried in his valises."

It was the first week in August when the three columns, each twenty
thousand strong, moved from their respective starting points.
Although the king was nominally in command of the central division,
Marshal Keith was the real commander. He rode with the king at the
head of the column, and his aides-de-camp, and those of Frederick,
were constantly on their way up and down the line, carrying orders
and bringing in reports as to the manner in which the regiments
maintained their respective positions, and especially how the
artillery and baggage train kept up.

There was no necessity, at present, for taking precautions. The
march would for some days lead through Prussia, and it was morally
certain that the Saxon army--which was small and scattered and,
even if united, would not equal the strength of one of the Prussian
armies--would not attempt any serious resistance; for the country
was flat, and there would be no defiles where a small force of men
could successfully oppose a larger one. Nevertheless, the daily
marches were long for the infantry and the baggage, but by no means
fatiguing for mounted men. The staff and aides-de-camp, with their
orderlies, rode behind the leaders. The troopers were sometimes
employed, instead of the officers, when a short written order had
to be sent back to the rear of the column.

The harvest having been gathered in, the cavalry rode across the
open country, thus reducing the length of the column. The day was
very hot, and the infantry opened their ranks, as much as possible,
to allow the passage of what little air was moving. At nine o'clock
the troops were halted. Each man had been served with a breakfast,
before starting; and the haversacks were now opened, and a meal
made of the bread they contained, washed down with an allowance of
rough wine, carried in each regimental waggon. Then the men sat
down, under the shade of greatcoats supported by ramrods and other
contrivances, and either slept or talked until half-past two; when
the bugle sounded. The greatcoats were rolled up and strapped on to
the knapsacks, then there was a vigorous use of the brush, to
remove the thick dust gathered on the march. At three the column
got into motion again, and halted for the night at half-past six;
when fires were lighted, coppers put on, and the main meal of the
day presently served.

The rations of the officers were the same as those of the men, but
the greater part of them supplemented the food by that carried in
their orderlies' saddlebags. Lindsay, Fergus, and the marshals
other two aides-de-camp had arranged that, when possible, they
should mess together; and their servants should prepare the meal by
turns, while those not so engaged looked after the horses, saw that
they were fed, watered, and groomed. The servants were all old
campaigners, and though neither Lindsay nor Fergus had thought of
giving them orders to that effect, both Donald and Karl had laid in
a stock of provisions.

Donald had cooked a pair of fowls on the previous evening. Karl had
bought a sucking pig. One of the German officer's servants had a
huge piece of salt beef, that had already been boiled, while the
other had a hare. It was agreed at once that the fowls should be
left for early breakfast; and the beef put aside for dinner, and
for supper, also, if nothing else could be obtained. Karl, as the
servant of the junior officer, was cook for the evening, and he
acquitted himself admirably.

Each officer carried in his saddlebag a tin plate, a drinking horn,
and a knife, fork, and spoon. There was no dish, but the spit was
handed round, and each cut off a portion. Soup made from the ration
of meat was first served, then the hare, and then the sucking pig,
while the four orderlies had an ample meal from the ration of meat.
A supply of spirits had been carried in the staff waggon. This they
took, plentifully watered, with the meal; with a stronger cup
afterwards.

The night was so fine that all agreed that it was not worthwhile to
erect the tent carried for them in the waggon. At eight o'clock the
order for the next day's march came out, and two of the king's
orderlies started on horseback with copies of it to the commanders
of brigades, who in their turn communicated to the colonels of
their respective regiments.

The next evening the force encamped round Torgau, a very strong
fortress, where a great store of provisions had been collected.
Ample quarters were assigned to the marshal and his staff in the
town. Here they halted for a day to allow the other armies, which
had both farther to march, to keep abreast of them on their
respective lines of route.

Then, following the Elbe, the army arrived after two marches in
front of Dresden. The court of Saxony had, for years, been wasting
the revenues of the country in extravagance and luxury; while
intriguing incessantly with Austria, and dreaming of obtaining an
increase of territory at the expense of Prussia. No effort had been
made to prepare to carry out the engagements entered into with
Austria; and the army, utterly neglected, numbered but some fifteen
thousand. These were scattered over the country, and but poorly
provided with artillery.

When, then, the news arrived that three Prussian armies had crossed
the frontier, there was no thought of resistance; but orders were
despatched for the whole force to concentrate at Pirna, a strongly
fortified camp among the defiles of the mountains separating Saxony
from Bohemia. The position was almost an impregnable one, and they
could receive reinforcements from Bohemia.

On the arrival of the Prussian army the king fled, and Dresden
threw open its gates. As Frederick hoped to detach Saxony from the
alliance against him, the greater portion of the army were encamped
outside the town; three or four regiments, only, marching in and
quartering themselves in the empty Saxon barracks. The aid Saxony
could render Frederick would be insignificant, but it was most
desirable for him that he should ensure its neutrality, in order to
secure his communications with Prussia when he marched forward into
Bohemia.

Finding the king had gone, his first step was to send a general
officer, with a party of soldiers, to seize the archives in the
palace. Among these was discovered the prize he most desired to
find; namely a signed copy of the secret treaty, between Austria,
Russia, France, and Saxony, for the invasion and partition of
Prussia. Copies of this document were instantly sent off to the
courts of Europe, thus affording an ample justification for what
would otherwise have appeared a wholly unprovoked attack by Prussia
upon her neighbours. Had it not been for the discovery of this
document, Frederick would probably have always remained under the
