buddy. She mayn't let it be known outside her own sorority, but we
aren't blind."

"Are there other sororities in the school then besides the Camellia
Buds?" asked Irene.

"Bless your innocence! I should think there are. There's a rival one in
the Transition. I rather fancy they've snapped up Mabel already. I gave
Winnie a hint she wasn't to tackle _you_, because you'd come to school
with an introduction to _me_, so I ought to have first innings. The
prefects have a sorority all to themselves, and the seniors have one,
and as for the juniors, silly little things, they're as transparent as
glass, with their signaling and their grips and their cypher letters.
Any one can see through them with half an eye. But we're wasting time.
We've got to fix you up with a buddy, and we must be quick before the
bell rings."

"May we choose?" asked Irene, and her eyes fell longingly on Peachy.

"No, we mayn't!" said President Agnes firmly. "We have to take what the
fates send us. It's Kismet. Every time we elect a new member we draw
lots again for buddies. It's a kind of general shuffle. If we're an
uneven number somebody of course has to be odd man out."

"I was the 'old maid' last draw, and I haven't had a buddy this term,"
remarked Sheila plaintively.

"Never mind, ducky! You're bound to find a partner now," consoled Delia.
"It might even be my little self, so live in hope."

"No such luck," groaned Sheila. "I'll probably get Joan, and you know
she always uses me as a door-mat."

Agnes meantime was writing ten names on ten separate pieces of paper and
folding them in identically the same fashion. Peachy offered the loan of
a hat, and into this treasury they were cast and shuffled.

"The newest member draws," murmured Agnes, and the others pushed Irene
forward. She chose two folds of paper at a venture, and twisted them
together, then performed the like service for another pair, until all
the ten were assorted. The thrill of the ceremony was when Agnes opened
the screws of paper and read out the names. Fate had mixed the Camellia
Buds together thus:

          Peachy Proctor--Sheila Yonge.
          Jess Cameron--Delia Watts.
          Joan Lucas--Esther Cartmel.
          Agnes Dalton--Mary Fergusson.
          Lorna Carson--Irene Beverley.

Whether the members of the secret sorority felt satisfied or otherwise
with the result of the shuffle, etiquette forbade them to show anything
but polite enthusiasm. Each took her buddy solemnly by the hand and
vowed allegiance. Peachy then produced what she called "the loving cup,"
a three-handled vase of brown pottery brought by Jess from Edinburgh and
with the motto "Mak' yersel' at hame," on it in cream-colored letters.
It was usually a receptacle for flowers, but it had been hastily washed
for the occasion and filled with lemonade, a rather bitter brew
concocted by Peachy and Delia from a half-ripe lemon plucked in the
garden and a few lumps of sugar saved from tea. This was passed round,
and the Camellia Buds gulped it heroically as a pledge of sisterhood.

"The password is _Thistle-down_," decreed Agnes, as the members, trying
not to pull sour faces, consoled themselves with candy and broke up the
meeting. "Any one who can think of a stunt for next time please bring
along propositions. We're always open to new ideas and ready for a
startler."

As a direct result of her admission to this select sorority Irene found
herself flung by Fate into the arms of Lorna Carson. Had any individual
choice been allowed she would have selected Peachy, Jess, Delia, or even
Sheila in preference, but the lot once cast she must abide by it and be
content. She had a very shrewd suspicion that when the buddies got tired
of each other they elected a fresh member and so necessitated a general
reshuffle of partners, and that her admission to the society had been
welcomed as the pretext for such a change. Here she was, however,
pledged to intimate friendship with Lorna, a girl who half fascinated
and half repelled her, and who, though she might possibly turn out
trumps in the future, was for the present at least most difficult to
understand.




CHAPTER V

Fairy Godmothers, Limited

Irene Beverley, when she first left the shores of her native land, was a
particularly light-hearted, jolly little Britisher, not at all bookish,
and not accustomed to worry her head over any of the deep affairs of
life, but ready to have a royal time with anybody of similar tastes and
inclinations. In her first letter home she summed up the results of a
week's experience.

                                       "THE VILLA CAMELLIA.

         "MUMMIE DARLING,

         "This is to tell you I am still alive! I'm a little
         surprised, because I thought math would kill me.
         Miss Bickford is most _horribly_ conscientious and
         insists upon finding out whether I really
         understand or not, and it is generally 'not.' I
         suppose I was born with a thick head for figures,
         anyway, she seems amazed at my ignorance. I lay the
         blame on St. Osmund's. Is that mean of me? It's my
         only way of paying out Miss Gordon for past scores.

         "I don't mind admitting I have warm times in
         school over some of the classes, but the rest of
         the life is lovely. Miss Bickford is often a big
         thorn, but Peachy is a rose. As for Lorna she's
         like one of those tropical flowers that Uncle
         Redvers grows in his conservatory. How does Vin
         like being at the office? Are you straight yet at
         the flat? Come and see me as soon as ever you can,
         because I'm a little bit lonesome and wanting my
         home folks, though I wouldn't confess it to any of
         these girls for the world.

         "Heaps of love to Dad and Vin and your dear self.

                                            "From

                                                "RENIE."

If Irene, who had found her niche in a congenial set at the Villa
Camellia, was capable of feeling the pangs of homesickness, that
unpleasant malady exhibited itself with far more serious symptoms in the
case of another new girl who had entered the school upon the same day.
Desiree Legrand could not settle down among the juniors. She was used to
the society of grown-up people, and did not take kindly to young
companions. In the excitement of her own affairs Irene had hardly given
the child a thought since her arrival, but one afternoon, when enjoying
a solitary ramble round the garden, she suddenly came face to face with
Little Flaxen. She was shocked at the change in her; the once pink
cheeks were white and pasty, and her eyelids were red and swollen as if
with perpetual crying.

"Hello! Whatever have you been doing to yourself?" exclaimed Irene.
"You look rather a bunch of misery, don't you? What's the matter?"

Desiree, squatting forlornly on the steps that led to the upper tennis
courts, produced a lace-bordered pocket-handkerchief and mopped her
eyes.

"Nobody loves me here!" she blurted out dramatically. "I'm just
wr-r-r-etched! They all laugh and call me Frenchie! I'm not French, and
I w-w-ant to be l-l-oved!"

Irene looked at her and shook her head.

"That's not the way to go about it I'm afraid. I'm sorry, but you know
you'll just _invite_ teasing if you carry on like this. Can't you brace
up and be sporty? Pretend you don't mind anything they say and they'll
soon stop."

"But I _do_ mind!" sobbed the tragic little figure on the steps. "I mind
d-d-dreadfully! Why are they all so horrid to me? People have always
been so nice till I came here!"

"That's exactly the reason," said Irene, grasping the situation and
explaining it truthfully. "You've been accustomed to be petted by
everybody, and after all why _should_ the other girls in your form pet
you? You don't pet _them_, do you?"

"N-n-o!"

Desiree's eyes were round with amazement.

"Well, can't you see school's a matter of give and take? If you do
something for the rest they'll possibly like you, but they won't fall on
your neck just out of sheer good nature. Why don't you write home for a
box of chocolates and offer them round your form?"

"I never thought of it. I had some chocolates--but--I ate them!"

"There you are! You expected to get all the attention and give nothing.
Sorry if I seem brutal, but it's the solid truth. You take my advice and
cheer up instead of continually sniveling. I've been at school myself
since I was seven, and I know a thing or two. If a girl's popular
there's generally some reason behind it. Look here, I'll help you if I
can. Those kids over there are doing nothing. I'll get them to come and
play rounders, choose you for a partner, and I'll back our side to win.
Here's Peachy! Perhaps she'll join in too. I'll ask her."

Irene rapidly explained her philanthropic intentions, and enlisted both
Peachy and Delia in her team. The juniors, amazed and flattered at an
invitation from older girls, were ready enough for a game. Irene
insisted upon the innovation of what she called "hunting in couples,"
that is to say, dividing the company into partners who made the course
hand in hand. She took good care to choose Desiree for her
"running-mate," and as they were both fleet of foot they scored
considerably. By the time the bell rang they had beaten the records.

"Look here!" said Irene, addressing the juniors before they scooted
away, "you kids are missing a chance. Why don't you make Desiree train
for the sports? She can run like a hare! With the start she'd get as a
junior she might win you a trophy. Hadn't it ever entered your silly
young noddles to see what she could do for your form? Well, you are a
set of slackers! That's my opinion of you. We manage our affairs better
in the Transition."

"Oh, thank you! Thank you!" gasped Little Flaxen, lingering a moment or
two behind the others. "You've been just great! I'll write to Dad
to-night to send me some chocs, and I won't eat a single one myself.
They shall have them all. They shall really!"

With scarlet cheeks and shining eyes she was a different child from the
weeping Niobe who had sat and sobbed on the steps.

"Now if I'd simply coddled her and sympathized she'd have cried a few
gallons more and have been no better off," mused Irene, as her protegee
danced away. "I fancy those juniors have been fairly nasty to her,
though I wouldn't tell her so. Something ought to be done about it, but
the question is 'what?' I want to have a talk with Peachy when I can
wedge in ten minutes of spare time."

All evening remembrance of Little Flaxen's red eyes and white cheeks
haunted Irene. She felt it ought not to have been possible for the child
to be so lonely and neglected. Granted that her unpopularity might be
partly her own fault, boycotting was nevertheless hard to bear. It was
clearly somebody's business to have looked after her, and that duty
ought not to have devolved upon a newcomer like herself, who only
realized the necessity by the merest chance.

"What's the use of the prefects?" Irene asked herself, but she gave up
the answer, and appealed to Peachy at breakfast-time instead.

That cheery young American took the matter more seriously than Irene
expected. There was a very kind little heart hidden under her bubbles of
fun.

"I'll call a meeting of the Camellia Buds right now," she declared. "I
guess we don't want any of those poor babes crying their eyes out. Talk
of homesickness! You should have seen me my first week here. I brought
four dozen pocket-handkerchiefs to school with me and I used them all.
It's not good enough! Prefects, did you say? Humph! I don't call Rachel
exactly laid out for this job. Bring your biscuits to the 'Grotto' at
interval, and we'll have a powwow about it."

There was a twenty-minute mid-morning break between classes, during
which the girls ate lunch and amused themselves as they pleased in the
house or grounds. The biscuits, three apiece, were laid out in rows on
the dining-room table together with each pupil's glass of milk. As Irene
ran in to take her portion she heard a scrimmage going on at the other
end of the room. Several small girls were quarreling loudly, and above
the noise came Desiree's piping, high-pitched voice:

"I haven't had a biscuit for days and it isn't fair."

"What's all this about?" asked Irene, striding into the crowd just in
time to see Mabel and another member of the Transition pass, laughing,
through the lower door.

There was a babel in reply.

"Those big girls come and grab our biscuits!"

"It's a shame of them!"

"There ought to be three apiece!"

"And there never are!"

"It's something if you get two!"

"Nancy's taken both mine!"

"Honest injun, I haven't!"

"I tell you I'm famished!"

"Help! Don't all shout at once," decreed Irene. "Let's have a biscuit
parade. Each hold out what she's got. Here, Audley, hand one of yours
over to Francie. Effie, break that one in half and share with Chris.
Desiree, you may have mine this morning, but this business mustn't
happen again. I've no time to stop now, but I'll inquire into this, you
bet!"

Leaving an only partially satisfied group of small girls behind her
Irene sped to her tryst in the garden. She took a short cut, and ran
through the orange grove, where the half-ripe oranges were beginning to
turn yellow on the trees, then shamelessly jumping over a flower border
of stocks and primulas, crossed under the rose-pergola, turned down a
creeper-covered side alley, and found herself in a neglected portion of
the grounds. Here there was a very dilapidated little arbor, built sixty
or seventy years ago when the Villa Camellia had been owned by an
Italian count with a weakness for the fine arts. The roof leaked, and a
riot of jessamine almost hid the door; the window-sill had fallen, and
the floor was a mass of dead leaves. The plastered walls were painted
with frescoes--faded and moldy now--of a country chateau with cypress
trees, and three ladies in big plumed hats riding on white horses, and a
gentleman in shooting costume and tall boots, who wore side whiskers,
and carried a gun, and had four hunting dogs standing in a row behind
him. All these were rather stiff and badly painted, yet gave an air of
neglected grandeur to the grotto. There were marble seats, and a rickety
marble table, and a little broken statue of Cupid in the corner, and the
floor under the rubbish was of blue glazed tiles, so that the building,
though fallen on evil days, still showed some remnants of its former
glory. As it was in an out-of-the-way spot and far from the tennis
courts, it was not often visited, and had therefore been appropriated by
the Camellia Buds as a suitable place for the secret meetings of their
sorority.

The nine were all assembled here waiting impatiently for Irene. She
brushed through the jessamine-covered doorway, took her seat, and
breathlessly explained the reason of her delay.

"Would you have believed such meanness?" she ended.

Peachy nodded solemnly.

"I told you some of our precious Transition would make you blush. Was
it Bertha? I thought so! I knew she had got hold of Mabel. I believe
they're buddies, and a charming pair they'll be! We shall have to tackle
them somehow. This certainly can't be allowed to go on."

"Isn't it a case for the prefects?" asked Irene, addressing the
President.

Agnes's forehead was drawn into a series of puckers.

"We hate telling," she sighed. "The fact is the prefects in this school
aren't quite what they ought to be. They _think_ they do their duty, but
they're too aloof and high-handed and bossing, and the consequence is
they're not popular, and the girls would as soon complain to a teacher
as to Rachel or Sybil or Erica. It simply isn't done. Yet those kids
need a champion. There are several abuses among them that I've noticed
myself."

"Guess we've got to take it on then and 'champ'," murmured Delia.

"Poor little souls, it's a shame to steal their 'bikkies'; we'll have to
stand over them and act as fairy godmothers," said Sheila.

Peachy bounced suddenly in her seat.

"Sheila Yonge, you've given me an idea--yes, an absolute brain-throb.
What the Camellia Buds ought to do is to turn the sorority into an
Amalgamated Society of Fairy Godmothers, and each of us take over a
junior to look after and act providence to. It's what those kids are
just aching for--only they mayn't know it. What good are prefects to
them except as bogies? They skedaddle like lightning if they see so much
as Rachel's shadow. They each ought to have one older girl whom they can
count on as a friend."

"A kind of buddy?"

"Something of the sort, but more like a foster-mother."

"I vote we ask them all to a candy party, and each adopt one," suggested
Delia warmly.

"There are ten of us, and there are nineteen juniors," calculated Jess.
"How's it going to work out?"

"Why, some of us must take twins or even triplets," decreed Peachy. "I'm
bursting to begin. Let's have that candy party right away. Can anybody
raise a lira or two?"

"We'll give you our subscriptions back in the house, if you'll act
treasurer and wheedle Antonio. Fairy Godmothers, Limited! It's a brainy
notion. When shall you ask those kids? You bet they'll buzz in like
bees."

The loud clanging of the garden bell, which seemed to punctuate life at
the Villa Camellia, broke up the meeting in a hurry and scattered its
members in the direction of their classrooms. At the first opportunity,
however, Irene unlocked her cash-box and took out a contribution towards
the candy party. She was not yet used to the Italian paper money, and
had only a vague idea of its value, but she judged that two lire was the
expected amount, and carried it accordingly to Peachy's dormitory.

"You white angel! It's a bountiful 'contrib.' I've squared Antonio.
He'll leave the parcel inside the grotto. What we should do without that
dear old man I can't imagine. I've told the juniors, and they're simply
crazy to come. I've fixed it up for directly after tea."

Antonio, the old concierge who had charge of the gate, was absolutely
faithful to his duties as porter, and guarded the Villa Camellia as
zealously as a convent, but he was lenient on one point--he was willing
sometimes to smuggle sweets, and those girls who knew how to coax could
induce him to make an expedition to the confectioner's and fetch them a
small private store of what delicacies they fancied. He had his own
ideas of how much was good for them, and would never be responsible for
more than a limited allowance; neither would he undertake more than one
commission per week for any single girl. It was a matter of favor, and
to some of the pupils he would only grunt a refusal. Peachy, however,
was a champion wheedler; she had a certain command over the Italian
language, and could persuade Antonio, in his native tongue, of the
absolute necessity of her demands. He was quite generous on this
occasion, and slipped a fair-sized parcel of mixed Neapolitan bonbons
into the sanctuary of the deserted summer-house.

Nineteen interested juniors, bidden to an unwonted entertainment,
dodged their prefect after tea, evaded a basket-ball practice, scattered
themselves in the grounds, met in the long pergola, and proceeded to the
jessamine-covered arbor, where they were received politely by their ten
hostesses. It was, of course, impossible to accommodate them inside, but
the grotto was close to the place where Paolo, the gardener, chopped
wood for the stoves, so there were plenty of logs lying about that
served as seats. In a very short time the guests were settled,
hospitality was handed round, the colored papers were removed from the
goodies, and there was a general abandonment to sticky satisfaction.
Between the first and second distributions Agnes, as President of the
Sorority, addressed the meeting.

"We've a proposition to make to you all," she began. "There are some
things in this school that aren't always quite what they ought to be,
and it's rather hard for juniors to fight their own battles. Sometimes
you squabble among yourselves--oh, _I_ know!--and sometimes you get it
hot from the seniors or the Transition. Well, we're going to help you.
Each of us means to take on one or more of you and be a sort of fairy
godmother to you, and responsible for seeing you're decently treated. I
understand there's been a little trouble about your lunch biscuits?"

"It's Bertha!"

"And Mabel!"

"They're real mean!"

"They simply grab them!"

"Oh, do please stop it!"

"And we haven't had our turns at the tennis courts!"

"And Winnie borrowed my paint-box and won't give it back!"

Agnes held up a hand to stop the general clamor.

"That'll do!" she decreed. "I'm going to sort you out and give you each
to your fairy godmother, and you may pour your woes into her ears, and
she'll try her level best to right your wrongs. No, you _mayn't_ say
whom you'd like to have. It's _we_ who'll do the choosing, thanks!
Anybody who's not satisfied can walk off and she won't get a champion at
all or any more candy either. I mean what I say."

Such an awful threat reduced the juniors to order, and they submitted
quite peaceably to be apportioned among their various benefactresses.
Irene secured Little Flaxen, Lorna had a pair of solemn-eyed sisters,
Peachy pounced upon the liveliest trio and proclaimed them as her
triplets, and Delia adopted the two youngest as twins.
