
"About saying as few words as possible to the customers in the shop;
Mrs. Maple told me she was most strict about it."

"Well, I suppose she is," said Marion, carelessly; "at least, just at
first;" but they were joined at this moment by two young men, whom Kate
instantly recognised as being frequent visitors at the shop.

She cast an inquiring glance at Marion, as one of them said, "This is
the cousin you told me was coming to help you in the shop, I suppose?"

"I have been there all the week, and seen you several times, I think,"
said Kate quickly, at which they all burst into a loud laugh.

A few minutes afterwards they were joined by some more friends, who
were likewise customers at the shop, as Kate's eyes instantly told her,
and she wondered whether her cousin did keep the rule about friends and
customers, as strictly as Mrs. Maple supposed.

Before the next week was over, she found that these friends of Marion's
came in for buns or pastry when Mrs. Maple was sure to be out of the
way, and a good deal of laughing and chatting went on between them.

"Of course I don't keep such a stupid rule as that, Kate, how can I?"
said her cousin afterwards, when they were talking about this.  "It
would not do to laugh and chat with the old lady in the way, but where
is the harm I should like to know?"

Kate shook her head.  "Of course I don't understand business," she
said, "but I thought it was a strange rule, myself."

"A strange rule!  It is the most stupid and absurd one that could be
thought of.  Some people come into the shop every day, and to think I
am only to say 'yes' and 'no' to them is ridiculous."

"But all those young men you met on Sunday--surely you knew some of
them in a different way than just coming into the shop?" said Kate.

"No, I don't," replied her cousin; "I never saw them until I came
here," she added, laughing.

Kate looked a little disappointed.  "I--I thought you knew them so
well, they seemed so friendly--that they must be friends of your
brothers--that your father knew their friends and all about them,"
stammered Kate.

"You little goose! what difference can it make to us, whether my father
and grandfather knew theirs, or whether we met last week for the first
time?" said Marion, laughing.

But Kate was not satisfied.  "I wish I could talk to mother about it,"
she said, half aloud.

"For patience sake don't look so solemn and talk so seriously about a
little thing like that, and as to telling your mother everything, why
no sensible girl of any spirit would think of such nonsense, for she
would know that her mother could not understand about things she had
never seen or heard of.  Now, don't be silly, Kate, and make your
mother uncomfortable about you.  We went to church last Sunday on
purpose that you might tell her we had been, and after that she will be
satisfied, unless you tell her something on purpose to make her anxious
about you."  And Marion went to serve another customer, feeling sure
that Kate would not say anything about these acquaintances now.

Kate certainly did not want to say anything that would make her mother
anxious.  Only this morning she had received a letter from her mother
saying she had lost almost all her fears concerning her welfare now,
for Kate's letters had given such a faithful account of Mrs. Maple's
strict ways, and the stringent rule about chance acquaintances, and her
resolution to induce her cousins to go with her to a Bible-class very
soon, that Mrs. Haydon grew almost as hopeful as Kate about the future.

And Kate was quite sincere in her desire to induce her cousins to spend
their Sundays differently, and she thought if she went with them to see
the various sights of London just once or twice they would be willing
to go with her afterwards.  The following Sunday morning when they were
dressing to go out Marion said, "Where do you think we are going
to-day, Kate?"

"You said you would take me to Westminster Abbey or to St. Paul's,"
said Kate.

"Ah, yes, so I did; but a wet Sunday will do for those places, and they
want us to go to Richmond or Greenwich Park.  Which shall it be, Kate?"
said her cousin, brushing her hair more vigorously.

"Who wants us to go?" asked Kate.

"Oh, you know--the friends who met us in the Park last Sunday."

"The young men who came into the shop on Friday?  Wouldn't they go with
us to the Abbey or to St. Paul's instead?" said Kate.

Marion laughed.  "I shouldn't like to ask them," she said; "and pray
don't say anything about Sunday school before them."

"I am not ashamed of it, I can tell you," said Kate, in a half-offended
tone.

"No, no, of course not; but then, you see, you are not in the country
now," said Marion, "and things are different in London."

"I don't see why they should be; there are Sunday schools in London, I
know, and I mean to find out a Bible-class, and then you and Bella
shall come and see how nice it is."

"Well, there's plenty of time for that when the fine weather is all
over," said Marion a little impatiently.  "Now, Kate, be quick and
decide where we shall go, for I expect they will meet us as we go home,
and we must tell them where to meet us this afternoon."

"Well, I would rather not go at all," said Kate slowly, for she knew
her conscience would not let her enjoy the most pleasant trip that
could be arranged.

"Oh, nonsense, but you must come, I have promised for you; they
particularly want you to go," said Marion.

Kate could not help feeling pleased and flattered by her cousin's
words, but she made another feeble protest.

"I would much rather go to St. Paul's," she said, "and if I go with you
to-day you must promise to go to Bible-class with me very soon."

"Oh, I promise," laughed Marion.  "And now, Kate, once more, where
shall we go, for I promised you should decide this?  I am a great mind
to be jealous of you, my little country cousin," she added; "Bella
would be, I know."

"I don't see what you have got to be jealous about," said Kate, yet
still feeling pleased and elated, in spite of her better sense.

"Now let me give you a few finishing touches before we go," said
Marion, a few minutes afterwards, "and I will lend you my green brooch
and a veil.  You must let me alter your bonnet a little one night next
week.  There; now you don't look quite so dowdy," said Marion, as she
pushed her cousin before the looking-glass after the "few touches" had
been given to her bonnet and neck ribbon.

"Come, Kate, will you take this parasol of mine?" said her cousin.

"Oh, yes, and I must take some money, I suppose," said Kate, going to
her box and unlocking it.  She did not like her cousin to see what a
small store of money she had, and so she put the purse into her pocket
as it was, but not intending to spend more than a shilling, for the
little sum her mother had given her was to last three months for her
extra expenses.




CHAPTER IV.

THE LOST PURSE.

Sunday "outings," in the holiday-making sense, were not much to Kate's
fancy, but she had exhausted all her excuses and objections, and found
herself forced to yield to Marion's proposal.  So the two girls went
off and found their friends waiting for them a short distance from the
shop.  The bells of various churches were ringing for morning service,
and Kate ventured to whisper to her cousin that she would like to go,
but Marion shook her head so decidedly that she gave up the point at
once, but she did not take much interest in the discussion that was
going on about the rival attractions of Greenwich and Richmond, saying
she knew nothing about either.

At last it was decided that they should spend the afternoon at
Greenwich, going and returning by water.  The young men walked with
them almost as far as Marion's home, but left them at the corner of the
street, and nothing was said to her father about these companions of
their walk.  When Isabel heard where they were going she declared she
must have her bonnet altered, and Marion sat down to do this while her
sister got the dinner ready.

As they were going out after dinner, Marion said, "Perhaps we shall
stop out to tea, father.  I want to go and see a friend to-day, and she
is sure to ask us to stay to tea."

"Very well, my dear, I can manage to get tea for myself and the boys,"
said her father, carelessly.  Marion always had been allowed to do very
much as she pleased, and since her mother's death, and she had got a
situation, she had taken the reins quite into her own hands, and seldom
asked advice, and still more rarely accepted it when it was offered.

Kate felt rather uncomfortable at first, when she thought of this
steamboat excursion, but she soon forgot this in the pleasure and
novelty of the scene around her, and she stifled the voice of
conscience, by whispering that this would not happen again--she had
only come this once, that her cousin might go with her to the
Bible-class when the fine weather was over.

The steamboat was crowded, and there was a good deal of pushing and
squeezing when they reached Greenwich Pier, where most of the
passengers were landed.

"All tickets ready! all tickets ready!" called the man at the end of
the landing-board, while another took each passenger's scrap of paper
as they passed out.  Kate had put her ticket in her purse for safety;
and now put her hand into her pocket to get it; but to her dismay she
found her pocket empty.  "Oh, stop a minute, wait for me, Marion, I
must have dropped my purse!" and Kate began to elbow her way through
the crowd back to where she had been sitting.  The place was vacant
now, and she hunted all round, but no purse could be seen.  "Oh, what
shall I do, what shall I do!" she exclaimed, bursting into tears.

"What is it, why don't you come?" said Marion, who had now come back
for her.

"My purse, my purse, I've lost it!" sobbed poor Kate.

"Lost your purse!" exclaimed Marion.  "Did you drop it?"

Kate shook her head.  "I don't know; I thought I put it into my
pocket," she said.

The two were looking under the seats, and all round as they talked, but
now they heard Bella and their companions calling to them from the pier
to make haste, as the steamboat was about to leave, so they had to give
up the search and run ashore.

"Tickets, Miss, tickets," said the man, as they were hastening past to
join their friends.  Marion gave up hers, but Kate could only repeat,
"What shall I do, what shall I do!"

"Have you had a purse given to you that was found on board the boat?"
asked Marion.

The man laughed at the question.  "I suppose you have lost one," he
said.

"Yes, and my steamboat ticket was in it.  Did anyone give it to you?"
asked Kate anxiously.

"Oh, no! my dear, I've seen no purse.  You must pay again, that's all I
can say."

"But how can I pay, all my money was in my purse," sobbed Kate.

"What is it, what's the row?" asked one of the young men, who had come
back for them.

"This young lady's lost her purse, that's all," said the man.  "Are you
one of her friends?" he suddenly added.

"Yes, I am!" said the young man.

"Ah, well then, the matter can soon be settled.  You see her ticket was
in the purse, and we can't be expected to lose that."

"Precious mean of you then," grumbled the friend, putting his hand into
his pocket and counting out Kate's fare.

There was a momentary sense of relief in Kate's mind, and Marion
