
"Awfully sorry, Grey, but--ha, ha, ha!--what am I to do? You--ha, ha,
ha!--you do look a treat! I--ha, ha, ha!--I'll stop in a minute. Oh, ho,
ho, ho, ho, ho!"

Poor Grey felt anything but amused. He gathered himself to his feet, and
remarked stiffly, "Well, Cadbury, when you've done--"

Cadbury steadied himself with an effort.

"It's all over now, Grey. I'm as grave as a judge. And to show you how
penitent I am, I'll see this job through for you. But you must obey me
to the letter. No, don't brush yourself! Just lie down again as you
were, and, however much you're tempted to, don't apologize! Be dignified
and injured."

Grey objected, but was persuaded to submit.

"Now to find the owner of this giddy young fowl! We'll see if they lay
claim to it here."

Cadbury pushed open a little gate, and knocked at the door of the
nearest cottage. It proved to be the residence of the chicken's
mistress, an untidy, heavy-looking woman, who apparently lived alone.
Cadbury greeted her with the air of a constable, lawyer, and magistrate
rolled into one, and the woman listened with deep respect.

"If the fowl of which I am speaking does belong to you," he pursued, in
stern and solemn tones, "I am sorry to tell you it has been the cause of
a most unfortunate accident that might have proved fatal. I suppose you
are well aware that cattle, poultry, and other domestic animals are
required to be kept under proper control. If you will kindly step
outside with me, I will show you what mischief has been done."

The woman, looking much concerned and a little frightened, followed
Cadbury meekly to the scene of disaster. When she saw the lifeless
chicken, she raised her hands in horror.

"Dear, dear, dear, sir! Why, it's dead!"

"And it's a very good thing, madam, for you and for all of us, that my
friend here is not dead," said Cadbury reprovingly. "The chicken did not
die until it had done its best to kill him. And also to wreck his
machine! A bicycle is a very costly thing. Grey, my dear fellow, are you
feeling a little better? You are sure no bones are broken?"

Cadbury's voice was full of tender anxiety.

"I think not, thanks," responded Grey without moving.

"Dear, dear, dear, sir!" exclaimed the woman again. "Is there anything I
can do for you? I'm sure I'm very sorry; I am that!"

"I'm sure you are," said Cadbury, softening towards her. "And we should
be most unwilling to take proceedings, or anything like that, if we can
only arrange things comfortably."

At mention of the word "proceedings", the woman grew visibly more
uncomfortable. She pressed them to enter her cottage, and plied them
with plum loaf and unripe gooseberries!

"You see, sir, I'm not so well up as I might be in law matters. Maybe
you're right, I won't say. It's hard to keep the chickens from
straying, but I'll mind 'em better in future, for their sake and my own
too. There's nobody regrets the haccident more'n I do; but I'm a poor
woman, and a fine would fall cruel 'eavy on me!"

"I assure you, we wouldn't be hard on you for anything," exclaimed
Cadbury, still more kindly.

"You're very good, sir. I don't really 'ardly know what to suggest, but
would the chicken be of any service to you now?"

"The chicken! Well, I'm sure we can't refuse that. What say you, Grey?"

"What on earth should we do with it?" muttered Grey.

"Ah, there is one little difficulty, but only a slight one. Would you
add the small favour of roasting it for us, ma'am? We have no
convenience for cooking it. We should then call the matter settled, and
say no more about it."

"Thank you kindly, sir. I'll roast it, and gladly. And where might I
bring it to, sir?"

"Oh, my goodness!" ejaculated Grey under his breath. Cadbury considered
a moment.

"I think it will be better to leave it to be called for," he said
presently. "We shall probably send someone over next Wednesday."

The woman looked mildly surprised at the suggested interval, but only
replied, "Very good, sir. Just when you please. It shall be ready. And
this is to go no further?"

"Certainly not. I'm sure you have made all the amends in your power, and
we are much obliged to you. Good afternoon! Come, Grey, do you feel as
if you could make a start? Lean on my arm, and I will help you."

As the woman, grateful and relieved, closed her door, Grey gazed
admiringly at his school-fellow.

"Cadbury, what a clever chap you are! I can't think how you worked it.
But I say, what about fetching the thing? Who's going to risk that?"

"You are."

"Me! What do you mean?"

"What I say. Aren't you expecting to visit your godmother next
Wednesday?"

"Yes; and what's more, I must! She'd write and ask West why I didn't
turn up."

"Oh, you'll turn up right enough! But you'll run over here first."

"She lives bang in the opposite direction."

"Never mind. You'll be an hour or so late for once. You must explain
that you were--well, detained! She can make what she likes of that."

"Um! I don't feel over sweet on the job."

"Possibly not; we can't always do what we like. It's your little part
in the game. I've done mine for the present. You must hide the chicken
away somehow and bring it home, and then I'll have a second innings, and
undertake all the risk."

[Illustration]

By this time the top of the hill was gained once more. Of course any
idea of rejoining the paper-chase had to be given up, but a little
brushing and beating made Grey respectable, and he and Cadbury rode home
together, to confess to having lost the track, and to await the return
of the pack, who, after a capital run, had eventually captured the hares
at a most convenient spot--the door of a lemonade shop!




CHAPTER IV

A KNOCK AT THE WINDOW


By mutual agreement the story of the chicken was kept secret for the
present, and the next three days passed uneventfully, except to Jack,
whose Sunday at home was no small event, though a weekly one. Lessons
were just ended on the following Wednesday morning, and Cadbury was
doing monitor's work in the school-room when Grey sidled up to him.

"Hullo, Dapple-grey, you're the culprit I was wanting. These are your
things, aren't they?"

"Yes; but I was just going to put them away. You mustn't mark me!"

"You've not forgotten the little call you have to pay this afternoon?"

"I wanted to speak to you about that, Cadbury. It's very difficult for
me to do it, you know. What do you say--supposing we leave that chicken
alone? I don't want to go after it. And it's my chicken, you know."

"Half of it," replied Cadbury. "You can leave your half behind if you
like, but I want mine. I earned it by getting you out of your scrape.
Look here, Grey! Here are five--six articles belonging to you. I put six
marks against your name, and that's half-way to an imp., unless you do
your duty towards that chicken."

"Oh, dash it! Well, what have I to do?"

"You can't carve, can you?"

"Don't know. 'Spect so."

"No, I'm sure you can't. It's an art. I can. So that settles it. I must
have the fowl first this evening; cut it up, and send on your portion to
your bedroom. Let the March Hare fetch it. He's a noiseless customer."

"That won't do," said Grey. "Hallett wouldn't allow it. Since that last
pillow-fight, when his bolster knocked a can over and got soaked, he's
been awfully down on larks. He's sworn to lick the first boy who opens
the door after the gas is out--and he can do it, you know."

"Very well, I'll send it _via_ the window," said Cadbury coolly. "All
the same, I don't think you'll find Hallett's above eating it. When you
hear the chicken knock, open the window and let it in--that's all."

"Oh, yes, it sounds easy enough to you! But supposing I get the chicken,
how am I to bring it into the house without being seen? Suppose I meet
West in the hall, or Miss Turner on the stairs, or the housemaid in your
bedroom? I defy you to hide a roast fowl about you, and I don't care for
getting into rows, if you do."

"My dear Grey, we know you don't," said Cadbury. "You're an adept at
escaping them. But you needn't fear for this; I have a way out of the
hole. I'll drop a line from our window. You come round beneath it on
your return, before you enter the house, and tie the chicken firmly to
the end of it. Then, when the right time comes, I can haul it up. And
look here, don't let's explain to the other chaps how we came by the
chicken. Let's make a complete mystery of it for a day or two, and have
a lark over it."

That seemed good fun. Grey gradually allowed himself to be persuaded to
perform his part of the task. Cadbury, in his turn, made what small
preparations seemed necessary. He upset a salt-cellar at dinner, and
managed to collect at least half the contents in his handkerchief. He
also made a collection of string, chiefly from the smaller boys, who
give without asking questions--or, at least, without demanding answers.

Evening came at length, and with it Grey's return. A wink and a nod was
all the communication that passed between him and Cadbury, but it
satisfied the latter that the chicken was in the garden, and for once he
longed for bed-time. In such a hurry was he when the happy hour arrived,
that he forgot to wait for Mr. West's departure, and was half-way
upstairs when he was called back with a rebuke for his breach of
manners.

In the room over which Escombe Trevelyan was head slept also Cadbury,
Vickers, Jack Brady, and Toppin, the last-named being despatched to bed
an hour before the rest.

"What's up, Cadburius?" enquired Trevelyan with an amused smile. "Got to
catch a train?"

"No, a chicken!" was the reply.

"Poor fellow, his mind's giving way!" said Jack.

"Talking about chickens," broke in Vickers, "I saw the old cat sneaking
along just now with what looked for all the world like the leg of a fowl
in her mouth. You bet the masters are having a tuck-in to-night."

"Not a bit of it!" exclaimed Cadbury. "Depend upon it, she's been at our
chicken. The shameless, thieving beast!"

"At yours, Cad?" This was uttered in chorus.

"At mine--ours! It's a treat for us all. I was going to wait till lights
were out, but I daren't now. The cat'll have the rest if we aren't
quick; perhaps she's eaten it already. Keep cave by the door, Jack,
while I haul in the line."

Few things really astonish a boy. Cadbury was regarded as capable of
anything, and when the sash was cautiously raised, and the string pulled
up, the fact that a real roast chicken, half-wrapped in newspaper,
dangled at the end, caused more amusement than amazement.

"Well, I'm blowed! Where did this grow?"

"I shall drop a line to-morrow--two lines--and see what comes up."

"It'll be the old cat, likely."

"Hush! I must stow this away till Pepper's been round," said Cadbury,
hastily stuffing the bird into his own bed.

There was not long to wait; Mr. Peace appeared almost before they were
ready for him. Mr. Peace was the senior resident master, whose short
temper had won for him the above nickname. His back was scarcely turned,
the boys were still responding cordially to his rather gruff
"Good-night", when Cadbury drew the chicken forth and waved it
triumphantly in his hand. Trevelyan, who was next the window, pulled the
blind up silently. It was a brilliant moonlight night, so that gas was
unneeded.

"The cat has had her full share," Cadbury remarked sadly. "But never
mind. Half the chicken belongs to Gr--, to the next room, I mean, and
as I've got the trouble of carving, I shall give them the Pussy-half.
It'll be all right, they won't know; they'll only think I cut it rather
roughly."

"And our reluctance to share supper with the cat is purely a matter of
sentiment," added Vickers. "'Where ignorance is bliss, 'tis folly to be
wise.'"

"There goes Chickabiddy!" exclaimed Jack, as the fowl suddenly sprang
from Cadbury's bed into the middle of the floor. He hopped out and
recaptured it.

"Thanks! Well, it's no easy job, I do assure you, to divide a fowl on a
bed, with no plate, no fork, and only a penknife. I can carve well
enough under civilized conditions, but--"

"Tell us how you came by it, old man," said Jack, who was trying to
decide in his own mind whether he should consent or refuse to join the
feast. He liked chicken very much indeed, and what would they think if
he declined it! Besides, there was no rule against eating chicken in the
bedrooms. True, there was something about "No eatables to be taken
upstairs". But then the chicken had not been taken upstairs; it had come
by a lift. Still, Jack could not quite quiet the little voice within.

"No, I won't shock you with details," replied Cadbury mischievously.
"Perhaps you wouldn't eat it if I did."

"I'm not going to anyhow, thanks very much," returned Jack with sudden
determination. "There'll be all the more for the rest of you, won't
there?"

"Don't talk nonsense!" exclaimed Trevelyan. "Of course you'll have some!
If I think fit to eat it, you may. Don't play the blameless prig, for
goodness' sake!"

"Brady thinks I've filched it," said Cadbury.

"Brady doesn't want a nightmare," rejoined Jack, laughing, "though he
thinks it awfully kind of Trevelyan to answer for his conscience."

"You won't refuse the merry-thought--just for luck, Jack!"

"I have too many of my own generally, specially at Pepper's classes."

"Oh, pinch Brady, somebody! He's punning!" cried Cadbury. "There! it's
come in two at last!" and he surveyed his handiwork with great pride.
"Now to send along the next room's share!"

Wrapping it in the torn newspaper, he tied it to the string once more,
