the girls turned around. This was a lonely spot, too remote from any
dwelling to call for help. Besides, the freshmen were outnumbered by
these weird figures, who appeared not unlike monks in their somber
cowls, although their faces were absolutely hidden by black masks.

The girls clustered together around the rock like a group of frightened
chickens. Jessica had turned pale. She was not very robust and often
overtaxed her strength to keep up with her two devoted friends.

The tallest of the masked figures then spoke in a queer, deep voice.

"Young women, are you not aware that this is a sacred spot, devoted for
generations past to the Black Monks of Asia, whose home this building
was before it became a roadhouse for stage coaches? Never invade this
spot again with your hilarity. And now we will permit you to go,
marching out single file, without looking back. But first, through your
leader you must give your word never to mention this meeting to anyone.
If you refuse this promise we shall punish you as only the Black Monks
of Asia know how to punish persons who have offended the order. The
leader will please step forward."

There was a moment's whispered conversation among the freshmen. Then
Grace, urged by her friends, said:

"We promise."

"Now march out, single file, as agreed," resumed the Black Monk of Asia,
his voice trembling a little with suppressed emotion of some sort.

The girls started to move out of the enclosure single file, Grace
leading the procession, when a gust of wind blew the robe of the leading
monk apart, disclosing a navy blue serge walking-skirt. Grace's quick
eye caught sight of the skirt at once, and breaking from the line, she
charged straight into the group of black monks, crying:

"Sophomores! Sophomores!"

The other girls ran after her, screaming at the tops of their voices;
and there might have been almost a free fight between the two classes
had not the Black Monks of Asia scattered in every direction, running at
utmost speed.

"Come on back, girls," cried Grace in a disgusted tone.

She had chased a monk half-way across the orchard; then stopped to
wonder what she would do if she caught the tall, black-robed individual
who had indecorously caught up her skirts and was flying well ahead over
the rough ground.

One by one the plebes returned to their meeting place.

"Well, that was a sell!" uttered Nora disgustedly. "How shall we ever
manage to get even with those mean sophomores!"

"If we don't," exclaimed Grace, "we shall never hear the last of it in
Oakdale."

"But who gave us away?" demanded Jessica. "Did anyone drop a hint to the
sophomores of our secret meeting place?"

"I didn't," said one girl after another.

"Perhaps they followed us," suggested Marian Barber.

"No one followed me," asserted Grace. "I was careful to look behind and
see."

"Nor me."

"Nor me," exclaimed several of her classmates.

"No," said Nora. "Somebody must have overheard and given the secret
away."

"Not Mi----" but Grace stopped before she had finished the name.

The girls looked at each other.

Could Miriam Nesbit have been so false to her class?

No one replied, but each made a secret resolution to ferret out Miriam's
suspected treachery if it were the last act of her life.

"Let's start home, now," said Grace. "It's too late to go nutting
anyhow, and these foolish sophomores have spoiled the afternoon, for me
at least. If we don't cook up something to pay them back, the name of
freshman will be disgraced forever more."

However, the afternoon adventures were not at an end.

As the group of girls started toward the road, some distance away,
trying not to look crestfallen, a gruff voice from the far side of the
Omnibus House called:

"Hold up there!"

The girls took no notice, thinking it was more upper-class tricks.

Five rough-looking men emerged from a grove of alders which grew about
the building.

The young girls were really frightened this time. No sophomore could
disguise herself like this. These were undoubtedly genuine ruffians of
the worst type, hungry, blear-eyed and ragged.

"What shall we do?" whispered Jessica, clinging to Grace desperately.

"Everybody run," answered her friend, trying to be calm as the five men
advanced on them. But when they broke away to run toward the distant
road they found their retreat cut off by the tramps, who were active
enough as soon as the girls showed signs of flight. Back of them lay the
dense woods into which the sophomores must have plunged and departed for
town by another road. Seeing that escape was impossible, since, if some
got away, others would be caught--and no girl was willing to desert her
friends--the frightened plebes paused again and clustered about their
leader.

"What do you want?" asked Grace of one of the men.

"First your money, then your jewelry," answered the tramp, insolently
leering at her.

"But suppose we haven't any money or jewelry," replied Grace.

"So much the worse for you, then," answered the tramp in a threatening
tone.

"He can have this gold bracelet," exclaimed Jessica, slipping the band
from her arm.

But Grace was not listening. Her attention was absorbed by a group of
people passing in a straggling line on the road. Lifting up her voice
she gave the High School yell, which had been familiar to every High
School boy and girl for the last twenty years:

"Hi-hi-hi; hi-hi-hi; Oakdale, Oakdale, HIGH SCHOOL!"

As she expected, the call was answered immediately, and some of the
loiterers along the highway vaulted the fence at one bound.

"Help!" cried all the girls in chorus. "Help! Help!"

"It's some of the High School boys!" exclaimed Nora, in a relieved voice
as the rescuers came bounding through the orchard.

The tramps looked irresolute for a moment, but when they saw that the
newcomers were five boys they held their ground.

"What do you want?" said the tallest boy, with a flaming head of red
hair, as he confronted one of the tramps.

"Thank heaven it's Reddy Brooks, pitcher on the sophomore baseball
team!" whispered Grace, unable to conceal her joy.

"Is that any of your business, young man?" demanded the tramp, showing
his teeth like an angry dog.

"It's my business to protect these young ladies," answered Reddy Brooks,
"and I'll do it if I have to shed somebody's blood in the attempt."

"Ho, ho, ho!" laughed the big tramp, clapping his hands to his sides and
almost dancing a jig in his amusement.

In the meantime Reddy had cast his eyes about for some kind of a weapon.
There was not a stick nor stone in sight. The only thing he could find
was a pile of winter apples that had evidently been collected by the
owner of the orchard to be barreled next day.

Reddy made a rush for the pile, to the amazement of his fellow-students,
who imagined for a moment that he was running away. They soon found out
his purpose, however, when the apples came whizzing through the air with
well-aimed precision.

The first one hit the biggest tramp squarely on the chin and almost
stunned him. Each boy then chose his man and the five ruffians were soon
running across the orchard to the wood, the boys after them, their
pockets bulging with apples. Laughing and yelling like wild Indians,
they pelted their victims until the men disappeared in the forest.

The girls, who had forgotten their fright in the excitement of the
chase, were laughing, too, and urging on the attacks exactly as they
would have done at one of the college football games. Perhaps they had
had a narrow escape, but it was great fun, now, especially when Reddy
Brooks threw one of his famous curved balls and hit a tramp plump on the
back of the head.

"Oh," cried Nora, wiping tears of laughter from her eyes, "I never had
such a good time in all my life! Wasn't it great?"

"Wasn't it though?" grinned Reddy, as the boys returned from the field
of victory. "Lots more fun than throwing balls at dummies at the county
fair, wasn't it, fellows?"

"You girls ought to be careful how you walk out here alone at this time
of the year," said Jimmie Burke. "There are a great many tramps around
now, going south in bunches to spend the winter in Palm Beach, no
doubt."

"We'll never do it again," answered Grace.

"Never again!" exclaimed Nora, raising her right hand to heaven.

"I suppose Farmer Smithson will wonder what became of his apples,"
observed Reddy.

"Oh, well, he has so many acres of orchards, I don't suppose he'll miss
this one little pile."

And the crowd started gayly off to town.

But the girls of the freshman class had not forgotten--or forgiven--the
Black Monks of Asia.

All along the walk Grace was turning over and over in her mind some
scheme of revenge. Nothing seemed feasible, however. The sophomores were
so well up in tricks that it would be difficult to deceive them.

"Suppose," Grace proposed suddenly, aloud, "we ask David Nesbit's advice
to-morrow night, when we go to the flying machine exhibition."

After that she dismissed the subject from her mind for the time being.




CHAPTER V

ANNE HAS A SECRET


On the night of the flying machine exhibition, the four chums, for Anne
had now been formally adopted by Grace and her friends, arrived somewhat
early at the great arched doorway leading into the gymnasium.

They were all somewhat excited over this new experience. There had been
many balloon ascensions at the State Fair, and once a dirigible airship
had sailed over the town of Oakdale. But to see a real flying machine
with all its grace and elegance and lightness was like stepping onto
another planet where progress had advanced much faster than it had on
this.

At least, so thought Anne as she followed her friends into the building.
There was a sound of puffing and churning, during which David arrived in
a cloud of smoke on his motor cycle.

"I mean to learn to ride one of those queer machines," exclaimed Grace
from the doorway, never dreaming what an important part that very
machine was one day to play in the history of Oakdale.

"All right, you're welcome to," replied David, jumping off as he stopped
the motor. "Come over to the campus to-morrow afternoon, and I'll give
you your first lesson."

"Is that really an invitation?" asked Grace. "For I shall accept it, if
it is."

"It certainly is," answered the young man, "and I shall expect you to
make a very excellent prize pupil, not like Reddy Brooks, who tumbled
off and smashed his nose because he suddenly forgot how to manage the
brakes."

A few other people gathered in the roomy gymnasium to see the
exhibition, but the girls could see that it was a very exclusive company
they had been invited to join. There were, in fact, no other girls,
except Miriam Nesbit, who came late with her mother, a handsome, quiet
woman to whom her son David bore a marked resemblance.

Grace and her friends spoke to Mrs. Nesbit cordially, while Miriam bowed
coldly and confined all her attentions to Miss Leece, the unpopular
teacher of mathematics. Miriam ignored Anne entirely.

"And now, ladies, if you will all be seated, the show will begin,"
announced David, leading them to the spectators' benches ranged against
the wall. "Don't expect anything wonderful of mine," he added. "It's
only in the first stages so far. I'm afraid she'll break down, but she's
a great little machine, just the same. Isn't she, mother?"

"She is wonderful, I think, David," replied Mrs. Nesbit, who was a very
shy, quiet woman, almost entirely wrapped up in her only son. Miriam had
always been too much for her, and she had long since given up attempting
to rule or direct her brilliant, willful daughter.

"Mrs. Nesbit," said Grace, "this is Anne Pierson, one of the brightest
girls in the freshman class."

"How do you do?" said Mrs. Nesbit cordially, giving the girl her hand.
"You are a newcomer, are you not? I haven't heard Miriam speak of you."

"She is a newcomer, mother, but I hear she's giving your daughter Miriam
a stiff pull for first place," said David teasingly.

"I wish you'd keep quiet, David," exclaimed his sister angrily. "You
always talk too much."

"Miriam!" remonstrated her mother.

"Miss Nesbit," said Miss Leece in a disagreeable, harsh voice, "will
have no trouble, I think, in holding her own."

The teacher gave Anne such a glare from her pale blue eyes that the poor
child shrank behind Grace in embarrassment.

"Dear, dear," murmured Mrs. Nesbit helplessly. She disliked exceedingly
the scenes to which her daughter often subjected the family.

David only laughed good-naturedly.

"The exhibition is about to begin," he said, and disappeared into the
room where the ships were to be put through their performances.

In a few moments six young airship builders appeared, each carrying in
his arms the result of his summer's labors. There was vigorous applause
from everybody except Miriam, who was too angry with her brother to
enjoy the spectacle.

The aeroplanes were all copies of well-known models, except David's,
which was of an entirely new and original design of his own invention.
It looked something like a flying fish, the girls thought, with its
slender, oblong body, gauzy fins at the sides and a funny little forked
tail at the stern.

The models were too light for machinery, so rubber bands, secured
cris-cross in the bows, when suddenly released with a snap gave the
little ships the impetus they needed to fly the length of the gymnasium.

Only four of the six, however, were destined to fly that evening. They
soared straight down the big room, as easily and gracefully as great
white birds, and dropped gently when they hit the curtain at the other
end, their builders running after them as eagerly as boys sailing kites.
One of the models fluttered and settled down before it reached the other
side, and David's machine, which had commanded most attention because it
was different, started out bravely enough, its little propeller making a
busy humming as it skimmed along. But it had gone hardly ten yards
before it collapsed and ignominiously crashed to the floor.

"I'm glad of it," said Miriam above the din, for everyone had gathered
about the young man to offer sympathy and congratulations at the same
time.

"It's very, very clever, my boy," said Professor Blitz, "and you'll
succeed yet, if you keep at it."

"She wouldn't go far, David," said Grace, stroking the little model, as
if it had been a pet dog, "but she's the prettiest of all, just the
same."

"Did it hurt it when it fell?" Anne asked him.

"I think it broke one of its little fins," laughed David. "It hurt me
much more than itself, because it wouldn't be good and fly all the way."

"Anne," called Grace, "here is some one looking for you. It's a boy with
a note."

Anne looked frightened as she opened a soiled looking envelope the boy
handed her.

"Is anything the matter?" asked Jessica, seeing the expression of fear
on her face.

"No--yes----," answered poor little Anne, undecidedly. "I must go home,
or rather I mustn't go the way I came. Don't you think I could leave at
a side entrance? I don't want to see the person who is waiting for me in
front."

"Of course, child," spoke up Grace. "We'll see you home ourselves. Won't
we, girls!"

"Wait until I lock up my motor cycle and I'll go along," called David.
"We'll all protect Miss Anne."

"Tell him," said Anne to the boy, putting the note back in the envelope
and giving it to him, "that what he asks is impossible."

