
And Seymour, while he appreciated the spirit of the maiden, felt a
little pang of grief that even to a country he should be second,--an
astonishing change from that spirit of humility which a moment since
contented itself with metaphorically kissing the ground she walked upon.

"By the way, father, where is Philip?" asked Katharine.

"He went up the branch fishing, with Bentley, I believe."

"But is n't it time they returned?  Do you know, I feel nervous about
them; suppose those raiders--"

"Pshaw, child!  Still harping on the raiders? and nervous too!  What
ails you, daughter?  I thought you never were nervous.  We Wiltons are
not accustomed to nervousness, you know, and what must our guest think?"

"Nothing but what is altogether agreeable," replied Seymour, a little
too promptly; and then, to cover his confusion, he continued: "But I
think Miss Wilton need feel under no apprehension.  Master Philip is
with Bentley, and I would trust the prudence and courage and skill of
that man in any situation.  You know my father, who was a shipmaster,
when he died aboard his ship in the China seas, gave me, a little boy
taking a cruise with him, into Bentley's charge, and told him to make a
sailor and a man of me, and from that day he has never left me.  At my
house, in Philadelphia, he is a privileged character.  There never was
a truer, better, braver man; and as for patriotism, love of country is
a passion with him, colonel.  He might set an example to many in higher
station in that particular."

"Yes, I have noticed that peculiarity about the man.  I think Philip is
safe enough with him, Katharine, even if those--  Ha! what is that?"
The colonel sprang to his feet, as the sound of a musket-shot rang out
in the night air, followed by one or two pistol-shots and then a
muffled cry.




CHAPTER IV

_Lord Dunmore's Men Pay an Evening Call_

"Oh, father, it must be the raiders!  That was Blodgett's voice," cried
Katharine, looking very pale and clasping her hands.

"Let me go and investigate, colonel," said Seymour, leaping to his feet
and seizing his sword.

"Do so, Seymour," cried the colonel, as the sailor hastily left the
room.  "Phoebus," to the butler, "go tell Caesar to call the slaves to
the house.  You, Scipio," to one of the footmen, "go open the
arm-chest.  Katharine, reach me my sword.  See that the doors are
closed, Billy," said the colonel to the other servant, rapidly and with
perfect coolness.  "I think, Katharine, that perhaps you would better
retire to your room;" but even as he spoke the sound of hurried
footsteps and excited voices outside was heard.  After a few moments
one of the field-hands, followed by Seymour, burst panting into the
room, his mouth working with excitement and his eyes almost starting
from his head.

"Well, sir, what is it?" said the colonel.

"Foh de Lawd's sake, suh, dey'se a-comin', suh, dey'se a-comin'.
Dey'se right behin' me; dey'll be heah in a minute, suh."

"Who is coming, you idiot!" exclaimed the colonel.

"De redcoats, de British sojuhs, suh; dey 'se fohty boat-loads ob 'em;
dey'se come off fum de lil' sloop out in de ribah, and dey 'se gwine
kill we all, and bu'n de house down.  Dey done shot Mars' Blodgett, and
dey'se coming heah special to get you, suh, Mars' Kunnel, kase I heahd
dem say, when I was lyin' down on de wha'f, dat de man dey wanted was
dat Kunnel Wilton."

"It is quite true, sir; they seem to be a party of raiders of some
sort," said Seymour, coolly.  "I fear that Blodgett has been killed, as
I heard nothing of him.  I saw them from the brow of the hill.  Perhaps
you may escape by the back way, though there is little time for that.
Do you take Miss Wilton and try it, sir; leave me to hold these men in
play."

"Yes, yes, father," urged Katharine; "I know it must be Lord Dunmore's
men and Johnson.  They know that you have come back from France, and
now the man wants to take you prisoner.  You remember what the governor
told you at Williamsburg, that he would make you rue the day you cast
your lot in with the colonists and refused to assist him in the
prosecution of his measures.  And you know we have been warned at least
a dozen times about it.  Oh, what shall we do?  Do fly, and let me stay
here and receive these men."

"What! my daughter, do you think a Wilton has ever left his house to be
defended by his guest and by a woman!  Seymour, I believe, however, as
an officer in the service of our country, your best course is to leave
while there is yet time."

"I will never leave you, sir; I will stay here with you and Mistress
Katharine, and share whatever fate may have in store for you."

But even as he spoke, the crowding footsteps of many men were heard at
both entrances to the wide hall-way which ran through the house.  At
the same moment the door was violently thrown open, and the dining-room
was filled with an irregular mass of motley, ragged, red-coated men,
whose reckless demeanor and hardened faces indicated that they had been
recruited from the lowest and most depraved classes of the inhabitants
of the colony.  They were led by a middle-aged man of dissipated
appearance, whose rough and brutal aspect was not concealed by the
captain's uniform he wore, nor was the malicious triumph in his bearing
and in his voice veiled by the mock courtesy with which he advanced,
pistol in hand.

"What means this intrusion, sir?" shouted Colonel Wilton, in a voice of
thunder.

"This is Colonel Wilton, I believe, is it not?" said the leader of the
band, taking off his hat.

"Yes, sir, it is; you, Mr. Johnson, should be the last to forget it,
and I desire to know at once the meaning of this outrageous descent
upon a peaceful dwelling."

The man bowed low with mock courtesy.  "I shall have to ask your
pardon, my dear sir, for appearing before the great Colonel Wilton so
unceremoniously.  But my orders, I regret to say, allow me no
discretion whatever; they are imperative.  You are my prisoner.  I have
been sent here by my Lord Dunmore, the governor of this colony of
Virginia, to secure the persons of some of the principal rebellious
subjects of his majesty King George, and your name, unfortunately, is
the first and chiefest on the list.  I shall have to request you to
accompany me at once."

The master of the situation smiled mockingly, and the colonel, white
with anger, looked about the room.  Resistance was perfectly hopeless;
all the windows even were now blocked up by the irregular soldiery.

"He has chosen a fit man to do his work," said the colonel, in haughty
scorn; "failing gentlemen, he must needs take blackguards and bullies
into his service as housebreakers and raiders."

Johnson flushed visibly, as he said with another bow, "Colonel Wilton
would better remember that I am master now."

"Sir, I am not likely to forget it.  There is the family plate.  I
presume, from what I know of your habits, that will not be overlooked
by you."

"Quite so," he returned; "it will doubtless be a welcome contribution
to the treasury of his majesty's colony.  Mistress Wilton's diamonds
also," he said meaningly; and then, turning to two of his men,
"Williams, you and Jones bundle up the plate in the tablecloth, get
what's on the sideboard too;" and laying his pistols down upon the
table, he continued:

"But before Colonel Wilton insults me again, it might be well for him
to remember that I am master not only of his person, but of the persons
of all others who are in this room."

The colonel started, and Johnson laughed, looking with insolence from
Katharine to her father.

"What, sir!  I reach through your insolent pride now, do I?  Curse
you!" with sudden heat, throwing off even the mask of politeness he had
hardly worn.  "I swore I would have revenge for that insult at
Williamsburg, and now it's my hour.  You are to go with me, and go
peaceably and quietly, or, by God, I 'll have you kicked and dragged
out of the building, or killed like that old fool who tried to stop us
coming up on the landing."

"What!  Blodgett, my old friend Blodgett!  You villain, you haven't
dared to kill him, have you?  Oh, my faithful--"

"Silence, sir!  We dare anything.  What consideration has a rebel a
right to expect at the hands of his majesty's faithful Rangers?  You,
Bruce and Denton, seize the old man.  If he makes any trouble, knock
him down, or kill him, for aught I care.  One of you, take the girl
there.  As for you, sir," to Seymour, who had been quietly watching the
scene, "I don't know who you are, but you are in bad company, and you
will have to consider yourself a prisoner; I trust you have sense
enough to come without force being used.  And so," clapping his hat on
his head defiantly, "God save the king!"

Two of the soldiers seized the colonel in spite of the vigorous
resistance he made; another approached Katharine, who had stood with
clasped hands during the whole of the colloquy between Johnson and her
father.  The soldier rudely chucked her under the chin, saying, "Come
on, my pretty one! you 'll give us a kiss, won't you, before we start?"
As she drew back, paling at the insult, Seymour, who had seen and heard
it all, quick as a flash drew his sword, and threw himself upon the
soldier; one rapid thrust at the surprised man he made, with all the
force and skill begotten of long practice and a strong arm, and the
hilt of his blade crushed against the man's throat, and he fell dead
upon the floor.  At the same instant one of the other soldiers, who had
observed the action, struck Seymour over the head with his clubbed
musket, and he also fell heavily to the floor, and lay there senseless
and still, blood running from a fearful-looking wound in his forehead.
The room was filled with tumult in an instant, and with shouts of "Kill
him!" "Shove your bayonet through the damn rebel hound!" "Shoot him!"
"Kill him!" the men moved towards Seymour.  Johnson looked on
unconcernedly.

"Good God!" shrieked the colonel, writhing in the grasp of the men who
held him, "are you going to allow a senseless, wounded man to be
murdered before your eyes?  Oh, how could anybody ever mistake you for
a gentleman for an instant?" he added, with withering contempt; and
then turning his head toward the fierce soldiery, "Stop, stop, you
bloody assassins!" he cried.

"Silence, sir!  He might as well die this way as on the gallows.
Besides, he struck the first blow, and he has killed one of his
majesty's loyal soldiers.  The soldier only wanted to kiss the girl
anyway, and she will find, before she gets to camp, that kisses are
cheap."

"Oh, my God," groaned the father, "and they call this war!"

At this moment one of the soldiers lifted his bayonet to plunge it into
the prostrate form of the unconscious sailor.  There was a blinding
flash of light in the room, and a quick, sharp report.  The man's arm
dropped to his side, and he shrieked and groaned with pain.  Katharine,
unnoticed in the confusion, had slipped to the side of the table, and
had quickly picked up one of the pistols which Johnson had laid upon it
after the silver had been taken away.  Her ready decision and unerring
aim had saved her lover's life.  She threw the smoking pistol she had
used with such effect down at her feet, and, seizing the other, she
stepped over to the side of her unconscious lover.

"I swear," she said, in a shrill, high-pitched voice which just escaped
a scream, and which trembled with the agitation of the moment, "by my
hope of heaven, if a single man of you lay hands on him, he shall have
this bullet also, you cowards!"

After a moment's hesitation, amid shouts of "Kill the girl!" the men
surged toward her.  Chloe, her black maid, flung herself upon her
mistress' breast.

"Oh, honey, I let dem kill me fust."

"Well done, Kate!  It's the true Wilton blood.  Oh, if I had a free
arm, you villains!" cried the still struggling colonel.

"Seize the girl," Johnson commanded promptly, "and let us get out of
this."

The men made a rush toward the table where Katharine stood undaunted,
her face flushed with excitement, her mouth tense with resolution.  She
cried,--

"Have a care, men! have a care!"

One life she could still command with her loaded pistol.  Her hands did
not tremble.  She waited to strike once more for love and country, but
it would be all over in a moment.

The colonel groaned in agony, "Kate, Kate!" but they were almost upon
her, when a new voice rose above the uproar,--

"Hold!  Are you men?  Do you war with old men and women?  Back with
you!  Get back, you dogs!  Back, I say!"




CHAPTER V

_A Timely Interference_

A young man in the uniform of a British naval lieutenant leaped in
front of the girl with drawn sword, with which he laid about him
lustily, striking some of the men with the flat of it, threatening
others with the point; and backing his actions by the prompt commands
of one not accustomed to be gainsaid, he soon cleared the space in
front of her.

"How dare you interfere in this matter, my lord?" shouted Johnson,
passionately.  "I command this party, and I intend--"

"I know you do," replied the officer, "and that I am only a volunteer
who has chosen to accompany you, worse luck! but I am a gentleman and a
lieutenant in his Britannic majesty's navy, and by heaven! when I see
old men mishandled, and wounded helpless men about to be assassinated,
and young women insulted, I don't care who commands the party, I
interfere.  And I don't propose to bandy words with any runagate
American partisan who uses his commission to further private vengeance.
And I swear to you, on my honor, if you do not instantly modify your
treatment of this gentleman, and call off this ragamuffin crew, you
shall be court-martialled, if I have any influence with Dunmore or
Parker or Lord Howe, or whoever is in authority, and I will have the
rest of you hung as high as Haman.  This is outrage and robbery and
murder; it is not fighting or making prisoners," continued the young
officer.  "You are not fit to be an officer; and you, you curs, you
disgrace the uniform you wear."

Johnson glanced at his men, who stood irresolute before him fiercely
muttering.  A rascally mob of the lowest class of people in the colony,
to whom war simply meant opportunity for plunder and rapine, they would
undoubtedly back up their leader, in their present mood, in any attempt
at resistance he might make the young officer.  But he hesitated a
moment.  Desborough was a lord, high in the confidence of Governor
Dunmore, and a man of great influence; his own position was too
precarious, the game was not worth the candle, and the risk of
opposition was too great.

"Well," he said in sulky acquiescence, "the men meant no special harm,
but have it your own way.  Fall back, men!  As to what you say to me
personally, you shall answer to me for that at a more fitting time," he
continued doggedly.

"When and where you please," answered Desborough, hotly, "though I 'd
soil a sword by passing it through you.  What was Dunmore thinking of
when he put you in charge of this party and sent you to do this work, I
wonder?  Give your orders to your men to unhand this gentleman
instantly.  You will give your parole, sir?  I regret that we are
compelled to secure your person, but those were the orders; and you,
madam," turning to Katharine, "I believe no order requires you to be
taken prisoner, and therefore you shall go free."

But Katharine had knelt down by her prostrate lover as soon as the
space in front of her had been cleared, and was entirely oblivious to
all that was taking place about her.

"Allow me to introduce myself, colonel," he resumed.  "I am Lord
Desborough.  I have often heard my father, the Earl of Desmond, in
Ireland, speak of you.  I regret that we meet under such unpleasant
circumstances, but the governor's orders must be carried out, though I
wish he had sent a more worthy representative to do so.  I will see,
however, that everything is done for your comfort in the future."

"Sir," said the colonel, bowing, "you have rendered me a service I can
never repay.  I know your father well.  He is one of the finest
gentlemen of his time, and his son has this day shown that he is worthy
of the honored name he bears.  I will go with you cheerfully, and you
have my parole of honor.  Katharine, you are free; you will be safe in
the house, I think, until I can arrange for your departure."

She looked up from the floor, and then rose.  "Oh, father, he is dead,
he is dead," she moaned.  "Yes, I will go with you; take me away."

"Nay, my child, I cannot."
