Not that I believed in ghosts.  Oh dear no.  I hoped I was not such a
fool as that, but supposing--

That rain again at the window!  Why couldn't it stop startling a fellow
in that way?  Yes, supposing Fergus's story had been founded on fact,
what a dreadful end to a boy Bubbles's end must have been!

"And they do say,"--the words seemed to echo in my ears--"that every
Christmas Eve he re-visits Ferriby, and tries to get down the chimney in
search of his lost legs."

Ugh!  Why did not some of the fellows wake up?  How unnaturally still
they all were!  I would have given all my pocket-money to two of them to
start another steeplechase that moment over the beds.  In fact, I had
half a mind to--

As I reached this point a sudden noise made my blood run cold, and froze
me to my bed.

It did not seem to be in the dormitory, or on the stairs outside, or in
the quadrangle below.  None of my companions appeared to have heard it,
for they all slept on quietly, and the silence which followed was doubly
as intense as that which had gone before.  What could it be?

I do not fancy I was a particularly cowardly boy, but somehow that sound
terrified me.  I could neither move nor call out.  All I could do was to
lie and listen.

There it was again! this time not so sudden, but far more distinct.
There was no mistaking it now.  As sure as I lay there, it was something
on the roof!  It sounded like something crawling slowly and by fits and
starts along the gutter just above the dormitory.  Sometimes it seemed
to spring upwards, as though attempting to reach a higher position, and
then sullenly slip down and proceed on its crawling way.

Yes, without doubt Fergus had told the truth!

Suddenly a voice in a loud whisper at the other end of the dormitory
exclaimed--

"Listen!  I say, listen!"

It was Lamb's voice.  There was at least some comfort in knowing that I
was not the only one awake.

With a desperate effort I sat up in my bed and replied--

"Oh, Lamb, what is it?"

His only reply was a gasp, as the noises recommenced.  The body,
whatever it was, seemed to have dragged itself forward, so as to be now
just over our heads.  The ceiling above us went right up into the roof,
and I could distinctly hear a rustling sound against the tiles, followed
by an occasional upward leap, sometimes almost wild in its eagerness.
How could I mistake these sounds?  The chimney was immediately above us,
and it was towards this goal, as I well knew, that the hapless and
legless Bubbles was destined fruitlessly to aspire.  At last one bound
more frantic than the rest, followed by a sudden clatter of displaced
tiles, unloosed my tongue, and I fairly cried out--

"Oh!"

Half a dozen fellows were on the alert in an instant.

"Who's that called out?" cried one.  "I'd like to scrag him."

"What's the row, whoever it is?" demanded Fergus.

"Hush!  Listen!" was all I could reply.

There must have been something in my voice which bespoke my horror, for
a dead silence ensued.

But not for long.  Once more the dull, dragging sound, interrupted by
the spasmodic and fruitless leaps!

A shudder went round the dormitory at the sound.  They knew as well as I
did what it meant.

"It's the ghost!" faltered Sparrow's trembling voice; and no one
contradicted him.  Fergus himself, like one suddenly confronted with a
spirit of his own raising, seemed the most terrified of the lot, and I
could hear him gasping as he sat petrified in his bed.

"Can't some one strike a light?"  Lamb said presently.

All very well, but the matches were on the table, and to secure them one
would have to get out of bed.  No one seemed quite inclined for that.

As we lay endeavouring to screw up our courage to the necessary pitch,
the sound once more recommenced, with a violent motion towards the edge
of the roof.  The moon at the same moment broke out from behind the
clouds and shot its pale light in at the big windows.  There was a
momentary pause above us, and then, casting a sudden shadow across the
dormitory floor, a dim white figure, as of a body without limbs, floated
down outside the window.  The moon once more was obscured, and we were
left motionless and horrified in utter silence and darkness!  What would
come next?

How long we might have remained in suspense I can't say, had not Lamb
and another fellow, by a combined effort of heroism, dashed arm in arm
from bed and secured the matches.  They were in the act of striking a
light (one match had broken, and another had had no head)--they were in
the act of striking a light when Lamb, who was close to the window,
suddenly exclaimed--"Look!"

There was such terror in his tone that we knew only too well what he had
seen.  But where!

"Where?"  I managed to gasp.

"There, down in the quad," he replied, pointing out of the window, but
looking another way.

Curiosity is sometimes greater than fear, and for all my terror I could
not resist the impulse to steal up to the window and look out.  And
others did the same.

It was as Lamb had said.  There in the quadrangle below, moving
restlessly to and fro, and swaying itself upward, as if in supplication,
was the white form, erect but helpless.  For a long time we gazed
without a word.  At last, one more hardy than the rest said--"What can
it be?"

What a question!  What could it be but--Bubbles!  Still, when the
question was once asked, it did occur to one or two of us that possibly
we might have jumped to a conclusion too hastily.  It's wonderful how
hardy a fellow will get when he's got twenty fellows clustering round
him.

"He's alive, anyhow," said one.  "Call out to him, some one," suggested
another.  "You're nearest the window, Fraser," said another.  Fraser was
vice-captain of the second fifteen, and always touchy whenever his pluck
was called in question.

"I'm not afraid," he said, in a voice which was hardly quite steady.
And as he spoke he threw up the window, and called out hurriedly, and in
rather deferential tones--"Who are you down there?"

I don't suppose Fraser ever did a pluckier thing than ask that question.
We listened, all ears, for the reply.  But none came.  Only a faint
moan, as the apparition swayed uneasily towards us, and even seemed to
try to raise itself in our direction; but never a word we heard, and we
closed the window again as much in the dark as to its identity as ever.

What could we do?  We couldn't go to bed with Bubbles's or anybody's
ghost wandering about in the quadrangle below us, that was evident.  But
how were we to solve the mystery, unless indeed--

It was a terrible alternative, but the only one.  We thought of it a
good bit before any one proposed it.  At last Fraser himself said--

"Who's game to come down into the quad?"

Fraser was on his mettle, or he would never have been so mad.  At first
a dead silence was the only answer to his challenge.  Then Lamb said--

"I don't mind."

If he didn't mind, why should he nearly choke saying so?  However, he
broke the ice, and others followed.  I considered myself as good a man
as Lamb any day (it was only my own opinion), and I wasn't going to be
outdone by him now.  So I volunteered.  And one or two others who
considered themselves as good as I volunteered too, until the forlorn
hope numbered a dozen.

"Come along," said Fraser, who had armed himself with a lighted candle
and led the way.

I think those who stayed behind felt a little dismayed when the last of
us glided from the door and left them behind.

Still, as far as happiness of mind was concerned, they would not have
gained much had they been of our party.  For we descended the staircase
in rather depressed spirits, starting at every creak, and--some of us--
wishing twenty times we were safe back in the dormitory.  But there was
no drawing back now.

What a noise the bars of the big door made as we unfastened them, and
what an ominous shriek the lock gave as we turned the key!  Our one hope
was that the ghost would have taken fright and vanished before we
reached the quadrangle.  But no!  As we stepped out into the damp breezy
night the first thing that met our eyes was the distant, restless figure
of Bubbles!

By one consent we halted, and as we did so a gust of wind extinguished
our leader's candle!  What was to be done?  I glanced up, and saw the
lights twinkling at the far distant dormitory window.  Oh, whatever
possessed me to come on this wild errand!

"Now then, you fellows!"  It was Fraser's voice, and more like himself
too.  "Now then, stick all together and--"

"Better get a light first," suggested some one.  "Will you run back to
the dormitory and get the matches?" asked our leader.

Nothing more was said about the light.

We advanced a few yards, and then halted again.

"Better speak to him, I think," said Lamb.

"All right," said Fraser.  "Now then, who are you?  What's your name
there?"

His voice sounded loud and startling in the night air; but it was wasted
breath.  Never a word spoke Bubbles, but moaned as he struggled
restlessly on the ground where he lay.

Fraser's spirits were rising every moment.  "Oh, hang it!" he exclaimed.
"I don't believe it's a ghost at all."

So saying, he made a further advance to within a few yards of the
apparition.

If it wasn't a ghost, it was the most unearthly thing in the dark I ever
saw as it lay there.  We were still too far off to see it clearly, but
it looked like some bloated creature without legs trying its hardest to
rise on the feet that were not there.

"Do you hear?" shouted Fraser once more.  "Why can't you speak and tell
us who you are?"

The creature gave a long sigh by way of answer, but no more.

Fraser advanced another step, and we were preparing to follow, when the
ghost slowly rose on end and made a sudden bound towards him!

In an instant we were back in the house, rushing pellmell up the stairs,
and looking neither this way nor that till we were safe back in the
dormitory with our companions.

We passed the remainder of that night dressed, and with candles burning,
and it was not till morning broke that we dared once more look out of
the window.

And then we discovered the mystery of Bubbles's ghost.

A small half-exhausted balloon, about five feet high, lay on the grass
below, with enough gas in it still to toss about restlessly in the
breeze, and now and then even to rise on end and drag its little car a
few inches.

Where it came from and who it belonged to we never discovered.  Probably
some toy balloon let up by Christmas Eve revellers, who little thought
it would alight on the roof of Jolliffe's, and after flopping about
there for some minutes would finally tumble into the court below, and
there act the part of Bubbles to a handful of scared schoolboys.

However, all's well that ends well, and among the many amusements which
made that day a Merry Christmas to us all there was none over which we
laughed more than "Bubbles's Ghost."



CHAPTER THREE.

Sub-Chapter I.

THE POETRY CLUB.

During one of my terms at G-- (and in speaking of that famous old school
it is quite unnecessary to mention more than the first letter of its
name) a serious epidemic broke out.  It affected chiefly the lower half
of the upper school, and during the brief period of its duration it
assumed so malignant a type that it is still a marvel to me how any one
of its victims ever survived it.  The medical and other authorities were
utterly incompetent to deal with it.  In fact--incredible as it may
seem--they deliberately ignored its existence, and left the sufferers to
pull through as and how they could.  Had it been an ordinary outbreak,
as, for instance, scarlatina or diphtheria, or even measles, they would
have cleared the school between two "call-overs," and had us all either
in the infirmary or in four-wheelers at our parents' doors.  But just
because they had not got this--the most destructive kind of all
epidemics--down on their list of infectious disorders, they chose to
disregard it utterly, and leave us all to sink or swim, without even
calling in the doctor to see us or giving our people at home the option
of withdrawing us from our infected surroundings.

I love the old place too well to dwell further on this gross case of
neglect.  The present authorities no doubt would not repeat the error of
their predecessors.  Should they be tempted to do so, I trust the
present harrowing revelation may be in time to avert the repetition of
the calamity of which I was not only a witness but a victim.

The fact is, in the term to which I allude, we fellows in the upper
Fifth and lower Sixth took to _writing poetry_!  I don't know how the
distemper broke out, or who brought it to G--.  Certain it is we all
took it, some worse than others; and had not the Christmas holidays
happily intervened to scatter us and so reduce the perils of the
contagion, the results might have been worse even than they were.

Now, one poet in a school is bad enough; and two usually make a place
very uncomfortable for any ordinarily constituted person.  But at G-- it
was not a case of one poet or even two.  There were twenty of us, if
there was one, and we each of us considered our claim to the laurel
wreath paramount.  Indeed, like the bards of old, we fell to the most
unseemly contentions, and hated one another as only poets can hate.

It was my tragic lot to act as hon. secretary to the "Poetry Club,"
which constituted the hospital, so to speak in which our disease worked
out its course during that melancholy term.  Why they selected me, it is
not for me to inquire.  Some of my friends assured me afterwards that it
was because, having no pretensions or even capacity to be a poet myself,
I was looked upon as the only impartial member of our afflicted
fraternity.  No doubt they thought it a good reason.  Had I known it at
the time I should have repudiated the base insinuation with scorn.  For
I humbly conceived that I was a poet of the first water; and had indeed
corrected a great many mistakes in Wordsworth and other writers, and
written fifty-six or fifty-seven sonnets before ever the club was
thought of.  And Stray himself, who was accounted our Laureate, had only
written thirty-four, and they averaged quite a line less than mine!

Be that as it may, I was secretary of the club, and to that circumstance
the reader is indebted for the treat to which I am about to admit him.
For in my official capacity I became custodian of not a few of the
poetical aspirations of our members; and as, after the abatement of the
disease, they none of them demanded back their handiwork--if poetry can
ever be called handiwork--these effusions have remained in my charge
ever since.

Some of them are far too sacred and tender for publication, and of
others, at this distance of time, I confess I can make nothing at all.
But there lies a batch before me which will serve as a specimen of our
talents, and can hardly hurt the feelings of any one responsible for
