seen--even the very bark was stripped from the trees, that now stood as
if withered by the hand of God!  Had fire swept the surface, it could
not have left it more naked and desolate.  There was no garden, there
were no fields of maize or buckwheat, there was no longer a farm--the
kraal stood in the midst of a desert!

Words cannot depict the emotions of the field-cornet at that moment.
The pen cannot describe his painful feelings.

Such a change in two hours!  He could scarce credit his senses--he could
scarce believe in its reality.  He knew that the locusts would eat up
his maize, and his wheat, and the vegetables of his garden; but his
fancy had fallen far short of the extreme desolation that had actually
been produced.  The whole landscape was metamorphosed--grass was out of
the question--trees, whose delicate foliage had played in the soft
breeze but two short hours before, now stood leafless, scathed by worse
than winter.  The very ground seemed altered in shape!  He would not
have known it as his own farm.  Most certainly had the owner been absent
during the period of the locust-flight, and approached without any
information of what had been passing, he would not have recognised the
place of his own habitation!

With the phlegm peculiar to his race, the field-cornet sat down, and
remained for a long time without speech or movement.

His children gathered near, and looked on--their young hearts painfully
throbbing.  They could not fully appreciate the difficult circumstances
in which this occurrence had placed them; nor did their father himself
at first.  He thought only of the loss he had sustained, in the
destruction of his fine crops; and this of itself, when we consider his
isolated situation, and the hopelessness of restoring them, was enough
to cause him very great chagrin.

"Gone! all gone!" he exclaimed, in a sorrowing voice.  "Oh!  Fortune--
Fortune--again art thou cruel!"

"Papa! do not grieve," said a soft voice; "we are all alive yet, we are
here by your side;" and with the words a little white hand was laid upon
his shoulder.  It was the hand of the beautiful Truey.

It seemed as if an angel had smiled upon him.  He lifted the child in
his arms, and in a paroxysm of fondness pressed her to his heart.  That
heart felt relieved.

"Bring me the Book," said he, addressing one of the boys.

The Bible was brought--its massive covers were opened--a verse was
chosen--and the song of praise rose up in the midst of the desert.

The Book was closed; and for some minutes all knelt in prayer.

When Von Bloom again stood upon his feet, and looked around him, the
desert seemed once more to "rejoice and blossom as the rose."

Upon the human heart such is the magic influence of resignation and
humility.



CHAPTER SIX.

"INSPANN AND TREK!"

With all his confidence in the protection of a Supreme Being, Von Bloom
knew that he was not to leave everything to the Divine hand.  That was
not the religion he had been taught; and he at once set about taking
measures to extricate himself from the unpleasant position in which he
was placed.

_Unpleasant_ position!  Ha!  It was more than unpleasant, as the
field-cornet began to perceive.  It was a position of _peril_!

The more Von Bloom reflected, the more was he convinced of this.  There
they were, in the middle of a black naked plain, that without a green
spot extended beyond the limits of vision.  How much farther he could
not guess; but he knew that the devastations of the migratory locust
sometimes cover an area of thousands of miles!  It was certain that the
one that had just swept past was on a very extensive scale.

It was evident he could no longer remain by his kraal.  His horses, and
cattle, and sheep, could not live without food; and should these perish,
upon what were he and his family to subsist?  He must leave the kraal.
He must go in search of pasture, without loss of time,--at once.
Already the animals, shut up beyond their usual hour, were uttering
their varied cries, impatient to be let out.  They would soon hunger;
and it was hard to say when food could be procured for them.

There was no time to be lost.  Every hour was of great importance,--even
minutes must not be wasted in dubious hesitation.

The field-cornet spent but a few minutes in consideration.  Whether
should he mount one of his best horses, and ride off alone in search of
pasture? or whether would it not be better to "inspann" his wagon, and
take everything along with him at once?

He soon decided in favour of the latter course.  In any case he would
have been compelled to move from his present location,--to leave the
kraal altogether.

He might as well take everything at once.  Should he go out alone, it
might cost him a long time to find grass and water--for both would be
necessary--and, meantime, his stock would be suffering.

These and other considerations decided him at once to "inspann" and
"trek" away, with his wagon, his horses, his cattle, his sheep, his
"household gods," and his whole family circle.

"Inspann and trek!" was the command: and Swartboy, who was proud of the
reputation he had earned as a wagon-driver, was now seen waving his
bamboo whip like a great fishing-rod.

"Inspann and trek!" echoed Swartboy, tying upon his twenty-feet lash a
new cracker, which he had twisted out of the skin of the hartebeest
antelope.

"Inspann and trek!" he repeated, making his vast whip crack like a
pistol; "yes, baas, I'll inspann;" and, having satisfied himself that
his "voorslag" was properly adjusted, Swartboy rested the bamboo handle
against the side of the house, and proceeded to the kraal to collect the
yoke-oxen.

A large wagon, of a sort that is the pride and property of every Cape
farmer, stood to one side of the house.  It was a vehicle of the first
class,--a regular "cap-tent" wagon,--that had been made for the
field-cornet in his better days, and in which he had been used to drive
his wife and children to the "nacht-maal" and upon _vrolykheids_
(parties of pleasure.)  In those days a team of eight fine horses used
to draw it along at a rattling rate.  Alas! oxen had now to take their
place; for Von Bloom had but five horses in his whole stud, and these
were required for the saddle.

But the wagon was almost as good as ever it had been,--almost as good as
when it used to be the envy of the field-cornet's neighbours, the boors
of Graaf Reinet.  Nothing was broken.  Everything was in its
place,--"voor-kist," and "achter-kist," and side-chests.  There was the
snow-white cap, with its "fore-clap" and "after-clap," and its inside
pockets, all complete; and the wheels neatly carved, and the well planed
boxing and "disselboom" and the strong "trektow" of buffalo-hide.
Nothing was wanting that ought to be found about a wagon.  It was, in
fact, the best part of the field-cornet's property that remained to
him,--for it was equal in value to all the oxen, cattle, and sheep, upon
his establishment.

While Swartboy, assisted by Hendrik, was catching up the twelve
yoke-oxen, and attaching them to the disselboom and trektow of the
wagon, the "baas" himself, aided by Hans, Totty, and also by Truey and
little Jan, was loading up the furniture and implements.  This was not a
difficult task.  The _Penates_ of the little kraal were not numerous,
and were all soon packed either inside or around the roomy vehicle.

In about an hour's time the wagon was loaded up, the oxen were
inspanned, the horses saddled, and everything was ready for "trekking."

And now arose the question, _whither_?

Up to this time Von Bloom had only thought of getting away from the
spot--of escaping beyond the naked waste that surrounded him.

It now became necessary to determine the direction in which they were to
travel--a most important consideration.

Important, indeed, as a little reflection showed.  They might go in the
direction in which the locusts had gone, or that in which they had
_come_?  On either route they might travel for scores of miles without
meeting with a mouthful of grass for the hungry animals; and in such a
case these would break down and perish.

Or the travellers might move in some other direction, and find grass,
but not water.  Without water, not only would they have to fear for the
cattle, but for themselves--for their own lives.  How important then it
was, which way they turned their faces!

At first the field-cornet bethought him of heading towards the
settlements.  The nearest water in that direction was almost fifty miles
off.  It lay to the eastward of the kraal.  The locusts had just gone
that way.  They would by this time have laid waste the whole country--
perhaps to the water or beyond it!

It would be a great risk going in that direction.

Northward lay the Kalihari desert.  It would be hopeless to steer north.
Von Bloom knew of no oasis in the desert.  Besides the locusts had come
from the north.  They were drifting southward when first seen; and from
the time they had been observed passing in this last direction, they had
no doubt ere this wasted the plains far to the south.

The thoughts of the field-cornet were now turned to the west.  It is
true the swarm had last approached from the west; but Von Bloom fancied
that they had first come down from the north, and that the sudden
veering round of the wind had caused them to change direction.  He
thought that by trekking westward he would soon get beyond the ground
they had laid bare.

He knew something of the plains to the west--not much indeed, but he
knew that at about forty miles distance there was a spring with good
pasturage around it, upon whose water he could depend.  He had once
visited it, while on a search for some of his cattle, that had wandered
thus far.  Indeed, it then appeared to him a better situation for cattle
than the one he held, and he had often thought of moving to it.  Its
great distance from any civilised settlement was the reason why he had
not done so.  Although he was already far beyond the frontier, he still
kept up a sort of communication with the settlements, whereas at the
more distant point such a communication would be extremely difficult.

Now that other considerations weighed with him, his thoughts once more
returned to this spring; and after spending a few minutes more in
earnest deliberation, he decided upon "trekking" westward.

Swartboy was ordered to head round, and strike to the west.  The Bushman
promptly leaped to his seat upon the voor-kist, cracked his mighty whip,
straightened out his long team, and moved off over the plain.

Hans and Hendrik were already in their saddles; and having cleared the
kraals of all their live-stock, with the assistance of the dogs, drove
the lowing and bleating animals before them.

Truey and little Jan sat beside Swartboy on the fore-chest of the wagon;
and the round full eyes of the pretty springbok could be seen peeping
curiously out from under the cap-tent.

Casting a last look upon his desolate kraal, the field-cornet turned his
horse's head, and rode after the wagon.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

"WATER!  WATER!"

On moved the little caravan, but not in silence.  Swartboy's voice and
whip made an almost continual noise.  The latter could be plainly heard
more than a mile over the plain, like repeated discharges of a musket.
Hendrik, too, did a good deal in the way of shouting; and even the
usually quiet Hans was under the necessity of using his voice to urge
the flock forward in the right direction.

Occasionally both the boys were called upon to give Swartboy a help with
the leading oxen when these became obstinate or restive, and would turn
out of the track.  At such times either Hans or Hendrik would gallop up,
set the heads of the animals right again, and ply the "jamboks" upon
their sides.

This "jambok" is a severe chastener to an obstinate ox.  It is an
elastic whip made of rhinoceros or hippopotamus skin,--hippopotamus is
the best,--near six feet long, and tapering regularly from butt to tip.

Whenever the led oxen misbehaved, and Swartboy could not reach them with
his long "voorslag," Hendrik was ever ready to tickle them with his
tough jambok; and, by this means, frighten them into good behaviour.
Indeed, one of the boys was obliged to be at their head nearly all the
time.

A "leader" is used to accompany most teams of oxen in South Africa.  But
those of the field-cornet had been accustomed to draw the wagon without
one, ever since the Hottentot servants fan away; and Swartboy had driven
many miles with no other help than his long whip.  But the strange look
of everything, since the locusts passed, had made the oxen shy and wild;
besides the insects had obliterated every track or path which oxen would
have followed.  The whole surface was alike,--there was neither trace
nor mark.  Even Von Bloom himself could with difficulty recognise the
features of the country, and had to guide himself by the sun in the sky.

Hendrik stayed mostly by the head of the leading oxen.  Hans had no
difficulty in driving the flock when once fairly started.  A sense of
fear kept all together, and as there was no herbage upon any side to
tempt them to stray, they moved regularly on.

Von Bloom rode in front to guide the caravan.  Neither he nor any of
them had made any change in their costume, but travelled in their
everyday dress.  The field-cornet himself was habited after the manner
of most boors,--in wide leathern trousers, termed in that country
"crackers;" a large roomy jacket of green cloth, with ample outside
pockets; a fawn-skin waistcoat; a huge white felt hat, with the broadest
of brims; and upon his feet a pair of brogans of African unstained
leather, known among the boors as "feldt-schoenen" (country shoes).
Over his saddle lay a "kaross," or robe of leopard-skins, and upon his
shoulder he carried his "roer"--a large smoothbore gun, about six feet
in length, with an old-fashioned flint-lock,--quite a load of itself.
This is the gun in which the boor puts all his trust; and although an
American backwoodsman would at first sight be disposed to laugh at such
a weapon, a little knowledge of the boor's country would change his
opinion of the "roer."  His own weapon--the small-bore rifle, with a
bullet less than a pea--would be almost useless among the large game
that inhabits the country of the boor.  Upon the "karoos" of Africa
there are crack shots and sterling hunters, as well as in the backwoods
or on the prairies of America.

Curving round under the field-cornet's left arm, and resting against his
side, was an immense powder-horn--of such size as could only be produced
upon the head of an African ox.  It was from the country of the
Bechuanas, though nearly all Cape oxen grow horns of vast dimensions.
Of course it was used to carry the field-cornet's powder, and, if full,
it must have contained half-a-dozen pounds at least!  A leopard-skin
pouch hanging under his right arm, a hunting-knife stuck in his
waist-belt, and a large meerschaum pipe through the band of his hat,
completed the equipments of the trek-boor, Von Bloom.

Hans and Hendrik were very similarly attired, armed, and equipped.  Of
course their trousers were of dressed sheep-skin, wide--like the
trousers of all young boors--and they also wore jackets and
"feldt-schoenen," and broad-brimmed white hats.  Hans carried a light
fowling-piece, while Hendrik's gun was a stout rifle of the kind known
as a "yager"--an excellent gun for large game.  In this piece Hendrik
had great pride, and had learnt to drive a nail with it at nearly a
hundred paces.  Hendrik was _par excellence_ the marksman of the party.
Each of the boys also carried a large crescent-shaped powder-horn, with
a pouch for bullets; and over the saddle of each was strapped the robe
or kaross, differing only from their father's in that his was of the
rarer leopard-skin, while theirs were a commoner sort, one of antelope,
and the other of jackal-skin.  Little Jan also wore wide trousers,
jacket, "feldt-schoenen," and broad-brimmed beaver,--in fact, Jan,
although scarce a yard high, was, in point of costume, a type of his
father,--a diminutive type of the boor.  Truey was habited in a skirt of
blue woollen stuff, with a neat bodice elaborately stitched and
embroidered after the Dutch fashion, and over her fair locks she wore a
light sun-hat of straw with a ribbon and strings.  Totty was very
plainly attired in strong homespun, without any head-dress.  As for
Swartboy, a pair of old leathern "crackers" and a striped shirt were all
the clothing he carried, beside his sheep-skin kaross.  Such were the
costumes of our travellers.

For full twenty miles the plain was wasted bare.  Not a bite could the
beasts obtain, and water there was none.  The sun during the day shone
brightly,--too brightly, for his beams were as hot as within the
tropics.  The travellers could scarce have borne them had it not been
that a stiff breeze was blowing all day long.  But this unfortunately
blew directly in their faces, and the dry karoos are never without dust.
The constant hopping of the locusts with their millions of tiny feet
had loosened the crust of earth; and now the dust rose freely upon the
wind.  Clouds of it enveloped the little caravan, and rendered their
forward movement both difficult and disagreeable.  Long before night
