only the better to balance himself.  It is true he would have been fain
to take a chop or two at the gristly proboscis of the elephant; but he
dared not bend his body into a stooping attitude, lest his centre of
gravity might get beyond the supporting base, and thus bring about the
result he dreaded.

No other course remained for him, than to preserve his body in an
upright attitude; and, conscious of this fact, he braced his nerves to
the utmost, and maintained himself erect and rigid as a statue of
bronze.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

A WHOLESALE TUMBLE.

In this attitude he remained for several minutes--the elephant all the
while continuing its efforts to reach him Karl and Caspar, seated upon
the branches of the tree, to which they had retreated, were witnesses of
the whole scene from beginning to end.  The situation of Ossaroo would
have bean sufficiently ludicrous for Caspar to have laughed at it, but
for the danger in which the shikaree was placed.  This was so evident,
that instead of indulging in anything akin to levity, Caspar looked on
with feelings of deep anxiety, Karl being equally apprehensive about the
result.  Neither could do anything to aid or rescue him, as they were
unarmed--both having dropped their pieces when ascending the tree.

I have said that Karl was as uneasy about the result as his brother.  He
was even more so.  It was not that he liked Ossaroo better, or would
have more bitterly lamented his fate, had the latter perished by the
proboscis of the elephant.  No, that was not the reason; but simply that
Karl more clearly comprehended the danger in which the shikaree was
placed.

After watching the efforts of the elephant for a short time, Caspar had
become convinced that the animal could not reach Ossaroo--so long as the
latter preserved his balance upon the summit of the rock.  Karl was
equally satisfied of this; and both by their shouts kept encouraging the
shikaree to stand firm.  But Karl soon noted another circumstance, which
was as yet unperceived by Caspar, and it was this that was inspiring him
with keener apprehension than that felt by his brother.  He had noticed
that, each time as the elephant erected himself against the obelisk, the
rock seemed slightly to shake.  Ossaroo was himself well aware of the
circumstance--and more troubled at it than any of them--for it rendered
it more difficult for him to preserve his equilibrium.  Caspar at length
also observed the trembling of the rock, but it gave him no particular
uneasiness: as, after what had passed, he felt confident that Ossaroo
would be able to keep his place.  Nor was it the fear of his falling in
that way that was distressing the young botanist; but rather a deduction
which he drew from the circumstance, not apparent to the less
philosophic mind of his brother.

The shaking of the rock had suggested to Karl a dangerous contingency.
What was it?  The speech addressed by him at that moment to Caspar will
explain.

"Oh, brother!" he exclaimed, on perceiving the danger, "if the rock
should fall--"

"No danger of that," said Caspar, interrupting him; "it stands firm
enough.  True, I see it shake a little, but only a very little; and that
only when the brute springs up against it.  No danger, I should think!"

"But I fear there is clanger," rejoined Karl, in a tone of undiminished
anxiety.  "Not," added he, "so long as the elephant acts as he is doing;
but he may not continue thus.  These creatures are wonderfully
sagacious; and if he only perceives that the pillar moves under his
weight, a new idea may get into his brain, and then it will be all up
with Ossaroo."

"Ha!  I begin to comprehend you," said Caspar, beginning to share the
alarm of his brother.  "There is danger in that.  What is to be done?
If we only had our guns up here, we might open fire on the brute.
Whether we succeeded in killing him or not, we might at all events
divert his attention from Ossaroo, and perhaps hinder him from thinking
of the plan you speak of.  We might go down and get our guns.  What is
to hinder us?--the elephant is too busy to notice us."

"True--an excellent idea of yours, brother Caspar."

"Well, then, to put it in execution.  I shall slip down to the ground;
you follow to the lowest branch, and I can hand the guns up to you.
Keep steady, and don't you fear, Ossy!" added the young hunter in a
louder voice, addressing himself to the shikaree.  "We'll fetch him away
from you directly--we'll tickle him with an ounce or two of lead through
that thick hide of his."

So saying, Caspar commenced letting himself rapidly down from branch to
branch, Karl following more leisurely.

Caspar had got upon the lowest limb of the tree, and Karl on that
immediately above it, when a loud crash, accompanied by a piercing
shriek, arrested the progress of both, causing them suddenly to turn
their faces towards the obelisk.  During the short time that their eyes
had been averted from it, a complete change had taken place in that
curious tableau.  Instead of a tall column of stone, standing
twenty-feet perpendicular, the same column was now seen lying along the
earth in a nearly horizontal position, with a huge mass of broken boughs
and branches of trees crushed under its top.  Near its base, now
upturned and standing almost vertically, was the elephant, no longer on
its hind feet, nor yet on all fours, but down upon its back, kicking its
huge hoofs in the air, and making the most stupendous efforts to recover
its legs.  Ossaroo was nowhere to be seen!

The contingency dreaded by Karl had come to pass.  The elephant, finding
it impossible to reach the shikaree with its trunk--and no doubt judging
by the "feel" that the rock was not immobile--had at length dropped down
on all fours and, placing its broad shoulder against it, backed by the
enormous weight of its bulky body, had sent the column crashing among
the tops of a chestnut tree growing near--the trunk of which, yielding
to the weight, gave way with a crash, and trunk, limbs, and branches
were all borne downward to the earth!

The elephant itself, not calculating that it should find the task so
easy of performance, had fallen at the same time--its cumbrous body
losing balance by the impetus which it had thrown into the effort.  In
short, of the four objects that formed the tableau--rock and tree,
quadruped and man--not one was standing any longer in its place--for it
is superfluous to say that Ossaroo had gone down with the obelisk.

But where was Ossaroo?  That was the question that occurred to both Karl
and Caspar.

"Oh! brother!" groaned Caspar, "I fear he is killed!"

Karl made no reply; but for all that, Caspar's reflection, delivered in
a loud tone, was not left without rejoinder.  Directly after the phrase
had issued from his lips, an answer was heard proceeding from among the
branches of the fallen chestnut tree, in a voice and with words that
caused the hearts of the brothers to beat with joy.

"No, young sahibs," replied the unseen Ossaroo; "me no killee, me no bit
damage.  If I only can get pass de old rogue, I safe and sound as ibber.
Here go for run!"

At the same moment the shikaree was seen shooting out from among the
branches under which he had been for the time buried; and, then running
with all his might towards the tree upon which the brothers had found
refuge.

Long before the elephant could regain its feet, Ossaroo had reached a
position of perfect security among the upper branches of the great tree;
which Karl and Caspar, no longer thinking of their guns, had also
re-ascended.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

A RING PERFORMANCE.

As the tree into which they had retreated was a very large one, there
was no longer any present fear of danger from the elephant, however
furious the latter might be; and they could look down upon it and watch
its movements with a feeling of perfect security.  The only one of the
party that was in dangerous proximity to that dreaded proboscis was
Fritz; but Fritz had already been well warned of the wicked designs of
the great brute, and was sufficiently swift-footed and sage enough to
give the animal a wide berth.

As for the elephant itself, having recovered its feet, it stood for some
seconds flapping its huge ears, and apparently in a kind of quandary--as
if taken aback by the unexpected accident that had befallen it.  Not for
long, however, did it continue in this tranquil attitude.  The arrow
still sticking in its trunk reminded it of its purposes of vengeance.
Once more angrily elevating its tail, and sounding its shrill trumpet,
it rushed towards the fallen tree, and buried its long proboscis among
the branches.  One by one it turned them over, as if in search of some
object.  It was searching for the shikaree.

After a time it desisted from this manoeuvre, and looked around--
evidently with a puzzled air, and wondering what had become of the man.
It had not seen him as he rushed towards the great tree: for his retreat
had been made while the creature was sprawling upon its back.  Just then
Fritz chanced to show himself--crouching under the branches upon which
his masters had taken refuge, and evidently envying them their secure
situation.

The sight of Fritz was enough.  It was he who had first challenged the
elephant on its approach through the woods, and had conducted it under
that terrible battery of bullets and arrows.  As soon, therefore, as the
latter set eyes upon the dog, its fury not only became rekindled, but
apparently redoubled; and, hoisting its tail on high, it charged full
tilt upon its original adversary.

Had the assailant been a boar, or even a bull, no doubt Fritz would have
stood his ground, or only swerved to one side, the better to elude the
onset, and make an attack in turn.  But with a quadruped as big as a
house--and of which Fritz, not being of Oriental origin, knew so little;
and of that little nothing that was good--one, too, evidently provided
with most formidable weapons, a tongue several feet long, and tusks in
proportion--it is not to be wondered at, nor is it any great blot upon
his escutcheon, that Fritz turned tail and fled.  So fast fled he, that
in less than a score of seconds he was out of sight--not only of his
masters in the tree, but of his pursuer, the elephant.  The latter only
followed him for some half-dozen lengths of its own carcase; and seeing
that the pursuit was likely to be a wild-goose chase, declined following
Fritz any farther.

They in the tree, as the elephant started after the dog, were in hopes
that the pursuit might carry the dangerous animal to some distance, and
thus give them time to get back to the ground, and make their escape
from the spot.

In this, however, they were doomed to disappointment; for having
desisted from the chase of the dog, the great pachyderm returned to the
point from whence it had started; and, after once more tossing the
broken branches of the fallen chestnut tree upon the point of its
proboscis, it commenced pacing round and round the fallen obelisk,
keeping in regular circles, as if it were training itself for some
performance in an amphitheatre.

For more than an hour did the brute continue this circular promenade, at
intervals stopping to give utterance to its shrieking note; but most of
the time moving on in sullen silence.  Now and then it directed its
eyes, and once or twice its trunk, towards the branches of the prostrate
tree as if it had still some suspicion that he who sent that stinging
arrow was there concealed.  Indeed, it appeared by its movements to be
keeping guard over that particular spot, lest its enemy should escape.
It had long since extracted the arrow, by placing its great foot upon
the shaft, and drawing it forth.

Fritz had stolen back to the edge of the thicket, but kept cowering so
close that the elephant could not see him.

The parties perched above were more than annoyed by their imprisonment
thus procrastinated, and began to think of how they might set themselves
free.  They talked of making a rush to possess themselves of their guns;
but to Karl this appeared too perilous to be attempted.  It was not
twenty yards from the tree to the spot where rested the dismounted
monolith; and the elephant, whose eye was in a state of continual
activity, could not fail to see them descending from the branches.  The
massive creature, though it moved about with apparently a gentle griding
step, could go almost as fast as a galloping horse; and should it espy
them in time, there would be but slight chance of eluding its prehensile
trunk.

Moreover, the sight of them--even should they succeed in regaining the
tree--would rekindle its rage, and cause it to prolong its stay upon the
ground.

There was yet another consideration that influenced them to remain
patiently on their perch.  They knew that they had provided themselves
with only a very limited quantity of ammunition.  That article had
become scarce with them; and they had prudently determined to economise
it.  Karl had only two bullets left, with just powder enough to make two
charges; while Caspar's horn and pouch were not better filled.  They
might fire their whole stock of lead into the elephant, and still not
succeed in killing a creature that sometimes walks off triumphantly with
a score of bullets "under his belt."  These shots might only have the
effect of incensing it still more, and causing it to stay upon the
ground to an indefinite period.

It was a true _rogue_--Ossaroo had long since pronounced it one--and an
"old tusker" at that.  It was therefore a most dangerous creature; and
though they knew they would never be safe in that valley until it should
be destroyed, it was agreed by all that it would be more prudent to
leave it undisturbed until some more favourable opportunity occurred for
effecting its destruction.

For these various reasons they resolved to remain quiet in the tree, and
patiently await the termination of that curious "ring performance,"
which the old tusker still continued to keep up.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

AN ODD APPEARANCE.

For the full length of another hour did the trio in the tree have their
patience tested.  During all that time the "rogue" remained upon the
ground, continuing his perambulations around the rock--until he had
trodden out a path that resembled the arena of a circus at the close of
a night's performance.

It is not necessary to say that the time hung heavily upon the hands of
the spectators--to say nothing of Fritz, who would no doubt have been
satisfied with a much shorter programme.

As regards the former, the hour might have been spent less pleasantly
than it was; for it so chanced that an _interlude_ was introduced, of so
interesting a character to all, but more especially to the naturalist
Karl, that for a while the proximity of their savage besieger was
forgotten, and they scarcely remembered that they were besieged.

Favoured by the accident of their situation, they became spectators of a
scene--one of those scenes only to be viewed amid the wild solitudes of
Nature.

Not far from the tree on which they had found shelter, stood another of
equal dimensions, but of an entirely different species.  It was a
sycamore, as even Caspar, without any botanical skill, could testify.
Its smooth bark, piebald with white and green spots, its
widely-straggling limbs and leaves, left no doubt about its being one.
It was the sycamore, identical with its European congener, the _Platanus
orientalis_.

It is the habit of this fine tree to become hollow.  Not only does the
lower part of its trunk exhibit the phenomenon of great cavities, but
holes are found high up in its main shaft or in the larger limbs.

The tree in question stood within a few yards of that on which Karl,
Caspar, and Ossaroo were perched.  It was just before their eyes,
whenever they looked in a horizontal direction; and occasionally, when
tired with watching the monotonous movements of the elephant, one or
other of them _did_ look horizontally.  The scanty foliage upon the
sycamore enabled them to see its trunk and most of its larger limbs,
without any obstruction of leaves or branches.

Caspar had not cast his eyes more than twice in the direction of this
tree, when he saw there was something peculiar about it.  Caspar was a
youth of quick sight and equally quick perception.  In the main stem of
the tree, and about six feet above its first forking, he perceived an
object that at once fixed his attention.  It looked like a goat's horn,
only that it was more like the curving tusk of a rhinoceros or a very
young elephant.  It was sticking out from the tree, with the curve
directed downwards.  Altogether, it looked quite different from a branch
of the sycamore, or anything belonging to the tree.

Once or twice, while Caspar had his eyes upon it, he thought or fancied
that it moved; but not being sure of this, he said nothing, lest the
others might laugh at him.  It would not have been the first time that
Karl, from his superior knowledge, had indulged in a laugh at his
brother's expense.

Caspar's attention being now engrossed by the peculiar appearance he had
noted, he continued to scrutinise it; and soon perceived that around the
curved excrescence there was a circular disc some eight or ten inches in
diameter, and differing in colour from the bark of the sycamore--by
being many shades darker.  This disc appeared composed of some substance
that was not ligneous: for it no more resembled wood than the curved
ivory-like object that protruded from its centre.  Had Caspar been asked
what it did look like, he would have answered that it resembled the
agglutinated mud used by swallows in building their nests--so like it,
that it might have been the same substance.

Caspar continued to scrutinise these two curious objects--the tusk-like
excrescence, and the dark disc from which it protruded; and not until he
became fully aware that the former had life in it, did he communicate
his discovery to his companions.  Of this fact he was convinced by
seeing the crescent suddenly disappear--as if drawn within the tree,
while in its place a dark round hole was alone visible.  Presently the
yellowish horn reappeared through the hole, and protruded outside,
filling it up as before!

Caspar was too much astonished by this exhibition to remain any longer
the sole proprietor of such a mysterious secret, and without more delay
he communicated his discovery to Karl, and indirectly to Ossaroo.

Both at the same time turned their eyes towards the tree, and bent them
upon the indicated spot.  Karl was as much mystified by the strange
appearance as had been Caspar himself.

Not so Ossaroo.  The moment he saw the carving ivory and the
dark-coloured disc, he pronounced, in a tone of careless indifference,
the simple phrase,--

"_Hornbill_--_de bird on him nest_."



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

A CURIOUS NEST.

Just then the curved projection was observed to recede within the tree;
and in its place appeared a small dark hole, apparently the entrance to
a larger cavity.  Karl, as Caspar had done the moment before, saw this
with surprise.

"Nest?" repeated Caspar, astonished at the shikaree's statement.  "A
bird's nest?  Is that what you mean, Ossy?"

"That just it, sahib.  Nest of great biggee bird.  Feringhees him call
_horneebill_."

"Well," rejoined Caspar, not greatly enlightened by Ossaroo's
explanation, "that's very curious.  We have seen something like a horn
sticking out of the tree, though it looks more like ivory than horn.  It
may be the bill of a bird; but as to a bird itself, or the nest of one,
where is that, pray?"

Ossaroo intimated that the nest was inside the tree; and that the bird
was on the nest just behind its beak, where it ought to be.

"What! the bird is in that hole where we saw the white thing sticking
out?  Why, it quite filled the hole, and if there's a bird there, and
what we saw be its bill, I have only to say that its bill must be as big
as its body--else how can it get out and in through so small an
aperture?  Certainly I see no hole but the one.  Oh! perhaps the bird is
a _toucan_.  I have heard there are some of that sort that can go
through any place where they can pass their beaks.  Is it a toucan,
Ossaroo?"

Ossaroo could not tell what a toucan was, never having heard of such a
bird.  His ornithological knowledge went no further than to the birds of
Bengal; and the toucan is found only in America.  He stated that the
bird in the tree was called by the Feringhees a "hornbill," but it was
also known to some as the "rhinoceros bird."  Ossaroo added that it was
as large as a goose; and that its body was many times thicker than its
bill, thick as the latter appeared to be.

"And you say it has its nest inside that hole?" interrogated Caspar,
pointing to the little round aperture, which did not appear to be over
three inches in diameter.

"Sure of it, young sahib," was Ossaroo's reply.

"Well, certainly there is some living creature in there, since we have
seen it move; and if it be a bird as large as a goose, will you explain
to me how it got in, and how it means to get out?  There must be a
larger entrance on the other side of the tree."

"No, sahib," confidently asserted Ossaroo; "that you see before your
eye--that the only way to de horneebill nest."

"Hurrah for you, Ossy!  So you mean to say that a bird as large as a
goose can go in and out by that hole?  Why, a sparrow could scarcely
squeeze itself through there!"

"Horneebill he no goee in, he no goee out.  He stay inside till him
little chickees ready for leavee nest."

"Come, Ossy!" said Caspar, in a bantering way; "that story is too good
to be true.  You don't expect us to believe all that?  What, stay in the
nest till the young are ready to leave it!  And how then?  How will the
young ones help their mother out of the scrape?  How will they get out
