the bulk of the birds that voided them; for while the latter were not
larger than common hens, the eggs were as big as those of a goose.  The
contents of one which Murtagh, in his careless Hibernian way,
accidentally broke--and which were caught in a tin pannikin that held as
much as a good-sized breakfast cup--filled the pannikin to its brim.

It was quite a seasonable supply.  These fine eggs proved not inferior
to those of the common hen; indeed they were thought superior, and in
flavour more like the eggs of a guinea-fowl or turkey.

About a dozen of them were cooked for breakfast, and in more ways than
one.  Some were boiled, one of the half shells of the same Singapore
oyster serving for a saucepan; while in the other, used as a frying-pan,
an immense omelette was frittered to perfection.  It was quite a change
from the fruit diet of the durion, reversing our present as well as the
old Roman fashion of eating, though not contrary to the custom of some
modern nations--the Spaniards, for example.  Instead of being _ab ovo ad
malum_, it was _ab malo ad ovum_.  [Note 2.]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  The Banshee, or Benshie, sometimes called the Shrieking Woman,
is an imaginary being, supposed by the Irish to predict, by her shrieks
and wails, the death of some member in the family over which she
exercises a kind of supervision.  To this fable Moore alludes in one of
his songs--

  "How oft has the Benshee cried."

Note 2.  The Romans began their noonday meal with eggs, and ended with a
dessert; _ab ovo ad malum_.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

THE LANOONS.

Certainly the most nutritious of all things eatable or drinkable is the
substance, or fluid, called milk.  It becomes blood almost immediately,
and then flesh, or muscle, as was designed by the Creator.  Hence it is
the first food given to all animated creatures--not alone to the
_mammalia_, but to the oviparous animals--even to the infantile forms of
the vegetable itself.  To the first it is presented in the form of
simple milk, or "lacteal fluid;" to the second in the "white" of the
egg; while the young tree or plant, springing from its embryo, finds it
in the farina, or succulent matter, with which it is surrounded, and in
which it has hitherto lain embedded and apparently lifeless, till the
nursing sun calls it into a growing existence.  It is albumen, gluten,
and other substances combined, all existing in the udder, in the
egg-shell, in the seed, root, or fruit; from which springs the progeny,
whether it be man or beast, flying bird or swimming fish, creeping
reptile or fast-rooted forest tree.

The meal of oyster-meat had restored to healthy action the long-fasting
stomachs of the castaways; the durion fruit, coming like a _dessert_,
had no doubt acted with an exceedingly beneficial effect; but not till
they had partaken of the true "staff of life"--represented in one of its
elementary forms, the egg--did they feel their blood running in its
right channels, alike restoring their vigour and strength.

Murtagh was one of the first to feel revivified, and declare himself
ready for anything.  But they were all much invigorated, and began to
think and talk of plans for the future.  The question, of course, was,
how they should quit the shore on which shipwreck, and afterwards a
chance wind, had cast them?  So far the coast appeared to be
uninhabited, and although not so very inhospitable, as their experience
had proved, still it would never do for them to remain there.

The American merchant-skipper had no ambition to match the Scotchman
Selkirk, and make a second Crusoe of himself.  Neither would Murtagh or
the Malay have cared to act as his man Friday for any very prolonged
period of hermitage, so long as there was a mode of escaping from it.

During the remainder of that evening, therefore, they talked of a change
of quarters, and discussed various plans for bringing this about.  It
was a question whether they should take to their boat and again put out
to sea, or endeavour, by an overland expedition, to reach some part of
the coast where they might find a European, and therefore a civilised,
settlement.  Captain Redwood knew there were more than one of these on
the great island of Borneo.  There were the Dutch residencies of Sambas
and Sarabang; the English government depot on the islet of Labuan; and
the strange heterogeneous settlement--half colony, half kingdom--then
acknowledging the authority of the bold British adventurer, Sir James
Brooke, styled "Rajah of Sarawak."  If any of these places could be
attained, either coastwise or across country, our castaways might
consider their sufferings at an end; and it was only a question which
would be the easiest to reach, and what the best way of reaching it.

After due consideration, Labuan was the point decided upon.  From that
part of the coast Captain Redwood supposed himself to be, it was by far
the nearest civilised settlement--in fact, the only one that offered a
chance of being reached by travellers circumstanced as they.  Of course
they had no intention to start immediately.  Their strength was not
sufficiently restored, and they were only discussing the question of a
journey to be undertaken before long, and the probabilities of their
being able to accomplish it.

Although they were now safe on land, and need no longer dread the
"dangers of the deep," they did not yet believe themselves delivered
from all peril.  The part of the coast on which they had landed appeared
uninhabited; but it was not this that made them uneasy.  On the
contrary, human beings were the very things they did not desire just
then to see.  From the place where his ship had been struck by the
typhoon, and the distance and direction in which they had since drifted,
Captain Redwood conjectured--was indeed almost sure of it--that they
were on some part of the north-eastern coast of Borneo, where it fronts
the Celebes Sea; and he had traded long enough among the islands of the
Malayan Archipelago to know that this was a most dangerous locality, not
from beasts of prey, but fierce, predatory men; from pirates, in short.

These sea-robbers, issuing from their hiding-places and strongholds
among the lagoons of many of the Malayan islands--more especially
Mindanao--are to be met with all through the Indian Archipelago; but
their most favourite cruising-grounds are in the seas lying around the
Sooloo isles, and stretching between Borneo and New Guinea.

They are usually known as "Lanoons," from Illanon, the southern
peninsula of Mindanao, their principal place of refuge and residence.
But they have also other haunts and ports where they make rendezvous--
many on the shores of the Celebes Sea, in the island of Celebes itself,
and also along the eastern and northern coast of Borneo.  In this last
they are usually known as "Dyak pirates," a name not very correct; since
most of these freebooters are of pure Malayan race, while the Bornean
Dyaks take but little part in their plundering, and are themselves often
its victims.

The craft in which they carry on their nefarious calling are large
junk-like vessels termed "praus," with short, stumpy masts and huge
square sails of woven matting stuff.  But they place more dependence
upon their broad paddle-bladed oars and skilled oarsmen, each prau
having from thirty to forty rowers, and some very large ones a much
greater number.  These, seated in double rows along each side of the
vessel, take no part in the fighting, which is done by the chiefs and
warriors stationed above on a sort of platform or upper deck that
extends nearly the whole length of the prau.  The advantage derived from
the oars is, that in the tropical seas very light winds and calms are of
common occurrence, during either of which the prau can easily overtake
an ordinary sailing-ship.  And when a brisk wind arises, and it is
desirable to avoid any vessel that may be endeavouring to come up with
them, they can, by means of their strong rowing force, get to windward
of the chasing craft, and so out of harm's way.

Ships are not always the objects of their piratical cruisings, or they
might at times find it but an unprofitable business.  Combined with sea
piracy, they make frequent land expeditions along the coasts of the
different islands, going up the inlets and rivers, and plundering the
towns or other settlements situated on their banks.  And their booty
does not always consist of goods, chattels, and money, but of men,
women, and children; for they are men-robbers as well as murderers and
pirates.  Their captives are carried off to their places of rendezvous,
and there kept until they can be sold into slavery--a market for this
kind of commodity being easily found in almost every island of the
Malayan Archipelago--whether it be Dutch, Spanish, Portuguese, or under
the dominion of its own native rulers, the sultans and rajahs.

Well aware of all these circumstances, Captain Redwood knew the danger
he and his party would incur should they fall into the hands of the
Lanoons.  So long as they were out upon the open sea, and in fear of
perishing by starvation, they had never had a thought about pirates.
Then the sight of a prau--even with the certainty of its being a
piratical craft--would have been welcome; since death by the Malay kris,
or slavery to the most cruel taskmaster, would have been a relief from
the sufferings they were enduring, from hunger as from thirst.  Now,
however, that these were things of the past, and they were not only safe
delivered from the perils of the deep, but seemed in no farther danger
of starvation, the pirates had become the subject of their gravest
fears, and their eyes were habitually on the alert--now scanning the
sea-shore on both sides, and now directed toward the forest, whenever
any noise from that quarter occurred to excite suspicion.

While in this frame of mind, the boat which had brought them safely
ashore caused them a good deal of apprehension.  They might themselves
have easily found concealment among the trees that stood thickly on the
land-side; but the large pinnace lying upon the open beach was a
conspicuous object, and could be seen miles off by any one straying
along the shore, or coming abruptly out of the forest.  If there were
any pirates' nest near, the boat would surely betray them, and the
question arose as to what should be done with it.

To have dragged it up the sand, and hidden it among the underwood, is
probably what they would have done had they been possessed of sufficient
strength.  But they knew that they were not, and therefore the thing was
not thought of.  It was as much as they could yet do to drag their own
bodies about, much less a heavy ship's boat.

Murtagh suggested breaking it up, and letting the fragments float off
upon the waves.  But Captain Redwood did not approve of this mode.  The
craft that had so long carried them through an unknown sea, and at
length set them safely ashore, deserved different treatment.  Besides,
they might again stand in need of it; for it was not yet certain whether
they were on the coast of the Bornean mainland, or one of the numerous
outlying islets to be found along its eastern side.  If an island, the
boat would still be required to carry them across to the main.

While they were engaged in discussing this subject on the day they had
made discovery of the maleos' eggs, Saloo's sharp eye, wandering about,
caught sight of something that promised a solution of the difficulty.
It was the little stream not far off, or rather, the estuary formed by
its current, which, flowing out through the sands, had cut a channel
deep enough for the keel of a much larger craft than a ship's pinnace.

"Why we no blingee boat up libba?" he asked.

"Saloo is right; it may be done," assented the captain.

"Troth an' that may it.  It's clivver of the nigger to be the first of
us to think of that same.  Then we'd betther set about it at once--
hadn't we, captin?"

"By all means," was the reply; and the three men, rising to their feet,
walked off toward the boat, leaving the young people under the tree.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

KRISSING A CONSTRICTOR.

It took them nearly an hour to get the pinnace round into the stream,
and opposite the place they had fixed upon for their temporary
encampment.  The current acting against their feeble efforts at rowing,
was the cause of delay.  They succeeded, however, and the boat was made
safe from being observed by the eye of any one going along the beach.
But, to make it still more secure, they poled it in under the branches
of an over-hanging tree not far off--a large Indian fig, or _banyan_,
whose umbrageous top overshadowed the water nearly half-way across the
stream.

To one of its numerous root-stems the craft was made fast by means of
the tiller-ropes; and they were stepping out of it to return to their
camping-place, when a shout from Saloo warned them of some danger ahead.

It was not ahead, but _overhead_; for, as his companions looked up--
following the example of the Malay--they saw what at first appeared to
be one of the stems of the banyan in motion, as if endowed with life!

They were soon convinced of their mistake; for instead of the moving
thing being part of the fig-tree, its supple, cylindrical body and
glittering scales showed it to be a serpent.

It was a python, and one of enormous dimensions, as they could tell by
what they saw of it, knowing that this was only a portion of the whole;
at least ten feet of it were depending from the tree, while, judging by
the taper of its body, and applying the ordinary rule as to serpent
shape, there could not be less than ten or twelve other feet concealed
among the branches above.

As Saloo first caught sight of it, it was descending from the tree, no
doubt having been disturbed by the noise made in mooring the boat, and
tempted to forsake its perch for some purpose unknown.  It was coming
down head foremost--not along any of the stems, but in an open space
between them--its tail coiled round a branch above, affording it a
support for this descent, monkey or 'possum-fashion.

Its snout had already touched the ground, and perhaps its whole body
would soon have been elongated upon the earth but for the shout of
Saloo.  At this it suddenly jerked up its head, but without taking in
any of its coils above; and with jaws agape and tongue protruding, it
commenced oscillating around as if trying its range, and ready to pounce
upon any creature that came within the radius of that wide circle of
which its forked tongue was describing the circumference.

The warning of the Malay was given soon enough to save Captain Redwood,
but not the ship-carpenter.  Murtagh was either too long in hearing, or
too slow in giving heed to it.  He was a step or two in advance of the
others, carrying in his arms some implements from the boat.  In looking
around and above he saw the snake sweeping about in its grand circular
vibrations, and at the same time perceived that he was within their
range.

It was but the simple obedience of instinct to leap to one side, which
he did; but as ill luck would have it, hampered by the _impedimenta_
carried in his arms, he came in violent collision with one of the stems
of the banyan, which not only sent him back with a rebound, but threw
him down upon the earth, flat on his face.  He would have done better by
lying still, for in that position the snake could not have coiled around
and constricted him.  And the python rarely takes to its teeth till it
has tried its powers of squeezing.

But the ship-carpenter, ignorant of this herpetological fact, and as an
Irishman not highly gifted either with patience or prudence, after
scrambling a while upon his hands and knees, stood once more upon his
feet.

He had scarcely got into an erect attitude when his body was embraced by
a series of spiral annulations that extended from head to foot--huge
thick rings, slimy and clammy to the touch, which he knew to be the
foldings of the python.

Had there been any Lanoons, or Dyak pirates, within a mile's distance,
they might have heard the cry that escaped him.  The forest birds heard
it afar off, and ceased their chatterings and warblings, so that there
was no sound for some time save the continuous shrieks and ejaculations
that came from Murtagh's lips.

Captain Redwood, altogether unarmed, leaped back into the pinnace to
seize the boat-hook, thinking it the best weapon for the occasion.  It
might have been of service if obtainable in time.  But long before he
could have returned with it the ship-carpenter's ribs would have been
compressed into a mass of broken bones, and the breath crushed out of
his body.

This would certainly have been the lamentable result but for a weapon
with which a Malay is always armed, carrying it on his body nearer than
his shirt, and almost as near as his skin.  It was the _kris_.  As a
matter of course, Saloo had one, and luckily for his old shipmate,
"Multa," he knew how to handle it with skill, so that, in driving its
twisted blade through the python's throat, he did not also impale upon
its point the jugular vein of the Irishman.  He did the one dexterously
without doing the other, and the consequence was that the huge snake,
suffering keenly from having its throat pierced through, quickly
uncoiled itself from the body of its intended victim, glad to let the
latter escape, and only thinking of getting free itself by scuttling off
into the thickest of the underwood, where it disappeared evidently
writhing in pain.

Too anxious about the condition of their comrade, neither Captain
Redwood nor Saloo thought of pursuing it, but stooped down over the
released body of the Irishman, who had fallen prostrate to the earth.

On due examination it proved that there was not much harm done beyond a
terrible fright; and after some congratulations, he was induced to get
once more upon his feet and accompany them to the camp.  But for Saloo
and his kris, beyond doubt he would never have returned to it alive.

For the python in the Old World is quite as formidable as the boa in the
New.  Perhaps it is even more to be dreaded; for, notwithstanding its
great length--twenty-five to thirty feet--it is exceedingly nimble and
its muscular strength is immense.  There are numerous authentic stories
on record of its having crushed the buffalo and the tiger in its huge
constricting folds.  The _python reticulatus_ is probably the largest
species.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

CHICKS QUICK TO TAKE WING.

Two more days passed without any occurrence of an unusual nature, though
the castaways made several short excursions and explorations into the
forest, and also up and down the shore, keeping, however, close to the
edge of the timber.  These ended without any important discovery being
made, but confirmed them in their conjecture that the coast on which
they had been cast was uninhabited, at least for a considerable distance
on each side of the place where they had landed.

The most disappointing thing about these exploratory trips was their
fruitlessness in obtaining food, the chief object for which they had
been made.  Excepting some stray roots and berries of an esculent
nature, they had nothing to eat after the maleos' eggs were consumed;
and these had lasted them only into the second day.  It is true the
durion stood near, and its fruit would for a time keep them from
starving.  Still it would do little for the restoration of their
strength; and upon such diet it would be a long time before they could
undertake the arduous journey contemplated with any fair prospect of
being able to finish it.  No more Singapore oysters could be found, no
fish caught; and such birds and beasts of the forest as Captain Redwood
had accidentally got a glimpse of, had either flown or fled away without
giving him as much as the chance of a snap shot.

At night they again heard the stridulous clamour of the maleos, and
every morning looked out for them; but these fine fowls did not put in
another appearance, much less deposit three dozen eggs right under their
eyes, and in a convenient spot for being gathered.

Saloo, however, who knew all about their habits, believed he might yet
find another ovarium; and with this view, on the morning of the third
day, after giving up all further attempts at getting shell-fish, he
started upon a "prospecting" expedition after eggs, the others going
with him.

Their route led along the shore, and among the dry sand-wreaths, swirled
up near the selvedge of the woods.  If another egg depository existed,
it was there it should be found.  He told his companions that not only
did different gangs of the maleos bury their eggs in different places,
but the same tribe or flock had the habit of returning to the beach at
different times, each time laying their collected eggs in a new and
separate pit.  That, moreover, these curious birds, guided by instinct
or cunning, are accustomed to conceal the place of deposit, which might
be easily recognised by their tracks and scratchings.  This they do by
scoring the ground in other places, and giving to the surface the same
appearance as it bears over the spot where their eggs have been left to
the hatching of the sun.

In this searching excursion Saloo had brought with him a boat-hook; and
it was not long before he had an opportunity of proving the truth of his
words.  A place where the sand was very much tracked by the huge feet of
the megapodes soon presented itself, exactly resembling the spot where
they had procured the first supply of eggs.  But on probing it with the
boat-hook, Saloo at once pronounced it one of the sham nests.

After all, the creatures did not show too much cunning; for the presence
of this pretended place of deposit told the Malay that a real one would
not be far off; and, sure enough, another was soon after discovered,
which, on being sounded by the iron point of the boat-hook, gave back a
firm feel and a sharp metallic click, that told him there were eggs
underneath.

The sand as before, was carefully removed--Murtagh having brought with
him an oar for the purpose--when, for the second time, nearly three
dozen beautiful salmon-coloured eggs were disclosed to their view.

These were carefully taken up, and carried back to the place of
encampment, where they were left lying upon the ground, the party
resuming their quest, in hope of being able to lay in a larger and more
permanent supply.

As it chanced, another considerable receptacle was struck, giving back
sweet music to the probing of the boat-hook; and its contents were also
added to the larder.

As the last lot had been found under sand that appeared but recently
stirred, it followed that they were fresher than those of the second
finding, and therefore was it determined upon that they should be first
eaten.

The egg-gatherers having been now several hours engaged, and again
become almost as hungry as when first cast upon the shore, once more
kindled a fire, set the huge shells upon it, and using the one as a
boiling-pot, and the other as a frying-pan, prepared themselves a meal
of two courses--_oeuf bouille_ and _omelette_.

Next day they again went in search of other eggs, intending to lay in a
store against the eventuality of any possible period of famine.

But although they discovered several scratched places, and carefully
"sounded" them, no more maleos' eggs could be found; and they came to
the conclusion that they had despoiled all the "incubator" beds existing
on that section of the Bornean coast.

By reason of their rapidly-increasing strength, their appetites were by
this time almost insatiable.  They were, therefore, not long in using up
all the "setting" last gathered, and were about to begin upon the other
lot that did not seem so "newly laid."  These had been kept separate,
and permitted to lie where they had first placed them--out on the open
surface of the sand, some fifteen or twenty yards beyond the shadow of
the tree.  Negligently, and somewhat unwisely, had this been done; for
during the day the hot sun shining down upon them would naturally have a
tendency to spoil and addle them.  Still the time had not been very
long; and as no one thought of their being damaged, they were preparing
to turn them into eggs poached, fried, boiled, or otherwise.

Saloo had rekindled the fire, and got ready his pots and pans; while
Murtagh, who had stepped out to the "larder", was about to take up one
of the eggs, and carry it to the "kitchen."  But at that moment a sight
met the eyes of the Irishman, that not only astonished, but caused him
to sing out so excitedly as at once to attract the attention of the
others to the same singular spectacle.

It was that of an egg rolling, as it were, spontaneously over the
ground?  And not only one egg; for, as they continued to gaze a while,
the whole lot, as if taking their cue from it, commenced imitating the
movement, some with a gentle, others a more violent motion!  Murtagh
sprang back affrighted, and stood with his red hair on end, gazing at
the odd and inexplicable phenomenon.  The others were as much puzzled as
he--all except the Malay, who at a glance understood the philosophy of
the movement.

"Young malee inside," he cried in explanation.  "We no eat egg, we get
chickee.  Wait little minnit.  You him see come out full featha."

Truly enough the "chicks" did come out, not as down-covered helpless
creatures, but pults in full plumage, as Saloo had predicted: at all
events, full enough to enable them to fly; for as the shells one after
another commenced crackling--burst outward by the young birds'
strength--each showed a perfect fledgling; that, springing forth from
the shivered encasement, like Jack out of his box, at once flapped its
little wings, and essayed short flights over the surface of the sand.

So much were the spectators taken by surprise, that one and all of the
new-born but completely equipped birds, would have winged their way into
the forest and been lost, had it not been for Saloo, who, accustomed to
such transformations, was in no way discomposed, but preserved his
coolness and equanimity.

Fortified by these, and armed with the boat-hook, which he had suddenly
seized, he struck down the precocious chicks one after another, and put
an end to their aspiring flights by laying them lifeless upon the sand.

In the end it was neither eggs nor omelettes, but tender, delicate
"squabs" the castaways had for their prandial repast.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

A GRAND TREE-CLIMBER.

The castaways having made a repast on chicks instead of eggs, as they
had been expecting, were for the time satisfied, so far as concerned
their appetites.  But aware that these would ere long recommence their
craving, they could not be contented to remain inactive.  It would be
necessary to procure some other kind of provisions, and, if possible, a
permanent stock on which they could rely until ready to set out on their
journey, with a surplus to carry them some way along it.

Although in Borneo there are many kinds of strange birds, and some of
them large ones, they are not to be found everywhere, and when seen, not
so easily caught or shot.  There are some large quadrupeds too, as the
Indian rhinoceros, and the Sumatran tapir; and although the flesh of
these great thick-skinned animals is neither tender nor delicate, yet
men who can get no other soon find themselves in a position to relish
it, despite its toughness and its coarse texture.  But neither
rhinoceros nor tapir was seen by our castaways; neither seemed to
frequent that part of the coast, as no tracks of them were observed
during their excursions.  If they had fallen in with a rhinoceros, they
would have had some difficulty in killing it; seeing that this enormous
brute is as large as a small elephant, its body protected by a thick
hide embossed with hard knob-like protuberances, like those upon
shields, giving to the animal the appearance of being encased in a full
suit of ancient armour.

The Sumatran tapir, too, is a creature that does not readily succumb to
its assailant, being larger and stronger than its namesake of South
America.

There are two species of deer known in Borneo; one of them, the "rusa,"
a fine large animal.

Captain Redwood was in hopes he might meet with an individual of either
species; and with this object in view, he continued to make short
excursions into the woods, taking his rifle along with him, occasionally
accompanied by Murtagh, with the ship's musket.

But they always returned empty-handed, and a good deal down-hearted,
having seen nothing that could be converted into venison.

Saloo had again tried for eggs and shell-fish, but was unsuccessful in
his search after both; evidently there were no more depositories of
maleos' eggs, nor Singapore oysters, nor, indeed, any kind of
shell-fish, on that part of the shore.  They did not again see any of
the mound-making birds--not even those they had despoiled; for it is not
the habit of the megapodes to return to their eggs, but to leave them to
be hatched under the hot sand, and the chicks to scratch their way
upward to the surface, thus taking care of themselves from the very
moment of their birth, and, indeed, we may say, before it, since it can
scarcely be said they are born before breaking through the shell; and
this they have to do for themselves, else they would never see daylight.
Talk of precocious chicks!  There are none anywhere to be compared with
the megapodean pullets of the Malayan Archipelago, no birds half so
"early" as they.

For some days, after eating up the last chicken of the flock, our
castaways could get nothing to live upon but durions; and although these
formed a diet sufficiently agreeable to the palate, they were not very
strengthening.  Besides, they were not so easily gathered; the few they
had found on some trees, which Saloo had conveniently climbed, being
quickly exhausted.  The large durion-tree under which they had first
encamped was well furnished with fruit.  But its tall stem, nearly a
hundred feet, without a branch, and with a bark smooth as that of a
sycamore, looked as if no mortal man could ascend it.  Captain Redwood
had fired several rounds of his chain-shot up into it, and brought down
many of the grand spinous pericarps; but this cost an expenditure of
ammunition; and, circumstanced as they were, they saw it would never do
to waste it in such whimsical fashion.  Still, for want of food, the
fruit must be obtained some way or other, and the question was how to
"pluck" it.

In their dilemma the Malay once more came to their aid.  Fortunately for
all, Saloo was a native of Sumatra, and had been brought up among its
forests, much resembling those of Borneo.  He was skilled in the
wood-craft common to both islands; and, perhaps, of all the crew of the
castaway ship, not one could have survived whose services would have
been of more value to Captain Redwood and his party than those of the
brown-skinned pilot;--especially since it had been their fate to be cast
upon the shores of Borneo.  His companions had already experienced the
benefit to be derived from his knowledge of the country's productions,
