
"We are in a pretty fix then," was the comment of Elwood, laughing at
the doleful countenances he saw.

"Boys," said Tim, hitching up his pantaloons and scratching his head,
"shall I tell yees something to your advantage, as the papers say?"

"Of course," answered Howard, "nothing could suit us better."

"Well, then, while we've been slaaping, our friends along shore have
been carried away, and we're lift to make ourselves comfortable, as the
peddler said when he hung himself up by his foot."

"Let us see!" exclaimed Elwood, "perhaps we are not too late yet."

The three rushed ever the rocks pell-mell, the dog being at their side,
and giving vent now and then to short, sharp barks, as if he enjoyed the
ramble.

Elwood was at the head, and had run but a short distance when he sprung
upon a bowlder higher than the others, and shading his eyes for a moment
as he looked off toward the sea, he called back:

"Yes, yonder they are! We are not left alone."

"But it's good to have company!" laughed Tim, "it won't be long before
some vessel will step in and lift us aboard."

"How odd they look!" remarked Elwood, as his friends clambered up beside
him. "They don't seem dressed in their usual fashion."

The Irishman, upon rising to his feet on top of the rock, uttered an
expression of surprise, looked intently toward the sea, and then quickly
sprung back again.

"Off of there quick!" he commanded in a hoarse whisper, at the same time
catching the shoulder of the up-climbing Howard and forcing him back
again.

"Why, what's the matter?" asked Elwood, a vague alarm taking possession
of him, as he rather hurriedly obeyed him.

"May the good Lord presarve us! _them are Injuns!_"

[Illustration: "'May the good Lord preserve us! them are Injuns,' said
Tim."]

"I thought they looked odd," said Elwood, "but I did not think of that.
Are they friendly?"

"Friendly!" repeated Tim, with an expression of intense disgust. "Do you
know what they are walking up and down the sand fur in that sassy
shtyle?"

"Plunder, I suppose."

"Yis; they are in hopes the saa may wash up some poor fellow that they
may have the pleasure of hacking him to pieces."

"Are they such terrible creatures. Perhaps they have slain those who
escaped from the steamer."

"Niver a fear; there was too many of 'em, as me brother used to say when
his wife tuk her broomstick at him."

"But they had no weapons to use."

Tim shook his head. He evidently had a small opinion of the courage of
the California aborigines.

"Had they massacred the survivors, we could see their bodies along
shore," remarked Howard. "The sun throws such a glare upon the sand that
we can detect a very small object."

This settled the matter in the mind of Elwood, who had been heartsick at
the great fear of such a fate having befallen his friends.

"Then the burning of the steamer has attracted the notice of a great
many vessels, and I think Mr. Yard was right when he was sure of being
taken off by some one."

"What a mistake we made in wandering away and going to sleep where no
one could find us!"

"We did, indeed, Elwood; we voluntarily banished ourselves."

"But Mr. Yard certainly knows we are here, and will he not get a company
of men to come after us?"

"Perhaps so; but, if he doesn't, your father and mine will certainly do
so, so soon as they find where we are."

"Yes, but what is to become of us between to-night and that time? I am
half-starved to death, and must get something to eat pretty soon."

"Providence, that has preserved us so kindly thus far, will still watch
over us."

"There's one bad thing," remarked Tim, "them Injins will hang around the
shore, and it won't do for us to show ourselves niver a bit."

The faces of the two boys now blanched with fear, for they understood
the danger that threatened them. It was truly a fear-inspiring sight, as
they gazed out from their hiding-place in the direction of the sea. The
sun was partially down the horizon, and appeared unnaturally large,
while the gaunt Indians, in their fantastic costume, assumed the form of
giants striding along apparently on the gleaming surface of the ocean
itself. They were outlined with that sharp, black distinctness which is
seen when at night a fireman runs along the outer walls of a burning
building.

"Just to think!" said Elwood "we haven't a gun or a pistol with us."

"And I'm a little hungry, as the man said after fasting three waaks."

"Suppose they saw you?" said Howard.

"I ain't sure but what they did. They are looking in this direction, and
appear to be disputing about some matter."

There were grounds for this alarming view of the case. The Indians
numbered about a dozen, and half of these could be seen in a knot,
gesticulating in their extravagant manner, while the others were running
up and down the shore as if they had detected something interesting in
the surf.

"Are they looking at us?"

"There is such a glare, from the sun that I cannot tell whether their
faces or backs are toward us. Tim, what do you say?"

The Irishman gazed long and carefully over the face of the rock, and
finally said:

"They've seen something this way that has tuk their eye."

"They are moving, too."

"Maybe they've seen the dog, and are coming to look for us."

"Heaven save us!" exclaimed Tim, in some excitement, "there's no maybe
about it; they're coming, sure!"




CHAPTER IX.

THE PURSUIT.


It was not the first time that Tim O'Rooney made a mistake. The Indians
were excited over something, but as yet they held no suspicion that
three white persons stood behind them and could be so easily reached.
They were talking in a wild manner, and ran several rods from the beach,
when they suddenly paused and picked up an object over which they
quarreled and were almost ready to proceed to violence. From where our
friends stood it looked as if it were nothing more than a coat or some
cast-off garment that had been thrown aside by so me of the survivors
when they were taken away by the Relief.

"No, they have not seen us yet," said Howard, who was watching them
intently, while his two companions where looking upon the readiest means
of escape.

"Then why did they start after us, be the same token?" demanded Tim,
with a great sigh of relief.

"They are quarreling over something that lies upon the beach."

"If they'd only have the onspakable kindness to go to fighting each
other like a lot of Kilkenny cats, and not sthop till there's not one of
'em left--I say if they'd have the kindness to do that, it would be
fortinit for us."

"Hardly probable, Tim; the fact, is they appear to have settled the
matter already, and have gone down to the edge of the sea again."

"I don't see the use of our remaining here," said Howard. "We daren't go
any nearer them than we now are, while if we put back into the country
we stand a chance of getting something to eat. As near as I can
calculate, the Salinas River isn't very far away, and California is said
to be very fertile along its streams, if it is barren in such places as
this."

"And we may come upon a party of miners further inland."

"I don't know about that," rejoined Howard. "The diggings are on the
other side of the Coast Range, between that and the Sierra Nevada, in
the Sacramento Valley, and I think they are further north, too."

"Let's lave," said Tim; "if we only start tramping perhaps I may git my
mind off the subjact and forgit that I'm hungry enough to eat a toad,
which I'd starve to death afore I'd do the same."

While they were thus debating with themselves, Terror, unobserved by any
of them, whisked to the top of a high rock and announced his discovery
of the Indians by several loud, gruff barks. At so great a distance it
was impossible that the dog should be heard, but the danger was that the
lynx-eyed savages would see him, and thus discover the presence of his
friends. The peril was imminent, and a hasty word from Howard brought
the Newfoundland to their feet.

But it was too late. He had scarcely ascended his perch when an Indian
caught sight of him, and giving out a strange half-whoop and stream, he
started on a full run toward him, closely followed by half of the entire
party.

"There's no mistake this time!" exclaimed Howard, wheeling round and
springing away. "Don't wait."

There was no waiting by either Tim or Elwood. The two boys were slim and
fleet-footed, and could easily distance their more awkward companion;
but they could not leave him alone, although he besought them to secure
their own safety, while he would attend to his.

There were several things in favor of the fugitives and several against
them. It was growing dark quite rapidly, and they had a good start; but
the pursuers ran over the rocks and bowlders with the facility of
mountain goats and gained very rapidly; they were also familiar with the
face of the country, while our friends were literally "going blind."

"But don't we make 'em run!" called out Tim, glancing over his shoulder.
"Them fellers was made to travel, and if they'd only throw down their
guns and take up a sprig of the shillaleh, like an ilegant gintleman
should do, I wouldn't ax better fun than to jine in wid 'em and tach 'em
a few scientific tricks, such as can be got in Tipperary and nowhere
ilse--Worrah!----"

Tim's exclamation was caused by catching his foot against a large stone
and falling flat upon his face with considerable violence. He quickly
scrambled up again, while Elwood anxiously inquired whether he was hurt
by the fall.

"Not by the fall, plase your honor, but by the stone that whacked me
betwaan the eyes."

"They are gaining!" whispered Howard, pausing a moment for his
companions to come up.

"Yes, but it will be so dark in a few minutes that they can't see us,
and then we will hide ourselves until the danger is past. Let us get
along an fast as possible while the danger lasts."

They did strain themselves to the utmost, and speedily reached a more
open country, where they could travel with greater safety. This, which
at first appeared sadly against their prospects, was really the means of
securing their escape. The moment they reached it they darted away at
almost double their rate of speed, and shortly reached another hilly
portion, into which they plunged, and running a short distance, at a
signal from Howard, they dropped flat upon their faces, and crawled
beneath thy sheltering projections of the rocks, Terror at the same time
nestling down by the prostrate form of Elwood.

In a few minutes they heard the tramp of their swift-footed pursuers,
who were running without exchanging words with each other, or uttering
those exultant whoops which the Indian of other portions of our country
are so accustomed to give when exulting in the certainty of capturing
their enemies.

Our friends did not venture to exchange a word with each other until a
long time after the Indians had passed, and nothing could be heard to
indicate that they were anywhere in the neighborhood. Then they crawled
near together and spoke in low whispers.

"They are gone!" said Elwood.

"I think so," replied Howard, "but they may be watching somewhere. We
must be very careful. How is it, Terror, are there any strangers near
us?"

The dog snuffed the air, but made no sound, which was a negative reply.

"I guess he is right," added Howard. "We will get as far away from here
as we can, for I am sure those Indians will look around here until
morning in the hope of getting us then."

All three crawled a considerable ways on their hands and knees, when
they stealthily arose to their feet, and seeing nothing suspicious,
followed a northeasterly direction--one that would both lead them away
from their pursuers and at the same time take them toward the Salinas or
San Buenaventura River, which point they hoped to reach some time the
next day.

After going some distance they walked more rapidly, and ventured to
exchange words with each other. Terror kept the advance, fully aware of
the responsibility that rested upon him. There was little fear but that
he would give timely notice of the approach of danger, and a sense of
comparative security took possession of our friends as they proceeded.

To their great surprise, after journeying a half-mile or so, the
character of the country underwent a great change. The ground became
more level, and they found themselves traveling among stunted trees and
sparse vegetation. The moon did not rise until quite late, so that until
then they could barely see each other's bodies as they moved along. This
made them uncertain as to whether they were following the right course;
but they were greatly pleased to find that they had deviated but
slightly from the line they intended to pursue.

All at once a low whine from Terror arrested them. At the same instant
all three detected the glimmer of a light among the trees. Cautiously
approaching, Tim O'Rooney in the advance, he said in his husky whisper:

"There's an owld Injin noddin' by the fire, and if he has a gun, or
anything to eat, we'll try and get him to lend 'em to us!"




CHAPTER X.

A GOOD SAMARITAN.


The three carefully approached the camp-fire, and soon assured themselves
that there was but a single person near it, an old Indian who sat with
closed eyes and nodding head, totally unmindful of their presence.

"Yes, he is all alone," remarked Howard, in response to the statement
that Tim had made on first seeing the fire. "But he has no gun, so far
as I can see."

"Has he anything to eat?" inquired Elwood. "For that is getting to be
the most important matter."

"There doesn't appear to be any."

"Jist howld still where you baas, till I takes a look around," said Tim,
with an admonitory wave of the hand.

They obeyed while he went still nearer on tiptoe. When he was scarcely
twenty feet away he paused, and stooping down and bending his head first
to one side and then to the other, and raising and arching his neck
until his longitudinal dimensions became fearful, he at last satisfied
himself that the Indian was alone.

Without moving his feet, Tim now turned his head and motioned for his
companions to join him. They did so very carefully and silently, and the
three men then stood where the light of the fire shone full in their
faces, and where they could not help being the first objects the Indian
would see when he was pleased to look up.

"We'll have to wake him," whispered Tim, "and shall I yill, or hit him
with a stone on top of the head?"

"Neither; I have heard that the slumber of Indians is very light, and if
you just speak or make a slight noise I have no doubt it will rouse
him."

The fire, which had at its first kindling been large, was now
smouldering as though it had not been touched for several hours. The
Indian was seated on a large stone, his arms hanging listlessly over his
knees, and his head sunk so low that his features could not be seen.
Instead of the defiant scalp-lock drooping from his crown, his hair was
long and luxuriant, and plentifully mixed with gray. It hung loosely
over his shoulders, and in front of his face, and helped to give him a
strange, repulsive appearance.

"I say, owld gintleman, are you draaming, or--"

As quick as lightning the head of the Indian flashed up, and his black
eyes were centered with a look of alarm upon the individuals before him.
Tim had had some experience with these people when a miner, and he now
began making signs to the savage, who seemed on the point of springing
up and darting away. Naturally enough the Irishman continued talking,
although it was certain that the one could not understand a word the
other uttered.

"We maan no harrum," said the Irishman, raising his hands and letting
them fall at his side, to show that he carried no weapons, and held good
will toward the stranger. The boys judged it best to imitate their
comrade; and after standing a few moments, the three walked quietly up
to the fire. The startled Indian instantly rose to his feet and placed
his hand upon the haft of a large knife at his waist.

"None of that, ye spalpeen, or I'll smash you to smithereens!" said Tim,
who, although his words were of such dire portent, spoke as gently as if
he were seeking to quiet an infant.

They now noticed that the Indian was very old. His face was scarred and
wrinkled, his body bent, and his limbs tottered as if scarcely able to
bear his weight; but his eye was as keen and defiant as the eagle's, and
he stood ready to defend himself if harm were offered him.

Tim did the most prudent thing possible. He advanced straight to the
savage and offered his hand. This means of salutation was understood by
the latter, who, after some tottering hesitation, raised his right hand
from the knife and returned the pressure. Dropping it, he looked toward
Elwood and Howard, who saluted him in the same manner, and the parties
were now satisfied regarding the feelings of each other.

"Ask him for something to eat!" said Elwood; "I am beginning to feel
faint for the want of food."

"What good will the same do? He hasn't anything to give."

"He must live some way himself, and what will support such an old man as
he is, is surely good for us."

The signs that Tim now made were unmistakable in their import. He opened
his huge mouth until the cavern was fearful to contemplate; then he
snapped his teeth together like a dog that has failed to catch a piece
of meat thrown to him; after which he carried his hand back and forth to
his mouth, and opened and shut it again.

The Indian watched these manuevers a moment, and then gave an
exclamation intended solely for his own benefit--and which, therefore,
it is not necessary to give, if we could, and we can't--and turning his
back, commenced moving away with the feeble, uncertain gait of old age.

"What does that mean?" inquired Howard.

The savage, seeing they did not follow, paused and looked back.

"That is an invitation," said Tim; "do yees foller."

"But where will he lead us?"

"How can I tell?"

"But it may be into danger," admonished the most cautious Howard.

"It's the only chance we've got to save ourselves from starving, and for
me getting a shmoke out of a pipe, which I am as hungry for as I am for
a few pounds of mate."

