
"Hold on, girl!  I say, Whitewing, she's not so far wrong.  Many a time
has woman rendered good service in warfare.  She's well mounted, and
might ride back with a message or something o' that sort.  You'd better
let her come."

"She may come," said Whitewing, and next moment he was bounding over the
prairie at the full speed of his fiery steed, closely followed by Little
Tim and Brighteyes.

That same night, at a late hour, a band of savage warriors entered a
thicket on the slopes of one of those hills on the western prairies
which form what are sometimes termed the spurs of the Rocky Mountains,
though there was little sign of the great mountain range itself, which
was still distant several days' march from the spot.  A group of wearied
women and children, some riding, some on foot, accompanied the band.  It
was that which had so recently destroyed the Indian village.  They had
pushed on with their prisoners and booty as far and as fast as their
jaded horses could go, in order to avoid pursuit--though, having slain
all the fighting men, there was little chance of that, except in the
case of friends coming to the rescue, which they thought improbable.
Still, with the wisdom of savage warriors, they took every precaution to
guard against surprise.  No fire was lighted in the camp, and sentries
were placed all round it to guard them during the few hours they meant
to devote to much-needed repose.

While these Blackfeet were eating their supper, Whitewing and Little Tim
came upon them.  Fortunately the sharp and practised eyes and intellects
of our two friends were on the alert.  So small a matter as a slight
wavering in the Blackfoot mind as to the best place for encamping
produced an effect on the trail sufficient to be instantly observed.

"H'm! they've took it into their heads here," said Little Tim, "that it
might be advisable to camp an' feed."

Whitewing did not speak at once, but his reining up at the moment his
friend broke silence showed that he too had observed the signs.

"It's always the way," remarked the trapper with a quiet chuckle as he
peered earnestly at the ground which the moon enabled him to see
distinctly, "if a band o' men only mention campin' when they're on the
march they're sure to waver a bit an' spoil the straight, go-ahead run
o' the trail."

"One turned aside to examine yonder bluff," said the Indian, pointing to
a trail which he saw clearly, although it was undistinguishable to
ordinary vision.

"Ay, an' the bluff didn't suit," returned Tim, "for here he rejoins his
friends, an' they go off agin at the run.  No more waverin'.  They'd
fixed their eyes a good bit ahead, an' made up their minds."

"They are in the thicket yonder," said the Indian, pointing to the place
referred to.

"Jist what I was goin' to remark," observed the trapper.  "Now,
Whitewing, it behoves us to be cautious.  Ay, I see your mind an' mine
always jumps togither."

This latter remark had reference to the fact that the Indian had leaped
off his horse and handed the reins to Brighteyes.  Placing his horse
also in charge of the Indian girl, Tim said, as the two set off--

"We have to do the rest on fut, an' the last part on our knees."

By this the trapper meant that he and his friend would have to creep up
to the enemy's camp on hands and knees, but Whitewing, whose mind had
been recently so much exercised on religious matters, at once thought of
what he had been taught about the importance of prayer, and again the
words, "looking unto Jesus," rushed with greater power than ever upon
his memory, so that, despite his anxiety as to the fate of his affianced
bride and the perilous nature of the enterprise in hand, he kept
puzzling his inquiring brain with such difficulties as the absolute
dependence of man on the will and leading of God, coupled with the fact
of his being required to go into vigorous, decisive, and apparently
independent action, trusting entirely to his own resources.

"Mystery," thought the red man, as he and his friend walked swiftly
along, taking advantage of the shelter afforded by every glade, thicket,
or eminence; "all is mystery!"

But Whitewing was wrong, as many men in all ages have been on first
bending their minds to the consideration of spiritual things.  All is
_not_ mystery.  In the dealings of God with man, much, very much, is
mysterious, and by us in this life apparently insoluble; but many
things--especially those things that are of vital importance to the
soul--are as clear as the sun at noonday.  However, our red man was at
this time only beginning to run the spiritual race, and, like many
others, he was puzzled.

But no sign did he show of what was going on within, as he glided along,
bending his keen eyes intently on the Blackfoot trail.

At last they came to the immediate neighbourhood of the spot where it
was rightly conjectured the enemy lay concealed.  Here, as Tim had
foretold, they went upon their knees, and advanced with the utmost
caution.  Coming to a grassy eminence they lay flat down and worked
their way slowly and painfully to the top.

Well was it for them that a few clouds shrouded the moon at that time,
for one of the Blackfoot sentinels had been stationed on that grassy
eminence, and if Whitewing and the trapper had been less expert in the
arts of savage war, they must certainly have been discovered.  As it
was, they were able to draw off in time and reach another part of the
mound where a thick bush effectually concealed them from view.

From this point, when the clouds cleared away, the camp could be clearly
seen in the vale below.  Even the forms of the women and children were
distinguishable, but not their faces.

"It won't be easy to get at them by surprise," whispered the trapper.
"Their position is strong, and they keep a bright lookout; besides, the
moon won't be down for some hours yet--not much before daybreak."

"Whitewing will take the prey from under their very noses," returned the
Indian.

"That won't be easy, but I've no doubt you'll try, an' sure, Little
Tim's the man to back ye, anyhow."

At that moment a slight rustling noise was heard.  Looking through the
bush, they saw the Blackfoot sentinel approaching.  Instantly they sank
down into the grass, where they lay so flat and still that it seemed as
if they had vanished entirely from the scene.

When the sentinel was almost abreast of them, a sound arose from the
camp which caused him to stop and listen.  It was the sound of song.
The missionary--the only _man_ the Blackfoot Indians had not slain--
having finished supper, had gathered some of the women and children
round him, and, after an earnest prayer, had begun a hymn of praise.  At
first the Blackfoot chief was on the point of ordering them to cease,
but as the sweet notes arose he seemed to be spell-bound, and remained a
silent and motionless listener.  The sentinel on the mound also became
like a dark statue.  He had never heard such tones before.

After listening a few minutes in wonder, he walked slowly to the end of
the mound nearest to the singers.

"Now's our chance, Whitewing," said the trapper, rising from his lair.

The Indian made no reply, but descended the slope as carefully as he had
ascended it, followed by his friend.  In a short time they were back at
the spot where the horses had been left in charge of Brighteyes.

Whitewing took his sister aside, and for a few minutes they conversed in
low tones.

"I have arranged it all with Brighteyes," said the Indian, returning to
the trapper.

"Didn't I tell 'ee," said Tim, with a low laugh, "that women was good at
helpin' men in time o' war?  Depend upon it that the sex must have a
finger in every pie; and, moreover, the pie's not worth much that they
haven't got a finger in."

To these remarks the young chief vouchsafed no answer, but gravely went
about making preparations to carry out his plans.

While tying the three horses to three separate trees, so as to be ready
for instant flight, he favoured his friend with a few explanations.

"It is not possible," he said, "to take more than three just now, for
the horses cannot carry more.  But these three Brighteyes will rescue
from the camp, and we will carry them off.  Then we will return with our
braves and have all the rest--if Manitou allows."

The trapper looked at his friend in surprise.  He had never before heard
him make use of such an expression as the last.  Nevertheless, he made
no remark, but while the three were gliding silently over the prairie
again towards the Blackfoot camp he kept murmuring to himself: "You're a
great puzzle, Whitewing, an' I can't make ye out nohow.  Yet I make no
doubt yer right.  Whativer ye do comes right somehow; but yer a great
puzzle--about the greatest puzzle that's comed across my tracks since I
was a squallin' little babby-boy!"



CHAPTER FOUR.

CIRCUMVENTING THE BLACKFEET.

On reaching the neighbourhood of the Blackfoot camp, Whitewing, and his
companions crept to the top of the eminence which overlooked it, taking
care, however, to keep as far away as possible from the sentinel who
still watched there.

Brighteyes proved herself to be quite as expert as her male companions
in advancing like a snake through the long grass, though encumbered with
a blanket wrapped round her shoulders.  The use of this blanket soon
became apparent.  As the three lay prone on their faces looking down at
the camp, from which the sound of voices still arose in subdued murmurs,
the young chief said to his sister--

"Let the signal be a few notes of the song Brighteyes learned from the
white preacher.  Go."

Without a word of reply, the girl began to move gently forward,
maintaining her recumbent position as she went, and gradually, as it
were, melted away.

The moon was still shining brightly, touching every object with pale but
effective lights, and covering hillocks and plains with correspondingly
dark shadows.  In a few minutes Brighteyes had crept past the young
sentinel, and lay within sight--almost within ear shot of the camp.

Much to her satisfaction she observed that the Indians had not bound
their captives.  Even the missionary's hands were free.  Evidently they
thought, and were perhaps justified in thinking, that escape was
impossible, for the horses of the party were all gathered together and
hobbled, besides being under a strong guard; and what chance could women
and children have, out on the plains on foot, against mounted men,
expert to follow the faintest trail?  As for the white man, he was a man
of peace and unarmed, as well as ignorant of warriors' ways.  The
captives were therefore not only unbound, but left free to move about
the camp at will, while some of their captors slept, some fed, and
others kept watch.

The missionary had just finished singing a hymn, and was about to begin
to read a portion of God's Word when one of the women left the group,
and wandered accidentally close to the spot where Brighteyes lay.  It
was Lightheart.

"Sister," whispered Brighteyes.

The girl stopped abruptly, and bent forward to listen, with intense
anxiety depicted on every feature of her pretty brown face.

"Sister," repeated Brighteyes, "sink in the grass and wait."

Lightheart was too well trained in Indian ways to speak or hesitate.  At
once, but slowly, she sank down and disappeared.  Another moment, and
Brighteyes was at her side.

"Sister," she said, "Manitou has sent help.  Listen.  We must be wise
and quick."

From this point she went on to explain in as few words as possible that
three fleet horses were ready close at hand to carry off three of those
who had been taken captive, and that she, Lightheart, must be one of the
three.

"But I cannot, will not, escape," said Lightheart, "while the others
and, the white preacher go into slavery."

To this Brighteyes replied that arrangements had been made to rescue the
whole party, and that she and two others were merely to be, as it were,
the firstfruits of the enterprise.  Still Lightheart objected; but when
her companion added that the plan had been arranged by her affianced
husband, she acquiesced at once with Indian-like humility.

"I had intended," said Brighteyes, "to enter the Blackfoot camp as if I
were one of the captives, and thus make known our plans; but that is not
now necessary.  Lightheart will carry the news; she is wise, and knows
how to act.  Whitewing and Leetil Tim are hid on yonder hillock like
snakes in the grass.  I will return to then, and let Lightheart, when
she comes, be careful to avoid the sentinel there--"

She stopped short, for at the moment a step was heard near them.  It was
that of a savage warrior, whose sharp eye had observed Lightheart quit
the camp, and who had begun to wonder why she did not return.

In another instant Brighteyes flung her blanket round her, whispered to
her friend, "Lie close," sprang up, and, brushing swiftly past the
warrior with a light laugh--as though amused at having been discovered--
ran into camp, joined the group round the missionary, and sat down.
Although much surprised, the captives were too wise to express their
feelings.  Even the missionary knew enough of Indian tactics to prevent
him from committing himself.  He calmly continued the reading in which
he had been engaged, and the Blackfoot warrior returned to his place,
congratulating himself, perhaps, on having interrupted the little plan
of one intending runaway.

Meanwhile Lightheart, easily understanding her friend's motives, crept
in a serpentine fashion to the hillock, where she soon found Whitewing--
to the intense but unexpressed joy of that valiant red man.

"Will Leetil Tim go back with Lightheart to the horses and wait, while
his brother remains here?" said the young chief.

"No, Little Tim _won't_," growled the trapper, in a tone of decision
that surprised his red friend.  "Brighteyes is in the Blackfoot camp,"
he continued, in growling explanation.

"True," returned the Indian, "but Brighteyes will escape; and even if
she fails to do so now, she will be rescued with the others at last."

"She will be rescued with _us_, just _now_," returned Little Tim in a
tone so emphatic that his friend looked at him with an expression of
surprise that was unusually strong for a redskin warrior.  Suddenly a
gleam of intelligence broke from his black eyes, and with the soft
exclamation, "Wah!" he sank flat on the grass again, and remained
perfectly still.

Brighteyes found that it was not all plain sailing when she had mingled
with her friends in the camp.  In the first place, the missionary
refused absolutely to quit the captives.  He would remain with them, he
said, and await God's will and leading.  In the second place, no third
person had been mentioned by her brother, whose chief anxiety had been
for his bride and the white man, and it did not seem to Brighteyes
creditable to quit the camp after all her risk and trouble without some
trophy of her prowess.  In this dilemma she put to herself the question,
"Whom would Lightheart wish me to rescue?"

Now, there were two girls among the captives, one of whom was a bosom
friend of Lightheart; the other was a younger sister.  To these
Brighteyes went, and straightway ordered them to prepare for flight.
They were of course quite ready to obey.  All the preparation needed was
to discard the blankets which Indian women are accustomed to wear as
convenient cloaks by day.  Thus unhampered, the two girls wandered about
the camp, as several of the others had occasionally been doing.
Separating from each other, they got into the outskirts in different
directions.  Meanwhile a hymn had been raised, which facilitated their
