females huddled together, wrapped in rugs and cloaks, drenched to the
skin, almost blown from their seats, ghastly with watching and fear,
solemn-visaged in the last degree, and yet singing "Pop goes the
weasel," and similar ditties, with all the energy of despair.

We paint no fanciful picture.  We describe facts, and there is no saying
how far the effect of that music might have helped in the saving of the
ship, had not an event occurred which rendered further efforts
unnecessary.

The captain, who had either lost his reckoning or his head, or both, was
seen to apply himself too frequently to a case-bottle in the cabin, and
much anxiety began to be felt as to his capacity to manage the vessel.
Owing, also, to the length of time that thick weather had prevailed, no
reliable observation had been obtained for several days.  While the
anxiety was at its height, there came a sudden and terrible shock, which
caused the good ship to tremble.  Then, for the first time, the roar of
breakers was heard above the howling of the storm.  As if to increase
the horror of the scene, the fog lifted and revealed towering cliffs
close ahead of them.

The transition from a comparatively hopeful state to one of absolute
despair was overwhelming.  The wild waves lifted the great hull of the
vessel and let it down on the rocks with another crash, sending the
masts over the side, while the passengers could only shriek in agony and
cling to the wreck.  Fortunately, in taking the ground, the vessel had
kept straight, so that the forepart formed a comparative shelter from
the waves that were fast breaking up the stern.

In the midst of all this confusion the first mate and Mr Bright seemed
to keep quite cool.  Between them they loaded and fired the bow
signal-guns several times, by which means they brought a few fishermen
and coastguard-men to the scene of disaster.  And among these, as we
have seen, were our heroes, Philip Maylands and George Aspel.

On arriving, these two found that the rocket apparatus was being set up
on the beach.

"Phil," said Aspel in a quick low voice, "they'll want the lifeboat, and
the wind carries the sound of their guns in the wrong direction.  Run
round, lad, and give the alarm.  There's not a moment to lose."

The boy turned to run without a word of reply, but he could not help
observing, as he turned, the compressed lips, the expanding nostrils,
and the blazing eyes of his friend, who almost quivered with suppressed
excitement.

For some time George Aspel stood beside the men of the coastguard while
they set up their apparatus and fired the rocket.  To offer assistance,
he knew, would only retard them.  The first rocket was carried to the
right of the vessel, which was now clearly visible.  The second went to
the other side.  There was a reef of rocks on that side which lay a few
yards farther out from the beach than the wreck.  Over this reef the
rocket-line fell and got entangled.  Part of the shore-end of the
apparatus also broke down.  While the men were quickly repairing it
Aspel said in a hurried manner:--"I'll clear the rocket-line," and away
he darted like a greyhound.

"Hold ha-a-rd! foolish fellow, you'll be drownded," roared one of the
men.

But Aspel heeded him not.  Another minute and he was far away on the
ledge of rock jutting out from a high cape--the point of which formed
the outlying reef above referred to.  He was soon at the extremity of
the ledge beyond which nearly a hundred yards of seething foam heaved
between him and the reef.  In he plunged without a moment's halt.  Going
with the rush of the waves through the channel he struck diagonally
across, and landed on the reef.  Every billow swept over it, but not
with sufficient force to prevent his struggling towards the rocket-line,
which he eventually reached and cleared.

"Wasn't that nately done!" cried an enthusiastic young fisherman on the
beach; "but, och! what is he up to now?"

A few seconds sufficed to give an answer to his question.  Instead of
letting go the line and returning, young Aspel tied it round his waist,
and ran or waded to the extreme edge of the reef which was nearest to
the wreck.  The vessel lay partially to leeward of him now, with not
much space between, but that space was a very whirlpool of tormented
waves.  Aspel gave no moment to thought.  In his then state of mind he
would have jumped down the throat of a cannon.  Next instant he was
battling with the billows, and soon reached the ship; but now his danger
was greatest, for the curling waves threw him so violently against the
side of the wreck that he almost lost consciousness and missed the
lifebuoy which, with a rope attached, had been thrown to him by the
anxious crew.

A great cry of anxiety arose at this, but Mr Bright had anticipated it,
and the first mate was ready to aid him.  Leaping into the sea with a
rope round his waist, Mr Bright caught Aspel as he struggled past.  The
mate's powerful hands held them both fast.  Some of the crew lent a
ready hand, and in a few seconds George Aspel was hauled on board.  He
had quite recovered by that time, and replied with a smile to the
ringing cheer that greeted him.  The cheer was echoed again and again by
the men on shore.  Major Beak attempted to grasp his hand, but failed.
Mr Blurt, feeling an irresistible impulse, tried to embrace him, but
was thrust aside, fell, and rolled into the lee-scuppers.

Scattering the people aside Aspel sprang on the bulwarks at the bow,
and, snatching Mr Stiff's travelling-cap from his head, held it up as a
signal to the men on shore.

Well did the youth know what to do in the circumstances, for many a time
had he talked it over with the men of the coastguard in former days.  On
receiving an answering signal from the shore he began to haul on the
rocket-line.  The men in charge had fastened to it a block, or pulley,
with two tails to it; a line was rove through this block.  The instant
the block reached his hands Aspel sprang with it to the stump of the
foremast, and looking round cried, "Who'll lend a--"

"Here you are," said Mr Bright, embracing the mast with both arms and
stooping,--for Mr Bright also knew well what to do.

George Aspel leaped on his shoulders and stood up.  Mr Bright then
raised himself steadily, and thus the former was enabled to tie the
block by its two tails to the mast at a height of about eleven feet.
The line rove through the block was the "whip," which was to be
manipulated by those on shore.  It was a double, and, of course, an
endless line.

Again the signal was given as before, and the line began to run.  Very
soon a stout hawser or cable was seen coming out to the wreck.  Aspel
fastened the end of this to the mast several feet below the pulley.

A third time the signal was given.

"Now then, ladies, stand by to go ashore, and let's have no hesitation.
It's life or death with us all," said the mate in a voice so stern that
the crowd of anxious and somewhat surprised females prepared to obey.

Presently a ring-shaped lifebuoy, with something like a pair of short
breeches dangling from it, came out from the shore, suspended to a block
which traversed on the cable, and was hauled out by means of the whip.

A seaman was ordered to get into it.  Mrs Tods, who stood beside the
mate, eyeing the process somewhat curiously, felt herself firmly but
gently seized.

"Come, Mrs Tods, step into it.  He'll take care of you--no fear."

"Never! never! without my two darlings," shrieked Mrs Tods.

But Mrs Tods was tenderly lifted over the side and placed in the
powerful arms of the sailor.  Her sons instantly set up a howl and
rushed towards her.  But Mr Bright had anticipated this also, and, with
the aid of a seaman, arrested them.  Meanwhile, the signal having been
given, the men on the land pulled in the cradle, and Mrs Tods went
shrieking over the hissing billows to the shore.  A few minutes more and
out came the cradle again.

"Now, then, for the two `darlings'," growled the mate.

They were forcibly put over the side and sent howling to their mother.

After them went Mrs Pods, who, profiting by the experience of her
friend, made no resistance.  This however, was more than counterbalanced
by the struggles of _her_ three treasures, who immediately followed.

But the shades of evening were now falling, and it was with an anxious
feeling at his heart that the mate surveyed the cluster of human beings
who had yet to be saved, while each roaring wave that struck the wreck
seemed about to break it up.

Suddenly there arose a cry of joy, and, looking seaward, the bright
white and blue form of the lifeboat was seen coming in like an angel of
light on the crests of the foaming seas.

We may not stay to describe what followed in detail.  The lifeboat's
anchor was let go to windward of the wreck, and the cable paid out until
the boat forged under the vessel's lee, where it heaved on the boiling
foam so violently that it was difficult to prevent it being stove in,
and still more difficult to get the women and children passed on board.
Soon the lifeboat was full--as full as she could hold--and many
passengers yet remained to be rescued.

The officer in charge of the mail-bags had got them up under the shelter
of the companion-hatch ready to be put into the boat, but human life was
of more value than letters--ay, even than diamonds.

"Now, then, one other lady.  Only room for one," roared the mate, who
stood with pistol in hand near the gangway.

Miss Gentle tried to get to the front, but Lady Tower stepped in before
her.

"Never mind, little woman," said Mr Bright, encouragingly, "the rocket
apparatus is still at work, and the wreck seems hard and fast on the
reef.  You'll get off next trip."

"But I can't bear to think of going by that awful thing," said Miss
Gentle, shuddering and sheltering herself from the blinding spray under
the lee of Bright's large and powerful body.

"Well, then," he returned, cheerfully, "the lifeboat will soon return;
you'll go ashore with the mails."

Mr Bright was right about the speedy return of the lifeboat with her
gallant crew, who seemed to rejoice in danger as if in the presence of a
familiar friend, but he was wrong about the wreck being hard and fast.
The rising tide shifted her a little, and drove her a few feet farther
in.  When the other women and children were got into the boat, Mr
Bright, who stood near the mail-bags looking anxiously at them, left his
position for a moment to assist Miss Gentle to the gangway.  She had
just been safely lowered when a tremendous wave lifted the wreck and
hurled it so far over the reef that the fore part of the vessel was
submerged in a pool of deep water lying between it and the shore.

Mr Bright looked back and saw the hatchway disappearing.  He made a
desperate bound towards it, but was met by the rush of the crew, who now
broke through the discipline that was no longer needed, and jumped
confusedly into the lifeboat on the sea, carrying Bright along with
them.  On recovering his feet he saw the ship make a final plunge
forward and sink to the bottom, so that nothing was left above water but
part of the two funnels.  The splendid lifeboat was partly drawn down,
but not upset.  She rose again like a cork, and in a few seconds freed
herself from water through the discharging tubes in her bottom.  The men
struggling in the water were quickly rescued, and the boat, having
finished her noble work, made for the shore amid cheers of triumph and
joy.

Among all the passengers in that lifeboat there was only one whose
visage expressed nothing but unutterable woe.

"Why, Mr Bright," said Miss Gentle, who clung to one of the thwarts
beside him, and was struck by his appearance, "you seem to have broken
down all at once.  What has happened?"

"The mail-bags!" groaned Mr Bright.

"Why do you take so deep an interest in the mails?" asked Miss Gentle.

"Because I happen to be connected with the post-office; and though I
have no charge of them, I can't bear to see them lost," said Mr Bright
with another groan, as he turned his eyes wistfully--not to the shore,
at which all on board were eagerly gazing--but towards the wreck of the
Royal Mail steamer _Trident_, the top of whose funnels rose black and
defiant in the midst of the raging waves.



CHAPTER SIX.

TREATS OF POVERTY, PRIDE, AND FIDELITY.

Behind a very fashionable square in a very unfashionable little street,
in the west end of London, dwelt Miss Sarah Lillycrop.

That lady's portion in this life was a scanty wardrobe, a small
apartment, a remarkably limited income, and a tender, religious spirit.
From this it will be seen that she was rich as well as poor.

Her age was, by a curious coincidence, exactly proportioned to her
income--the one being forty pounds, and the other forty years.  She
added to the former, with difficulty, by teaching, and to the latter,
unavoidably, by living.

By means of a well-known quality styled economy, she more than doubled
her income, and by uniting prayer with practice and a gracious mien she
did good, as it were, at the rate of five hundred, or five thousand, a
year.

It could not be said, however, that Miss Lillycrop lived well in the
ordinary sense of that expression.

To those who knew her most intimately it seemed a species of standing
miracle that she contrived to exist at all, for she fed chiefly on toast
and tea.  Her dietary resulted in an attenuated frame and a thread-paper
constitution.  Occasionally she indulged in an egg, sometimes even in a
sausage.  But, morally speaking, Miss Lillycrop lived well, because she
lived for others.  Of course we do not mean to imply that she had no
regard for herself at all.  On the contrary, she rejoiced in creature
comforts when she had the chance, and laid in daily "one ha'p'orth of
milk" all for herself.  She paid for it, too, which is more than can be
said of every one.  She also indulged herself to some extent in the
luxury of brown sugar at twopence-halfpenny a pound, and was absolutely
extravagant in hot water, which she not only imbibed in the form of weak
tea and _eau sucree_ hot, but actually took to bed with her every night
in an india-rubber bottle.  But with the exception of these excusable
touches of selfishness, Miss Lillycrop ignored herself systematically,
and devoted her time, talents, and means, to the welfare of mankind.

Beside a trim little tea-table set for three, she sat one evening with
her hands folded on her lap, and her eyes fixed on the door as if she
expected it to make a sudden and unprovoked assault on her.  In a few
minutes her expectations were almost realised, for the door burst open
and a boy burst into the room with--"Here we are, Cousin Lillycrop."

"Phil, darling, at last!" exclaimed Cousin Lillycrop, rising in haste.

Philip Maylands offered both hands, but Cousin Lillycrop declined them,
seized him round the neck, kissed him on both cheeks, and thrust him
down into an easy chair.  Then she retired into her own easy chair and
gloated over him.

"How much you've grown--and so handsome, dear boy," murmured the little
lady.

"Ah! then, cousin, it's the blarney stone you've been kissing since I
saw you last!"

"No, Phil, I've kissed nothing but the cat since I saw you last.  I kiss
that delicious creature every night on the forehead before going to bed,
but the undemonstrative thing does not seem to reciprocate.  However, I
cannot help that."

Miss Lillycrop was right, she could not help it.  She was overflowing
with the milk of human kindness, and, rather than let any of that
valuable liquid go to waste, she poured some of it, not inappropriately,
on the thankless cat.

"I'm glad you arrived before your sister, Phil," said Miss Lillycrop.
"Of course I asked her here to meet you.  I am _so_ sorry the dear girl
cannot live with me: I had fully meant that she should, but my little
rooms are so far from the Post-Office, where her work is, you know, that
it could not be managed.  However, we see each other as often as
possible, and she visits sometimes with me in my district.  What has
made you so late, Phil?"

"I expected to have been here sooner, cousin," replied Phil, as he took
off his greatcoat, "but was delayed by my friend, George Aspel, who has
come to London with me to look after a situation that has been promised
him by Sir James Clubley, M.P. for I forget where.  He's coming here
to-night."

"Who, Sir James Clubley?"

"No," returned the boy, laughing, "George Aspel.  He went with Mr Blurt
to a hotel to see after a bed, and promised to come here to tea.  I
asked him, knowing that you'd be glad to receive any intimate friend of
mine.  Won't you, Coz?"

Miss Lillycrop expressed and felt great delight at the prospect of
meeting Phil's friend, but the smallest possible shade of anxiety was
mingled with the feeling as she glanced at her very small and not too
heavily-loaded table.

"Besides," continued Phil, "George is such a splendid fellow, and, as
maybe you remember, lived with us long ago.  May will be glad to meet
him; and he saved Mr Blurt's life, so you see--"

"Saved Mr Blurt's life!" interrupted Miss Lillycrop.

"Yes, and he saved ever so many more people at the same time, who would
likely have been all lost if he hadn't swum off to 'em with the
rocket-line, and while he was doing that I ran off to call out the
lifeboat, an' didn't they get her out and launch her with a will--for
you see I had to run three miles, and though I went like the wind they
couldn't call out the men and launch her in a minute, you know; but
there was no delay.  We were in good time, and saved the whole of 'em--
passengers and crew."

"So, then, _you_ had a hand in the saving of them," said Miss Lillycrop.

"Sure I had," said Phil with a flush of pleasure at the remembrance of
his share in the good work; "but I'd never have thought of the lifeboat,
I was so excited with what was going on, if George hadn't sent me off.
He was bursting with big thoughts, and as cool as a cucumber all the
time.  I do hope he'll get a good situation here.  It's in a large East
