That Hardman, on his part, detested the youths was apparent, though he
tried to conceal the feeling when he feared it might attract the
attention of others. He had little to say to them or they to him. Frank
decided to tell his chum of the discovery he had made, and they would
consult as to whether they should take Jeff and Tim into their
confidence.

Meanwhile, the trio gathered their loads upon their backs and started
northward without so much as calling good-by to those whom they left
behind, and who were not sorry to part company with them.

The gold-hunters had had a little lift on their journey, but it was not
worth considering, in view of what remained before them. A mile advance
with sleds and their packs took them to the head of Lake Bennet, where
it may be said the navigation of the Yukon really begins. The lake is
about twenty-eight miles long, contains a number of islands, and in
going to the foot one passes from Alaska into British Columbia. Along
its shores were scores of miners, busily engaged in building boats with
which to make the rest of the journey. Sad to say, owing to their
impatience and lack of skill, some of the boats were so flimsy and
ill-constructed that they were certain to go to pieces in the fierce
rapids below, and add their owners to the long list of victims whose
bodies strew the pathway from Chilkoot to the Upper Yukon.

Here, too, it became necessary for our friends to build a craft, and
since it was comparatively early in the day, Jeff and Tim, each with an
axe over his shoulder, went into the wood, already partly cut down,
Hardman accompanying them, in order to bear his turn. The boys remained
behind to guard the property, though their neighbors were so occupied
with their own affairs that they gave them little heed. Frank took the
opportunity to tell his companion what he had observed on the boat
while crossing the lake.

"Hardman has joined our company for some evil purpose," said Roswell,
"and the other man is his partner in the plot."

"But they are gone, and we may not see them again."

"One of them, at least, has an understanding with Hardman, and will
keep him within hailing distance."

"We will say nothing to Jeff or Tim until to-morrow; I fear that we
shall learn something to-night."

The boy was right in his supposition.




CHAPTER VII.

THE PLOTTERS.


All day long the two axes swung vigorously. Both Jeff and Tim were
expert woodmen, and they felled pine after pine. Hardman pleaded that
he was unaccustomed to such work; but Jeff grimly told him he could
never have a better chance to learn to cut down trees, and compelled
him to take his turn. The work was continued until dark, which, it will
be remembered, comes much later in the far North than in our latitude.

The distance between the scene of their work and the point where the
outfits and goods were piled was so slight that there was really no
need of the boys remaining on guard. Feeling that they were favored too
much, they sauntered to the wood and asked the privilege of taking a
hand in felling the trees. It was granted; but they made such sorry
work, finding it almost impossible to sink the blade twice in the same
spot, that they yielded the implements to those who understood the
business so much better.

The snow was deep, and the camp was much the same as the one made
before entering Chilkoot Pass. All were tired, and lay down after the
evening meal, glad of the opportunity for a few hours' sleep.

In accordance with their agreement, the boys said nothing to either of
their friends about what Frank had observed on the boat. It was
understood between them that they were to feign sleep, but to keep
watch of Hardman during the night as long as they could remain awake.
Ordinarily it is a difficult if not impossible task for one to fight
off the insidious approach of slumber, but Frank Mansley had wrought
himself into such a state of anxiety that he was sure he could command
his senses until well toward morning.

He and Roswell lay under the same blanket, with their backs to each
other, while the others were by themselves, the interior of the tent
barely permitting the arrangement. Had any one stealthily entered
fifteen minutes after they had lain down, he would have declared that
all were asleep, though such was not the fact.

Despite his nervousness, Frank was beginning to feel drowsy when he was
startled and set on edge by a sound that penetrated the profound
silence. It resembled the whistle of a bird from the timber, soft,
clear, and tremulous. Almost in the same instant he heard one of the
men rise stealthily from his couch. It was easy to determine, from the
direction of the slight rustle, that it was Hardman.

Frank thrust his elbow into the back of his comrade as a warning for
him to be alert; but there was no response. Roswell had been asleep for
an hour. It was too dark to perceive anything within the tent, though
all was clear outside; but the lad's senses were in that tense
condition that he heard the man lift the flap of the tent and move
softly over the snow on the outside. With the same silence, Frank flung
back the blanket that enveloped him and stepped out on the packed snow
of the interior. Pausing but a moment, he crept through the opening. In
that cold region men sleep in their clothing, so he had nothing to fear
from exposure.

The night was brilliantly clear, the sky studded with stars, and not a
breath of air stirring. He remained a brief while in a crouching
posture, while he peered in different directions. Before him stretched
the lake, its shores crusted with snow and ice, with the cold water
shining in the star-gleam. Still stooping low and looking intently
about him, he saw something move between the tent and the water. A
second glance revealed Hardman, who was standing alone and looking
about him, as if he expected the approach of some person. Impatient at
the delay, he repeated the signal that had aroused the attention of
Frank a few minutes before.

The tremulous note had scarcely pierced the air when a shadowy form
emerged from the wood and walked the short distance that took him to
the waiting Hardman. The two were so far off that it was impossible to
identify him; but the lad was as certain it was the man who had
exchanged the words and signs with Hardman as if the noonday sun were
shining.

Frank Mansley would have given anything he had to be able to steal near
enough to overhear what passed between them, but that was clearly
impossible. To move from his place by the tent was certain to bring
instant detection. Now and then he could catch the faint murmur of
their voices, but not once was he able to distinguish a syllable that
was uttered.

The interview lasted but a short time. Whatever understanding was
reached between the plotters must have been simple, else it would not
have been effected so soon. Suddenly the stranger moved off over the
snow in the direction of the wood and disappeared among the trees. At
the same moment Hardman moved silently toward the tent. Frank was on
the alert, and when the man entered he was lying on his couch, his
blanket over him, and his chilled body against the warm form of his
comrade, who recoiled slightly with a shiver, though he did not awake.

The fear of Frank Mansley had been that the two men were plotting some
scheme for the robbery of Jeff, though it would seem that they would
prefer to wait until he had made a strike in the gold district. What
the youth had seen convinced him that the latter plan would be
followed, or at least attempted, and he had hardly reached that
conclusion when he fell asleep.

"You're a pretty fellow to stand guard," he remarked to his cousin the
next morning, after the men had gone to the wood again.

[Illustration: "YOU'RE A PRETTY FELLOW TO STAND GUARD," SAID FRANK.]

"I didn't try to stand guard," replied Roswell with a laugh; "I was
lying down all the time."

"Why didn't you keep awake?"

"Because I fell asleep, and you would have done the same if you hadn't
kept awake."

"Probably I should--most people do; but what do you think of it,
Roswell?"

"First tell me something to think of."

His cousin told all that he had seen the night before.

"There can't be any doubt that Hardman and one, if not all three of
those fellows, are plotting mischief. It might have been one of the
others who signalled to and met him. I think we ought to tell Jeff."

"We'll do so before night. It isn't likely Hardman suspects anything,
and you will have no trouble in finding the chance."

"You think it best that I should tell Jeff?"

"By all means, since you will tell what you saw. Such things are best
first-hand; but neither of us will say anything to Tim."

"Why not?"

"Jeff is the leader of this expedition. Tim is so soft-hearted that
likely enough he would try to convince Hardman of his wrongdoing, and
so put him on his guard. Let Jeff tell him if he chooses."

"I hope he will drive Hardman out of our party; my impression of him is
that he would not only rob but kill for the sake of gold."

Roswell looked grave. The same thought had been in his mind, but he
disliked to give expression to it. He hoped his cousin was wrong, but
could not feel certain that he was.

"Frank, make an excuse for calling Jeff here; he ought to know of this
at once."

Looking toward the timber, they saw that their friend had just given up
his axe to Hardman, who was swinging it a short distance from where Tim
McCabe was lustily doing the same. Frank called to him, and when the
old miner looked around, he beckoned for him to approach. Jeff slouched
forward, wondering why the boys had summoned him from his work. He was
quickly told. He listened, silent, but deeply interested, until the
story was finished. Then, without any excitement, he said, "Don't let
Tim know anything of this, younkers;" and, with a strange gleam in his
keen gray eyes, the old man added, "I've got a Winchester and a
revolver, and I keep 'em both loaded, and I've plenty of ammunition. I
think I'll have use for 'em purty soon."




CHAPTER VIII.

ON LAKE BENNET.


The men wrought steadily in felling trees, and by the close of the
second day had enough timber for their raft. It would have been much
preferable could they have constructed a good, stout boat; but it was
not feasible, though Jeff and Tim would have built it had they
possessed the necessary planking and boards. They had provided
themselves with oakum, pitch, and other material; but the labor of
sawing out the right kind of stuff would have taken weeks. The Irishman
had learned from his late experience; as a result of which a
double-decker, as it may be termed, was planned. This consisted first
of a substantial framework of buoyant pine logs, securely nailed
together, while upon that was reared another some two feet in height.
This upper framework was intended to bear their outfits, over which
were fastened rubber cloths. The Alaskan lakes are often swept by
terrific tempests, the waves sometimes dashing entirely over the rafts
and boats, and wetting everything that is not well protected. The upper
deck serves also partially to protect the men.

The boys spent a portion of the days in fishing. There was a notable
moderation in the weather, the snow and ice rapidly melting. Sitting or
standing on the bank, they cast out their lines, baited with bits of
meat, and met with pleasing success. Plump, luscious white-fish,
grayling, and lake trout were landed in such numbers that little or no
other solid food was eaten during their halt at the head of Lake
Bennet.

Work was pushed so vigorously that on the third day the goods were
carefully piled on the upper deck, secured in place, and with their
long poles they pushed out from the shore on the voyage of twenty-eight
miles to the foot of the sheet of water. They were provided with a
sturdy mast reared near the middle of the craft, but they did not erect
a sail, for the reason that the strong wind which was blowing was
almost directly from the north, and would have checked their progress.

The unwieldy structure was pushed along the eastern side, where the
poles were serviceable at all times. Each took his turn at the work,
the boys with the others, and the progress, if slow, was sure.

The first twelve miles of Lake Bennet are quite shallow, with a width
barely exceeding a half mile. Fifteen miles down occurs the junction
with the southwest arm, and the point had hardly come into sight when
Tim said:

"Now look out for trouble, for here's where we'll catch it sure."

All understood what he meant, for a wind was blowing down the arm with
such fierceness that it looked as if everything would be swept off the
raft. The prospect was so threatening that they ran inshore while yet
at a safe distance, and waited for the gale to subside.

"Is it likely to last long?" asked Roswell, when they had secured
shelter.

"That depinds how far off the end of the same may be," was the
unsatisfactory reply. "I've knowed men to be held here for days, but I
have hopes that we may get off in the coorse of two or three weeks."

The boys as well as Jeff could not believe that Tim was in earnest, for
his lightest words were often spoken with the gravest expression of
face; but their former experience taught them to be prepared for almost
any whim in the weather. They recalled those dismal days and nights
earlier on their journey, when they were storm-stayed, and they were
depressed at the thought that something of the nature might again
overtake them. When the boys proposed to put up the tent, the Irishman
said:

"It is early in the day; bide awhile before going to that trouble."

This remark convinced them that he was more hopeful of a release than
would be implied from his words; so they wrapped their heavy coats
closer and hoped for the best. The men lit their pipes, while the boys
huddled close together and had little to say. Unexpectedly there came
such a lull in the gale early in the afternoon that the voyage, to the
delight of all, was resumed.

Ike Hardman was in more genial spirits than at any time since he joined
the company. He showed an eagerness to help, declining to yield the
pole when Jeff offered to relieve him, and ventured now and then upon
some jest with Roswell and Frank. Their distrust, however, was not
lessened, and they were too honest to affect a liking that it was
impossible to feel. They had little to say to him, and noticing the
fact, he finally let them alone. Whatever misgiving Jeff may have felt
was skilfully concealed, and the fellow could have felt no suspicion
that his secret was suspected by any member of the company.

The wind blew so strongly that there was some misgiving; but observing
that it came from the right quarter, the sail was hoisted, and as the
canvas bellied outward, the raft caught the impulse and began moving
through the water at a rate that sent the ripples flying over the
square ends of the logs at the front. All sat down on the upper
framework, with the exception of Jeff, who stood, pole in hand, at the
bow, ready to guide the structure should it sheer in the wrong
direction.

The conformation of the shore and a slight change of wind carried the
raft farther out on the lake. Observing that it was getting slightly
askew, Jeff pushed the long pole downward until his hand almost touched
the surface of the water. While holding it there the other end bobbed
up, having failed to touch ground.

"No use," he said, facing his friends, who were watching him, "the
bottom may be half a mile below."

"That looks as if we're over our hids," said Tim; "by which token, if
this steamer blows up we've got to swim for our lives, and I never
larned to swim a stroke."

The boys looked at him wonderingly.

"How is it you did not learn?" asked Roswell.

"I've tried hundreds of times. I kept in the water till me toes begun
to have webs between 'em, but at the first stroke me hid went down and
me heels up. I can swim in that style," he added gravely, "but find the
same slightly inconvanient owing to the necissity of braithing now and
thin. I tried fur a long time to braithe through me toes, but niver
made much of a succiss of it."

"And I learned to swim in one day," remarked Frank; "strange that you
should have so much trouble."

"Undoubtedly that's because yer hid is so light, while me own brains
weigh me down; it's aisy to understand that."

"If we should have any mishap, Tim," said Frank, "you must remember to
hold fast to a piece of wood to help you float--a small bit is enough."

"I have a bitter plan than that."

"What is it?"

"Niver have anything to do wid the water."

"That would be certain safety if you could carry it out; but you can't
help it all times--such, for instance, as the present."

"And I'm thinking we shall have plinty of the same before we raich
Dawson."

"After we get to the foot of this lake, what comes next, Tim?"

"Caribou Crossing, which we pass through to Lake Tagish, which isn't
quite as big as is this one. I'm thinking," he added thoughtfully,
watching the rising anger of the waves, "that bime-by, whin we come
near land, we'll be going that fast that we'll skim over the snow like
a sled to the nixt lake."

Roswell pointed to the shore on their right, indicating a stake which
rose upright from the ground and stood close to the water.

"What is the meaning of that?" he asked.

"That," replied Tim, "marks the grave of some poor chap that died on
his way to the Klondike. Do ye obsarve that cairn of stones a bit
beyont?"

Each saw it.

"That marks anither grave; and ye may call to mind that we obsarved
more of the same along Lake Lindeman."

Such was the fact, though this was the first reference to them.

"And we shall hardly be out of sight of some of the same all the way to
the Klondike; and I'm thinking," was his truthful remark, "that
hundreds more will lay their bones down in these parts and niver see
their loved ones again."

It was a sad thought. In a few years improved routes, railway-tracks,
and houses for food and lodging will rob the Klondike region of its
terrors, but until then death must exact a heavy toll from the
gold-seekers crowding northward, without regard to season or the
simplest laws of prudence.

Roswell was standing on the upper deck, near a corner, when he
exclaimed excitedly:

"Oh, look there! Isn't it dreadful?"

[Illustration: "OH, LOOK THERE! ISN'T IT DREADFUL?"]

He was pointing out on the lake, and, following the direction of his
hand, all saw the answer to his question.




CHAPTER IX.

INTO BRITISH TERRITORY.


All hurried to the side of Roswell, who was pointing to a place a short
distance from the raft.

It was the body of a man that they saw, floating face upward. His
clothing was good, and the white features, partly hidden by a black
beard, must have been pleasing in life. The feet and hands, dangling at
the sides, were so low in the water that only when stirred by the waves
did they show, but the face rose and fell, sometimes above, and never
more than a few inches below, so that it was in view all the time.

The group silently viewed the scene. The body drifted nearer and nearer
and faintly touched the edge of the raft, as the wind carried it past.
Then it continued dipping, and gradually floated away in the gathering
gloom.

"We ought to give it burial," said Frank to Jeff, who shook his head.

"What's the use? We might tow it ashore, dig up a foot of the frozen
earth, and set a wooden cross or heap of stones to mark the grave, but
the lake is as good a burial-place as it could have."

"I wonder who he could have been," said Roswell thoughtfully. "Some
man, no doubt, who has come from his home in the States, thousands of
miles away, and started to search for gold. He may have left wife and
children behind, who will look longingly for his coming, but will never
see his face again."

"The world is full of such sad things," observed Tim McCabe, impressed,
like all, with the melancholy incident, and then he expressed the
thought that was in the mind of each: "There be five of us: will we all
see home again?"

There was no reply. Hardman had not spoken, and, as if the occasion was
too oppressive, he sauntered to another part of the raft, while the
rest gradually separated, each grave and saddened by what he had
witnessed.

It is well for us to turn aside from the hurly-burly of life and
reflect upon the solemn fact of the inevitable end that awaits us all.

But the long afternoon was drawing to a close, and the question to be
considered was whether the raft should be allowed to drift or land, or
they should continue forward, despite a certain degree of danger during
the darkness. All were eager to improve the time, and Jeff, as the head
of the expedition, said they would keep at it at least for a while
longer.

"As far as I can tell," he said, "there's no danger of running into
anything that'll wreck us, and we must use our sail while we can.
Besides," he added, after testing it, "the water is so deep that we
can't reach bottom, and there isn't much chance to help ourselves."

The wind which swept over the raft had risen almost to a gale, and
brought with it a few scurrying flakes of snow. There was a perceptible
fall in the temperature, and the chilly, penetrating air caused all to
shiver, despite their thick clothing.

Finally night closed in, and the raft was still drifting, the wind
carrying it four or five miles an hour. The night was so short that the
hope was general that the straightforward progress would continue until
sunrise, though Tim, who was better acquainted with the region,
expressed the belief that a storm of several days' duration had set in.

Since there was nothing to do, the men and boys disposed of themselves
as comfortably as possible on the lee side of the raft, beyond reach of
the waves, though the spray now and then dashed against their rubber
blankets which each had wrapped about his shoulders and body. After a
time Jeff took his station at the bow, though an almost imperceptible
change of wind caused the structure to drift partly sideways.

Roswell and Frank, who were seated back to back and in an easy
attitude, had sunk into a doze, when both were startled by a bump which
swung them partly over. They straightened up and looked around in the
gloom, wondering what it meant.

"We've struck shore," called Jeff, who was the only one on watch. "The
voyage is over for the time."

There was hurrying to and fro, as all perceived that he had spoken the
truth. The corner of the raft had impinged against some ice that was
piled on the beach. The gloom was too deep for any one to see more than
a few rods, so that Tim, who had traversed the sheet of water before,
was unable to guess where they were.

"Provided we've come over a straight coorse," said the Irishman, "we
can't be far from the fut of the lake."

"We'll know in the morning, which can't be far off," replied Jeff;
"we'll make ourselves as comfortable as we can until then."

Despite the wind, they managed to light several matches and examine
their watches. To their surprise, the night was nearly gone, and it was
decided not to attempt to put up their tent until daylight.
