As he spoke he drew the man's pistols, knife, and carbine, and handed
them to Quashy.

"There," he said, "you may find these useful."

Meanwhile the robber lay quietly on his back, glancing from one to
another of the party with looks of hatred that told clearly enough how
he would have acted had he been free.

Turning to him as he was about to remount and quit the scene, Pedro said
very sternly in Spanish--

"You and I have met before, friend, and you know my powers with the
rifle at long-range.  If you offer to rise from the spot where you now
lie until we have disappeared round that rocky point half a mile along
the road, you are a dead man.  After we have turned the point, you may
go where you will and do what you please.  I might point out that in
refraining from cutting your throat I am showing mercy which you don't
deserve--but it is useless to throw pearls to swine."

The man spoke no word of reply, though he did look a little surprised as
the party left him and rode away.

"Would it not have been safer to have bound his hands behind his back?"
asked Lawrence.

"No doubt it would, but he is secure enough for our purpose as he is.
If I had bound him as you suggest, he would have been almost certain to
perish, being quite unable to help himself.  As it is, he can use his
tied hands to some extent, and, by perseverance in sawing the lines
against sharp rocks, he will set himself free at last.  By that time,
however, we shall be beyond his reach."

From time to time they all glanced over their shoulders as they rode
along, but the bound man did not stir.  After they had passed beyond the
point of rock before referred to, Lawrence's curiosity prompted him to
turn back and peep round.

The bandit had already risen from the ground, and could be seen walking,
as quickly as circumstances permitted, up the track by which they had
just descended.

In a few minutes his tall figure was seen to pause for a brief space at
the summit of the pass.  Then it disappeared on the other side into the
gloomy recesses of the mountains.



CHAPTER FOUR.

IN WHICH QUASHY IS COMMUNICATIVE AND AN ENEMY IS TURNED INTO A FRIEND.

The pass which our travellers had just crossed merely led them over a
mountain chain which may be described as the Peruvian Cordillera.
Beyond it lay a fruitful valley of considerable extent, which terminated
at the base of the great range, or backbone, of the Andes.  Beyond this
again lay another valley of greater extent than the first, which was
bounded by a third range or cordillera of inferior height, the eastern
slopes of which descended on one hand in varying undulations to the
dense forests of equatorial Brazil, on the other, by easy gradations to
the level Pampas or plains which extend for hundreds of miles through
the lands of the Argentine Confederation to the Atlantic.

Two mountain passes, therefore, were still to be crossed, and Lawrence
Armstrong began to think that if things went on as they had begun a
pretty lively experience probably lay before them.

But in this he was mistaken, at least as regarded banditti, though in
some other respects the journey was not quite devoid of stirring
incidents--as we shall see.

We have said that the good-nature of the young Englishman induced him to
attempt conversation with the Indian girl, and at first Manuela appeared
to be amused, if not interested, by his unsuccessful efforts; but after
one of these futile attempts Pedro made some remarks to the girl in the
Indian tongue, and in a tone of remonstrance, which had the effect of
rendering her more silent and grave than before.  Lawrence, therefore,
finally ceased to address her, though his natural gallantry prompted him
to offer assistance when it seemed necessary, and to accost her with a
hearty good-night and good-morning each day.

As Pedro, in his capacity of guide, usually rode a few paces in advance,
and was frequently in a silent, abstracted mood, Lawrence was thus
thrown almost entirely on the negro for companionship.  Although the
young Englishman may not have estimated his company very highly, nothing
could have been more satisfactory to Quashy, who, with delight expressed
in every wrinkle and lineament of his black visage, fully availed
himself of his opportunities.

"O Massa Lawrie!" he exclaimed, at the close of one of their
conversations, "how I does lub to talk ob de ole times when me an' you
was play togidder!"

"Yes, it's very nice to recall old times," answered Lawrence, with a
half-suppressed yawn, for they had by that time gone over the old times
so often that the novelty had rather worn off.

"Yes, bery nice," repeated Quashy, with gleaming eyes, "when I tink ob
de ole fadder an' de ole mill an' de ole fun what me an' you carried
on--oh! my heart goes like to bu'st."

"Don't let it bu'st here, whatever you do, Quashy, for you'll need all
the heart you possess to carry you safely over these mountain passes."

Quashy opened his huge mouth, shut his eyes, and went off in a high
falsetto--his usual mode of laughing.  He always laughed at Lawrence's
little jokes, whether good or bad, insomuch that the youth finally
abstained from jesting as much as possible.

"I did not know," continued Lawrence, "that there were so many robbers
about.  Pedro tells me that the mountains are swarming with them just
now."

"Ho yis, massa, plenty ob rubbers eberywhar," said Quashy, with a nod,
"more nor 'nuff ob dem.  You see, massa, Chili an' Proo's a-fightin' wid
each oder jus' now.  What dey's fightin' about no mortial knows; an',
what's more, nobody cares.  I s'pose one say de oder's wrong an' de oder
say de one's say not right.  Bof say das a big lie so at it dey goes
hammer an' tongs to prove--ha! ha! to prove dey's bof right.  Oh my!"

Here the negro opened his cavernous jaws and gave vent to another
explosion of shrill laughter.

"What fools dey is!"

"Then you think it is only fools who fight, Quashy?"

"Ob coorse, massa.  Don' you see, if dey wasn't fools dey wouldn't
fight; 'cause fightin' can't prove nuffin', an' it can't do nuffin',
'cep' waste life an' money.  No doubt," added the negro, with a
meditative gaze at the ground, "when rubbers come at a feller he's boun'
to fight, for why? he can't help it; or when Red Injin savages--"

"Have a care, Quashy, what you say about Indians.  I've warned you once
already."

"O massa!" said the poor black, with a look of almost superhuman
penitence, "I beg your pard'n.  I's quite forgit to remimber.  I was
just agwine to say that there _is_ times when you _mus'_ fight.  But
isn't Chili Christ'n, an' isn't P'roo Christ'n?  I don' bleeve in
Christ'ns what cut each oder's t'roats to prove dey's right.  Howsever,
das noting.  What I's agwine to say is--dars a lot o' white livers on
bof sides, an' dese dey runs away, takes to de mountains and becomes
rubbers.  But dey's not all bad alike, dough none of em's good.  You's
heer'd ob Conrad ob de Mountains, massa?"

"Yes, Pedro mentioned his name.  He seems to be a celebrated bandit."

"Well, I's not sure.  Some peepil say he's not a rubber at all, but a
good sort o' feller as goes mad sometimes.  He's bery kind to women an'
child'n, but he's bery awrful."

"That's a strange character.  How do you know he's so very awful,
Quashy?"

"Because I seed 'im, massa."

"Indeed, where?"

"On de plains ob Proo, massa," replied the negro, with that
self-satisfied clearing of the throat which was usually the prelude to a
long story.

"Come now, Quashy," said Lawrence, with a laugh, "don't be too
long-winded, and don't exaggerate."

"Don't ex-what-gerate, massa?"

"Exaggerate."

"What's dat, massa?"

"Never mind, Quashy--go on."

With a genial and highly exaggerated smile, the negro proceeded:--

"Well, as I was agwine to say, I see dis man, Conrad ob de Mountains, on
de plains ob Proo.  I's in de Proo camp at de time, attendin' on you's
fadder, an' de army ob Chili was in front ob us on de slopes ob de
hills, agwine to go in for a fight wid us.  De sojers of Proo wasn't
bery keen for fightin'.  I could see dat, but their gin'ral screwed 'em
up to de pint, an' dey was all ready, when all of a sudden, we sees a
pris'ner brought in by four sojers.  Dey seem so 'fraid ob him dey
darn't touch him, tho' he was unarmed.  Two walked behind him, an' two
walked in front ob 'im, all wid dere baynets pintin' at 'im, ready to
skewer 'im all round if he was try to run.  But, poor chap, he walk wid
his head down, bery sad-like--nebber t'inkin' ob runnin'.  So dey druv'
'im up to our gin'ral.  I was in a crowd o' tall fellers, an' de
pris'ner had his back to me, so I not seed his face well.  `Das Conrad
ob de Mountains dey've cotched,' says a feller near me.  `Listen!'  We
all listen'd so quiet you could hear a 'skito sneeze.  `What's you'
name?' asks de gin'ral, ridin' close up to Conrad on his splendid
war-hoss--a child ob one ob de war-hosses as come ober wid Pizarro from
Spain.  `My name's Pumpkin,' answers de pris'ner.  `Das a lie!' says de
gin'ral.  `No's not,' says Conrad, lookin' up, as I could see by de back
ob his head.  `What side you b'longs to, raskil?'  `To no side,
gin'ral.'  `Whar you come fro'?'  `Fro' de mountains, gin'r'l.'  `Whar
you go to?'  `Ober de mountains, gin'ral.'  I could see by de way de
fedders in de gin'ral's hat shake dat he's gittin' in a wax at de cool
imprence ob de pris'ner, but he 'strain hisself, an' spoke sarkmustic.
`Senhor Pumpkin,' says he, `you are Conrad ob de Mountains,'--('cause he
guess who he was by dat time); `how you prepose to go ober de
mountains?'  `Dis way!' says Conrad, an', nixt momint, up goes de
gin'ral's leg, down goes his head an' fedders on de ground, and Conrad
sits in de saddle afore you can wink.  All round de baynets was charge,
but dey haul up jist in time not to skewer one anoder, for de horse
shotted out fro' between dem all, an' away straight to de Chili lines,
whar dere was a great cheerin', for dey t'ought it was a deserter.  When
Conrad came up, he trotted quietly troo de ranks, till he got near to
whar de Chili commander stood wid his hofficers, wonderin' who he was.
As he couldn't 'spec' to git no furder, he rides quietly up to a
hofficer, takes de sword out ob his hand afore he understand what he
wants, den, diggin' de spurs into de big war-hoss, off he goes wid a
yell like a Red Inj--oh!  I's mean like a--a buff'lo bull.  Out comes de
swords.  Dey close all round 'im.  I no see him by dat time.  He too fur
off; but a friend ob mine was near, an' he say dat Conrad swing de long
sword so quick, an' de sun was shinin' so clar, dat it look like a
circle ob fire all round him.  Down dey hoed on ebery side.  Off goed a
head here, an arm dere.  One trooper cut troo at de waist, an' fall'd
off, but de legs stick on.  Anoder splitted right down fro' de helmet,
so as one half fall on one side, an' de odour half fall--"

"Come now, Quashy," interrupted Lawrence, with a laugh, "you
exaggerate."

"What! you call _dat_ exaggerate, massa?  Den Conrad exaggerate about
ten more afore he cut his way troo an' 'scaped to de hills.  Oh, he's an
awrful man!"

"Truly he must be very awful, if all you relate of him be true," said
Lawrence; "and I sincerely trust that if we fall in with him we may find
him friendly.  Now, I shall ride forward, and ask Pedro if we are far
from our halting-place."

This abrupt change of subject was usually understood by the amiable
negro to mean that our hero--whom he persisted in regarding as his
master--had had enough of his conversation at that time, so he reined
back his mule, while Lawrence pushed forward.

To his question Pedro replied that he expected to reach the next
sleeping-place very soon.

"It will not be as luxurious as the last," he said; "but, doubtless, one
who has traversed the mountains of Scotland is prepared to rough it in
South America."

"You speak as if you were yourself somewhat acquainted with the Scottish
mountains."

"So I am, senhor," replied the guide.  "I had clambered up Ben Nevis
while I was yet a little boy."

"Surely you are not a Scot?" said Lawrence, with a quick glance.

"No, I am not a Scot, senhor.  To have travelled in a country does not
render one a native, else might I claim England, Ireland, and
Switzerland as my native lands.  See, yonder lies the little farm where
I hope to put up for the night."

He pointed as he spoke to the head of the glen or valley, which was
somewhat narrower and more gloomy than the vales through which they had
ridden in the earlier part of the day.  Since crossing the first
cordillera on the Pacific side of the Andes they had, indeed, traversed
a great variety of country.  In some places the land was rocky and
comparatively barren.  In others, where the peculiar form of the
mountains sheltered the table-lands, the country was fertile, and
numerous farms dotted the landscape, but as they ascended higher on the
main chain the farms became fewer, until they finally disappeared, and
an occasional hut, with a mere patch of cultivated ground, was all that
remained in the vast solitudes to tell of the presence of man.

It was to one of these huts that Pedro now directed his companion's
attention.

"A most suitable place for the abode of banditti," remarked Lawrence, as
they advanced up the winding path.

"And many a time do the bandits lodge there," returned Pedro.  "Of
course, robbers of the Andes do not go about with placards on their
backs announcing their profession to all the world, and, as long as they
behave themselves, farmers are bound to regard them as honest men."

"You said, if I heard rightly," observed Lawrence, "that you had
formerly met with the rascal whom we let off the other day."

"Yes, I know him well.  One of the worst men in the land.  I'm almost
sorry we did not shoot him, but I never could take human life in cold
blood, even when that life had been forfeited over and over again.
However, he's sure to get his deserts sooner or later."

"Then he is not Conrad of the Mountains whom you mentioned to me
lately?"

"No, Conrad is a very different stamp of man--though he has not too much
to boast of in the way of character if all that's said of him be true.
The man we let go is a gaucho of the Pampas named Cruz.  He delights in
war, and has fought in the armies of Chili, Peru, and the Argentine
Confederation without much regard to the cause of quarrel.  In fact,
wherever fighting is going on Cruz is sure to be there.  Lately he has
taken to the mountains, and now fights for his own hand."

"And the other poor fellow who went over the precipice," asked Lawrence,
"did you know him?"

"I knew him slightly.  Antonio is his name, I think, but he is a villain
of no note--an inferior bandit, though quite equal to his captain, no
doubt, in selfishness and cruelty."

On arriving at the hut or small farm at the head of the valley, they
found its owner, a burly, good-humoured Creole, alone with his mother,
an old woman whose shrivelled-up appearance suggested the idea of a
mummy partially thawed into life.  She was busy cooking over a small
fire, the smoke of which seemed congenial to her--judging from the
frequency with which she thrust her old head into it while inspecting
the contents of an iron pot.

There was plenty of room for them, the host said, with an air of
profound respect for Pedro, whom he saluted as an old acquaintance.  The
house had been full two days before, but the travellers had gone on, and
the only one who remained was a poor man who lay in an out-house very
sick.

"Who is he?" asked Pedro, as he assisted Manuela to alight.

"I know not, senhor," replied the host.  "He is a stranger, who tells me
he has been robbed.  I can well believe it, for he has been roughly
handled, and there are some well-known bandits in the neighbourhood.
His injuries would not have been so serious, however, if he had not
caught a fever from exposure."

"Indeed," returned the guide, who, however, seemed more interested in
unsaddling his mules than in listening to the account of the unfortunate
man, "was it near this that he fell in with the bandits?"

"No, senhor, it was far to the west.  The travellers who brought him on
said they found him almost insensible on the banks of a stream into
which he appeared to have fallen or been thrown."

Pedro glanced at Lawrence.

"Hear you that, senhor?"

"My Spanish only suffices to inform me that some one has been robbed and
injured."

Explaining fully what their host had said, Pedro advised Lawrence to
visit the stranger in his medical character.

"My friend is a doctor," he said, turning to the host, "take him to the
sick man; for myself, I will put up the mules and then assist the old
mother, for mountain air sharpens appetite."

In a rude, tumble-down hut close to the main building Lawrence found his
patient.  He lay stretched in a corner on a heap of straw in a state of
great exhaustion--apparently dying--and with several bandages about his
cut and bruised head and face.

The first glance told Lawrence that it was Antonio, the robber whom he
had tried to rescue, but he carefully concealed his knowledge, and,
bending over the man, addressed him as if he were a stranger.  The start
and look of surprise mingled with alarm on the robber's face told that
he had recognised Lawrence, but he also laid restraint on himself, and
drew one of the bandages lower down on his eyes.

Feeling his pulse, Lawrence asked him about his food.

He got little, he said, and that little was not good; the people of the
farm seemed to grudge it.

"My poor man," said Lawrence in his bad Spanish, "they are starving you
to death.  But I'll see to that."

He rose and went out quickly.  Returning with a basin of soup, he
