deck into the cabin.  A ship is just like a large house, divided into a
number of rooms--some of which are sitting rooms, some store and
provision rooms, some kitchens and pantries, closets and cupboards; and
there are two or three flats in some ships, so that you can go up or
down stairs at your pleasure.  When Davy went down the ladder or stair,
which is called the "companion," and followed the steward through many
rooms full of all kinds of things that seemed to be all in confusion,
and saw the sailors sitting, and smoking, and laughing, and talking on
chests and tables, he almost believed that he was in a house on shore;
but then he remembered that houses on shore don't dance about and roll,
first on one side and then on the other, and plunge forwards and then
backwards; so he sighed and put his hands to his breast, which felt very
uncomfortable.

"Here's your hammock," said the steward; "all the sailors sleep in these
things, and this one is yours."  So saying, he lifted Davy from the
ground and tossed him into bed.  The "hammock" is a long piece of canvas
drawn in round an iron ring at each end.  To this ring a number of cords
are attached, and the hammock is slung by them to the beams of the ship.
In the bed thus formed the blankets are put; and a very snug bed it is,
as it swings about with the ship.  Davy soon fell asleep, but he was
quickly wakened again by the horrible noises on deck.  Ropes were thrown
about, men's feet were stamping, pieces of wood were falling, doors were
banging, masts were creaking, the wind was howling; in short, Davy
thought it must be a terrible storm and that they should all be lost.
But the steward said to him, in passing, "It's only a stiff breeze,
youngster;" so he turned round and went to sleep again.  For two days
and two nights did Davy lie there--very sick!  On the morning of the
third day he awoke much refreshed, and felt strongly inclined to eat his
blankets!  As he lay wondering how he was to get down out of his hammock
without breaking his neck, he heard his friend Ben Block conversing with
a man in another hammock who had never been to sea before and was very,
very sick.

"Oh! dear me," sighed the sick man, "where are we now?"

"Don't know," answered Ben; "we've been drove pretty far out of our
course to the nor'ard, I guess.  It's a dead calm."

"A dead what?" said the sick man faintly.

"Why, a dead calm," replied Ben.  "When there's no wind it's a calm, and
when there's no motion at all, either in the air or in the water, except
the swell o' the sea, it's a dead calm.  D'ye understand?"

"Is it fine weather, Ben?" cried Davy cheerfully.

"Yes, lad, it is," replied the sailor.

On hearing this Davy sprang, or, as the sailors call it, tumbled out of
bed.  He tried to get out of it; but not being used to hammocks, he was
awkward and fell plump on the floor!  However, he was not hurt; and
throwing on his jacket, he ran up on deck.

Well might Davy's heart leap and his voice shout at the beautiful sight
that met his gaze when he reached the forecastle.  The sea was like one
wide beautiful mirror, in which all the clouds were clearly reflected.
The sun shone brightly and glittered on the swell on which the ship
rolled slowly; and the only sound that could be heard was the gentle
flapping of the loose sails, now and then, against the masts.

"Have you had breakfast, youngster?" inquired the captain of the ship,
laying his hand on Davy's head.

"No, sir, not yet," answered the boy.

"Run below, then, and get it, and after you've done come to me.  We must
put you to work now, lad, and make a sailor of you."

The steward soon gave Davy as much food as he could eat; then he sprang
up the companion ladder, and, running to the poop where the captain was,
touched his cap, saying--

"I'm ready, sir."

"Very good, my lad," said the captain, sitting down on the skylight, or
window on the deck, which gives light to the cabin below.  "Do you see
that little thing on top of the mainmast like a button?"

"Do you mean the truck?" said Davy.

"Oh, you know its name, do you? well, do you think you could climb up to
it?"

"I'll try," cried Davy, springing towards the mast.

"Stay!" shouted the captain; "not so fast, boy.  You'd tumble down and
break your neck if you tried to climb to the truck the first time you
ever went up the mast.  But you may go to the `maintop.'  That's where
you see the lower mast joined to the top mast.  Climb up by those rope
ladders--the `shrouds,' we call them."  Away went Davy, and was soon
halfway up the shrouds; but he went too fast, and had to stop for
breath.  Then he came to the mass of woodwork and ropes at the head of
the lower mast.  Here he had great difficulty in getting on; but, being
a fearless boy, he soon succeeded.  The captain then called to him to go
out to the end of the "yardarm."

Yards are the huge cross beams fastened to the masts to which the sails
are fixed.  The "main-yard" is the largest.  The mainsail is attached to
it.

Davy soon crept out nearly to the end, but when he got there the yard
