
The Arab hesitated, looked somewhat perplexed, and said something in
Portuguese to Marizano, who pointed to the slave-girl, and spoke with
considerable vehemence.

Lindsay did not understand what was said, but, conjecturing that the
half-caste was proposing that Azinte should remain with him, he
said:--"The girl must return with you--if you would not incur the
Governor's displeasure."

Marizano, on having this explained to him, looked with much ferocity at
the lieutenant and spoke to Yoosoof in wrathful tones, but the latter
shook his head, and the former, who disliked Marizano's appearance
excessively, took not the least notice of him.

"I do go," said Yoosoof, turning back.  Motioning to Azinte to follow,
he retraced his steps with the lieutenant and the slave--while Marizano
strode into the town in a towering rage.

We need scarcely say that Maraquita, having got possession of Azinte,
did not find it impossible to persuade her father to purchase her, and
that Yoosoof, although sorry to disappoint Marizano, who was an
important ally and assistant in the slave-trade, did not see his way to
thwart the wishes of the Governor, whose power to interfere with his
trade was very great indeed, and to whom he was under the necessity of
paying head-money for every slave that was exported by him from that
part of the coast.

Soon after Azinte had been thus happily rescued from the clutches of two
of the greatest villains on the East African coast--where villains of
the deepest dye are by no means uncommon--Lindsay met Captain Romer of
the `Firefly' on the beach, with his first lieutenant Mr Small, who, by
the way, happened to be one of the largest men in his ship.  The three
officers had been invited to dine that day with the Governor, and as
there seemed no particular occasion for their putting to sea that night,
and a fresh supply of water had to be taken on board, the invitation had
been accepted, all the more readily, too, that Captain Romer thought it
afforded an opportunity for obtaining further information as to the
movements of certain notorious slavers who were said to be thereabouts
at that time.  Lieutenant Lindsay had been sent ashore at an earlier
part of the day, accompanied by one of the sailors who understood
Portuguese, and who, being a remarkably intelligent man, might, it was
thought, acquire some useful information from some of the people of the
town.

"Well, Mr Lindsay, has Jackson been of any use to you?" inquired the
captain.

"Not yet," replied the lieutenant; "at least I know not what he may have
done, not having met him since we parted on landing; but I have myself
been so fortunate as to rescue a slave-girl under somewhat peculiar
circumstances."

"Truly, a most romantic and gallant affair," said the captain, laughing,
when Lindsay had related the incident, "and worthy of being mentioned in
despatches; but I suspect, considering the part that the Senhorina
Maraquita played in it and the fact that you only rescued the girl from
one slaveholder in order to hand her over to another, the less that is
said about the subject the better!--But here comes Jackson.  Perhaps he
may have learned something about the scoundrels we are in search of."

The seaman referred to approached and touched his cap.

"What news?" demanded the captain, who knew by the twinkle in Jack's eye
that he had something interesting to report.

"I've diskivered all about it sir," replied the man, with an
ill-suppressed chuckle.

"Indeed! come this way.  Now, let's hear what you have to tell," said
the captain, when at a sufficient distance from his boat to render the
conversation quite private.

"Well, sir," began Jackson, "w'en I got up into the town, arter leavin'
Mr Lindsay, who should I meet but a man as had bin a messmate o' mine
aboard of that there Portuguese ship w'ere I picked up a smatterin' o'
the lingo?  Of course we hailed each other and hove-to for a spell, and
then we made sail for a grog-shop, where we spliced the main-brace.
After a deal o' tackin' and beatin' about, which enabled me to find out
that he'd left the sea an' taken to business on his own account, which
in them parts seems to mean loafin' about doin' little or nothin', I
went slap into the subject that was uppermost in my mind, and says I to
him, says I, they does a deal o' slavin' on this here coast, it
appears--Black Ivory is a profitable trade, ain't it?  W'y, sir, you
should have seen the way he grinned and winked, and opened out on
'em.--`Black Ivory!' says he, `w'y, Jackson, there's more slaves
exported from these here parts annooally than would fill a good-sized
city.  I could tell you--but,' says he, pullin' up sudden, `you won't
split on me, messmate?'  `Honour bright,' says I, `if ye don't call
tellin' my captain splittin'.'  `Oh no,' says he, with a laugh, `it's
little I care what _he_ knows, or does to the pirates--for that's their
true name, and murderers to boot--but don't let it come to the
Governor's ears, else I'm a ruined man.'  I says I wouldn't and then he
goes on to tell me all sorts of hanecdots about their doin's--that they
does it with the full consent of the Governor, who gets head-money for
every slave exported; that nearly all the Governors on the coast are
birds of the same feather, and that the Governor-General himself, [See
Consul McLeod's _Travels in Eastern Africa_, volume one page 306.] at
Mozambique, winks at it and makes the subordinate Governors pay him
tribute.  Then he goes on to tell me more about the Governor of this
here town, an' says that, though a kind-hearted man in the main, and
very good to his domestic slaves, he encourages the export trade,
because it brings him in a splendid revenue, which he has much need of,
poor man, for like most, if not all, of the Governors on the coast, he
do receive nothin' like a respectible salary from the Portuguese
Government at home, and has to make it up by slave-tradin'."  [See
McLeod's _Travels_, volume one page 293.]

It must be explained here that British cruisers were, and still are,
kept on the east coast of Africa, for the purpose of crushing only the
_export_ slave-trade.  They claim no right to interfere with "domestic
slavery," an institution which is still legal in the dominions of the
Sultan of Zanzibar and in the so-called colonies of Portugal on that
coast.

"But that is not the best of it, sir," continued Jackson, with a
respectful smile, "after we'd had our jaw out I goes off along the road
by the beach to think a bit what I'd best do, an' have a smoke--for
that's wot usually sets my brain to work full-swing.  Bein' hot I lay
down in the lee of a bush to excogitate.  You see, sir, my old messmate
told me that there are two men here, the worst characters he ever
know'd--ashore or afloat.  One they calls Yoosoof--an Arab he is; the
other Marizano--he's a slave-catcher, and an outlaw just now, havin'
taken up arms and rebelled against the Portuguese authorities.
Nevertheless these two men are secretly hand and glove with the Governor
here, and at this moment there are said to be a lot o' slaves ready for
shipment and only waitin' till the `Firefly' is out of the way.  More
than this my friend could not tell, so that's w'y I went to
excogitate.--I beg parding, sir, for being so long wi' my yarn, but I
ain't got the knack o' cuttin' it short, sir, that's w'ere it is."

"Never mind, lad; go on to the end of it," replied the captain.  "Did
you excogitate anything more?"

"I can't say as I did, sir, but it was cooriously enough excogitated
_for_ me.  W'en I was lying there looking through the bush at the bay, I
sees two men comin' along, arm in arm.  One of 'em was an Arab.  W'en
they was near I saw the Arab start; I thought he'd seen me, and didn't
like me.  No more did I like him or his comrade.  However, I was wrong,
for after whisperin' somethin' very earnest-like to his friend, who
laughed very much; but said nothin', they came and sat down not far from
the bush where I lay.  Now, thinks I, it ain't pleasant to be an
eavesdropper, but as I'm here to find out the secrets of villains, and
as these two look uncommon like villains, I'll wait a bit; if they
broach business as don't consarn me or her Majesty the Queen, I'll
sneeze an' let 'em know I'm here, before they're properly under weigh;
but if they speaks of wot I wants to know, I'll keep quiet.  Well, sir,
to my surprise, the Arab--he speaks in bad English, whereby I came to
suppose the other was an Englishman, but, if he is, the climate must
have spoiled him badly, for I never did see such a ruffian to look at.
But he only laughed, and didn't speak, so I couldn't be sure.  Well, to
come to the pint, sir, the Arab said he'd got hold of two shipwrecked
Englishmen, whom he meant to put on board of his dhow, at that time
lyin' up a river not three miles off, and full of slaves, take 'em off
the coast, seize 'em when asleep, and heave 'em overboard; the reason
bein' that he was afraid, if they was left ashore here, they'd discover
the town, which they are ignorant of at present, and give the alarm to
our ship, sir, an' so prevent him gettin' clear off, which he means to
attempt about midnight just after the moon goes down."

This unexpected information was very gratifying to Captain Romer, who
immediately gave orders to get steam up and have everything in readiness
to start the moment he should make his appearance on board, at the same
time enjoining absolute silence on his lieutenants and Jackson, who all
returned to the `Firefly,' chuckling inwardly.

If they had known that the Arab's information, though partly true, was a
_ruse_; that Jackson had indeed been observed by the keen-eyed Oriental,
who had thereupon sat down purposely within earshot, and after a
whispered hint to his companion, gave forth such information as would be
likely to lead the British cruiser into his snares--speaking in bad
English, under the natural impression that the sailor did not understand
Portuguese, to the immense amusement of Marizano, who understood the
_ruse_, though he did not understand a single word of what his companion
said--had they known all this, we say, it is probable that they would
have chuckled less, and--but why indulge in probabilities when facts are
before us?  The sequel will show that the best-laid plans may fail.



CHAPTER THREE.

RELATES THE FURTHER ADVENTURES OF HAROLD AND DISCO, AND LIFTS THE
CURTAIN A LITTLE HIGHER IN REGARD TO THE SLAVE-TRADE.

So Captain Romer and his lieutenants went to dine with the worthy
Governor Senhor Francisco Alfonso Toledo Bignoso Letotti, while Yoosoof
returned to the creek to carry out his deep-laid plans.

In regard to the dinner, let it suffice to observe that it was good, and
that the Governor was urbane, hospitable, communicative, and every way
agreeable.  It is probable that if he had been trained in another sphere
and in different circumstances he might have been a better man.  As
things stood, he was unquestionably a pleasant one, and Captain Romer
found it hard to believe that he was an underhand schemer.

Nothing could exceed the open way in which Senhor Letotti condemned the
slave-trade, praised the English for their zeal in attempting to
suppress it, explained that the King of Portugal and the Sultan of
Zanzibar were equally anxious for its total extinction, and assured his
guests that he would do everything that lay in his power to further
their efforts to capture the guilty kidnappers, and to free the poor
slaves!

"But, my dear sir," said he, at the conclusion of an emphatic
declaration of sympathy, "the thing is exceedingly difficult.  You are
aware that Arab traders swarm upon the coast, that they are reckless
men, who possess boats and money in abundance, that the trade is very
profitable, and that, being to some extent real traders in ivory,
palm-oil, indigo, and other kinds of native produce, these men have many
_ruses_ and methods--what you English call dodges--whereby they can
deceive even the most sharp-sighted and energetic.  The Arabs are smart
smugglers of negroes--very much as your people who live in the Scottish
land are smart smugglers of the dew of the mountain--what your great
poet Burns speaks much of--I forget its name--it is not easy to put them
down."

After dinner, Senhor Letotti led the officers into his garden, and
showed them his fruit-trees and offices, also his domestic slaves, who
looked healthy, well cared for, and really in some degree happy.

He did not, however, tell his guests that being naturally a humane man,
his slaves were better treated than any other slaves in the town.  He
did not remind them that, being slaves, they were his property, his
goods and chattels, and that he possessed the right and the power to
flay them alive if so disposed.  He did not explain that many in the
town _were_ so disposed; that cruelty grows and feeds upon itself; that
there were ladies and gentlemen there who flogged their slaves--men,
women, and children--nearly to the death; that one gentleman of an
irascible disposition, when irritated by some slight oversight on the
part of the unfortunate boy who acted as his valet, could find no relief
to his feelings until he had welted him first into a condition of
unutterable terror, and then into a state of insensibility.  Neither did
he inform them that a certain lady in the town, who seemed at most times
to be possessed of a reasonably quiet spirit, was roused once to such a
degree by a female slave that she caused her to be forcibly held, thrust
a boiling hot egg into her mouth, skewered her lips together with a
sail-needle, and then striking her cheeks, burst the egg, and let the
scalding contents run down her throat.  [See Consul McLeod's _Travels_,
volume two page 32.]

No, nothing of all this did the amiable Governor Letotti so much as hint
at.  He would not for the world have shocked the sensibilities of his
guests by the recital of such cruelties.  To say truth, the worthy man
himself did not like to speak or think of them.  In this respect he
resembled a certain class among ourselves, who, rather than submit to a
little probing of their feelings for a few minutes, would prefer to miss
the chance of making an intelligently indignant protest against slavery,
and would allow the bodies and souls of their fellow-men to continue
writhing in agony through all time.

It was much more gratifying to the feelings of Senhor Letotti to convey
his guests to the drawing-room, and there gratify their palates with
excellent coffee, while the graceful, and now clothed, Azinte brought a
Spanish guitar to the Senhorina Maraquita, whose sweet voice soon
charmed away all thoughts of the cruel side of slavery.  But duty ere
long stepped in to call the guests to other scenes.

"What a sweet girl the Senhorina is!" remarked Captain Romer, while on
his way to the beach.

"Ay, and what a pretty girl Azinte is, black though she be," observed
Lieutenant Small.

"Call her not black; she is brown--a brunette," said the captain.

"I wonder how _we_ should feel," said Lindsay, "if the tables were
turned, and _our_ women and children, with our stoutest young men, were
forcibly taken from us by thousands every year, and imported into Africa
to grind the corn and hoe the fields of the black man.  Poor Azinte!"

"Do you know anything of her history?" inquired Mr Small.

"A little.  I had some conversation in French with the Senhorina just
before we left--"

"Yes, I observed that," interrupted the captain, with a quiet smile.

"And," continued Lindsay, "she told me that she had discovered, through
an interpreter, that the poor girl is married, and that her home is far
away in the interior.  She was caught, with many others, while out
working in the fields one day several months ago, by a party of
slave-traders, under an Arab named Yoosoof and carried off.  Her husband
was absent at the time; her infant boy was with its grandmother in their
village, and she thinks may have escaped into the woods, but she has not
seen any of them again since the day of her capture."

"It is a sad case," said the captain, "and yet bad though it be, it
might be far worse, for Azinte's master and mistress are very kind,
which is more than can be said of most slave-owners in this region."

In a few minutes the captain's gig was alongside the "Firefly," and soon
afterwards that vessel quietly put to sea.  Of course it was impossible
that she should depart unobserved, but her commander took the precaution
to run due south at first, exactly opposite to the direction of his true
course, intending to make a wide sweep out to sea, and thus get
unobserved to the northward of the place where the slaver's dhow was
supposed to be lying, in time to intercept it.

Yoosoof, from a neighbouring height watched the manoeuvre, and
thoroughly understood it.  When the vessel had disappeared into the
shades of night that brooded over the sea, he smiled calmly, and in a
placid frame of mind betook himself to his lair in the creek beside the
mangrove trees.

He found Harold Seadrift and Disco Lillihammer in the hut, somewhat
impatient of his prolonged absence, and a dozen of his men looking
rather suspiciously at the strangers.

"Is all ready, Moosa?" he inquired of a powerful man, half-Portuguese,
half-negro in appearance, who met him outside the door of the hut.

"All ready," replied the half-caste, in a gruff tone of voice, "but what
are you going to do with these English brutes?"

"Take them with us, of course," replied Yoosoof.

"For what end?"

"For our own safety.  Why, don't you see, Moosa, that if we had set them
free, they might have discovered the town and given information to the
cruiser about us, which would have been awkward?  We might now, indeed,
set them free, for the cruiser is gone, but I still have good reason for
wishing to take them with me.  They think that we have but _one_ boat in
this creek, and I should like to make use of them for the purpose of
propagating that false idea.  I have had the good luck while in the town
to find an opportunity of giving one of the sailors of the cruiser a
little information as to my movements--some of it true, some of it
false--which will perhaps do us a service."

The Arab smiled slightly as he said this.

"Do these men know our trade?" asked Moosa.

"I think they suspect it," answered Yoosoof.

"And what if they be not willing to go with us?" demanded Moosa.

"Can twelve men not manage two?" asked the Arab.  Dark though the night
had become by that time, there was sufficient light to gleam on the
teeth that Moosa exposed on receiving this reply.

"Now, Moosa, we must be prompt," continued Yoosoof; "let some of you get
round behind the Englishmen, and have the slave-chains handy.  Keep your
eye on me while I talk with them; if they are refractory, a nod shall be
the signal."

Entering the hut Yoosoof informed Harold that it was now time to set
sail.

"Good, we are ready," said Harold, rising, "but tell me one thing before
