
While this terrible fight for dear life was going on, the lifeboat-men
were not idle.  They ran out their good boat, the Constance, and
launched her.  And what a fearful launching that was!  This boat
belonged to the Institution, and her crew were justly proud of her.

According to the account given by her gallant coxswain, James Gilbert,
they could see nothing whatever at the time of starting but the white
flash of the seas as they passed over boat and crew, without
intermission, twelve or thirteen times.  Yet, as quickly as the boat was
filled, she emptied herself through her discharging-tubes.  Of these
tubes I shall treat hereafter.  Gilbert could not even see his own men,
except the second coxswain, who, I presume, was close to him.  Sometimes
the boat was "driven to an angle of forty or forty-five degrees in
clearing the rocks."  When they were in a position to make for the
steamer, the order was given to "back all oars and keep her end-on to
the sea."  The men obeyed; they seemed to be inspired with fresh vigour
as they neared the wreck.  Let Gilbert himself tell the rest of the
story as follows.

"When abreast of the port bow, two men told us they had a rope ready on
the starboard bow.  We said we would be there in a moment.  I then
ordered the bow-man to be ready to receive the rope.  As soon as we were
ready we made two dashing strokes, and were under the bowsprit,
expecting to receive the rope, when we heard a dreadful noise, and the
next instant the sea fell over the bows of the Stanley, and buried the
lifeboat.  Every oar was broken at the gunwale of the boat, and the
outer ends were swept away.  The men made a grasp for the spare oars.
Three were gone; two only remained.  We were then left with the rudder
and two oars.  The next sea struck the boat almost over end on board the
Friendship, the boat at the time being nearly perpendicular.  We then
had the misfortune to lose four of our crew.  As the boat made a most
fearful crash, and fell alongside the vessel, James Grant was, I
believe, killed on the spot, betwixt the ship and the boat; Edmund
Robson and James Blackburn were thrown out, Joseph Bell jumped as the
boat fell.  My own impression is that the men all jumped from the boat
on to the vessel.  We saw them no more.  There were four men standing in
a group before the mainmast of the schooner.  We implored them to come
into the boat, but no one answered."

Little wonder at that, James Gilbert!  The massive wreck must have
seemed--at least to men who did not know the qualities of a lifeboat--a
surer foothold than the tossed cockleshell with "only two oars and a
rudder," out of which four of her own gallant crew had just been lost.
Even landsmen can perceive that it must have required much faith to
trust a lifeboat in the circumstances.

"The next sea that struck the lifeboat," continues the coxswain, "landed
her within six feet of the foundation-stone of Tynemouth Dock, with a
quickness seldom witnessed.  The crew plied the remaining two oars to
leeward against the rudder and boathook.  We never saw anything till
coming near the three Shields lifeboats.  We asked them for oars to
proceed back to the Friendship, but they had none to spare."

Thus the brave Constance was baffled, and had to retire, severely
wounded, from the fight.  She drove, in her disabled and unmanageable
condition, into the harbour.  Of the four men thrown out of her, Grant
and Robson, who had found temporary refuge in the wrecked schooner,
perished.  The other two, Bell and Blackburn, were buoyed up by their
cork lifebelts, washed ashore, and saved.  The schooner itself was
afterwards destroyed, and her crew of four men and a boy were lost.

Meanwhile the screams of those on board of her and the Stanley were
borne on the gale to the vast crowds who, despite darkness and tempest,
lined the neighbouring cliffs, and the Shields lifeboats just referred
to made gallant attempts to approach the wrecks, but failed.  Indeed, it
seemed to have been a rash attempt on the part of the noble fellows of
the Constance to have made the venture at all.

The second cabin of the Stanley was on deck, and formed the bridge, or
outlook.  On this a number of the passengers and crew had taken refuge,
but a tremendous sea carried it, and all its occupants, bodily away.
After this the fury of the sea increased, and about an hour before
midnight the steamer, with a hideous crash, broke in two amidships.  The
after part remained fast; the fore part swung round.  All the people who
remained on the after part were swept away and drowned.  The new
position into which the fore part of the wreck had been forced was so
far an advantage to those who still clung to it, that the bows broke the
first violence of the waves, and thus partially protected the exhausted
people, thirty-five of whom still remained alive out of the sixty souls
originally on board.  Ten of these were passengers--two being ladies.

Meanwhile fresh preparations were being made by the rocket-men.
Messengers had been sent in hot haste to Cullercoats for more rockets,
those at Tynemouth having been exhausted.  They arrived at five o'clock
in the morning.  By that time the tide had fallen considerably,
admitting of a nearer approach to the wreck, and once more a gleam of
hope cheered the hearts of the perishing as they beheld the fiery
messenger of mercy rush fiercely towards them from the shore.  But hope
was still delayed.  Four of the rockets missed.  The fifth passed right
over them, dropping the lifeline on the wreck, and drawing from the poor
sufferers a feeble cheer, which was replied to lustily from the shore.
This time, fortunately, no mistakes were made by those on board.  The
blocks and tackle were drawn out, the hawser on which the sling-lifebuoy
traversed was fastened high up on the foremast to prevent the ropes
fouling the rocks, as they had done on the first attempt; then the
lifebuoy was run out, and, eventually, every soul was drawn in safety to
the shore.

Thus did that battle end, with much of disaster and death to regret,
indeed, but with upwards of thirty-five rescued lives to rejoice over.

I have now shown the action and bearing of our coast heroes, both in
circumstances of triumphant victory and of partial success.  Before
proceeding to other matters it is well to add that, when intelligence of
this disaster was telegraphed to the Lifeboat Institution, a new
lifeboat was immediately forwarded to Tynemouth, temporarily to replace
the damaged Constance.  Instructions were given for the relief of the
widows and children of the two lifeboat-men who had perished, and 26
pounds was sent to the crew of the boat.  At their next meeting the
committee of the Institution, besides recording their deep regret for
the melancholy loss of life, voted 100 pounds in aid of a fund raised
locally for the widows and seven children of the two men.  They likewise
bestowed their silver medal and a vote of thanks, inscribed on vellum,
to Mr Lawrence Byrne, of the coastguard, in testimony of his gallant
services on the occasion.  Contributions were also raised by a local
committee for the relief of the sufferers by these disasters, and a
Volunteer Corps was formed to assist in working the rocket apparatus on
future occasions of shipwreck.

Let me at this point earnestly request the reader who dwells in an
_inland_ home, and who never hears the roaring of the terrible sea,
carefully to note that in this case it was _men of the coast_ who did
the work, and _people of the coast town_ who gave subscriptions, who
sympathised with sufferers, and raised a Volunteer Corps.  Ponder this
well, good reader, and ask yourself the question, "Is all as it should
be here?  Have I and my fellow-inlanders nothing to do but read, admire,
and say, Well done?"  A hint is sufficient at this point.  I will return
to the subject hereafter.

Sometimes our gallant lifeboat-men when called into action go through a
very different and not very comfortable experience.  They neither gain a
glorious victory nor achieve a partial success, but, after all their
efforts, risks, and exposure, find that their services are not required,
and that they must return meekly home with nothing to reward them but an
approving conscience!

One such incident I once had the opportunity of observing.  I was living
at the time--for purposes of investigation, and by special permission--
on board of the Gull Lightship, which lies directly off Ramsgate
Harbour, close to the Goodwin Sands.  It was in the month of March.
During the greater part of my two weeks' sojourn in that lightship the
weather was reasonably fine, but one evening it came on to blow hard,
and became what Jack styles "dirty."  I went to rest that night in a
condition which may be described as semi-sea-sick.  For some time I lay
in my bunk moralising on the madness of those who choose the sea for a
profession.  Suddenly I was roused--and the seasickness instantly
cured--by the watch on deck shouting down the hatchway to the mate,
"South Sand Head Light is firing, sir, and sending up rockets!"

The mate sprang from his bunk--just opposite to mine--and was on the
cabin floor before the sentence was well finished.  Thrusting the poker
with violence into the cabin fire, he rushed on deck.  I jumped up and
pulled on coat, nether garments, and shoes, as if my life depended on my
speed, wondering the while at the poker incident.  There was unusual
need for clothing, for the night was bitterly cold.

On gaining the deck I found the two men on duty actively at work, one
loading the lee gun, the other fitting a rocket to its stick.  A few
hurried questions by the mate elicited all that it was needful to know.
The flash of a gun from the South Sand Head Lightship, about six miles
distant, had been seen, followed by a rocket, indicating that a vessel
had got upon the fatal sands in her vicinity.  While the men were
speaking I saw the flash of another gun, but heard no report, owing to
the gale carrying the sound to leeward.  A rocket followed, and at the
same moment we observed the distress signal of the vessel in danger
flaring on the southern tail of the sands, but very faintly; it was so
far away, and the night so thick.

By this time our gun was charged and the rocket in position.

"Look alive, Jack; fetch the poker!" cried the mate, as he primed the
gun.

I was enlightened as to the poker!  Jack dived down the hatchway and
next moment returned with that instrument red-hot.  He applied it in
quick succession to gun and rocket.  A grand flash and crash from the
first was followed by a blinding blaze and a whiz as the second sprang
with a magnificent curve far away into surrounding darkness.  This was
our answer to the South Sand Head Lightship.  It was, at the same time,
our signal-call to the lookout on the pier of Ramsgate Harbour.

"That's a beauty!" said our mate, referring to the rocket.  "Get up
another, Jack.  Sponge her well out, Jacobs; we'll give 'em another shot
in a few minutes."

Loud and clear were both our signals, but four and a half miles of
distance and a fresh gale neutralised their influence on that dark and
dismal night.  The lookout did not see them.  In a few minutes the gun
and rocket were fired again.  Still no answering signal came from
Ramsgate.

"Load the weather gun!" said the mate.

Jacobs obeyed, and I sought shelter under the lee of the weather
bulwarks, for the wind seemed to be made of pen-knives and needles!  The
sturdy Gull straining and plunging wildly at her huge cables, trembled
as our third gun thundered forth its summons, but the rocket struck the
rigging and made a low, wavering flight.  Another was therefore sent up,
but it had scarcely cut its bright line across the sky when we observed
the answering signal--a rocket from Ramsgate pier.

"That's all right now, sir; _our_ work is done," said the mate to me, as
he went below and quietly turned in, while the watch, having sponged out
and re-covered the gun, resumed their active perambulations of the deck.

I confess that I felt somewhat disappointed at the sudden termination of
the noise and excitement.  I was told that the Ramsgate lifeboat could
not well be out in less than an hour.  There was nothing for it,
therefore, but patience, so I turned in, "all standing," as sailors have
it, with a request that I should be called when the lights of the tug
should come in sight.  Scarcely had I lain down, however, when the voice
of the watch was heard shouting hastily, "Lifeboat close alongside, sir!
Didn't see it till this moment.  She carries no lights."

Out I bounced, minus hat, coat, and shoes, and scrambled on deck just in
time to see a boat close under our stern, rendered spectrally visible by
the light of our lantern.  It was not the Ramsgate but the Broadstairs
lifeboat, the men of which had observed our first rocket, had launched
their boat at once, and had run down with the favouring gale.

"What are you firing for?" shouted the coxswain of the boat.

"Ship on the sands bearing south," replied Jack, at the full pitch of
his stentorian voice.

The boat which was under sail, did not pause, and nothing more was said.
With a magnificent rush it passed us, and shot away into the darkness.
Our reply had been heard, and the lifeboat, steering by compass, went
straight as an arrow to the rescue.

It was a thrilling experience to me!  Spectral as a vision though it
seemed, and brief almost as the lightning flash, its visit was the
_real_ thing at last.  Many a time had I heard and read of our
lifeboats, and had seen them reposing in their boat-houses, as well as
out "for exercise," but now I had _seen_ a lifeboat tearing before the
gale through the tormented sea, sternly bent on the real work of saving
human life.

Once again all became silent and unexciting on board the Gull, and I
went shivering below with exalted notions of the courage, endurance, and
businesslike vigour of our coast heroes.  I now lay wakeful and
expectant.  Presently the shout came again.

"Tug's in sight, sir!"

And once more I went on deck with the mate.

The steamer was quickly alongside, heaving wildly in the sea, with the
Ramsgate lifeboat "Bradford" in tow far astern.  She merely slowed a
little to admit of the same brief question and reply, the latter being
repeated, as the boat passed, for the benefit of the coxswain.  As she
swept by us I looked down and observed that the ten men who formed her
crew crouched flat on the thwarts.  Only the steersman sat up.  No
wonder.  It must be hard to sit up in a stiff gale with freezing spray,
and sometimes heavy seas sweeping over one.  I knew that the men were
wide awake and listening, but, as far as vision went that boat was
manned only by ten oilskin coats and sou'-westers!

A few seconds carried them out of sight, and thus, as regards the Gull
Lightship, the drama ended.  There was no possibility of the dwellers in
the floating lights hearing anything of the details of that night's work
until the fortnightly visit of their "tender" should fall due, but next
morning at low tide, far away in the distance, we could see the wreck,
bottom up, high on the Goodwin Sands.

Afterwards I learned that the ship's crew had escaped in one of their
own boats, and taken refuge in the South Sand Head Lightship, whence
they were conveyed next day to land, so that the gallant men of Ramsgate
and Broadstairs had all their toil and trouble for nothing!

Thus, you see, there are not only high lights and deep shadows, but also
neutral tints in the various incidents which go to make up the grand
picture of lifeboat work.

There is a Fund connected with the Broadstairs Lifeboat which deserves
