line, bent his body almost to the ground, and, exerting himself to the
utmost, threw it into the same hollow from which he had lifted it.

"Equal!" cried Ulf.  "Come, Haldor, try again."

"Nay, I will not try until he beats me," replied Haldor with a
good-natured laugh.  "But do thou take a cast, Ulf.  Thine arm is
powerful, as I can tell from experience."

"Not so," replied Ulf.  "It becomes men who are past their prime to
reserve their strength for the sword and battle-axe.  Try it once more,
Kettle.  Mayhap thou wilt pass the mark next time."

Kettle tried again and again, but without gaining a hair's-breadth on
Haldor's throw.  The stalwart thrall had indeed put forth greater force
in his efforts than Haldor, but he did not possess his skill.

"Will no young man make trial of his strength and skill?" said Haldor,
looking round upon the eager faces of the crowd.

"Glumm is no doubt anxious to try his hand," said Erling, who stood
close to the line, with his arms resting on the head of his long-hafted
battle-axe.  "The shining of the Sunbeam will doubtless warm thy heart
and nerve thine arm."

Erling muttered the latter part of his speech in a somewhat bitter tone,
alluding to Hilda's smiles; but the jealous and sulky Glumm could
appreciate no sunbeams save those that flashed from Ada's dark eyes.  He
understood the remark as a triumphant and ironical taunt, and, leaping
fiercely into the ring formed by the spectators, exclaimed:

"I will cast the stone, but I must have a better man than thou, Kettle,
to strive with.  If Erling the Bold will throw--"

"I will not balk thee," interrupted the other quickly, as he laid down
his axe and stepped up to the line.

Glumm now made a cast.  Everyone knew well enough that he was one of the
best throwers of the stone in all the dale, and confidently anticipated
an easy victory over the thrall.  But the unusual tumult of conflicting
feelings in the young man's breast rendered him at the time incapable of
exerting his powers to the utmost in a feat, to excel in which requires
the union of skill with strength.  At his first throw the stone fell
short about an inch!

At this Ada's face became grave, and her heart began to flutter with
anxiety; for although willing enough to torment her lover a little
herself, she could not brook the idea of his failing in a feat of
strength before his comrades.

Furious with disappointment and jealousy, and attributing Ada's
expression to anxiety lest he should succeed, Glumm cast again with
passionate energy, and sent the stone just an inch beyond the thrall's
mark.  There was a dispute on the point, however, which did not tend to
soothe the youth's feelings, but it was ultimately decided in his
favour.

Erling now stood forth; and as he raised his tall form to its full
height, and elevated the stone above his head, he seemed (especially to
Hilda) the _beau-ideal_ of manly strength and beauty.

He was grieved, however, at Glumm's failure, for he knew him to be
capable of doing better than he had done.  He remembered their old
friendship too, and pity for his friend's loss of credit caused the
recently implanted jealousy for a moment to abate.  He resolved,
therefore, to exert himself just sufficiently to maintain his credit.

But, unhappily for the successful issue of this effort of self-denial,
Erling happened to cast his eye towards the spot where Hilda stood.  The
tender-hearted maiden chanced at that moment to be regarding Glumm with
a look of genuine pity.  Of course Erling misconstrued the look!  Next
moment the huge stone went singing through the air, and fell with a
crash full two yards beyond Glumm's mark.  Happening to alight on a
piece of rock, it sprang onward, passed over the edge of the hill or
brae on the summit of which the field lay, and gathering additional
impetus in its descent, went bounding down the slope, tearing through
everything in its way, until it found rest at last on the sea beach
below.

A perfect storm of laughter and applause greeted this unexpected feat,
but high above the din rose the voice of Glumm, who, now in a towering
passion, seized his double-handed sword, and shouting--

"Guard thee, Erling!" made a furious blow at his conqueror's head.

Erling had fortunately picked up his axe after throwing the stone.  He
immediately whirled the heavy head so violently against the descending
sword that the blade broke off close to the hilt, and Glumm stood before
him, disarmed and helpless, gazing in speechless astonishment at the
hilt which remained in his hands.

"My good sword!" he exclaimed, in a tone of deep despondency.

At this Erling burst into a hearty fit of laughter.  "My bad sword, thou
must mean," said he.  "How often have I told thee, Glumm, that there was
a flaw in the metal!  I have advised thee more than once to prove the
blade, and now that thou hast consented to do so, behold the result!
But be not so cast down, man; I have forged another blade specially for
thyself, friend Glumm, but did not think to give it thee so soon."

Glumm stood abashed, and had not a word to reply.  Fortunately his
feelings were relieved by the attention of the whole party being
attracted at that moment to the figure of a man on the opposite side of
the valley, who ran towards them at full speed, leaping over almost
every obstacle that presented itself in his course.  In a few minutes he
rushed, panting, into the midst of the throng, and presented a baton or
short piece of wood to Ulf, at the same time exclaiming: "Haste!  King
Harald holds a Thing at the Springs.  Speed on the token."

The import of this message and signal were well understood by the men of
Horlingdal.  When an assembly or Thing was to be convened for discussing
civil matters a wooden truncheon was sent round from place to place by
fleet messengers, each of whom ran a certain distance, and then
delivered over his "message-token" to another runner, who carried it
forward to a third, and so on.  In this manner the whole country could
be roused and its chief men assembled in a comparatively short time.
When, however, the Thing was to be assembled for the discussion of
affairs pertaining to war, an arrow split in four parts was the
message-token.  When the split arrow passed through the land men were
expected to assemble armed to the teeth, but when the baton went round
it was intended that they should meet without the full panoply of war.

As soon as the token was presented, Ulf looked about for a fleet man to
carry forward the message.  Several of the youths at once stepped
forward offering their services.  Foremost among them was a stout,
deep-chested active boy of about twelve years of age, with long flaxen
curls, a round sunburnt face, a bold yet not forward look, a merry
smile, and a pair of laughing blue eyes.  This was Erling's little
brother Alric--a lad whose bosom was kept in a perpetual state of stormy
agitation by the conflict carried on therein between a powerful tendency
to fun and mischief, and a strong sense of the obedience due to parents.

"I will go," said the boy eagerly, holding out his hand for the token.

"Thou, my son?" said Haldor, regarding him with a look of ill-suppressed
pride.  "Go to thy mother's bower, boy.  What if a fox, or mayhap even a
wolf, met thee on the fell?"

"Have I not my good bow of elm?" replied Alric, touching the weapon,
which, with a quiver full of arrows, was slung across his back.

"Tush! boy; go pop at the squirrels till thou be grown big enough to
warrant thy boasting."

"Father," said Alric with a look of glee, "I'm sure I did not boast.  I
did but point to my poor weapons.  Besides, I have good legs.  If I
cannot fight, methinks I can run."

"Out upon thee--"

"Nay, Haldor," said Ulf, interrupting the discussion, "thou art too hard
on the lad.  Can he run well?"

"I'll answer for that," said Erling, laying his large hand on his
brother's flaxen head.  "I doubt if there is a fleeter foot in all the
dale."

"Away then," cried Ulf, handing the token to Alric, "and see that ye
deserve all this praise.  And now, sirs, let us fare to the hall to sup
and prepare for our journey to the Springs."

The crowd at once broke up and hurried away to Ulfstede in separate
groups, discussing eagerly as they went, and stepping out like men who
had some pressing business on hand.  Alric had already darted away like
a hunted deer.

Erling turned hastily aside and went away alone.  As soon as he reached
a spot where the rugged nature of the ground concealed him from his late
companions, he started up the valley at his utmost speed, directing his
course so as to enable him to overshoot and intercept his brother.  He
passed a gorge ahead of the boy; and then, turning suddenly to the left,
bore down upon him.  So well did he calculate the distance, that on
turning round the edge of a jutting cliff he met him face to face, and
the two ran somewhat violently into each other's arms.

On being relieved from this involuntary embrace, Alric stepped back and
opened his eyes wide with surprise, while Erling roared with laughter.

"Ye are merry, my brother," said Alric, relaxing into a grin, "but I
have seen thee often thus, and may not stop to observe thee now, seeing
that it is nothing new."

"Give me an arrow, thou rogue!  There," said Erling, splitting the shaft
into four parts, handing it back to the boy, and taking the baton from
him.  "Get thee gone, and use thy legs well.  We must not do the King
the dishonour to appear before him without our weapons in these
unsettled times.  Let the token be sent out north, south, east, and
west; and, harkee, lad, say nothing to anyone about the object of the
assembly."

Alric's countenance became grave, then it again relaxed into a broad
grin.  Giving his brother an emphatic wink with one of his large blue
eyes, he darted past him, and was soon far up the glen, running with the
speed of a deer and waving the war-token over his head.



CHAPTER FOUR.

DESCRIBES WARLIKE PREPARATIONS, AND A NORSE HALL IN THE OLDEN TIME--
TELLS ALSO OF A SURPRISE.

Instead of returning to Ulfstede, Erling directed his steps homeward at
a brisk pace, and in a short space of time reached the door of his
forge.  Here he met one of his father's thralls.

"Ho! fellow," said he, "is thy mistress at home?"

"Yes, master, she is in the hall getting supper ready against your
father's return."

"Go tell her there will be no men to eat supper in the hall to-night,"
said Erling, unfastening the door of the forge.  "Say that I am in the
forge, and will presently be in to speak with her.  Go also to Thorer,
and tell him to get the house-carles busked for war.  When they are
ready let him come hither to me; and, harkee, use thine utmost speed;
there may be bloody work for us all to do this night before the birds
are on the wing.  Away!"

The man turned and ran to the house, while Erling blew up the
smouldering fire of the forge.  Throwing off his jerkin, he rolled up
his sleeves, and seizing the axe on which he had been engaged when Hilda
interrupted him, he wrought so vigorously at the stubborn metal with the
great forehammer that in the course of half an hour it was ready to fit
on the haft.  There was a bundle of hafts in a corner of the workshop.
One of these, a tough thick one without knot or flaw, and about five
feet long, he fitted to the iron head with great neatness and skill.
The polishing of this formidable weapon he deferred to a period of
greater leisure.  Having completed this piece of work, Erling next
turned to another corner of the forge and took up the huge two-handed
sword which he had made for his friend Glumm.

The weapon was beautifully executed, and being highly polished, the
blade glittered with a flashing light in the ruddy glare of the forge
fire.  The young giant sat down on his anvil and put a few finishing
touches to the sword, regarding it the while with a grim smile, as if he
speculated on the probability of his having formed a weapon wherewith
his own skull was destined to be cloven asunder.  While he was thus
engaged his mother Herfrida entered.

The soft-eyed dame could scarcely be called a matronly personage.
Having married when about sixteen, she was now just thirty-eight years
of age; and though the bloom of maidenhood was gone, the beauty of a
well-favoured and healthy woman still remained.  She wore a cloak of
rich blue wool, and under it a scarlet kirtle with a silver girdle.

"How now, my son," she said; "why these warlike preparations?"

"Because there is rumour of war; I'm sure that is neither strange nor
new to you, mother."

"Truly no; and well do I know that where war is, there my husband and my
son will be found."

Herfrida said this with a feeling of pride, for, like most of the women
of that time and country, she esteemed most highly the men who were
boldest and could use their weapons best.

"'Twere well if we were less noted in that way, and more given to
peace," said Erling half-jestingly.  "For my own part, I have no liking
for war, but you women will be for ever egging us on!"

Herfrida laughed.  She was well aware of what she was pleased to term
her son's weakness, namely, an idea that he loved peace, while he was
constantly proving to the world that he was just cut out for war.  Had
he ever shown a spark of cowardice she would have regarded those
speeches of his with much anxiety, but as it was she only laughed at
them.

"Erling, my boy," she said suddenly, as her eye fell on the axe at his
side,--"what terrible weapon is this?  Surely thou must have purchased
Thor's hammer.  Can ye wield such a thing?"

"I hope so, mother," said Erling curtly; "if not, I shall soon be in
Valhalla's halls."

"What are these rumours of war that are abroad just now?" asked
Herfrida.

Erling replied by giving his mother an account of King Harald's recent
deeds, and told her of the calling of the Thing, and of the appearance
of the Danish vikings off the coast.

"May good spirits attend thee, my son!" she said, kissing the youth's
forehead fervently, as a natural gush of tenderness and womanly anxiety
filled her breast for a moment.  But the feeling passed away as quickly
as it came; for women who are born and nurtured in warlike times become
accustomed and comparatively indifferent to danger, whether it threatens
themselves or those most dear to them.

While mother and son were conversing, Thorer entered the smithy, bearing
Erling's armour.

"Are the lads all a-boun?"  [armed and ready] enquired Erling as he
rose.

"Aye, master; and I have brought your war-gear."

The man who thus spoke was Haldor's chief house-carle.  He was a very
short and extremely powerful man of about forty-five years of age, and
so sturdy and muscular as to have acquired the title of Thorer the
Thick.  He wore a shirt of scale armour, rather rusty, and somewhat the
worse of having figured in many a tough battle by land and sea.  A
triangular shield hung at his back, and his headpiece was a simple
peaked helmet of iron, with a prolongation in front that guarded his
nose.  Thorer's offensive armour consisted of a short straight sword, a
javelin and a bow, with a quiver of arrows.

"How many men hast thou assembled, Thorer?" asked Erling as he donned
his armour.

"Seventy-five, master; the rest are up on the fells, on what errand I
know not."

"Seventy-five will do.  Haste thee, carle, and lead them to my longship
the Swan.  Methinks we will skate upon the ocean to-night.  [Longships,
or war-vessels, were sometimes called ocean-skates.] I will follow thee.
Let every man be at his post, and quit not the shore till I come on
board.  Now fare away as swiftly as may be, and see that everything be
done stealthily; above all, keep well out of sight of Ulfstede."

Thus admonished, Thorer quickly left the forge; and a few seconds later
the clanking tread of armed men was heard as Erling's followers took
their way to the fiord.

"Now I will to the hall, my son, and pray that thou mayst fare well,"
said Herfrida, once more kissing the forehead which the youth lowered to
receive the parting salute.  The mother retired, and left her son
standing in the forge gazing pensively at the fire, the dying flames of
which shot up fitfully now and then, and gleamed on his shining mail.

If Erling the Bold was a splendid specimen of a man in his ordinary
costume, when clad in the full panoply of war he was truly magnificent.
The rude but not ungraceful armour of the period was admirably fitted to
display to advantage the elegant proportions of his gigantic figure.  A
shirt or tunic of leather, covered with steel rings, hung loosely--yet,
owing to its weight, closely--on his shoulders.  This was gathered in at
the waist by a broad leathern belt, studded with silver ornaments, from
which hung a short dagger.  A cross belt of somewhat similar make hung
from his right shoulder, and supported a two-edged sword of immense
weight, which was quite as strong, though not nearly so long, as that
which he had forged for Glumm.  It was intended for a single-handed
weapon, though men of smaller size might have been constrained, in
attempting to wield it, to make use of both hands.  The youth's lower
limbs were clothed in closely-fitting leather leggings, and a pair of
untanned leather shoes, laced with a single thong, protected his feet.
On his head he wore a small skull-cap, or helmet, of burnished steel,
from the top of which rose a pair of hawk's wings expanded, as if in the
act of flight.  No gloves or gauntlets covered his hands, but on his
left arm hung a large shield, shaped somewhat like an elongated heart,
with a sharp point at its lower end.  Its top touched his shoulder, and
the lower part reached to his knee.

This shield was made of several plies of thick bull-hide, with an outer
coat of iron--the whole being riveted firmly together with iron studs.
It was painted pure white, without device of any kind, but there was a
band of azure blue round it, near the margin--the rim itself being of
polished steel.  In addition to his enormous axe, sword, and dagger,
Erling carried at his back a short bow and a quiver full of arrows.

The whole of this war gear bore evidence of being cherished with the
utmost care and solicitude.  Every ring on the tunic was polished as
highly as the metal would admit of, so that the light appeared to
trickle over it as its wearer moved.  The helmet shone like a globe of
