Douglas.  "D'ee mean to say that it beats them in a good or a bad way?"

"I means wot I says," replied Joe, with a stern expression of
countenance, as he relighted his pipe with the burnt end of a piece of
stick.  "I means that it beats 'em _both_ ways;--if ye haven't got
schoolin' enough to understand plain English, you'd better go home again
an' get your edicashun completed."

"I'd do that at once, Joe, if I could only make sure o' finding the
schoolmaster alive that reared _you_."

"Ha! goot," observed the German.  "Him must be von notable krakter."

Further conversation on this point was cut short by the sudden
appearance within the circle of light of an Indian, who advanced in a
half-crouching attitude, as if he feared a bad reception, yet could not
resist the attraction of the fire.

At that time some of the tribes in the neighbourhood of Bigbear Gully
had committed numerous depredations at the diggings, and had murdered
several white men, so that the latter had begun to regard the Red Men as
their natural enemies.  Indeed some of the more violent among them had
vowed that they would treat them as vermin, and shoot down every native
they chanced to meet, whether he belonged to the guilty tribe or not.
The Indian who now approached the camp-fire of the white men knew that
he had good ground to fear the nature of his reception, and there is no
doubt that it would have been an unpleasant one had it not been for the
fact that his appearance was pitiable in the extreme.

He was squalid, dirty, and small, and so attenuated that it was evident
he had for some time been suffering from starvation.  He wore no
clothing, carried no arms of any kind, and was so utterly abject, and so
evidently incapable of doing harm to any one, that none of the party
thought it worth while to rise, or lay hands on a weapon.  When he
appeared, Joe Graddy merely pointed to him with the stem of his pipe and
said--

"There's a beauty, ain't it? another of the cooriosities of Californy!"

"Starvin'," observed Rance.

"Poor wretch!" exclaimed Frank, as the man advanced slowly with timid
steps, while his large sunken eyes absolutely glared at the broken meat
which lay scattered about.

"Give him von morsel," suggested Meyer.

"Give him a bullet in his dirty carcase," growled Bradling.

The Indian stopped when within ten paces of the fire and grinned
horribly.

"Here, stop up your ghastly mouth wi' that," cried Jeffson, tossing a
lump of salt-pork towards him.

He caught it with the dexterity of a monkey, and, squatting down on the
trunk of a fallen tree, devoured it with the ravenous ferocity of a
famishing hyena.  The piece of pork would have been a sufficient meal
for any ordinary man, but it quickly vanished down the throat of the
savage, who licked his fingers, and, with eyes which required no tongue
to interpret their meaning, asked for more!

"Look out!" cried Joe Graddy, tossing him a sea biscuit as one throws a
quoit.

The Indian caught it deftly; crash went his powerful teeth into the hard
mass, and in an incredibly short time it was--with the pork!

The whole party were so highly amused by this, that they "went in," as
Jeffson said, "for an evening's entertainment."  One tossed the poor man
a cut of ham, another a slice of pork, a third a mass of bread, and so
they continued to ply him with victuals, determined to test his powers
to the uttermost.

"Try another bit of pork," said Douglas, laughing, as he threw him a cut
as large as the first; "you've finished all the cooked meat now."

The Indian caught it eagerly, and began to devour it as though he had
eaten nothing.

"He's tightening up like a drum," observed Jeffson, handing him a greasy
wedge off a raw flitch of bacon.

"Him vill boost," said Meyer, staring at the Indian and smoking slowly,
owing to the strength of his amazement.

"Jack the Giant Killer was a joke to him," muttered Graddy.

"A bottomless pit," observed Rance, referring to his stomach.

The Indian, however, proved that Rance was wrong by suddenly coming to a
dead halt and dropping the last morsel he was in the act of raising to
his mouth.  He then heaved a deep sigh and looked round on the whole
party with a radiant smile, which was literally sparkling by reason of
the firelight which glittered on his greasy countenance.

"What! stuffed full at last?" exclaimed Jeffson, as they all burst into
a fit of laughter.

"Ay, chock full to the beams," said Joe Graddy; "moreover, hatches
battened down, topsails shook out, anchor up, and away!"

This was indeed the case.  Having eaten as much as he could hold, the
poor Indian attempted to rise and walk off, but he suddenly fell down,
and rolled about groaning and rubbing himself as if in great agony.  The
alarmed travellers began to fear that the poor little man had
absolutely, as Joe said, eaten himself to death.  He recovered, however,
in a few minutes, rose again with some difficulty, and went off in the
midst of a splendid burst of moonlight which appeared to have come out
expressly to light him on his way!  His gait was awkward, and he was
obliged to sit down every twenty or thirty yards like a man resting
under a heavy load.  When last seen on his diminutive legs he looked
like a huge bloated spider waddling into the obscurity of the forest.

"How disgusting!" perhaps exclaims the reader.  True, yet not _much_
more disgusting than the gormandising which goes on among too many
civilised men, who, besides possessing better knowledge, have got
dyspepsia to inform them that they daily act the part of the Californian
savage, while many learned doctors, we believe, tell them that it is not
so much quality as quantity that kills.

That eventful night did not terminate, however, with the departure of
the Indian.  Another scene was enacted, but, unlike the popular mode of
theatrical procedure, the farce was followed by a tragedy.

Before lying down to rest, the fire was drawn together, fresh logs were
heaped upon it, and a great blaze was made to scare away the wolves.
Frank, Jeffson, and Douglas, then rolled themselves in their blankets,
and lay down with their feet towards the fire and their rifles beside
them.  The others lighted their pipes for a finishing whiff--a nightcap
as Joe styled it.

They had not sat long thus, making occasional quiet remarks, as fatigued
and sleepy men are wont to do before going to rest, when they were
startled by the sound of heavy footsteps in the woods.  Rance, whose
duty it was to keep watch the first part of the night, instantly leaped
up and cocked his rifle, while the sleepers awoke, raised themselves on
their elbows, and looked about somewhat bewildered.

Before any one had time to act or speak, a man, clad in the flannel
shirt, heavy boots, etcetera, of a miner, strode into the circle of
light, with the air of one whose intentions are peaceful.

"Evening, strangers," he said, looking round and setting the butt of a
long rifle on the ground; "I've got lost.  You'll not object to let me
rest a bit by your fire, I daresay--hallo!"

The latter exclamation was uttered when the stranger's eyes fell on
Bradling, who was gazing at him with the expression of a man who had
seen a ghost.  At the same time the stranger threw forward his rifle,
and his countenance became unusually pale.

For two seconds each looked at the other in profound silence, which was
only broken by the sharp click of the lock as the stranger cocked his
piece.

Like a flash of lightning Bradling plucked a revolver from his belt,
pointed full at the man's breast and fired.  He fell without uttering a
cry, and his rifle exploded as he went down, but the ball passed
harmlessly over the heads of the party.

For a few seconds the travellers stood as if paralysed, and Bradling
himself remained motionless, gazing sullenly on his victim.  Then Frank
Allfrey leaped upon him, and grasping him by the throat wrenched the
pistol out of his hand.

"Murderer!" he exclaimed, tightening his hold, as Bradling struggled to
release himself.

"I'm no murderer," gasped Bradling; "you saw as well as I did that the
fellow threatened to shoot me.  Besides, he is not dead."

"That's true," said Joe Graddy, turning towards the fallen man, whom
Rance and some of the others were examining, and who had showed some
symptoms of returning consciousness; "but his wound is a bad one, and if
you ain't a murderer yet, pr'aps it won't be long afore ye are one."

Hearing this Frank flung Bradling violently off, and turned to examine
the wounded man.  As he did so the other pointed his pistol deliberately
at Frank's back, fired, and then sprang into the woods.  Before he had
quite disappeared, however, each man who could seize his gun or pistol
in time fired a shot after him, but apparently without effect, for
although they examined the bushes carefully afterwards no marks of blood
could be found.

Fortunately the miscreant missed Frank, yet so narrowly that the ball
had touched his hair as it whistled past his ear.

The wounded man was as carefully tended as was possible in the
circumstances, but neither on that night nor the following day did he
recover sufficiently to be able to give any account of himself.  He was
left at the first "ranch" they came to next day, with directions from
Frank that he should be cared for and sent back to Sacramento city as
soon as possible.  Our hero was unable of course to pay his expenses,
but he and all the party contributed a small sum, which, with the gold
found on the stranger's person, was sufficient to satisfy the ranchero,
who appeared to be a more amiable man than the rest of his class.  To
secure as far as possible the faithful performance of his duty, Frank
earnestly assured him that if he was attentive to the man he would give
him something additional on his return from the diggings.

"That's very good of you, sir," said the ranchero with a peculiar smile,
"but I wouldn't promise too much if I were you.  Mayhap you won't be
able to fulfil it.  All gold-diggers don't make fortunes."

"Perhaps not," said Frank; "but few of them, I believe, fail to make
enough to pay off their debts."

"H'm, except those who die," said the ranchero.

"Well, but _I_ am not going to die," said Frank with a smile.

"I hope not.  All the young and strong ones seem to think as you do when
they go up; but I have lived here, off an' on, since the first rush and
all I can say is that I have seen a lot more men go up to the diggin's
than ever I saw come down from 'em; and, of those who did return, more
were poor than rich, while very few of 'em looked either as stout or as
cheerful as they did when passing up."

"Come, shut up your potato-trap, old man, and don't try to take the
heart out of us all in that fashion," said Jeffson; "but let's have a
feed of the best you have in the house, for we're all alive and kicking
as yet, anyhow, and not too poor to pay our way; and, I say, let's have
some home-brewed beer if you can, because we've got a German with us,
and a haggis also for our Scotchman."

"You have forgotten roast-beef for the Englishman," said Frank,
laughing.

"I daresay you won't want sauce," observed the host with an air of
simplicity; "my meat never seems to want it when there's a Yankee in the
room."

Saying this the worthy ranchero went to work, and speedily supplied the
travellers with a meal consisting of hard biscuit and rancid pork, with
a glass of bitter brandy to wash it down; for which he charged them the
sum of eight shillings a head.



CHAPTER FIVE.

THE TRAVELLERS MEET WITH INDIANS, AND ARE LED TO WISH THAT THEY HAD NOT
GONE SEEKING FOR GOLD.

It was the evening of a hot sultry day, when our travellers, fatigued
and foot-sore, arrived at the entrance of a small valley not far distant
from the intended scene of their future operations.  Here they
determined to encamp for the night on the margin of a small stream,
where there was grass for the mule and shelter under the trees for the
men.  On making their way, however, to the place, they observed an
Indian village down on a plain below, and, being uncertain as to the
numbers or the temper of the natives, they were about to cross the
stream and continue their journey a little further, when a party of six
Indians suddenly made their appearance in front, and advanced
fearlessly, making signs of friendship.

It was found that they understood and could talk a little Spanish, which
Rance spoke fluently.  After a short conversation, the guide thought
that it would be quite safe to stay beside them.  The encampment
therefore was made, and supper prepared.

While this was in progress Frank and Joe went to the top of a
neighbouring mound to survey the village.  It was a curious residence
for human beings.  Joe's remark that it resembled "a colony of big
moles" was not inappropriate, for the huts, of which there were about
forty, were not unlike huge mole-hills.

These huts, it was found, they formed by excavating circular holes in
the earth, about twelve feet in diameter and four feet deep, then
bending over these a number of stout saplings, which they bound together
with tendrils of the vine, they formed a dome-shaped roof, which was
plastered with a thick coat of clay.  An opening in one side of each
formed a door, through which entrance could be made by creeping.  On the
roofs of these curious dwellings many of the natives were seated,
evidently awaiting the result of the deputation's conference with the
white men.

The main object that the Indians appeared to have in view was the
obtaining of fire-arms, and it was observed that they cast longing eyes
upon the rifles which leaned on the trees beside the fire.  Rance
therefore advised every man to look carefully after his weapons, while
he talked with the chief, and told him that he had no guns or ammunition
to spare.  In order to please him, however, he gave him an old rusty
carbine, which was bent in the barrel, and nearly useless, in exchange
for a few fresh fish.

"My white brother is liberal," said the delighted savage in bad Spanish,
as he surveyed the weapon with admiration, "but it is necessary to have
black powder and balls."

"I have none to spare," replied Rance, "but the settlements of the white
men are not far off.  Besides, the Indian chief is wise.  He does not
require to be told that white men come here continually, searching for
gold, and that they bring much powder and ball with them.  Let gold be
offered, and both may be obtained."

The chief took this remark for a hint, and at once offered some
gold-dust in exchange for powder and shot, but Rance shook his head,
knowing that, if obtained, the ammunition would in all probability be
used against himself.  The chief was therefore obliged to rest content
in the mean time with the harmless weapon.

Meanwhile, another party of seven or eight Indians had gone towards
Frank and Joe, and by signs made them to understand that there was
something worth shooting on the other side of a cliff not fifty yards
off.  Our hero and his nautical friend were both of unsuspicious
natures, and being much amused by the ludicrous gesticulations of the
savages in their efforts to enlighten them, as well as curious to
ascertain what it could be that was on the other side of the cliff, they
accompanied them in that direction.

The moment they had passed out of sight of the camp a powerful savage
leaped on Frank from behind, and, grasping him round the throat with
both arms, endeavoured to throw him, while another Indian wrenched the
rifle out of his hand.  At the same moment Joe Graddy was similarly
seized.  The savages had, however, underrated the strength of their
antagonists.  Frank stooped violently forward, almost to the ground, and
hurled the Indian completely over his head.  At the same time he drew a
revolver from his belt, fired at and wounded the other Indian, who
dropped the rifle, and doubled like a hare into the bushes.  The others
fled right and left, as Frank sprang forward and recovered his weapon--
