tendency to judge.  There was nothing for it, however, but to exercise
philosophic patience, so he went below and turned in, as sailors have
it, "all standing," to be ready when the lifeboat should make its
appearance.

The young sailor's sleep was prompt and profound.  It seemed to him but
a few minutes after he had laid his head on the pillow when Jack Shale's
voice again resounded in the cabin--

"Lifeboat close alongside, sir.  Didn't see her till this moment.  She
carries no lights."

The Weltons, father and son, sprang out of their bunks a second time,
and, minus coat, hat, and shoes, scrambled on deck just in time to see
the Broadstairs lifeboat rush past before the gale.  She was close under
the stern, and rendered spectrally visible by the light of the lantern.

"What are you firing for?" shouted the coxswain of the boat.

"Ship on the sands, bearing south," roared Jack Shales at the full pitch
of his stentorian voice.

There was no time for more, for the boat did not pause in her
meteor-like flight.  The question was asked and answered as she passed
with a magnificent rush into darkness.  The reply had been heard, and
the lifeboat shot, straight as an arrow, to the rescue.

Reader, we often hear and read of such scenes, but we can tell you from
experience that vision is necessary to enable one to realise the full
import of all that goes on.  There was a strange thrill at the heart of
young Welton when he saw the familiar blue-and-white boat leaping over
the foaming billows.  Often had he seen it in model and in quiescence in
its boat-house, ponderous and almost ungainly; but now he saw it for the
first time in action, as if endued with life.  So, we fancy, warriors
might speak of our heavy cavalry as _we_ see them in barracks and as
_they_ saw them at Alma.

Again all was silent and unexciting on board the Gull; but, not many
minutes later, the watch once more shouted down the skylight--

"Tug's in sight, sir."

It was afterwards ascertained that a mistake had been made in reference
to the vessel that had signalled.  Some one on shore had reported that
the guns and rockets had been seen flashing from the _North_ sandhead
vessel, whereas the report should have been, "from the vessel at the
_South_ sandhead."  The single word was all-important.  It had the
effect of sending the steam-tug Aid (which always attends upon the
Ramsgate lifeboat) in the wrong direction, involving much loss of time.
But we mention this merely as a fact, not as a reproof.  Accidents will
happen, even in the best regulated families.  The Ramsgate lifeboat
service is most admirably regulated; and for once that an error of this
kind can be pointed out, we can point to dozens--ay, hundreds--of cases
in which the steamer and lifeboat have gone, straight as the crow flies,
to the rescue, and have done good service on occasions when all other
lifeboats would certainly have failed; so great is the value of steam in
such matters.

On this occasion, however, the tug appeared somewhat late on the scene,
and hailed the Gull.  When the true state of the case was ascertained,
her course was directed aright, and full steam let on.  The Ramsgate
boat was in tow far astern.  As she passed, the brief questions and
answers were repeated for the benefit of the coxswain, and Jim Welton
observed that every man in the boat appeared to be crouching down on the
thwarts except the coxswain, who stood at the steering tackles.  No
wonder.  It is not an easy matter to sit up in a gale of wind, with
freezing spray, and sometimes green seas, sweeping over one!  The men
were doubtless wideawake and listening, but, as far as vision went, that
boat was manned by ten oilskin coats and sou'westers!

A few seconds carried them out of sight, and so great was the power of
steam that, despite the loss of time, they reached the neighbourhood of
the wreck as soon as the Broadstairs boat, and found that the crew of
the stranded vessel had already been saved, and taken ashore by the Deal
lifeboat.

It may be as well to observe here, that although in this case much
energy was expended unnecessarily, it does not follow that it is
frequently so expended.  Often, far too often, all the force of lifeboat
service on that coast is insufficient to meet the demands on it.  The
crews of the various boats in the vicinity of the Goodwin Sands are
frequently called out more than once in a night, and they are sometimes
out all night, visiting various wrecks in succession.  In all this work
the value of the steam-tug is very conspicuous, for it can tow its boat
again and again to windward of a wreck, and renew the effort to save
life in cases where, devoid of such aid, lifeboats would be compelled to
give in after the failure of their first attempt, in consequence of
their being driven helplessly to leeward.

But we have forestalled our narrative.  The drama, as far as the
Gull-Light was concerned, ended that night with the disappearance of the
tug and lifeboat.  It was not until several days afterwards that her
crew learned the particulars of the wreck in connection with which they
had acted so brief but so important a part.

Meanwhile, Dick Moy, who always walked the deck with a rolling swagger,
with his huge hands thrust deep into his breeches' pockets when there
was nothing for them to do, said to Jim Welton, "he'd advise 'im to go
below an' clap the dead-lights on 'is peepers."

Jim, approving the advice, was about to descend to the cabin, when he
was arrested by a sharp cry that appeared to rise out of the waves.

"Wot iver is that?" exclaimed Dick, as they all rushed to the port bow
of the vessel and looked over the side.

"Something in the water," cried Jack Shales, hastily catching up a coil
of rope and throwing it overboard with that promptitude which is
peculiar to seamen.

"Why, _he_ can't kitch hold on it; it's only a dog," observed Dick Moy.

All uncertainty on this point was cleared away, by a loud wail to which
the poor animal gave vent, as it scraped along the ship's hull, vainly
endeavouring to prevent itself from being carried past by the tide.

By this time they were joined by the mate and the rest of the crew, who
had heard the unwonted sounds and hurried on deck.  Each man was eagerly
suggesting a method of rescue, or attempting to carry one into effect,
by means of a noose or otherwise, when Mr Welton, senior, observed that
Mr Welton, junior, was hastily tying a rope round his waist.

"Hallo!  Jim," he cried, "surely you don't mean to risk your life for a
dog?"

"There's no risk about it, father.  Why should I leave a poor dog to
drown when it will only cost a ducking at the worst?  You know I can
swim like a cork, and I ain't easily cooled down."

"You shan't do it if I can prevent," cried the mate, rushing at his
reckless son.

But Jim was too nimble for him.  He ran to the stern of the vessel,
leaped on the bulwarks, flung the end of the coil of rope among the men,
and shouting, "Hold on taut, boys!" sprang into the sea.

The men did "hold on" most powerfully; they did more, they hauled upon
the rope, hand over hand, to a "Yo-heave-ho!" from Jerry MacGowl, which
put to shame the roaring gale, and finally hauled Jim Welton on board
with a magnificent Newfoundland dog in his arms, an event which was
greeted with three enthusiastic cheers!



CHAPTER FOUR.

A NEW CHARACTER INTRODUCED.

The gale was a short-lived one.  On the following morning the wind had
decreased to a moderate breeze, and before night the sea had gone down
sufficiently to allow the boat of Mr Jones's sloop to come alongside of
the floating light.

Before Jim Welton bade his friends good-bye, he managed to have an
earnest and private talk with each of them.  Although he had never been
connected with the Gull, he had frequently met with the men of that
vessel, and, being one of those large-hearted sympathetic men who
somehow worm themselves into the affection and confidence of most of
their friends and comrades, he had something particular to say to each,
either in reference to wives and families on shore, or to other members
of that distracting section of the human family which, according to Mr
Welton senior, lay at the foundation of all mischief.

But young Welton did not confine himself to temporal matters.  It has
already been hinted that he had for some time been in the habit of
attending prayer-meetings, but the truth was that he had recently been
led by a sailor's missionary to read the Bible, and the precious Word of
God had been so blessed to his soul, that he had seen his own lost
condition by nature, and had also seen, and joyfully accepted, Jesus
Christ as his all-sufficient Saviour.  He had come to "know the truth,"
and "the truth had set him free;" free, not only from spiritual death
and the power of sin, but free from that unmanly shame which, alas! too
often prevents Christians from taking a bold stand on the Lord's side.

The young sailor had, no doubt, had severe inward conflicts, which were
known only to God and himself, but he had been delivered and
strengthened, for he was not ashamed of Christ in the presence of his
old comrades, and he sought by all the means in his power to draw them
to the same blessed Saviour.

"Well, good-bye, Jim," said Mr Welton, senior, as his son moved towards
the gangway, when the boat came alongside, "all I've got to say to 'ee,
lad, is, that you're on dangerous ground, and you have no right to shove
yourself in the way of temptation."

"But I don't _shove_ myself, father; I think I am led in that way.  I
may be wrong, perhaps, but such is my belief."

"You'll not forget that message to my mother," whispered a
sickly-looking seaman, whose strong-boned frame appeared to be somewhat
attenuated by disease.

"I'll not forget, Rainer.  It's likely that we shall be in Yarmouth in a
couple of days, and you may depend upon my looking up the old woman as
soon after I get ashore as possible."

"Hallo! hi!" shouted a voice from below, "wot's all the hurry?" cried
Dick Moy, stumbling hastily up on deck while in the act of closing a
letter which bore evidence of having been completed under difficulties,
for its form was irregular, and its back was blotted.  "Here you are,
putt that in the post at Yarmouth, will 'ee, like a good fellow?"

"Why, you've forgotten the address," exclaimed Jim Welton in affected
surprise.

"No, I 'aven't.  There it is hall right on the back."

"What, that blot?"

"Ay, that's wot stands for Mrs Moy," said Dick, with a good-natured
smile.

"Sure now," observed Jerry MacGowl, looking earnestly at the letter, "it
do seem to me, for all the world, as if a cat had drawed his tail across
it after stumblin' over a ink-bottle."

"Don't Mrs Moy live in Ramsgate?" inquired Jim Welton.

"Of course she do," replied Dick.

"But I'm not going there; I'm goin' to Yarmouth," said Jim.

"Wot then?" retorted Dick, "d'ee suppose the clerk o' the post-office at
Yarmouth ain't as well able to read as the one at Ramsgate, even though
the writin' _do_ be done with a cat's tail?  Go along with 'ee."

Thus dismissed, Jim descended the side and was quickly on board the
sloop Nora to which he belonged.

On the deck of the little craft he was received gruffly by a man of
powerful frame and stern aspect, but whose massive head, covered with
shaggy grey curling hair, seemed to indicate superior powers of
intellect.  This was Morley Jones, the master and owner of the sloop.

"A pretty mess you've made of it; I might have been in Yarmouth by this
time," he said, testily.

"More likely at the bottom of the sea," answered Jim, quietly, as he
went aft and looked at the compass--more from habit than from any desire
to receive information from that instrument.

"Well, if I had been at the bottom o' the sea, what then?  Who's to say
that I mayn't risk my life if I see fit?  It's not worth much," he said,
gloomily.

"You seem to forget that in risking your own life you risk the lives of
those who sail along with you," replied Jim, with a bold yet
good-humoured look at the skipper.

"And what if I do risk their lives?--they ain't worth much, either,
_I'm_ sure?"

"Not to you, Morley, but worth a good deal to themselves, not to mention
their wives and families and friends.  You know well enough that if I
had wished ever so much to return aboard last night your boat could not
have got alongside the Gull for the sea.  Moreover, you also know that
if you had attempted to put to sea in such weather, this leaky tub, with
rotten sails and running gear, would have been a wreck on the Goodwin
sands before now, and you and I, with the two men and the boy, would
have been food for the gulls and fishes."

"Not at all," retorted Jones, "there's not much fear of our lives here.
The lifeboat crews are too active for that; and as to the sloop, why,
she's insured you know for her full value--for more than her value,
indeed."

Jones said this with a chuckle and a sly expression in his face, as he
glanced meaningly at his companion.

"I know nothing about your insurance or your cargo, and, what's more, I
don't want to know," said Jim, almost angrily.  "You've been at
Square-Tom again," he added, suddenly laying his hand upon the shoulder
of his companion and looking earnestly into his eyes.

It was now Jones's turn to be angry, yet it was evident that he made an
effort to restrain his feelings, as he replied, "Well, what if I have?
It's one thing for you to advise me to become a teetotaller, and it's
quite another thing for me to agree to do it.  I tell you again, as I've
often told you before, Jim Welton, that _I don't mean to do it_, and I'm
not going to submit to be warned and reasoned with by you, as if you was
my grandfather.  I _know_ that drink is the curse of my life, and I know
that it will kill me, and that I am a fool for giving way to it, but it
is the only thing that makes me able to endure this life; and as for the
next, I don't care for it, and _I don't believe in it_."

"But your not believing in it does not make it less certain," replied
Jim, quietly, but without any approach to solemnity in his tone or look,
for he knew that his companion was not in a mood just then to stand such
treatment.  "You remember the story of the ostrich that was run down?
Finding that it could not escape, it stuck its head in the sand and
thought that nobody saw it.  You may shut your eyes, Morley, but facts
remain facts for all that."

"Shutting my eyes is just what I am _not_ doing," returned Jones,
flinging round and striding to the other side of the deck; then, turning
quickly, he strode back, and added, with an oath, "have I not told you
that I see myself, my position, and my prospects, as clearly as you do,
and that I intend to face them all, and take the consequences?"

Jim Welton flushed slightly, and his eyes dilated, as he replied--

"Have you not the sense to see, Morley Jones, that my remonstrances with
you are at least disinterested?  What would you think if I were to say
to you, `Go, drink your fill till death finds you at last wallowing on
the ground like a beast, or worse than a beast; I leave you to your
fate?'"

"I would think that Jim Welton had changed his nature," replied Jones,
whose anger disappeared as quickly as it came.  "I have no objection to
your storming at me, Jim.  You may swear at me as much as you please,
but, for any sake, spare me your reasonings and entreaties, because they
only rouse the evil spirit within me, without doing an atom of good; and
don't talk of leaving me.  Besides, let me tell you, you are not so
disinterested in this matter as you think.  There is some one in
Yarmouth who has something to do with your interest in me."

The young man flushed again at the close of this speech, but not from a
feeling of anger.  He dropt his eyes before the earnest though unsteady
gaze of his half-tipsy companion, who burst into a loud laugh as Jim
attempted some stammering reply.

"Come," he added, again assuming the stern aspect which was natural to
him, but giving Jim a friendly slap on the shoulder, "don't let us fall
out, Jim you and I don't want to part just now.  Moreover, if we have a
mind to get the benefit of the tide to-night, the sooner we up anchor
the better, so we won't waste any more time talking."

Without waiting for a reply, Mr Jones went forward and called the crew.
The anchor was weighed, the sails were set, and the sloop Nora--bending
over before the breeze, as if doing homage in passing her friend the
Gull-Light--put to sea, and directed her course for the ancient town and
port of Yarmouth.



CHAPTER FIVE.

MORE NEW CHARACTERS INTRODUCED.

If it be true that time and tide wait for no man, it is equally true, we
rejoice to know, that authors and readers have a corresponding immunity
from shackles, and are in nowise bound to wait for time or tide.
