Jacob Crossley held out his hand with an expression of affability which
was for him quite marvellous.

"You're a much better man than I thought!" exclaimed Charlie, grasping
the proffered hand with a fervour that caused the other to wince.

"Young sir," returned Crossley, regarding the fingers of his right hand
somewhat pitifully, "people whose physique is moulded on the pattern of
Samson ought to bear in mind that rheumatism is not altogether unknown
to elderly men.  Your opinion of me was probably erroneous to begin
with, and it is certainly false to end with.  Let me advise you to
remember that the gift of money does not necessarily prove anything
except that a man has money to give--nay, it does not always prove even
that, for many people are notoriously prone to give away money that
belongs to somebody else.  Five hundred pounds is to some men not of
much more importance than five pence is to others.  Everything is
relative.  Good-bye."

While he was speaking Mr Crossley rang the bell and politely opened the
dining-room door, so that our hero found himself in the street before he
had quite recovered from his astonishment.

"Please, sir," said Mrs Bland to her master after Charlie was gone,
"Cap'en Stride is awaitin' in the library."

"Send him here," said Crossley, once more consulting his watch.

"Well, Captain Stride, I've had a talk with him," he said, as an
exceedingly broad, heavy, short-legged man entered, with a bald head and
a general air of salt water, tar, and whiskers about him.  "Sit down.
Have you made up your mind to take command of the _Walrus_?"

"Well, Mr Crossley, since you're so _very_ good," said the sea-captain
with a modest look, "I had feared that the loss o'--"

"Never mind the loss of the brig, Captain.  It was no fault of yours
that she came to grief.  Other ship-owners may do as they please.  I
shall take the liberty of doing as _I_ please.  So, if you are ready,
the ship is ready.  I have seen Captain Stuart, and I find that he is
down with typhoid fever, poor fellow, and won't be fit for duty again
for many weeks.  The _Walrus_ must sail not later than a week or ten
days hence.  She can't sail without a captain, and I know of no better
man than yourself; so, if you agree to take command, there she is, if
not I'll find another man."

"I'm agreeable, sir," said Captain Stride, with a gratified, meek look
on his large bronzed face--a look so very different from the leonine
glare with which he was wont to regard tempestuous weather or turbulent
men.  "Of course it'll come rather sudden on the missus, but w'en it
blows hard what's a man got to do but make all snug and stand by?"

"Quite true, Stride, I have no doubt that you are nautically as well as
morally correct, so I leave it to you to bring round the mistress, and
consider that matter as settled.  By the way, I hope that she and your
little girl have not suffered from the wetting and rough handling
experienced when being rescued."

"Not in the least, sir, thankee.  In fact I incline to the belief that
they are rather more frisky than usual in consekince.  Leastwise
_little_ Maggie is."

"Glad to hear it.  Now, about that young fellow."

"By which I s'pose you mean Mr Brooke, sir?"

"The same.  He has just left me, and upon my word, he's about the
coolest young fellow I ever met with."

"That's just what I said to the missus, sir, the very night arter we was
rescued.  `The way that young feller come off, Maggie,' says I, `is most
extraor'nar'.  No fish that--'"

"Yes, yes, Stride, I know, but that's not exactly what I mean: it's his
being so amazingly independent that--"

"'Zactly what I said, sir.  `Maggie,' says I, `that young feller seemed
to be quite independent of fin or tail, for he came right off in the
teeth o' wind and tide--'"

"That's not what I mean either, Captain," interrupted the old gentleman,
with slight impatience.  "It's his independent spirit I refer to."

"Oh!  I ax your pardon, sir."

"Well, now, listen, and don't interrupt me.  But first let me ask, does
he know that I am the owner of the brig that was lost?"

"Yes; he knows that."

"Does he know that I also own the _Walrus_."

"No, I'm pretty sure he don't.  Leastwise I didn't tell him, an' there's
nobody else down there as knows anything about you."

"So far, good.  Now, Stride, I want you to help me.  The young goose is
so proud, or I know not what, that he won't accept any favours or
rewards from me, and I find that he is out of work just now, so I'm
determined to give him something to do in spite of himself.  The present
supercargo of the _Walrus_ is a young man who will be pleased to fall in
with anything I propose to him.  I mean, therefore, to put him in
another ship and appoint young Brooke to the _Walrus_.  Fortunately the
firm of Withers and Company does not reveal my name--I having been
Company originally, though I'm the firm now, so that he won't suspect
anything, and what I want is, that you should do the engaging of him--
being authorised by Withers and Company--you understand?"

"I follow you, sir.  But what if he objects?"

"He won't object.  I have privately inquired about him.  He is anxious
to get employment, and has strong leanings to an adventurous life on the
sea.  There's no accounting for taste, Captain!"

"Right you are, sir," replied the Captain, with an approving nod.
"That's what I said only this mornin' to my missus.  `Maggie,' says I,
`salt water hasn't a good taste, as even the stoopidest of mortals
knows, but w'en a man has had to lick it off his lips at sea for the
better part of half a century, it's astonishin' how he not only gits
used to it, but even comes to like the taste of it.'  `Pooh!' says she,
`don't tell me you likes it, for you don't!  It's all a d'lusion an' a
snare.  I hates both the taste an' the smell of it.'  `Maggie,' says I,
quite solemn-like, `that may be so, but you're not me.'  `No, thank
goodness!' says she--which you mustn't suppose, sir, meant as she didn't
like _me_, for she's a true-hearted affectionate creetur--though I say
it as shouldn't--but she meant that she'd have had to go to sea reg'lar
if she had been me, an' that would have done for her in about six weeks,
more or less, for the first time she ever went she was all but turned
inside--"

"If you're going citywards," interrupted Mr Crossley, again pulling out
his watch, "we may as well finish our talk in the street."

As Captain Stride was "quite agreeable" to this proposal, the two left
the house together, and, hailing a hansom, drove off in the direction of
the City.



CHAPTER FOUR.

DRIFTING ON THE ROCKS.

On the sea-shore, not far from the spot where the brig had been wrecked,
Charlie Brooke and Shank Leather walked up and down engaged in earnest
conversation soon after the interviews just described.

Very different was the day from that on which the wreck had taken place.
It seemed almost beyond possibility that the serene sky above, and the
calm, glinting ocean which rippled so softly at their feet, could be
connected with the same world in which inky clouds and snowy foam and
roaring billows had but a short time before held high revelry.

"Well, Charlie," said his friend, after a pause, "it was very good of
you, old boy, and I hope that I'll do credit to your recommendation.
The old man seems a decent sort of chap, though somewhat cross-grained."

"He is kind-hearted, Shank; I feel quite sure of that, and hope
sincerely that you will get on well with him."

"`With him!'" repeated Leather; "you don't seem to understand that the
situation he is to get for me is _not_ in connection with his own
business, whatever that may be.  It is in some other City firm, the name
of which he has not yet mentioned.  I can't myself understand why he is
so close!"

"Perhaps because he has been born with a secretive nature," suggested
Charlie.

"May be so.  However, that's no business of mine, and it doesn't do to
be too inquisitive when a man is offering you a situation of two hundred
a year.  It would be like looking a gift-horse in the mouth.  All I care
about is that I'm to go to London next week and begin work--Why, you
don't seem pleased to hear of my good fortune," continued Leather,
turning a sharp look on his friend, who was gazing gravely at the sand,
in which he was poking holes with his stick.

"I congratulate you, Shank, with all my heart, and you know it; but--I'm
sorry to find that you are not to be in connection with Mr Crossley
himself, for there is more good in him than appears on the surface.  Did
he then make no mention of the nature of his own business?"

"None whatever.  To say truth, that mysteriousness or secrecy is the
only point about the old fellow's character that I don't like," said
Leather, with a frown of virtuous disapproval.  "`All fair and
above-board,' that's my motto.  Speak out your mind and fear nothing!"

At these noble sentiments a faint smile, if we may say so, hovered
somewhere in the recesses of Charlie Brooke's interior, but not the
quiver of a muscle disturbed the solemnity of his face.

"The secrecy of his nature seems even to have infected that skipper
with--or rather by--whom he was wrecked," continued Leather, "for when I
asked him yesterday about the old gentleman, he became suddenly silent,
and when I pressed him, he made me a rigmarole speech something like
this: `Young man, I make it a rule to know nothin' whatever about my
passengers.  As I said only two days past to my missus: "Maggie," says
I, "it's of no use your axin' me.  My passengers' business is _their_
business, and my business is mine.  All I've got to do is to sail my
ship, an' see to it that I land my passengers in safety."'

"`You made a pretty mess of your business, then, the last trip,' said I,
for I was bothered with his obvious determination not to give me any
information.

"`Right you are, young man,' said he, `and it would have been a still
prettier mess if your friend Mr Brooke hadn't come off wi' that there
line!'

"I laughed at this and recovered my temper, but I could pump nothing
more out of him.  Perhaps there was nothing to pump.--But now tell me,
how is it--for I cannot understand--that you refused all offers to
yourself?  You are as much `out of work' just now as I am."

"That's true, Shank, and really I feel almost as incapable of giving you
an answer as Captain Stride himself.  You see, during our conversation
Mr Crossley attributed mean--at all events wrong--motives to me, and
somehow I felt that I _could_ not accept any favour at his hands just
then.  I suspect I was too hasty.  I fear it was false pride--"

"Ha! ha!" laughed Leather; "`pride!'  I wonder in what secret chamber of
your big corpus your pride lies."

"Well, I don't know.  It must be pretty deep.  Perhaps it is engrained,
and cannot be easily recognised."

"That last is true, Charlie.  Assuredly it can't be recognised, for it's
not there at all.  Why, if you had been born with a scrap of false pride
you and I could never have been friends--for I hate it!"

Shank Leather, in saying this, had hit the nail fairly on the head,
although he had not intelligently probed the truth to the bottom.  In
fact a great deal of the friendship which drew these young men together
was the result of their great dissimilarity of character.  They acted on
each other somewhat after the fashion of a well-adjusted piece of
mechanism, the ratchets of selfishness and cog-wheels of vanity in Shank
fitting easily into the pinions of good-will and modesty which
characterised his friend, so that there was no jarring in their
intercourse.  This alone would not, perhaps, have induced the strong
friendship that existed if it had not been coupled with their intimacy
from childhood, and if Brooke had not been particularly fond of Shank's
invalid mother, and recognised a few of her good characteristics faintly
reproduced in her son, while Shank fully appreciated in Charlie that
amiable temperament which inclines its happy possessor to sympathise
much with others, to talk little of self, to believe all things and to
hope all things, to the verge almost of infantine credulity.

"Well, well," resumed Charlie, with a laugh, "however that may be, I
_did_ decline Mr Crossley's offers, but it does not matter much now,
for that same worthy captain who bothered you so much has told me of a
situation of which he has the gift, and has offered it to me."

"You don't say so!  Is it a good one?"

"Yes, and well paid, I'm told, though I don't know the exact amount of
the salary yet."

"And have you accepted?"

"I have.  Mother agreed, after some demur, that it is better than
nothing, so, like you, I begin work in a few days."

"Well now, how strangely things do happen sometimes!" said Leather,
stopping and looking out seaward, where the remains of the brig could
still be distinguished on the rocks that had fixed her doom.  "But for
that fortunate wreck and our saving the people in her, you and I might
still have been whistling in the ranks of the Great Unemployed--And what
sort of a situation is it, Charlie?"

"You will smile, perhaps, when I tell you.  It is to act as supercargo
of the _Walrus_, which is commanded by Captain Stride himself."

Young Leather's countenance fell.  "Why, Charlie," he said, "that means
that you're going away to sea!"

"I fear it does."

"Soon?"

"In a week or two."

For some little time Leather did not speak.  The news fell upon him with
a shock of disagreeable surprise, for, apart from the fact that he
really loved his friend, he was somehow aware that there were not many
other young men who cared much for himself--in regard to which he was
not a little surprised, for it never occurred to him that egotism and
selfishness had anything to do with the coolness of his friends, or that
none but men like our hero, with sweet tempers and self-forgetting
dispositions, could by any possibility put up with him.

"Who are the owners of the _Walrus_, Charlie?" he asked, as they turned
into the lane that led from the beach to the village.

"Withers and Company of London."

"H'm--don't know them.  They must be trustful fellows, however, to take
a captain into their employ who has just lost his vessel."

"They have not _taken_ him into their employ," said Charlie.  "Captain
Stride tells me he has been in their service for more than a quarter of
a century, and they exonerate him from all blame in the loss of the
brig.  It does seem odd to me, however, that he should be appointed so
immediately to a new ship, but, as you remarked, that's none of my
business.  Come, I'll go in with you and congratulate your mother and
May on your appointment."

They had reached the door of Shank Leather's house by that time.  It was
a poor-looking house, in a poor side street or blind alley of the
village, the haunt of riotous children during the day-time, and of
maddening cats at night.  Stray dogs now and then invaded the alley,
but, for the most part, it was to children and cats that the region was
given over.  Here, for the purpose of enabling the proverbial "two ends"
to "meet," dwelt a considerable population in houses of diminutive size
and small accommodation.  A few of these were persons who, having "seen
better days," were anxious to hide their poverty and existence from the
"friends" of those better days.  There was likewise a sprinkling of
individuals and families who, having grown callous to the sorrows of
earth, had reached that condition wherein the meeting of the two ends is
a matter of comparative indifference, because they never met, and were
never more expected to meet--the blank, annually left gaping, being
filled up, somehow, by a sort of compromise between bankruptcy, charity,
and starvation.

To the second of these the Leather family belonged.  They had been
brought to their sad condition by that prolific source of human misery--
the bottle.

To do the family justice, it was only the father who had succumbed.  He
had been a gentleman; he was now a sot.  His wife--delicate owing to bad
treatment, sorrow, and insufficient nourishment--was, ever had been, and
ever would be, a lady and a Christian.  Owing to the last priceless
condition she was still alive.  It is despair that kills, and despair
had been banished from her vocabulary ever since she had laid down the
arms of her rebellion and accepted the Saviour of mankind as her guide
and consolation.

But sorrow, suffering, toil had not departed when the demon despair fled
away.  They had, however, been wonderfully lightened, and one of the
brightest gleams of hope in her sad life was that she might possibly be
used as the means of saving her husband.  There were other gleams of
light, however, one of the brightest of them being that May, her only
daughter, was loving and sympathetic--or, as she sometimes expressed it,
"as good as gold."  But there was also a very dark spot in her life:
Shank, her only son, was beginning to show a tendency to tread in his
father's steps.

Many golden texts were enshrined in the heart of poor Mrs Leather, and
not a few of these--painted by the hand of May--hung on the walls of
their little sitting-room, but the word to which she turned her eyes in
seasons of profoundest obscurity, and which served her as a sheet-anchor
in the midst of the wildest storms, was, "Hope thou in God, for thou
shalt _yet_ praise Him."  And alongside of that text, whenever she
thought of it or chanced to look at it, there invariably flashed
another: "Immanuel, God with us."

May and her mother were alone when the young men entered; the former was
at her lessons, the latter busy with knitting-needles.

Knitting was the means by which Mrs Leather, with constant labour and
inexhaustible perseverance, managed to fill up the gap between the
before-mentioned "two ends," which her dissolute husband failed to draw
together.  She could read or assist May with her lessons, while her
delicate fingers, working below the table, performed miraculous
gyrations with steel and worsted.  To most male minds, we presume, this
is utterly incomprehensible.  It is well not to attempt the description
of that which one does not understand.  The good lady knitted socks and
stockings, and mittens and cuffs, and comforters, and other things, in
absolutely overwhelming quantities, so that the accumulation in the
press in which she stored them was at times quite marvellous.  Yet that
press never quite filled up, owing to the fact that there was an
incurable leak in it--a sort of secret channel--through which the
products of her toil flowed out nearly as fast as she poured them in.

This leak in the worsted press, strange to say, increased wonderfully
just after the wreck described in a previous chapter, and the rivulet to
which it gave rise flowed in the direction of the back-door of the
house, emptying itself into a reservoir which always took the form of a
little elderly lady, with a plain but intensely lovable countenance, who
had been, perhaps still was, governess in a family in a neighbouring
town where Mrs Leather had spent some of her "better days."  Her name
was Molloy.

Like a burglar Miss Molloy came in a stealthy manner at irregular
