



LITTLE BOY BLUE


_Permission to use words and music:-- D. Appleton and Co._

[Music:
  Little Boy Blue, come blow up your horn,
  There's sheep in the meadow and cows in the corn;
  Where is the boy that looks after the sheep?
  He's under the haycock fast asleep.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention with hands on
hips.


1st Line;-- Little Boy Blue, come blow up your horn,

  Interpretation;-- Mark time, in place. (Four counts.) Upon the word,
  "blow," hands clenched, elbows raised high, imitate the blowing of
  the horn. Finish with hands on hips.

2nd Line;-- There's sheep in the meadow and cows in the corn;

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "sheep," point to the right and look in
  direction pointed. Upon the word, "cows," replace right hand to hip;
  point to the left and look in direction pointed. Finish with hands on
  hips and eyes front.

3rd Line;-- Where is the boy that looks after the sheep?

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "where," shade the eyes with the right hand
  and look to the right. Upon the word, "looks," replace right hand to
  hip; shade the eyes with the left hand and look to the left. Finish
  with left hand on hip and eyes front.

4th Line;-- He's under the haycock fast asleep.

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "under," resume seats and lower head to
  desks upon folded arms.


[Illustration: THERE'S SHEEP IN THE MEADOW]




WEE WILLIE WINKIE


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Wee Willie Winkie runs thru the town,
  Upstairs and downstairs in his nightgown;
  Rapping at the window,
    Crying thru the lock:--
  Are all the children in their beds?
    Now 'tis eight o'clock.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle with hands on hips.


1st Line;-- Wee Willie Winkie runs through the town,

  Interpretation;-- Mark time, in place. (Knees waist high.) (Seven
  counts.)

2nd Line;-- Upstairs and

  Inter.;-- Heels raised.

downstairs

  Inter.;-- Bend knees deeply.

in his night-

  Inter.;-- Stretch knees, lower heels and bow.

gown;

  Inter.;-- Assume erect position.

3rd Line;-- Rapping at the window,

  Inter.;-- With hands clenched, stretch arms upward and tap imaginary
  window. (Four times.)

Crying through the lock:--

  Inter.;-- Cup hands and carry to mouth as if calling, bending knees
  deeply.

4th Line;-- "Are all the children

  Inter.;-- Turn head to the right.

in their beds?

  Inter.;-- Turn head to the left.

Now 'tis eight o'clock."

  Inter.;-- Stretch the knees and lower heels.




HEY, DIDDLE, DIDDLE


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Hey, diddle, diddle, the cat and the fiddle,
  The cow jump'd over the moon;
  The little dog laughed to see such sport,
  And the dish ran away with the spoon.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention with hands on
hips.


1st Line;-- Hey, diddle, diddle,

  Interpretation;-- Mark time, in place, five counts.

the cat and

  Inter.;-- Imitate the action of playing the fiddle. One upward stroke
  of the bow.

the fiddle,

  Inter.;-- One downward stroke of the bow.

2nd Line;-- The cow

  Inter.;-- Turn to the left; place hands on edge of desk and back of
  seat and bend knees slightly.

jumped over

  Inter.;-- Vault over the seat.

the moon;

  Inter.;-- Turn to the right (front); stretch knees, lower heels and
  place hands on hips.

3rd Line;-- The little dog

laughed to see

  Inter.;-- Bend trunk forward, hugging self, imitating great hilarity.

such sport,

  Inter.;-- Assume erect position with hands on hips.

4th Line;-- And the

dish ran away with the spoon.

  Inter.;-- Execute a complete turn to the right with seven running
  steps, terminating action upon the word, "spoon."

Stamp feet twice, in place, at the completion of the entire activity.




WHERE HAS MY LITTLE DOG GONE?


_Permission to use words and music:--
Miss Lydia Clark and Benj. H. Sanborn & Co._

Arr. by +Fannie Robertson+

[Music:
  Oh where, oh where has my little dog gone?
  Oh where, oh where has he gone?
  With his tail cut short and his ears cut long,
  Oh where, oh where has he gone?]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention with hands on
hips.


1st Line;-- Oh where,

  Interpretation;-- Shade eyes with the right hand and with a jump
  execute 1/4 turn to the right.

oh where

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the left. (Front.)

has my little

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the left.

dog gone?

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the right. (Front.)

2nd Line;-- Oh where

  Inter.;-- Replace right hand to hip; shade eyes with the left hand
  and with a jump execute 1/4 turn to the left.

oh where

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the right (Front.)

has he g-

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the right.

one?

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the left (Front.)

3rd Line;-- With his tail cut short and his ears cut long,

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "tail," bend forward, placing hands behind
  back (palms together; fingers extended.)

  Upon the words, "and his," assume erect position with hands at sides.

  Upon the word, "ears," raise arms sideward, placing thumbs in ears
  (fingers extended.)

4th Line;-- Oh where,

  Inter.;-- Replace left hand to hip; shade eyes with the right hand
  and with a jump execute 1/2 turn right about.

oh where has he

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/2 turn right about. (Front.)

gone?

  Inter.;-- Replace right hand to hip, bow and assume erect position.


[Illustration: LOOKING FOR THE DOG]




RIDE A COCK-HORSE


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Ride a Cock-horse to Banbury Cross,
  To see a fine lady upon a white horse,
  Rings on her fingers and bells on her toes,
  She shall have music wherever she goes.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention with hands on
hips.


1st Line;-- Ride a Cock-horse to Banbury Cross,

  Interpretation;-- Stretch arms forward, holding imaginary reins;
  bending and stretching knees. (Three times.)

2nd Line;-- To see a fine lady upon a white horse,

  Inter.;-- Replace left hand to hip; shade the eyes with the right
  hand and rotate the body to the right upon the word, "To." Replace
  the right hand to hip; shade the eyes with the left hand and rotate
  the body to the left upon the word, "upon." Replace the left hand to
  hip and turn the body forward upon the word, "horse."

3rd Line;-- Rings on her fingers and bells on her toes,

  Inter.;-- Raise arms forward, palms forward, fingers and thumbs
  extended upon the word, "Rings." Bend the trunk slightly forward and
  lower arms (palms forward), looking at the toes, upon the word,
  "bells." Assume erect position with hands on hips, upon the word,
  "toes."

4th Line;-- She shall have music wherever she goes.

  Inter.;-- Wave the baton with the right hand (forefinger extended;
  thumb and remaining fingers clenched) to the left, right, left, right
  and left, upon the words, "She shall have music." (Five counts.)

  Replace the right hand to hip, bow and assume erect position upon the
  words, "wherever she goes."


[Illustration: THE SALUTE (_See page 35_)]


[Illustration: THE RIDING OF THE HORSE]




YANKEE DOODLE


[Music:
  Yankee Doodle came to town,
  A riding on a pony,
  He stuck a feather in his hat,
  And called it Macaroni.
  Yankee Doodle, Ha! Ha! Ha!
  Yankee Doodle Dandy;
  Mind the music and your step
  And round the house be handy.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention with hands on
hips.


Verse

1st Line;-- Yankee Doodle came to town,

  Interpretation;-- Children mark time, in place. (Seven counts.)

2nd Line;-- A riding on a pony,

  Inter.;-- Stretching arms forward as if holding imaginary reins;
  bend and stretch knees (four times), finishing with hands on hips.

3rd Line;-- He stuck a feather in his hat,
