
But she dropped a little towards the roofs of the houses, and Diamond
could see down into the streets. There were very few people about,
though. The lamps flickered and flared again, but nobody seemed to want
them.

Suddenly Diamond espied a little girl coming along a street. She was
dreadfully blown by the wind, and a broom she was trailing behind her
was very troublesome. It seemed as if the wind had a spite at her--it
kept worrying her like a wild beast, and tearing at her rags. She was so
lonely there!

"Oh! please, North Wind," he cried, "won't you help that little girl?"

"No, Diamond; I mustn't leave my work."

"But why shouldn't you be kind to her?"

"I am kind to her. I am sweeping the wicked smells away."

"But you're kinder to me, dear North Wind. Why shouldn't you be as kind
to her as you are to me?"

"There are reasons, Diamond. Everybody can't be done to all the same.
Everybody is not ready for the same thing."

"But I don't see why I should be kinder used than she."

"Do you think nothing's to be done but what you can see, Diamond, you
silly! It's all right. Of course you can help her if you like. You've
got nothing particular to do at this moment; I have."

"Oh! do let me help her, then. But you won't be able to wait, perhaps?"

"No, I can't wait; you must do it yourself. And, mind, the wind will get
a hold of you, too."

"Don't you want me to help her, North Wind?"

"Not without having some idea what will happen. If you break down and
cry, that won't be much of a help to her, and it will make a goose of
little Diamond."

"I want to go," said Diamond. "Only there's just one thing--how am I to
get home?"

"If you're anxious about that, perhaps you had better go with me. I am
bound to take you home again, if you do."

"There!" cried Diamond, who was still looking after the little girl.
"I'm sure the wind will blow her over, and perhaps kill her. Do let me
go."

They had been sweeping more slowly along the line of the street. There
was a lull in the roaring.

"Well, though I cannot promise to take you home," said North Wind, as
she sank nearer and nearer to the tops of the houses, "I can promise
you it will be all right in the end. You will get home somehow. Have you
made up your mind what to do?"

"Yes; to help the little girl," said Diamond firmly.

The same moment North Wind dropt into the street and stood, only a tall
lady, but with her hair flying up over the housetops. She put her hands
to her back, took Diamond, and set him down in the street. The same
moment he was caught in the fierce coils of the blast, and all but blown
away. North Wind stepped back a step, and at once towered in stature to
the height of the houses. A chimney-pot clashed at Diamond's feet. He
turned in terror, but it was to look for the little girl, and when he
turned again the lady had vanished, and the wind was roaring along the
street as if it had been the bed of an invisible torrent. The little
girl was scudding before the blast, her hair flying too, and behind her
she dragged her broom. Her little legs were going as fast as ever they
could to keep her from falling. Diamond crept into the shelter of a
doorway, thinking to stop her; but she passed him like a bird, crying
gently and pitifully.

"Stop! stop! little girl," shouted Diamond, starting in pursuit.

"I can't," wailed the girl, "the wind won't leave go of me."

Diamond could run faster than she, and he had no broom. In a few moments
he had caught her by the frock, but it tore in his hand, and away went
the little girl. So he had to run again, and this time he ran so fast
that he got before her, and turning round caught her in his arms, when
down they went both together, which made the little girl laugh in the
midst of her crying.

"Where are you going?" asked Diamond, rubbing the elbow that had stuck
farthest out. The arm it belonged to was twined round a lamp-post as he
stood between the little girl and the wind.

"Home," she said, gasping for breath.

"Then I will go with you," said Diamond.

And then they were silent for a while, for the wind blew worse than
ever, and they had both to hold on to the lamp-post.

"Where is your crossing?" asked the girl at length.

"I don't sweep," answered Diamond.

"What do you do, then?" asked she. "You ain't big enough for most
things."

"I don't know what I do do," answered he, feeling rather ashamed.
"Nothing, I suppose. My father's Mr. Coleman's coachman."

"Have you a father?" she said, staring at him as if a boy with a father
was a natural curiosity.

"Yes. Haven't you?" returned Diamond.

"No; nor mother neither. Old Sal's all I've got." And she began to cry
again.

"I wouldn't go to her if she wasn't good to me," said Diamond.

"But you must go somewheres."

"Move on," said the voice of a policeman behind them.

"I told you so," said the girl. "You must go somewheres. They're always
at it."

"But old Sal doesn't beat you, does she?"

"I wish she would."

"What do you mean?" asked Diamond, quite bewildered.

"She would if she was my mother. But she wouldn't lie abed a-cuddlin' of
her ugly old bones, and laugh to hear me crying at the door."

"You don't mean she won't let you in to-night?"

"It'll be a good chance if she does."

"Why are you out so late, then?" asked Diamond.

"My crossing's a long way off at the West End, and I had been indulgin'
in door-steps and mewses."

"We'd better have a try anyhow," said Diamond. "Come along."

As he spoke Diamond thought he caught a glimpse of North Wind turning a
corner in front of them; and when they turned the corner too, they found
it quiet there, but he saw nothing of the lady.

"Now you lead me," he said, taking her hand, "and I'll take care of
you."

The girl withdrew her hand, but only to dry her eyes with her frock, for
the other had enough to do with her broom. She put it in his again, and
led him, turning after turning, until they stopped at a cellar-door in a
very dirty lane. There she knocked.

"I shouldn't like to live here," said Diamond.

"Oh, yes, you would, if you had nowhere else to go to," answered the
girl. "I only wish we may get in."

"I don't want to go in," said Diamond.

"Where do you mean to go, then?"

"Home to my home."

"Where's that?"

"I don't exactly know."

"Then you're worse off than I am."

"Oh no, for North Wind--" began Diamond, and stopped, he hardly knew
why.

"What?" said the girl, as she held her ear to the door listening.

But Diamond did not reply. Neither did old Sal.

"I told you so," said the girl. "She is wide awake hearkening. But we
don't get in."

"What will you do, then?" asked Diamond.

"Move on," she answered.

"Where?"

"Oh, anywheres. Bless you, I'm used to it."

"Hadn't you better come home with me, then?"

"That's a good joke, when you don't know where it is. Come on."

"But where?"

"Oh, nowheres in particular. Come on."

Diamond obeyed. The wind had now fallen considerably. They wandered on
and on, turning in this direction and that, without any reason for one
way more than another, until they had got out of the thick of the houses
into a waste kind of place. By this time they were both very tired.
Diamond felt a good deal inclined to cry, and thought he had been very
silly to get down from the back of North Wind; not that he would have
minded it if he had done the girl any good; but he thought he had been
of no use to her. He was mistaken there, for she was far happier for
having Diamond with her than if she had been wandering about alone. She
did not seem so tired as he was.

"Do let us rest a bit," said Diamond.

"Let's see," she answered. "There's something like a railway there.
Perhaps there's an open arch."

They went towards it and found one, and, better still, there was an
empty barrel lying under the arch.

"Hallo! here we are!" said the girl. "A barrel's the jolliest bed
going--on the tramp, I mean. We'll have forty winks, and then go on
again."

She crept in, and Diamond crept in beside her. They put their arms round
each other, and when he began to grow warm, Diamond's courage began to
come back.

"This is jolly!" he said. "I'm so glad!"

"I don't think so much of it," said the girl. "I'm used to it, I
suppose. But I can't think how a kid like you comes to be out all alone
this time o' night."

She called him a kid, but she was not really a month older than he was;
only she had had to work for her bread, and that so soon makes people
older.

"But I shouldn't have been out so late if I hadn't got down to help
you," said Diamond. "North Wind is gone home long ago."

"I think you must ha' got out o' one o' them Hidget Asylms," said the
girl. "You said something about the north wind afore that I couldn't get
the rights of."

So now, for the sake of his character, Diamond had to tell her the whole
story.

She did not believe a word of it. She said he wasn't such a flat as to
believe all that bosh. But as she spoke there came a great blast of wind
through the arch, and set the barrel rolling. So they made haste to get
out of it, for they had no notion of being rolled over and over as if
they had been packed tight and wouldn't hurt, like a barrel of herrings.

"I thought we should have had a sleep," said Diamond; "but I can't say
I'm very sleepy after all. Come, let's go on again."

They wandered on and on, sometimes sitting on a door-step, but always
turning into lanes or fields when they had a chance.

They found themselves at last on a rising ground that sloped rather
steeply on the other side. It was a waste kind of spot below, bounded by
an irregular wall, with a few doors in it. Outside lay broken things in
general, from garden rollers to flower-pots and wine-bottles. But the
moment they reached the brow of the rising ground, a gust of wind
seized them and blew them down hill as fast as they could run. Nor could
Diamond stop before he went bang against one of the doors in the wall.
To his dismay it burst open. When they came to themselves they peeped
in. It was the back door of a garden.

"Ah, ah!" cried Diamond, after staring for a few moments, "I thought
so! North Wind takes nobody in! Here I am in master's garden! I tell you
what, little girl, you just bore a hole in old Sal's wall, and put your
mouth to it, and say, 'Please, North Wind, mayn't I go out with you?'
and then you'll see what'll come."

"I daresay I shall. But I'm out in the wind too often already to want
more of it."

"I said with the North Wind, not in it."

"It's all one."

"It's not all one."

"It is all one."

"But I know best."

"And I know better. I'll box your ears," said the girl.

Diamond got very angry. But he remembered that even if she did box his
ears, he musn't box hers again, for she was a girl, and all that boys
must do, if girls are rude, is to go away and leave them. So he went in
at the door.

"Good-bye, mister" said the girl.

This brought Diamond to his senses.

"I'm sorry I was cross," he said. "Come in, and my mother will give you
some breakfast."

"No, thank you. I must be off to my crossing. It's morning now."

"I'm very sorry for you," said Diamond.

"Well, it is a life to be tired of--what with old Sal, and so many holes
in my shoes."

"I wonder you're so good. I should kill myself."

"Oh, no, you wouldn't! When I think of it, I always want to see what's
coming next, and so I always wait till next is over. Well! I suppose
there's somebody happy somewheres. But it ain't in them carriages. Oh
my! how they do look sometimes--fit to bite your head off! Good-bye!"

She ran up the hill and disappeared behind it. Then Diamond shut the
door as he best could, and ran through the kitchen-garden to the stable.
And wasn't he glad to get into his own blessed bed again!




CHAPTER V. THE SUMMER-HOUSE


DIAMOND said nothing to his mother about his adventures. He had half a
notion that North Wind was a friend of his mother, and that, if she did
not know all about it, at least she did not mind his going anywhere with
the lady of the wind. At the same time he doubted whether he might not
appear to be telling stories if he told all, especially as he could
hardly believe it himself when he thought about it in the middle of the
day, although when the twilight was once half-way on to night he had no
doubt about it, at least for the first few days after he had been with
her. The girl that swept the crossing had certainly refused to believe
him. Besides, he felt sure that North Wind would tell him if he ought to
speak.

It was some time before he saw the lady of the wind again. Indeed
nothing remarkable took place in Diamond's history until the following
week. This was what happened then. Diamond the horse wanted new shoes,
and Diamond's father took him out of the stable, and was just getting on
his back to ride him to the forge, when he saw his little boy standing
by the pump, and looking at him wistfully. Then the coachman took his
foot out of the stirrup, left his hold of the mane and bridle, came
across to his boy, lifted him up, and setting him on the horse's back,
told him to sit up like a man. He then led away both Diamonds together.

The boy atop felt not a little tremulous as the great muscles that
lifted the legs of the horse knotted and relaxed against his legs, and
he cowered towards the withers, grasping with his hands the bit of mane
worn short by the collar; but when his father looked back at him,
saying once more, "Sit up, Diamond," he let the mane go and sat up,
notwithstanding that the horse, thinking, I suppose, that his master
had said to him, "Come up, Diamond," stepped out faster. For both the
Diamonds were just grandly obedient. And Diamond soon found that, as he
was obedient to his father, so the horse was obedient to him. For he had
