
=Force.= Force is vocal energy; in other words, it is the power or
volume of the voice, and is determined by the amount of physical and
mental energy exerted by the speaker.

The language of everyday conversation, when not marked by intensity of
feeling or purpose, requires only a moderate amount of physical and
mental energy and is expressed by _moderate force_. Intensity of
feeling or purpose, on the other hand, is accompanied by a great
expenditure of energy, and finds its natural outlet in _strong force_.
In the following lines, (p. 132) the king's emphatic approval of De
Lorge's action and his vehement condemnation of the lady's vanity find
expression in strong force:

  "In truth!" cried Francis, "rightly done!" and he rose from where
    he sat:
  "No love," quoth he, "but vanity, sets love a task like that!"

Compare the moderate amount of energy expended in uttering the
narrative clauses "cried Francis," "and he rose from where he sat,"
and "quoth he," which should be read with moderate force.

More physical energy is expended in making one's self understood at a
distance than near at hand, and in addressing a large audience than a
small one; hence strong force is used in the following where it is
accompanied by a loud tone of voice:

  "Come back, come back Horatius!"
  Loud cried the Fathers all.

But strong force does not necessarily imply a loud tone of voice:

  "Curse on him!" quoth false Sextus;
    "Will not the villain drown?
  But for this stay, ere close of day
    We should have sacked the town!"

Here Sextus gives vent to his concentrated hate for Horatius and
speaks with strong force, but not in a loud tone of voice.

The effort to influence the mind and action of others draws on a great
fund of mental energy; hence commands, persuasion, and argument, all
find their vocal expression in strong force. Herve Riel, urging the
captains to allow him to pilot the ships, speaks with strong force:

  Sirs, they know I speak the truth! Sirs, believe me there's a way!
  Only let me lead the line,

  When the mental or physical energy is at a low ebb we
  speak with _weak force_:

  But all that I could think of, in the darkness and the cold,
  Was just that I was leaving home, and my folks were growing old.

  Take me out, sink me deep in the green profound,
  To sway with the long-weed, swing with the drowned,
  Where the change of the soft tide makes no sound,
  Far below the keels of the outward bound.

For the same reason such poems as _The Day is Done_, (p. 63) and Part
IV, of _The Lady of Shalott_, (p. 200) are read with gentle force.

A change in force often accompanies a change in pitch. The lower pitch
of parenthetical expressions, and narrative clauses which interrupt
direct discourse, is accompanied by weaker force, and the higher pitch
resulting from the efforts to make one's self heard at a distance is
accompanied by stronger force.

=Stress= is force applied to the vowel sound. When we are taken by
surprise and give expression to it by means of the one word "Oh," we
apply the force or volume of the voice to the beginning of the vowel
sound. This is called _initial or radical stress_ (>). When we wish to
give a very emphatic denial to a statement, or to insist on a refusal
to some persistent request we say "No," gradually increasing the force
of the voice to the last part of the vowel sound. This is called
_final_ or _vanishing stress_ (<). Again, if our minds are uplifted
with wonder and delight at something we have heard or seen, we exclaim
"Oh" applying the force to the middle of the vowel sound. This swell
of the vowel sound is called _median stress_ (<>).

It has already been pointed out that force depends upon the _amount_
of energy. The above examples show that stress or the location of
force depends upon the _kind_ of mental energy, or the attitude of
mind, whether it be that of abruptness, of insistence, or of uplift.

All speech has a slight tendency toward initial stress, because the
effort made by the vocal chords to articulate sound is characterized
by abruptness. If, in addition, the mental energy of the speaker
possesses abruptness through sudden impulse or emotion, or through
unconscious imitation of sound or movement, the initial stress is
very prominent:

  _Where_ is thy leather apron, and thy rule?
  _What_ dost thou with thy best apparel on?--
  _You_, sir, _what trade_ are _you_?

  _Quick_, as it fell, from the broken staff
  Dame Barbara _snatched_ the silken scarf.

  She leaned far out on the window-sill,
  And _shook_ it forth with a royal will.

  While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping,
  As of some one gently rapping, rapping at my chamber door.

If the speaker desires to impress on others his own feelings or
convictions, the final stress is the result. Such insistence is found
in the expression of anger, scorn, indignation, and determination:

  _Burn_ the fleet and _ruin_ France?
  That were _worse_ than _fifty_ Hogues!
  Sirs, they _know_ I speak the truth!
  Sirs, _believe_ me, _there's a way_!

In the first two lines Herve Riel wishes to make others feel his own
indignation at the thought of burning the fleet. In the last two, he
tries to impress them with his conviction that there is a way out of
the difficulty. Hence the final stress in each case.

Sometimes the speaker tries to enforce his own opinion by peevishness,
whining, or complaining, with the result that he uses the final
stress:

_Lady Teazle._ Then _why_ will you _endeavour_ to
make yourself so _disagreeable_ to me, and _thwart_ me
in _every little elegant expense_?

_Sir Peter._ Madam, I say, had you any of these
little elegant expenses when you married me?

_Lady Teazle._ _Sir Peter!_ would you have me be
_out of the fashion_?

If the mental energy or mental attitude is one of uplift or
exaltation, expressing itself in adoration of the Deity, or in
admiration and love of the beautiful, or in sympathy and tenderness
toward mankind, the median stress is used:

  Bless the Lord, O my soul: and all that is within me, bless his
    holy name.

  _Roll on_, thou _deep_ and _dark_ blue ocean--_roll_!

  Dear lost companions of my tuneful art,
    Dear as the light that visits these sad eyes,
  Dear as the ruddy drops that warm my heart,
    Ye died amidst your dying country's cries.

Determination and settled conviction in the speaker's
mind, especially when accompanied by a marked degree of
dignity, calmness, and self-control, cause equal stress on
every part of the vowel sound. This is called _thorough stress_:

  If every ducat in six thousand ducats
  Were in six parts, and every part a ducat,
  I would not draw them; I would have my bond.

It is the stress of quiet strength and great reserve force:

Though the water flashed around them,
  _Not an eye was seen to quiver_;
Though the shot flew sharp and deadly,
  _Not a man relax'd his hold_.

In a more marked degree, it is also the stress used in calling:

  Then rose a warning cry behind, a joyous shout before:
  "The current's strong,--the way is long,--they'll never reach
    the shore!
  See, see! they stagger in the midst, they waver in their line!
  Fire on the madmen! break their ranks, and whelm them in
    the Rhine!"

If the speaker's attitude of mind is not straightforward and sincere,
if he speaks with a double meaning, in irony or sarcasm, the stress is
a combination of the radical and final, known as _compound stress_
(><). This is analogous to the compound inflection. See page 21.

  Now welcome, welcome, Sextus!
    Now welcome to thy home!
  Why dost thou stay, and turn away?
    Here lies the road to Rome.

Accordingly, the compound stress is used when the intention is to
taunt or to ridicule:

_Sir Peter._ Ay--there again--taste! Zounds!
Madam, you had no taste when you married me!

_Lady Teazle._ _That's very true_, indeed, Sir Peter!
and after having married _you_, I should _never pretend
to taste again_, I allow.

=Emphasis=--The importance of an idea, whether this idea is expressed
by a single word, or by a phrase or clause, is indicated by a
variation of pitch, force, or time. This change in pitch, force, or
time, by attracting attention to that idea, is a means of emphasis. It
is the new idea, or the idea which is important through contrast
either expressed or implied, which will attract the reader's attention
and which he will make prominent in this way:

  _Brutus._ You say you are a _better soldier_:
  Let it _appear_ so; make your vaunting _true_,
  And it shall _please me well_: for mine own part,
  I shall be _glad_ to learn of noble men.

  _Cassius._ You _wrong_ me every way; you _wrong_ me, Brutus;
  I said, an _elder_ soldier, not a _better_:

"better soldier," "appear," and "true" are central ideas; they express
important ideas not mentioned before. When Cassius replies he at once
throws the idea of "soldier" in the back-ground and emphasizes
"better" by contrasting it with "elder." He also introduces the new
idea "wrong" which he makes still more emphatic by repetition. Brutus
also introduces the new idea "please me well" which he makes emphatic
by repeating it in the word "glad." Other examples of words and
phrases becoming more emphatic through repetition are:

  Faster come, faster come;
    Faster and faster,
       *       *       *       *       *
  Fast they come, fast they come;

  "_Jump_--far--out boy into the wave,
    JUMP, or I fire," he said,
  "This chance alone your life can save:
    JUMP, JUMP."

In the case of a climax, the emphasis grows stronger on each member of
the series:

  "Take the helm, lead the line, save the squadron!" cried its chief.

  It is enthroned in the hearts of Kings,
  It is an attribute to God himself.

  When a wind from the lands they had ruin'd awoke from sleep,
  And the water began to heave and the weather to moan,
  And or ever that evening ended a great gale blew,
  And a wave like the wave that is raised by an earthquake grew,
  Till it smote on their hulls and their sails and their masts and
    their flags.

However, if a word is repeated, it is not necessarily emphatic each
time:

  The German heart is stout and true, the German arm is strong;
  The German foot goes seldom back where armed foemen throng.

In the phrase "The German heart" the chief emphasis is on "heart,"
with a slighter emphasis on German. The emphasis is then transferred
to "arm" and "foot" through contrast with "heart." To emphasize
"German" again would weaken the effect.

Compare the repetition, in the following, of the syllable "un," also
of the phrase "this year":

  Unwatched along Clitumnus
    Grazes the milk-white steer;
  Unharmed the water-fowl may dip
    In the Volsinian mere.

  The harvests of Arretium,
    This year, old men shall reap,
  This year young boys in Umbro
    Shall plunge the struggling sheep;
  And in the vats of Luna,
    This year, the must shall foam
  Round the white feet of laughing girls
    Whose sires have marched to Rome.

Words and phrases are emphatic quite as often through contrast implied
as through contrast expressed. It is evident that such a sentence as:
"Will you ride to town to-day?" may have a number of different meanings
according to the words emphasized. This difference of meaning is due
to an implied contrast. If "you" is emphatic, it is because there is a
mental contrast between "you" and some other person. If "ride" is
emphatic, it is because riding is being contrasted with walking or
driving and so on. The following contain examples of emphasis through
implied contrast:

  _Great_ things were ne'er begotten in an hour.

  But _now_ no sound of laughter was heard among the foes.

As already shown on page 21, the emphasis, in the case of implied
contrast, is brought out by the circumflex inflection.

=Shading= and =Perspective=. These deal with the relative importance
of words, phrases, or clauses. According as an idea suggested by a
word or group of words is regarded as principal or subordinate, the
voice either projects it or holds it in the back-ground as an artist
shades his picture:

  And, though the legend does not live,--for legends lightly die--
  The peasant, as he sees the stream in winter rolling by,
  And foaming o'er its channel-bed between him and the spot
  Won by the warriors of the sword, still calls that deep and
    dangerous ford
  The Passage of the Scot.

The principal statement, "The peasant still calls that deep and
dangerous ford the Passage of the Scot," is projected or emphasized by
higher pitch and stronger force, the thought being sustained, and the
connection made between "The peasant" and "still calls" by means of
the rising inflection. The subordinate statements, "though the legend
does not live" and "as he sees the stream in winter rolling by ...
sword," are kept in the back-ground by slightly lower pitch and
moderate force. The parenthetical clause, "for legends lightly die,"
is subordinate to the subordinate statement and is thrown still more
into the back-ground in the same way as the preceding.

Strictly speaking, the term "shading" is used to indicate the value of
individual phrases or clauses; "perspective," to indicate the values
of several phrases or clauses viewed relatively.

The =quality=, or timbre, of the voice reveals the speaker's emotions,
their character, number, and intensity. The voice is affected by the
muscular texture of the throat, just as the tone of an instrument is
affected by the texture of the material of which it is made. This
muscular texture is affected by nerve and muscular vibrations which
are caused by emotion, the result of mental impressions. Whatever be
the quality of voice peculiar to the individual, it is greatly
modified by his emotions. The man of few emotions has few vocal
vibrations; hence his monotonous voice. The man whose emotions are
habitually cruel, has a harsh, hard muscular texture through
contraction of the muscles; hence the hard voice. It is plain that the
natural voice is an index to the character. If the imagination and
soul are cultivated, the voice will gain in richness and fulness. If,
in reading that which expresses the sublime, noble, and grand, the
imagination is kindled, the voice will express by its vibrations the
largeness of our conception. This full, rich voice is called the
_orotund_:

  These are the gardens of the Desert, these
  The unshorn fields, boundless and beautiful,
  For which the speech of England has no name--
  The prairies.

  For as the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy
    toward them that fear him.
  As far as the east is from the west, so far hath he removed our
    transgressions from us.

In thinking of what is stern, severe, harsh, cruel, or base, the
muscles of the throat contract and produce the rigid, throaty tone
known as the _guttural_:

  On what compulsion must I? Tell me that.

  "Curse on him!" quoth false Sextus
    "Will not the villain drown?
  But for this stay, ere close of day,
    We should have sacked the town!"

Certain states of mind, such as awe, caution, secrecy, fear, etc.,
produce in greater or less degree an aspirated or "breathy" quality,
called the _whisper_ or _aspirate_:

  When Jubal struck the chorded shell,
    His listening brethren stood around,
  And, wondering, on their faces fell
    To worship that celestial sound.

  The red rose cries, "She is near, she is near;"
    And the white rose weeps, "She is late;"
  The larkspur listens, "I hear, I hear;"
    And the lily whispers, "I wait."

The atmosphere of hush and repose expresses itself by a partial
whisper:

  Ne'er saw I, never felt, a calm so deep!
    The river glideth at his own sweet will:
  Dear God! the very houses seem asleep;
    And all that mighty heart is lying still!

It must not be supposed that the whisper is always associated with
moderate or with weak force as in the preceding examples. Strong force
is used with the whisper to express intensity of feeling or vehemence:

  Whispering with white lips: the foe! they come! they come!

  Hush, I say, hush!

Other emotional states have their corresponding qualities of voice,
such, for example, as the quality of oppressed feeling and the quality
expressing agitation.

To conclude: it must be carefully borne in mind that the reader should
never strive to produce a certain quality apart from the emotion which
should precede. By force alone, for example, he will succeed in
producing mere sound without the quality. Nor are any of the examples
given above, in dealing with the various elements of vocal expression,
intended for practice in voice gymnastics apart from the preliminary
state of which they are the vocal expression. They are intended merely
as illustrations of the laws which govern correct speech.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE HIGH SCHOOL READER

THE BANNER OF ST. GEORGE

Words by Shapcott Wensley: music by Sir Edward Elgar
