the water. She had got less than a third of the way across when a
thundering One-eye came roaring at her from the opposite end. She was
much frightened, but knowing their stupidity and blindness, she dropped
to a low side beam and there crouched in hiding. Of course the stupid
Monster missed her and passed on, and all would have been well, but it
turned back, or another just like it came suddenly spitting behind her.
Pussy leaped to the long track and made for the home shore. She might
have got there had not a third of the Red-eyed Terrors come screeching
at her from that side. She was running her hardest, but was caught
between two foes. There was nothing for it but a desperate leap from
the timbers into-she didn't know what. Down, down, down-plop, splash,
plunge into the deep water, not cold, for it was August, but oh, so
horrible! She spluttered and coughed when she came to the top, glanced
around to see if the Monsters were swimming after her, and struck out
for shore. She had never learned to swim, and yet she swam, for the
simple reason that a Cat's position and actions in swimming are the
same as her position and actions in walking. She had fallen into a
place she did not like; naturally she tried to walk out, and the result
was that she swam ashore. Which shore? The home-love never fails: the
south side was the only shore for her, the one nearest home. She
scrambled out all dripping wet, up the muddy bank and through
coal-piles and dust-heaps, looking as black, dirty, and unroyal as it
was possible for a Cat to look.

Once the shock was over, the Royal-pedigreed Slummer began to feel
better for the plunge. A genial glow without from the bath, a genial
sense of triumph within, for had she not outwitted three of the big
Terrors?

Her nose, her memory, and her instinct of direction inclined her to get
on the track again; but the place was infested with those
Thunder-rollers, and prudence led her to turn aside and follow the
river-bank with its musky home-reminders; and thus she was spared the
unspeakable horrors of the tunnel.

She was over three days learning the manifold dangers and complexities
of the East River docks. Once she got by mistake on a ferryboat and was
carried over to Long Island; but she took an early boat back. At length
on the third night she reached familiar ground, the place she had
passed the night of her first escape. From that her course was sure and
rapid. She knew just where she was going and how to get there. She knew
even the more prominent features in the Dog-scape now. She went faster,
felt happier. In a little while surely she would be curled up in her
native Orient--the old junk-yard. Another turn, and the block was in
sight.

But--what! It was gone! Kitty couldn't believe her eyes; but she must,
for the sun was not yet up. There where once had stood or leaned or
slouched or straggled the houses of the block, was a great broken
wilderness of stone, lumber, and holes in the ground.

Kitty walked all around it. She knew by the bearings and by the local
color of the pavement that she was in her home, that there had lived
the bird-man, and there was the old junk-yard; but all were gone,
completely gone, taking their familiar odors with them, and Pussy
turned sick at heart in the utter hopelessness of the case. Her
place-love was her master-mood. She had given up all to come to a home
that no longer existed, and for once her sturdy little heart was cast
down. She wandered over the silent heaps of rubbish and found neither
consolation nor eatables. The ruin had taken in several of the blocks
and reached back from the water. It was not a fire; Kitty had seen one
of those things. This looked more like the work of a flock of the
Red-eyed Monsters. Pussy knew nothing of the great bridge that was to
rise from this very spot.

When the sun came up she sought for cover. An adjoining block still
stood with little change, and the Royal Analostan retired to that. She
knew some of its trails; but once there, was unpleasantly surprised to
find the place swarming with Cats that, like herself, were driven from
their old grounds, and when the garbage-cans came out there were
several Slummers at each. It meant a famine in the land, and Pussy,
after standing it a few days, was reduced to seeking her other home on
Fifth Avenue. She got there to find it shut up and deserted. She waited
about for a day; had an unpleasant experience with a big man in a blue
coat, and next night returned to the crowded slum.

September and October wore away. Many of the Cats died of starvation or
were too weak to escape their natural enemies. But Kitty, young and
strong, still lived.

Great changes had come over the ruined blocks. Though silent on the
night when she first saw them, they were crowded with noisy workmen all
day. A tall building, well advanced on her arrival, was completed at
the end of October, and Slum Kitty, driven by hunger, went sneaking up
to a pail that a negro had set outside. The pail, unfortunately, was
not for garbage; it was a new thing in that region: a scrubbing-pail. A
sad disappointment, but it had a sense of comfort--there were traces of
a familiar touch on the handle. While she was studying it, the negro
elevator-boy came out again. In spite of his blue clothes, his odorous
person confirmed the good impression of the handle. Kitty had retreated
across the street. He gazed at her.

"Sho ef dat don't look like de Royal Ankalostan! Hyar, Pussy, Pussy,
Pu-s-s-s-s-y! Co-o-o-o-m-e, Pu-u-s-s-sy, hyar! I 'spec's she's sho
hungry."

Hungry! She hadn't  had a real meal for months. The negro went into the
building and reappeared with a portion of his own lunch.

"Hyar, Pussy, Puss, Puss, Puss!" It seemed very good, but Pussy had her
doubts of the man. At length he laid the meat on the pavement, and went
back to the door. Slum Kitty came forward very warily; sniffed at the
meat, seized it, and fled like a little Tigress to eat her prize in
peace.




LIFE IV

XI

This was the beginning of a new era. Pussy came to the door of the
building now whenever pinched by hunger, and the good feeling for the
negro grew. She had never understood that man before. He had always
seemed hostile. Now he was her friend, the only one she had.

One week she had a streak of luck. Seven good meals on seven successive
days; and right on the top of the last meal she found a juicy dead Rat,
the genuine thing, a perfect windfall. She had never killed a
full-grown Rat in all her lives, but seized the prize and ran off to
hide it for future use. She was crossing the street in front of the new
building when an old enemy appeared,--the Wharf Dog,--and Kitty
retreated, naturally enough, to the door where she had a friend. Just
as she neared it, he opened the door for a well-dressed man to come
out, and both saw the Cat with her prize.

"Hello! Look at that for a Cat!"

"Yes, sah," answered the negro. "Dat's ma Cat, sah; she's a terror on
Rats, sah! hez 'em about cleaned up, sah; dat's why she's so thin."

"Well, don't let her starve," said the man with the air of the
landlord. "Can't you feed her?

"De liver meat-man comes reg'lar, sah; quatah dollar a week, sah," said
the negro, fully realizing that he was entitled to the extra fifteen
cents for "the idea."

"That's all right. I'll stand it."


XII

"M-e-a-t! M-e-a-t!" is heard the magnetic, cat-conjuring cry of the old
liver-man, as his barrow is pushed up the glorified Scrimper's Alley,
and Cats come crowding, as of yore, to receive their due.

There are Cats black, white, yellow, and gray to be remembered, and,
above all, there are owners to be remembered. As the barrow rounds the
corner near the new building it makes a newly scheduled stop.

"Hyar, you, get out o' the road, you common trash," cries the
liver-man, and he waves his wand to make way for the little gray Cat
with blue eyes and white nose. She receives an unusually large portion,
for Sam is wisely dividing the returns evenly; and Slum Kitty retreats
with her 'daily' into shelter of the great building, to which she is
regularly attached. She has entered into her fourth life with prospects
of happiness never before dreamed of. Everything was against her at
first; now everything seems to be coming her way. It is very doubtful
that her mind was broadened by travel, but she knew what she wanted and
she got it. She has achieved her long-time great ambition by catching,
not a Sparrow, but two of them, while they were clinched in mortal
combat in the gutter.

There is no reason to suppose that she ever caught another Rat; but the
negro secures a dead one when he can, for purposes of exhibition, lest
her pension be imperilled. The dead one is left in the hall till the
proprietor comes; then it is apologetically swept away. "Well, drat dat
Cat, sah; dat Royal Ankalostan blood, sah, is terrors on Rats."

She has had several broods since. The negro thinks the Yellow Tom is
the father of some of them, and no doubt the negro is right.

He has sold her a number of times with a perfectly clear conscience,
knowing quite well that it is only a question of a few days before the
Royal Analostan comes back again. Doubtless he is saving the money for
some honorable ambition. She has learned to tolerate the elevator, and
even to ride up and down on it. The negro stoutly maintains that once,
when she heard the meat-man, while she was on the top floor, she
managed to press the button that called the elevator to take her down.

She is sleek and beautiful again. She is not only one of the four
hundred that form the inner circle about the liver-barrow, but she is
recognized as the star pensioner among them. The liver-man is
positively respectful. Not even the cream-and-chicken fed Cat of the
pawn-broker's wife has such a position as the Royal Analostan. But in
spite of her prosperity, her social position, her royal name and fake
pedigree, the greatest pleasure of her life is to slip out and go
a-slumming in the gloaming, for now, as in her previous lives, she is
at heart, and likely to be, nothing but a dirty little Slum Cat.




ARNAUX

THE CHRONICLE OF A HOMING PIGEON

We passed through the side door of a big stable on West Nineteenth
Street. The mild smell of the well-kept stalls was lost in the sweet
odor of hay, as we mounted a ladder and entered the long garret. The
south end was walled off, and the familiar "Coo-oo, cooooo-oo,
ruk-at-a-coo," varied with the "whirr, whirr, whirr" of wings, informed
us that we were at the  pigeon-loft.

This was the home of a famous lot of birds, and to-day there was to be
a race among fifty of the youngsters. The owner of the loft had asked
me, as an unprejudiced outsider, to be judge in the contest.

It was a training race of the young birds. They had been taken out for
short distances with their parents once or twice, then set free to
return to the loft. Now for the first time they were to be flown
without the old ones. The point of start, Elizabeth, N. J., was a long
journey for their first unaided attempt. "But then," the trainer
remarked, "that's how we weed out the fools; only the best birds make
it, and that's all we want back."

There was another side to the flight. It was to be a race among those
that did return. Each of the men about the loft as well as several
neighboring fanciers were interested in one or other of the Homers.
They made up a purse for the winner, and on me was to devolve the
important duty of deciding which should take the stakes. Not the first
bird back, but the first bird into the loft, was to win, for one that
returns to his neighborhood merely, without immediately reporting at
home, is of little use as a letter-carrier.

The Homing Pigeon used to be called the Carrier because it carried
messages, but here I found that name restricted to the show bird, the
creature with absurdly developed wattles; the one that carries the
messages is now called the Homer, or Homing Pigeon--the bird that
always comes home. These Pigeons are not of any special color, nor have
they any of the fancy adornments of the kind that figure in Bird shows.
They are not bred for style, but for speed and for their mental gifts.
They must be true to their home, able to return to it without fail. The
sense of direction is now believed to be located in the bony labyrinth
of the ear. There is no creature with finer sense of locality and
direction than a good Homer, and the only visible proofs of it are the
great bulge on each side of the head over the ears, and the superb
wings that complete his equipment to obey the noble impulse of
home-love. Now the mental and physical equipments of the last lot of
young birds were to be put to test.

Although there were plenty of witnesses, I thought it best to close all
but one of the pigeon-doors and stand ready to shut that behind the
first arrival.

I shall never forget the sensations of that day. I had been warned:
"They start at 12; they should be here at 12:30; but look out, they
come like a whirlwind. You hardly see them till they're in."

We were ranged along the inside of the loft, each with an eye to a
crack or a partly closed pigeon-door, anxiously scanning the
southwestern horizon, when one shouted: "Look out--here they come!"
Like a white cloud they burst into view, low skimming over the city
roofs, around a great chimney pile, and in two seconds after first
being seen they were back. The flash of white, the rush of pinions,
were all so sudden, so short, that, though preparing, I was unprepared.
I was at the only open door. A whistling arrow of blue shot in, lashed
my face with its pinions, and passed. I had hardly time to drop the
little door, as a yell burst from the men, "Arnaux! Arnaux! I told you
he would. Oh, he's a darling; only three months old and a winner--he's
a little darling!" and Arnaux's owner danced, more for joy in his bird
than in the purse he had won.

The men sat or kneeled and watched him in positive reverence as he
gulped a quantity of water, then turned to the food-trough.

"Look at that eye, those wings, and did you ever see such a breast? Oh,
but he's the real grit!" so his owner prattled to the silent ones whose
birds had been defeated.

That was the first of Arnaux's exploits. Best of fifty birds from a
good loft, his future was bright with promise.

He was invested with the silver anklet of the Sacred Order of the High
Homer. It bore his number, 2590 C, a number which to-day means much to
all men in the world of the Homing Pigeon.

In that trial flight from Elizabeth only forty birds had returned. It
is usually so. Some were weak and got left behind, some were foolish
and strayed. By this simple process of flight selection the
pigeon-owners keep improving their stock. Of the ten, five were seen no
more, but five returned later that day, not all at once, but straggling
in; the last of the loiterers was a big, lubberly Blue Pigeon. The man
in the loft at the time called: "Here comes that old sap-headed Blue
that Jakey was betting on. I didn't suppose he would come back, and I
didn't care, neither, for it's my belief he has a streak of Pouter."

The Big Blue, also called "Corner-box" from the nest where he was
hatched, had shown remarkable vigor from the first. Though all were
about the same age, he had grown faster, was bigger, and incidentally
handsomer, though the fanciers cared little for that. He seemed fully
aware of his importance, and early showed a disposition to bully his
smaller cousins. His owner prophesied great things of him, but Billy,
the stable-man, had grave doubts over the length of his neck, the
bigness of his crop, his carriage, and his over-size. "A bird can't
make time pushing a bag of wind ahead of him. Them long legs is dead
weight, an' a neck like that ain't got no gimp in it," Billy would
grunt disparagingly as he cleaned out the loft of a morning.


