Those wild Indians of long ago had many noble traits. They were strong
and brave and fearless.

    Read in some of your school books about Indians and their homes.


3

THE NEGROES

There were no negroes in this country till many years after Columbus and
the other white men began to settle here. Some white men went far across
the sea to Africa. They stole the negroes away from their homes, carried
them to their ships and sailed back to this country. Then these white
men sold the negroes to other men for money. The poor colored men had to
work terribly hard as slaves and received no pay for their work. At last
they were freed by Abraham Lincoln and others who helped him.

[Illustration: NEGRO.]

The negroes have much that is fine in their character. Even when they
were slaves they often grew to love their masters so dearly that they
would do anything in the world, even give up their lives, for their
masters. We should always remember that God made the negro as well as
the white man. Fair-minded people will try to be honest, kind and just
to everyone.


4

THE CHINESE

[Illustration: CHINESE MANDARIN AND SERVANT.]

Many Chinamen have come to our country from their distant homes in
China. Their country is so crowded, and it is so hard to earn a living
there, that most of the people are very poor.

The Chinese living in our country are peaceful and quiet. They work very
hard in their laundries and other places of business; yet there are many
white people so cruel and thoughtless as to ridicule a Chinaman whenever
they see one. These white people should remember that God made the
Chinaman and that he is a stranger here in our country. Is it not even
worse to ill-treat a stranger than one who is at home? The color of our
skin and hair is not very important. It matters far more whether we are
honest, loving, industrious and fair-minded.

Not all of the white people living around us were born in this country.
Where did your parents and grandparents live when they were children?
Do you know any people who came from distant lands? Where were their
first homes? Find out how many of the parents of your schoolmates came a
long journey over the water to reach our land.

Yes, we have people from many foreign countries. Some are English,
Irish, Scotch or French. Then there are the Germans, Italians, Russians
and others. From what country did each of these people come?

Here they are all living together, people from all over the great wide
world. Our homes stand side by side. We work and play together. Truly we
are brothers and sisters, for we are all children in the great human
family. It matters not from what distant land our people may have come,
we should all be bound together like one family by human love and
kindness.




CHAPTER VI

INDUSTRIES AND OCCUPATIONS


1

Which members of your family work? Why do they work? For what is the
money they earn spent? Think which of these things are absolutely
necessary to keep us alive.

We all need _food_.

We all need _clothing_.

We all need _homes or shelter_.

Without these provisions we should die.

How do we get our food, our clothing and our homes? How did people get
them when there were no stores and no money? Do you know of any people
who were compelled to get things in this way?

    In a school reader, read about how primitive people lived.


2

THE SOIL

We have two kinds of food, vegetable food, which grows from the ground,
and animal food. Name some foods of each kind. All plants grow out of
the earth or soil. The soil is necessary to produce our animal food
also. The meat we eat comes from sheep, cows, chickens and other
animals. These animals all live on vegetable food. Without good soil
there would be no grass nor hay. No grass would mean no food for cows
and sheep. So we see that all of our food really comes from the soil.

Our clothing, too, is dependent upon the soil. The cotton plant grows up
out of the ground. The wool comes from the sheep, which eats grass which
grows from the ground.

Even our homes could not be built without products from the earth or
soil. Think how much wood is used in the construction of a house. The
trees which grow in the soil give us all the wood. Much iron, steel,
copper, brass and nickel are used in our homes. Stones and bricks form
part of many houses. All of these things come out of the earth. What a
wonderful thing is the soil! Out of it come our food, our clothing and
our shelter!

    In one of your books read the wonderful story of how we obtain a
    loaf of bread.


3


Write a list of all the kinds of work you can think of which people do.

Copy this list of industries and place a cross beside the ones at which
any persons you know work:

  Mining                 Printing and bookmaking
  Weaving                Iron and steel work
  Shipbuilding           Glass-blowing
  Lumbering              Pottery making
  Brickmaking            Meat packing
  Farming                Dairying
  Manufacturing foods    Manufacturing clothing
  Ice cutting            Manufacturing furniture

Which are town industries? Which are country industries?


4

Would you like to go to-morrow to visit a factory in which some food or
clothing is manufactured? Look at the map of the town. Find your school.
Find the factory. How far must we go and in what direction? What is the
name of the place we will visit? Notice all of the things made there.
Try to remember all of the materials needed at the factory, and find out
where these materials come from. Try to remember just how the articles
are made. Find out what will be done with the things that are
manufactured. Notice the number and kinds of machines used. See how many
workmen are employed.


5

AFTER THE TRIP

Write a letter to a friend in another class telling all about your
visit. Mention these points:

1. Where you went.

2. What was made.

3. How it was made.

4. The materials used.

5. The machinery.

6. The workmen.

7. The usefulness of the factory.

8. The care and skill of the workmen.

9. Anything else interesting about the trip.


6

Every town and every village is a workshop. There are many workmen here
that do good, careful work. Some of the goods of our town may be sent
thousands of miles away to other people who need them. The country
people, too, do much useful work. Name some of the things which our
workmen do for other people living at a distance from us.

    Read about the manufacture of the articles which you saw being made
    at the factory.


7

There are many workers in the world who do not make things with their
hands. Most of their work is done with their minds, though, of course,
their hands help too. Name some of these. What kind of work does each of
the following do?

  Teacher    Lawyer    Minister
  Doctor     Author    Banker




CHAPTER VII

ANIMALS AND PLANTS


1

There are many other living creatures in the world besides people. Write
a list of all the kinds of animals that you have ever seen.

[Illustration: AMERICAN BUFFALO.]

Some of these animals live near the homes of men. They are tame. Men
take care of them and see that they get food. Many of these animals are
very useful to us. Write a list of these tame animals. At the top of the
list write _Domestic Animals_. Of what use is each of the following
animals when alive? Which are useful after they are killed? Of what use
to man is each one?

  Horse    Pig    Chicken
  Cow      Dog    Duck
  Sheep    Cat    Pigeon.

    Read about how our meat is supplied to us.


2

Write a list of all the _wild animals_ you remember ever having seen.
Where did you see them? How were they prevented from harming people?
Where was the natural home of these animals? How did they get their
food? How do they now get their food?

[Illustration: RACCOON.]

Some of these animals so closely resemble the domestic animals that they
are said to belong to the same family. Read the names of the animals
belonging to the same family and tell in what way they resemble each
other. Tell which are domestic and which are wild.

THE CAT FAMILY

  Cat    Lion    Tiger    Leopard

[Illustration: TIGER.]

THE DOG FAMILY

  Dog    Fox    Wolf

THE HORSE FAMILY

  Horse    Zebra

THE COW FAMILY

  Cow    Buffalo

Describe some of these wild animals:

  Elephant    Fox
  Squirrel    Wolf
  Bear        Deer

There are also many fish, birds and insects.

Paste in your notebook any pictures of animals.


3

Take a trip to the Zoological Gardens and see these animals.

[Illustration: LEOPARD.]


4

Which domestic or wild animals are useful to us in obtaining food,
clothing and shelter?


5

PLANTS

We cannot live without food, clothing and shelter. Let us see how plants
