It was not only that there was something akin to association and
intimacy in drinking next, but there was the fearful joy of meeting her
in transit and receiving a cold and disdainful look from her wonderful
eyes.

On a certain warm day in summer Rebecca's thirst exceeded the bounds of
propriety. When she asked a third time for permission to quench it at
the common fountain Miss Dearborn nodded "yes," but lifted her eyebrows
unpleasantly as Rebecca neared the desk. As she replaced the dipper
Seesaw promptly raised his hand, and Miss Dearborn indicated a weary
affirmative.

"What is the matter with you, Rebecca?" she asked.

"It is a very thirsty morning," answered Rebecca.

There seemed nothing humorous about this reply, which was merely the
statement of a fact, but an irrepressible titter ran through the
school.  Miss Dearborn did not enjoy jokes neither made nor understood
by herself, and her face flushed.

"I think you had better stand by the pail for five minutes, Rebecca; it
may help you to control your thirst."

Rebecca's heart fluttered. She to stand in the corner by the water pail
and be stared at by all the scholars! She unconsciously made a gesture
of angry dissent and moved a step nearer her seat, but was arrested by
Miss Dearborn's command in a still firmer voice.

"Stand by the pail, Rebecca!--Samuel Simpson how many times have you
asked for water already?"

"This is the f-f-fourth."

"Don't touch the dipper, please. The school has done nothing but drink
all day; it has had no time whatever to study. What is the matter with
you, Samuel?"

"It is a v-very thirsty m-morning," remarked Samuel, looking at Rebecca
while the school tittered.

"I judged so. Stand by the other side of the pail, with Rebecca."
Rebecca's head was bowed with shame and wrath. Life looked too black a
thing to be endured. The punishment was bad enough, but to be coupled
in correction with Seesaw Simpson was beyond human endurance.

Singing was the last exercise in the afternoon, and Minnie Smellie
chose "Shall we Gather at the River?" It was a curious choice and
seemed to hold some secret association with the situation and general
progress of events; or at any rate there was apparently some obscure
reason for the energy and vim with which the scholars looked at the
empty water pail as they shouted the choral invitation again and
again:--

  "Shall we gather at the river,
  The beautiful, the beautiful river?"

Miss Dearborn stole a look at Rebecca's bent head, and was frightened.
The child's face was pale save for two red spots glowing on her checks.
Tears hung on her lashes; her breath came and went quickly, and the
hand that held her pocket handkerchief trembled like a leaf.

"You may go to your seat, Rebecca," said Miss Dearborn at the end of
the first song. "Samuel, stay where you are till the close of school.
And let me tell you, scholars, that I asked Rebecca to stand by the
pail only to break up this habit of incessant drinking, which is
nothing but empty-mindedness and desire to walk to and fro over the
floor. Every time Rebecca has asked for a drink to-day the whole school
has gone to the pail like a regiment. She is really thirsty, and I dare
say I ought to have punished you for following her example, not her for
setting it. What shall we sing now, Alice?"

"'The Old Oaken Bucket,' please."

"Think of something dry, Alice, and change the subject. Yes, 'The Star
Spangled Banner' if you like, or anything else." Rebecca sank into her
seat and pulled the singing book from her desk. Miss Dearborn's public
explanation had shifted some of the weight from her heart, and she felt
a trifle raised in her self-esteem.

Under cover of the general relaxation of singing, offerings of
respectful sympathy began to make their appearance at her shrine.
Living Perkins, who could not sing, dropped a piece of maple sugar in
her lap as he passed her on his way to the blackboard to draw the map
of Maine, while Alice Robinson rolled a perfectly new slate pencil over
the floor with her foot until it reached Rebecca's place.

Altogether existence grew brighter, and when she was left alone with
the teacher for her grammar lesson she had nearly recovered her
equanimity, which was more than Miss Dearborn had. The last clattering
foot had echoed through the hall, Seesaw's backward glance of penitence
had been met and answered defiantly by one of cold disdain.

"Rebecca, I am afraid I punished you more than I meant," said Miss
Dearborn, who was only eighteen herself, and in her year of teaching
country schools had never encountered a child like Rebecca.

"I had n't missed a question this whole day, nor whispered either,"
quavered the culprit; "and I don't think I ought to be shamed just for
drinking."

"You started all the others, or it seemed as if you did. Whatever you
do they all do, whether you laugh, or write notes, or ask to leave the
room, or drink; and it must be stopped."

"Sam Simpson is a copycoat!" stormed Rebecca. "I would n't have minded
standing in the corner alone--that is, not so very much; but I couldn't
bear standing with him."

"I saw that you could n't, and that's the reason I told you to take
your seat, and left him in the corner. Remember that you are a stranger
in the place, and they take more notice of what you do, so you must be
careful. Now let's have our conjugations. Give me the verb 'to be,'
potential mood, past perfect tense."

  "I might have been
  Thou mightst have been
  He might have been
  We might  have been
  You might have been
  They might have been"

"Give me an example, please."

  "I might have been glad
  Thou mightst have been glad
  He, she, or it might have been glad"

"'He' or 'she' might have been glad because they are masculine and
feminine, but could 'it' have been glad?" asked Miss Dearborn, who was
very fond of splitting hairs.

"Why not?" asked Rebecca.

"Because 'it' is neuter gender."

"Could n't we say, 'The kitten might have been glad if it had known it
was not going to be drowned'?"

"Ye-es," Miss Dearborn answered hesitatingly, never very sure of
herself under Rebecca's fire; "but though we often speak of a baby, a
chicken, or a kitten as 'it,' they are really masculine or feminine
gender, not neuter."

Rebecca reflected a long moment and then asked, "Is a hollyhock neuter?"

"Oh yes, of course it is, Rebecca."

"Well, could n't we say, 'The hollyhock might have been glad to see it
rain, but there was a weak little baby bud growing out of its stalk and
it was afraid it might be hurt by the storm; so the big hollyhock was
kind of afraid, instead of being real glad'?"

Miss Dearborn looked puzzled as she answered, "Of course, Rebecca,
hollyhocks could not be sorry, or glad, or afraid, really."

"We can't tell, I s'pose," replied the child; "but I think they are,
anyway. Now what shall I say?"

"The subjunctive mood, past perfect tense of the verb 'to know.'"

  "If I had known
  If thou hadst known
  If he had known
  If we had known
  If you had known
  If they had known"

"Oh, it is the saddest tense," sighed Rebecca with a little a little
break in her voice; "nothing but ifs, ifs, ifs! And it makes you feel
that if they only had known, things might have been better!"

Miss Dearborn had not thought of it before, but on reflection she
believed the subjective mood was a "sad" one and "if" rather a sorry
"part of speech."

"Give me some examples of the subjective, Rebecca, and that will do for
this afternoon," she said.

"If I had not eaten salt mackerel for breakfast I should not have been
thirsty," said Rebecca with an April smile, as she closed her grammar.
"If thou hadst love me truly thou wouldst not have stood me up in the
corner. If Samuel had not loved wickedness he would not have followed
me to the water pail."

"And if Rebecca had loved the rules of the school she would have
controlled her thirst," finished Miss Dearborn with a kiss, and the two
parted friends.



IV

THE SAVING OF THE COLORS

EVEN when Rebecca had left school, having attained the great age of
seventeen and therefore able to look back over a past incredibly long
and full, she still reckoned time not by years, but by certain
important occurrences. Between these epoch-making events certain other
happenings stood out in bold relief against the gray of dull daily
life. There was the coming of the new minister, for though many were
tried only one was chosen; and finally there was the flag-raising, a
festivity that thrilled Riverboro and Edgewood society from centre to
circumference, a festivity that took place just before she entered the
Female Seminary at Wareham and said good-by to kind Miss Dearborn and
the village school.

There must have been other flag-raisings in history,--even the persons
most interested in this particular one would grudgingly have allowed
that much,--but it would have seemed to them improbable that any such
flag-raising, as theirs could twice glorify the same century. Of some
pageants it is tacitly admitted that there can be no duplicates, and
the flag-raising at Riverboro Centre was one of these; so that it is
small wonder if Rebecca chose it as one of the important dates in her
personal almanac. Mrs. Baxter, the new minister's wife, was the being,
under Providence, who had conceived the first idea of the flag. Mrs.
Baxter communicated her patriotic idea of a new flag to the Dorcas
Society, proposing that the women should cut and make it themselves.

"It may not be quite as good as those manufactured in the large
cities," she said, "but we shall be proud to see our home-made flag
flying in the breeze, and it will mean all the more to the young voters
