armed, and loaded his guns.  More canoes were putting off from shore and
crowding round until there were about three hundred of them, with
upwards of two thousand men, some of whom sang a gruff sort of war-song,
while others blew into a shell as if it were a trumpet, and some played
on an instrument resembling a flute.

In the midst of these discordant noises one canoe, larger than the
others, and with a canopy over it, pushed alongside, and a naked warrior
handed up a bunch of red and yellow feathers.  This was, of course,
supposed to be a sign of peace, but such was not the case.  Immediately
afterwards the canoe pushed off and the leader threw into the air the
branch of a cocoa-nut tree.  This was the signal.  A general shout burst
from the savages; the canoes made for the ship, and showers of stones
were thrown on board.  Many of these stones were fully two pounds
weight, and as they were thrown with great force, some of the sailors
were severely wounded.

The crew of the _Dolphin_ rushed to quarters.  The watch on deck
instantly opened a fire of musketry on those nearest the ship, and two
of the quarter-deck swivel guns, which happened to be loaded with
small-shot, were also discharged.  This warm and vigorous reception
checked the attack for a few minutes; but the courage of the savages was
aroused.  They quickly renewed the assault, coming on in all directions,
and receiving constant reinforcements from the shore.  But now the great
guns of the ship were brought into play; the thunder of artillery
echoed, for the first time, from the mountain-sides of Tahiti; and, as
the heavy balls tore up the sea and crashed upon the shore, the
terrified natives in the canoes nearest the ship took to flight.

Seeing this, the Captain at once ordered the fire to cease, being
anxious to do as little harm as possible.  This, however, had the effect
of restoring confidence to the natives, who lay for some time gazing at
the ship from a considerable distance.  They had evidently profited by
their short experience in this new style of warfare, for, observing that
the terrible iron shower came thundering only from the _sides_ of the
ship, they made their next attack on the bow and stern--advancing with
much daring, and throwing their stones with great violence and good aim,
insomuch that some more of the men were severely hurt.

There is no saying what might have been the end of this fight, had not a
lucky cannon-shot, fired from one of the great guns that had been run
out at the bow, hit the canoe of the savage chief, and cut it in two.  A
result so tremendous had the effect of filling the hearts of the savages
with terror.  Every canoe turned tail and made for the shore in dire
confusion, while the people who had crowded the beach took to their
heels and ran over the hills in the utmost haste, as if they felt their
only safety lay in placing the mountains between them and the terrible
strangers in the big canoe.  In half an hour not a single canoe was to
be seen!

Captain Wallis now hoped that the natives would feel his immense
superiority, and cease a useless contest, but he was mistaken.  He was
not yet done with them.  They were a very determined set of men.  Soon
after this fight they were observed making preparations for a renewed
attack.  They could be seen pouring over the hills in all directions,
and lurking in the thickets, while, round the point, numbers of
war-canoes came paddling to the beach, where fresh warriors and bags of
stones were embarked.  It was evident that a grand attack was to be
made; so Wallis prepared to repel it.  Soon after, the bay was crowded
with canoes as they paddled straight and swift toward the ship.  At once
the great guns opened with terrible effect, and so tremendous a fire was
kept up that the entire flotilla was almost instantly dispersed.  Many
of the canoes were run ashore and deserted; others fled round the point,
and the savages took to the woods.  Into these the fire was then
directed, and the natives, who doubtless imagined that no danger could
penetrate from such a distance into the heart of their thick bushes,
were driven, astonished and horrified, up a hill on which thousands of
women and children had taken up their position to witness the fight.

Here they deemed themselves quite safe, but Captain Wallis resolved to
show them that they were not so.  He thought that the best thing he
could do would be to inspire them with a wholesome dread of his
tremendous artillery, so he ordered the guns to be fired at the crowded
hill.  The shots tore up the earth near a tree under which a dense crowd
was collected.  It need scarcely be added that the whole host fled on
the wings of terror, and in less than two minutes not a man, woman, or
child was to be seen.

The natives now at length submitted.  Not many hours after the close of
this fight, a few of them came down to the beach carrying green boughs
which they stuck into the sand, and placed beside them a peace-offering
of hogs and dogs and bundles of native cloth.  Of course Wallis was
right glad to accept it, and in return gave them presents of hatchets,
nails, and other things.  Peace was now thoroughly established, and the
two parties engaged in amicable traffic with as much good-will as if
they had neither quarrelled nor fought.  The queen of the island visited
the ship, and from that time till the _Dolphin_ left everything went
smoothly.

The ignorance of the natives as to the relative value of various metals
was curiously shown one day.  In order to find out what things they
liked best, Captain Wallis spread before them a coin called a johannes,
a guinea, a crown piece, a Spanish dollar, a few shillings, some new
halfpence, and two large nails, and made a sign to them to help
themselves.  The nails were first seized with great eagerness, and then
a few of the glittering new halfpence, but the silver and gold lay
neglected!

The friendship thus established continued to increase as long as Wallis
remained there, and when at length he took his departure the natives
exhibited every sign of extreme regret--the queen especially was
inconsolable, and wept bitterly when she bade them farewell.

Such were a few of the scenes that occurred at the discovery of Tahiti,
an island which has since become famous as the scene of the residence of
the mutineers of the _Bounty_, and the field of much earnest and deeply
interesting missionary labour.



CHAPTER SIX.

CAPTAIN COOK'S VISIT TO TAHITI.

Less than two years after the discovery of Tahiti by Wallis, Captain
Cook arrived in the _Endeavour_ at the same island.  He first saw its
high mountains rise on the horizon on the 11th of June 1769, and soon
afterwards a few canoes came off to the ship, but the natives were timid
at first.  They evidently had not forgotten the thundering guns and
crashing shot of the _Dolphin_.

In every canoe there were young plantains and branches of trees, which
latter were intended as tokens of peace and friendship.  The people in
one of the canoes ventured to the ship, and handed these branches up the
side, making signals at the same time with great earnestness.  At first
the sailors were unable to make out their meaning, but at length,
guessing that they wished those symbols to be placed in some conspicuous
part of the ship, they immediately stuck them about the rigging, upon
which the natives expressed the greatest satisfaction.  Cook then
purchased the cargoes of the canoes, consisting of cocoa-nuts and
various kinds of fruits, which, after their long voyage, were most
acceptable.

Next morning the _Endeavour_ was safely anchored in a bay called by the
natives Matavai.  Here the visitors were received with much kindness.
The natives regarded them with great respect and awe; the first man who
approached them crouching so low that he almost crept on his hands and
knees.  Then two of the chiefs came forward, and each selected his
friend.  One chose Cook, and the other selected Mr Banks, and each,
taking off the greater part of his clothes, put them solemnly on his
chosen friend.

On visiting their houses afterwards, they passed through delightful
groves of trees which were loaded with cocoa-nuts and bread-fruit.
These were found to be most excellent food.  Before becoming quite ripe
the liquid inside the cocoa-nut is said to resemble lemonade, when riper
it is more like milk; and the bread-fruit nut, when properly dressed, is
like the crumb of wheaten bread; so that it may be said of those
favoured regions, with some degree of truth, that the people find
something like bread and milk growing on the trees!  There is indeed
little occasion there for men to work.  The fruits of the earth grow
luxuriantly in a wild state; hence the natives, although a strong and
active race, are habitually indolent.  It has been proved, however, that
when the blessed influence of the Christian religion is brought to bear
on them, the South-Sea islanders are, in mind and body, good specimens
of mankind.

One of the houses visited by Cook, in company with Messrs. Banks and
Monkhouse, Dr Solander and others, on his first landing, was that of
Tootahah, a middle-aged man, who seemed to be a person of rank.  He
received them hospitably, spread mats for the party, desired them to sit
down by his side, and gave them an excellent dinner of bread-fruit,
cocoa-nuts, plantains, and fish--the latter raw as well as dressed.
Cook naturally preferred his fish cooked, but the natives seemed to
relish it raw!  Thereafter Tootahah presented Mr Banks and Captain Cook
with a cock and hen, which curious gifts they accepted with many thanks,
and in return gave Tootahah a laced silk neckcloth and a pocket
handkerchief, in which he immediately dressed himself with immense
satisfaction.  Mr Banks seems to have been a favourite with the savage
ladies, for they plied him earnestly with cocoa-nut milk.  He, as well
as Cook, received a further gift of native cloth, which, although rough
in texture, was agreeably perfumed.

Beads and other ornaments were presented to the women, and altogether
the new friends were becoming mutually delighted with each other when a
sudden interruption to the harmonious meeting was caused by the
discovery that some of the savages had acquired the art of picking
pockets.  A snuff-box belonging to Mr Monkhouse disappeared, and an
opera-glass in a shagreen case, the property of Dr Solander, vanished.
To pass over a first act of this kind lightly would have led to
interminable pilferings and quarrellings.  Mr Banks therefore started
up angrily and struck the butt of his musket violently on the ground.
Whereupon the most of the natives were panic-stricken, and darted out of
the hut with the utmost precipitation.  The chief endeavoured to appease
the wrath of his guests by offering them gifts of cloth; but they were
not thus to be silenced.  They insisted on the restoration of the stolen
articles, so the chief went out and shortly after returned with a
beaming countenance--he had found them both; but his countenance fell
when, on opening the case of the opera-glass, the glass itself was not
there.  With immense energy he resumed his detective duties, and was so
fortunate as to recover the glass in a short time.  Thus peace was
restored, and the natives were taught to feel that their propensity to
steal would prove a source of great annoyance and some danger to them,
should they venture to give way to it in future.

Soon after this Cook selected a spot on the beach, not far from the
ship, and, pitching his tent there, began to arrange for making the
astronomical observations which had brought him to the South Seas.  They
had not remained long, however, before they found that the islanders
were all addicted to stealing.  Cook tells us that men and women of all
ranks were the "arrantest thieves upon the face of the earth," yet they
seemed to feel that the act of theft was wrong, for if charged with
being guilty when they were in reality innocent, they were often moved
to passionate indignation.

One day, when a large number of natives visited the ship, the chiefs
employed themselves in stealing what they could in the cabin, while
their dependants were no less industrious in other parts of the ship.
They snatched up everything that it was possible for them to secrete
till they got on shore.  Two knives had been lost on shore, one of them
belonging to Mr Banks, who taxed a man named Tubourai Tamaide, whom he
suspected, with the theft.  The man denied it stoutly, but upon Mr
Banks saying firmly that, no matter who had taken it, he was determined
to have it back, another native, feeling alarmed for his own safety,
stepped forward and produced a rag in which three knives were tied up.
One belonged to Dr Solander, another to Captain Cook; the owner of the
third was not known.  Mr Banks continued to charge Tubourai Tamaide
with the theft of his knife, and the poor man continued to deny it
indignantly.  Not long after, it was discovered to have been mislaid by
Mr Banks's own servant, who at length found it.  Upon this
demonstration of his innocence, Tubourai expressed strong emotions of
mind.  The fellow was, doubtless, as great a thief as the rest of his
comrades, but on this occasion he felt himself to be an injured
innocent, and refused to be comforted until Mr Banks expressed great
sorrow for his unjust accusation, and made him a few trifling presents,
whereupon he immediately forgot his wrongs and was perfectly reconciled!

In his dealings with these natives Captain Cook invariably acted with
the gentleness, firmness, and wisdom of a truly great man, and at all
times treated evil-doers with impartial justice.

One day a chief came to the tent on the beach in a state of intense
excitement, and, hastily seizing Mr Banks by the arm, made signs that
he should follow him.  Mr Banks immediately complied, and soon came to
a place where they found the ship's butcher with a reaping-hook in his
hand.  Here the chief stopped, and in a transport of rage explained, as
well as he could by signs, that the butcher had threatened to cut his
wife's throat with the hook.  Mr Banks assured him that, if he could
fully explain the offence, the man should be punished.  Upon this he
became calm, and explained that the offender, having taken a fancy to a
stone hatchet which lay in his house, had offered to purchase it of his
wife for a nail; that she having refused to part with it, he had seized
it, and, throwing down the nail, threatened to cut her throat if she
made any resistance.  As the nail and hatchet were produced in proof of
this charge, and the butcher had little to say in his defence, there was
no reason to doubt its truth.

On the matter being reported to Cook, he took the opportunity of the
chief and his wives with a number of natives being on board the ship, to
call up the butcher, and, after repeating the charge and proof, he gave
orders that the man should be punished.  The natives looked on with
fixed attention while the man was being stripped and tied up to the
rigging, waiting in silent suspense for the event; but as soon as the
first stroke was given they interfered with great agitation, earnestly
entreating that he might be forgiven.  Cook, however, did not think it
advisable to agree to this.  He would not consent, and, when they found
that their entreaties were of no avail, they gave vent to their pity in
tears.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

SHOWS WHAT VANITY WILL INDUCE MEN AND WOMEN TO DO.

It fills one with wonder to think of the strange and absurd things that
men, in all ages and in all parts of the world, have done to themselves
in order to improve their personal appearance.  The flat-head Indian of
North America squeezes his forehead out of shape; the Eastern beauty
blackens her teeth and nails; the Chinaman shaves the hair off his head,
leaving a tuft on the top; the Englishman shaves the hair off his face,
leaving a tuft on each cheek,--and all of these deluded mortals run thus
deliberately in the face of nature, under the impression that by so
doing they are improving their personal appearance!

Not to be behindhand, the South-Sea islanders tattoo themselves.  In
other words, they prick a multitude of little holes in their skins, and
rub into these some colouring matter, which, when thoroughly fixed,
cannot again be washed out.  The ornamental devices with which they
thus, more or less, cover their persons are sometimes very cleverly and
tastefully done, and they would be really admirable if depicted on a
piece of wood or a sheet of paper; but when applied to the human body
they are altogether ridiculous.

The operation of tattooing is a very painful one; so much so, that a
great deal of it cannot be done at one time, and it is said that persons
