
"Certainly. You are doing this for our accommodation, not for your own,
and there is no earthly reason why you should perform the work outside
your regular hours."

"But it is for my accommodation, too," put in the lad with
characteristic candor.

"I am very glad if it happens to be," nodded Mr. Wharton. "So much the
better. But at any rate, you are not going to take your recreation time
for the job. Now before you go, tell me your ideas as to furnishings.
You will need some things, of course."

"Not much," Ted answered quickly. "As I said, I can knock together a
bunk and rough table myself. If I could just have a couple of
chairs----"

Mr. Wharton smiled at the modesty of the request.

"Suppose we leave the furnishing until later," said he, turning back to
his desk with a gesture of dismissal. "I may drop round there some time
to-day while you're working. We can then decide more fully upon what is
necessary. You'll find brooms, mops, rags, and water in the barn, you
know. Now be off. I'm busy."

Away went Ted, only too eager to obey. In no time he was laden with all
the paraphernalia he desired. He stopped at Stevens' cottage only long
enough to add to his equipment a pail of steaming water and then,
staggering under the weight of his burden of implements, made his way
to the shack. Once there he threw off his coat, removed his collar and
tie, rolled up his sleeves, and went to work. First he cleared the bulk
of rubbish from the room and set it outside; then he swept up the floor
and mopped it with hot suds; afterwards he washed the windows and
rubbed them until they shone. Often he had watched his mother and
sisters, who were well trained New England housekeepers, perform
similar offices and therefore he knew exactly how such things should be
done. It took him a solid morning to render the interior spotless and
just as he was pausing to view his handiwork with weary satisfaction
Mr. Wharton came striding in at the door.

"Mercy on us!" gasped the newcomer with amazement. "You have been busy!
Why, I had no idea there were such possibilities in this place. The
room is actually a pretty one, isn't it? We shall be able to fix you up
snug as a bug in a rug here." He ran his eye quickly about. "If you put
your bunk between the windows, you will get plenty of air. You'll need
window shades, some comfortable chairs, a bureau, a table----"

"I think I can make a table myself," Ted put in timidly. "That is, if I
can have some boards."

"No, no, no! There are boards enough. But you don't want a makeshift
thing like that. If you are going to have books and perhaps read or
study, you must have something that will stand solidly on four legs. I
may be able to root a table out of some corner. Then there will be
bedding----"

"I can bring that from home."

"All right. We'll count on you to supply that if you are sure you have
it to spare. I'll be responsible for the rest." He stopped an instant
to glance into the boy's face then added kindly, "So you think you are
going to like your new quarters, eh?"

"You bet I am!"

"That's good! And by the by, I have arranged for you to have your meals
with Stevens and his wife. They like you and were glad to take you in.
Only you must be prompt and not make them wait for you. Should you
prove yourself a bother they might turn you out."

"I'll be on hand, sir."

"See that you are. They have breakfast at seven, dinner at twelve, and
supper at six. Whenever you decide to spend Sunday with your family, or
take any meals elsewhere, you must, of course, be thoughtful enough to
announce beforehand that you are to be away."

"Yes, sir."

Ted waited a few moments and then, as Mr. Wharton appeared to be on the
point of leaving, he asked with hesitancy:

"How--how--much will my meals cost?"

An intonation of anxiety rang in the question.

"Your meals are our hunt," Mr. Wharton replied instantly. "We shall see
to those."

"But--but----"

"You'll be worth your board to the Fernald estates, never fear, my lad;
so put it all out of your mind and don't think of it any more. All is,
should we ask of you some little extra service now and then, I am sure
you will willingly perform it, won't you?"

"Sure!" came with emphatic heartiness.

"Then I don't see but everything is settled," the manager declared, as
he started back through the grove of pines. "I gave orders up at the
toolhouse that you were to have whatever boards, nails, and tools you
wanted, so don't hesitate to sail in and hunt up anything you need."

"You are mighty kind, sir."

"Pooh, pooh. Nonsense! Aren't you improving the Fernald property, I'd
like to know?" Mr. Wharton laughed. "This boathouse has been an eyesore
for years. We shall be glad enough to have it fixed up and used for
something."




CHAPTER IV

THE FIRST NIGHT IN THE SHACK


Throughout the long summer afternoon Ted worked on, fitting up his new
quarters. Not only did he make a comfortable bunk for himself such as
he had frequently constructed when at logging or sugaring-off camps in
Vermont, but having several boards left he built along the racks
originally intended for canoes some shelves for the books he meant to
bring from home. By late afternoon he had finished all it was possible
for him to do and he decided to go to Freeman's Falls and join his own
family at supper, and while there collect the possessions he wished to
transfer to the shack.

Accordingly he washed up and started out.

It was a little late when he reached the house and already his father
and sisters were at table.

"Mercy on us, Ted, what under the sun have you been doing until this
time of night?" demanded Mr. Turner. "I should call from seven in the
morning until seven at night a pretty long day."

"Oh, I haven't been working all this time," laughed the boy. "Or at
least, if I have, I have been having the time of my life doing it."

Eagerly, and with youthful enthusiasm, he poured out the tale of the
day's happenings while the others listened.

"So you are starting out housekeeping, are you?" chuckled Mr. Turner,
when the narrative was finished. "It certainly ain't a bad idea. Not
that we're glad to get rid of you--although I will admit we ain't got
the room here that I wish we had. It is the amount of time you'll save
and the strength, too, that I'm thinking of. It must be a good three
miles up to Aldercliffe and Pine Lea is at least two miles farther.
Being on the spot is going to make a lot of difference. But how are you
going to get along? What will you do for food? I ain't going to have
you eating stuff out of tin cans."

"Oh, you needn't worry about me, Dad. Mr. Wharton has arranged for me
to take my meals with Mr. and Mrs. Stevens who have a cottage on the
place. Stevens is the head farmer, you know."

"A pretty penny that will cost you! What does the man think you are--a
millionaire?"

"Mr. Wharton told me the Fernalds would see to the bill."

"Oh! That's another matter," ejaculated Mr. Turner, entirely mollified.
"I will say it's pretty decent of Mr. Wharton. Seems to me he is doing
a good deal for you."

"Yes, he is."

"Well, all is you must do your full share in return so he won't lose
anything by it." The elder man paused thoughtfully. "Ain't there
anything we could do to help out? Perhaps we could donate something
toward your furnishings."

"Mr. Wharton said if I could supply my own bedding----"

"We certainly can do that," put in Ruth quickly. "There is a trunkful
of extra comforters and blankets in the back room that I should be
thankful enough to ship off somewhere else. And wouldn't you like some
curtains? Seems to me they'd make it cosy and homelike. I've a piece of
old chintz we've never used. Why not make it into curtains and do away
with buying window shades?"

"That would be great!"

"It would be lots more cheerful," remarked Nancy. "What kind of a bed
have you got?"

"I've built a wooden bunk-two bunks, in fact--one over the other like
the berths in a ship. I thought perhaps sometime Dad might want to come
up and visit me; and while I was at it, it was no more work to make two
beds than one."

Mr. Turner smiled in friendly fashion into his son's eyes. The two were
great pals and it pleased him that the lad should have included him in
his plans.

"Beds like that will do all very well for a night or two; but for a
steady thing they will be darned uncomfortable. Cover 'em with pine
boughs after a long tramp through the woods and they seem like heaven;
but try 'em day after day and they cease to be a joke. Wasn't there a
wire spring round here somewhere, Ruth? Seems to me I remember it
standing up against something. Why wouldn't that be the very thing? You
could fasten it in place and have a bed good as you have at home."

"That's a corking idea, Dad!"

"I wish we could go up and see the place," Ruth suggested. "I am crazy
to know what it looks like. Besides, I want to measure the windows."

"Maybe we could run up there to-night," her father replied rising. "It
is not late and the Maguires said they would take us out for a little
spin in their Ford before dark. They might enjoy riding up to
Aldercliffe and be quite willing we should take along the spring bed.
Mat is a kind soul and I haven't a doubt he'd be glad to do us a favor.
Run down and ask him, Ted; or wait--I'll go myself."

The Maguires had the apartment just below the Turner's and Mat, a
thrifty and good-humored Irishman, was one of the night watchmen at the
Fernald mills. He had a plump little wife, but as there were no
children he had been able to save more money than had some of his
neighbors, and in consequence had purchased a small car which it was
his delight to use for the benefit of his friends. In fact, he often
called it the Maguire jitney, and the joke never became threadbare to
his simple mind, for every time he made it he laughed as heartily as if
he had never heard it before, and so did everybody else. Therefore no
sooner had Mr. Turner proposed his plan than Mat was all eagerness to
further the project.

"Sure I'll take you--as many of you as can pile in, and the spring bed,
too! If you don't mind the inconvenience of the luggage, I don't. And
tell Ted to bring along anything else he'd like to carry. We can pack
you all in and the stuff on top of you. 'Twill be easy enough. Just
make ready as soon as you can, so the dark won't catch us."

You may be sure the Turners needed no second bidding. Ruth and Nancy
scrambled the supper dishes out of the way while Ted and his father
hauled the wire spring out, brushed it, and dragged it downstairs.
Afterward Ted collected his box of electrical treasures, his books, and
clothing. What he would do with all these things he did not stop to
inquire. The chance to transfer them was at hand and he seized it with
avidity. His belongings might as well be stored in the shack as
anywhere else,--better, far better, for the space they left behind
would be very welcome to the Turner household.

Therefore with many a laugh, the party crowded into the waiting car and
set out for Aldercliffe; and when at length they arrived at the house
in the pines and Ted unlocked the sliding doors and pushed them wide
open, ushering in his guests, what a landholder he felt!

"My, but this is a tidy little place!" Maguire ejaculated. "And it's
not so little, either. Why, it's a regular palace! Look at the
fireplace and the four windows! My eye! And the tier of bunks is neat
as a ship's cabin. Bear a hand here with the spring. I'm all of a
quaver to see if it fits," cried the man.

"I made the bunks regulation size, so I guess there won't be any
trouble about that," Ted answered.

"The head on the lad!" the Irishman cried. "Ain't he the brainy one,
though? You don't catch him wool-gathering! Not he!"

Nevertheless he was not content until the spring had been hoisted into
place and he saw with his own eyes that it was exactly the proper size.
"Could anything be cuter!" observed he with satisfaction. "Now with a
good mattress atop of that you will have a bed fit for a king. You'll
be comfortable as if you were in a solid gold bedstead, laddie!"

"I'm afraid I may be too comfortable," laughed Ted. "What if I should
oversleep and not get to breakfast, or to work, on time!"

"That would never do," Mr. Turner said promptly. "You must have an
alarm clock. 'Twould be but a poor return for Mr. Wharton's kindness
were you to come dawdling to work."

"I guess you can trust Ted to be on time," put in Ruth soothingly. "He
is seldom late--especially to _meals_. Even if he were to be late at
other places, I should always be sure he would show up when there was
anything to eat."

"You bet I would," announced the boy, with a good-humored grin.

"I shall have enough chintz for curtains for all your windows,"
interrupted Nancy, who had been busy taking careful measurements during
the conversation. "We'll get some brass rods and make the hangings so
they will slip back and forth easily; they will be much nicer than
window shades."

"Ain't there nothin' I can donate?" inquired Mat Maguire anxiously. "A
rag rug, now--why wouldn't that be a good thing? The missus makes 'em
by the dozen and our house is full of 'em. We're breakin' our necks
mornin', noon, and night on 'em. A couple to lay down here wouldn't be
so bad, I'm thinking. You could put one beside your bed and another
before the door to wipe your feet on. They'd cheer the room up as well
as help keep you warm. Just say the word, sonny, and you shall have
'em."

"I'd like them tremendously."

The kind-hearted Irishman beamed with pleasure.

"Sure, they'll be better out of our house than in it," remarked he,
trying to conceal his gratification. "You can try stumbling over 'em a
