you?" repeated Donald.

"Yes, if I am able; I don't feel very well to-day." And the boat-builder
doubled himself up, as though he was in great pain.

The young man in the standing-room of the Sea Foam was Samuel Rodman, a
schoolmate of Donald, whose father was a wealthy man, and had ordered
another boat like the Skylark, which had been the model for the new
yacht. He had come down to see the craft, and had been invited to take a
sail in her; but an engagement had prevented him from going as far as
Turtle Head, and the boat-builder and his son had returned to land him,
intending still to make the trip. By this time Captain Patterdale had
reached the end of the wharf. He went on board of the Sea Foam, and
looked her over with a critical eye, and was entirely satisfied with
her. He was invited to sail in her for as short a time as he chose, but
he declined.

"By the way, Donald, did you see the green tin box when you were in my
library this afternoon?" he asked, when all the topics relating to the
yacht had been disposed of.

"Yes, sir; I saw you take some money from it," replied Donald.

"Then you remember the box?"

"Yes, sir."

"Did you notice it when you came out--I mean, when you left the house?"

"I don't remember seeing it when I came out," answered Donald, wondering
what these questions meant.

"I want to get another box just like that one. Did you take particular
notice of it?"

"No, sir; I can't say I did."

"You didn't stay any time in the library after you came down from
Michael's room, did you?"

"No, sir; I only went for my hat, and didn't stay there a minute."

"And you didn't notice the tin box?"

"No, sir; I didn't see it at all when I came out."

"Then of course you didn't see any marks upon it," added the captain,
with a smile.

"If I didn't see the box, I shouldn't have been likely to see the
marks," laughed Donald. "What marks were they, sir?"

"It's of no consequence, if you didn't see them. The box was in the
library--wasn't it?--when you went out."

"I don't know whether it was or not. I only know that I don't remember
noticing it," said Donald, who thought the captain's question was a very
queer one, after those he had just answered.

The nabob was no better satisfied with Donald's answers than he had been
with those of Laud Cavendish, except that the former looked him full in
the face when he spoke. He obtained no information, and went home to
seek it at other sources.

"I think I won't go out again, Donald," said Mr. Ramsay, when Captain
Patterdale had left. "I don't feel very well, and you may go alone."

"Do you feel very sick, father?" asked the son, in tones of sympathy.

"No; but I think I will go into the house and take some medicine. You
can run over to Turtle Head alone," added the boat-builder, as he walked
towards the house.

"Can't you go any how, Sam?" said Donald, turning to his friend.

"No, I must go home now. I have to drive over to Searsport after my
sister," replied Sam, as he left the yacht, and walked up the wharf.

Donald hoisted the jib of the Sea Foam, shoved off her head, and laid
her course, with the wind over the quarter, for Turtle Head--distant
about seven miles.




CHAPTER III

THE YACHT CLUB AT TURTLE HEAD.


The Sea Foam was a sloop yacht, thirty feet in length, and as handsome
as a picture in an illustrated paper, than which nothing could be finer.
It was a fact that she had cost twelve hundred dollars; but even this
sum was cheaper than she could have been built and fitted up in Boston
or Bristol. She was provided with everything required by a first class
yacht of her size, both for the comfort and safety of the voyager, as
well as for fast sailing. Though Mr. Ramsay, her builder, was a ship
carpenter, he was a very intelligent and well-read man. He had made
yachts a specialty, and devoted a great deal of study to the subject. He
had examined the fastest craft in New York and Newport, and had their
lines in his head. And he was a very ingenious man, so that he had the
tact to make the most of small spaces, and to economize every spare
inch in lockers, closets, and stow-holes for the numerous articles
required in a pleasure craft. He had learned his trade as a ship
carpenter and joiner in Scotland, where the mechanic's education is much
more thorough than in our own country, and he was an excellent workman.

The cabin of the Sea Foam was about twelve feet long, with transoms on
each side, which were used both as berths and sofas. They were supplied
with cushions covered with Brussels carpet, with a pillow of the same
material at each end. Through the middle, fore and aft, was the
centre-board casing, on each side of which was a table on hinges, so
that it could be dropped down when not in use. The only possible
objection to this cabin, in the mind of a shoreman, would have been its
lack of height. It was necessarily "low studded," being only five feet
from floor to ceiling, which was rather trying to the perpendicularity
of a six-footer. But it was a very comfortable cabin for all that,
though tall men were compelled to be humble within its low limits.

It was entered from the standing-room by a single step covered with
plate brass, in which the name of the yacht was wrought with bright
copper nails. On each side of the companion-way was a closet, one of
which was for dishes, and the other for miscellaneous stores. The trunk,
which readers away from boatable waters may need to be informed is an
elevation about a foot above the main deck, to afford head-room in the
middle of the cabin, had three deck lights, or ports, on each side. At
one end of the casing of the centre-board was a place for the water-jar,
and a rack for tumblers. In the middle were hooks in the trunk-beams for
the caster and the lantern. The brass-covered step at the entrance was
movable, and when it was drawn out it left an opening into the run under
the standing-room, where a considerable space was available for use. In
the centre of it was the ice-chest, a box two feet square, lined with
zinc, which was rigged on little grooved wheels running on iron rods,
like a railroad car, so that the chest could be drawn forward where the
contents could be reached. On each side of this box was a water-tank,
holding thirty gallons, which could be filled from the standing-room.
The water was drawn by a faucet lower than the bottom of the tank in a
recess at one side of the companion-way. The tanks were connected by a
pipe, so that the water was drawn from both. At the side of the step was
a gauge to indicate the supply of fresh water on board.

Forward of the cabin, in the bow of the yacht, was the cook-room, with a
scuttle opening into it from the forecastle. The stove, a miniature
affair, with an oven large enough to roast an eight-pound rib of beef,
and two holes on the top, was in the fore peak. It was placed in a
shallow pan filled with sand, and the wood-work was covered with sheet
tin, to guard against fire. Behind the stove was a fuel-bin. On each
side of the cook room was a shelf eighteen inches wide at the bulk-head
and tapering forward to nothing. Under it were several lockers for the
galley utensils and small stores. The room was only four feet high, and
a tall cook in the Sea Foam would have found it necessary to discount
himself. On the foremast was a seat on a hinge, which could be dropped
down, on which the "doctor" could sit and do his work, roasting himself
at the same time he roasted his beef or fried his fish. Everything in
the cook-room and the cabin, as well as on deck, was neat and nice. The
cabin was covered with a handsome oil-cloth carpet, and the wood was
white with zinc paint, varnished, with gilt moulding to ornament it.
Edward Patterdale, who was to be the nominal owner and the real skipper
of this beautiful craft, intended to have several framed pictures on the
spaces between the deck lights, a clock in the forward end over the
cook-room door, and brass brackets for the spy-glass in the
companion-way.

On deck the Sea Foam was as well appointed as she was below. Her
bowsprit had a gentle downward curve, her mast was a beautiful spar, and
her topmast was elegantly tapered and set up in good shape. Unlike most
of the regular highflyer yachts, her jib and mainsail were not
unreasonably large. Mr. Ramsay did not intend that it should be
necessary to reef when it blew a twelve-knot breeze, and, like the
Skylark, she was expected to carry all sail in anything short of a full
gale. But she was provided with an abundance of "kites," including an
immense gaff-topsail, which extended on poles far above the topmast
head, and far beyond the peak, a balloon-jib, a jib-topsail, and a
three-cornered studding-sail. The balloon-jib, or the jib-topsail, was
bent on with snap-hooks when it was needed, for only one was used at the
same time. These extra sails were to be required only in races, and they
were kept on shore. One stout hand could manage her very well, though
two made it easier work, and six were allowed in a race.

Donald seated himself in the standing-room, with the tiller in his right
hand. As soon as he had run out a little way, his attention was excited
by discovering three other sloop yachts coming down the bay. In one of
them he recognized the Skylark, and in another the Christabel, while the
third was a stranger to him, though he had heard of the arrival that day
of a new yacht from Newport, and concluded this was she. He let off his
sheet, and ran up to meet the little fleet.

"Sloop, ahoy!" shouted Robert Montague, from the Skylark, as Donald came
within hailing distance.

"On board the Skylark!" replied the skipper of the Sea Foam.

"Is that you, Don John?"

"Ay, ay."

"What sloop is that?" demanded Robert.

"The Sea Foam."

"Where bound?"

"Over to Turtle Head."

"We are bound there; come with us."

"Ay ay."

"Hold on a minute, Don John," shouted some one from the Christabel.

Each of the yachts had a tender towing astern, and that from the
Christabel, with five boys in it, immediately put off, and pulled to the
Sea Foam.

"Will you take us on board, Don John?" asked Gus Barker, as the tender
came alongside.

"Certainly; I'm glad to have your company," replied Donald, who had
thrown the yacht up into the wind.

Three of the party in the tender jumped upon the deck of the Sea Foam,
and the boat returned to the Christabel. Each of the yachts appeared to
have half a dozen or more on board of her, so that there was quite a
party on the way to Turtle Head. The sloops filled away again, the
Skylark and the new arrival having taken the lead, while the other two
were delayed.

"What sloop is that with the Skylark?" asked Donald.

"That's the Phantom. She got here from Newport this forenoon. Joe
Guilford's father bought her for him. She is the twin sister of the
Skylark, and they seem to make an even thing of it in sailing," replied
Gus Barker.

"You have quite a fleet now," added Donald.

"Yes; and we are going to form a Yacht Club. We intend to have a meeting
over at Turtle Head. Will you join, Don John?"

"I haven't any boat."

"Nor I, either. All the members can't be skippers," laughed Gus. "I am
to be mate of the Sea Foam, and that's the reason I wanted to come on
board of her."

"And I am to be one of her crew," added Dick Adams.

"And I the steward," laughed Ben Johnson. "I am going down into the
cook-room to see how things look there."

"You will join--won't you, Don?"

"Well, I don't know. I can't afford to run with you fellows with rich
fathers."

"O, get out! That don't make any difference," puffed Gus. "The owner of
the yacht has to foot the bills. Besides, we want you, Don John, for you
know more about a boat than all the rest of the fellows put together."

"Well, I shall be very glad to do anything I can to help the thing
along; but there are plenty of fellows that can sail a boat better than
I can."

"But you know all about a boat, and they want you for measurer. We have
the printed constitution of a Yacht Club, which Bob Montague got in
Boston, and according to that the measurer is entitled to ten cents a
foot for measuring a yacht; so you may make something out of your
office."

"I don't want to make any money out of it," protested Donald.

"You can make enough to pay your dues, for we have to raise some money
for prizes in the regattas; and we talk of having a club house over on
Turtle Head," rattled Gus, whose tongue seemed to be hung on a pivot in
his enthusiasm over the club. "Every fellow must be voted in, and pay
five dollars a year for membership. We shall have some big times.--We
are gaining on the Skylark, as true as you live!"

"I think we are; but I guess Bob isn't driving her," added Donald.

"She carries the same sail as the Sea Foam. I would give anything to
beat her. Make her do her best, Don John."

"I will," laughed the skipper, who had kept one eye on the Skylark all
the time.

He trimmed the sails a little, and began to be somewhat excited over the
prospect of a race. The Christabel was three feet longer than the other
yachts, and it was soon evident that in a light wind she was more than a
match for them, for she ran ahead of the Sea Foam. Her jib and mainsail
were much larger in proportion to her size than those of the other
sloops, but she was not an able boat, not a heavy-weather craft, like
them. The Sea Foam continued to gain on the Skylark, till she was
abreast of her, while the Phantom kept about even with her. But then
Robert Montague was busy all the time talking with his companions about
the Yacht Club, and did not pay particular attention to the sailing of
his boat. The Sea Foam began to walk ahead of him, and then, for the
first time, it dawned upon him that the reputation of the Skylark was at
stake. He had his crew of five with him, and he placed them in position
to improve the sailing of his craft. He ordered one of his hands to give
a small pull on the jib-sheet, another to let off the main sheet a
little, and a third to haul up the centre-board a little more, as she
was going free.

The effect of this attention on the part of the skipper of the Skylark
