
"What do you mean, Corrie, by such conduct?" said his captor, shaking
him vigorously.  "I have half a mind to give you a wallopping."

"Never do anything by halves, Henry," said the boy mildly.  "_I_ never
do.  It's a bad habit; always go the whole length or none.  Now that we
are alone, I'll give you a reasonable account of what I know, if you'll
remove your hand from my collar.  You forget that I'm growing, and that,
when I am big enough, the day of reckoning between us will surely come!"

"But why would you not give me the information I want in the house.  The
people you saw there are as much interested in it as I am."

"Oh! are they?" returned Corrie with a glance of peculiar meaning;
"perhaps they are _more_ interested than you are."

"How so?"

"Why, how do I know, and how do you know, that these fellows are not
pirates in disguise?"

"Because," said Henry, "one of them is an old friend--that is, an
acquaintance--at least a sort of intimate, who has been many and many a
time at our house before, and my mother knows him well.  I can't say I
like him--that is to say, I don't exactly like some of his ways--though
I don't dislike the man himself."

"A most unsatisfactory style of reply, Henry, for a man--ah, beg pardon,
a boy--of your straightforward character.  Which o' the three are you
speaking of--the grampus?"

"No, the other big handsome-looking fellow."

"And you're sure you've known him long?" continued the boy, while an
expression of perplexity flitted over his face.

"Quite sure; why?"

"Because _I_ have seen you often enough, and your house and your mother,
not to mention your cat and your pigs, and hens; but I've never seen
_him_ before to-day."

"That's because he usually comes at night, and seldom stays more than an
hour or two."

"A most uncomfortable style of acquaintance," said Corrie, trying to
look wise, which was an utterly futile effort, seeing that his
countenance was fat and round, and rosy, and very much the reverse of
philosophical.  "But how do you know that the grampus is not the
pirate?"

"Because he is one of Gascoyne's men."

"Oh! his name is Gascoyne, is it?--a most piratical name it is.
However, since he is your friend, Henry, it's all right; what's tother's
name?"

"Bumpus--John Bumpus."

On hearing this, the boy clapped both hands to his sides, expanded his
eyes and mouth, shewed his teeth, and finally gave vent to roars of
uncontrollable laughter, swaying his body about the while as if in
agony.

"Oh, clear!" he cried, after a time, "John Bumpus, ha! ha! ha! what a
name!--John Bumpus, ha! ha! the grampus--why, it's magnificent, ha! ha!"
and again the boy gave free vent to his merriment, while his companion
looked on with a quiet grin of amusement.

Presently, Corrie became grave, and said, "But what of the third, the
little chap, all over gold lace?  P'r'aps he's the pirate.  He looked
bold enough a'most for anything."

"Why, you goose, that's the commander of his Britannic Majesty's frigate
_Talisman_."

"Indeed?  I hope his Britannic Majesty has many more like him."

"Plenty more like him.  But come, boy; what have you heard of this
pirate, and what do you mean about a wounded nigger?"

"I just mean this," answered the lad, suddenly becoming serious, "that
when I was out on the mountain this morning, I thought I would cross the
ridge, and when I did so, the first thing I saw was a schooner lying in
the bay at the foot of the hill, where you and I have so often gone
chasing pigs together; well, being curious to know what sort of a craft
she was, I went down the hill, intendin' to go aboard; but before I'd
got half way through the cocoanut grove, I heard a horrible yell of a
savage; so, thinks I, here comes them blackguard pagans again, to attack
the settlement; and before I could hide out of the way, a naked savage
almost ran into my arms.  He was sea-green in the face with fright, and
blood was running over his right arm.

"The moment he saw me, instead of splitting me up with his knife and
eating me alive, as these fellers are so fond of doin', he gave a start,
and another great cry, and doubled on his track like a hare.  His cry
was answered by a shout from half a dozen sailors, who burst out of the
thicket at that moment, and I saw they were in pursuit of him.  Down I
went at once behind a thick bush, and the whole lot o' the blind bats
passed right on in full cry, within half an inch of my nose.  And I
never saw sich a set o' piratical-looking villains since I was born.  I
felt quite sure that yon schooner is the pirate that has been doing so
much mischief hereabouts, so I came back as fast as my legs could carry
me, to tell you what I had seen.  There, you have got all that I know of
the matter now."

"You are wrong, boy--the schooner you saw is not the pirate, it is the
_Foam_.  Strange, very strange!" muttered Henry.

"What's strange," inquired the lad.

"Not the appearance of the wounded nigger," answered the other; "I can
explain all about him, but the sailors--that puzzles me."

Henry then related the morning's adventure to his young companion.

"But," continued he, after detailing all that the reader already knows,
"I cannot comprehend how the pirates you speak of could have landed
without their vessel being in sight; and that nothing is to be seen from
the mountain tops except the _Talisman_ on the one side of the island
and the _Foam_ on the other, I can vouch for.  Boats might lie concealed
among the rocks on the shore, no doubt.  But no boats would venture to
put ashore with hostile intentions, unless the ship to which they
belonged were within sight.  As for the crew of the _Foam_, they are
ordinary seamen, and not likely to amuse themselves chasing wounded
savages, even if they were allowed to go ashore, which I think is not
likely, for Gascoyne knows well enough, that that side of the island is
inhabited by the pagans, who would as soon kill and eat a man as they
would a pig."

"Sooner,--the monsters," exclaimed the boy indignantly, for he had, on
more than one occasion, been an eye-witness, of the horrible practice of
cannibalism which prevails, even at the present day, among some of the
South Sea islanders.

"There is mystery here," said Henry, starting up, "and the sooner we
alarm the people of the settlement, the better.  Come, Corrie, we shall
return to the house and let the British officer hear what you have told
me."

When the lad had finished relating his adventure to the party, in Widow
Stuart's cottage, Gascoyne said quietly, "I would advise you, Captain
Montague, to return to your ship and make your preparations for
capturing this pirate, for that he is even now almost within range of
your guns, I have not the slightest doubt.  As to the men appearing
piratical-looking fellows to this boy, I don't wonder at that; most men
are wild enough when their blood is up.  Some of my own men are as
savage to look at as one would desire.  But I gave strict orders this
morning, that only a few were to go ashore, and these were to keep well
out of sight of the settlement of the savages.  Doubtless, they are all
aboard by this time.  If you decide upon anything like a hunt among the
mountains, I can lend you a few hands."

"Thank you, I may perhaps require some of your hands," said Montague,
with a dash of sarcasm in his tone; "meanwhile, since you will not
favour me with your company on board, I shall bid you good afternoon."

He bowed stiffly, and, leaving the cottage, hastened on board his ship,
where the shrill notes of the boatswain's whistle, and the deep hoarse
tones of that officer's gruff voice, quickly announced to the people on
shore that orders had been promptly given, and were in course of being
as promptly obeyed.

During the hour that followed these events, the captain of the _Foam_
was closeted with Widow Stuart and her son, and the youthful Corrie was
engaged in laying the foundations of a never-to-die friendship with John
Bumpus, or, as that eccentric youngster preferred to style him, Jo
Grampus.



CHAPTER FIVE.

THE PASTOR'S HOUSEHOLD--PREPARATIONS FOR WAR.

When the conference in the widow's cottage closed, Henry Stuart and
Gascoyne hastened into the woods together, and followed a narrow
footpath which led towards the interior of the island.  Arriving at a
spot where this path branched into two, Henry took the one that ran
round the outskirts of the settlement towards the residence of Mr
Mason, while his companion pursued the other which struck into the
recesses of the mountains.

"Come in," cried the missionary, as Henry knocked at the door of his
study.  "Ah, Henry, I'm glad to see you.  You were in my thoughts this
moment.  I have come to a difficulty in my drawings of the spire of our
new church, and I want your fertile imagination to devise some plan
whereby we may overcome it.  But of that I shall speak presently.  I see
from your looks that more important matters have brought you hither.
Nothing wrong at the cottage, I trust?"

"No, nothing--that is to say, not exactly wrong, but things, I fear, are
not altogether right in the settlement.  I have had an unfortunate
rencontre this morning with one of the savages, which is likely to lead
to mischief, for blood was drawn, and I know the fellow to be
revengeful.  In addition to this, it is suspected that Durward, the
pirate, is hovering among the islands, and meditates a descent on us.
How much truth there may be in the report I cannot pretend to guess; but
Gascoyne, the captain of the _Foam_, has been over at our cottage, and
says he has seen the pirate, and that there is no saying what he may
venture to attempt, for he is a bold fellow, and, as you know, cannot
have a good-will to missionary settlements."

"I'm not so sure of that," said the pastor, in answer to the last
remark.  "It is well known that wherever a Christian settlement is
founded in these islands, that place becomes a safe port for vessels of
all sorts--pirates as well as others, if they sail under false colours
and pretend to be honest traders;--while in all the other islands, it is
equally well known, the only safety one can count on, in landing, is
superior force.  But I am grieved to hear of your affray with the
native.  I hope that life will not be sacrificed."

"No fear of that; the rascal got only a flesh wound."

Here the young man related his adventure of the morning, and finished by
asking what the pastor advised should be done in the way of precaution.

"It seems to me," said Mr Mason, gravely, "that our chief difficulty
will be to save ourselves from our friends--"

"Would friends harm us, father?" asked a sweet soft voice at the
pastor's elbow.  Next moment Alice Mason was seated on her father's
knee, gazing up in his face with an expression of undisguised amazement.

Alice was a fair, delicate, gentle child.  Twelve summers and winters
had passed over her little head without a cloud to obscure the sunshine
of her life save one--but that one was a terribly dark one, and its
shadow lingered over her for many years.  When Alice lost her mother,
she lost the joy and delight of her existence; and although six years
had passed since that awful day, and a fond Christian father had done
his best to impress on her young mind that the beloved one was not lost
for ever, but would one day be found sitting at the feet of Jesus in a
bright and beautiful world, the poor child could not recover her former
elasticity of spirits.  Doubtless, her isolated position and the want of
suitable companions, had something to do with the prolonged sadness of
her little heart.

It is almost unnecessary to say that her love for her father was
boundless.  This was natural, but it did not seem by any means so
natural that the delicate child should give the next place in her heart
to a wild little boy, a black girl, and a ragged little dog!  Yet so it
was, and it would have been difficult for the closest observer to tell
which of these three Alice liked best.

No one could so frequently draw forth the merry laugh that in former
days had rung so sweetly over the hill-sides of the verdant isle, as our
young friend Will Corrie.  Nothing could delight the heart of the child
so much as to witness the mad gambols, not to mention the mischievous
deeds, of that ragged little piece of an old door-mat, which, in virtue
of its being possessed of animal life, was named Toozle.  And when Alice
wished to talk quietly,--to pour out her heart, and sometimes her
tears,--the bosom she sought on which to lay her head, next to her
father's, was that of her youthful nursery-maid, a good, kind, and
gentle, but an awfully stupid native girl named Kekupoopi.

This name was, of course, reduced in its fair proportions by little
Alice, who, however, retained the latter part thereof in preference to
the former, and styled her maid Poopy.  Young Master Corrie, on the
other hand, called her Kickup or Puppy, indifferently, according to the
humour he chanced to be in when he met her, or to the word that rose
most readily to his lips.

Mr Mason replied to the question put by Alice, at the beginning of this
somewhat lengthy digression, "No, my lamb, friends would not willingly
do us harm; but there are those who call themselves friends who do not
deserve the name, who pretend to be such, but who are in reality secret
enemies.  But go, dearest, to your room; I am busy just now talking with
Henry--he, at least, is a trusty friend.  When I have done you shall
come back to me."

Alice kissed her father, and, getting off his knee, went at once in
search of her friend Poopy.

That dark-skinned and curly black-headed domestic was in the kitchen,
seated on the bottom of an overturned iron pot, inside the dingy niche
in which the domestic fire was wont to burn when anything of a culinary
nature was going on.  At the time when her mistress entered, nothing of
the kind was in progress, and the fire had subsided to extinction.

The girl, who might have been any age between twelve and sixteen--nearer
the latter, perhaps, than the former--was gazing with expressionless
eyes straight before her, and thinking, evidently, of nothing.  She was
clothed in a white tunic, from which her black legs, arms, neck, and
head protruded--forming a startling contrast therewith.

"Oh!  Poopy, what a bad girl you are!" cried Alice, laughing, as she
observed where her maid was seated.

Poopy's visage at once beamed with a look of good humour, a wide gash
suddenly appeared somewhere near her chin, displaying a double row of
brilliant teeth surrounded by red gums; at the same time the whites of
her eyes disappeared, because, being very plump, it was a physical
impossibility that she should laugh and keep them uncovered.

"Hee! hee!" exclaimed Poopy.

We are really sorry to give the reader a false impression, as we feel
that we have done, of our friend Kekupoopi, but a regard for truth
compels us to shew the worst of her character first.  She was not
demonstrative; and the few words and signs by which she endeavoured to
communicate the state of her feelings to the outward world were not
easily interpreted except by those who knew her well.  There is no doubt
whatever that Poopy was--we scarcely like to use the expression, but we
know of no other more appropriate--a donkey!  We hasten to guard
ourselves from misconstruction here.  That word, if used in an
ill-natured and passionate manner, is a bad one, and by no means to be
countenanced; but, as surgeons may cut off legs at times, without
thereby sanctioning the indiscriminate practice of amputation in a
miscellaneous sort of way as a pastime, to this otherwise objectionable
word may, we think, be used to bring out a certain trait of character in
full force.  Holding this opinion, and begging the reader to observe
that we make the statement gravely and in an entirely philosophical way,
we repeat that Poopy was--figuratively speaking--a donkey!

Yet she was an amiable, affectionate: good girl for all that, with an
amount of love in her heart for her young mistress which words cannot
convey, and which it is no wonder, therefore, that Poopy herself could
not adequately express either by word or look.

"It's all very well for you to sit there and say `Hee! hee!'" cried
Alice, advancing to the fire-place; "but you must have made a dreadful
mark on your clean white frock.  Get up and turn round."

"Hee! hee!" exclaimed the girl, as she obeyed the mandate.

The "Oh! oh!! oh!!!" that burst from Alice, on observing the pattern of
the pot neatly printed off on Poopy's garment, was so emphatic, that the
girl became impressed with the fact that she had done something wrong,
and twisted her head and neck in a most alarming manner in a series of
vain attempts to behold the extent of the damage.

"_What_ a figure!" exclaimed Alice, on recovering from the first shock.

"It vill vash," said Poopy, in a deprecatory tone.

"I hope it will," replied Alice, shaking her head doubtfully, for her
experience in the laundry had not yet been so extensive as to enable her
to pronounce at once on the eradicability of such a frightfully deep
impression.  While she was still shaking her head in dubiety on this
point, and while Poopy was still making futile attempts to obtain a view
of the spot, the door of the kitchen opened, and Master Corrie swaggered
in with his hands thrust into the outer pockets of his jacket, his shirt
collar thrown very much open, and his round straw hat placed very much
on the back of his head; for, having seen some of the crew of the
_Talisman_, he had been smitten with a strong desire to imitate a
man-of-war's-man in aspect and gait.

At his heels came that scampering mass of ragged door-mat Toozle, who,
feeling that a sensation of some kind or other was being got up for his
amusement, joined heartily in the shout of delight that burst from the
youthful Corrie when he beheld the extraordinary figure in the
fireplace.

"Well, I say, Kickup," cried the youth, picking up his hat, which had
fallen off in the convulsion, and drying his tears, "you're a sweet
lookin' creetur, you are!  Is this a new frock you've got to go to
church with?  Come, I rather like that pattern, but there's not quite
enough of 'em.  Suppose I lend a hand and print a few more all over you.
There's plenty of pots and pans here to do it; and if Alice will bring
down her white frock I'll give it a touch up too."

"How can you talk such nonsense, Corrie!" said Alice, laughing.  "Down,
Toozle; silence, sir.  Go, my dear Poopy, and put on another frock, and
make haste, for I've something to say to you."

Thus admonished, the girl ran to a small apartment that opened off the
kitchen, and speedily reappeared in another tunic.  Meanwhile, Corrie
had seated himself on the floor, with Toozle between his knees and Alice
on a stool at his side.  Poopy, in a fit of absence of mind, was about
to resume her seat on the iron pot, when a simultaneous shriek, bark,
and roar, recalled her scattered faculties, produced a "hee! hee!"
varied with a faint "ho!" and induced her to sit down on the floor
beside her mistress.

"Now, tell me, Poopy," said Alice, "did you ever hear of friends who
were not really friends, but enemies?"

The girl stared with a vacant countenance at the bright intelligent face
of the child, and shook her head slowly.

"Why don't you ask _me_?" inquired Corrie.  "_You_ might as well ask
Toozle as that potato Kickup.  Eh?  Puppy, don't you confess that you
