the light air died away altogether, and the fleet was left floating
idly, in picturesque groups and with flapping sails, on the glassy sea.

Among the groups thus scattered about, there was one smack which had
quietly joined the fleet when the men were busy transhipping or
"ferrying" the fish to the steam-carrier.  Its rig was so similar to
that of the other smacks that a stranger might have taken it for one of
the fleet but the fishermen knew better.  It was that enemy of souls,
that floating grog-shop, that pirate of the North Sea, the _coper_.

"Good luck to 'ee," muttered Joe Stubley, whose sharp, because
sympathetic, eye was first to observe the vessel.

"It's bad luck to _you_ anyhow," remarked Bob the cook, who chanced to
pass at the moment.

"Mind your own business, Lumpy, an' none o' your sauce, if you don't
want a rope's-endin'," retorted the man.

"Ain't I just mindin' my own business?  Why, wot is sauce but part of a
cook's business?" returned the boy.

"I _won't_ go to her," thought Stephen Lockley, who overheard the
conversation, and in whose breast a struggle had been going on, for he
also had seen the _coper_, and, his case-bottle having run dry, he was
severely tempted to have it replenished.

"Would it not be as well, skipper, to go aboard o' the _coper_, as she's
so near at hand!" said the mate, coming aft at the moment.

"Well, no, Peter; I think it would be as well to drop the _coper_
altogether.  The abominable stuff the Dutchmen sell us is enough to
poison a shark.  You know I'm not a teetotaller, but if I'm to be killed
at all, I'd rather be killed by good spirits than bad."

"Right you are," replied Jay, "but, you see, a lot of us are hard up for
baccy, and--"

"Of course, of course; the men must have baccy," interrupted the
skipper, "an' we don't need to buy their vile brandy unless we like.
Yes, get the boat out, Jay, an' we'll go."

Stephen Lockley was not the first man who has deceived himself as to his
motives.  Tobacco was his excuse for visiting the floating den of
temptation, but a craving for strong drink was his real motive.  This
craving had been created imperceptibly, and had been growing by degrees
for some years past, twining its octopus arms tighter and tighter round
his being, until the strong and hearty young fisherman was slowly but
surely becoming an abject slave, though he had fancied himself
heretofore as free as the breezes that whistled round his vessel.  Now,
for the first time, Lockley began to have uncomfortable suspicions about
himself.  Being naturally bold and candid, he turned sharply round, and,
as it were, faced _himself_ with the stern question, "Stephen, are you
sure that it's baccy that tempts you aboard of the _coper_?  Are you
clear that schnapps has nothing to do with it?"

It is one of the characteristics of the slavery to which we refer, that
although strong-minded and resolute men put pointed questions of this
sort to themselves not unfrequently, they very seldom return answers to
them.  Their once vigorous spirits, it would seem, are still capable of
an occasional heave and struggle--a sort of flash in the pan--but that
is all.  The influence of the depraved appetite immediately weighs them
down, and they relapse into willing submission to the bondage.  Lockley
had not returned an answer to his own question when the mate reported
that the boat was ready.  Without a word he jumped into her, but kept
thinking to himself, "We'll only get baccy, an' I'll leave the _coper_
before the lads can do themselves any harm.  I'll not taste a drop
myself--not a single drop o' their vile stuff."

The Dutch skipper of the _coper_ had a round fat face and person, and a
jovial, hearty manner.  He received the visitors with an air of
open-handed hospitality which seemed to indicate that nothing was
further from his thoughts than gain.

"We've come for baccy," said Lockley, as he leaped over the bulwarks and
shook hands, "I s'pose you've plenty of that?"

"Ya," the Dutchman had "plenty tabac--ver sheep too, an' mit sooch a
goot vlavour!"

He was what the Yankees would call a 'cute fellow, that Dutchman.
Observing the emphasis with which Lockley mentioned tobacco, he
understood at once that the skipper did not want his men to drink, and
laid his snares accordingly.

"Com'," he said, in a confidential tone, taking hold of Lockley's arm,
"com' b'low, an' you shall zee de tabac, an' smell him yourself."

Our skipper accepted the invitation, went below, and was soon busy
commenting on the weed, which, as the Dutchman truly pointed out, was
"_so_ sheep as well as goot."  But another smell in that cabin
overpowered that of the tobacco.  It was the smell of Hollands, or some
sort of spirit, which soon aroused the craving that had gained such
power over the fisherman.

"Have some schnapps!" said the Dutch skipper, suddenly producing a
case-bottle as square as himself, and pouring out a glass.

"No, thank 'ee," said Stephen firmly.

"No!" exclaimed the other, with well-feigned surprise.  "You not drink?"

"Oh yes, I drink," replied Lockley, with a laugh, "but not to-day."

"I not ask you to buy," rejoined the tempter, holding the spirits a
little nearer to his victim's nose.  "Joost take von leetle glass for
goot vellowship."

It seemed rude to decline a proposal so liberally made, and with such a
smiling countenance.  Lockley took the glass, drank it off and went
hurriedly on deck, followed by the Dutchman, with the case-bottle in one
hand and the glass in the other.  Of course the men had no objection to
be treated.  They had a small glass all round.

"That's the stuff for my money!" cried Stubley, smacking his lips.  "I
say, old chap, let's have a bottle of it.  None o' your thimblefuls for
me.  I like a good swig when I'm at it."

"You'd better wait till we get aboard, Joe, before you begin," suggested
Lockley, who was well aware of Joe's tendencies.

Joe admitted the propriety of this advice, but said he would treat his
mates to one glass before starting, by "way o' wetting their whistles."

"Ya, joost von glass vor vet deir vistles," echoed the Dutchman, with a
wink and a look which produced a roar of laughter.  The glass was
accepted by all, including Lockley, who had been quite demoralised by
the first glass.

The victory was gained by the tempter for that time at least.  The
fishermen who went for baccy, remained for schnapps, and some of them
were very soon more than half drunk.  It was a fierce, maddening kind of
spirit, which produced its powerful effects quickly.

The skipper of the _Lively Poll_ kept himself better in hand than his
men, but, being very sociable in disposition, and finding the Dutchman a
humorous and chatty fellow, he saw no reason to hurry them away.
Besides, his vessel was close alongside, and nothing could be done in
the fishing way during the dead calm that prevailed.

While he and his men were engaged in a lively conversation about nothing
in particular--though they were as earnest over it as if the fate of
empires depended on their judgment--the Dutch skipper rose to welcome
another boat's crew, which approached on the other side of the _coper_.
So eager and fuddled were the disputants of the _Lively Poll_ that they
did not at first observe the newcomers.

It was the _Fairy's_ boat, with Dick Martin in charge.

"Hallo, Dick, mein boy; gif me your vlipper."

A sign from Martin induced the Dutchman to lean over the side and speak
in lower tones.

"Let's have a keg of it," said Dick, with a mysterious look.  "Ned Bryce
sent me for a good supply, an' here's _fish_ to pay for it."

The fish--which of course belonged to the owner of the _Fairy_, not to
Ned Bryce--were quickly passed up, and a keg of spirits passed down.
Then the Dutchman asked if Dick or his men wanted tabac or schnapps for
themselves.

"I vill take jersey, or vish, or sail, or boots, or vat you please in
exchange.  Com' aboard, anyhow, an' have von leetle glass."

Dick and his men having thus smartly transacted their chief business,
leaped on deck, made fast their painter, let the boat drop astern, and
were soon smoking and drinking amicably with the crew of the _Lively
Poll_.  Not long afterwards they were quarrelling.  Then Dick Martin,
who was apt to become pugnacious over his liquor, asserted stoutly that
something or other "was."  Joe Stubley swore that it "_was not_,"
whereupon Dick Martin planted his fist on Joe Stubley's nose and laid
its growly owner flat on the deck.

Starting up, Joe was about to retaliate, when Lockley, seizing him by
the neck thrust him over the side into the boat, and ordered his more or
less drunken crew to follow.  They did so with a bad grace, but the
order was given in a tone which they well understood must not be
disobeyed.

As they pushed off, Stubley staggered and fell into the sea.  Another
moment and he would have been beyond all human aid, but Lockley caught a
glimpse of his shaggy black head as it sank.  Plunging his long right
arm down, and holding on to the boat with his left, he caught the
drowning man by the hair.  Strong and willing arms helped, and Stubley
was hauled inboard--restored to life, opportunity, and hope--and flung
into the bottom of the boat.

The oars were shipped, and they pulled for the _Lively Poll_.  As they
rode away they saw that other boats were proceeding towards the _coper_.
The men in them were all anxious to buy baccy.  No mention was made of
drink.  Oh dear no!  They cared nothing for that, though, of course,
they had no sort of objection to accept the wily Dutchman's generous
offer of "von leetle glass vor goot vellowship."



CHAPTER SIX.

THE POWER OF SYMPATHY.

One fine afternoon, not long after the visit to the _coper_, Bob
Lumsden, _alias_ Lumpy, was called from his culinary labours to assist
in hauling in the net.

Now it is extremely interesting to note what a wonderful effect the
power of loving sympathy can have on a human being.  Lumpy was a human
being--though some of his mates insisted that he must have been
descended from a cod-fish, because his mouth was so large.  No doubt it
was, and when the boy laughed heartily he was, indeed, apt to remind one
of that fish; nevertheless it was a good, well-shaped mouth, though
large, with a kindly expression about it, and a set of splendid white
teeth inside of it.  But, whether human or fishy in his nature, Bob
Lumsden had been overwhelmed by a flood of sympathy ever since that
memorable day when he had first caught a glimpse of the sweet, pale face
of the little invalid Eve Mooney.  It was but a brief glimpse, yet it
had opened a new sluice in Lumpy's heart, through which the waters of
tenderness gushed in a wild torrent.

One of the curious results of this flood was that Bob was always more
prompt to the summons to haul up the trawl than he had ever been before,
more energetic in clawing the net inboard, and more eager to see and
examine the contents of the cod-end.  The explanation is simple.  He had
overheard his skipper say how fond Eve was of shells--especially of
those which came from the bottom of the North Sea, and of all sorts of
pretty and curious things, wherever they came from.

From that hour Bob Lumpy became a diligent collector of marine
curiosities, and the very small particular corner of the vessel which he
called his own became ere long quite a museum.  They say that sympathy
is apt to grow stronger between persons of opposite constitutions.  If
this be so, perhaps it was his nature--his bold, hearty, gushing,
skylarking spirit, his strong rugged frame, his robust health, his
carroty hair, his appley cheeks, his eagle nose, his flashing eyes--that
drew him so powerfully to the helpless, tender little invalid, with her
delicate frame and pale cheeks, straight little nose, bud of a mouth,
and timid, though by no means cowardly, spirit.

On another occasion Bob overheard Lockley again talking about Eve.  "I'm
sorry for the poor thing," he said to Peter Jay, as they paced the deck
together; "she's got such a wretched home, an' her mother's such a
drunken bru--"

Lockley checked himself, and did not finish the sentence.

"The doctor says," he resumed, "that if Eve had only a bath-chair or
suthin' o' that sort, to get wheeled about in the fresh air, she'd very
likely get better as she growed older--specially if she had good
victuals.  You see, small as she is, and young as she looks, she's over
fifteen.  But even if she had the chair, poor thing! who would wheel it
for her?  It would be no use unless it was done regular, an' her mother
can't do it--or won't."

From that hour Bob Lumpy became a miser.  He had been a smoker like the
rest of the crew, but he gave up "baccy."  He used to take an occasional
glass of beer or spirits when on shore or on board the _copers_, but he
became a total abstainer, much to his own benefit in every way, and as a
result he became rich--in an extremely small way.

There was a very small, thin, and dirty, but lively and intelligent boy
in Yarmouth, who loved Bob Lumsden better, if possible, than himself.
His name was Pat Stiver.  The affection was mutual.  Bob took this boy
into his confidence.

One day, a considerable time after Bob's discovery of Eve, Pat, having
nothing to do, sauntered to the end of Gorleston Pier, and there to his
inexpressible joy, met his friend.  Before he had recovered sufficiently
from surprise to utter a word, Bob seized him by the arms, lifted him
up, and shook him.

"Take care, Lumpy," cried the boy, "I'm wery tender, like an over-young
chicken.  You'd better set me down before I comes in pieces."

"Why, Stiver, you're the very man I was thinkin' of," said Lumpy,
setting the boy on the edge of the pier, and sitting down beside him.

Stiver looked proud, and felt six inches taller.

"Listen," said Bob, with an earnest look that was apt to captivate his
friends; "I want help.  Will you do somethin' for me?"

"Anything," replied the boy with emphasis, "from pitch and toss to
manslaughter!"

"Well, look here.  You know Eve Mooney?"

"Do I know the blessedest angel in all Gorleston?  In course I does.
Wot of her?"

"She's ill--very ill," said Lumpy.

"You might as well tell me, when it's daytime, that the sun's up,"
returned Pat.

"Don't be so awful sharp, Stiver, else I'll have to snub you."

"Which you've on'y got to frown, Bob Lumpy, an' the deed's done."

Bob gave a short laugh, and then proceeded to explain matters to his
friend: how he had been saving up his wages for some time past to buy a
second-hand bath-chair for Eve, because the doctor had said it would do
her so much good, especially if backed up with good victuals.

"It's the wittles as bothers me, Stiver," said Bob, regarding his friend
with a puzzled expression.

"H'm! well," returned the small boy seriously, "wittles has bothered me
too, off an' on, pretty well since I was born, though I'm bound to
confess I does get a full blow-out now an'--"

"Hold on, Stiver; you're away on the wrong tack," cried Bob,
interrupting.  "I don't mean the difficulty o' findin' wittles, but how
to get Eve to take 'em."

"Tell her to shut her eyes an' open her mouth, an' then shove 'em in,"
suggested Pat.

"I'll shove you into the sea if you go on talking balderdash," said Bob.
"Now, look here, you hain't got nothin' to do, have you!"

"If you mean in the way o' my purfession, Bob, you're right.  I purfess
to do anything, but nobody as yet has axed me to do nothin'.  In the
ways o' huntin' up wittles, howsever, I've plenty to do.  It's hard
lines, and yet I ain't extravagant in my expectations.  Most coves
require three good meals a day, w'ereas I'm content with one.  I begins
at breakfast, an' I goes on a-eatin' promiskoously all day till arter
supper--w'en I can get it."

"Just so, Stiver.  Now, I want to engage you professionally.  Your
dooties will be to hang about Mrs Mooney's, but in an offhand, careless
sort o' way, like them superintendent chaps as git five or six hundred a
year for doin' nuffin, an' be ready at any time to offer to give Eve a
shove in the chair.  But first you'll have to take the chair to her, an'
say it was sent to her from--"

"Robert Lumsden, Esquire," said Pat, seeing that his friend hesitated.

"Not at all, you little idiot," said Bob sharply.  "You mustn't mention
my name on no account."

"From a gentleman, then," suggested Pat.

"That might do; but I ain't a gentleman, Stiver, an' I can't allow you
to go an' tell lies."

"I'd like to know who is if you ain't," returned the boy indignantly.
"Ain't a gentleman a man wot's gentle?  An' w'en you was the other day
a-spreadin' of them lovely shells, an' crabs, an' sea-goin' kooriosities
out on her pocket-hankercher, didn't I _see_ that you was gentle?"

"I'll be pretty rough on you, Pat, in a minit, if you don't hold your
jaw," interrupted Bob, who, however, did not seem displeased with his
friend's definition of a gentleman.  "Well, you may say what you like,
only be sure you say what's true.  An' then you'll have to take some
nice things as I'll get for her from time to time w'en I comes ashore.
But there'll be difficulties, I doubt, in the way of gettin' her to take
wittles w'en she don't know who they comes from."

"Oh, don't you bother your head about that," said Pat.  "I'll manage it.
I'm used to difficulties.  Just you leave it to me, an' it'll be all
right."

"Well, I will, Pat; so you'll come round with me to the old furnitur'
shop in Yarmouth, an' fetch the chair.  I got it awful cheap from the
old chap as keeps the shop w'en I told him what it was for.  Then you'll
bring it out to Eve, an' try to git her to have a ride in it to-day, if
you can.  I'll see about the wittles arter.  Hain't quite worked that
out in my mind yet.  Now, as to wages.  I fear I can't offer you none--"

"I never axed for none," retorted Pat proudly.

"That's true Pat; but I'm not a-goin' to make you slave for nuthin'.
I'll just promise you that I'll save all I can o' my wages, an' give you
what I can spare.  You'll just have to trust me as to that."

"Trust you, Bob!" exclaimed Pat, with enthusiasm, "look here, now; this
is how the wind blows.  If the Prime Minister o' Rooshia was to come to
me in full regimentals an' offer to make me capting o' the Horse Marines
to the Hemperor, I'd say, `No thankee, I'm engaged,' as the young woman
said to the young man she didn't want to marry."

The matter being thus satisfactorily settled, Bob Lumsden and his little
friend went off to Yarmouth, intent on carrying out the first part of
their plan.

It chanced about the same time that another couple were having a quiet
chat together in the neighbourhood of Gorleston Pier.  Fred Martin and
Isa Wentworth had met by appointment to talk over a subject of peculiar
interest to themselves.  Let us approach and become eavesdroppers.

"Now, Fred," said Isa, with a good deal of decision in her tone, "I'm
not at all satisfied with your explanation.  These mysterious and long
visits you make to London ought to be accounted for, and as I have
agreed to become your wife within the next three or four months, just to
please _you_, the least you can do, I think, is to have no secrets from
_me_.  Besides, you have no idea what the people here and your former
shipmates are saying about you."

"Indeed, dear lass, what do they say?"

"Well, they say now you've got well they can't understand why you should
go loafing about doin' nothin' or idling your time in London, instead of
goin' to sea."

"Idlin' my time!" exclaimed Fred with affected indignation.  "How do
they know I'm idlin' my time?  What if I was studyin' to be a doctor or
a parson?"

"Perhaps they'd say that _was_ idlin' your time, seein' that you're only
a fisherman," returned Isa, looking up in her lover's face with a bright
smile.  "But tell me, Fred, why should you have any secret from _me_?"

"Because, dear lass, the thing that gives me so much pleasure and hope
is not absolutely fixed, and I don't want you to be made anxious.  This
much I will tell you, however: you know I passed my examination for
skipper when I was home last time, and now, through God's goodness, I
have been offered the command of a smack.  If all goes well, I hope to
sail in her next week; then, on my return, I hope to--to take the
