helmet.

Rooney possessed an active mind.  His thoughts flew fast.  This check
induced the following ideas--

"What if I shud want to scratch me head or blow me nose?  Or what if an
earwig shud chance to have got inside this iron pot, and take a fancy to
go into my ear?"

His right ear became itchy at the bare idea.  He made a desperate blow
at it, and skinned his knuckles, while a hitherto unconceived intensity
of desire to scratch his head and blow his nose took violent possession
of him.

Just then a dead cat, that had been flung into the harbour the night
before, and had not been immersed long enough to rise to the surface,
floated past with the tide, and its sightless eyeballs and ghastly row
of teeth glared and glistened on him, as it surged against his
front-glass.  A slight spirt of water came through the regulating cock
at the same instant, as if the dead cat had spit in his face.

"Hooroo!  Haul up!" shouted Rooney, following the order with a yell that
sounded like the concentrated voice of infuriated Ireland.  At the same
time he seized the life-line and air-tube, and tugged at both, not four
times, but nigh forty times four, and never ceased to tug until he found
himself gasping on the deck of the barge with his helmet off and his
comrades laughing round him.

"It's not a bad beginning," said Baldwin, as he assisted his pupil to
unrobe; "you'll make a good diver in course o' time."

Baldwin was right in this prophecy, for in a few months Rooney Machowl
became one of the best and coolest divers on his staff.

We need not try the reader's patience with an account of Edgar's
descent, which immediately followed that of the Irishman.  Let it
suffice to say that he too accomplished, with credit and with less
demonstration, his first descent to the bottom of the sea.



CHAPTER THREE.

REFERS TO A SMALL TEA-PARTY, AND TOUCHES VERY MILDLY ON LOVE.

Miss Pritty was a good soul, but weak.  She was Edgar Berrington's
maiden aunt--of an uncertain age--on the mother's side.  Her chief
characteristic was delicacy--delicacy of health, delicacy of sentiment,
delicacy of intellect--general delicacy, in fact, all over.  She was
slight too--slightly made, slightly educated, slightly pretty, and
slightly cracked.  But there were a few things in regard to which Miss
Laura Pritty was strong.  She was strong in her affections, strong in
her reverence for all good things (including a few bad things which in
her innocence she thought good), strong in her prejudices and impulses,
and strong--remarkably strong--in parentheses.  Her speech was eminently
parenthetical, insomuch that the range of her ideas was wholly
untrammelled by the proprieties of subject or language.  Given a point
to be aimed at in conversation, Miss Pritty _never_ aimed at it.  She
invariably began with it, and, parting finally from it at the outset,
diverged to any or every other point in nature.  Perplexity, as a matter
of course, was the usual result both in speaker and hearer, but then
that mattered little, for Miss Pritty was also strong in easy-going
good-nature.

On the evening in which we introduce her, Miss Pritty was going to have
her dear and intimate friend Aileen Hazlit to tea, and she laid out her
little tea-table with as much care as an engineer might have taken in
drawing a mathematical problem.  The teapot was placed in the exact
centre of the tray, with its spout and handle pointing so that a line
drawn through them would have been parallel to the sides of her little
"boudoir."  The urn stood exactly behind it.  The sugar-basin formed, on
one side of the tray, a _pendant_ to the cream-jug on the other, and
inasmuch as the cream-jug was small, a toast-rack was coupled with it to
constitute the necessary balance.  So, too, with the cups: they were
placed equidistant from the teapot, the sides of the tray, and each
other, while a salver of cake on one side of the table was scrupulously
balanced by a plate of buns on the other side.

"There she is--the _darling_!" exclaimed Miss Pritty, with a little skip
and (excuse the word) a giggle as the bell rang.

"Miss Aileen Hazlit," announced Miss Pritty's small and only domestic,
who flung wide open the door of the boudoir, as its owner was fond of
styling it.

Whereupon there entered "an angel in blue, with a straw hat and ostrich
feather."

We quote from the last, almost dying, speech of a hopeless youth in the
town--a lawyer's clerk--whose heart was stamped over so completely with
the word "Aileen" that it was unrecognisable, and practically useless
for any purpose except beating--which it did, hard, at all times.

Aileen was beautiful beyond compare, because, in her case, extreme
beauty of face and feature was coupled with rare beauty of expression,
indicating fine qualities of mind.  She was quiet in demeanour, grave in
speech, serious and very earnest in thought, enthusiastic in action,
unconscious and unselfish.

"Pooh!  Perfection!"  I hear some lady reader ejaculate.

No, fair one, not quite that, but as near it as was compatible with
humanity.  Happily there are many such in the world--some with more and
some with less of the external beauty--and man is blessed and the world
upheld by them.

The chief bond that bound Aileen and Miss Pritty together was a text of
Scripture, "Consider the poor."  The latter had strong sympathy with the
poor, being herself one of the number.  The former, being rich in faith
as well as in means, "considered" them.  The two laid their heads
together and concerted plans for the "raising of the masses," which
might have been food for study to _some_ statesmen.  For instance, they
fed the hungry and clothed the naked; they encouraged the well-disposed
and reproved the evil; they "scattered seeds of kindness" wherever they
went; they sowed the precious Word of God in all kinds of ground--good
and bad; they comforted the sorrowing; they visited the sick and the
prisoner; they refused to help, or, in any way to encourage, the idle;
they handed the obstreperous and violent over to the police, with the
hope--if not the recommendation--that the rod should not be spared; and
in all cases they prayed for them.  The results were considerable, but,
not being ostentatiously trumpeted, were not always recognised or traced
to their true cause.

"Come away, darling," exclaimed Miss Pritty, eagerly embracing and
kissing her friend, who accepted, but did not return, the embrace,
though she did the kiss.  "I thought you were not coming at all, and I
have not seen you for a whole week!  What has kept you?  There, put off
your hat.  I'm _so_ glad to see you, dear Aileen.  Isn't it strange that
I'm so fond of you?  They say that people who are contrasts generally
draw together--at least I've often heard Mrs Boxer, the wife of Captain
Boxer, you know, of the navy, who used to swear so dreadfully before he
was married, but, I am happy to say, has quite given it up now, which
says a great deal for wedded life, though it's a state that I don't
quite believe in myself, for if Adam had never married Eve he would not
have been tempted to eat the forbidden fruit, and so there would have
been no sin and no sorrow or poverty--no poor!  Only think of that."

"So that our chief occupation would have been gone," said Aileen, with a
slight twinkle of her lustrous blue eyes, "and perhaps you and I might
never have met."

Miss Pritty replied to this something very much to the effect that she
would have preferred the entrance of sin and all its consequences--
poverty included--into the world, rather than have missed making the
friendship of Miss Hazlit.  At least her words might have borne that
interpretation--or any other!

"My father detained me," said Aileen, seating herself at the table,
while her volatile friend put lumps of sugar into the cups, with a
tender yet sprightly motion of the hand, as if she were doing the cups a
special kindness--as indeed she was, when preparing one of them to touch
the lips of Aileen.

"Naughty man, why did he detain you?" said Miss Pritty.

"Only to write one or two notes, his right hand being disabled at
present by rheumatism."

"A gentleman, Miss, in the dinin'-room," said the small domestic,
suddenly opening a chink of the door for the admission of her somewhat
dishevelled head.  "He won't send his name up--says he wants to see
you."

"How vexing!" exclaimed Miss Pritty, "but I'll go down.  I'm determined
that he shan't interrupt our _tete-a-tete_."

Miss Pritty uttered a little scream of surprise on entering the
dining-room.

"Well, aunt," said Edgar Berrington, with a hearty smile, as he extended
his hand, "you are surprised to see me?"

"Of course I am, dear Eddy," cried Miss Pritty, holding up her cheek for
a kiss.  "Sit down.  Why, you were in London when I last heard of you."

"True, but I'm not in London now, as you see.  I've been a week here."

"A week, Eddy!  And you did not come to see me till now?"

"Well, I ought to apologise," replied the youth, with a slight look of
confusion, "but--the fact is, I came down partly on business, and--and--
so you see I've been very busy."

"Of course," laughed Miss Pritty; "people who have business to do are
usually very busy!  Well, I forgive you, and am glad to see you--but--"

"Well, aunt--but what?"

"In short, Eddy, I happen to be particularly engaged this evening--on
_business_, too, like yourself; but, after all, why should I not
introduce you to my friend?  You might help us in our discussion--it is
to be about the poor.  Do you know much about the poor and their
miseries?"

Edgar smiled sadly as he replied--

"Yes, I have had some experimental knowledge of the poor--being one of
them myself, and my poverty too has made me inconceivably miserable."

"Come, Eddy, don't talk nonsense.  You know I mean the _very_ poor, the
destitute.  But let us go up-stairs and have a cup of tea."

The idea of discussing the condition of the poor over a cup of tea with
two ladies was not attractive to our hero in his then state of mind, and
he was beginning to excuse himself when his aunt stopped him:--

"Now, don't say you can't, or won't, for you must.  And I shall
introduce you to a very pretty girl--oh! _such_ a pretty one--you've no
idea--and _so_ sweet!"

Miss Pritty spoke impressively and with enthusiasm, but as the youth
knew himself to be already acquainted with and beloved by the prettiest
girl in the town he was not so much impressed as he might have been.
However, being a good-natured fellow, he was easily persuaded.

All the way up-stairs, and while they were entering the boudoir, little
Miss Pritty's tongue never ceased to vibrate, but when she observed her
nephew gazing in surprise at her friend, whose usually calm and
self-possessed face was covered with confusion, she stopped suddenly.

"Good-evening, Miss Hazlit," said Edgar, recovering himself, and holding
out his hand as he advanced towards her; "I did not anticipate the
pleasure of meeting _you_ here."

"Then you are acquainted already!" exclaimed Miss Pritty, looking as
much amazed as if the accident of two young people being acquainted
without her knowledge were something tantamount to a miracle.

"Yes, I have met Mr Berrington at my father's several times," said
Aileen, resuming her seat, and bestowing a minute examination on the
corner of her handkerchief.

If Aileen had added that she had met Mr Berrington every evening for a
week past at her father's, had there renewed the acquaintance begun in
London a year before, and had been wooed and won by him before his stern
repulse by her father, she would have said nothing beyond the bare
truth; but she thought, no doubt, that it was not necessary to add all
that.

"Well, well, what strange things do happen!" said Miss Pritty, resuming
her duties at the tea-table.  "Sugar, Eddy?  And cream?--Only to think
that Aileen and I have known each other so well, and she did not know
that you were my nephew; but after all it could not well be otherwise,
for now I think of it, I never mentioned your name to her.  Out of
sight, out of mind, Eddy, you know, and indeed you don't deserve to be
remembered.  If we all had our deserts, some people that I know of would
be in a very different position from what they are, and some people
wouldn't _be_ at all."

"Why, aunt," said Edgar, laughing.  "Would you--"

"Some more cake, Eddy?"

"No, thank you.  I was going to say--"

"Have you enough cream?  Allow me to--"

"_Quite_ enough, thanks.  I was about to remark--"

"Some sugar, Aileen?--I beg your pardon--yes--you were about to say--"

"Oh!  Nothing," replied Edgar, half exasperated by these frequent
interruptions, but laughing in spite of himself, "only I'm surprised
that sentence of annihilation should be passed on `some people' by one
so amiable as you are."

"Oh!  I didn't exactly mean annihilation," returned Miss Pritty, with a
pitiful smile; "I only mean that I wouldn't have had them come into
existence, they seem to be so utterly useless in the world, and _so_
interfering, too, with those who _want_ to be useful."

"Surely that quality, or capacity of interference, proves them to be not
_utterly_ useless," said Edgar, "for does it not give occasion for the
exercise of patience and forbearance?"

"Ah!" replied Miss Pritty, with an arch smile, shaking her finger at her
nephew, "you are a fallacious reasoner.  Do you know what that means?  I
can't help laughing still at the trouble I used to have in trying to
find out the meaning of that word fallacious, when I was at Miss
Dullandoor's seminary for young ladies--hi!  Hi!  Some of us were
excessively _young_ ladies, and we were taught everything by rote,
explanations of meanings of anything being quite ignored by Miss
Dullandoor.  Do you remember her sister?  Oh!  I'm so stupid to forget
that it's exactly thirty years to-day since she died, and you can't be
quite that age yet; besides, even if you were, it would require that you
should have seen, and recognised, and remembered her on her deathbed
about the time of your own birth.  Oh!  She _was_ so funny, both in face
and figure.  One of the older girls made a portrait of her for me which
I have yet.  I'll go fetch it; the expression is irresistible--it is
killing.  Excuse me a minute."

Miss Pritty rose and tripped--she never walked--from the room.  During
much of the previous conversation our hero had been sorely perplexed in
his mind as to his duty in present circumstances.  Having been forbidden
to hold any intercourse with Aileen, he questioned the propriety of his
remaining to spend the evening with her, and had made up his mind to
rise and tear himself away when this unlooked-for opportunity for a
_tete-a-tete_ occurred.  Being a man of quick wit and strong will, he
did not neglect it.  Turning suddenly to the fair girl, he said, in a
voice low and measured--

"Aileen, your father commanded me to have no further intercourse with
you, and he made me aware that he had laid a similar injunction on
yourself.  I know full well your true-hearted loyalty to him, and do not
intend to induce you to disobey.  I ask you to make no reply to what I
say that is not consistent with your promise to your father.  For
myself, common courtesy tells me that I may not leave your presence for
a distant land without saying at least good-bye.  Nay, more, I feel that
I break no command in making to you a simple deliberate statement."

Edgar paused for a moment, for, in spite of the powerful restraint put
on himself, and the intended sedateness of his words, his feelings were
almost too strong for him.

"Aileen," he resumed, "I may never see you again.  Your father intends
that I shall not.  Your looks seem to say that you fear as much.  Now,
my heart tells me that I _shall_; but, whatever betide, or wherever I
go, let me assure you that I will continue to love you with unalterable
fidelity.  More than this I shall not say, less I could not.  You said
that these New Testaments"--pointing to a pile of four or five which lay
on the table--"are meant to be given to poor men.  _I_ am a poor man:
will you give me one?"

"Willingly," said Aileen, taking one from the pile.

She handed it to her lover without a single word, but with a tender
anxious look that went straight to his heart, and took up its lodging
there--to abide for ever!

The youth grasped the book and the hand at once, and, stooping, pressed
the latter fervently to his lips.

At that moment Miss Pritty was heard tripping along the passage.

Edgar sprang to intercept her, and closed the door of the boudoir behind
him.

"Why, Edgar, you seem in haste!"

"I am, dear aunt; circumstances require that I should be.  Come
down-stairs with me.  I have stayed too long already.  I am going
abroad, and may not spend more time with you this evening."

"Going abroad!" exclaimed Miss Pritty, in breathless surprise, "where?"

"I don't know.  To China, Japan, New Zealand, the North Pole--anywhere.
In fact, I've not quite fixed.  Good-bye, dear aunt.  Sorry to have seen
so little of you.  Good-bye."

He stooped, printed a gentle kiss between Miss Pritty's wondering eyes,
and vanished.

"A most remarkable boy," said the disconcerted lady, resuming her seat
at the tea-table--"so impulsive and volatile.  But he's a dear good boy
nevertheless--was so kind to his mother while she was alive, and ran
away from school when quite young--and no wonder, for it was a dreadful
school, where they used to torture the boys,--absolutely tortured them.
