Mr Sudberry now took to holding a muttered conversation with himself--a
practice which was by no means new to him, and in the course of which he
was wont to address himself in curiously disrespectful terms.  "Come,
come, John, my boy, don't be cast down!  Never say die!  Hope, ay, hope
told a flatter--Hallo! was that a rise?  No, it must have been another
of these--what can be the matter with your skin to-day, John?  I don't
believe it's the sun, after all.  The sun never drove anyone frantic.
Never mind; cheer up, old cock!  That seems a very likely hole--a
beautiful--beau-ti--steady!  That was a good cast--the best you've made
to-day, my buck; try it again--ha! s-s-us! caught again, as I'm a
Dutchman.  This is too bad.  Really, you know--well, you've come off
easier than might have been expected.  Now then, softly.  What _can_ be
the matter with your face?--surely--it cannot be," (Mr Sudberry's heart
palpitated as he thought), "the _measles_!  Oh! impossible, pooh! pooh!
you had the measles when you were a baby, of course--d'ye know, John,
you're not quite sure of that.  Fevers, too, occasionally come on with
extreme--dear me, how hot it is, and what a time you have been fishing,
you stupid fellow, without a rise!  It must be getting late."

Mr Sudberry stopped with a startled look as he said this.  He glanced
at the sun, pulled out his watch, gazed at it with unutterable surprise,
put it to his ear, and groaned.

"Too late! half-past five; dinner at five--punctually!  Oh!  Mary, Mary,
won't I catch it to-night!"

A cloud passed over the sun as he spoke.  Being very susceptible to
outward influences, the gloom of the shadow descended on his spirits as
well as his person, and for the first time that day a look of deep
dejection overspread his countenance.

Suddenly there was a violent twitch at the end of the rod, the reel spun
round with a sharp whirr-r, and every nerve in Mr Sudberry's system
received an electric shock as he bent forward, straddled his legs, and
made a desperate effort to fling the trout over his head.

The slender rod would not, however, permit of such treatment.  It bent
double, and the excited piscator was fain to wind up--an operation which
he performed so hastily that the line became entangled with the winch of
the reel, which brought it to a dead-lock.  With a gasp of anxiety he
flung down the rod, and seizing the line with his hands, hauled out a
beautiful yellow trout of about a quarter of a pound in weight, and five
or six inches long.

To describe the joy of Mr Sudberry at this piece of good fortune were
next to impossible.  Sitting down on his fishing-basket, with the trout
full in view, he drew forth a small flask of sherry, a slice of bread,
and a lump of cheese, and proceeded then and there to regale himself.
He cared nothing now for the loss of his dinner; no thought gave he to
the anticipated scold from neglected Mrs Sudberry.  He gave full scope
to his joy at the catching of this, his first trout.  He looked up at
the cloud that obscured the sun, and forgave it, little thinking,
innocent man, that the said cloud had done him a good turn that day.  He
smiled benignantly on water, earth, and sky.  He rubbed his face, and
when he did so he thought of the measles and laughed--laughed heartily,
for by that time he had discovered the true cause of his misery; and
although we cannot venture to say that he forgave the midges, sure we
are that he was greatly mollified towards them.

Does any ignorant or cynical reader deem such an extravagance of delight
inconsistent with so trifling an occasion?  Let him ponder before he
ventures to exclaim, "Ridiculous!"  Let him look round upon this busy,
whirling, incomprehensible world, and note how its laughing and weeping
multitudes are oft-times tickled to uproarious merriment, or whelmed in
gloomy woe, by the veriest trifles, and then let him try to look with
sympathy on Mr Sudberry and his first trout.

Having carefully deposited the fish in his basket, he once more resumed
his rod and his expectations.

But if the petty annoyances that beset our friend in the fore part of
that day may be styled harassing, those with which he was overwhelmed
towards evening may be called exasperating.  First of all he broke the
top of his rod, a misfortune which broke his heart entirely.  But
recollecting suddenly that he had three spare top-pieces in the butt,
his heart was cemented and bound up, so to speak, in a rough and ready
manner.  Next, he stepped into a hole, which turned out to be three feet
deep, so that he was instantly soaked up to the waist.  Being extremely
hot, besides having grown quite reckless, Mr Sudberry did not mind
this; it was pleasantly cooling.  He was cheered, too, at the moment, by
the re-appearance of the sun, which shone out as bright as ever, warming
his heart, (poor, ignorant man!) and, all unknown to him, damaging his
chance of catching any more fish at that time.

Soon after this he came to a part of the river where it flowed through
extremely rugged rocks, and plunged over one or two precipices, sending
up clouds of grey mist and a dull roar which overawed him, and depressed
his spirits.  This latter effect was still further increased by the
bruising of his shins and elbows, which resulted from the rough nature
of the ground.  He became quite expert now in hanking on bushes and
disentangling the line, and experienced a growing belief in the truth of
the old saying that "practice makes perfect."  He cast better, he hanked
oftener, and he disentangled more easily than he had done at an earlier
period of the day.  The midges, too, increased as evening advanced.

Presently he came upon a picturesque portion of the stream where the
waters warbled and curled in little easy-going rapids, miniature falls,
and deep oily pools.  Being an angler by nature, though not by practice,
(as yet), he felt that there must be _something_ there.  A row of
natural stepping-stones ran out towards a splendid pool, in which he
felt assured there must be a large trout--perhaps a grilse.  His modesty
forbade him to hint "a salmon," even to himself.

It is a very difficult thing, as everyone knows, to step from one stone
to another in a river, especially when the water flowing between runs
swift and deep.  Mr Sudberry found it so.  In his effort to approach
the pool in question, which lay under the opposite bank, he exhibited
not a few of the postures of the rope-dancer and the acrobat; but he
succeeded, for Mr Sudberry was a man of indomitable pluck.

Standing on a small stone, carefully balanced, and with his feet close
together, he made a beautiful cast.  It was gracefully done; it was
vigorously, manfully done--considering the difficulty of the position,
and the voracity of the midges--and would have been undoubtedly
successful but for the branch of a tree which grew on the opposite bank
and overhung the stream.  This branch Mr Sudberry, in his eagerness,
did not observe.  In casting, he thrust the end of his rod violently
into it; the line twirled in dire confusion round the leaves and small
boughs, and the drag hook, as if to taunt him, hung down within a foot
of his nose.

Mr Sudberry, in despair, made a desperate grasp at this and caught it.
More than that--it caught him, and sunk into his forefinger over the
barb, so that he could not get it out.  The rock on which he stood was
too narrow to admit of much movement, much less to permit of his resting
the butt of his rod on it, even if that had been practicable--which it
was not, owing to the line being fast to the bough, and the reel in a
state of dead-lock from some indescribable manoeuvre, to which it had
previously been subjected.

There he stood, the very personification of despair; but while standing
there he revolved in his mind the best method of releasing his line
without breaking it or further damaging his rod.  Alas! fortune, in this
instance, did not favour the brave.  While he was looking up in rueful
contemplation of the havoc above, and then down at his pierced and
captured finger, his foot slipped and he fell with a heavy plunge into
deep water.  That settled the question.  The whole of his tackle
remained attached to the fatal bough excepting the hook in his finger,
with which, and the remains of his fishing-rod, he floundered to the
shore.

Mr Sudberry's first act on gaining the land was to look into his
basket, where, to his great relief, the trout was still reposing.  His
next was to pick up his hat, which was sailing in an eddy fifty yards
down the stream.  Then he squeezed the water out of his garments, took
down his rod, with a heavy sigh strangely mingled with a triumphant
smile, and turned his steps home just as the sun began to dip behind the
peaks of the distant hills.

To his surprise and relief; Mrs Sudberry did _not_ scold when, about an
hour later, he entered the hall or porch of the White House with the
deprecatory air of a dog that knows he has been misbehaving, and with
the general aspect of a drowned rat.  His wife had been terribly anxious
about his non-arrival, and the joy she felt on seeing him safe and well,
induced her to forget the scold.

"Oh!  John dear, quick, get off your clothes," was her first
exclamation.

As for Jacky, he uttered a cheer of delight and amazement at beholding
his father in such a woeful plight; and he spent the remainder of the
evening in a state of impish triumph; for, had not his own father come
home in the same wet and draggled condition as that in which he himself
had presented himself to Mrs Brown earlier in the day, and for which he
had received a sound whipping?  "Hooray!" and with that the amiable
child went off to inform his worthy nurse that "papa was as bad a boy as
himself--badder, in fact; for he, (Jacky), had only been in the water up
to the waist, while papa had gone into it head and heels!"



STORY ONE, CHAPTER 6.

THE PICNIC.

A Vision of beauty now breaks upon the scene!  This vision is tall,
graceful, and commanding in figure.  It has long black ringlets,
piercing black eyes, a fair delicate skin, and a bewitching smile that
displays a row of--of "pearls!"  The vision is about sixteen years of
age, and answers to the romantic name of Flora Macdonald.  It is sister
to that stalwart Hector who first showed Mr Sudberry how to fish; and
stately, sedate, and beautiful does it appear, as, leaning on its
brother's arm, it ascends the hill towards the White House, where
extensive preparations are being made for a picnic.

"Good-morning, Mr Sudberry," cries Hector, doffing his bonnet and
bowing low to Lucy.  "Allow me to introduce my sister, Flora; but,"
(glancing at the preparations), "I fear that my visit is inopportune."

Mr Sudberry rushes forward and shakes Hector and sister heartily by the
hand.

"My dear sir, my dear madam, inopportune! impossible!  I am charmed.  We
are just going on a picnic, that is all, and you will go with us.  Lucy,
my dear, allow me to introduce you to Miss Macdonald--"

"_Flora_, my good sir; pray do not let us stand upon ceremony,"
interposes Hector.

Lucy bows with a slight air of bashful reserve; Flora advances and
boldly offers her hand.  The blue eyes and the black meet; the former
twinkle, the latter beam, and the knot is tied; they are fast friends
for life!

"Glorious day," cries Mr Sudberry, rubbing his hands.

"Magnificent," assents Hector.  "You are fortunate in the weather, for,
to say truth, we have little enough of sunshine here.  Sometimes it
rains for three or four weeks, almost without cessation."

"Does it indeed?"

Mr Sudberry's visage elongates a little for one moment.  Just then
George and Fred come out of the White House laden with hampers and
fishing-baskets full of provisions.  They start, gaze in surprise at the
vision, and drop the provisions.

"These are my boys, Miss Macdonald--Hector's sister, lads," cries Mr
Sudberry.  "You'll join us I trust?"  (to Hector.)

Hector assents "with pleasure."  He is a most amiable and accommodating
man.  Meanwhile George and Fred shake hands with Flora, and express
their "delight, their pleasure, etcetera, at this unexpected meeting
which, etcetera, etcetera."  Their eyes meet, too, as Lucy's and Flora's
had met a minute before.  Whether the concussion of that meeting is too
severe, we cannot say, but the result is, that the three pair of eyes
drop to the ground, and their owners blush.  George even goes the length
of stammering something incoherent about "Highland scenery," when a
diversion is created in his favour by Jacky, who comes suddenly round
the corner of the house with a North-American-Indian howl, and with the
nine dogs tearing after him clamorously.

Jacky tumbles over a basket, of course, (a state of disaster is his
normal condition), bruises his shins, and yells fearfully, to the dismay
of his mother, who runs shrieking to the window in her dressing-gown,
meets the gaze of Hector and Flora Macdonald, and retires precipitately
in discomfiture.

No such sensibility affects the stern bosom of Mrs Brown, who darts out
at the front door, catches the unhappy boy by one arm, and drags him
into the house by it as if _it_ were a rope, the child a homeward-bound
vessel, and _she_ a tug-steamer of nine hundred horse-power.  The sounds
that proceed from the nursery thereafter are strikingly suggestive: they
might be taken for loud clapping of hands, but the shrieks which follow
forbid the idea of plaudits.

Poor Tilly, who is confused by the uproar, follows the nurse timidly,
bent upon intercession, for she loves Jacky dearly.

The nine dogs--easy-going, jovial creatures--at once jump to the
conclusion that the ham and cold chicken have been prepared and laid out
there on the green hill-side for their special entertainment.  They make
a prompt dash at the hampers.  Gentlemen and ladies alike rush to the
rescue, and the dogs are obliged to retire.  They do so with a surprised
and injured look in their innocent eyes.

"Have you one or two raw onions and a few cold boiled potatoes?"
inquires Hector.

"I'll run and see," cries George, who soon returns with the desired
edibles in a tin can.

"That will do.  Now I shall let you taste a potato salad; meanwhile I
will assist in carrying the baskets down to the boat."

Hector's and Lucy's eyes meet as this is said.  There must be some
unaccountable influence in the atmosphere this morning, for the meeting
of eyes, all round, seems to produce unusual results!

"Will Mr McAllister accompany us?" says Mr Sudberry.

Mr McAllister permits a quiet smile to disturb the gravity of his
countenance, and agrees to do so, at the same time making vague
reference to the groves of Arcadia, and the delight of dining
_alfresco_, specially in wet weather,--observations which surprise Mr
Sudberry, and cause Hector and the two brothers to laugh.

Mrs Sudberry is ready at last!  The gentlemen and Hobbs load
themselves, and, followed by Jacky and the ladies, proceed to the margin
of the loch, which sheet of water Mr Sudberry styles a "lock," while
his better half deliberately and obstinately calls it a "lake."  The
party is a large one for so small a boat, but it holds them all easily.
Besides, the day is calm and the water lies like a sheet of pure glass;
it seems almost a pity to break such a faithful mirror with the plashing
oars as they row away.

Thus, pleasantly, the picnic began!

George and Fred rowed, Hector steered, and the ladies sang,--Mr
Sudberry assisting with a bass.  His voice, being a strong baritone, was
overwhelmingly loud in the middle notes, and sank into a muffled
ineffective rumble in the deep tones.  Having a bad ear for tune, he
disconcerted the ladies--also the rowers.  But what did that matter?  He
was overflowing with delight, and apologised for his awkwardness by
laughing loudly and begging the ladies to begin again.  This they always
did, with immense good humour.  Mrs Sudberry had two engrossing
subjects of contemplation.  The one was the boat, which, she was firmly
persuaded, was on the point of upsetting when any one moved ever so
little; the other was Jacky, who, owing to some strange impulse natural
to his impish character, strove to stretch as much of his person beyond
the side of the boat as was possible without absolutely throwing himself
overboard.

The loch was upwards of three miles in length; before the party had gone
half the distance Mr Sudberry senior had sung himself quite hoarse, and
Master Sudberry junior had leaped three-quarters of his length out of
the boat six times, and in various other ways had terrified his poor
mother almost into fits, and imperilled the lives of the party more than
once.

"By the way," said Fred, when his father concluded a fine old boat-song
with a magnificent flourish worthy of an operatic _artiste_, "can any
one tell me any thing about the strange old woman that lives down in the
hut near the bridge?"

"Ha! ha!" laughed George, "I can tell you that she's an old witch, and a
very fierce one too."

A slight frown gathered on Flora's white forehead, and a flash shot from
her dark eyes, as George said this, but George saw it not.  Lucy did,
however, and became observant, while George continued--

"But methinks, Fred, that the long visit you paid her lately must have
been sadly misapplied if you have not pumped her history out of her."

"I went to paint, not to pump.  Perhaps Mr Macdonald can tell me about
her."

"Not I," said Hector, lighting a cigar.  "I only know that she lost her
grandson about six years ago, and that she's been mad ever since, poor
thing."

"For shame, Hector," said Flora; "you know that poor old Moggy is no
more mad than yourself."

"Possibly not, sweet sister, but as you often tell me that I _am_ mad,
and as I never deny the charge, it seems to me that you have said
nothing to vindicate the old woman's character for sanity."

"Poor thing," said Flora, turning from her brother, and speaking with
warmth to Fred; "if you knew how much that unhappy old creature has
suffered, you would not be surprised to find her somewhat cross at
times.  She is one of my people, and I'm very glad to find that you take
an interest in her."

"`My people!'  Flora then takes an interest in the poor," thought the
observant Lucy.  Another link was added to the chain of friendship.

"Do tell us about her, please," cried George.  "There is nothing that I
love so much as a story--especially a horrible one, with two or three
dreadful murders to chill one's blood, and a deal of retributive justice
to warm it up again.  I'm dying to know about old Moggy."

"Are you?" said Flora saucily.  "I'm glad to hear that, because I mean
to keep you in a dying state.  I will tell the story as a dead secret to
Lucy, when I take her to see my poor people, and you sha'n't hear it for
weeks to come."

George cast up his eyes in affected despair, and said with a groan, that
he "would endeavour to exist notwithstanding."

"Oh!  _I_ know all about old Moggy," cried Jacky with energy.

Everyone looked at the boy in surprise.  In the midst of the foregoing
dialogue he had suddenly ceased to tempt his fate, and sat down quietly
with a hand on each knee and his eyes fixed intently on Flora
Macdonald--to the surprise and secret joy of his mother, who, being thus
relieved from anxiety on his account, had leisure to transfer the agony
of her attention to the boat.

"What do _you_ know about her, child?" asked Flora.

"She's jolly," replied the boy with prompt vivacity.

"Most genuine testimony in her favour," laughed Hector, "though the word
is scarcely appropriate to one whose temper is sour."

"Why do you think her jolly, my boy?" said Flora.

"'Cause I do.  She's a old brick!"

"Jacky, darling," said Mrs Sudberry, "do try to give up those ugly
slang words--they're _so_ naughty--that is to say--at least--they are
very ugly if they're not positively naughty."

"She's a jolly old brick," retorted Jacky, with a look at his mother
that was the concentrated essence of defiance.

"Dear child!"

Lucy snickered and coughed somewhat violently into her handkerchief;
while Flora, repressing a smile, said--

"But why does Jacky like old Moggy so much?"

"Hallo! don't run us ashore," shouted Mr Sudberry, starting up with a
sudden impetuosity which shook the boat and sent a pang to the heart of
his wife, the sharpness of which no words can convey.  A piercing
shriek, however, betrayed the state of her feelings as the boat was
swept violently round by George to avoid a point of rock.  As they were
now drawing near to the spot where it was proposed that they should
picnic, Jacky suddenly became alive to the fact that in his interest
about old Moggy he had been betrayed into a forgetfulness of his
opportunities.  No time was to be lost.  Turning round with a cheer, he
made a desperate plunge at the water and went much farther over than he
had intended, insomuch that he would certainly have taken a "header"
into its depths, had not McAllister grasped him by the baggy region of
his trousers and gravely lifted him into his mother's lap.  Next moment
the boat's keel grated sharply on the gravel, to the horror of Mrs
Sudberry, who, having buried her face in the bosom of her saved son, saw
not what had occurred, and regarded the shock as her death-warrant.

Thus agreeably the picnic continued!



STORY ONE, CHAPTER 7.

THE PICNIC CONCLUDED.

What a glorious day it was, and what spirits it put everybody in!  The
sun shone with an intensity almost torrid; the spot on which they had
landed was green and bright, like a slice out of the realms of
Fairy-land.  No zephyr dared to disturb the leaves or the glassy water;
great clouds hung in the bright blue sky--rotund, fat, and heavy, like
