"'What are you doing here?'

"'His honor, the Mayor, sent for me, your honor.'

"'What were you doing just now?'

"'Waiting to be sent for, your honor.'

"'Where is your horse?' asked the Mayor.

[Illustration: TIP-TOP AND THE MAYOR]

"'I have no horse, your honor.'

"'Why do you carry your saddle?'

"'Because no one will carry it for me, your honor.'

"'Why do you not sell it and be rid of it, ninny?'

"'Few are rich enough to buy it, your honor.'

"'How much money is it worth?'

"'Two thousand pieces of gold, your honor.'

"'Are you crazy?' cried the Mayor. 'Why is it so valuable?'

"'It is a Talking-Saddle, your honor.'

"'What does it say?'

"'Everything, your honor. It warns, it predicts, and it gives advice.'

"'Let it talk for me,' said the Mayor, full of curiosity.

"'Your honor would fail to understand its language,' replied Tip-Top.

"'Let it talk and do you tell me what it says.'

"Tip-Top placed his saddle on the carpet and pressed his foot against
it until the leather made a creaking noise.

"'I am waiting,' said the Mayor. 'What does the saddle say?'

"'It says, your honor, that you must call the housemaid.'

"The Mayor, to humor the joke, did so. The housemaid came, grumbling.
She looked at the saddle, at Tip-Top, and then at the Mayor.

"'Now what does the saddle say?' asked the Mayor.

"'It says, your honor, that this woman has a brother, who has just
returned from a journey in strange lands. The saddle says, your honor,
that this woman's brother has a companion who has long hair and a
strong arm.'

"'Is that all?' asked the Mayor.

"'No, your honor, it is not half.'

"'It is very strange,' said the housemaid.

"'The saddle says, your honor, that if you will sit in the closet by
the chimney, in the first room to the right, where there is an iron
box that is very heavy, you will receive a visit to-night from this
woman's brother and his companion.'

"The Mayor was very much astonished, but before he could open his lips
the woman fell on her knees and confessed all. The Mayor called an
officer and sent her away. Then he turned to Tip-Top, and asked:--

"'Is that all?'

"'By no means, your honor. The saddle says send for the coachman.'

"The Mayor did so, and the coachman came, bowing and smiling.

"'How much is the saddle worth?' the Mayor asked him.

"'Master, it is worthless,' replied the coachman, with a sneer.

"'Let us see,' said the Mayor. Then, turning to Tip-Top: 'What does
the saddle say?'

"'It says, your honor, that this coachman here has a nephew, who has
just returned from a long journey. It says that the nephew has a
companion who has short hair and a heavy hand.'

"'What more?'

"'The saddle says, your honor, that if you will sleep in the manger
where your two finest horses feed, you will receive a visit from the
coachman's nephew and his traveling companion.'

"The coachman implored his master's mercy, and told all. Of course,
the Mayor was very much astonished. He turned his unfaithful servants
over to an officer, and that night had a watch set around his house
and stable, and caught the thieves and their companions."

"But the saddle didn't talk," said Sweetest Susan. "So the man didn't
tell what was true." She made this remark with so much dignity that
Mrs. Meadows laughed.

But Buster John was quite impatient.

"This isn't a girl's story," he exclaimed.

"Oh, yes," replied Mrs. Meadows. "It is for girls as well as boys.
Sometimes people tell stories just to pass the time away, and if the
stories have little fibs in 'em, that don't do anybody any harm, they
just keep them in there. If they didn't, the story wouldn't be true."

"Is that the end of the story of the Talking-Saddle?" asked Buster
John.

"No! Oh, no!" Mr. Thimblefinger answered. "I was just going to tell
you the rest."

But before he could go on with it, the noise of laughter was heard at
the door, and then there came running in a queer-looking girl and a
very queer-looking boy.




VI.

THE TALKING-SADDLE AND THE THIEF.


The queer-looking girl was running from the very queer-looking boy,
and both were laughing loudly. When they saw the children sitting at
the table they both stopped suddenly. The queer-looking girl turned
and made a wry face at the very queer-looking boy. At this both burst
out laughing, and suddenly stopped again.

"Be ashamed of yourselves!" exclaimed old Mr. Rabbit, rapping on the
floor with his cane. "Be ashamed! Where are your manners? Go and speak
to our friends and make your best bow, too,--don't forget that!" Mr.
Rabbit appeared to be very indignant.

Mrs. Meadows was in a better humor. "This," she said, as the
queer-looking girl came forward, "is Chickamy Crany Crow, and this,"
as the very queer-looking boy came timidly up, "is Tickle-My-Toes."

They bowed, and then went off a little way, looking very solemn and
comical. They didn't dare glance at each other for fear they would
begin laughing again. The reason they looked so queer was because,
although they acted like children, they were old in appearance,--as
old as a person past middle age.

"They are country-raised, poor things! You'll have to excuse them.
They don't know any better." Mr. Thimblefinger sighed as he said this,
and looked thoughtful.

"What about the Talking-Saddle?" Buster John inquired. "You said the
story wasn't finished."

"To be sure! To be sure!" Mr. Thimblefinger cried. "My mind is like a
wagon without a tongue. It goes every way but the right way. Where was
I? Oh, yes, I remember now."

"Well, the Mayor was very thankful to Tip-Top for saving his treasure
and his horses, but he wasn't satisfied about the saddle. He was
worried. Now, you know when a child is worried it cries, but when a
grown man is worried he sits down and looks away off, and puts his
elbow in his hand and his finger to his nose--so."

"Oh, I've seen papa do that," laughed Sweetest Susan.

"Yes, that's the way the Mayor did," Mr. Thimblefinger continued.
"There was a great thief in that country who had never been caught. He
didn't care for judges and juries and courthouses. He always sent the
Mayor word when he was coming to the city and when he was going away.

"Now, the Mayor had received a letter from this man just the day
before Tip-Top came. The thief said he was coming after a fine
race-horse that was owned by the Mayor's brother. So the Mayor sat and
thought, and finally he asked Tip-Top if his Talking-Saddle could
catch a famous thief.

"'It has just caught four common rogues, your honor,' replied Tip-Top,
'and I think it can catch one uncommon thief.'

"Then the Mayor told Tip-Top that the most famous thief in all that
country intended to steal his brother's race-horse. Tip-Top said he
must see the horse, and together they went to the stable where it was
kept. The horse was already guarded. Two servants sat in the stall,
two sat outside, and two remained near the door. The Mayor's brother
was also there.

"'What is this?' the brother asked.

"'This fellow wants to sell his saddle,' replied the Mayor.

"'Then arrest him,' cried the brother, 'for he is the thief.'

"'Nonsense,' replied the Mayor. 'He is a very honest man and I will
vouch for him.'

"Then the Mayor called his brother aside and told him why the man with
the saddle had come to see the horse.

"Tip-Top talked with the men who had been set to guard the horse, and
he soon found that one of them was an accomplice of the thief. This
man made a swift sign to Tip-Top, and placed his finger on his mouth.
Tip-Top replied by closing his eyes with his fingers, as if to show
that he saw nothing. When he had an opportunity he said to this man:--

"'Tell your master I will be willing to sell the saddle to-night. I
will sleep with it under my head on the next corner. It is worth one
thousand pieces of gold.'

"Then he returned to the Mayor, and they went away. Tip-Top laughed as
they walked along. 'This thief,' he remarked, 'is a fool. It is so
easy to steal a horse that he will not buy a saddle. He will try to
steal mine. Then we shall catch him. He will get the horse--'

"'What!' cried the Mayor; 'get the horse?'

"'Certainly; nothing is easier,' replied Tip-Top. 'He will get the
horse, and then he will want a saddle. He will be passing the wall
here. He will see me sleeping with my head on my friend and then he
will attempt to steal it, but the surcingle will be buckled around my
body, and I will awake and cry blue murder. Then you and your brother
can come forward from the vacant house yonder and seize him.'

"'Where did you learn all this?' asked the Mayor. He began to suspect
that his brother was right when he said that Tip-Top was the thief.

"'My saddle told me,' Tip-Top answered.

"'Well,' said the Mayor, 'your plan is as good as any, but how will
the thief get the horse that is so well guarded?'

"'Ah!' Tip-Top exclaimed, 'if I were to tell you, we should never
catch the thief.'

"So it was all arranged. Tip-Top was to sleep on his Talking-Saddle,
near the wall and the Mayor and his brother were to watch from the
windows of the vacant house opposite.

"When night came, the watchers who had been set to guard the horse
were very anxious. They were ready to arrest any one who might chance
to enter. Whenever they heard footsteps approaching they seized their
clubs and stood on the defensive. Sometimes a passer-by would pause,
look in, and ask what the trouble was. Then the watchers would reply
that they were waiting for the great thief who was coming to steal the
fine horse. Thus the hours passed, but no thief came. Then the
watchers began to get tired.

"'We are crazy,' said one. 'How can a thief steal this horse, even if
he were to come in here? We are four to one. Two of us should sleep a
while, and thus we can take turns in watching.' This was agreed to,
and two of the guards stretched themselves on the straw and prepared
to sleep. But just then they heard some one singing far down the
street. It was a jolly song, and the sound of it came louder and
louder. As the singer was going by, the light in the stable caught his
eye, and he paused and looked in, but still kept up his singing.

"'Friends,' he said when his song was done, 'what is the trouble?'

"'We are watching a horse.'

"'Is he sick? Perhaps I can aid you. I have doctored many a horse in
my day.'

"'He is not sick,' replied the watchers. 'He is well and taking his
ease. We are watching to prevent a thief from stealing him.'

"Then they told him the threat the thief had made.

"'Come, that is too good,' cried the newcomer. 'This thief will be
worth looking at when four such stout lads as you get through with
him. When does he show himself?'

"'That is what we are to find out,' replied the watchers.

"'Very well,' the newcomer said; 'I'll stay, by your permission, and
see you double him up.'

"The watchers gave their consent gladly, for the newcomer had a lively
manner and a rattling tongue. He sang songs and told stories for an
hour or more, and then pulled a bottle from under his coat.

"'A little wine,' he said, 'will clear the fog from our throats.' He
passed the bottle around, and all drank except the guard who was
watching in the stall.

"Now the man who had come singing up the street was the thief himself,
and the guard in the stall was his companion. The wine was drugged,
and in a very few minutes three of the watchers were fast asleep. Then
the thief and his companion took the horse from the stall.

"'I shall have to remain here and pretend to be asleep,' said the
companion. 'You will find a saddle around the corner.' He then told
the thief about the man with the saddle.

"'You are a fool, my friend,' said the thief. 'It is a trick--a trap.'

"But when he had carried off the horse and hid it at the house of an
acquaintance, the thought of the man with the saddle worried him so
that he went back to satisfy himself. Tip-Top and his saddle were
there, and Tip-Top had slept so soundly that his head had rolled from
his pillow. The thief thought it would be a good stroke of business to
take the saddle along, but when he tried to lift it, Tip-Top awoke and
seized him, and cried 'Murder!' at the top of his voice.

"The Mayor and his brother rushed from their place of concealment,
and soon the thief was bound.

"'Where is the horse?' cried the Mayor.

"'What horse?' exclaimed the thief. 'Do you think I carry horses in my
pocket?'

"'What were you doing here, then?'

"'This fellow's head had slipped from its pillow, and when I tried to
put it back he seized me and yelled that I was murdering him! I saw no
horse under the saddle.'

"'Wait here a little,' said Tip-Top. 'Hold this thief till I return.'

"He went to the stable, woke the thief's accomplice, who by this time
was really asleep, and told him his companion had been captured. 'If I
can find the horse and hide it our friend will be safe, for nothing
can be proved on him.'

"The man was so frightened that he told Tip-Top where he had arranged
to meet the thief the next day. Then Tip-Top returned to the Mayor and
his brother, who still held the thief, and took them to the house
where the horse had been stabled.

"When the horse had been found and restored to its owner the Mayor
said to Tip-Top that he would not only reward him handsomely but
grant any request he might make.

"'Then, your honor,' replied Tip-Top, 'give this man his liberty.'

"'Why?' asked the Mayor, much astonished.

"'Because, your honor, he is my brother.'

"The thief was as much astonished as the Mayor at this turn in his
affairs, but he had no difficulty in recognizing Tip-Top as his
younger brother.

"'He certainly is a man of talent,' said the Mayor, 'and it is a pity
that he should be executed.'

"Then the thief fell on his knees and begged the Mayor to pardon him,
promising him to live and die an honest man. And he kept his promise.
He engaged in business, and, aided by Tip-Top's advice and influence,
made a large fortune."

"What became of the Talking-Saddle?" asked Buster John.

"Well," replied Mr. Thimblefinger, "Tip-Top hung the saddle in his
front porch, as you have seen farmers do. He thought a great deal of
it."

[Illustration: THE MAYOR PARDONING THE THIEF]

"I've read something about the great thief," remarked Buster John.
"But the story didn't end that way. The thief escaped every time."

"Oh, well, you know how some people are," exclaimed Mrs. Meadows.
"They want everything to happen just so; even a thief must be a big
man if he's in a story; but I don't believe anybody ever stole
anything yet without getting into trouble about it."

"Who is that crying?" Mr. Rabbit suddenly exclaimed.

"I hear no crying," said Mrs. Meadows.

"I certainly thought I heard crying," persisted Mr. Rabbit.

"It is Chickamy Crany Crow and Tickle-My-Toes singing. Listen!"

Sure enough the queer-looking boy and the queer-looking girl were
singing a song. One sang one line and the other the next line, and
this made the song somewhat comical. The words were something like
these:--


CHICKAMY CRANY CROW.

            Oh sing it slow,
            This song of woe,
    Of the girl who went to wash her toe!
            Her name was Chick--
            (Oh run here quick--
            The word's so thick)--
    Chickamy--Chickamy Crany Crow!

            Chickamy what? and Chickamy which?
            She went to the well and fell in the ditch;
            What o'clock, old Witch?

            The clock struck one
            And bowed to the sun;
    But the sun was fast asleep you know;
            And the moon was quick,
            With her oldtime trick--
            To hide from Chick--
    Chickamy--Chickamy Crany Crow!

            Chickamy what? and Chickamy which?
            She went to the well and fell in the ditch;
            What o'clock, old Witch?

            Oh, sad to tell!
            She went to the well--
    The time was as close to eve as to dawn--
            To Chickamy Chick,
            So supple and slick,
            The clock said "Tick!"
    But when she came back her chicken was gone!

            Oh, whatamy, whichamy, chickamy, oh!
            Moonery, oonery, tickamy Toe!
            Wellery, tellery, gittery go!
            Witchery, itchery, knitchery know.

[Illustration: CHICKAMY CRANY CROW AND TICKLE-MY-TOES]

"What kinder gwines on is dat?" exclaimed Drusilla, whose mind had
never been quite easy since she walked through the dry water in the
spring without getting drowned. "We all better be makin' our way
to'rds home. Time we git dar--ef we ever is ter git dar--it'll be dark
good. Den what yo' ma gwine to say? She gwine ter talk wid de flat er
her han'--dat what she gwine ter talk wid. Come on!"

"Can't you be quiet?" cried Buster John. "It's nothing but a song."

"Oh, you kin stay, an' I'll stay wid you," said Drusilla; "but when
Mistiss git you in de wash-room, don't you come sayin' dat I wouldn't
fetch you home."

"I want to see everything," said Buster John.

"I done seed much ez I want ter see," replied Drusilla, "an' now I
want ter live ter tell it."

Before Buster John could say anything more, everything suddenly grew a
little darker, and in the middle of the sky--or what ought to have
been the sky, but which was the enlarged bottom of the spring--there
was a huge shadow. The children looked at it in silence.




VII.

THE LADDER OF LIONS.


The shadow that seemed to fall over everything caused Buster John and
Sweetest Susan and Drusilla to run to the door. It was not a very dark
shadow, but it was dark enough to attract their attention and excite
their alarm. They were not yet used to their surroundings, for,
although a great many things they saw and heard were familiar to them,
they could not forget that they had come through the water in the
spring. They could not forget that Mr. Thimblefinger was the smallest
grown person they had ever seen,--even if he were a grown person,--nor
could they forget that they had never seen a rabbit so wonderfully
large as Mr. Rabbit. Drusilla expressed the feelings of all when she
remarked that she felt "skittish." They were ready to take alarm at
anything that might happen. Therefore they ran to the door to see what
the shadow meant. Finally they looked up at the sky, or what seemed to
be the sky, and there they saw, covering a large part of it, the
vague outline of a huge jug. The shadow wobbled about and wavered, and
ripples of light and shadow played about it and ran down to the
horizon on all sides.

An astronomer, seeing these fantastic wobblings and waverings of light
and shadow in our firmament, would straightway send a letter or a
cable dispatch to the newspapers, declaring that an unheard-of
convulsion was shaking the depths of celestial space. And, indeed, it
was all very puzzling, even to the children, but Drusilla, who had
less imagination than any of the rest, accounted for it all by one
bold stroke of common sense.

"Shuh! 'T ain't nothin' 't all!" she exclaimed. "Dey done got froo wid
dinner at home, an' ol' Aunt 'Cindy done put de buttermilk-jug back in
de spring."

Sweetest Susan caught her breath with a gasp, and laughed
hysterically. She had been very much alarmed.

"I expect that's what it is," said Buster John, but there was some
doubt in his tone. He turned to Mr. Thimblefinger, who had followed
them. "What time is it, please?"

Mr. Thimblefinger drew his watch from his pocket with as much dignity
as he could assume, and held his head gravely on one side. "It is
now--let me see--_ahem!_--it is now precisely thirteen minutes and
eleven seconds after one o'clock."

"Is that the jug in the spring?" asked Sweetest Susan, pointing to the
huge black shadow that was now wobbling and wavering more slowly.

Mr. Thimblefinger shaded his eyes with his hand and examined the
shadow critically. "Yes, that is the jug--the light hurts my
eyes--yes, certainly, that is the jug."

Presently a volume of white vapor shot out from the shadow. It was
larger than the largest comet, and almost as brilliant.

"What is that?" asked Sweetest Susan.

Mr. Thimblefinger felt almost as thoughtful as a sure-enough man of
science.

"That," said he, "is an emanation--an exhalation, you might say--that
we frequently witness in our atmosphere."

"A which?" asked Buster John.

"Well," replied Mr. Thimblefinger, clearing his throat, "it's--er--an
emanation."

"Huh!" cried Drusilla, "'t ain't no kind er nation. It's des de milk
leakin' out'n dat jug. I done tol' Aunt 'Cindy 'bout dat leakin' jug."

Mr. Rabbit and Mrs. Meadows had come out of the house in time to hear
this, and they laughed heartily. In fact, they all laughed except Mr.
Thimblefinger and Drusilla.

"It happens every day," said Mrs. Meadows. "We never notice it. I
suppose if it happened up there where you children live, everybody
would make a great to-do? I'm glad I don't live there where there's so
much fussing and guessing going on. I know how it is. Something
happens that doesn't happen every day, and then somebody'll guess one
way and somebody another way, and the first thing you know there's a
great rumpus over nothing. I'm truly glad I came away from there in
time to get out of the worst of it. You children had better take a
notion and stay here with us."

"Oh, no," cried Sweetest Susan. "Mamma and papa would want to see us."

"That's so," said Mrs. Meadows. "Well, I just came out here to tell
you not to get too near the Green Moss Swamp beyond the hill yonder.
There's an old Spring Lizard over there that might want to shake hands
with you with his tail. Besides it's not healthy around there; it is
too damp."

"Oh, we are not going anywhere until we start home," Sweetest Susan
remarked.

"How large is the Spring Lizard?" inquired Buster John.

"He's a heap too big for you to manage," replied Mrs. Meadows. "I
don't know that he'd hurt you, but he's slept in the mud over there
until he's so fat he can't wallow scarcely. He might roll over on you
and hurt you some."

"Are there any lions over there?" inquired Sweetest Susan.

"No, honey, not a living one," said Mrs. Meadows.

By this time Mr. Rabbit had come out on the piazza, bringing his
walking-cane and his pipe. He presently seated himself on the steps,
and leaned his head comfortably against one of the posts.

"Well, well, well," he exclaimed. "It has been years and years since
I've heard the name of Brother Lion. Is he still living and doing
well?" Mr. Rabbit turned an inquiring eye on Sweetest Susan.

"She doesn't know anything about lions," said Buster John.

"Why, I do!" cried Sweetest Susan. "I saw one once in a cage."

"In a cage? Brother Lion in a cage?" Mr. Rabbit raised his hands and
rolled his eyes in astonishment. "What is the world coming to? Well,
I've said many and many a time that Brother Lion was not right up
here." Mr. Rabbit tapped his forehead significantly. "In a cage! Now,
that pesters me. Why, he used to go roaring and romping about the
country, scaring them that didn't know him mighty nigh to death. And
so Brother Lion is in a cage? But I might have known it. I wonder how
the rest of the family are getting on? Not that they are any kin to
me, for they are not. I called him Brother Lion just to be neighborly.
Oh, no! He and his family are no kin to me. They are too heavy in both
head and feet for that."

Mr. Rabbit closed his eyes as if reflecting, and patted the ground
softly with his foot.

"Well, well! I remember just as well as if it were yesterday the day
I told Brother Lion that if he wasn't careful, Mr. Man would catch him
and put him in a cage for his children to look at. But he just hooted
at it--and now, sure enough, there he is! I mind the first time he
began his pursuit of Mr. Man. That was the time he got his hand caught
