
Because she wasn't angry, Daniel felt that she would make him a good
wife. Life in the wilderness was often difficult and dangerous. He
wanted a wife who did not become upset easily.

They were married, and soon the first of their many children arrived.
Daniel loved his children. As soon as his son James was old enough, he
taught him to hunt.

In the spring and summer Daniel would farm. In the autumn he hunted,
and in the winter he trapped. He made long trips in the forest and
brought home food for his family and valuable furs and deerskins. Many
of these he sold. He enjoyed exploring as much as he enjoyed hunting.
Once he even went as far south as Florida with the idea of settling
there. But he was disappointed in the land. He longed to explore
Kentucky, but did not want to go alone.

One day the Boone family heard a knock at the door. It was Boone's old
friend, John Finley.

"Let's go to Kentucky, Daniel!" he said.

"Let's!" Daniel agreed. "I think about it all the time. You know how
much I love the wilderness. That's the one place I really feel at
home."




On to Kentucky


Early in 1769, Daniel Boone, John Finley, and four other strong men
started for Kentucky. One of the men was Daniel's brother-in-law. They
took their guns. They carried animal traps, too. They planned to bring
back skins and furs to sell.

The hunters rode their horses across the mountains. Soon they came to
Cumberland Gap, a narrow mountain valley which led into Kentucky. The
Indians used the Gap also, but the white men did not see any of them at
this time. It was weeks before they saw a single Indian.

But they did see rich green meadows, which stretched ahead for miles.
Silver rivers wound like ribbons through them. In some places there
were low rolling hills and in others great towering mountains. The
woods were thick and still. The sunlight made dancing patterns on the
pine needles. Kentucky was as beautiful as John Finley had said.

Everywhere they went the men found lots of game. There were deer and
buffalo. There were fur-bearing animals, such as mink and otter and
beaver. There were many different kinds of birds.

When the men went hunting, they separated into pairs. One winter day
Boone and his brother-in-law were captured by Indians. The Indians did
not harm them, but they took all the white men's deerskins.

"Get out of Kentucky and stay out!" the Indians told them.

Daniel Boone did not scare easily. He and his brother-in-law did not
want to leave Kentucky.

But the other four were afraid. They returned to the settlements. Boone
never saw Finley again. But Boone was soon joined by his brother,
Squire, and a friend named Alexander Neeley. Squire had promised to
harvest the crops back home and then join them in the late autumn with
fresh horses, traps, and gunpowder. Skilled woodsmen that they were,
the brothers somehow found each other in the wilderness.

While they were hunting, the men separated again. They met every two
weeks. One week Boone's brother-in-law did not return to camp. He never
did come back. Five years later a skeleton with a powder horn beside it
was found in a hollow tree. Perhaps he was wounded by an Indian. No one
really knows what happened to him.

Neeley was scared. He decided to go home alone. But Daniel and Squire
stayed on all winter and spring. They hunted and trapped until they had
a lot of skins. Then Squire went home to sell the skins and buy more
gunpowder and traps.

Daniel stayed on in the wilderness. He did not mind being alone. He was
never afraid. With his trusty rifle, Tick-Licker, over his shoulder, he
explored much of Kentucky. He was happy because the wilderness was wide
and he felt free. After a few months, Squire came back. Again the
brothers hunted together.

At last Daniel said to Squire, "I'll go home with you this time. We
have all the skins we can carry."

"When we sell them, we'll have plenty of money to take to our
families," Squire said happily.

It did not happen that way. Indians attacked the brothers when they
were nearly home and took the skins. The Boones were still poor men.

But Daniel was happy. He was glad that he had roamed the wilderness for
nearly two years. He was sorry he had lost the skins, but he was happy
that he had seen Kentucky.




Attacked by Indians


Two years later Daniel Boone decided that he had been away from
Kentucky long enough. "Pack up, Rebecca," he said to his wife. "Pack
up, children. We Boones can't stay in one spot forever. We're going to
move to Kentucky. It's wild and beautiful there. There'll be plenty of
land for you young ones when you want homes of your own."

So the Boones packed up. Six other families joined them. People always
seemed ready to join Daniel in his search for adventure. The household
goods and the farm tools were piled on pack horses. A few of the people
rode horseback. But most of them walked. They drove their pigs and
cattle before them. The rough trails made travel slow, but the families
did not seem to mind.

Just before they reached Cumberland Gap, Daniel Boone sent his
sixteen-year-old son, James, on an errand.

