Crinklink, to be sure; but if there had been you'd be severely whipped
for breaking all those dishes."

[Illustration]

The Wizard now rose, took off the coat with the button heads, and spread
it on the floor, wrong side up. At once there crept from beneath it a
bear, a wolf, a cat, a weasel, and a field-mouse, who all rushed from
the room and escaped into the mountains.

"Come on, Toto," said Dorothy; "let's go back to the Emerald City.
You've given me a good scare, Wizard," she added, with dignity, "and
p'raps I'll forgive you, by'n'by; but just now I'm mad to think how
easily you fooled me."

[Illustration]




TIKTOK AND THE NOME KING


The Nome King was unpleasantly angry. He had carelessly bitten his
tongue at breakfast and it still hurt; so he roared and raved and
stamped around in his underground palace in a way that rendered him very
disagreeable.

It so happened that on this unfortunate day Tiktok, the Clockwork Man,
visited the Nome King to ask a favor. Tiktok lived in the Land of Oz,
and although he was an active and important person, he was made entirely
of metal. Machinery within him, something like the works of a clock,
made him move; other machinery made him talk; still other machinery made
him think.

[Illustration]

Although so cleverly constructed, the Clockwork Man was far from
perfect. Three separate keys wound up his motion machinery, his speech
works, and his thoughts. One or more of these contrivances was likely to
run down at a critical moment, leaving poor Tiktok helpless. Also some
of his parts were wearing out, through much use, and just now his
thought machinery needed repair. The skillful little Wizard of Oz had
tinkered with Tiktok's thoughts without being able to get them properly
regulated, so he had advised the Clockwork Man to go to the Nome King
and secure a new set of springs, which would render his thoughts more
elastic and responsive.

"Be careful what you say to the Nome King," warned the Wizard. "He has a
bad temper and the least little thing makes him angry."

Tiktok promised, and the Wizard wound his machinery and set him walking
in the direction of the Nome King's dominions, just across the desert
from the Land of Oz. He ran down just as he reached the entrance to the
underground palace, and there Kaliko, the Nome King's Chief Steward,
found him and wound him up again.

"I want to see the King," said Tiktok, in his jerky voice.

"Well," remarked Kaliko, "it may be safe for a cast-iron person like you
to face his Majesty this morning; but you must announce yourself, for
should I show my face inside the jewel-studded cavern where the King is
now raving, I'd soon look like a dish of mashed potatoes, and be of no
further use to anyone."

"I'm not a-fraid," said Tiktok.

"Then walk in and make yourself at home," answered Kaliko, and threw
open the door of the King's cavern.

[Illustration]

Tiktok promptly walked in and faced the astonished Nome King, to whom
he said: "Good morn-ing. I want two new steel springs for my
thought-works and a new cog-wheel for my speech-pro-du-cer. How a-bout
it, your Maj-es-ty?"

The Nome King growled a menacing growl and his eyes were red with rage.

"How dare you enter my presence?" he shouted.

"I dare an-y-thing," said Tiktok. "I'm not a-fraid of a fat Nome."

[Illustration]

This was true, yet an unwise speech. Had Tiktok's thoughts been in good
working order he would have said something else. The angry Nome King
quickly caught up his heavy mace and hurled it straight at Tiktok. When
it struck the metal man's breast, the force of the blow burst the
bolts which held the plates of his body together and they clattered to
the floor in a score of pieces. Hundreds and hundreds of wheels, pins,
cogs and springs filled the air like a cloud and then rattled like hail
upon the floor.

Where Tiktok had stood was now only a scrap-heap and the Nome King was
so amazed by the terrible effect of his blow that he stared in wonder.

His Majesty's anger quickly cooled. He remembered that the Clockwork Man
was a favorite subject of the powerful Princess, Ozma of Oz, who would
be sure to resent Tiktok's ruin.

"Too bad! too bad!" he muttered, regretfully. "I'm really sorry I made
junk of the fellow. I didn't know he'd break."

"You'd better be," remarked Kaliko, who now ventured to enter the room.
"You'll have a war on your hands when Ozma hears of this, and the
chances are you will lose your throne and your kingdom."

The Nome King turned pale, for he loved to rule the Nomes and did not
know of any other way to earn a living in case Ozma fought and conquered
him.

"Do--do you think Ozma will be angry?" he asked anxiously.

"I'm sure of it," said Kaliko. "And she has the right to be. You've made
scrap-iron of her favorite."

The King groaned.

"Sweep him up and throw the rubbish into the black pit," he commanded;
and then he shut himself up in his private den and for days would see no
one, because he was so ashamed of his unreasoning anger and so feared
the results of his rash act.

Kaliko swept up the pieces, but he did not throw them into the black
pit. Being a clever and skillful mechanic he determined to fit the
pieces together again.

No man ever faced a greater puzzle; but it was interesting work and
Kaliko succeeded. When he found a spring or wheel worn or imperfect, he
made a new one.

[Illustration]

Within two weeks, by working steadily night and day, the Chief Steward
completed his task and put the three sets of clockworks and the last
rivet into Tiktok's body. He then wound up the motion machinery, and the
Clockwork Man walked up and down the room as naturally as ever. Then
Kaliko wound up the thought works and the speech regulator and said to
Tiktok:

"How do you feel now?"

"Fine," said the Clockwork Man. "You have done a ve-ry good job,
Kal-i-ko, and saved me from de-struc-tion. Much o-bliged."

"Don't mention it," replied the Chief Steward. "I quite enjoyed the
work."

Just then the Nome King's gong sounded, and Kaliko rushed away through
the jewel-studded cavern and into the den where the King had hidden,
leaving the doors ajar.

"Kaliko," said the King, in a meek voice, "I've been shut up here long
enough to repent bitterly the destruction of Tiktok. Of course Ozma will
have revenge, and send an army to fight us, but we must take our
medicine. One thing comforts me: Tiktok wasn't really a live person; he
was only a machine man, and so it wasn't very wicked to stop his
clockworks. I couldn't sleep nights, at first, for worry; but there's no
more harm in smashing a machine man than in breaking a wax doll. Don't
you think so?"

"I am too humble to think in the presence of your Majesty," said Kaliko.

"Then get me something to eat," commanded the King, "for I'm nearly
starved. Two roasted goats, a barrel of cakes and nine mince pies will
do me until dinnertime."

Kaliko bowed and hurried away to the royal kitchen, forgetting Tiktok,
who was wandering around in the outer cavern. Suddenly the Nome King
looked up and saw the Clockwork Man standing before him, and at the
sight the monarch's eyes grew big and round and he fell a-trembling in
every limb.

"Away, grim Shadow!" he cried. "You're not here, you know; you're only a
hash of cogwheels and springs, lying at the bottom of the black pit.
Vanish, thou Vision of the demolished Tiktok, and leave me in peace--for
I have bitterly repented!"

[Illustration]

"Then beg my pardon," said Tiktok in a gruff voice, for Kaliko had
forgotten to oil the speech works.

