          If you will but be mine,
        You shall dine on cherry pie,
          And drink nice currant wine.
        I'll dress you like a Goldfinch,
          Or like a Peacock gay;
        So if you'll have me, Jenny,
          Let us appoint the day."

        Jenny blushed behind her fan,
          And thus declared her mind:
        "Then let it be to-morrow, Bob,
          I take your offer kind--
        Cherry pie is very good!
          So is currant wine!
        But I will wear my brown gown,
          And never dress too fine."

        Robin rose up early
          At the break of day;
        He flew to Jenny Wren's house,
          To sing a roundelay.
        He met the Cock and Hen,
          And bid the Cock declare,
        This was his wedding-day
          With Jenny Wren, the fair.

        The Cock then blew his horn,
          To let the neighbors know,
        This was Robin's wedding-day,
          And they might see the show.
        And first came parson Rook,
          With his spectacles and band,
        And one of _Mother Hubbard's_ books
          He held within his hand.

        Then followed him the Lark,
          For he could sweetly sing,
        And he was to be clerk
          At Cock Robin's wedding.
        He sang of Robin's love
          For little Jenny Wren;
        And when he came unto the end,
          Then he began again.

        Then came the bride and bridegroom;
          Quite plainly was she dressed,
        And blushed so much, her cheeks were
          As red as Robin's breast.
        But Robin cheered her up:
          "My pretty Jen," said he,
        "We're going to be married
          And happy we shall be."

        The Goldfinch came on next,
          To give away the bride;
        The Linnet, being bride's maid,
          Walked by Jenny's side;
        And, as she was a-walking,
          She said, "Upon my word,
        I think that your Cock Robin
          Is a very pretty bird."

        The Bullfinch walked by Robin,
          And thus to him did say,
        "Pray, mark, friend Robin Redbreast,
          That Goldfinch, dressed so gay;
        What though her gay apparel
          Becomes her very well,
        Yet Jenny's modest dress and look
          Must bear away the bell."

        The Blackbird and the Thrush,
          And charming Nightingale,
        Whose sweet jug sweetly echoes
          Through every grove and dale;
        The Sparrow and Tom Tit,
          And many more, were there:
        All came to see the wedding
          Of Jenny Wren, the fair.

        "O then," says parson Rook,
          "Who gives this maid away?"
        "I do," says the Goldfinch,
          "And her fortune I will pay:
        Here's a bag of grain of many sorts,
          And other things beside;
        Now happy be the bridegroom,
          And happy be the bride!"

        "And will you have her, Robin,
          To be your wedded wife?"
        "Yes, I will," says Robin,
          "And love her all my life."
        "And will you have him, Jenny,
          Your husband now to be?"
        "Yes, I will," says Jenny,
          "And love him heartily."

        Then on her finger fair
          Cock Robin put the ring;
        "You're married now," says parson Rook,
          While the Lark aloud did sing:
        "Happy be the bridegroom,
          And happy be the bride!
        And may not man, nor bird, nor beast,
          This happy pair divide."

        The birds were asked to dine;
          Not Jenny's friends alone,
        But every pretty songster
          That had Cock Robin known.
        They had a cherry pie,
          Besides some currant wine,
        And every guest brought something,
          That sumptuous they might dine.

        Now they all sat or stood
          To eat and to drink;
        And every one said what
          He happened to think;
        They each took a bumper,
          And drank to the pair:
        Cock Robin, the bridegroom,
          And Jenny Wren, the fair.

        The dinner-things removed,
          They all began to sing;
        And soon they made the place
          Near a mile round to ring.
        The concert it was fine;
          And every bird tried
        Who best could sing for Robin
          And Jenny Wren, the bride.

        Then in came the Cuckoo,
          And he made a great rout:
        He caught hold of Jenny,
          And pulled her about.
        Cock Robin was angry,
          And so was the Sparrow,
        Who fetched in a hurry
          His bow and his arrow.

        His aim then he took,
          But he took it not right;
        His skill was not good,
          Or he shot in a fright;
        For the Cuckoo he missed,
          But Cock Robin killed!--
        And all the birds mourned
          That his blood was so spilled.



142


THE BURIAL OF POOR COCK ROBIN

        Who killed Cock Robin?
          "I," said the Sparrow,
          "With my bow and arrow;
        And I killed Cock Robin."

        Who saw him die?
          "I," said the Fly,
          "With my little eye;
        And I saw him die."

        Who caught his blood?
          "I," said the Fish,
          "With my little dish;
        And I caught his blood."

        Who made his shroud?
          "I," said the Beetle,
          "With my little needle;
        And I made his shroud."

        Who will be the parson?
          "I," said the Rook;
          "With my little book;
        And I will be the parson."

        Who will dig his grave?
          "I," said the Owl,
          "With my spade and shovel;
        And I'll dig his grave."

        Who will be the clerk?
          "I," said the Lark,
          "If 'tis not in the dark;
        And I will be the clerk."

        Who'll carry him to the grave?
          "I," said the Kite,
          "If 'tis not in the night;
        And I'll carry him to the grave."

        Who will be the chief mourner?
          "I," said the Dove,
          "Because of my love;
        And I will be chief mourner."

        Who will sing a psalm?
          "I," said the Thrush,
          As she sat in a bush;
        "And I will sing a psalm."

        Who will bear the pall?
          "We," said the Wren,
          Both the Cock and the Hen;
        "And we will bear the pall."

        Who will toll the bell?
          "I," said the Bull,
          "Because I can pull."
        And so, Cock Robin, farewell.

              All the birds of the air
                Fell to sighing and sobbing
              When they heard the bell toll
                For poor Cock Robin.



143

        The following tale was edited (1885) for
        children by John Ruskin from a version "written
        principally by a lady of ninety (Mrs. Sharp.)"
        Ruskin himself added the third, fourth, eighth,
        and ninth stanzas, because "in the old books no
        account is given of what the cats learned when
        they went to school, and I thought my younger
        readers might be glad of some notice of such
        particulars." But he thought his rhymes did not
        ring like the real ones, of which he said: "I
        aver these rhymes to possess the primary value
        of rhyme--that is, to be rhythmical in a
        pleasant and exemplary degree." The book was
        illustrated with quaint woodcuts for each
        stanza after the edition of 1823, with
        additional drawings for the four new stanzas by
        Kate Greenaway, one of the most famous
        illustrators of children's books. Ruskin
        commends the result "to the indulgence of the
        Christmas fireside, because it relates nothing
        that is sad, and portrays nothing that is
        ugly."


DAME WIGGINS OF LEE, AND HER SEVEN WONDERFUL CATS

        Dame Wiggins of Lee
        Was a worthy old soul,
        As e'er threaded a nee-
        dle, or wash'd in a bowl;
        She held mice and rats
        In such antipa-thy,
        That seven fine cats
        Kept Dame Wiggins of Lee.

        The rats and mice scared
        By this fierce whisker'd crew,
        The poor seven cats
        Soon had nothing to do;
        So, as any one idle
        She ne'er loved to see,
        She sent them to school,
        Did Dame Wiggins of Lee.

        The Master soon wrote
        That they all of them knew
        How to read the word "milk"
        And to spell the word "mew."
        And they all washed their faces
        Before they took tea:
        "Were there ever such dears!"
        Said Dame Wiggins of Lee.

        He had also thought well
        To comply with their wish
        To spend all their play-time
        In learning to fish
        For stitlings; they sent her
        A present of three,
        Which, fried, were a feast
        For Dame Wiggins of Lee.

        But soon she grew tired
        Of living alone;
        So she sent for her cats
        From school to come home.
        Each rowing a wherry,
        Returning you see:
        The frolic made merry
        Dame Wiggins of Lee.

        The Dame was quite pleas'd
        And ran out to market;
        When she came back
        They were mending the carpet.
        The needle each handled
        As brisk as a bee;
        "Well done, my good cats,"
        Said Dame Wiggins of Lee.

        To give them a treat,
        She ran out for some rice;
        When she came back,
        They were skating on ice.
        "I shall soon see one down,
        Aye, perhaps, two or three,
        I'll bet half-a-crown,"
        Said Dame Wiggins of Lee.

        When spring-time came back
        They had breakfast of curds;
        And were greatly afraid
        Of disturbing the birds.
        "If you sit, like good cats,
        All the seven in a tree,
        They will teach you to sing!"
        Said Dame Wiggins of Lee.

        So they sat in a tree,
        And said "Beautiful! Hark!"
        And they listened and looked
        In the clouds for the lark.
        Then sang, by the fireside,
        Symphonious-ly
        A song without words
        To Dame Wiggins of Lee.

        They called the next day
        On the tomtit and sparrow,
        And wheeled a poor sick lamb
        Home in a barrow.
        "You shall all have some sprats
        For your humani-ty,
        My seven good cats,"
        Said Dame Wiggins of Lee.

        While she ran to the field,
        To look for its dam,
        They were warming the bed
        For the poor sick lamb:
        They turn'd up the clothes
        All as neat as could be;
        "I shall ne'er want a nurse,"
        Said Dame Wiggins of Lee.

        She wished them good night,
        And went up to bed:
        When, lo! in the morning,
        The cats were all fled.
        But soon--what a fuss!
        "Where can they all be?
        Here, pussy, puss, puss!"
        Cried Dame Wiggins of Lee.

        The Dame's heart was nigh broke,
        So she sat down to weep,
        When she saw them come back
        Each riding a sheep:
        She fondled and patted
        Each purring tom-my:
        "Ah! welcome, my dears,"
        Said Dame Wiggins of Lee.

        The Dame was unable
        Her pleasure to smother,
        To see the sick lamb
        Jump up to its mother.
        In spite of the gout,
        And a pain in her knee,
        She went dancing about:
        Did Dame Wiggins of Lee.

        The Farmer soon heard
        Where his sheep went astray,
        And arrived at Dame's door
        With his faithful dog Tray.
        He knocked with his crook,
        And the stranger to see,
        Out the window did look
        Dame Wiggins of Lee.

        For their kindness he had them
        All drawn by his team;
        And gave them some field-mice,
        And raspberry-cream.
        Said he, "All my stock
        You shall presently see;
        For I honor the cats
        Of Dame Wiggins of Lee."

        He sent his maid out
        For some muffins and crumpets;
        And when he turn'd round
        They were blowing of trumpets.
        Said he, "I suppose
        She's as deaf as can be,
        Or this ne'er could be borne
        By Dame Wiggins of Lee."

        To show them his poultry,
        He turn'd them all loose,
        When each nimbly leap'd
        On the back of a goose,
        Which frighten'd them so
        That they ran to the sea,
        And half-drown'd the poor cats
        Of Dame Wiggins of Lee.

        For the care of his lamb,
        And their comical pranks,
        He gave them a ham
        And abundance of thanks.
        "I wish you good-day,
        My fine fellows," said he;
        "My compliments, pray,
        To Dame Wiggins of Lee."

        You see them arrived
        At their Dame's welcome door;
        They show her their presents,
        And all their good store.
        "Now come in to supper,
        And sit down with me;
        All welcome once more,"
        Cried Dame Wiggins of Lee.



144

        This is the perfect pattern of all the
        accumulative stories, perhaps the best known
        and most loved of children among all nursery
        jingles. Halliwell thought it descended from
        the mystical Hebrew hymn, "A kid, a kid," found
        in the Talmud. Most commentators since have
        followed his example in calling attention to
        the parallel, though scholars have insisted
        that the hymn referred to is a late
        interpolation. The hymn opens:

        "A kid, a kid, my father bought,
        For two pieces of money:
                   A kid, a kid.

        "Then came the cat, and ate the kid,
        That my father bought," etc.

        Then came the dog and bit the cat, then the
        staff and beat the dog, then the fire and
        burned the staff, then water and quenched the
        fire, then the ox and drank the water, then the
        butcher and slew the ox, then the angel of
        death and killed the butcher, and the hymn
        concludes:

        "Then came the Holy One, blessed be He!
        And killed the angel of death,
        That killed the butcher,
        That slew the ox,
        That drank the water,
        That quenched the fire,
        That burned the staff,
        That beat the dog,
        That bit the cat,
        That ate the kid,
        That my father bought
        For two pieces of money:
                   A kid, a kid."

        There is an elaborate interpretation of the
        symbolism of this hymn, going back at least as
        far as 1731, in which the kid denotes the
        Hebrews, the father is Jehovah, the cat is the
        Assyrians, the dog is the Babylonians, the
        staff is the Persians, the fire is Greece under
        Alexander, the water is the Roman Empire, the
        ox is the Saracens, the butcher is the
        crusaders, the angel of death is the Turkish
        power, while the concluding accumulation shows
        that God will take vengeance on the enemies of
        the chosen people. This is the interpretation
        in barest outline only. Without the key no one
        would ever guess its hidden meaning.
        Fortunately, "The House That Jack Built" has no
        such hidden meaning. But the important point
        is that such accumulative stories are almost as
        old as human records, and, like so many other
        possessions of the race, seem to have come to
        us from the Far East.


THIS IS THE HOUSE THAT JACK BUILT

        This is the house that Jack built.

        This is the malt
        That lay in the house that Jack built.

        This is the rat,
        That ate the malt
        That lay in the house that Jack built.

        This is the cat,
        That killed the rat,
        That ate the malt
        That lay in the house that Jack built.

        This is the dog,
        That worried the cat,
        That killed the rat,
        That ate the malt
        That lay in the house that Jack built.

        This is the cow with the crumpled horn,
        That tossed the dog,
        That worried the cat,
        That killed the rat,
        That ate the malt
        That lay in the house that Jack built.

        This is the maiden all forlorn,
        That milked the cow with the crumpled horn,
        That tossed the dog,
        That worried the cat,
        That killed the rat,
        That ate the malt
        That lay in the house that Jack built.

        This is the man all tattered and torn,
        That kissed the maiden all forlorn,
        That milked the cow with the crumpled horn,
        That tossed the dog,
        That worried the cat,
        That killed the rat,
        That ate the malt
        That lay in the house that Jack built.

        This is the priest all shaven and shorn,
        That married the man all tattered and torn,
        That kissed the maiden all forlorn,
        That milked the cow with the crumpled horn,
        That tossed the dog,
        That worried the cat,
        That killed the rat,
        That ate the malt
        That lay in the house that Jack built.

        This is the cock that crowed in the morn,
        That waked the priest all shaven and shorn,
        That married the man all tattered and torn,
        That kissed the maiden all forlorn,
        That milked the cow with the crumpled horn,
        That tossed the dog,
        That worried the cat,
        That killed the rat,
        That ate the malt
        That lay in the house that Jack built.

        This is the farmer sowing his corn,
        That kept the cock that crowed in the morn,
        That waked the priest all shaven and shorn,
        That married the man all tattered and torn,
        That kissed the maiden all forlorn,
        That milked the cow with the crumpled horn,
        That tossed the dog,
        That worried the cat,
        That killed the rat,
        That ate the malt
        That lay in the house that Jack built.



145


THE EGG IN THE NEST

        There was a tree stood in the ground,
        The prettiest tree you ever did see;
        The tree in the wood, and the wood in the ground,
        And the green grass growing all around.

        And on this tree there was a limb,
        The prettiest limb you ever did see;
        The limb on the tree, and the tree in the wood,
        The tree in the wood, and the wood in the ground,
        And the green grass growing all around.

        And on this limb there was a bough,
        The prettiest bough you ever did see;
        The bough on the limb, and the limb on the tree,
        The limb on the tree, and the tree in the wood,
        The tree in the wood, and the wood in the ground,
        And the green grass growing all around.

        Now on this bough there was a nest,
        The prettiest nest you ever did see;
        The nest on the bough, and the bough on the limb,
        The limb on the tree, and the tree in the wood,
        The tree in the wood, and the wood in the ground,
        And the green grass growing all around.

        And in the nest there were some eggs,
        The prettiest eggs you ever did see;
        Eggs in the nest, and the nest on the bough,
        The bough on the limb, and the limb on the tree,
        The limb on the tree, and the tree in the wood,
        The tree in the wood, and the wood in the ground,
        And the green grass growing all around,
        _And the green grass growing all around_.



146

        The following story is the same as that of the
        Norwegian tale "The Husband Who Was to Mind the
        House" (No. 170). In the Halliwell version the
        final lines read,

        "If his wife didn't do a day's work in her life,
        She should ne'er be ruled by he."

        A later reading, now generally accepted, avoids
        the bad grammar by changing to direct
        discourse.


CHANGE ABOUT

        There was an old man, who lived in a wood,
          As you may plainly see;
        He said he could do as much work in a day,
          As his wife could do in three.
        With all my heart, the old woman said,
          If that you will allow,
        To-morrow you'll stay at home in my stead,
          And I'll go drive the plough:

        But you must milk the Tidy cow,
          For fear that she go dry;
        And you must feed the little pigs
          That are within the sty;
        And you must mind the speckled hen,
          For fear she lay away;
        And you must reel the spool of yarn,
          That I spun yesterday.

        The old woman took a staff in her hand,
          And went to drive the plough:
        The old man took a pail in his hand,
          And went to milk the cow;
        But Tidy hinched, and Tidy flinched,
          And Tidy broke his nose,
        And Tidy gave him such a blow,
          That the blood ran down to his toes.

        High! Tidy! ho! Tidy! high!
          Tidy! do stand still;
        If ever I milk you, Tidy, again,
          'Twill be sore against my will!

        He went to feed the little pigs
          That were within the sty;
        He hit his head against the beam,
          And he made the blood to fly.
        He went to mind the speckled hen,
          For fear she'd lay astray,
        And he forgot the spool of yarn
          His wife spun yesterday.

        So he swore by the sun, the moon, and the stars,
          And the green leaves on the tree,
        "If my wife doesn't do a day's work in her life,
          She shall ne'er be ruled by me."




SECTION III

FAIRY STORIES--TRADITIONAL TALES




BIBLIOGRAPHY

I. STANDARD GENERAL COLLECTIONS

  Jacobs, Joseph, _English Fairy Tales_, _More English Fairy Tales_,
     _Celtic Fairy Tales_, _More Celtic Fairy Tales_, _Indian Fairy
     Tales_, _Europa's Fairy Tales_.

  Lang, Andrew, _The Blue Fairy Book_, _The Red Fairy Book_, _The
     Green Fairy Book_, _The Yellow Fairy Book_.

        The Perrault stories are included in the first.
        Many other volumes named by colors (_Violet_,
        _Orange_, etc.) were made under Mr. Lang's
        direction, but these four include the cream.


II. NATIONAL COLLECTIONS

  ENGLISH: Campbell, J. F., _Popular Tales of the West Highlands_.
               4 vols.
           Halliwell, J. O., _Popular Rhymes and Nursery Tales_.
           Hartland, E. S., _English Fairy and Folk Tales_.

  GERMAN: Grimm, J. and W., _Kinder und Hausmaerchen_ (_Household
              Tales_).

        Translated by Edgar Taylor as _Grimm's Popular
        Stories_ (55 stories, 1823-1827), and
        illustrated by George Cruikshank. Best reprint
        is in one volume with introduction by John
        Ruskin.

        Translated complete by Margaret Hunt (2 vols.,
        1884), Introduction by Andrew Lang.

        Other excellent translations of selected
        stories by Mrs. Lucas and by Lucy Crane.

  INDIAN: Frere, Mary, _Old Deccan Days_.
          Knowles, J. H., _Folk Tales of Kashmir_.
          Steel, Flora Annie, _Tales of the Punjab_. (Notes by
              Captain R. C. Temple.)
          Stokes, Maive, _Indian Fairy Tales_.

  IRISH: Curtin, J., _Hero Tales of Ireland_.
          Graves, A. P., _The Irish Fairy Book_.
          Hyde, Douglas, _Beside the Fire_.
          Joyce, P. W., _Old Celtic Romances_.
          Wilde, Lady Constance, _Ancient Irish Legends_.
          Yeats, W. B., _Irish Fairy Tales_.

  ITALIAN: Crane, T. F., _Italian Popular Tales_.

  NORSE: Asbjoernsen, P. C., and Moe, J., _Norske Folke-eventyr_
            (_Norwegian Folk Tales_, 1842-1844, with subsequent
            additions).

        Translated by Sir George Webbe Dasent in
        _Popular Tales from the Norse_ and _Tales of
        the Fjeld_; by H. L. Braekstad in _Round the
        Yule Log_ and _Fairy Tales from the North_.

  SLAVIC: Bain, R. Nesbit, _Cossack Fairy Tales_, _Russian Folk
              Tales_.


III. THE SCIENCE OF FOLKLORE

  Cox, Roalfe, _Cinderella_. (Introduction by Lang.)
  Clouston, W. A., _Popular Tales and Fictions_. 2 vols.
  Gomme, G. L., _Folklore as an Historical Science_.
  Hartland, E. S., _The Science of Fairy Tales_.
  Keightly, Thomas, _Fairy Mythology_.
  Lang, Andrew, _Perrault's Popular Tales_. (Introduction.)
  MacCulloch, J. A., _The Childhood of Fiction_.


IV. PEDAGOGY

  Adler, Felix, _The Moral Instruction of Children_, pp. 63-79.
  Kready, Laura F., _The Study of Fairy Tales_. (Indispensable.)
  MacClintock, P. L., _Literature in the Elementary School_, pp.
      92-112.
  McMurry, Charles, _Special Method in Reading_, pp. 47-69.




SECTION III: FAIRY STORIES--TRADITIONAL TALES

INTRODUCTORY


The forty-three tales in this section have been chosen (1) in the light
of what experience shows children most enjoy, (2) to represent as fully
as possible the great variety of our traditional inheritance, (3) to
afford an opportunity of calling attention to additional riches in
various collections, and (4) to suggest a fair minimum of the amount of
such material to be used with children. As in all such questions of
judgment, there must inevitably be differences of opinion. Many will
doubtless find stories missing that seem necessary even to so small a
list, while others will find tales included that may seem questionable.
Such a selection can be, and is intended to be, only tentative, a
starting point from which there are many lines of departure.

_Folklore._ These tales are all from the traditional field. They are
mainly of anonymous and popular origin, handed down orally by peasants.
The investigation of their origin, distribution, and interrelations
belongs to the science of folklore. A good-sized library could be filled
entirely with the books concerned with the studies and disputations in
this interesting field. While the folklorists have very much of value to
tell the teacher, their questions may be largely ignored until the
latter is quite fully acquainted with a large body of the acknowledged
masterpieces among folk stories, especially those which the schools have
taken to themselves as useful in elementary work. Teachers interested in
pursuing the matter further--and it is to be hoped there are many
such--will find suggestions in the notes at the head of each tale and in
the preceding bibliography that may prove serviceable in directing them
some little way. Each book will point the student to many others; when
he is once started on the road of investigation, there will open up many
unexpected and fascinating vistas.

_Objections to fairy tales._ These objections seem to fall as a rule
under two main heads. First, there are those who object to any
stimulation of the fanciful in children, and who would have us confine
ourselves to what they call realities. They would eliminate as far as
possible all the imaginings of children. The make-believe world so dear
to infancy has no place in their creed. Second, there are those who
doubt the moral tendency of all fairy tales. They observe that many of
these tales come to us from a cruder and coarser social state than our
own, that they contain elements of a superstitious and animistic past,
that they often deal with cruelties and horrors, trickeries and
disloyalties, that they are full of romantic improbabilities and
impossibilities. It may as well be admitted at once that the folklore of
the world contains many stories to which these and other objections are
valid.

_Is there a proper line of defense for fairy tales?_ Dr. Felix Adler,
who certainly cannot be accused of being insensible to realities, puts
the case thus, as between defenders and objectors: "I venture to think
that, as in many other cases, the cause of the quarrel is what logicians
call an _undistributed middle_--in other words, that the parties to the
dispute have each a different kind of fairy tale in mind. This species
of literature can be divided broadly into two classes--one consisting of
tales which ought to be rejected because they are really harmful, and
children ought to be protected from their bad influence, the other of
tales which have a most beautiful and elevating effect, and which we
cannot possibly afford to leave unutilized." Dr. Adler proceeds to point
out that the chief pedagogic values of the latter class are (1) that
they exercise and cultivate the imagination, and (2) that they stimulate
the idealizing tendency.

John Ruskin, another teacher who constantly in his writings throws the
emphasis upon the necessity of a true ethical understanding, has this to
say about the mischievous habit of trying to remake the fairy story in
the service of morals: "And the effect of the endeavor to make stories
moral upon the literary merit of the work itself, is as harmful as the
motive of the effort is false. For every fairy tale worth recording at
all is the remnant of a tradition possessing true historical
value;--historical, at least in so far as it has naturally arisen out of
the mind of a people under special circumstances, and arisen not without
meaning, nor removed altogether from their sphere of religious faith. It
sustains afterwards natural changes from the sincere action of the fear
or fancy of successive generations; it takes new color from their manner
of life, and new form from their changing moral tempers. As long as
these changes are natural and effortless, accidental and inevitable, the
story remains essentially true, altering its form, indeed, like a flying
cloud, but remaining a sign of the sky; a shadowy image, as truly a part
of the great firmament of the human mind as the light of reason which it
seems to interrupt. But the fair deceit and innocent error of it cannot
be interpreted nor restrained by a wilful purpose, and all additions to
it by art do but defile, as the shepherd disturbs the flakes of morning
mist with smoke from his fire of dead leaves." Instead of retouching
stories "to suit particular tastes, or inculcate favorite doctrines,"
Ruskin would have the child "know his fairy tale accurately, and have
perfect joy or awe in the conception of it as if it were real; thus he
will always be exercising his power of grasping realities: but a
confused, careless, and discrediting tenure of the fiction will lead to
as confused and careless reading of fact." Still further, Ruskin defends
the vulgarity, or commonness of language, found in many of the tales as
"of a wholesome and harmless kind. It is not, for instance, graceful
English, to say that a thought 'popped into Catherine's head'; but it
nevertheless is far better, as an initiation into literary style, that a
child should be told this than that 'a subject attracted Catherine's
attention.'"

Finally, we cannot forbear adding one more quotation, from the most
delightful of attacks upon the attackers of fairy tales, by Miss
Repplier: "That which is vital in literature or tradition, which has
survived the obscurity and wreckage of the past, whether as legend, or
ballad, or mere nursery rhyme, has survived in right of some intrinsic
merit of its own, and will not be snuffed out of existence by any of our
precautionary or hygienic measures. . . . Puss in Boots is one long record
of triumphant effrontery and deception. An honest and self-respecting
lad would have explained to the king that he was not the Marquis of
Carabas at all; that he had no desire to profit by his cat's ingenious
falsehoods, and no weak ambition to connect himself with the
aristocracy. Such a hero would be a credit to our modern schoolrooms,
and lift a load of care from the shoulders of our modern critics. Only
the children would have none of him, but would turn wistfully back to
those brave old tales which are their inheritance from a splendid past,
and of which no hand shall rob them." And upon this ultimate fact that
in literature the final decision rests with the audience appealed to,
the discussion may end.

_How to use fairy stories._ Briefly, the whole matter may be summed up
thus: _Know your story perfectly. Don't read it (unless you can't do
better). Tell it--with all the graces of voice and action you can
command. Tell it naturally and simply, as the folk-tellers did, not with
studied and elaborate "elocutionary" effects. Tell it again and again.
If you do it well, the children will not soon tire of it--and they will
indicate what you should do next!_


SUGGESTIONS

        (Books referred to by authors' name are listed
        in bibliography.)

        The one important full-length discussion for
        teachers on the whole subject of the fairy tale
        is Kready's _A Study of Fairy Tales_. It is
        enthusiastic rather than severely critical, and
        that adds to its helpfulness. It has exhaustive
        bibliographies. The Ruskin quotations above are
        from his introduction to Taylor's _Grimm_; it
        may be found also in his collected works, in
        _On the Old Road_. Miss Repplier's "Battle of
        the Babies" in her _Essays in Miniature_ should
        be read entire. A thoroughly stimulating
        article is Brian Hooker's "Narrative and the
        Fairy Tale," _Bookman_, Vol. XXXIII, pp. 389,
        501; see also his "Types of Fairy Tales,"
        _Forum_, Vol. XL, p. 375. For the scientific
        phase start with Hartland's _Science of Fairy
        Tales_. For pedagogy see Adler, MacClintock,
        McMurry.



147

        Many English folk tales have doubtless been
        lost because no one made a serious attempt to
        collect them until railroads, newspapers, and
        popular education had greatly changed the life
        of the English folk and destroyed many of the
        traditions. For the preservation of many folk
        tales that we have, English-speaking peoples
        are indebted to the scholarly antiquarian James
        Orchard Halliwell (afterwards
        Halliwell-Phillips, 1820-1889), who in the year
        1842 edited a collection of _The Nursery Rhymes
        of England_ for the Percy Society. He followed
        it a few years later with _Popular Rhymes and
        Nursery Tales_. They have long been regarded as
        the basic books in their field. These two
        collections were reprinted as _Nursery Rhymes
        and Tales_. This one-volume edition is the one
        referred to in the following pages. Halliwell
        should be remembered as the first person to
        collect in a scientific way the folk literature
        of England. He gathered these rhymes and tales
        from the mouths of the folk, from chapbooks,
        and from many other sources and endeavored to
        tell them as they had been told by the folk.

        "The Old Woman and Her Pig" is perhaps the most
        familiar of all nursery stories. It belongs to
        the type of story known as the "accumulative,"
        of which "The House That Jack Built" is the
        purest model. In such a story there is a
        constant repetition of the plot, with an
        addition or slight change at each repetition,
        until at the end there is a quick unwinding
        which carries us back to the initial situation
        and solves the difficulty with which the story
        started. Halliwell gives two versions of this
        particular story. It is so widespread that many
        slight variations would be expected in
        successful retellings of it. The traditional
        version which follows seems to be the favorite
        with primary teachers. It introduces at the
        sixth stage the attractive rhyme "I see by the
        moonlight, etc.," which originally formed part
        of another nursery tale.


THE OLD WOMAN AND HER PIG

Once upon a time, an old woman was sweeping her little house, when, to
her great joy, she found a silver sixpence.

"What," said she, "shall I do with this little sixpence? I think I will
go to market and buy a pig." So the next day, she went to market, and
bought a nice little white pig. She tied a string to one of the pig's
legs, and began to drive him home.

On the way, the old woman and her pig came to a stile, and she said,--

        "Please, pig, get over the stile."
          But the pig would not.

Just then a little dog came trotting up, and the old woman said to
him,--

        "Dog, dog, bite pig;
        Pig won't get over the stile,
        And I sha'n't get home to-night."
          But the dog would not.

So the old woman held up her stick, and said,--

        "Stick, stick, beat dog;
        Dog won't bite pig;
        Pig won't get over the stile,
        And I sha'n't get home to-night."
          But the stick would not.

So the old woman gathered some bits of wood together to make a fire, and
set them on fire, and then threw her stick into the fire, and said,--

        "Fire, fire, burn stick;
        Stick won't beat dog;
        Dog won't bite pig;
        Pig won't get over the stile,
        And I sha'n't get home to-night."
          But the fire would not.

So the old woman fetched a pail of water that was standing near, and
said,--

        "Water, water, quench fire;
        Fire won't burn stick;
        Stick won't beat dog;
        Dog won't bite pig;
        Pig won't get over the stile,
        And I sha'n't get home to-night."
          But the water would not.

Then the old woman saw an ox coming; so she said,--

        "Ox, ox, drink water;
        Water won't quench fire;
        Fire won't burn stick;
        Stick won't beat dog;
        Dog won't bite pig;
        Pig won't go.
        I see by the moonlight,
        It's long past midnight;
        Time pig and I were home an hour and a half ago."
          But the ox would not.

So the old woman turned round, and saw a butcher, and she said,--

        "Butcher, butcher, kill ox;
        Ox won't drink water;
        Water won't quench fire;
        Fire won't burn stick;
        Stick won't beat dog;
        Dog won't bite pig;
        Pig won't go.
        I see by the moonlight,
        It's long past midnight;
        Time pig and I were home an hour and a half ago."
          But the butcher would not.

So the old woman took a rope out of her pocket, and said,--

        "Rope, rope, hang butcher;
        Butcher won't kill ox;
        Ox won't drink water;
        Water won't quench fire;
        Fire won't burn stick;
        Stick won't beat dog;
        Dog won't bite pig;
        Pig won't go.
        I see by the moonlight,
        It's long past midnight;
        Time pig and I were home an hour and a half ago."
          But the rope would not.

Just then a large brown mouse ran across the meadow, and she said,--

        "Mouse, mouse, gnaw rope;
        Rope won't hang butcher;
        Butcher won't kill ox;
        Ox won't drink water;
        Water won't quench fire;
        Fire won't burn stick;
        Stick won't beat dog;
        Dog won't bite pig;
        Pig won't go.
        I see by the moonlight,
        It's long past midnight;
        Time pig and I were home an hour and a half ago."
        "Yes," said the mouse, "I will if you
          will give me some cheese."

So the old woman put her hand in her pocket, and found a nice piece of
cheese; and when the mouse had eaten it,

        The mouse began to gnaw the rope,
        The rope began to hang the butcher,
        The butcher began to kill the ox,
        The ox began to drink the water,
        The water began to quench the fire,
        The fire began to burn the stick,
        The stick began to beat the dog,
        The dog began to bite the pig,
        And the pig began to go.

But what time the old woman and her pig got home, you, nor I, nor nobody
knows.



148

        Teachers and parents owe a greater debt of
        gratitude to Joseph Jacobs than to any other
        modern student of folklore. He was born in
        Australia in 1854, spent most of his life in
        scholarly pursuits in England, and died in
        America in 1916. In his six volumes of English,
        Celtic, Indian, and European fairy tales he
        gave the world versions of its best known and
        most representative folk stories in a form
        suited to children while remaining true in all
        essentials to the original oral versions of the
        folk. This combination of scientific accuracy
        and literary workmanship is very rare. In the
        introductions and notes to these various
        volumes may be found a wealth of information
        which the general reader can understand without
        the necessity of special training in the
        science of folklore. And best of all, these
        volumes can be had at prices that are
        comparatively cheap.

        The following story of "Henny-Penny" is given
        in the fine version by Joseph Jacobs in his
        _English Fairy Tales_. He heard it as a child
        in Australia and he thinks "the fun consists in
        the avoidance of all pronouns, which results in
        jawbreaking sentences." This story is also very
        familiar in the Halliwell version called
        "Chicken-Licken," and there are numerous
        European parallels.


HENNY-PENNY

One day Henny-penny was picking up corn in the cornyard
when--whack!--something hit her upon the head. "Goodness gracious me!"
said Henny-penny; "the sky's a-going to fall; I must go and tell the
king."

So she went along, and she went along, and she went along till she met
Cocky-locky. "Where are you going, Henny-penny?" says Cocky-locky. "Oh!
I'm going to tell the king the sky's a-falling," says Henny-penny. "May
I come with you?" says Cocky-locky. "Certainly," says Henny-penny. So
Henny-penny and Cocky-locky went to tell the king the sky was a-falling.

They went along, and they went along, and they went along, till they met
Ducky-daddles. "Where are you going to, Henny-penny and Cocky-locky?"
says Ducky-daddles. "Oh! we're going to tell the king the sky's
a-falling," said Henny-penny and Cocky-locky. "May I come with you?"
says Ducky-daddles. "Certainly," said Henny-penny and Cocky-locky. So
Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, and Ducky-daddles went to tell the king the
sky was a-falling.

So they went along, and they went along, and they went along, till they
met Goosey-poosey. "Where are you going to, Henny-penny, Cocky-locky,
and Ducky-daddles?" said Goosey-poosey. "Oh! we're going to tell the
king the sky's a-falling," said Henny-penny and Cocky-locky and
Ducky-daddles. "May I come with you?" said Goosey-poosey. "Certainly,"
said Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, and Ducky-daddles. So Henny-penny,
Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles, and Goosey-poosey went to tell the king the
sky was a-falling.

So they went along, and they went along, and they went along, till they
met Turkey-lurkey. "Where are you going, Henny-penny, Cocky-locky,
Ducky-daddles, and Goosey-poosey?" says Turkey-lurkey. "Oh! we're going
to tell the king the sky's a-falling," said Henny-penny, Cocky-locky,
Ducky-daddles, and Goosey-poosey. "May I come with you, Henny-penny,
Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles, and Goosey-poosey?" said Turkey-lurkey. "Oh,
certainly, Turkey-lurkey," said Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles,
and Goosey-poosey. So Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles,
Goosey-poosey, and Turkey-lurkey all went to tell the king the sky was
a-falling.

So they went along, and they went along, and they went along, till they
met Foxy-woxy, and Foxy-woxy said to Henny-penny, Cocky-locky,
Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey, and Turkey-lurkey: "Where are you going,
Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey, and
Turkey-lurkey?" And Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles,
Goosey-poosey, and Turkey-lurkey said to Foxy-woxy: "We're going to tell
the king the sky's a-falling." "Oh! but this is not the way to the king,
Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey, and
Turkey-lurkey," says Foxy-woxy; "I know the proper way; shall I show it
you?" "Oh, certainly, Foxy-woxy," said Henny-Penny, Cocky-locky,
Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey, and Turkey-lurkey. So Henny-penny,
Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey, Turkey-lurkey, and Foxy-woxy
all went to tell the king the sky was a-falling.

So they went along, and they went along, and they went along, till they
came to a narrow and dark hole. Now this was the door of Foxy-woxy's
cave. But Foxy-woxy said to Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles,
Goosey-poosey, and Turkey-lurkey: "This is the short way to the king's
palace; you'll soon get there if you follow me. I will go first and you
come after, Henny-Penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey, and
Turkey-lurkey." "Why of course, certainly, without doubt, why not?" said
Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey, and
Turkey-lurkey.

So Foxy-woxy went into his cave, and he didn't go very far, but turned
round to wait for Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles,
Goosey-poosey, and Turkey-lurkey. So at last at first Turkey-lurkey went
through the dark hole into the cave. He hadn't got far when "Hrumph,"
Foxy-woxy snapped off Turkey-lurkey's head and threw his body over his
left shoulder. Then Goosey-poosey went in, and "Hrumph," off went her
head and Goosey-poosey was thrown beside Turkey-lurkey. Then
Ducky-daddles waddled down, and "Hrumph," snapped Foxy-woxy, and
Ducky-daddles' head was off and Ducky-daddles was thrown alongside
Turkey-lurkey and Goosey-poosey. Then Cocky-locky strutted down into the
cave, and he hadn't gone far when "Snap, Hrumph!" went Foxy-woxy and
Cocky-locky was thrown alongside of Turkey-lurkey, Goosey-poosey, and
Ducky-daddles.

But Foxy-woxy had made two bites at Cocky-locky, and when the first snap
only hurt Cocky-locky, but didn't kill him, he called out to
Henny-penny. But she turned tail and off she ran home, so she never told
the king the sky was a-falling.



149

        The favorite story of "Teeny-Tiny" is taken
        from Halliwell, who obtained it from oral
        tradition, and by whom it was, apparently,
        first put into print. "This simple tale," he
        says, "seldom fails to rivet the attention of
        children, especially if well told. The last two
        words should be said loudly with a start." Many
        modern story-tellers seem to prefer modified
        forms of this story, presumably owing to a
        feeling on their part that the bone and the
        churchyard have gruesome suggestions. Carolyn
        S. Bailey gives one of the best of these
        modified forms in her _Firelight Stories_,
        where the woman goes into a field instead of
        the churchyard, finds a hen at the foot of a
        tree, thinks this is a chance to have an egg
        for her breakfast, puts the hen in her
        reticule, goes home, puts the hen in her
        cupboard, and goes upstairs to take a nap. Of
        course the "teeny-tiny" goes in at every point.
        Substituting "hen" for "bone," the story
        continues substantially as given below.

TEENY-TINY

Once upon a time there was a teeny-tiny woman lived in a teeny-tiny
house in a teeny-tiny village. Now, one day this teeny-tiny woman put on
her teeny-tiny bonnet, and went out of her teeny-tiny house to take a
teeny-tiny walk. And when this teeny-tiny woman had gone a teeny-tiny
way, she came to a teeny-tiny gate; so the teeny-tiny woman opened the
teeny-tiny gate, and went into a teeny-tiny churchyard. And when this
teeny-tiny woman had got into the teeny-tiny churchyard, she saw a
teeny-tiny bone on a teeny-tiny grave, and the teeny-tiny woman said to
her teeny-tiny self, "This teeny-tiny bone will make me some teeny-tiny
soup for my teeny-tiny supper." So the teeny-tiny woman put the
teeny-tiny bone into her teeny-tiny pocket, and went home to her
teeny-tiny house.

Now when the teeny-tiny woman got home to her teeny-tiny house, she was
a teeny-tiny tired; so she went up her teeny-tiny stairs to her
teeny-tiny bed, and put the teeny-tiny bone into a teeny-tiny cupboard.
And when this teeny-tiny woman had been to sleep a teeny-tiny time, she
was awakened by a teeny-tiny voice from the teeny-tiny cupboard, which
said:

        "GIVE ME MY BONE!"

And this teeny-tiny woman was a teeny-tiny frightened, so she hid her
teeny-tiny head under the teeny-tiny clothes and went to sleep again.
And when she had been to sleep again a teeny-tiny time, the teeny-tiny
voice again cried out from the teeny-tiny cupboard a teeny-tiny louder,

        "GIVE ME MY BONE!"

This made the teeny-tiny woman a teeny-tiny more frightened, so she hid
her teeny-tiny head a teeny-tiny farther under the teeny-tiny clothes.
And when the teeny-tiny woman had been to sleep again a teeny-tiny time,
the teeny-tiny voice from the teeny-tiny cupboard said again a
teeny-tiny louder,

        "GIVE ME MY BONE!"

And this teeny-tiny woman was a teeny-tiny bit more frightened, but she
put her teeny-tiny head out of the teeny-tiny clothes, and said in her
loudest teeny-tiny voice,

        "TAKE IT!"



150

        The very old story that follows is taken from
        Halliwell, and is, according to Jacobs,
        scarcely more than a variant of "The Old Woman
        and Her Pig." Like that story, "The Cat and the
        Mouse" appeals to small people by its
        pronounced rhythmical structure, accentuated by
        the rhyme which marks the transition to each
        new section, and by the "run" at the close.


THE CAT AND THE MOUSE

        The cat and the mouse
        Played in the malt-house:

The cat bit the mouse's tail off. "Pray, puss, give me my tail."

"No," said the cat, "I'll not give you your tail till you go to the cow
and fetch me some milk."

        First she leapt, and then she ran,
        Till she came to the cow, and thus began:

"Pray, cow, give me milk, that I may give cat milk, that cat may give me
my own tail again."

"No," said the cow, "I will give you no milk till you go to the farmer
and fetch me some hay."

        First she leapt, and then she ran,
        Till she came to the farmer, and thus began:

"Pray, farmer, give me hay, that I may give cow hay, that cow may give
me milk, that I may give cat milk, that cat may give me my own tail
again."

"No," said the farmer, "I'll give you no hay till you go to the butcher
and fetch me some meat."

        First she leapt, and then she ran,
        Till she came to the butcher, and thus began:

"Pray, butcher, give me meat, that I may give farmer meat, that farmer
may give me hay, that I may give cow hay, that cow may give me milk,
that I may give cat milk, that cat may give me my own tail again."

"No," said the butcher, "I'll give you no meat till you go to the baker
and fetch me some bread."

        First she leapt, and then she ran,
        Till she came to the baker, and thus began:

"Pray, baker, give me bread, that I may give butcher bread, that butcher
may give me meat, that I may give farmer meat, that farmer may give me
hay, that I may give cow hay, that cow may give me milk, that I may give
cat milk, that cat may give me my own tail again."

        "Yes," said the baker, "I'll give you some bread,
        But if you eat my meal, I'll cut off your head."

Then the baker gave mouse bread, and mouse gave butcher bread, and
butcher gave mouse meat, and mouse gave farmer meat, and farmer gave
mouse hay, and mouse gave cow hay, and cow gave mouse milk, and mouse
gave cat milk, and cat gave mouse her own tail again.



151

        The following story is in the most familiar
        version of Halliwell's collection. Another
        much-used form of the story may be found in
        Lang's _Green Fairy Book_, in which the pigs
        are distinctly characterized and given the
        names of Browny, Whitey, and Blacky. Jacobs
        uses the Halliwell version in his _English
        Fairy Tales_, but prefixes to it an opening
        formula which seems to have been much in use by
        old story-tellers as a way of beginning almost
        any oral story for children:

        "Once upon a time when pigs spoke rhyme
        And monkeys chewed tobacco,
        And hens took snuff to make them tough,
        And ducks went quack, quack, quack, O!"


THE STORY OF THE THREE LITTLE PIGS

Once upon a time there was an old sow with three little pigs, and as she
had not enough to keep them, she sent them out to seek their fortune.
The first that went off met a man with a bundle of straw, and said to
him:

"Please, man, give me that straw to build me a house."

Which the man did, and the little pig built a house with it. Presently
came along a wolf, and knocked at the door, and said:

"Little pig, little pig, let me come in."

To which the pig answered:

"No, no, by the hair of my chinny chin chin."

The wolf then answered to that:

"Then I'll huff, and I'll puff, and I'll blow your house in."

So he huffed, and he puffed, and he blew his house in, and ate up the
little pig.

The second little pig met a man with a bundle of furze and said:

"Please, man, give me that furze to build a house."

Which the man did, and the pig built his house. Then along came the
wolf, and said:

"Little pig, little pig, let me come in."

"No, no, by the hair of my chinny chin chin."

"Then I'll puff, and I'll huff, and I'll blow your house in."

So he huffed, and he puffed, and he puffed, and he huffed, and at last
he blew the house down, and he ate up the little pig.

The third little pig met a man with a load of bricks, and said:

"Please, man, give me those bricks to build a house with."

So the man gave him the bricks, and he built his house with them. So the
wolf came, as he did to the other little pigs, and said:

"Little pig, little pig, let me come in."

"No, no, by the hair on my chinny chin chin."

"Then I'll huff, and I'll puff, and I'll blow your house in."

Well, he huffed, and he puffed, and he huffed and he puffed, and he
puffed and huffed; but he could _not_ get the house down. When he found
that he could not, with all his huffing and puffing, blow the house
down, he said:

"Little pig, I know where there is a nice field of turnips."

"Where?" said the little pig.

"Oh, in Mr. Smith's Home-field, and if you will be ready to-morrow
morning I will call for you, and we will go together and get some for
dinner."

"Very well," said the little pig, "I will be ready. What time do you
mean to go?"

"Oh, at six o'clock."

Well, the little pig got up at five and got the turnips before the wolf
came (which he did about six), who said:

"Little pig, are you ready?"

The little pig said: "Ready! I have been and come back again, and got a
nice potful for dinner."

The wolf felt very angry at this, but thought that he would be _up to_
the little pig somehow or other, so he said:

"Little pig, I know where there is a nice apple-tree."

"Where?" said the pig.

"Down at Merry-garden," replied the wolf, "and if you will not deceive
me I will come for you at five o'clock tomorrow and we will go together
and get some apples."

Well, the little pig bustled up the next morning at four o'clock, and
went off for the apples, hoping to get back before the wolf came; but he
had farther to go and had to climb the tree, so that just as he was
coming down from it, he saw the wolf coming, which, as you may suppose,
frightened him very much. When the wolf came up he said:

"Little pig, what! are you here before me? Are they nice apples?"

"Yes, very," said the little pig. "I will throw you down one."

And he threw it so far that, while the wolf was gone to pick it up, the
little pig jumped down and ran home. The next day the wolf came again
and said to the little pig:

"Little pig, there is a fair at Shanklin this afternoon. Will you go?"

"Oh, yes," said the pig, "I will go. What time shall you be ready?"

"At three," said the wolf. So the little pig went off before the time as
usual, and got to the fair and bought a butter-churn, which he was going
home with, when he saw the wolf coming. Then he could not tell what to
do. So he got into the churn to hide, and by so doing turned it round,
and it rolled down the hill with the pig in it, which frightened the
wolf so much that he ran home without going to the fair. He went to the
little pig's house and told him how frightened he had been by a great
round thing which came down the hill past him. Then the little pig said:

"Hah, I frightened you, then. I had been to the fair and bought a
butter-churn, and when I saw you, I got into it and rolled down the
hill."

Then the wolf was very angry indeed, and declared he _would_ eat up the
little pig and that he would get down the chimney after him. When the
little pig saw what he was about, he hung on the pot full of water and
made up a blazing fire, and, just as the wolf was coming down, took off
the cover, and in fell the wolf; so the little pig put on the cover
again in an instant, boiled him up, and ate him for supper, and lived
happy ever afterwards.



152

        How great calamities sometimes grow out of
        small causes is illustrated in an old
        proverbial saying of Poor Richard (see No.
        137). The favorite English folk-tale version of
        this theme, taken from Halliwell, is given
        below. It takes the form of an accumulative
        droll, or comic story. The overwhelming
        catastrophe at the end is so complete and so
        unexpected that it has a decidedly humorous
        effect.


TITTY MOUSE AND TATTY MOUSE

        Titty Mouse and Tatty Mouse both lived in a house,
          Titty Mouse went a leasing and Tatty Mouse went a leasing,
        So they both went a leasing.

          Titty Mouse leased an ear of corn, and
            Tatty Mouse leased an ear of corn,
        So they both leased an ear of corn.

          Titty Mouse made a pudding, and
            Tatty Mouse made a pudding,
        So they both made a pudding.

          And Tatty Mouse put her pudding into the pot to boil,
          But when Titty went to put hers in, the pot tumbled over, and
               scalded her to death.

Then Tatty sat down and wept; then a three-legged stool said: "Tatty,
why do you weep?" "Titty's dead," said Tatty, "and so I weep." "Then,"
said the stool, "I'll hop," so the stool hopped.

Then a broom in the corner of the room said: "Stool, why do you hop?"
"Oh!" said the stool, "Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, and so I hop."
"Then," said the broom, "I'll sweep," so the broom began to sweep.

"Then," said the door, "Broom, why do you sweep?" "Oh!" said the broom,
"Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, and the stool hops, and so I sweep."
"Then," said the door, "I'll jar," so the door jarred.

"Then," said the window, "Door, why do you jar?" "Oh," said the door,
"Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, the stool hops, and the broom sweeps,
and so I jar."

"Then," said the window, "I'll creak," so the window creaked. Now there
was an old form outside the house, and when the window creaked, the form
said: "Window, why do you creak?" "Oh!" said the window, "Titty's dead,
and Tatty weeps, and the stool hops, and the broom sweeps, the door
jars, and so I creak."

"Then," said the old form, "I'll run round the house"; then the old form
ran round the house. Now there was a fine large walnut-tree growing by
the cottage, and the tree said to the form: "Form, why do you run round
the house?" "Oh!" said the form, "Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, and the
stool hops, and the broom sweeps, the door jars, and the window creaks,
and so I run round the house."

"Then," said the walnut-tree, "I'll shed my leaves," so the walnut-tree
shed all its beautiful green leaves. Now there was a little bird perched
on one of the boughs of the tree, and when all the leaves fell, it said:
"Walnut-tree, why do you shed your leaves?" "Oh!" said the tree,
"Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, the stool hops, and the broom sweeps,
the door jars, and the window creaks, the old form runs round the house,
and so I shed my leaves."

"Then," said the little bird, "I'll moult all my feathers," so he
moulted all his pretty feathers. Now there was a little girl walking
below, carrying a jug of milk for her brothers' and sisters' supper, and
when she saw the poor little bird moult all its feathers, she said:
"Little bird, why do you moult all your feathers?" "Oh!" said the little
bird, "Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, the stool hops, and the broom
sweeps, the door jars, and the window creaks, the old form runs round
the house, the walnut-tree sheds its leaves, and so I moult all my
feathers."

"Then," said the little girl, "I'll spill the milk," so she dropt the
pitcher and spilt the milk. Now there was an old man just by on the top
of a ladder thatching a rick, and when he saw the little girl spill the
milk, he said: "Little girl, what do you mean by spilling the
milk?--your little brothers and sisters must go without their supper."
Then said the little girl: "Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, the stool
hops, and the broom sweeps, the door jars, and the window creaks, the
old form runs round the house, the walnut-tree sheds all its leaves, the
little bird moults all its feathers, and so I spill the milk."

"Oh!" said the old man, "then I'll tumble off the ladder and break my
neck," so he tumbled off the ladder and broke his neck; and when the old
man broke his neck, the great walnut-tree fell down with a crash and
upset the old form and house, and the house falling knocked the window
out, and the window knocked the door down, and the door upset the broom,
and the broom upset the stool, and poor little Tatty Mouse was buried
beneath the ruins.



153

        "The Story of the Three Bears" is perhaps the
        only instance in which a piece of literature by
        a known English author is found among accepted
        folk tales. It appeared in Robert Southey's
        rambling miscellany, _The Doctor_ (1837). He
        may have taken it from an old tale, but no
        amount of investigation has located any certain
        source. In the most familiar versions the
        naughty old woman gives place to a little girl
        whose name is Goldenhair, Goldilocks,
        Silverhair, or Silverlocks. The point to the
        story is lessened by the change, but the
        popularity of these modifications seems to
        suggest that children prefer to have the
        ill-mannered old woman turned into an
        attractive little girl. Southey apparently was
        delighted with efforts to bring his story into
        any form more pleasing to the folk, and we find
        his son-in-law saying that he was especially
        pleased with a versification "by G. N. and
        published especially for the amusement of
        'little people' lest in the volumes of _The
        Doctor_ it should 'escape their sight.'"
        However, it would appear that teachers at least
        should know this masterpiece in the only form
        in which its author put it. To that end this
        version of "The Three Bears" follows Southey
        with the change of a single word. At the head
        of the story he placed these lines from
        Gascoyne:

        "A tale which may content the minds
         Of learned men and grave philosophers."


THE STORY OF THE THREE BEARS

ROBERT SOUTHEY


       [Transcriber's Note: For this story, different
       sized text was used to indicate the size of the
       different bears' voices. The largest text has
       been denote by use of the ~ symbol and the
       smallest text has been denoted by use of the +
       symbol.]

Once upon a time there were Three Bears who lived together in a house of
their own in a wood. One of them was a Little, Small, Wee Bear; and one
was a Middle-sized Bear, and the other was a Great, Huge Bear. They had
each a pot for their porridge; a little pot for the Little, Small, Wee
Bear; and a middle-sized pot for the Middle Bear; and a great pot for
the Great, Huge Bear. And they had each a chair to sit in; a little
chair for the Little, Small, Wee Bear; and a middle-sized chair for the
Middle Bear; and a great chair for the Great, Huge Bear. And they had
each a bed to sleep in; a little bed for the Little, Small, Wee Bear;
and a middle-sized bed for the Middle Bear; and a great bed for the
