So Lightfoot bounded along deeper and deeper into the Green
Forest.  Presently through the trees he caught the gleam of water.
It was Paddy's pond.  Lightfoot approached it cautiously.
He felt sure he was rid of the hunter who had followed him so
far that day, but he knew that there might be other hunters in the
Green Forest.  He knew that he couldn't afford to be careless for
even one little minute.  Lightfoot had lived long enough to know
that most of the sad things and dreadful things that happen in
the Green Forest and on the Green Meadows are due to carelessness.
No one who is hunted, be he big or little, can afford ever to
be careless.

Now Lightfoot had known of hunters hiding near water, hoping to
shoot him when he came to drink.  That always seemed to Lightfoot
a dreadful thing, an unfair thing.  But hunters had done it
before and they might do it again.  So Lightfoot was careful to
approach Paddy's pond upwind.  That is, he approached the side of
the pond from which the Merry Little Breezes were blowing toward
him, and all the time he kept his nose working.  He knew that if
any hunters were hidden there, the Merry Little Breezes would
bring him their scent and thus warn him.

He had almost reached the edge of Paddy's pond when from the
farther shore there came a sudden crash.  It startled Lightfoot
terribly for just an instant.  Then he guessed what it meant.
That crash was the falling of a tree. There wasn't enough wind to
blow over even the most shaky dead tree.  There had been no sound
of axes, so he knew it could not have been chopped down by men.
It must be that Paddy the Beaver had cut it, and if Paddy had been
working in daylight, it was certain that no one had been around
that pond for a long time.

So Lightfoot hurried forward eagerly, cautiously. When he reached
the bank he looked across towards where the sound of that falling
tree had come from; a branch of a tree was moving along in the
water and half hidden by it was a brown head. It was Paddy the
Beaver taking the branch to his food pile.




CHAPTER XIII: Lightfoot And Paddy Become Partners


The instant Lightfoot saw Paddy the Beaver he knew that for the
time being, at least, there was no danger.  He knew that Paddy is
one of the shyest of all the little people of the Green Forest
and that when he is found working in the daytime it means that he
has been undisturbed for a long time; otherwise he would work
only at night.

Paddy saw Lightfoot almost as soon as he stepped out on the
bank.  He kept right on swimming with the branch of a poplar-tree
until he reached his food pile, which, you know, is in the
water.  There he forced the branch down until it was held by other
branches already sunken in the pond.  This done, he swam over to
where Lightfoot was watching.  "Hello, Lightfoot!" he exclaimed.
"You are looking handsomer than ever. How are you feeling
these fine autumn days?"

"Anxious," replied Lightfoot.  "I am feeling terribly anxious.
Do you know what day this is?"

"No," replied Paddy, "I don't know what day it is, and I don't
particularly care.  It is enough for me that it is one of the
finest days we've had for a long time."

"I wish I could feel that way," said Lightfoot wistfully.  "I wish
I could feel that way, Paddy, but I can't.  No, Sir, I can't.
You see, this is the first of the most dreadful days in all the year
for me.  The hunters started looking for me before Mr. Sun was
really out of bed.  At least one hunter did, and I don't doubt
there are others.  I fooled that one, but from now to the end of
the hunting season there will not be a single moment of daylight
when I will feel absolutely safe."

Paddy crept out on the bank and chewed a little twig of poplar
thoughtfully.  Paddy says he can always think better if he is
chewing something.  "That's bad news, Lightfoot.  I'm sorry to hear
it.  I certainly am sorry to hear it," said Paddy.  "Why anybody
wants to hunt such a handsome fellow as you are, I cannot
understand.  My, but that's a beautiful set of antlers you have!"

"They are the best I've ever had; but do you know, Paddy, I
suspect that they may be one of the reasons I am hunted so,"
replied Lightfoot a little sadly.  "Good looks are not always to
be desired.  Have you seen any hunters around here lately?"

Paddy shook his Lead.  "Not a single hunter," he replied.  "I tell
you what it is, Lightfoot, let's be partners for a while.
You stay right around my pond.  If I see or hear or smell anything
suspicious, I'll warn you.  You do the same for me.  Two sets of
eyes, ears and noses are better than one.  What do you say,
Lightfoot?"

"I'll do it," replied Lightfoot.




CHAPTER XIV: How Paddy Warned Lightfoot


It was a queer partnership, that partnership between Lightfoot
and Paddy, but it was a good partnership.  They had been the best
of friends for a long time.  Paddy had always been glad to have
Lightfoot visit his pond.  To tell the truth, he was rather fond
of handsome Lightfoot.  You know Paddy is himself not at all
handsome.  On land he is a rather clumsy-looking fellow and
really homely.  So he admired Lightfoot greatly.  That is one
reason why he proposed that they be partners.

Lightfoot himself thought the idea a splendid one.  He spent that
night browsing not far from Paddy's pond.  With the coming of
daylight he lay down in a thicket of young hemlock-trees near the
upper end of the pond.  It was a quiet, peaceful day.  It was so
quiet and peaceful and beautiful it was hard to believe that
hunters with terrible guns were searching the Green Forest for
beautiful Lightfoot.  But they were, and Lightfoot knew that
sooner or later one of them would be sure to visit Paddy's pond.
So, though he rested and took short naps all through that
beautiful day, he was anxious.  He couldn't help but be.

The next morning found Lightfoot back in the same place.  But this
morning he took no naps.  He rested, but all the time he was
watchful and alert.  A feeling of uneasiness possessed him.
He felt in his bones that danger in the shape of a hunter with a
terrible gun was not far distant.

But the hours slipped away, and little by little he grew less uneasy.
He began to hope that that day would prove as peaceful as the
previous day had been.  Then suddenly there was a sharp report from
the farther end of Paddy's pond.  It was almost like a pistol shot.
However, it wasn't a pistol shot.  It wasn't a shot at all.
It was the slap of Paddy's broad tail on the surface of the water.
Instantly Lightfoot was on his feet.  He knew just what that meant.
He knew that Paddy had seen or heard or smelled a hunter.

It was even so.  Paddy had heard a dry stick snap.  It was a very
tiny snap, but it was enough to warn Paddy.  With only his head
above water he had watched in the direction from which that sound
had come.  Presently, stealing quietly along towards the pond, a
hunter had come in view.  Instantly Paddy had brought his broad
tail down on the water with all his force.  He knew that Lightfoot
would know that that meant danger.  Then Paddy had dived,
and swimming under water, had sought the safety of his house.
He had done his part, and there was nothing more he could do.




CHAPTER XV: The Three Watchers


When Paddy the Beaver slapped the water with his broad tail,
making a noise like a pistol shot, Lightfoot understood that this
was meant as a warning of danger.  He was on his feet instantly,
with eyes, ears and nose seeking the cause of Paddy's warning.
After a moment or two he stole softly up to the top of a
little ridge some distance back from Paddy's pond, but from the
top of which he could see the whole of the pond.  There he hid
among some close-growing young hemlock-trees.  It wasn't long
before he saw a hunter with a terrible gun come down to the shore
of the pond.

Now the hunter had heard Paddy slap the water with his broad
tail.  Of course.  There would have been something very wrong with
his ears had he failed to hear it.

"Confound that Beaver!" muttered the hunter crossly.  "If there
was a Deer anywhere around this pond, he probably is on his way now.
I'll have a look around and see if there are any signs."

So the hunter went on to the edge of Paddy's pond and then began
to walk around it, studying the ground as he walked.  Presently he
found the footprints of Lightfoot in the mud where Lightfoot had
gone down to the pond to drink.

"I thought as much," muttered the hunter.  "Those tracks were made
last night.  That Deer probably was lying down somewhere near
here, and I might have had a shot but for that pesky Beaver.
I'll just look the land over, and then I think I'll wait here
awhile.  If that Deer isn't too badly scared, he may come back."

So the hunter went quite around the pond, looking into all likely
hiding-places.  He found where Lightfoot had been lying, and he
knew that in all probability Lightfoot had been there when Paddy
gave the danger signal.

"It's of no use for me to try to follow him," thought the
hunter.  "It is too dry for me to track him. He may not be so
badly scared, after all.  I'll just find a good place and wait."

So the hunter found an old log behind some small trees and there
sat down.  He could see all around Paddy's pond.  He sat
perfectly still.  He was a clever hunter and he knew that so long
as he did not move he was not likely to be noticed by any sharp
eyes that might come that way.  What he didn't know was that
Lightfoot had been watching him all the time and was even then
standing where he could see him.  And another thing he didn't
know was that Paddy the Beaver had come out of his house and,
swimming under water, had reached a hiding-place on the opposite
shore from which he too had seen the hunter sit down on the log.
So the hunter watched for Lightfoot, and Lightfoot and Paddy
watched the hunter.




CHAPTER XVI: Visitors To Paddy's Pond


That hunter was a man of patience.  Also he was a man who
understood the little people of the Green Forest and the Green
Meadows.  He knew that if he would not be seen he must not move.
So he didn't move.  He kept as motionless as if he were a part of
the very log on which he was sitting.

For some time there was no sign of any living thing.  Then, from
over the tree tops in the direction of the Big River, came the
whistle of swift wings, and Mr. and Mrs. Quack alighted with a
splash in the pond.  For a few moments they sat on the water, a
picture of watchful suspicion.  They were looking and listening
to make sure that no danger was near.  Satisfied at last, they
began to clean their feathers.  It was plain that they felt safe.
Paddy the Beaver was tempted to warn them that they were not as
safe as they thought, but as long as the hunter did not move
Paddy decided to wait.

Now the hunter was sorely tempted to shoot these Ducks, but he
knew that if he did he would have no chance that day to get
Lightfoot the Deer, and it was Lightfoot he wanted.  So Mr. and
Mrs. Quack swam about within easy range of that terrible gun
without once suspecting that danger was anywhere near.

By and by the hunter's keen eyes caught a movement at one end of
Paddy's dam.  An instant later Bobby Coon appeared.  It was clear
that Bobby was quite unsuspicious.  He carried something, but just
what the hunter could not make out.  He took it down to the edge
of the water and there carefully washed it.  Then he climbed up on
Paddy's dam and began to eat.  You know Bobby Coon is very
particular about his food.  Whenever there is water near, Bobby
washes his food before eating.  Once more the hunter was tempted,
but did not yield to the temptation, which was a very good thing
for Bobby Coon.

All this Lightfoot saw as he stood among the little hemlock-trees
at the top of the ridge behind the hunter.  He saw and he
understood.  "It is because he wants to kill me that he doesn't
shoot at Mr. and Mrs. Quack or Bobby Coon," thought Lightfoot a
little bitterly.  "What have I ever done that he should be so
anxious to kill me?"

Still the hunter sat without moving.  Mr. and Mrs. Quack
contentedly hunted for food in the mud at the bottom of Paddy's
pond.  Bobby Coon finished his meal, crossed the dam and
disappeared in the Green Forest.  He had gone off to take a nap
somewhere.  Time slipped away.  The hunter continued to watch
patiently for Lightfoot, and Lightfoot and Paddy the Beaver
watched the hunter.  Finally, another visitor appeared at the
upper end of the pond--a visitor in a wonderful coat of red.
It was Reddy Fox.




CHAPTER XVII: Sammy Jay Arrives


When Reddy Fox arrived at the pond of Paddy the Beaver, the
hunter who was hiding there saw him instantly.  So did Lightfoot.
But no one else did.  He approached in that cautious, careful way
that he always uses when he is hunting.  The instant he reached
a place where he could see all over Paddy's pond, he stopped
as suddenly as if he had been turned to stone.  He stopped
with one foot lifted in the act of taking a step.  He had
seen Mr. and Mrs. Quack.

Now you know there is nothing Reddy Fox likes better for a dinner
than a Duck.  The instant he saw Mr. and Mrs. Quack, a gleam of
longing crept into his eyes and his mouth began to water.
