the hole down which he had disappeared a few minutes before. Whitefoot
grinned. Then he looked over to where he had last seen Jumper. Jumper
was still there; it was clear that he hadn't moved, and so Whitey hadn't
seen him. Again Whitefoot grinned. Then he settled himself to watch
patiently for Whitey to become tired of watching that hole and fly away.

So it was that Whitefoot saw all that happened. He saw Whitey suddenly
sail out on silent wings from that stump and swoop with great claws
reaching for some one. And then he saw who that some one was,--Shadow
the Weasel! He saw Shadow dodge in the very nick of time. Then he
watched Whitey swoop again and again as Shadow dodged this way and that
way. Finally both disappeared amongst the trees. Then he turned just
in time to see Jumper the Hare bounding away with all the speed of his
wonderful, long legs.

Fear, the greatest fear he had known for a long time, took possession
of Whitefoot. "Shadow the Weasel!" he gasped and had such a thing been
possible he certainly would have turned pale. "Whitey won't catch him;
Shadow is too quick for him. And when Whitey has given up and flown
away, Shadow will come back. He probably had found the tracks of Jumper
the Hare and he will come back. I know him; he'll come back. Jumper is
safe enough from him now, because he has such a long start, but Shadow
will be sure to find one of my holes in the snow. Oh, dear! Oh, dear!
What shall I do?"

You see Shadow the Weasel is the one enemy that can follow Whitefoot
into most of his hiding-places.

For a minute or two Whitefoot sat there, shaking with fright. Then he
made up his mind. "I'll get away from here before he returns," thought
Whitefoot. "I've got to. I've spent a comfortable winter here so far,
but there will be no safety for me here any longer. I don't know where
to go, but anywhere will be better than here now."

Without waiting another second, Whitefoot scampered away. And how he did
hope that his scent would have disappeared by the time Shadow returned.
If it hadn't, there would be little hope for him and he knew it.



CHAPTER XIV: Shadows Return

   He little gains and has no pride
   Who from his purpose turns aside.
     --Whitefoot.

Shadow the Weasel believes in persistence. When he sets out to do a
thing, he keeps at it until it is done or he knows for a certainty it
cannot be done. He is not easily discouraged. This is one reason he is
so feared by the little people he delights to hunt. They know that once
he gets on their trail, they will be fortunate indeed if they escape
him.

When Whitey the Snowy Owl swooped at him and so nearly caught him, he
was not afraid as he dodged this way and that way. Any other of the
little people with the exception of his cousin, Billy Mink, would have
been frightened half to death. But Shadow was simply angry. He was angry
that any one should try to catch him. He was still more angry because
his hunt for Jumper the Hare was interfered with. You see, he had just
found Jumper's trail when Whitey swooped at him.

So Shadow's little eyes grew red with rage as he dodged this way and
that and was gradually driven away from the place where he had found the
trail of Jumper the Hare. At last he saw a hole in an old log and into
this he darted. Whitey couldn't get him there. Whitey knew this and he
knew, too, that waiting for Shadow to come out again would be a waste of
time. So Whitey promptly flew away.

Hardly had he disappeared when Shadow popped out of that hole, for he
had been peeping out and watching Whitey. Without a moment's pause
he turned straight back for the place where he had found the trail of
Jumper the Hare. He had no intention of giving up that hunt just because
he had been driven away. Straight to the very spot where Whitey had
first swooped at him he ran, and there once more his keen little nose
took up the trail of Jumper. It led him straight to the foot of the tree
where Jumper had crouched so long.

But, as you know, Jumper wasn't there then. Shadow ran in a circle and
presently he found where Jumper had landed on the snow at the end
of that first bound. Shadow snarled. He understood exactly what had
happened.

"Jumper was under that tree when that white robber from the Far North
tried to catch me, and he took that chance to leave in a hurry. I can
tell that by the length of this jump. Probably he is still going. It is
useless to follow him because he has too long a start," said Shadow, and
he snarled again in rage and disappointment.

Then, for such is his way, he wasted no more time or thought on Jumper
the Hare. Instead he began to look for other trails. So it was that he
found one of the little holes of Whitefoot the Wood Mouse.

"Ha! So this is where Whitefoot has been living this winter!" he
exclaimed. Once more his eyes glowed red, but this time with eagerness
and the joy of the hunt. He plunged down into that little hole in the
snow. Down there the scent of Whitefoot was strong. Shadow followed it
until it led out of another little hole in the snow. But there he lost
it. You see, it was so long since Whitefoot had hurriedly left that the
scent on the surface had disappeared.

Shadow ran swiftly this way and that way in a big circle, but he
couldn't find Whitefoot's trail again. Snarling with anger and
disappointment, he returned to the little hole in the snow and vanished.
Then he followed all Whitefoot's little tunnels. He found Whitefoot's
nest. He found his store of seeds. But he didn't find Whitefoot.

"He'll come back," muttered Shadow, and curled up in Whitefoot's nest to
wait.



CHAPTER XV: Whitefoots Dreadful Journey

   Danger may be anywhere,
   So I expect it everywhere.
      --Whitefoot.

Whitefoot the Wood Mouse was terribly frightened. Yes, sir, he was
terribly frightened. It was a long, long time since he had been as
frightened as he now was. He is used to frights, is Whitefoot. He has
them every day and every night, but usually they are sudden frights,
quickly over and as quickly forgotten.

This fright was different. You see Whitefoot had caught a glimpse of
Shadow the Weasel. And he knew that if Shadow returned he would be sure
to find the little round holes in the snow that led down to Whitefoot's
private little tunnels underneath.

The only thing for Whitefoot to do was to get just as far from that
place as he could before Shadow should return. And so poor little
Whitefoot started out on a journey that was to take him he knew not
where. All he could do was to go and go and go until he could find a
safe hiding-place.

My, my, but that was a dreadful journey! Every time a twig snapped,
Whitefoot's heart seemed to jump right up in his throat. Every time he
saw a moving shadow, and the branches of the trees moving in the wind
were constantly making moving shadows on the snow, he dodged behind
a tree trunk or under a piece of bark or wherever he could find a
hiding-place.

You see, Whitefoot has so many enemies always looking for him that he
hides whenever he sees anything moving. When at home, he is forever
dodging in and out of his hiding-places. So, because everything was
strange to him, and because of the great fear of Shadow the Weasel, he
suspected everything that moved and every sound he heard. For a long way
no one saw him, for no one was about. Yet all that way Whitefoot
twisted and dodged and darted from place to place and was just as badly
frightened as if there had been enemies all about.

"Oh, dear! Oh, dear me!" he kept saying over and over to himself.
"Wherever shall I go? Whatever shall I do? However shall I get enough to
eat? I won't dare go back to get food from my little storehouses, and I
shall have to live in a strange place where I won't know where to look
for food. I am getting tired. My legs ache. I 'm getting hungry. I want
my nice, warm, soft bed. Oh, dear! Oh, dear! Oh, dear me!"

But in spite of his frights, Whitefoot kept on. You see, he was more
afraid to stop than he was to go on. He just had to get as far from
Shadow the Weasel as he could. Being such a little fellow, what would be
a short distance for you or me is a long distance for Whitefoot.

And so that journey was to him very long indeed. Of course, it seemed
longer because of the constant frights which came one right after
another. It really was a terrible journey. Yet if he had only known it,
there wasn't a thing along the whole way to be afraid of. You know it
often happens that people are frightened more by what they don't know
than by what they do know.



CHAPTER XVI: Whitefoot Climbs A Tree

    I'd rather be frightened With no cause for fear
    Than fearful of nothing When danger is near.
      --Whitefoot.

Whitefoot kept on going and going. Every time he thought that he was so
tired he must stop, he would think of Shadow the Weasel and then go on
again. By and by he became so tired that not even the thought of Shadow
the Weasel could make him go much farther. So he began to look about for
a safe hiding-place in which to rest.

Now the home which he had left had been a snug little room beneath the
roots of a certain old stump. There he had lived for a long time in the
greatest comfort. Little tunnels led to his storehouses and up to the
surface of the snow. It had been a splendid place and one in which he
had felt perfectly safe until Shadow the Weasel had appeared. Had you
seen him playing about there, you would have thought him one of the
little people of the ground, like his cousin Danny Meadow Mouse.

But Whitefoot is quite as much at home in trees as on the ground. In
fact, he is quite as much at home in trees as is Chatterer the Red
Squirrel, and a lot more at home in trees than is Striped Chipmunk,
although Striped Chipmunk belongs to the Squirrel family. So now that
he must find a hiding-place, Whitefoot decided that he would feel much
safer in a tree than on the ground.

"If only I can find a hollow tree," whimpered Whitefoot. "I will feel
ever so much safer in a tree than hiding in or near the ground in a
strange place."

So Whitefoot began to look for a dead tree. You see, he knew that there
was more likely to be a hollow in a dead tree than in a living tree. By
and by he came to a tall, dead tree. He knew it was a dead tree, because
there was no bark on it. But, of course, he couldn't tell whether or not
that tree was hollow. I mean he couldn't tell from the ground.

"Oh, dear!" he whimpered again. "Oh, dear! I suppose I will have to
climb this, and I am so tired. It ought to be hollow. There ought to
be splendid holes in it. It is just the kind of a tree that Drummer the
Woodpecker likes to make his house in. I shall be terribly disappointed
if I don't find one of his houses somewhere in it, but I wish I hadn't
got to climb it to find out. Well, here goes."

He looked anxiously this way. He looked anxiously that way. He looked
anxiously the other way. In fact, he looked anxiously every way.

But he saw no one and nothing to be afraid of, and so he started up the
tree.

He was half-way up when, glancing down, he saw a shadow moving across
the snow. Once more Whitefoot's heart seemed to jump right up in his
throat. That shadow was the shadow of some one flying. There couldn't be
the least bit of doubt about it. Whitefoot flattened himself against the
side of the tree and peeked around it. He was just in time to see a gray
and black and white bird almost the size of Sammy Jay alight in the very
next tree. He had come along near the ground and then risen sharply into
the tree. His bill was black, and there was just a tiny hook on the end
of it. Whitefoot knew who it was. It was Butcher the Shrike. Whitefoot
shivered.



CHAPTER XVII: Whitefoot Finds A Hole Just In Time

   Just in time, not just too late,
   Will make you master of your fate.
     --Whitefoot.

Whitefoot, half-way up that dead tree, flattened himself against the
trunk and, with his heart going pit-a-pat, pit-a-pat with fright, peered
