your skill," he exclaimed, as Archie cut down one soldier, and
wounded another who pressed upon him.

"They are gathering in force, Sir William," the knight's companion
said, "and if we do not cut our way through them we shall assuredly
be taken." Keeping near the wall they retreated down the street,
Archie and Sir John Grahame, for it was he, clearing the way, and
Wallace defending the rear. So terrific were the blows he dealt
that the English soldiers shrank back from attacking him.

At this moment two horsemen rode up and reined in their horses to
witness the fray. They were father and son, and the instant the
eyes of the elder fell upon Archie he exclaimed to his son:

"This is good fortune. That is young Forbes fighting by the side
of the outlaw Wallace. I will finish our dispute at once."

So saying he drew his sword, and urged his horse through the
soldiers towards Archie; the latter equally recognized the enemy of
his family. Sir John aimed a sweeping blow at him.  The lad parried
it, and, leaping back, struck at the horse's leg. The animal fell
instantly, and as he did so Archie struck full on the helm of Sir
John Kerr, stretching him on the ground beside his horse.

By this time the little party had retreated down the street until
they were passing the house of Marion Bradfute. The door opened,
and Marion herself cried to them to enter. So hemmed in were they,
indeed, that further retreat was now impossible, and there being
no time for hesitation, Wallace and his companions sprang in before
their assailants could hinder them, and shut the door behind them.

"Marion," Wallace exclaimed, "why did you do this? It mattered
not were I killed or taken; but now you have brought danger upon
yourself."

"But it mattered much to me. What would life be worth were you
killed? Think not of danger to me. Angry as they may be, they will
hardly touch a woman. But waste no time in talking, for the door
will soon yield to their blows. Fly by the back entrance, while
there is time."

So saying, she hurried them to the back of the house, and without
allowing them to pause for another word almost pushed them out, and
closed the door behind them. The lane was deserted; but the shouts
and clamour of the English soldiers beyond the houses rose loud in
the air. "Quick, Sir William," Sir John Grahame said, "or we shall
be cut off!  They will bethink them of the back way, and send
soldiers down to intercept us."

Such, indeed, was the case, for as they ran they heard shouts behind,
and saw some English soldiers entering the other end of the lane.
In front, however, all was clear, and running on they turned into
another street, and then down to the gate. The guard, hearing the
tumult, had turned out, and seeing them running, strove to bar
their way. Wallace, however, cleared a path by sweeping blows with
his sword, and dashing through the gates into the open country
they were safe. For some distance they ran without checking their
speed, and then as they neared a wood, where they no longer feared
pursuit, they broke into a walk.

"My best thanks to you," Wallace said to Archie. "You have indeed
proved yourself a staunch and skilful swordsman, and Duncan's opinion
is well founded.  Indeed I could wish for no stouter sword beside
me in a fight; but what will you do now? If you think that you were
not recognized you can return to your uncle; but if any there knew
you, you must even then take to the woods with me."

"I was recognized," Archie said in a tone of satisfaction.  "The
armed knight whom you saw attack me was Sir John Kerr, the slayer
of my father and the enemy of my house.  Assuredly he will bring
the news of my share in the fray to the ears of the governor."

"I do not think that he will carry any news for some time," Sir
William replied; "for that blow you gave him on the head must have
well nigh brought your quarrel to an end.  It is a pity your arm
had not a little more weight, for then, assuredly you would have
slain him."

"But the one with him was his son," Archie said, "and would know
me too; so that I shall not be safe for an hour at my uncle's."

"In that case, Sir Archie, you must needs go with me, there being
no other way for it, and truly, now that it is proved a matter of
necessity, I am glad that it has so chanced, since I see that your
youth is indeed no drawback; and Sir John Grahame will agree with
me that there is no better sword in my company."

"Yes, indeed," the young knight said. "I could scarce believe my
eyes when I saw one so young bear himself so stoutly. Without his
aid I could assuredly have made no way through the soldiers who
barred our retreat; and truly his sword did more execution than
mine, although I fought my best. If you will accept my friendship,
young sir, henceforth we will be brothers in arms." Colouring with
pleasure, Archie grasped the hand which the young knight held out
to him.

"That is well said, Sir John," Wallace assented. "Hitherto you and
I have been like brothers; henceforth there will be three of us,
and I foresee that the only difficulty we shall have with this
our youngest relation will be to curb his courage and ardour. Who
knows," he went on sadly, "but that save you two I am now alone in
the world! My heart misgives me sorely as to the fate of Marion; and
were it not for the sake of Scotland, to whom my life is sworn, I
would that I had stopped and died outside her door before I entered
and brought danger upon her head. Had I had time to reflect, methinks
I would have done so; but I heard her call, I saw the open door,
and without time for thought or reflection I leapt in."

"You must not blame yourself, Sir William," Grahame said, "for,
indeed, there was no time for thought; nor will I that it should
have been otherwise, even should harm, which I cannot believe,
befall Mistress Marion.  It is on you that the hopes of Scotland
now rest. You have awakened her spirit and taught the lesson of
resistance. Soon I hope that the fire now smouldering in the breast
of every true Scotsman will burst into flame, and that Scotland
will make a great effort for freedom; but were you to fall now,
despair would seize on all and all hope of a general rising be at
an end."

Wallace made no reply, but strode silently forward. A short distance
farther they came to the spot where three of Wallace's followers
were holding horses, for he had on his entry into Lanark, been
accompanied by another of his party, who had been slain at the
commencement of the fray. Wallace bade Archie mount the spare horse,
and they then rode to Cart Lane Craigs, scarce a word being spoken
on their journey.

Wallace's headquarters were upon a narrow shelf of rock on the face
of a steep and craggy hill. It was well chosen against surprise,
and could be held against sudden attack even by a large force,
since both behind and in front the face of the hill was too steep
to be climbed, and the only approach was by a steep and winding
path which two men could hold against a host. The ledge was some
50 feet long by 12 wide.  At the back a natural depression in the
crags had been deepened so as to form a shallow cave just deep
enough to afford a defense against the weather; here a pile of
heather served as a bed for Wallace, Grahame, and one or two others
of the leaders of his company, and here Wallace told Archie that
his place was to be. On the ledge without were some low arbours of
heather in which lay ten of Wallace's bravest companions; the rest
of his band were scattered among the surrounding hills, or in the
woods, and a bugle note repeated from place to place would call
all together in a short space of time.

Of stores and provisions there was no lack, these having been
obtained in very large quantities from the convoys of supplies and
the castles that had been captured. Money, too, was not wanting,
considerable amounts having fallen into their hands, and the
peasantry through all the country round were glad in every way to
assist the band, whom they regarded as their champions.

Archie sat down by Sir John Grahame, who gave him particulars
regarding the strength of the various bands, their position, the
rules which had been laid down by Wallace for their order, the system
of signals and other particulars; while Wallace paced restlessly up
and down the narrow shelf, a prey to the keenest anxiety. Towards
nightfall two of the men were despatched towards Lanark to endeavour
to find out what had taken place there; but in an hour they returned
with a woman, whom both Sir William and Archie recognized as one of
the female attendants of Marion. A single glance sufficed to tell
her tale. Her face was swollen with crying, and wore a look of
horror as well as of grief.

"She is dead!" Wallace exclaimed in a low voice.

"Alas!" the woman sobbed, "that I should have to tell it.  Yes, my
dear mistress is dead; she was slain by the orders of the governor
himself, for having aided your escape."

A groan burst from Wallace, a cry of horror and indignation from
his followers. The former turned, and without a word strode away
and threw himself upon the heather. The others, heart struck at
the cruel blow which had befallen their chief, and burning with
indignation and rage, could only utter oaths of vengeance and curses
on the English tyrants.

After a time Grahame went to the cave, and putting his hand on
Wallace's shoulder strove to address a few words of consolation to
him.

Sir William rose: "I have done with weeping, Grahame, or rather I
will put off my weeping until I have time for it.  The first thing
to think of is vengeance, and vengeance I swear that I will have.
This night I will strike the first blow in earnest towards freeing
Scotland. It may be that God has willed it that this cruel blow,
which has been struck at me, shall be the means of bringing this
about. Hitherto, although I have hated the English and have fought
against them, it has been but fitfully and without order or method,
seeing that other things were in my heart. Henceforth I will live
but for vengeance and Scotland. Hitherto the English have regarded
me as an outlaw and a brigand. Henceforth they shall view me as an
enemy to be dreaded. Sound the signal of assembly at once. Signify
that as many as are within reach shall gather below in two hours.
There will be but few, for, not dreaming of this, the bands but
two days since dispersed. But even were there none but ourselves
it would suffice. Tonight we will take Lanark."




Chapter IV

The Capture of Lanark


A low shout of enthusiasm rose from Wallace's followers, and they
repeated his words as though it had been a vow: "Tonight we will
take Lanark." The notes of a bugle rang through the air, and Archie
could hear them repeated as by an echo by others far away in the
woods.

The next two hours were spent in cooking and eating a meal; then
the party on the ledge descended the narrow path, several of their
number bearing torches. At a short distance from its foot some other
torches were seen, and fifteen men were found gathered together.

In a few words the sad news of what had taken place at Lanark was
related to them and the determination which had been arrived at,
and then the whole party marched away to the west. Archie's heart
beat with excitement as he felt himself engaged in one of the adventures
which had so filled his thoughts and excited his admiration. An
adventure, too, far surpassing in magnitude and importance any in
which Wallace had hitherto been engaged.

It seemed almost like an act of madness for twenty-five men to
attack a city garrisoned by over 500 English troops, defended by
strong walls; but Archie never doubted for a moment that success
would attend the enterprise, so implicit was his confidence in his
leader. When at some little distance from the town they halted,
and Wallace ordered a tree to be felled and lopped of its branches.
It was some eight inches in diameter at the butt and thirty feet
long. A rope had been brought, and this was now cut into lengths
of some four feet. Wallace placed ten of his men on each side of
the tree, and the cords being placed under it, it was lifted and
carried along with them.

Before they started Wallace briefly gave them his orders, so that
no word need be spoken when near the town.  The band were, when
they entered, to divide in three. Sir John Grahame, with a party,
was to make for the dwelling of Sir Robert Thorne. Auchinleck, who
had arrived with the party summoned by the bugle, was to arouse
the town and attack any parties of soldiers in the street, while
Wallace himself was to assault the house of Hazelrig. He bade Archie
accompany him.

Knowing the town well Wallace led the party to the moat at a spot
facing a sally port. They moved without a word being spoken. The
men bearing the tree laid it noiselessly to the ground. Wallace
himself sprang into the moat and swam across. The splash in the
water attracted the attention of a sentry over the gate, who at
once challenged. There was no answer, and the man again shouted,
peering over the wall to endeavour to discover what had caused
the splash. In a few vigorous strokes Wallace was across, hauled
himself up to the sill of the door, and with his heavy battleaxe
smote on the chains which held up the drawbridge. Two mighty blows
and the chains yielded, and the drawbridge fell with a crash across
the moat.

Instantly the men lifted the tree, and dashing across swung it
like a battering ram against the door--half a dozen blows, and
the oak and iron yielded before it. The door was burst in and the
party entered Lanark.  The sentry on the wall had fled at once to
arouse the garrison. Instantly the three leaders started to perform
the tasks assigned to them.  As yet the town lay in profound sleep,
although near the gate windows were opening and heads were being
put out to ascertain the cause of the din. As the Scots ran forward
they shouted "Death to the English, death to the bloody Hazelrig!"
The governor had long been odious for his cruelty and tyranny, and
the murder of Marion Bradfute had that day roused the indignation
of the people to the utmost. Not knowing how small was the force
that had entered the town, but hoping only that deliverers had
arrived, numbers of the burghers rose and armed themselves, and
issued forth into the streets to aid their countrymen. Wallace soon
arrived at the governor's house, and with a few blows with his axe
broke in the door; then he and his followers rushed into the house,
cutting down the frightened men as they started up with sudden
alarm, until he met Sir John Hazelrig, who had snatched up his arms
and hurried from his chamber.

"Villain!" Wallace exclaimed, seizing him by his throat; "your time
has come to make atonement for the murder of my wife."

Then dragging him into the street he called upon the burghers,
who were running up, to witness the execution of their tyrant,
and stepping back a pace smote off his head with his sword. Young
Hazelrig was also killed, as were all soldiers found in the house.
The alarm bells were ringing now, and in a few minutes the armed
burghers swarmed in the street. As the English soldiers, as yet
but scarce awake, and bewildered by this sudden attack, hurried
from their houses, they were fallen upon and slain by Wallace and
the townspeople. Some of those in the larger houses issuing forth
together were able to cut their way through and to make their
escape by the gates; many made for the walls, and dropping in the
moat swam across and escaped; but two hundred and fifty of their
number were left dead in the streets. The town, once cleared of the
English, gave itself up to wild rejoicings; bonfires were lighted
in the streets, the bells were rung, and the wives and daughters
of the citizens issued out to join in their rejoicing and applaud
their liberators.

Wallace held council at once with the chief burghers.  Their talk
was a grave one, for though rejoicing in the liberation of the city,
they could not but perceive that the situation was a serious one.
By the defeat and destruction of the garrison, and the slaying of
the governor, the town would bring upon itself the terrible wrath
of King Edward, and of what he was capable the murdered thousands
at Berwick sufficiently attested. However, the die was cast and there
was no drawing back, and the burghers undertook to put their town
in a state of full defence, to furnish a contingent of men-at-arms to
Wallace, and to raise a considerable sum of money to aid him in the
carrying on of the war; while he on his part undertook to endeavour,
as fast as possible, to prevent the English from concentrating their
forces for a siege of the town, by so harassing their garrisons
elsewhere that none would be able to spare troops for any general
purposes.

Proclamations were immediately made out in the name of Wallace,
and were sent off by mounted messengers throughout the country.
In these he announced to the people of Scotland that he had raised
the national banner and had commenced a war for the freeing of the
country from the English, and that as a first step he had captured
Lanark. He called upon all true Scotchmen to rally round him.

While the council was being held, the wives of the burghers had
taken the body of Marion from the place where it had been cast,
and where hitherto none had dared to touch it, and had prepared it
for burial, placing it in a stone coffin, such as were in use in
those days, upon a car which was covered with trappings of white and
green boughs.  Soon after daybreak a great procession was formed,
and accompanied by all the matrons and maids of Lanark the body
was conveyed to the church at Ellerslie, and there buried with
the rites of the church. This sad duty ended, Wallace mounted his
horse and rode for Cart Lane Craigs, which he had named as the
rendezvous where all who loved Scotland and would follow him, were
to assemble. Archie rode first to Sir Robert Gordon's. His uncle
received him kindly.

"Ah! my boy," he said, "I feared that your wilful disposition would
have its way. You have embarked young on a stormy course, and none
can say where it will end. I myself have no hope that it can be
successful. Did the English rule depend solely on the troops which
garrison our towns and fortresses, I should believe that Wallace
might possibly expel them; but this is as nothing. Edward can march
a hundred and fifty thousand trained soldiers hither, and how will
it be possible for any gathering of Scotchmen to resist these?
However, you have chosen your course, and as it is too late to
draw back now, I would not dispirit you. Take the best of my horses
from the stable, and such arms and armour as you may choose from
the walls. Here is a purse for your own private needs, and in this
other are a hundred pounds, which I pray you hand to Sir William
Wallace. Fighting never was in my way, and I am too old to begin
now. Tell him, however, that my best wishes are with him. I have
already sent word to all my tenants that they are free, if they
choose, to follow his banner."

"You have plenty of pikes and swords in the armoury, uncle; weapons
will be very useful; can I take some of them?"

"Certainly, Archie, as many as you like. But your aunt wants you
to ride at once to Glen Cairn, to ask your mother to come over here
and take up her abode till the stormy times are over. The news of
last night's doings in Lanark will travel fast, and she will be
terribly anxious. Besides, as the Kerrs are heart and soul with the
English faction, like enough they will take the opportunity of the
disturbed times, and of your being involved in the rising, to destroy
the hold altogether, seeing that so long as it stands there it is
a sort of symbol that their lordship over the lands is disputed."

"The very thing that I was going to ask you, uncle. My mother's
position at Glen Cairn would always be on my mind.  As to the
Kerrs, let them burn the castle if they will. If the rising fail,
and I am killed, the line will be extinct, and it matters little
about our hold. If we succeed, then I shall regain my own, and shall
turn the tables on the Kerrs, and will rebuild Glen Cairn twice as
strong as before. And now can I take a cart to convey the arms?"

"Certainly, Archie; and may they be of service in the cause. You
will, I suppose, conduct your mother hither?"

Archie replied that he should do so, and then at once made his
preparations for the start. His uncle's armoury was well supplied,
and Archie had no difficulty in suiting himself. For work like
that which he would have to do he did not care to encumber himself
with heavy armour, but chose a light but strong steel cap, with a
curtain of mail falling so as to guard the neck and ears, leaving
only the face exposed, and a shirt of the same material. It was
of fine workmanship and of no great weight, and did not hamper
his movements.  He also chose some leg pieces for wearing when on
horseback. He had already his father's sword, and needed only a
light battleaxe and a dagger to complete his offensive equipment.
Then he took down from the racks twenty swords and as many short
pikes, and bonnets strengthened with iron hoops, which, although
light, were sufficient to give much protection to the head. These
were all placed in a light cart, and with one of his uncle's
followers to drive, he took his seat in the cart, and started for
Cart Lane Craigs.

Here he concealed the arms in a thicket, and then went up to speak
to his leader.

"May I take ten men with me to Glen Cairn, Sir William? I am going
to fetch my mother to reside with my uncle until the storm is
over. He has sent you a hundred pounds towards the expenses of the
struggle. I want the guard because it is possible that the Kerrs
may be down there. I hear Sir John was carried away, three hours
after the fight, in a litter; it was well for him that he was not
in Lanark when we took it. But like enough this morning, if well
enough to give orders, he may be sending down to Glen Cairn to see
if I have returned, and may burn the hold over my mother's head."

"Certainly," Sir William replied. "Henceforth I will put twenty
men under your special orders, but for today Sir John Grahame shall
tell off some of his own party. Of course they will go well armed."

Half riding in the cart and half walking by turns, the party reached
