three times, in a shocking voice, turning about and kicking with his
heels against the panel of the door.  For a time there was no reply;
then the door opened far enough to permit a donkey's head to stick out
and look at them.

It was a white head, with big, awful ears and round, solemn eyes.

"Have the foxes gone?" it asked, in a trembling voice.

"They haven't been here, most stupendous Majesty," replied the grey
one.  "The new arrivals prove to be travelers of distinction."

"Oh," said the King, in a relieved tone of voice.  "Let them come in."

He opened the door wide, and the party marched into a big room, which,
Dorothy thought, looked quite unlike a king's palace.  There were mats
of woven grasses on the floor and the place was clean and neat; but his
Majesty had no other furniture at all--perhaps because he didn't need
it.  He squatted down in the center of the room and a little brown
donkey ran and brought a big gold crown which it placed on the
monarch's head, and a golden staff with a jeweled ball at the end of
it, which the King held between his front hoofs as he sat upright.

"Now then," said his Majesty, waving his long ears gently to and fro,
"tell me why you are here, and what you expect me to do for you."  He
eyed Button-Bright rather sharply, as if afraid of the little boy's
queer head, though it was the shaggy man who undertook to reply.

"Most noble and supreme ruler of Dunkiton," he said, trying not to
laugh in the solemn King's face, "we are strangers traveling through
your dominions and have entered your magnificent city because the road
led through it, and there was no way to go around.  All we desire is to
pay our respects to your Majesty--the cleverest king in all the world,
I'm sure--and then to continue on our way."

This polite speech pleased the King very much; indeed, it pleased him
so much that it proved an unlucky speech for the shaggy man.  Perhaps
the Love Magnet helped to win his Majesty's affections as well as the
flattery, but however this may be, the white donkey looked kindly upon
the speaker and said:

"Only a donkey should be able to use such fine, big words, and you are
too wise and admirable in all ways to be a mere man.  Also, I feel that
I love you as well as I do my own favored people, so I will bestow upon
you the greatest gift within my power--a donkey's head."

As he spoke he waved his jeweled staff.  Although the shaggy man cried
out and tried to leap backward and escape, it proved of no use.
Suddenly his own head was gone and a donkey head appeared in its
place--a brown, shaggy head so absurd and droll that Dorothy and Polly
both broke into merry laughter, and even Button-Bright's fox face wore
a smile.

"Dear me! dear me!" cried the shaggy man, feeling of his shaggy new
head and his long ears.  "What a misfortune--what a great misfortune!
Give me back my own head, you stupid king--if you love me at all!"

"Don't you like it?" asked the King, surprised.

"Hee-haw!  I hate it!  Take it away, quick!" said the shaggy man.

"But I can't do that," was the reply.  "My magic works only one way.  I
can DO things, but I can't UNdo them.  You'll have to find the Truth
Pond, and bathe in its water, in order to get back your own head.  But
I advise you not to do that.  This head is much more beautiful than the
old one."

"That's a matter of taste," said Dorothy.

"Where is the Truth Pond?" asked the shaggy man, earnestly.

"Somewhere in the Land of Oz; but just the exact location of it I can
not tell," was the answer.

"Don't worry, Shaggy Man," said Dorothy, smiling because her friend
wagged his new ears so comically.  "If the Truth Pond is in Oz, we'll
be sure to find it when we get there."

"Oh!  Are you going to the Land of Oz?" asked King Kik-a-bray.

"I don't know," she replied, "but we've been told we are nearer the
Land of Oz than to Kansas, and if that's so, the quickest way for me to
get home is to find Ozma."

"Haw-haw!  Do you know the mighty Princess Ozma?" asked the King, his
tone both surprised and eager.

"'Course I do; she's my friend," said Dorothy.

"Then perhaps you'll do me a favor," continued the white donkey, much
excited.

"What is it?" she asked.

"Perhaps you can get me an invitation to Princess Ozma's birthday
celebration, which will be the grandest royal function ever held in
Fairyland.  I'd love to go."

"Hee-haw!  You deserve punishment, rather than reward, for giving me
this dreadful head," said the shaggy man, sorrowfully.

"I wish you wouldn't say 'hee-haw' so much," Polychrome begged him; "it
makes cold chills run down my back."

"But I can't help it, my dear; my donkey head wants to bray
continually," he replied.  "Doesn't your fox head want to yelp every
minute?" he asked Button-Bright.

"Don't know," said the boy, still staring at the shaggy man's ears.
These seemed to interest him greatly, and the sight also made him
forget his own fox head, which was a comfort.

"What do you think, Polly?  Shall I promise the donkey king an
invitation to Ozma's party?" asked Dorothy of the Rainbow's Daughter,
who was flitting about the room like a sunbeam because she could never
keep still.

"Do as you please, dear," answered Polychrome.  "He might help to amuse
the guests of the Princess."

"Then, if you will give us some supper and a place to sleep to-night,
and let us get started on our journey early to-morrow morning," said
Dorothy to the King, "I'll ask Ozma to invite you--if I happen to get
to Oz."

"Good!  Hee-haw! Excellent!" cried Kik-a-bray, much pleased.  "You
shall all have fine suppers and good beds.  What food would you prefer,
a bran mash or ripe oats in the shell?"

"Neither one," replied Dorothy, promptly.

"Perhaps plain hay, or some sweet juicy grass would suit you better,"
suggested Kik-a-bray, musingly.

"Is that all you have to eat?" asked the girl.

"What more do you desire?"

"Well, you see we're not donkeys," she explained, "and so we're used to
other food.  The foxes gave us a nice supper in Foxville."

"We'd like some dewdrops and mist-cakes," said Polychrome.

"I'd prefer apples and a ham sandwich," declared the shaggy man, "for
although I've a donkey head, I still have my own particular stomach."

"I want pie," said Button-Bright.

"I think some beefsteak and chocolate layer-cake would taste best,"
said Dorothy.

"Hee-haw!  I declare!" exclaimed the King.  "It seems each one of you
wants a different food.  How queer all living creatures are, except
donkeys!"

"And donkeys like you are queerest of all," laughed Polychrome.

"Well," decided the King, "I suppose my Magic Staff will produce the
things you crave; if you are lacking in good taste it is not my fault."

With this, he waved his staff with the jeweled ball, and before them
instantly appeared a tea-table, set with linen and pretty dishes, and
on the table were the very things each had wished for.  Dorothy's
beefsteak was smoking hot, and the shaggy man's apples were plump and
rosy-cheeked.  The King had not thought to provide chairs, so they all
stood in their places around the table and ate with good appetite,
being hungry.  The Rainbow's Daughter found three tiny dewdrops on a
crystal plate, and Button-Bright had a big slice of apple pie, which he
devoured eagerly.

Afterward the King called the brown donkey, which was his favorite
servant, and bade it lead his guests to the vacant house where they
were to pass the night.  It had only one room and no furniture except
beds of clean straw and a few mats of woven grasses; but our travelers
were contented with these simple things because they realized it was
the best the Donkey-King had to offer them.  As soon as it was dark
they lay down on the mats and slept comfortably until morning.

At daybreak there was a dreadful noise throughout the city.  Every
donkey in the place brayed.  When he heard this the shaggy man woke up
and called out "Hee-haw!" as loud as he could.

"Stop that!" said Button-Bright, in a cross voice.  Both Dorothy and
Polly looked at the shaggy man reproachfully.

"I couldn't help it, my dears," he said, as if ashamed of his bray;
"but I'll try not to do it again."

Of coursed they forgave him, for as he still had the Love Magnet in his
pocket they were all obliged to love him as much as ever.

They did not see the King again, but Kik-a-bray remembered them; for a
table appeared again in their room with the same food upon it as on the
night before.

"Don't want pie for breakfus'," said Button-Bright.

"I'll give you some of my beefsteak," proposed Dorothy; "there's plenty
for us all."

That suited the boy better, but the shaggy man said he was content with
his apples and sandwiches, although he ended the meal by eating
Button-Bright's pie.  Polly liked her dewdrops and mist-cakes better
than any other food, so they all enjoyed an excellent breakfast.  Toto
had the scraps left from the beefsteak, and he stood up nicely on his
hind legs while Dorothy fed them to him.

Breakfast ended, they passed through the village to the side opposite
that by which they had entered, the brown servant-donkey guiding them
through the maze of scattered houses.  There was the road again,
leading far away into the unknown country beyond.

"King Kik-a-bray says you must not forget his invitation," said the
brown donkey, as they passed through the opening in the wall.

"I shan't," promised Dorothy.

Perhaps no one ever beheld a more strangely assorted group than the one
which now walked along the road, through pretty green fields and past
groves of feathery pepper-trees and fragrant mimosa.  Polychrome, her
beautiful gauzy robes floating around her like a rainbow cloud, went
first, dancing back and forth and darting now here to pluck a
wild-flower or there to watch a beetle crawl across the path.  Toto ran
after her at times, barking joyously the while, only to become sober
again and trot along at Dorothy's heels.  The little Kansas girl walked
holding Button-Bright's hand clasped in her own, and the wee boy with
his fox head covered by the sailor hat presented an odd appearance.
Strangest of all, perhaps, was the shaggy man, with his shaggy donkey
head, who shuffled along in the rear with his hands thrust deep in his
big pockets.

None of the party was really unhappy.  All were straying in an unknown
land and had suffered more or less annoyance and discomfort; but they
realized they were having a fairy adventure in a fairy country, and
were much interested in finding out what would happen next.




8.  The Musicker


About the middle of the forenoon they began to go up a long hill.
By-and-by this hill suddenly dropped down into a pretty valley, where
the travelers saw, to their surprise, a small house standing by the
road-side.

It was the first house they had seen, and they hastened into the valley
to discover who lived there.  No one was in sight as they approached,
but when they began to get nearer the house they heard queer sounds
coming from it.  They could not make these out at first, but as they
became louder our friends thought they heard a sort of music like that
made by a wheezy hand-organ; the music fell upon their ears in this way:

  Tiddle-widdle-iddle oom pom-pom!
      Oom, pom-pom! oom, pom-pom!
  Tiddle-tiddle-tiddle oom pom-pom!
      Oom, pom-pom--pah!


"What is it, a band or a mouth-organ?" asked Dorothy.

"Don't know," said Button-Bright.

"Sounds to me like a played-out phonograph," said the shaggy man,
lifting his enormous ears to listen.

"Oh, there just COULDN'T be a funnygraf in Fairyland!" cried Dorothy.

"It's rather pretty, isn't it?" asked Polychrome, trying to dance to
the strains.

  Tiddle-widdle-iddle, oom pom-pom,
      Oom pom-pom; oom pom-pom!


came the music to their ears, more distinctly as they drew nearer the
house.  Presently, they saw a little fat man sitting on a bench before
the door.  He wore a red, braided jacket that reached to his waist, a
blue waistcoat, and white trousers with gold stripes down the sides.
On his bald head was perched a little, round, red cap held in place by
a rubber elastic underneath his chin.  His face was round, his eyes a
faded blue, and he wore white cotton gloves.  The man leaned on a stout
gold-headed cane, bending forward on his seat to watch his visitors
approach.

Singularly enough, the musical sounds they had heard seemed to come
from the inside of the fat man himself; for he was playing no
instrument nor was any to be seen near him.

They came up and stood in a row, staring at him, and he stared back
while the queer sounds came from him as before:

  Tiddle-iddle-iddle, oom pom-pom,
      Oom, pom-pom; oom pom-pom!
  Tiddle-widdle-iddle, oom pom-pom,
      Oom, pom-pom--pah!


"Why, he's a reg'lar musicker!" said Button-Bright.

"What's a musicker?" asked Dorothy.

"Him!" said the boy.

Hearing this, the fat man sat up a little stiffer than before, as if he
had received a compliment, and still came the sounds:

  Tiddle-widdle-iddle, oom pom-pom,
      Oom pom-pom, oom--


"Stop it!" cried the shaggy man, earnestly.  "Stop that dreadful noise."

The fat man looked at him sadly and began his reply.  When he spoke the
music changed and the words seemed to accompany the notes.  He said--or
rather sang:

  It isn't a noise that you hear,
  But Music, harmonic and clear.
      My breath makes me play
      Like an organ, all day--
  That bass note is in my left ear.


"How funny!" exclaimed Dorothy; "he says his breath makes the music."

"That's all nonsense," declared the shaggy man; but now the music began
again, and they all listened carefully.

  My lungs are full of reeds like those
  In organs, therefore I suppose,
  If I breathe in or out my nose,
      The reeds are bound to play.

  So as I breathe to live, you know,
  I squeeze out music as I go;
  I'm very sorry this is so--
      Forgive my piping, pray!


"Poor man," said Polychrome; "he can't help it.  What a great
misfortune it is!"

"Yes," replied the shaggy man; "we are only obliged to hear this music
a short time, until we leave him and go away; but the poor fellow must
listen to himself as long as he lives, and that is enough to drive him
crazy.  Don't you think so?"

"Don't know," said Button-Bright.  Toto said, "Bow-wow!" and the others
laughed.

"Perhaps that's why he lives all alone," suggested Dorothy.

"Yes; if he had neighbors, they might do him an injury," responded the
shaggy man.

All this while the little fat musicker was breathing the notes:

  Tiddle-tiddle-iddle, oom, pom-pom,


and they had to speak loud in order to hear themselves.  The shaggy man
said:

"Who are you, sir?"

The reply came in the shape of this sing-song:

  I'm Allegro da Capo, a very famous man;
  Just find another, high or low, to match me if you can.
      Some people try, but can't, to play
      And have to practice every day;
  But I've been musical always, since first my life began.


"Why, I b'lieve he's proud of it," exclaimed Dorothy; "and seems to me
I've heard worse music than he makes."

"Where?" asked Button-Bright.

"I've forgotten, just now.  But Mr. Da Capo is certainly a strange
person--isn't he?--and p'r'aps he's the only one of his kind in all the
world."

This praise seemed to please the little fat musicker, for he swelled
out his chest, looked important and sang as follows:

  I wear no band around me,
      And yet I am a band!
  I do not strain to make my strains
      But, on the other hand,
  My toot is always destitute
      Of flats or other errors;
  To see sharp and be natural are
      For me but minor terrors.


"I don't quite understand that," said Polychrome, with a puzzled look;
"but perhaps it's because I'm accustomed only to the music of the
spheres."

"What's that?" asked Button-Bright.

"Oh, Polly means the atmosphere and hemisphere, I s'pose," explained
Dorothy.

"Oh," said Button-Bright.

"Bow-wow!" said Toto.

But the musicker was still breathing his constant

  Oom, pom-pom; Oom pom-pom--


and it seemed to jar on the shaggy man's nerves.

"Stop it, can't you?" he cried angrily; "or breathe in a whisper; or
put a clothes-pin on your nose.  Do something, anyhow!"

But the fat one, with a sad look, sang this answer:

  Music hath charms, and it may
  Soothe even the savage, they say;
      So if savage you feel
      Just list to my reel,
  For sooth to say that's the real way.


The shaggy man had to laugh at this, and when he laughed he stretched
his donkey mouth wide open.  Said Dorothy:

"I don't know how good his poetry is, but it seems to fit the notes, so
that's all that can be 'xpected."

"I like it," said Button-Bright, who was staring hard at the musicker,
his little legs spread wide apart.  To the surprise of his companions,
the boy asked this long question:

"If I swallowed a mouth-organ, what would I be?"

"An organette," said the shaggy man.  "But come, my dears; I think the
best thing we can do is to continue on our journey before Button-Bright
swallows anything.  We must try to find that Land of Oz, you know."

Hearing this speech the musicker sang, quickly:

  If you go to the Land of Oz
  Please take me along, because
      On Ozma's birthday
      I'm anxious to play
  The loveliest song ever was.


"No thank you," said Dorothy; "we prefer to travel alone.  But if I see
Ozma I'll tell her you want to come to her birthday party."

"Let's be going," urged the shaggy man, anxiously.

Polly was already dancing along the road, far in advance, and the
others turned to follow her.  Toto did not like the fat musicker and
made a grab for his chubby leg.  Dorothy quickly caught up the growling
little dog and hurried after her companions, who were walking faster
than usual in order to get out of hearing.  They had to climb a hill,
and until they got to the top they could not escape the musicker's
monotonous piping:

  Oom, pom-pom; oom, pom-pom;
  Tiddle-iddle-widdle, oom, pom-pom;
  Oom, pom-pom--pah!


As they passed the brow of the hill, however, and descended on the
other side, the sounds gradually died away, whereat they all felt much
relieved.

"I'm glad I don't have to live with the organ-man; aren't you, Polly?"
said Dorothy.

"Yes indeed," answered the Rainbow's Daughter.

"He's nice," declared Button-Bright, soberly.

"I hope your Princess Ozma won't invite him to her birthday
celebration," remarked the shaggy man; "for the fellow's music would
drive her guests all crazy.  You've given me an idea, Button-Bright; I
believe the musicker must have swallowed an accordeon in his youth."

"What's 'cordeon?" asked the boy.

"It's a kind of pleating," explained Dorothy, putting down the dog.

"Bow-wow!" said Toto, and ran away at a mad gallop to chase a
bumble-bee.




9.  Facing the Scoodlers


The country wasn't so pretty now.  Before the travelers appeared a
rocky plain covered with hills on which grew nothing green.  They were
nearing some low mountains, too, and the road, which before had been
smooth and pleasant to walk upon, grew rough and uneven.

Button-Bright's little feet stumbled more than once, and Polychrome
ceased her dancing because the walking was now so difficult that she
had no trouble to keep warm.

It had become afternoon, yet there wasn't a thing for their luncheon
except two apples which the shaggy man had taken from the breakfast
table.  He divided these into four pieces and gave a portion to each of
his companions.  Dorothy and Button-Bright were glad to get theirs; but
Polly was satisfied with a small bite, and Toto did not like apples.

"Do you know," asked the Rainbow's Daughter, "if this is the right road
to the Emerald City?"

"No, I don't," replied Dorothy, "but it's the only road in this part of
the country, so we may as well go to the end of it."

"It looks now as if it might end pretty soon," remarked the shaggy man;
"and what shall we do if it does?"

"Don't know," said Button-Bright.

"If I had my Magic Belt," replied Dorothy, thoughtfully, "it could do
us a lot of good just now."

"What is your Magic Belt?" asked Polychrome.

"It's a thing I captured from the Nome King one day, and it can do
'most any wonderful thing.  But I left it with Ozma, you know; 'cause
magic won't work in Kansas, but only in fairy countries."

"Is this a fairy country?" asked Button-Bright.

"I should think you'd know," said the little girl, gravely.  "If it
wasn't a fairy country you couldn't have a fox head and the shaggy man
couldn't have a donkey head, and the Rainbow's Daughter would be
invis'ble."

"What's that?" asked the boy.

"You don't seem to know anything, Button-Bright.  Invis'ble is a thing
you can't see."

"Then Toto's invis'ble," declared the boy, and Dorothy found he was
right.  Toto had disappeared from view, but they could hear him barking
furiously among the heaps of grey rock ahead of them.

They moved forward a little faster to see what the dog was barking at,
and found perched upon a point of rock by the roadside a curious
creature.  It had the form of a man, middle-sized and rather slender
