water or of possible progeny was an accident for which he was not
accountable." In the same manner did Miss Dearborn lay what she fondly
imagined to be foundations in the infant mind.

Rebecca walked to school after the first morning. She loved this part
of the day's programme. When the dew was not too heavy and the weather
was fair there was a short cut through the woods. She turned off the
main road, crept through uncle Josh Woodman's bars, waved away Mrs.
Carter's cows, trod the short grass of the pasture, with its well-worn
path running through gardens of buttercups and white-weed, and groves
of ivory leaves and sweet fern. She descended a little hill, jumped
from stone to stone across a woodland brook, startling the drowsy
frogs, who were always winking and blinking in the morning sun. Then
came the "woodsy bit," with her feet pressing the slippery carpet of
brown pine needles; the "woodsy bit" so full of dewy morning,
surprises,--fungous growths of brilliant orange and crimson springing
up around the stumps of dead trees, beautiful things born in a single
night; and now and then the miracle of a little clump of waxen Indian
pipes, seen just quickly enough to be saved from her careless tread.
Then she climbed a stile, went through a grassy meadow, slid under
another pair of bars, and came out into the road again having gained
nearly half a mile.

How delicious it all was! Rebecca clasped her Quackenbos's Grammar and
Greenleaf's Arithmetic with a joyful sense of knowing her lessons. Her
dinner pail swung from her right hand, and she had a blissful
consciousness of the two soda biscuits spread with butter and syrup,
the baked cup-custard, the doughnut, and the square of hard
gingerbread. Sometimes she said whatever "piece" she was going to speak
on the next Friday afternoon.

  "A soldier of the Legion lay dying in Algiers,
   There was lack of woman's nursing, there was dearth of
          woman's tears."

How she loved the swing and the sentiment of it! How her young voice
quivered whenever she came to the refrain:--

  "But we'll meet no more at Bingen, dear Bingen on the Rhine."

It always sounded beautiful in her ears, as she sent her tearful little
treble into the clear morning air. Another early favorite (for we must
remember that Rebecca's only knowledge of the great world of poetry
consisted of the selections in vogue in school readers) was:--

  "Woodman, spare that tree!
    Touch not a single bough!
  In youth it sheltered me,
    And I'll protect it now."

When Emma Jane Perkins walked through the "short cut" with her, the two
children used to render this with appropriate dramatic action. Emma
Jane always chose to be the woodman because she had nothing to do but
raise on high an imaginary axe. On the one occasion when she essayed
the part of the tree's romantic protector, she represented herself as
feeling "so awful foolish" that she refused to undertake it again, much
to the secret delight of Rebecca, who found the woodman's role much too
tame for her vaulting ambition. She reveled in the impassioned appeal
of the poet, and implored the ruthless woodman to be as brutal as
possible with the axe, so that she might properly put greater spirit
into her lines. One morning, feeling more frisky than usual, she fell
upon her knees and wept in the woodman's petticoat. Curiously enough,
her sense of proportion rejected this as soon as it was done.

"That wasn't right, it was silly, Emma Jane; but I'll tell you where it
might come in--in Give me Three Grains of Corn. You be the mother, and
I'll be the famishing Irish child. For pity's sake put the axe down;
you are not the woodman any longer!"

"What'll I do with my hands, then?" asked Emma Jane.

"Whatever you like," Rebecca answered wearily; "you're just a
mother--that's all. What does YOUR mother do with her hands? Now here
goes!

  "'Give me three grains of corn, mother,
    Only three grains of corn,
  'T will keep the little life I have
    Till the coming of the morn.'"

This sort of thing made Emma Jane nervous and fidgety, but she was
Rebecca's slave and hugged her chains, no matter how uncomfortable they
made her.

At the last pair of bars the two girls were sometimes met by a
detachment of the Simpson children, who lived in a black house with a
red door and a red barn behind, on the Blueberry Plains road. Rebecca
felt an interest in the Simpsons from the first, because there were so
many of them and they were so patched and darned, just like her own
brood at the home farm.

The little schoolhouse with its flagpole on top and its two doors in
front, one for boys and the other for girls, stood on the crest of a
hill, with rolling fields and meadows on one side, a stretch of pine
woods on the other, and the river glinting and sparkling in the
distance. It boasted no attractions within. All was as bare and ugly
and uncomfortable as it well could be, for the villages along the river
expended so much money in repairing and rebuilding bridges that they
were obliged to be very economical in school privileges. The teacher's
desk and chair stood on a platform in one corner; there was an uncouth
stove, never blackened oftener than once a year, a map of the United
States, two black-boards, a ten-quart tin pail of water and
long-handled dipper on a corner shelf, and wooden desks and benches for
the scholars, who only numbered twenty in Rebecca's time. The seats
were higher in the back of the room, and the more advanced and
longer-legged pupils sat there, the position being greatly to be
envied, as they were at once nearer to the windows and farther from the
teacher.

There were classes of a sort, although nobody, broadly speaking,
studied the same book with anybody else, or had arrived at the same
degree of proficiency in any one branch of learning. Rebecca in
particular was so difficult to classify that Miss Dearborn at the end
of a fortnight gave up the attempt altogether. She read with Dick
Carter and Living Perkins, who were fitting for the academy; recited
arithmetic with lisping little Thuthan Thimpthon; geography with Emma
Jane Perkins, and grammar after school hours to Miss Dearborn alone.
Full to the brim as she was of clever thoughts and quaint fancies, she
made at first but a poor hand at composition. The labor of writing and
spelling, with the added difficulties of punctuation and capitals,
interfered sadly with the free expression of ideas. She took history
with Alice Robinson's class, which was attacking the subject of the
Revolution, while Rebecca was bidden to begin with the discovery of
America. In a week she had mastered the course of events up to the
Revolution, and in ten days had arrived at Yorktown, where the class
had apparently established summer quarters. Then finding that extra
effort would only result in her reciting with the oldest Simpson boy,
she deliberately held herself back, for wisdom's ways were not those of
pleasantness nor her paths those of peace if one were compelled to
tread them in the company of Seesaw Simpson. Samuel Simpson was
generally called Seesaw, because of his difficulty in making up his
mind. Whether it were a question of fact, of spelling, or of date, of
going swimming or fishing, of choosing a book in the Sunday-school
library or a stick of candy at the village store, he had no sooner
determined on one plan of action than his wish fondly reverted to the
opposite one. Seesaw was pale, flaxen haired, blue eyed, round
shouldered, and given to stammering when nervous. Perhaps because of
his very weakness Rebecca's decision of character had a fascination for
him, and although she snubbed him to the verge of madness, he could
never keep his eyes away from her. The force with which she tied her
shoe when the lacing came undone, the flirt over shoulder she gave her
black braid when she was excited or warm, her manner of studying,--book
on desk, arms folded, eyes fixed on the opposite wall,--all had an
abiding charm for Seesaw Simpson. When, having obtained permission, she
walked to the water pail in the corner and drank from the dipper,
unseen forces dragged Seesaw from his seat to go and drink after her.
It was not only that there was something akin to association and
intimacy in drinking next, but there was the fearful joy of meeting her
in transit and receiving a cold and disdainful look from her wonderful
eyes.

On a certain warm day in summer Rebecca's thirst exceeded the bounds of
propriety. When she asked a third time for permission to quench it at
the common fountain Miss Dearborn nodded "yes," but lifted her eyebrows
unpleasantly as Rebecca neared the desk. As she replaced the dipper
Seesaw promptly raised his hand, and Miss Dearborn indicated a weary
affirmative.

"What is the matter with you, Rebecca?" she asked.

"I had salt mackerel for breakfast," answered Rebecca.

There seemed nothing humorous about this reply, which was merely the
statement of a fact, but an irrepressible titter ran through the
school. Miss Dearborn did not enjoy jokes neither made nor understood
by herself, and her face flushed.

"I think you had better stand by the pail for five minutes, Rebecca; it
may help you to control your thirst."

Rebecca's heart fluttered. She to stand in the corner by the water pail
and be stared at by all the scholars! She unconsciously made a gesture
of angry dissent and moved a step nearer her seat, but was arrested by
Miss Dearborn's command in a still firmer voice.

"Stand by the pail, Rebecca! Samuel, how many times have you asked for
water to-day?"

"This is the f-f-fourth."

"Don't touch the dipper, please. The school has done nothing but drink
this afternoon; it has had no time whatever to study. I suppose you had
something salt for breakfast, Samuel?" queried Miss Dearborn with
sarcasm.

"I had m-m-mackerel, j-just like Reb-b-becca." (Irrepressible giggles
by the school.)

"I judged so. Stand by the other side of the pail, Samuel."

Rebecca's head was bowed with shame and wrath. Life looked too black a
thing to be endured. The punishment was bad enough, but to be coupled
in correction with Seesaw Simpson was beyond human endurance.

Singing was the last exercise in the afternoon, and Minnie Smellie
chose Shall we Gather at the River? It was a baleful choice and seemed
to hold some secret and subtle association with the situation and
general progress of events; or at any rate there was apparently some
obscure reason for the energy and vim with which the scholars shouted
the choral invitation again and again:--

  "Shall we gather at the river,
  The beautiful, the beautiful river?"

Miss Dearborn stole a look at Rebecca's bent head and was frightened.
The child's face was pale save for two red spots glowing on her cheeks.
Tears hung on her lashes; her breath came and went quickly, and the
hand that held her pocket handkerchief trembled like a leaf.

"You may go to your seat, Rebecca," said Miss Dearborn at the end of
the first song. "Samuel, stay where you are till the close of school.
And let me tell you, scholars, that I asked Rebecca to stand by the
pail only to break up this habit of incessant drinking, which is
nothing but empty-mindedness and desire to walk to and fro over the
floor. Every time Rebecca has asked for a drink to-day the whole school
has gone to the pail one after another. She is really thirsty, and I
dare say I ought to have punished you for following her example, not
her for setting it. What shall we sing now, Alice?"

"The Old Oaken Bucket, please."

"Think of something dry, Alice, and change the subject. Yes, The Star
Spangled Banner if you like, or anything else."

Rebecca sank into her seat and pulled the singing book from her desk.
Miss Dearborn's public explanation had shifted some of the weight from
her heart, and she felt a trifle raised in her self-esteem.

Under cover of the general relaxation of singing, votive offerings of
respectful sympathy began to make their appearance at her shrine.
Living Perkins, who could not sing, dropped a piece of maple sugar in
her lap as he passed her on his way to the blackboard to draw the map
of Maine. Alice Robinson rolled a perfectly new slate pencil over the
floor with her foot until it reached Rebecca's place, while her
seat-mate, Emma Jane, had made up a little mound of paper balls and
labeled them "Bullets for you know who."

Altogether existence grew brighter, and when she was left alone with
the teacher for her grammar lesson she had nearly recovered her
equanimity, which was more than Miss Dearborn had. The last clattering
foot had echoed through the hall, Seesaw's backward glance of penitence
had been met and answered defiantly by one of cold disdain.

"Rebecca, I am afraid I punished you more than I meant," said Miss
Dearborn, who was only eighteen herself, and in her year of teaching
country schools had never encountered a child like Rebecca.

"I hadn't missed a question this whole day, nor whispered either,"
quavered the culprit; "and I don't think I ought to be shamed just for
drinking."

"You started all the others, or it seemed as if you did. Whatever you
do they all do, whether you laugh, or miss, or write notes, or ask to
leave the room, or drink; and it must be stopped."

"Sam Simpson is a copycoat!" stormed Rebecca "I wouldn't have minded
standing in the corner alone--that is, not so very much; but I couldn't
bear standing with him."

"I saw that you couldn't, and that's the reason I told you to take your
seat, and left him in the corner. Remember that you are a stranger in
the place, and they take more notice of what you do, so you must be
careful. Now let's have our conjugations. Give me the verb 'to be,'
potential mood, past perfect tense."

  "I might have been           "We might have been
  Thou mightst have been       You might have been
  He might have been           They might have been."

"Give me an example, please."

  "I might have been glad
  Thou mightst have been glad
  He, she, or it might have been glad."

"'He' or 'she' might have been glad because they are masculine and
feminine, but could 'it' have been glad?" asked Miss Dearborn, who was
very fond of splitting hairs.

"Why not?" asked Rebecca

"Because 'it' is neuter gender."

"Couldn't we say, 'The kitten might have been glad if it had known it
was not going to be drowned'?"

"Ye--es," Miss Dearborn answered hesitatingly, never very sure of
herself under Rebecca's fire; "but though we often speak of a baby, a
chicken, or a kitten as 'it,' they are really masculine or feminine
gender, not neuter."

Rebecca reflected a long moment and then asked, "Is a hollyhock neuter?"

"Oh yes, of course it is, Rebecca"

"Well, couldn't we say, 'The hollyhock might have been glad to see the
rain, but there was a weak little hollyhock bud growing out of its
stalk and it was afraid that that might be hurt by the storm; so the
big hollyhock was kind of afraid, instead of being real glad'?"

Miss Dearborn looked puzzled as she answered, "Of course, Rebecca,
hollyhocks could not be sorry, or glad, or afraid, really."

"We can't tell, I s'pose," replied the child; "but _I_ think they are,
anyway. Now what shall I say?"

"The subjunctive mood, past perfect tense of the verb 'to know.'"

  "If I had known            "If we had known
  If thou hadst known        If you had known
  If he had known            If they had known.

"Oh, it is the saddest tense," sighed Rebecca with a little break in
her voice; "nothing but IFS, IFS, IFS! And it makes you feel that if
they only HAD known, things might have been better!"

Miss Dearborn had not thought of it before, but on reflection she
believed the subjunctive mood was a "sad" one and "if" rather a sorry
"part of speech."

"Give me some more examples of the subjunctive, Rebecca, and that will
do for this afternoon," she said.

"If I had not loved mackerel I should not have been thirsty;" said
Rebecca with an April smile, as she closed her grammar. "If thou hadst
loved me truly thou wouldst not have stood me up in the corner. If
Samuel had not loved wickedness he would not have followed me to the
water pail."

"And if Rebecca had loved the rules of the school she would have
controlled her thirst," finished Miss Dearborn with a kiss, and the two
parted friends.



VI

SUNSHINE IN A SHADY PLACE

The little schoolhouse on the hill had its moments of triumph as well
as its scenes of tribulation, but it was fortunate that Rebecca had her
books and her new acquaintances to keep her interested and occupied, or
life would have gone heavily with her that first summer in Riverboro.
She tried to like her aunt Miranda (the idea of loving her had been
given up at the moment of meeting), but failed ignominiously in the
attempt. She was a very faulty and passionately human child, with no
aspirations towards being an angel of the house, but she had a sense of
duty and a desire to be good,--respectably, decently good. Whenever she
fell below this self-imposed standard she was miserable. She did not
like to be under her aunt's roof, eating bread, wearing clothes, and
studying books provided by her, and dislike her so heartily all the
time. She felt instinctively that this was wrong and mean, and whenever
the feeling of remorse was strong within her she made a desperate
effort to please her grim and difficult relative. But how could she
succeed when she was never herself in her aunt Miranda's presence? The
searching look of the eyes, the sharp voice, the hard knotty fingers,
the thin straight lips, the long silences, the "front-piece" that
didn't match her hair, the very obvious "parting" that seemed sewed in
with linen thread on black net,--there was not a single item that
appealed to Rebecca. There are certain narrow, unimaginative, and
autocratic old people who seem to call out the most mischievous, and
sometimes the worst traits in children. Miss Miranda, had she lived in
a populous neighborhood, would have had her doorbell pulled, her gate
tied up, or "dirt traps" set in her garden paths. The Simpson twins
stood in such awe of her that they could not be persuaded to come to
the side door even when Miss Jane held gingerbread cookies in her
outstretched hands.

It is needless to say that Rebecca irritated her aunt with every breath
she drew. She continually forgot and started up the front stairs
because it was the shortest route to her bedroom; she left the dipper
on the kitchen shelf instead of hanging it up over the pail; she sat in
the chair the cat liked best; she was willing to go on errands, but
often forgot what she was sent for; she left the screen doors ajar, so
that flies came in; her tongue was ever in motion; she sang or whistled
when she was picking up chips; she was always messing with flowers,
putting them in vases, pinning them on her dress, and sticking them in
her hat; finally she was an everlasting reminder of her foolish,
worthless father, whose handsome face and engaging manner had so
deceived Aurelia, and perhaps, if the facts were known, others besides
Aurelia. The Randalls were aliens. They had not been born in Riverboro
nor even in York County. Miranda would have allowed, on compulsion,
that in the nature of things a large number of persons must necessarily
be born outside this sacred precinct; but she had her opinion of them,
and it was not a flattering one. Now if Hannah had come--Hannah took
after the other side of the house; she was "all Sawyer." (Poor Hannah!
that was true!) Hannah spoke only when spoken to, instead of first,
last, and all the time; Hannah at fourteen was a member of the church;
Hannah liked to knit; Hannah was, probably, or would have been, a
pattern of all the smaller virtues; instead of which here was this
black-haired gypsy, with eyes as big as cartwheels, installed as a
member of the household.

What sunshine in a shady place was aunt Jane to Rebecca! Aunt Jane with
her quiet voice, her understanding eyes, her ready excuses, in these
first difficult weeks, when the impulsive little stranger was trying to
settle down into the "brick house ways." She did learn them, in part,
and by degrees, and the constant fitting of herself to these new and
difficult standards of conduct seemed to make her older than ever for
her years.

The child took her sewing and sat beside aunt Jane in the kitchen while
aunt Miranda had the post of observation at the sitting-room window.
Sometimes they would work on the side porch where the clematis and
woodbine shaded them from the hot sun. To Rebecca the lengths of brown
gingham were interminable. She made hard work of sewing, broke the
thread, dropped her thimble into the syringa bushes, pricked her
finger, wiped the perspiration from her forehead, could not match the
checks, puckered the seams. She polished her needles to nothing,
pushing them in and out of the emery strawberry, but they always
squeaked. Still aunt Jane's patience held good, and some small measure
of skill was creeping into Rebecca's fingers, fingers that held pencil,
paint brush, and pen so cleverly and were so clumsy with the dainty
little needle.

When the first brown gingham frock was completed, the child seized what
she thought an opportune moment and asked her aunt Miranda if she might
have another color for the next one.

"I bought a whole piece of the brown," said Miranda laconically.
"That'll give you two more dresses, with plenty for new sleeves, and to
