The Smiling Pool, the Laughing Brook, and the Green Meadows are Jerry
Muskrat's little world. Now, as he sat on the Big Rock and looked about
him, the Green Meadows were as lovely as ever. He could see no change in
them. But the Laughing Brook had stopped laughing, and the Smiling Pool
had stopped smiling. The truth is there wasn't enough of the Laughing
Brook left to laugh, and there wasn't enough of the Smiling Pool left to
smile.

It was dreadful! Jerry looked over to his house, of which he had once
been so proud. He had built it with the doorway under water. He had felt
perfectly safe there, because no one excepting Billy Mink or Little Joe
Otter, who can swim under water, could reach him. Now the Smiling
Pool had grown so small that Jerry's house wasn't in the water at all.
Anybody who wanted to could get into it. There was the doorway plainly
to be seen. Worse still, there was the secret entrance to the long
tunnel leading to his castle under the roots of the Big Hickory-tree.
That had been Jerry's most secret secret, and now there it was for all
the world to see. And there were all the wonderful caves and holes and
hiding-places under the bank which had been known only to Jerry Muskrat
and Billy Mink and Little Joe Otter, because the openings had always
been under water. Now anybody could find them, for they were plainly to
be seen. And where had always been smiling, dimpling water, Jerry saw
only mud. It was mud, mud, mud everywhere! The bulrushes, which had
always grown with their feet in the water, now had them only in mud, and
that was fast drying up. The lily-pads lay half curled up at the ends of
their long stems, stretched out on the mud, and looked very, very sick.
Jerry turned towards the Laughing Brook. There was just a little, teeny,
weeny stream of water trickling down the middle of it, with here and
there a tiny pool in which frightened trout and minnows were crowded.
All the secrets of the Laughing Brook were exposed, just as were the
secrets of the Smiling Pool. Jerry knew that if he wanted to find Billy
Mink's hiding-places, all he need do would be to walk up the Laughing
Brook and look.

"Yes, Sir, the world has turned upside down," said Jerry in a mournful
voice.

"I believe it has," replied Grandfather Frog, looking up from the little
pool of water left at the foot of the Big Rock.

"I know it has!" cried Jerry. "I wonder if it will ever turn upside up
again."

"If it doesn't, what are you going to do?" asked Grandfather Frog.

"I don't know," replied Jerry Muskrat. "Here come Little Joe Otter and
Billy Mink; let's find out what they are going to do."



CHAPTER XI: Five Heads Together

Something had to be done. Jerry Muskrat said so. Grandfather Frog said
so. Billy Mink said so. Little Joe Otter said so. Even Spotty the
Turtle said so. The Laughing Brook couldn't laugh, and the Smiling Pool
couldn't smile. You see, there wasn't water enough in either of them to
laugh or smile, and nobody knew if there ever would be again. Nobody had
ever known anything like it before, and so nobody knew what to think or
do. And yet they all felt that something must be done.

"What do you think, Billy Mink?" asked Grandfather Frog.

Billy Mink looked down from the top of the Big Rock into the little pool
of water that was all there was left of the Smiling Pool. He could see
a dozen fat trout in it, and he knew that he could catch them just as
easily as not, because there was no place for them to swim away from
him. But somehow he didn't want to catch them. He knew that they were
frightened almost to death already by the running away of nearly all the
water from the Laughing Brook and the Smiling Pool, and somehow he felt
sorry for them.

"I think that the best thing we can do is to move down to the Big River.
I've been down there, and that's all right," said Billy Mink.

"That's what I think," said Little Joe Otter. "There's no danger that
the Big River will go dry."

"How do you know?" asked Jerry Muskrat. "The Laughing Brook and the
Smiling Pool never went dry before."

"It's a long, long way down to the Big River," broke in Spotty the
Turtle, who travels very, very slowly and carries his house with him.

"Chugarum! I, for one, don't want to leave the Smiling Pool without
finding out what the trouble is.

 "There's nothing happens, as you know,
  But has a cause to make it so.

"Now there must be some cause, some reason, for this terrible trouble
with the Smiling Pool, and if we can find that out, perhaps we shall
know better what to do," said Grandfather Frog.

Jerry Muskrat nodded his head. "Grandfather Frog is right," said he. "Of
course there must be a cause, but where are we to look for it? I've been
all over the Smiling Pool, and I'm sure it isn't there."

Grandfather Frog actually smiled. "Chugarum!" said he. "Of course the
cause of all the trouble isn't in the Smiling Pool. Any one would know
that!"

"Well, if you know so much, tell us where it is then!" snapped Jerry
Muskrat.

"In the Laughing Brook, of course," replied Grandfather Frog.

"No such thing!" said Billy Mink. "I've been all the way down the
Laughing Brook to the Big River, and I didn't find a thing."

"Have you been all the way up the Laughing Brook to the place it starts
from?" asked Grandfather Frog.

"No-o," replied Billy Mink.

"Well, that's where the cause of all the trouble is," said Grandfather
Frog, just as if he knew all about it. "It's the water that comes down
the Laughing Brook that makes the Smiling Pool, and the Smiling Pool
never could dry up if the Laughing Brook didn't first stop running."

"That's so! I never had thought of that," cried Little Joe Otter. "I
tell you what, Billy Mink and I will go way up the Laughing Brook and
see what we can find."

"Chugarum! Let us all go," said Grandfather Frog.

Then the five put their heads together and decided that they would go up
the Laughing Brook to hunt for the trouble.



CHAPTER XII: A Hunt For Trouble

Ol' Mistah Buzzard, sailing high in the blue, blue sky, looked down on
a funny sight. Yes, Sir, it certainly was a funny sight. It was a little
procession of five of his friends of the Smiling Pool. First was Billy
Mink, who, because he is slim and nimble, moves so quickly it sometimes
is hard to follow him. Behind him was Little Joe Otter, whose legs are
so short that he almost looks as if he hadn't any. Behind Little Joe
was Jerry Muskrat, who is a better traveler in the water than on land.
Behind Jerry was Grandfather Frog, who neither walks nor runs but
travels with great jumps. Last of all was Spotty the Turtle, who travels
very, very slowly because, you know, he carries his house with him.
And all five were headed up the Laughing Brook, which laughed no more,
because there was not water enough in it.

Now Ol' Mistah Buzzard hadn't been over near the Smiling Pool for some
time, and he hadn't heard how the Smiling Pool had stopped smiling, and
the Laughing Brook had stopped laughing. When he looked down and saw how
the water was so nearly gone from them that the trout and the minnows
had hardly enough in which to live, he was so surprised that he kept
saying over and over to himself:

"Fo' the lan's sake! Fo' the lan's sake!"

Then, when he saw his five little friends marching up the Laughing
Brook, he guessed right away that it must be something to do with the
trouble in the Smiling Pool. Ol' Mistah Buzzard just turned his broad
wings and slid down, down out of the blue, blue sky until he was right
over Grandfather Frog.

"Where are yo'alls going?" asked Ol' Mistah Buzzard.

"Chugarum! To find out what is the trouble with the Laughing Brook,"
replied Grandfather Frog.

"I'll help you," said Ol' Mistah Buzzard, once more sailing up in the
blue, blue sky.

Grandfather Frog watched him until he was nothing but a speck. "I wish I
had wings," sighed Grandfather Frog, and once more began to hop along up
the bed of the Laughing Brook.

The Laughing Brook came down from the Green Forest and wound through the
Green Meadows for a little way before it reached the Smiling Pool. There
the sun shone down into it, and Grandfather Frog didn't mind, although
his legs were getting tired. But when they got into the Green Forest it
was dark and gloomy. At least Grandfather Frog thought so, and so did
Spotty the Turtle, for both dearly love the sunshine. But still they
kept on, for they felt that they must find the trouble with the Laughing
Brook. If they found this, they would also find the trouble with the
Smiling Pool.

So Billy Mink jumped and skipped far ahead; Little Joe Otter ran; Jerry
Muskrat walked, for he soon gets tired on land; Grandfather Frog hopped;
Spotty the Turtle crawled, and way, way up in the blue, blue sky, OF
Mistah Buzzard flew, all looking for the trouble which had stopped the
laughing of the Laughing Brook and the smiling of the Smiling Pool.



CHAPTER XIII: Ol' Mistah Buzzard Sees Something

"Wait for me!" cried Little Joe Otter to Billy Mink, but Billy Mink was
in too much of a hurry and just ran faster.

"Wait for me!" cried Jerry Muskrat to Little Joe Otter, but Little Joe
was in too much of a hurry and just ran faster.

"Wait for me!" cried Grandfather Frog to Jerry Muskrat, but Jerry was in
too much of a hurry and just walked faster.

"Wait for me!" cried Spotty the Turtle to Grandfather Frog, but
Grandfather Frog was in too much of a hurry and just jumped faster.

So running and walking and jumping and crawling, Billy Mink, Little Joe
Otter, Jerry Muskrat, Grandfather Frog, and Spotty the Turtle hurried up
the Laughing Brook to try to find out why it laughed no more. And high
overhead in the blue, blue sky sailed Ol' Mistah Buzzard, and he also
was looking for the trouble that had taken away the laugh from the
Laughing Brook and the smile from the Smiling Pool.

