embroidered on perforated paper.  Johnnie gave Katy a case of pencils,
and Clover a pen-knife with a pearl handle.  Dorry and Phil clubbed to
buy a box of note-paper and envelopes, which the girls were requested
to divide between them.  Miss Petingill contributed a bottle of ginger
balsam, and a box of opodeldoc salve, to be used in case of  possible
chilblains.  Old Mary's offering was a couple of needle-books, full of
bright sharp needles.

"I wouldn't give you scissors," she said; "but you can't cut love--or,
for the matter of that, any thing else--with a needle."

Miss Finch, the new housekeeper, arrived a few days before they
started: so Katy had time to take her over the house and explain all
the different things she wanted done and not done, to secure papa's
comfort and the children's.  Miss Finch was meek and gentle.  She
seemed glad of a comfortable home.  And Katy felt that she would be
kind to the boys, and not fret Debby, and drive her into marrying
Alexander and going away,--an event which Aunt Izzie had been used to
predict.  Now that all was settled, she and Clover found themselves
looking forward to the change with pleasure.  There was something new
and interesting about it which excited their imaginations.

The last evening was a melancholy one.  Elsie had been too much
absorbed in the preparations to realize her loss; but, when it came
to locking the trunks, her courage gave way altogether.  She was in
such a state of affliction that everybody else became afflicted too;
and there is no knowing what would have happened, had not a parcel
arrived by express and distracted their attention.  The parcel was
from Cousin Helen, whose things, like herself, had a knack of coming
at the moment when most wanted.  It contained two pretty silk
umbrellas--one brown, and one dark-green, with Katy's initials on
one handle and Clover's on the other.  Opening these treasures,
and exclaiming over them, helped the family through the evening
wonderfully; and next morning there was such a bustle of getting
off that nobody had time to cry.

After the last kisses had been given, and Philly, who had climbed on
the horse-block, was clamoring for "one more,--just one more," Dr.
Carr, looking at the sober faces, was struck by a bright idea, and,
calling Alexander, told him to hurry old Whitey into the carryall,
and drive the children down to Willett's Point, that they might wave
there handkerchiefs to the boat as she went by.  This suggestion
worked like a charm on the spirits of the party.  Phil began to caper,
and Elsie and John ran in to get their hats.  Half an hour later, when
the boat rounded the point, there stood the little crew, radiant with
smiles, fluttering the handkerchiefs and kissing their hands as
cheerfully as possible.  It was a pleasant last look to the two
who stood beside papa on the deck; and, as they waved back their
greetings to the little ones, and then looked forward across the
blue water to the unknown places they were going to see, Katy and
Clover felt that the new life opened well, and promised to be very
interesting indeed.




CHAPTER III.  ON THE WAY.


The journey from Burnet to Hillsover was a very long one.  It took the
greater part of three days, and as Dr. Carr was in a hurry to get back
to his patients, they travelled without stopping; spending the first
night on the boat, and the second on a railroad train.  Papa found
this tiresome; but the girls, to whom every thing was new, thought it
delightful.  They enjoyed their state-room, with its narrow shelves of
beds, as much as if it had been a baby house, and they two children
playing in it.  To tuck themselves away for the night in a car-section
seemed the greatest fun in the world.  When older people fretted, they
laughed.  Every thing was interesting, from the telegraph poles by the
wayside to the faces of their fellow-passengers.  It amused them to
watch people, and make up stories about them,--where they were going,
and what relation they could be to each other.  The strange people,
in their turn, cast curious glances toward the bright, happy-faced
sisters; but Katy and Clover did not mind that, or, in fact, notice
it.  They were too much absorbed to think of themselves, or the
impression they were making on others.

It was early on the third morning that the train, puffing and shrieking,
ran into the Springfield depot.  Other trains stood waiting; and there
was such a chorus of snorts and whistles, and such clouds of smoke,
that Katy was half frightened.  Papa, who was half asleep, jumped up,
and told the girls to collect their bags and books; for they were to
breakfast here, and to meet Lilly Page, who was going on to Hillsover
with them.

"Do you suppose she is here already?" asked Katy, tucking the railway
guide into the shawl-strap, and closing her bag with a snap.

"Yes: we shall meet her at the Massasoit.  She and her father were to
pass the night there."

The Massasoit was close at hand, and in less then five minutes the
girls and papa were seated at a table in its pleasant dining-room.
They were ordering their breakfast, when Mr. Page came in, accompanied
by his daughter,--a pretty girl, with light hair, delicate, rather
sharp features, and her mother's stylish ease of manner.  Her
travelling dress was simple, but had the finish which a French
dressmaker knows how to give to a simple thing; and all its
appointments--boots, hat, gloves, collar, neck ribbon--were so
perfect, each in its way, that Clover, glancing down at her own
gray alpaca, and then at Katy's, felt suddenly countrified and
shabby.

"Well, Lilly, here they are: here are your cousins," said Mr. Page,
giving the girls a cordial greeting.  Lilly only said, "How do you
do?"  Clover saw her glancing at the gray alpacas, and was conscious
of a sudden flush.  But perhaps Lilly looked at something inside
the alpaca; for after a minute her manner changed, and became more
friendly.

"Did you order waffles?" she asked.

"Waffles? no, I think not," replied Katy.

"Oh! why not?  Don't you know how celebrated they are for waffles at
this hotel?  I thought everybody knew _that_."  Then she tinkled her
fork against her glass, and, when the waiter came, said, "Waffles,
please," with an air which impressed Clover extremely.  Lilly seemed
to her like a young lady in a story,--so elegant and self-possessed.
She wondered if all the girls at Hillsover were going to be like her?

The waffles came, crisp and hot, with delicious maple syrup to eat on
them; and the party made a satisfactory breakfast.  Lilly, in spite
of all her elegance, displayed a wonderful appetite.  "You see," she
explained to Clover, "I don't expect to have another decent thing to
eat till next September,--not a thing; so I'm making the most of this."
Accordingly she disposed of nine waffles, in quick succession, before
she found time to utter any thing farther, except "Butter, please,"
or, "May I trouble you for the molasses?"  As she swallowed the last
morsel, Dr. Carr, looking at his watch, said that it was time to start
for the train; and they set off.  As they crossed the street, Katy was
surprised to see that Lilly, who had seemed quite happy only a minute
before, had begun to cry.  After they reached the car, her tears
increased to sobs: she grew almost hysterical.

"Oh! don't make me go, papa," she implored, clinging to her father's
arm.  "I shall be so homesick!  It will kill me; I know it will.
Please let me stay.  Please let me go home with you."

"Now, my darling," protested Mr. Page, "this is foolish; you know it
is."

"I can't help it," blubbered Lilly.  "I ca--n't help it.  Oh! don't
make me go.  Don't, papa dear.  I ca--n't bear it."

Katy and Clover felt embarrassed during this scene.  They had always
been used to considering tears as things to be rather ashamed of,--
to be kept back, if possible; or, if not, shed in private corners,
in dark closets, or behind the bed in the nursery.  To see the stylish
Lilly crying like a baby in the midst of a railway carriage, with
strangers looking on, quite shocked them.  It did not last long,
however.  The whistle sounded; the conductor shouted, "All aboard!"
and Mr. Page, giving Lilly a last kiss, disengaged her clinging arms,
put her into the seat beside Clover, and hurried out of the car.
Lilly sobbed loudly for a few seconds; then she dried her eyes,
lifted her head, adjusted her veil and the wrists of her three-
buttoned gloves, and remarked,--

"I always go on in this way.  Ma says I am a real cry-baby; and I
suppose I am.  I don't see how people can be calm and composed when
they're leaving home, do you?  You'll be just as bad to-morrow, when
you come to say good-by to your papa."

"Oh! I hope not," said Katy.  "Because papa would feel so badly."

Lilly stared.  "I shall think you real cold-hearted if you don't,"
she said, in an offended tone.

Katy took no notice of the tone; and before long Lilly recovered from
her pettishness, and began to talk about the school.  Katy and Clover
asked eager questions.  They were eager to hear all that Lily could
tell.

"You'll adore Mrs. Florence," she said.  "All the girls do.  She's the
most fascinating woman!  She does just what she likes with everybody.
Why, even the students think her perfectly splendid, and yet she's
just as strict as she can be."

"Strict with the students?" asked Clover, looking puzzled.

"No; strict with us girls.  She never lets any one call, unless it's
a brother or a first cousin; and then you have to have a letter from
you parents, asking permission.  I wanted ma to write and say that
George Hickman might call on me.  He isn't a first cousin exactly,
but his father married pa's sister-in-law's sister.  So it's just as
good.  But ma was real mean about it.  She says I'm too young to have
gentlemen coming to see me!  I can't think why.  Ever so many girls
have them, who are younger than I."

"Which Row are you going to room in?" she went on.

"I don't know.  Nobody told us that there were any rows."

"Oh, yes!  Shaker Row and Quaker Row and Attic Row.  Attic Row is the
nicest, because it's highest up, and furthest away from Mrs. Florence.
My room is in Attic Row.  Annie Silsbie and I engaged it last term.
You'll be in Quaker Row, I guess.  Most of the new girls are."

"Is that a nice row?" asked Clover, greatly interested.

"Pretty nice.  It isn't so good as Attic, but it's ever so much better
than Shaker;  Because there you're close to Mrs. Florence, and can't
have a bit of fun without her hearing you.  I'd try to get the end
room, if I were you.  Mary Andrews and I had it once.  There is a
splendid view of Berry Searles's window."

"Berry Searles?"

"Yes; President Searles, you know; his youngest son.  He's an elegant
fellow.  All the girls are cracked about him,--perfectly cracked!  The
president's house is next door to the Nunnery, you know; and Berry
rooms at the very end of the back building, just opposite Quaker Row.
It used to be such fun!  He'd sit at his window, and we'd sit at ours,
in silent study hour, you know; and he'd pretend to read, and all the
time keep looking over the top of his book at us, and trying to make
us laugh.  Once Mary did laugh right out; and Miss Jane heard her, and
came in.  But Berry is just as quick as a flash, and he ducked down
under the window-sill; so she didn't see him.  It was such fun!"

"Who's Miss Jane?" asked Katy.

"The horridest old thing.  She's Mrs. Florence's niece, and engaged
to a missionary.  Mrs. Florence keeps her on purpose to spy us girls,
and report when we break the rules.  Oh, those rules!  Just wait till
you come to read 'em over.  They're nailed up on all the doors,--
thirty-two of them, and you can't help breaking 'em if you try ever
so much."

"What are they? what sort of rules?" cried Katy and Clover in a breath.

"Oh! about being punctual to prayers, and turning you mattress, and
smoothing over the under-sheet before you leave your room, and never
speaking a word in the hall, or in private study hour, and hanging
your towel on your own nail in the wash-room, and all that."

"Wash-room? what _do_ you mean?" said Katy, aghast.

"At the head of Quaker Row, you know.  All the girls wash there,
except on Saturdays when they go to the bath-house.  You have your
own bowl and soap-dish, and a hook for you towel.  Why, what's the
matter?  How big your eyes are!"

"I never heard any thing so horrid!" cried Katy, when she had recovered
her breath.  "Do you really mean that girls don't have wash-stands in
their own rooms?"

"You'll get used to it.  All the girls do," responded Lilly.

"I don't want to get used to it," said Katy, resolving to appeal to
papa; but papa had gone into the smoking-car, and she had to wait.
Meantime Lilly went on talking.

"If you have that end room in Quaker Row, you'll see all the fun that
goes on at commencement time.  Mrs. Searles always has a big party,
and you can look right in, and watch the people and the supper-table,
just as if you were there.  Last summer, Berry and Alpheus Seccomb got
a lot of cakes and mottoes from the table and came out into the yard,
and threw them up one by one to Rose Red and her room-mate.  They
didn't have the end room, though; but the one next to it."

"What a funny name!--Rose Red," said Clover.

"Oh! her real name is Rosamond Redding; but the girls call her Rose
Red.  She's the greatest witch in the school; not exactly pretty, you
know, but sort of killing and fascinating.  She's always getting into
the most awful scrapes.  Mrs. Florence would had expelled her long
ago, if she hadn't been such a favorite; and Mr. Redding's daughter,
beside.  He's a member of Congress, you know, and all that; and Mrs.
Florence is quite proud of having Rose in her school.

"Berry Searles is so funny!" she continued.  "His mother is a horrid
old thing, and always interfering with him.  Sometimes when he has a
party of fellows in his room, and they're playing cards, we can see
her coming with her candle through the house; and when she gets to his
door, she tries it, and then she knocks, and calls out, 'Abernathy, my
son!'  And the fellows whip the cards into their pockets, and stick
the bottles under the table, and get out their books and dictionaries
like a flash; and when Berry unlocks the door, there they sit, studying
away; and Mrs. Searles looks so disappointed!  I thought I should die
one night, Mary Andrews and I laughed so."

I verily believe that if Dr. Carr had been present at this conversation,
he would have stopped at the next station, and taken the girls back to
Burnet.  But he did not return from the smoking-car till the anecdotes
about Berry were finished, and Lilly had begun again on Mrs. Florence.

"She's a sort of queen, you know.  Everybody minds her.  She's tall,
and always dresses beautifully.  Her eyes are lovely; but, when she
gets angry, they're perfectly awful.  Rose Red says she'd rather face
a mad bull any day than Mrs. Florence in a fury; and Rose ought to
know, for she's had more reprimands than any girl in school."

"How many girls are there?" inquired Dr. Carr.

"There were forty-eight last term.  I don't know how many there'll be
this, for they say Mrs. Florence is going to give up.  It's she who
makes the school so popular."

All this time the train was moving northward.  With every mile the
country grew prettier.  Spring had not fairly opened; but the grass
was green, and the buds on the tress gave a tender mist-like color
to the woods.  The road followed the river, which here and there
turned upon itself in long links and windings.  Ranges of blue hills
closed the distance.  Now and then a nearer mountain rose, single and
alone, from the plain.  The air was cool, and full of brilliant zest,
which the Western girls had never before tasted.  Katy felt as if she
were drinking champagne.  She and Clover flew from window to window,
exclaiming with such delight that Lilly was surprised.

"I can't see what there is to make such a fuss about," she remarked.
"That's only Deerfield.  It's quite a small place."

"But how pretty it looks, nestled in among the hills!  Hills are
lovely, Clover, aren't they?"

"These hills are nothing.  You should see the White Mountains," said
the experienced Lilly.  "Ma and I spent three weeks at the Profile
House last vacation.  It was perfectly elegant."

In the course of the afternoon, Katy drew papa away to a distant seat,
