"I will bring you some of the red that I color my roses and tulips
with," cried the Red Ryl; "and then you can make the cat's lips and
tongue red."

"I will bring some of the green that I color my grasses and leaves
with," said the Green Ryl; "and then you can color the cat's eyes
green."

"They will need a bit of yellow, also," remarked the Yellow Ryl; "I
must fetch some of the yellow that I use to color my buttercups and
goldenrods with."

"The real cat is black," said the Black Ryl; "I will bring some of the
black that I use to color the eyes of my pansies with, and then you can
paint your wooden cat black."

"I see you have a blue ribbon around Blinkie's neck," added the Blue
Ryl.  "I will get some of the color that I use to paint the bluebells
and forget-me-nots with, and then you can carve a wooden ribbon on the
toy cat's neck and paint it blue."

So the Ryls disappeared, and by the time Claus had finished carving out
the form of the cat they were all back with the paints and brushes.

They made Blinkie sit upon the table, that Claus might paint the toy
cat just the right color, and when the work was done the Ryls declared
it was exactly as good as a live cat.

"That is, to all appearances," added the Red Ryl.

Blinkie seemed a little offended by the attention bestowed upon the
toy, and that she might not seem to approve the imitation cat she
walked to the corner of the hearth and sat down with a dignified air.

But Claus was delighted, and as soon as morning came he started out and
tramped through the snow, across the Valley and the plain, until he
came to a village.  There, in a poor hut near the walls of the
beautiful palace of the Lord of Lerd, a little girl lay upon a wretched
cot, moaning with pain.

Claus approached the child and kissed her and comforted her, and then
he drew the toy cat from beneath his coat, where he had hidden it, and
placed it in her arms.

Ah, how well he felt himself repaid for his labor and his long walk
when he saw the little one's eyes grow bright with pleasure!  She
hugged the kitty tight to her breast, as if it had been a precious gem,
and would not let it go for a single moment.  The fever was quieted,
the pain grew less, and she fell into a sweet and refreshing sleep.

Claus laughed and whistled and sang all the way home.  Never had he
been so happy as on that day.

When he entered his house he found Shiegra, the lioness, awaiting him.
Since his babyhood Shiegra had loved Claus, and while he dwelt in the
Forest she had often come to visit him at Necile's bower.  After Claus
had gone to live in the Laughing Valley Shiegra became lonely and ill
at ease, and now she had braved the snow-drifts, which all lions abhor,
to see him once more.  Shiegra was getting old and her teeth were
beginning to fall out, while the hairs that tipped her ears and tail
had changed from tawny-yellow to white.

Claus found her lying on his hearth, and he put his arms around the
neck of the lioness and hugged her lovingly.  The cat had retired into
a far corner.  She did not care to associate with Shiegra.

Claus told his old friend about the cats he had made, and how much
pleasure they had given Weekum and the sick girl.  Shiegra did not know
much about children; indeed, if she met a child she could scarcely be
trusted not to devour it.  But she was interested in Claus' new labors,
and said:

"These images seem to me very attractive.  Yet I can not see why you
should make cats, which are very unimportant animals.  Suppose, now
that I am here, you make the image of a lioness, the Queen of all
beasts.  Then, indeed, your children will be happy--and safe at the
same time!"

Claus thought this was a good suggestion.  So he got a piece of wood
and sharpened his knife, while Shiegra crouched upon the hearth at his
feet.  With much care he carved the head in the likeness of the
lioness, even to the two fierce teeth that curved over her lower lip
and the deep, frowning lines above her wide-open eyes.

When it was finished he said:

"You have a terrible look, Shiegra."

"Then the image is like me," she answered; "for I am indeed terrible to
all who are not my friends."

Claus now carved out the body, with Shiegra's long tail trailing behind
it.  The image of the crouching lioness was very life-like.

"It pleases me," said Shiegra, yawning and stretching her body
gracefully.  "Now I will watch while you paint."

He brought the paints the Ryls had given him from the cupboard and
colored the image to resemble the real Shiegra.

The lioness placed her big, padded paws upon the edge of the table and
raised herself while she carefully examined the toy that was her
likeness.

"You are indeed skillful!" she said, proudly.  "The children will like
that better than cats, I'm sure."

Then snarling at Blinkie, who arched her back in terror and whined
fearfully, she walked away toward her forest home with stately strides.



4.  How Little Mayrie Became Frightened

The winter was over now, and all the Laughing Valley was filled with
joyous excitement.  The brook was so happy at being free once again
that it gurgled more boisterously than ever and dashed so recklessly
against the rocks that it sent showers of spray high in the air.  The
grass thrust its sharp little blades upward through the mat of dead
stalks where it had hidden from the snow, but the flowers were yet too
timid to show themselves, although the Ryls were busy feeding their
roots.  The sun was in remarkably good humor, and sent his rays dancing
merrily throughout the Valley.

Claus was eating his dinner one day when he heard a timid knock on his
door.

"Come in!" he called.

No one entered, but after a pause came another rapping.

Claus jumped up and threw open the door.  Before him stood a small girl
holding a smaller brother fast by the hand.

"Is you Tlaus?" she asked, shyly.

"Indeed I am, my dear!" he answered, with a laugh, as he caught both
children in his arms and kissed them.  "You are very welcome, and you
have come just in time to share my dinner."

He took them to the table and fed them with fresh milk and nut-cakes.
When they had eaten enough he asked:

"Why have you made this long journey to see me?"

"I wants a tat!" replied little Mayrie; and her brother, who had not
yet learned to speak many words, nodded his head and exclaimed like an
echo: "Tat!"

"Oh, you want my toy cats, do you?" returned Claus, greatly pleased to
discover that his creations were so popular with children.

The little visitors nodded eagerly.

"Unfortunately," he continued, "I have but one cat now ready, for I
carried two to children in the town yesterday.  And the one I have
shall be given to your brother, Mayrie, because he is the smaller; and
the next one I make shall be for you."

The boy's face was bright with smiles as he took the precious toy Claus
held out to him; but little Mayrie covered her face with her arm and
began to sob grievously.

"I--I--I wants a t--t--tat now!" she wailed.

Her disappointment made Claus feel miserable for a moment.  Then he
suddenly remembered Shiegra.

"Don't cry, darling!" he said, soothingly; "I have a toy much nicer
than a cat, and you shall have that."

He went to the cupboard and drew out the image of the lioness, which he
placed on the table before Mayrie.

The girl raised her arm and gave one glance at the fierce teeth and
glaring eyes of the beast, and then, uttering a terrified scream, she
rushed from the house.  The boy followed her, also screaming lustily,
and even dropping his precious cat in his fear.

For a moment Claus stood motionless, being puzzled and astonished.
Then he threw Shiegra's image into the cupboard and ran after the
children, calling to them not to be frightened.

Little Mayrie stopped in her flight and her brother clung to her skirt;
but they both cast fearful glances at the house until Claus had assured
them many times that the beast had been locked in the cupboard.

"Yet why were you frightened at seeing it?" he asked.  "It is only a
toy to play with!"

"It's bad!" said Mayrie, decidedly, "an'--an'--just horrid, an' not a
bit nice, like tats!"

"Perhaps you are right," returned Claus, thoughtfully.  "But if you
will return with me to the house I will soon make you a pretty cat."

So they timidly entered the house again, having faith in their friend's
words; and afterward they had the joy of watching Claus carve out a cat
from a bit of wood and paint it in natural colors.  It did not take him
long to do this, for he had become skillful with his knife by this
time, and Mayrie loved her toy the more dearly because she had seen it
made.

After his little visitors had trotted away on their journey homeward
Claus sat long in deep thought.  And he then decided that such fierce
creatures as his friend the lioness would never do as models from which
to fashion his toys.

"There must be nothing to frighten the dear babies," he reflected; "and
while I know Shiegra well, and am not afraid of her, it is but natural
that children should look upon her image with terror.  Hereafter I will
choose such mild-mannered animals as squirrels and rabbits and deer and
lambkins from which to carve my toys, for then the little ones will
love rather than fear them."

He began his work that very day, and before bedtime had made a wooden
rabbit and a lamb.  They were not quite so lifelike as the cats had
been, because they were formed from memory, while Blinkie had sat very
still for Claus to look at while he worked.

But the new toys pleased the children nevertheless, and the fame of
Claus' playthings quickly spread to every cottage on plain and in
village.  He always carried his gifts to the sick or crippled children,
but those who were strong enough walked to the house in the Valley to
ask for them, so a little path was soon worn from the plain to the door
of the toy-maker's cottage.

First came the children who had been playmates of Claus, before he
began to make toys.  These, you may be sure, were well supplied.  Then
children who lived farther away heard of the wonderful images and made
journeys to the Valley to secure them.  All little ones were welcome,
and never a one went away empty-handed.

This demand for his handiwork kept Claus busily occupied, but he was
quite happy in knowing the pleasure he gave to so many of the dear
children.  His friends the immortals were pleased with his success and
supported him bravely.

The Knooks selected for him clear pieces of soft wood, that his knife
might not be blunted in cutting them; the Ryls kept him supplied with
paints of all colors and brushes fashioned from the tips of timothy
grasses; the Fairies discovered that the workman needed saws and
chisels and hammers and nails, as well as knives, and brought him a
goodly array of such tools.

Claus soon turned his living room into a most wonderful workshop.  He
built a bench before the window, and arranged his tools and paints so
that he could reach everything as he sat on his stool.  And as he
finished toy after toy to delight the hearts of little children he
found himself growing so gay and happy that he could not refrain from
singing and laughing and whistling all the day long.

"It's because I live in the Laughing Valley, where everything else
laughs!" said Claus.

But that was not the reason.



5.  How Bessie Blithesome Came to the Laughing Valley

One day, as Claus sat before his door to enjoy the sunshine while he
busily carved the head and horns of a toy deer, he looked up and
discovered a glittering cavalcade of horsemen approaching through the
Valley.

When they drew nearer he saw that the band consisted of a score of
men-at-arms, clad in bright armor and bearing in their hands spears and
battle-axes.  In front of these rode little Bessie Blithesome, the
pretty daughter of that proud Lord of Lerd who had once driven Claus
from his palace.  Her palfrey was pure white, its bridle was covered
with glittering gems, and its saddle draped with cloth of gold, richly
broidered.  The soldiers were sent to protect her from harm while she
journeyed.

Claus was surprised, but he continued to whittle and to sing until the
cavalcade drew up before him.  Then the little girl leaned over the
neck of her palfrey and said:

"Please, Mr. Claus, I want a toy!"

Her voice was so pleading that Claus jumped up at once and stood beside
her.  But he was puzzled how to answer her request.

"You are a rich lord's daughter," said he, "and have all that you
desire."

"Except toys," added Bessie.  "There are no toys in all the world but
yours."

"And I make them for the poor children, who have nothing else to amuse
them," continued Claus.

"Do poor children love to play with toys more than rich ones?" asked
Bessie.

"I suppose not," said Claus, thoughtfully.

"Am I to blame because my father is a lord?  Must I be denied the
pretty toys I long for because other children are poorer than I?" she
inquired earnestly.

"I'm afraid you must, dear," he answered; "for the poor have nothing
else with which to amuse themselves.  You have your pony to ride, your
servants to wait on you, and every comfort that money can procure."

"But I want toys!" cried Bessie, wiping away the tears that forced
themselves into her eyes.  "If I can not have them, I shall be very
unhappy."

Claus was troubled, for her grief recalled to him the thought that his
desire was to make all children happy, without regard to their
condition in life.  Yet, while so many poor children were clamoring for
his toys he could not bear to give one to them to Bessie Blithesome,
who had so much already to make her happy.

"Listen, my child," said he, gently; "all the toys I am now making are
promised to others.  But the next shall be yours, since your heart so
longs for it.  Come to me again in two days and it shall be ready for
you."

Bessie gave a cry of delight, and leaning over her pony's neck she
kissed Claus prettily upon his forehead.  Then, calling to her
men-at-arms, she rode gaily away, leaving Claus to resume his work.

"If I am to supply the rich children as well as the poor ones," he
thought, "I shall not have a spare moment in the whole year!  But is it
right I should give to the rich?  Surely I must go to Necile and talk
with her about this matter."

So when he had finished the toy deer, which was very like a deer he had
known in the Forest glades, he walked into Burzee and made his way to
the bower of the beautiful Nymph Necile, who had been his foster mother.

She greeted him tenderly and lovingly, listening with interest to his
story of the visit of Bessie Blithesome.

"And now tell me," said he, "shall I give toys to rich children?"

"We of the Forest know nothing of riches," she replied.  "It seems to
me that one child is like another child, since they are all made of the
same clay, and that riches are like a gown, which may be put on or
taken away, leaving the child unchanged.  But the Fairies are guardians
of mankind, and know mortal children better than I.  Let us call the
Fairy Queen."

This was done, and the Queen of the Fairies sat beside them and heard
Claus relate his reasons for thinking the rich children could get along
without his toys, and also what the Nymph had said.

"Necile is right," declared the Queen; "for, whether it be rich or
poor, a child's longings for pretty playthings are but natural.  Rich
Bessie's heart may suffer as much grief as poor Mayrie's; she can be
just as lonely and discontented, and just as gay and happy.  I think,
friend Claus, it is your duty to make all little ones glad, whether
they chance to live in palaces or in cottages."

"Your words are wise, fair Queen," replied Claus, "and my heart tells
me they are as just as they are wise.  Hereafter all children may claim
my services."

Then he bowed before the gracious Fairy and, kissing Necile's red lips,
went back into his Valley.

At the brook he stopped to drink, and afterward he sat on the bank and
took a piece of moist clay in his hands while he thought what sort of
toy he should make for Bessie Blithesome.  He did not notice that his
fingers were working the clay into shape until, glancing downward, he
found he had unconsciously formed a head that bore a slight resemblance
to the Nymph Necile!

At once he became interested.  Gathering more of the clay from the bank
he carried it to his house.  Then, with the aid of his knife and a bit
of wood he succeeded in working the clay into the image of a toy nymph.
With skillful strokes he formed long, waving hair on the head and
covered the body with a gown of oakleaves, while the two feet sticking
out at the bottom of the gown were clad in sandals.

But the clay was soft, and Claus found he must handle it gently to
avoid ruining his pretty work.

"Perhaps the rays of the sun will draw out the moisture and cause the
clay to become hard," he thought.  So he laid the image on a flat board
and placed it in the glare of the sun.

This done, he went to his bench and began painting the toy deer, and
soon he became so interested in the work that he forgot all about the
clay nymph.  But next morning, happening to notice it as it lay on the
board, he found the sun had baked it to the hardness of stone, and it
was strong enough to be safely handled.

Claus now painted the nymph with great care in the likeness of Necile,
giving it deep-blue eyes, white teeth, rosy lips and ruddy-brown hair.
The gown he colored oak-leaf green, and when the paint was dry Claus
himself was charmed with the new toy.  Of course it was not nearly so
lovely as the real Necile; but, considering the material of which it
was made, Claus thought it was very beautiful.

