seats for one thing. They were all sitting on one now. Jerry, tired of
leap frog, was playing on a jew's-harp. Carl was lovingly poring over a
strange beetle he had found; Una was trying to make a doll's dress, and
Faith, leaning back on her slender brown wrists, was swinging her bare
feet in lively time to the jew's-harp.

Jerry had his father's black hair and large black eyes, but in him the
latter were flashing instead of dreamy. Faith, who came next to him,
wore her beauty like a rose, careless and glowing. She had golden-brown
eyes, golden-brown curls and crimson cheeks. She laughed too much to
please her father's congregation and had shocked old Mrs. Taylor,
the disconsolate spouse of several departed husbands, by saucily
declaring--in the church-porch at that--"The world ISN'T a vale of
tears, Mrs. Taylor. It's a world of laughter."

Little dreamy Una was not given to laughter. Her braids of straight,
dead-black hair betrayed no lawless kinks, and her almond-shaped,
dark-blue eyes had something wistful and sorrowful in them. Her mouth
had a trick of falling open over her tiny white teeth, and a shy,
meditative smile occasionally crept over her small face. She was
much more sensitive to public opinion than Faith, and had an uneasy
consciousness that there was something askew in their way of living. She
longed to put it right, but did not know how. Now and then she dusted
the furniture--but it was so seldom she could find the duster because it
was never in the same place twice. And when the clothes-brush was to be
found she tried to brush her father's best suit on Saturdays, and once
sewed on a missing button with coarse white thread. When Mr. Meredith
went to church next day every female eye saw that button and the peace
of the Ladies' Aid was upset for weeks.

Carl had the clear, bright, dark-blue eyes, fearless and direct, of his
dead mother, and her brown hair with its glints of gold. He knew the
secrets of bugs and had a sort of freemasonry with bees and beetles. Una
never liked to sit near him because she never knew what uncanny creature
might be secreted about him. Jerry refused to sleep with him because
Carl had once taken a young garter snake to bed with him; so Carl slept
in his old cot, which was so short that he could never stretch out, and
had strange bed-fellows. Perhaps it was just as well that Aunt Martha
was half blind when she made that bed. Altogether they were a jolly,
lovable little crew, and Cecilia Meredith's heart must have ached
bitterly when she faced the knowledge that she must leave them.

"Where would you like to be buried if you were a Methodist?" asked Faith
cheerfully.

This opened up an interesting field of speculation.

"There isn't much choice. The place is full," said Jerry. "I'D like that
corner near the road, I guess. I could hear the teams going past and the
people talking."

"I'd like that little hollow under the weeping birch," said Una. "That
birch is such a place for birds and they sing like mad in the mornings."

"I'd take the Porter lot where there's so many children buried. _I_ like
lots of company," said Faith. "Carl, where'd you?"

"I'd rather not be buried at all," said Carl, "but if I had to be I'd
like the ant-bed. Ants are AWF'LY int'resting."

"How very good all the people who are buried here must have been," said
Una, who had been reading the laudatory old epitaphs. "There doesn't
seem to be a single bad person in the whole graveyard. Methodists must
be better than Presbyterians after all."

"Maybe the Methodists bury their bad people just like they do cats,"
suggested Carl. "Maybe they don't bother bringing them to the graveyard
at all."

"Nonsense," said Faith. "The people that are buried here weren't any
better than other folks, Una. But when anyone is dead you mustn't say
anything of him but good or he'll come back and ha'nt you. Aunt Martha
told me that. I asked father if it was true and he just looked through
me and muttered, 'True? True? What is truth? What IS truth, O jesting
Pilate?' I concluded from that it must be true."

"I wonder if Mr. Alec Davis would come back and ha'nt me if I threw a
stone at the urn on top of his tombstone," said Jerry.

"Mrs. Davis would," giggled Faith. "She just watches us in church like
a cat watching mice. Last Sunday I made a face at her nephew and he made
one back at me and you should have seen her glare. I'll bet she boxed
HIS ears when they got out. Mrs. Marshall Elliott told me we mustn't
offend her on any account or I'd have made a face at her, too!"

"They say Jem Blythe stuck out his tongue at her once and she would
never have his father again, even when her husband was dying," said
Jerry. "I wonder what the Blythe gang will be like."

"I liked their looks," said Faith. The manse children had been at the
station that afternoon when the Blythe small fry had arrived. "I liked
Jem's looks ESPECIALLY."

"They say in school that Walter's a sissy," said Jerry.

"I don't believe it," said Una, who had thought Walter very handsome.

"Well, he writes poetry, anyhow. He won the prize the teacher offered
last year for writing a poem, Bertie Shakespeare Drew told me. Bertie's
mother thought HE should have got the prize because of his name, but
Bertie said he couldn't write poetry to save his soul, name or no name."

"I suppose we'll get acquainted with them as soon as they begin going to
school," mused Faith. "I hope the girls are nice. I don't like most of
the girls round here. Even the nice ones are poky. But the Blythe twins
look jolly. I thought twins always looked alike, but they don't. I think
the red-haired one is the nicest."

"I liked their mother's looks," said Una with a little sigh. Una envied
all children their mothers. She had been only six when her mother died,
but she had some very precious memories, treasured in her soul like
jewels, of twilight cuddlings and morning frolics, of loving eyes, a
tender voice, and the sweetest, gayest laugh.

"They say she isn't like other people," said Jerry.

"Mrs. Elliot says that is because she never really grew up," said Faith.

"She's taller than Mrs. Elliott."

"Yes, yes, but it is inside--Mrs. Elliot says Mrs. Blythe just stayed a
little girl inside."

"What do I smell?" interrupted Carl, sniffing.

They all smelled it now. A most delectable odour came floating up on the
still evening air from the direction of the little woodsy dell below the
manse hill.

"That makes me hungry," said Jerry.

"We had only bread and molasses for supper and cold ditto for dinner,"
said Una plaintively.

Aunt Martha's habit was to boil a large slab of mutton early in the week
and serve it up every day, cold and greasy, as long as it lasted. To
this Faith, in a moment of inspiration, had give the name of "ditto",
and by this it was invariably known at the manse.

"Let's go and see where that smell is coming from," said Jerry.

They all sprang up, frolicked over the lawn with the abandon of young
puppies, climbed a fence, and tore down the mossy slope, guided by the
savory lure that ever grew stronger. A few minutes later they arrived
breathlessly in the sanctum sanctorum of Rainbow Valley where the Blythe
children were just about to give thanks and eat.

They halted shyly. Una wished they had not been so precipitate: but Di
Blythe was equal to that and any occasion. She stepped forward, with a
comrade's smile.

"I guess I know who you are," she said. "You belong to the manse, don't
you?"

Faith nodded, her face creased by dimples.

"We smelled your trout cooking and wondered what it was."

"You must sit down and help us eat them," said Di.

"Maybe you haven't more than you want yourselves," said Jerry, looking
hungrily at the tin platter.

"We've heaps--three apiece," said Jem. "Sit down."

No more ceremony was necessary. Down they all sat on mossy stones. Merry
was that feast and long. Nan and Di would probably have died of horror
had they known what Faith and Una knew perfectly well--that Carl had
two young mice in his jacket pocket. But they never knew it, so it never
hurt them. Where can folks get better acquainted than over a meal table?
When the last trout had vanished, the manse children and the Ingleside
children were sworn friends and allies. They had always known each other
and always would. The race of Joseph recognized its own.

They poured out the history of their little pasts. The manse children
heard of Avonlea and Green Gables, of Rainbow Valley traditions, and
of the little house by the harbour shore where Jem had been born. The
Ingleside children heard of Maywater, where the Merediths had lived
before coming to the Glen, of Una's beloved, one-eyed doll and Faith's
pet rooster.

Faith was inclined to resent the fact that people laughed at her for
petting a rooster. She liked the Blythes because they accepted it
without question.

"A handsome rooster like Adam is just as nice a pet as a dog or cat, _I_
think," she said. "If he was a canary nobody would wonder. And I brought
him up from a little, wee, yellow chicken. Mrs. Johnson at Maywater gave
him to me. A weasel had killed all his brothers and sisters. I called
him after her husband. I never liked dolls or cats. Cats are too sneaky
and dolls are DEAD."

"Who lives in that house away up there?" asked Jerry.

"The Miss Wests--Rosemary and Ellen," answered Nan. "Di and I are going
to take music lessons from Miss Rosemary this summer."

Una gazed at the lucky twins with eyes whose longing was too gentle for
envy. Oh, if she could only have music lessons! It was one of the dreams
of her little hidden life. But nobody ever thought of such a thing.

"Miss Rosemary is so sweet and she always dresses so pretty," said
Di. "Her hair is just the colour of new molasses taffy," she added
wistfully--for Di, like her mother before her, was not resigned to her
own ruddy tresses.

"I like Miss Ellen, too," said Nan. "She always used to give me candies
when she came to church. But Di is afraid of her."

"Her brows are so black and she has such a great deep voice," said
Di. "Oh, how scared of her Kenneth Ford used to be when he was little!
Mother says the first Sunday Mrs. Ford brought him to church Miss Ellen
happened to be there, sitting right behind them. And the minute Kenneth
saw her he just screamed and screamed until Mrs. Ford had to carry him
out."

"Who is Mrs. Ford?" asked Una wonderingly.

"Oh, the Fords don't live here. They only come here in the summer. And
they're not coming this summer. They live in that little house 'way,
'way down on the harbour shore where father and mother used to lie. I
wish you could see Persis Ford. She is just like a picture."

"I've heard of Mrs. Ford," broke in Faith. "Bertie Shakespeare Drew told
me about her. She was married fourteen years to a dead man and then he
came to life."

"Nonsense," said Nan. "That isn't the way it goes at all. Bertie
Shakespeare can never get anything straight. I know the whole story and
I'll tell it to you some time, but not now, for it's too long and it's
time for us to go home. Mother doesn't like us to be out late these damp
evenings."

Nobody cared whether the manse children were out in the damp or not.
Aunt Martha was already in bed and the minister was still too deeply
lost in speculations concerning the immortality of the soul to remember
the mortality of the body. But they went home, too, with visions of good
times coming in their heads.

"I think Rainbow Valley is even nicer than the graveyard," said Una.
"And I just love those dear Blythes. It's SO nice when you can love
people because so often you CAN'T. Father said in his sermon last Sunday
that we should love everybody. But how can we? How could we love Mrs.
Alec Davis?"

"Oh, father only said that in the pulpit," said Faith airily. "He has
more sense than to really think it outside."

The Blythe children went up to Ingleside, except Jem, who slipped away
for a few moments on a solitary expedition to a remote corner of Rainbow
Valley. Mayflowers grew there and Jem never forgot to take his mother a
bouquet as long as they lasted.



CHAPTER V. THE ADVENT OF MARY VANCE

"This is just the sort of day you feel as if things might happen," said
Faith, responsive to the lure of crystal air and blue hills. She hugged
herself with delight and danced a hornpipe on old Hezekiah Pollock's
bench tombstone, much to the horror of two ancient maidens who happened
to be driving past just as Faith hopped on one foot around the stone,
waving the other and her arms in the air.

"And that," groaned one ancient maiden, "is our minister's daughter."

"What else could you expect of a widower's family?" groaned the other
ancient maiden. And then they both shook their heads.

It was early on Saturday morning and the Merediths were out in the
dew-drenched world with a delightful consciousness of the holiday. They
had never had anything to do on a holiday. Even Nan and Di Blythe had
certain household tasks for Saturday mornings, but the daughters of the
manse were free to roam from blushing morn to dewy eve if so it pleased
them. It DID please Faith, but Una felt a secret, bitter humiliation
because they never learned to do anything. The other girls in her class
at school could cook and sew and knit; she only was a little ignoramus.

Jerry suggested that they go exploring; so they went lingeringly through
the fir grove, picking up Carl on the way, who was on his knees in the
dripping grass studying his darling ants. Beyond the grove they came out
in Mr. Taylor's pasture field, sprinkled over with the white ghosts of
dandelions; in a remote corner was an old tumbledown barn, where Mr.
Taylor sometimes stored his surplus hay crop but which was never used
for any other purpose. Thither the Meredith children trooped, and
prowled about the ground floor for several minutes.

"What was that?" whispered Una suddenly.

They all listened. There was a faint but distinct rustle in the hayloft
above. The Merediths looked at each other.

"There's something up there," breathed Faith.

"I'm going up to see what it is," said Jerry resolutely.

"Oh, don't," begged Una, catching his arm.

"I'm going."

"We'll all go, too, then," said Faith.

The whole four climbed the shaky ladder, Jerry and Faith quite
dauntless, Una pale from fright, and Carl rather absent-mindedly
speculating on the possibility of finding a bat up in the loft. He
longed to see a bat in daylight.

When they stepped off the ladder they saw what had made the rustle and
