to dance.

"Thank you," she answered, taking his arm.

Randolph took his place with her as head couple. Linton and Annie
Comray faced them. To Randolph's amazement, Luke and Fanny Pratt
took their places as one of the side couples. Randolph, who was
aware that Luke had never taken lessons, remarked this with equal
surprise and disgust. His lip curled as he remarked to his partner:
"Really, I didn't know that Luke Larkin danced."

"Nor I," answered Florence.

"I am sorry he is in our set."

"Why?" asked Florence, regarding him attentively.

"He will probably put us out by his clownish performance."

"Wouldn't it be well to wait and see whether he does or not?"
responded Florence, quietly.

Randolph shrugged his shoulders.

"I pity his partner, at any rate," he said.

"I can't join in any such conversation about one of my guests,"
said Florence, with dignity.

Here the first directions were given, and the quadrille commenced.

Luke felt a little nervous, it must be confessed, and for
that reason he watched with unusual care the movements of the
head couples. He was quick to learn, and ordinarily cool and
self-possessed. Besides, he knew that no one was likely to
criticize him except Randolph. He saw the latter regarding him with
a mocking smile, and this stimulated him to unusual carefulness.
The result was that he went through his part with quite as much ease
and correctness as any except the most practiced dancers. Florence
said nothing, but she turned with a significant smile to Randolph.
The latter looked disappointed and mortified. His mean disposition
would have been gratified by Luke's failure, but this was a
gratification he was not to enjoy.

The dance was at length concluded, and Luke, as he led his
partner to a seat, felt that he had scored a success.

"May I have the pleasure of dancing with you next time, Florence?"
asked Randolph.

"Thank you, but I should not think it right to slight my other
guests," said the young lady.

Just then Luke came up and preferred the same request. He would
not have done so if he had not acquitted himself well in the
first quadrille.

Florence accepted with a smile.

"I was not aware that dancing was one of your accomplishments,
Luke," she said.

"Nor I, till this evening," answered Luke. "There stands my
teacher," and he pointed to Linton.

"You do credit to your teacher," said Florence. "I should not
have known you were such a novice."

Luke was pleased with this compliment, and very glad that he had
been spared the mortification of breaking down before the eyes of
his ill-wisher, Randolph Duncan. It is hardly necessary to say that
he did equally well in the second quadrille, though he and Florence
were head couple.

The next dance was the Virginia Reel. Here Florence had Linton for
a partner, and Luke secured as his own partner a very good dancer.
From prudence, however, he took his place at some distance from the
head, and by dint of careful watching he acquitted himself as well
as in the quadrilles.

"Really, Luke, you are doing wonderfully well," said Linton, when
the dance was over. "I can hardly believe that you have taken but
one lesson, and that from so poor a teacher as I am."

"I couldn't have had a better teacher, Lin," said Luke. "I owe my
success to you."

"Didn't you say Luke couldn't dance?" asked Sam Noble of Randolph,
later in the evening.

"He can't," answered Randolph, irritably.

"He gets along very well, I am sure. He dances as well as I do."

"That isn't saying much," answered Randolph, with a sneer. He could
not help sneering even at his friends, and this was one reason why
no one was really attached to him.

Sam walked away offended.

The party broke up at half-past ten. It was an early hour, but late
enough considering the youth of the participants. Luke accompanied
home one of the girls who had no brother present, and then turned
toward his own home.

He had nearly reached it, when a tall figure, moving from the
roadside, put a hand on his shoulder.

"You are Luke Larkin?" said the stranger, in questioning tone.

"Yes, sir."

"Is the tin box safe?"

"Yes, sir."

"That is all--for the present," and the stranger walked quickly away.

"Who can he be," thought Luke, in wonder, "and why should he have
trusted a complete stranger--and a boy?"

Evidently there was some mystery about the matter. Had the stranger
come honestly by the box, or was Luke aiding and abetting a thief?
He could not tell.



CHAPTER VIII

MISS SPRAGUE DISCOVERS A SECRET


About this time it became known to one person in the village that
the Larkins had in their possession a tin box, contents unknown.

This is the way it happened:

Among the best-known village residents was Miss Melinda Sprague,
a maiden lady, who took a profound interest in the affairs of her
neighbors. She seldom went beyond the limits of Groveton, which
was her world. She had learned the business of dressmaking, and
often did work at home for her customers. She was of a curious and
prying disposition, and nothing delighted her more than to acquire
the knowledge of a secret.

One day--a few days after Florence Grant's party--Mrs. Larkin was
in her own chamber. She had the trunk open, having occasion to take
something from it, when, with a light step, Miss Sprague entered
the room. The widow, who was on her knees before the trunk, turning,
recognized the intruder, not without displeasure.

"I hope you'll excuse my coming in so unceremoniously, Mrs. Larkin,"
said Melinda, effusively. "I knocked, but you didn't hear it, being
upstairs, and I took the liberty, being as we were so well
acquainted, to come upstairs in search of you."

"Yes, certainly," answered Mrs. Larkin, but her tone was
constrained.

She quickly shut the lid of the trunk. There was only one thing
among its contents which she was anxious to hide, but that Miss
Melinda's sharp eyes had already discovered. Unfortunately, the
tin box was at one side, in plain sight.

"What on earth does Mrs. Larkin do with a tin box?" she asked
herself, with eager curiosity. "Can she have property that people
don't know of? I always thought she was left poor."

Melinda asked no questions. The sudden closing of the trunk
showed her that the widow would not be inclined to answer any
questions.

"I won't let her think I saw anything," she said to herself.
"Perhaps she'll get anxious and refer to it."

"We will go downstairs, Melinda," said Mrs. Larkin. "It will be
more comfortable."

"If you have anything to do up here, I beg you won't mind me," said
the spinster.

"No, I have nothing that won't wait."

So the two went down into the sitting-room.

"And how is Luke?" asked Miss Sprague, in a tone of friendly interest.

"Very well, thank you."

"Luke was always a great favorite of mine," continued the spinster.
"Such a manly boy as he is!"

"He is a great help to me," said Mrs. Larkin.

"No doubt he is. He takes care of the schoolhouse, doesn't he?"

"Yes."

"How much pay does he get?"

"A dollar a week."

"I hope he will be able to keep the position."

"What do you mean, Melinda?" asked the widow, not without anxiety.

"You know Doctor Snodgrass has resigned on the school committee,
and Squire Duncan has been elected in his place."

"Well?"

"Mrs. Flanagan went to him yesterday to ask to have her son Tim
appointed janitor in place of Luke, and I heard that she received
considerable encouragement from the squire."

"Do they find any fault with Luke?" asked Mrs. Larkin, jealously.

"No, not as I've heard; but Mrs. Flanagan said Luke had had
it for a year, and now some one else ought to have the chance."

"Are you quite sure of this, Melinda?"

Miss Sprague, though over forty, was generally called by her first
name, not as a tribute to her youth, but to the fact of her being
still unmarried.

"Yes, I am; I had it from Mrs. Flanagan herself."

"I don't think Tim would do as well as Luke. He has never been
able to keep a place yet."

"Just so; but, of course, his mother thinks him a polygon." Probably
Miss Sprague meant a paragon--she was not very careful in her
speech, but Mrs. Larkin did not smile at her mistake. She was too
much troubled at the news she had just heard. A dollar a week may
seem a ridiculous trifle to some of my readers, but, where the
entire income of the family was so small, it was a matter of some
consequence.

"I don't think Luke has heard anything of this," said the widow. "He
has not mentioned it to me."

"Perhaps there won't be any change, after all," said Melinda. "I am
sure Tim Flanagan wouldn't do near as well as Luke."

Miss Melinda was not entirely sincere. She had said to Mrs. Flanagan
that she quite agreed with her that Luke had been janitor long
enough, and hoped Tim would get the place. She was in the habit of
siding with the person she chanced to be talking with at the moment,
and this was pretty well understood.

Luke, however, had heard of this threatened removal. For this, it
may be said, Randolph was partly responsible. Just after Mrs.
Flanagan's call upon the squire to solicit his official influence,
Prince Duncan mentioned the matter to his son.

"How long has Luke Larkin been janitor at the schoolhouse?"
he asked.

"About a year. Why do you ask?"

"Does he attend to the duties pretty well?"

"I suppose so. He's just fit to make fires and sweep the floor,"
answered Randolph, his lip curling.

"Mrs. Flanagan has been here to ask me to appoint her son Tim in
Luke's place."

"You'd better do it, pa," said Randolph, quickly.

"Why? You say Luke is well fitted for the position."

"Oh, anybody could do as well, but Luke puts on airs. He feels
too big for his position."

"I suppose Mrs. Larkin needs the money."

"So does Mrs. Flanagan," said Randolph.

"What sort of a boy is Tim? I have heard that he is lazy."

"Oh, I guess he'll do. Of course, I am not well acquainted with a
boy like him," said the young aristocrat. "But I'm quite disgusted
with Luke. He was at Florence Grant's party the other evening, and
was cheeky enough to ask her to dance with him."

"Did she do so?"

"Yes; I suppose it was out of pity. He ought to have known better
than to attend a party with such a suit. His coat and pantaloons
were both too small for him, but he flourished around as if he
were fashionably dressed."

Squire Duncan made no reply to his son's comments, but he felt
disposed, for reasons of his own, to appoint Tim Flanagan. He was
hoping to be nominated for representative at the next election, and
thought the appointment might influence the Irish vote in his favor.

"Shall you appoint Tim, pa?" asked Randolph.

"I think it probable. It seems only right to give him a chance.
Rotation in office is a principle of which I approve."

"That's good!" thought Randolph, with a smile of gratification.
"It isn't a very important place, but Luke will be sorry to
lose it. The first time I see him I will give him a hint of it."

Randolph met Luke about an hour later in the village street.
He did not often stop to speak with our hero, but this time he
had an object in doing so.



CHAPTER IX

LUKE LOSES HIS POSITION


"Luke Larkin!"

Luke turned, on hearing his name called, and was rather surprised
to see Randolph hastening toward him.

"How are you, Randolph?" he said politely.

"Where are you going?" asked Randolph, not heeding the inquiry.

"To the schoolhouse, to sweep out."

"How long have you been janitor?" asked Randolph, abruptly.

"About a year," Luke answered, in surprise.

"That's a good while."

Luke was puzzled. Why should Randolph feel such an interest,
all at once, in his humble office?

"I suppose you know that my father is now on the school committee?"
Randolph continued.

"Yes; I heard so."

"He thinks of appointing Tim Flanagan janitor in your place."

Luke's face showed his surprise and concern. The loss of his modest
income would, as he knew, be severely felt by his mother and
himself. The worst of it was, there seemed no chance in Groveton
of making it up in any other way.

"Did your father tell you this?" he asked, after a pause.

"Yes; he just told me," answered Randolph, complacently.

"Why does he think of removing me? Are there any complaints of
the way I perform my duties?"

"Really, my good fellow," said Randolph, languidly, "I can't
enlighten you on that point. You've held the office a good while,
you know."

"You are very kind to tell me--this bad news," said Luke, pointedly.

"Oh, don't mention it. Good morning. Were you fatigued after your
violent exercise at Florence Grant's party?"

"No. Were you?"

"I didn't take any," said Randolph, haughtily. "I danced--I didn't
jump round."

"Thank you for the compliment. Is there anything more you wish to
say to me?"

"No."

"Then good morning."

When Luke was left alone he felt serious. How was he going to make
up the dollar a week of which he was to be deprived? The more he
considered the matter the further he was from thinking anything. He
was not quite sure whether the news was reliable, or merely invented
by Randolph to tease and annoy him. Upon this point, however, he was
soon made certain. The next day, as he was attending to his duties
in the schoolhouse, Tim Flanagan entered.

"Here's a note for you, Luke," he said.

Luke opened the note and found it brief but significant. It ran
thus:

"LUKE LARKIN: I have appointed the bearer, Timothy Flanagan, janitor
in your place. You will give him the key of the schoolhouse, and he
will at once assume your duties.

"PRINCE DUNCAN."

"Well, Tim," said Luke, calmly, "it appears that you are going
to take my place."

"Yes, Luke, but I don't care much about it. My mother went to the
squire and got me the job. The pay's a dollar a week, isn't it?"

"Yes."

"That isn't enough."

"It isn't very much, but there are not many ways of earning
money here in Groveton."

"What do you have to do?"

"Make the fire every morning and sweep out twice a week.
Then there's dusting, splitting up kindlings, and so on."

"I don't think I'll like it. I ain't good at makin' fires."

"Squire Duncan writes you are to begin at once."

"Shure, I'm afraid I won't succeed."

"I'll tell you what, Tim. I'll help you along till you've got
used to the duties. After a while they'll get easy for you."
