"And the moon will be full to-night," said Grace, beginning to sing:

"'De jay-bird hunt de sparrer-nes',
    All by de light of de moon.
  De bee-martin sail all 'roun',
    All by de light of de moon.
  De squirrel he holler from de top of de tree;
    Mr. Mole he stay in de groun',
  Oh, yes! Mr. Mole he stay in de groun'--'"

Sylvia listened and smiled as she looked at the happy faces of her
friends. But she could not forget Dinkie, and wondered if Philip could
really protect the unhappy woman from a whipping, and prevent her being
sold away from her children.

As they passed the cabins of the negroes the children ran out bobbing
and smiling to their young mistress, and Flora called out a friendly
greeting.

"Father's going to sell a lot of those niggers," she said carelessly.
"They eat more than they're worth."

"But won't their mothers feel dreadfully to let them go?" ventured
Sylvia. "Of course they will," declared Grace, before Flora could
respond. "And I do think it's a shame. Did you know Uncle Robert is
going to sell Estralla?" she asked turning to Sylvia.

Sylvia's grasp on the reins loosened, and she nearly lost her seat on
the broad back of the fat pony.

"What for?" she questioned, thinking to herself that Estralla should
not be sold away from her home and mother if she, Sylvia, could prevent
it.

"Oh, Uncle's agent says she isn't of any use, and he can get a good
price for her. He would have sold her last month if your mother had not
taken her in. I expect Aunt Connie will be half crazy, for all her
other children are gone," said Grace.

"We mustn't ride too far this time," Flora interrupted, "because it's
Sylvia's first ride. Hasn't she done well? Do you suppose you can turn
the pony?"

"Yes, indeed," answered Sylvia, drawing the left rein so tightly that
the little pony swung round before Flora had time to give a word of
direction. As they were now headed toward home "Snap" went off at a
good pace, well in advance of the others. It was all Sylvia could do to
keep her seat, but she was not frightened, and when the pony raced up
the driveway and came to a standstill directly in front of the piazza
steps she was laughing with delight. For the moment she had quite
forgotten Dinkie and Estralla.




CHAPTER VII

SYLVIA SEES A GHOST


"It was splendid," declared Sylvia as Grace and Flora dismounted and
the three little friends entered the house. Flora's black "Mammy" was
waiting for them on the piazza.

"Thar's some 'freshments fur yo' in de dinin'-room," she said; and the
girls were glad for the cool milk and the tiny frosted cakes which a
negro girl served them. Sylvia wondered if Flora ever did anything for
herself; for there seemed to be so many negro servants who were on the
alert to wait upon all the white people at the "big house."

"Come up to my room, girls, and rest until it's time to dress for
supper," said Flora.

Flora's room was just across the hall from the one where Grace and
Sylvia were to sleep. Instead of a small white bed like theirs there
was a big bed of dark mahogany with four tall, high posts. The bed was
so high that there was a cushioned step beside it. The portrait of a
lady hung over a beautiful inlaid desk, and Flora pointed to it with
evident pride.

"That's my great-grandmother; and her father built this house. My
mother says that she was Lady Caroline, and that she was so beautiful
that whenever she went to Charleston people would run after her coach
just to look at her," and Flora looked at her companions expectantly,
quite forgetting that she had told them the story before.

"Oh, Flora! Every time I come out here you tell me about your wonderful
great-grand-mother," said Grace, "and you used to tell me that her
ghost haunted this house."

"Well, it does," declared Flora.

Sylvia had never heard of Lady Caroline's ghost. "Do tell me about it,
Flora," she urged.

There was a wide cushioned seat with many pillows beneath the windows,
and here the girls established themselves very comfortably.

"Yes, tell Sylvia the story," said Grace, piling up several cushions
behind her back. "Of course it isn't true, but it's thrilling."

"It is true," persisted Flora. "My mother says that her own governess
saw Lady Caroline's ghost. And that she had on the very hat she has on
in the portrait, and the same blue dress and lace collar. You know
there's a secret stairway in this house. It leads from one of the
closets in your room down to a closet in my father's library and
out-of-doors, and Lady Caroline's ghost always comes in that way."

Sylvia looked up at the beautiful pictured face with a little shiver.
"I guess that the governess dreamed it," she said.

"Of course she did," declared Grace. "I think you look like that
picture, Flora," she added.

"Well, whether you believe it or not, everybody knows that this is a
haunted house," persisted Flora. "Why, there is an account of it in a
book."

But Grace shook her head laughingly. "Flora, show Sylvia your lovely
lace-work," she said.

Flora nodded, but Sylvia was sure that she was not pleased at Grace's
refusal to believe in the ghost.

"Mammy! Mam-m-e-e," called Flora, and in a moment the black woman stood
bobbing and smiling in the doorway.

"Bring my lace-work," said Flora.

"Yas, Missy," and Mammy trotted across the room to a little table in
the further corner and brought Flora a covered basket. She opened it
and set it down in front of her little mistress.

"Do's yo' want anyt'ing else, Missy Flora?" she asked.

"If I do I'll call," replied the little girl, and Mammy again
disappeared.

The basket was lined with rose-colored silk, and there were little
pockets all around it. In the centre lay a cushion on which was a lace
pattern defined by delicate threads and tiny circles of pins. A little
strip of finished lace was rolled up in a bit of tissue paper. Flora
took off the paper. "See, it is the jessamine pattern," she explained.
"My mother's governess was a Belgian lady, and she taught my mother how
to make lace and my mother taught me."

"I wish I could make lace," said Sylvia. "It would be lovely to make
some for a present for my mother."

"Of course it would. I'll teach you this winter," promised the
good-natured Flora; "let me see your hands. You know a lace-maker's
hands must be as smooth as silk, because any roughness would catch the
delicate threads."

Sylvia's hands were still scratched and roughed from her fall in Miss
Rosalie's garden and her scramble over the wall, and Flora shook her
head. "You'll have to wait awhile. And you must wear gloves every time
you go out, and wash your hands in milk every night," she said very
seriously. "Now I'll show you my embroidery. Mam-m-e-e! Mam-m-e-e," and
another basket was brought and opened. This basket was also lined with
rose-colored silk, but the silk had delicate green vines running over
it. On the inside of the cover, held in place by tiny straps, were two
pairs of shining scissors with gold handles, a gold-mounted emery bag,
shaped like a strawberry, an embroidery stiletto of ivory, and a gold
thimble.

Flora lifted out the embroidery frame, and putting on her thimble took
a few exact, dainty stitches in the collar.

"What lovely work you can do, Flora!" exclaimed Sylvia. "Don't you ever
play dolls?" remembering her own cherished dolls in their small chairs
in the corner of her room at home.

"Oh, I used to," replied Flora, "but since I began school at Miss
Patten's I don't seem to care about dolls."

"Flora can play on the harp," announced Grace.

"Oh, only just a little," responded Flora quickly.

"I think Flora can do more things than any girl I ever knew," declared
Sylvia admiringly; "and I was just thinking that the servants did
everything in the world."

Flora laughed. "You never lived on a plantation, or you couldn't think
that. Why, my mother works more than Mammy ever did. She has to tell
all the house darkies what to do, and see that all the hands have
clothes, and that the fruits are preserved. Why, she's always busy,"
replied Flora. "And of course ladies have to know how to do things,"
she concluded.

When Grace and Sylvia went to their own room Flora went with them.
"I'll show you where that secret staircase is," she said, and opening
the closet door pressed on a broad panel which moved slowly.

"There," and Flora drew Sylvia near so she could look down a dark
narrow stairway.

"But that isn't seeing a ghost," Grace said laughingly.

It was rather late when Mrs. Hayes led the way back to the house, and
Grace declared that she was almost too sleepy to walk up-stairs. But
Sylvia was not at all sleepy. After the colored girl had helped them
prepare for bed, blown out the candle, and left the room, she lay
watching the shadows of the moving vines on the wall. She wished she
was at home, for who knew but that Estralla's master might sell her
before she returned. Sylvia wondered what she could do to protect the
little girl. "I might hide her," she thought; but what place would be
secure? Suddenly she remembered something that she had heard Captain
Carleton say when she was eating luncheon on that unlucky trip to Fort
Sumter. "This fort could make South Carolina give up slavery," he had
said. Why, then, of course Estralla would be perfectly safe if she was
only at Fort Sumter, concluded the little girl, with a long sigh of
relief. "I must get her there just as soon as I get home," she decided.

Then suddenly Sylvia sat straight up in bed. The closet door had swung
softly open, and a figure with a big hat and trailing dress stepped
out. Sylvia was not frightened. "It's the ghost," she whispered; and
leaning across poked Grace, exclaiming: "Grace! Look quick! here is
Lady Caroline!"

In an instant Grace was wide awake.

"Where?" she demanded, in a frightened voice, clutching Sylvia's hand.

"Right there! By the closet door," said Sylvia. "Oh! she's gone!"

For as she looked toward the closet the figure had disappeared.

"There, you waked me up for nothing. You dreamed it," declared Grace.

"Oh, I didn't! Truly, I didn't. I haven't been asleep," Sylvia
insisted. "It is just as Flora said. There is a ghost." Just then both
the girls heard a startled cry, and a sound as if something had fallen
in the room under them.

"What's that?" whispered Grace. "Oh, Sylvia, do you suppose there
really is a ghost?"

"Yes, I saw it," declared Sylvia, with such evident satisfaction in her
tone that Grace forgot to be frightened. "Well, I guess it fell
downstairs," she chuckled; but in spite of their lack of fear both the
little girls were excited over the unusual noise, and Sylvia was sure
now that Flora had been right in saying the house was haunted. She
wished it was already morning that she might tell Flora all that had
happened.




CHAPTER VIII

A TWILIGHT TEA-PARTY


It was late when Grace and Sylvia awoke the following morning, but they
were down-stairs before the boys appeared. Mrs. Hayes greeted them
smilingly, but she said that Flora was not well and that Mammy would
take her breakfast to her up-stairs.

"After breakfast you must go up and stay with her a little while," said
Mrs. Hayes.

"Why, Flora was never ill in her life," declared Ralph; "what's the
matter?"

"She is not really ill, but she fell over something last night and
bruised her arm and shoulder, so that she feels lame and tired, and I
thought a few hours in bed would be the best thing for her," explained
Mrs. Hayes. "Mammy doesn't seem to know just how it happened," she
concluded.

Sylvia and Grace had talked over the "ghost" before coming down-stairs.
Grace had tried best to convince Sylvia that she had really dreamed
"Lady Caroline," but Sylvia insisted that a figure in a wide plumed hat
and a trailing gown had really stepped out of the closet.

"The moon was shining right where she stood. I saw her just as plainly
as I could see you when you sat up in bed," Sylvia declared. But both
the girls agreed that it would be best not to say anything about "Lady
Caroline" until they had told Flora.

After breakfast Mammy came to tell the visitors that Flora was ready to
see them.

"But jus' for a little while," she added, as she opened the door of
Flora's chamber.

Flora was bolstered up in bed, and had on a dainty dressing-gown of
pink muslin tied with white ribbons. But there was a bandage about her
right wrist, and a soft strip of cotton was bound about her head.

"Oh, girls! It's too bad that I can't help you to have a good time
to-day," she said, "and all because I was so clumsy."

Both the girls assured her that it was a good time just to be at the
Hayes plantation.

"Flora! There is a ghost! Just as you said! I saw it. Just about
midnight," said Sylvia.

"Truly!" exclaimed Flora, in rather a faint voice.

"Yes. And it was Lady Caroline. For it wore a big hat, like the one in
the picture, and its dress trailed all about it," replied Sylvia.

"Then I guess Grace will believe this is a haunted house," said Flora,
a little triumphantly.

"I didn't see it," said Grace. "And, truly, I believe Sylvia just
dreamed it."

Flora sat up in bed suddenly.

"Sylvia did not dream it. I know she saw it," she declared.

"Well, perhaps so. But I didn't," and Grace laughed good-naturedly; but
Flora turned her face from them and began to cry.

"After my being hurt, and--" she sobbed, but stopped quickly.

Sylvia and Grace looked at each other in amazement.

"It's because she is ill. And she's disappointed because you didn't see
Lady Caroline," Sylvia whispered. In a moment Flora looked up with a
little smile.

"I am so silly," she said. "You must forgive me. But I'm sure Sylvia
did see--"

"I begin to think she did," Grace owned laughingly. She had happened to
look toward the open closet and had seen certain things which made her
quite ready to own that Flora might be right. But she was rather
serious and silent for the rest of the visit. Before they left Flora's
room Flora asked Sylvia not to tell anyone that she had seen a "ghost."
"You see, the boys would laugh, and no one but me really believes the
house is haunted," she explained.

Of course Sylvia promised, but she was puzzled by Flora's request.

It was decided that Ralph and Philip should ride back to Charleston
that afternoon when Uncle Chris drove the little visitors home, and
that Flora should stay at the plantation with her mother for a day or
two.

Sylvia had enjoyed her visit. She had even enjoyed seeing the "ghost,"
but she was sorry that she could not tell her mother and father of the
great adventure. Nevertheless she was glad when the carriage stopped in
front of her own home, and she saw Estralla, smiling and happy in the
pink gingham dress, waiting to welcome her.

"Sylvia, I'm coming over to-night. I've got something to tell you,"
Grace said, as the two friends stood for a moment at Sylvia's gate,
after they had thanked Uncle Chris, and said good-bye to Sylvia's
brothers.

Grace was so serious that Sylvia wondered what it could be. "It isn't
that Estralla is going to be sold right away, is it?" she asked
anxiously.

"No. I'll tell you after supper," Grace responded and ran on to her own
home.

Sylvia's mother and father were interested to hear all that she had to
tell them about the corn-shucking, and of the wonderful cake with its
palmetto flag. She told them about poor Dinkie, and what Philip had
said: that Dinkie should not be sold away from her children, or whipped.

Mr. Fulton seemed greatly pleased with Sylvia's account of her visit.
He said Philip was a fine boy, and that there were many like him in
South Carolina.

They had just finished supper when Grace appeared, and the two little
girls went up to Sylvia's room.

"What is it, Grace?" Sylvia asked eagerly. "I can't think what you want
to tell me that makes you look so sober."

Grace looked all about the room and then closed the door, not seeing a
little figure crouching in a shadowy corner.

"I wouldn't want anybody else to hear. It's about the ghost," she
whispered. "I know all about it. It was Flora herself! Yes, it was!"
she continued quickly. "When we were in her room this morning I saw a
big hat with a long feather on it, hanging on her closet door, and a
long blue skirt, one of her mother's. They weren't there yesterday, for
the door was open, just as it was to-day."

"Well, what of that?" asked Sylvia.

"Oh, Sylvia! Can't you see?" Grace asked impatiently. "Flora dressed up
in her mother's things, and then came up the stairs to our room. She
was determined to make us think she had a truly ghost in her house.
Then when you called out, she got frightened and stumbled on the
stairs. You know we heard someone fall and cry out. Of course it was
Flora. Nobody seems to know how she got hurt. The minute I saw that
plumed hat I knew just the trick she had played. I knew there wasn't a
ghost," Grace concluded triumphantly.

Sylvia felt almost disappointed that it had not really been "Lady
Caroline." She wondered why Flora had wanted to deceive them.

"I don't think it was fair," she said slowly.

"Of course it wasn't fair. I wouldn't have believed that a Charleston
girl would do such a mean trick," declared Grace. "Of course, as we
were her company, we can't let her know that we have found her out."

"Perhaps she meant to tell us, anyway," suggested Sylvia hopefully.
"I'm sure she did. She thought it would make us laugh."

"Well, then why didn't she?" asked Grace.

Sylvia's face clouded; she could not answer this question, but she was
sure that Flora had not meant to frighten or really deceive them, and
she wanted to defend her absent friend.

"Well, Grace, we know Flora wouldn't do anything mean. And, you see,
she got hurt, and so she's just waiting to get well before she tells us
of the joke. You wait and see. Flora will tell us just as soon as we
see her again."

There was a little note of entreaty in Sylvia's voice, as if she were
pleading with Grace not to blame Flora.

"I know one thing, Sylvia. You wouldn't do anything mean, if you are a
Yankee," Grace declared warmly. "What's that noise?" she added quickly.

The room was shadowy in the gathering twilight, and the two little
girls had been sitting near the window. As Grace spoke they both turned
quickly, for there was a sudden noise of an overturned chair in the
further corner of the room, and they could see a dark figure sprawling
on the floor.

Before Sylvia could speak she heard the little wailing cry which
Estralla always gave when in trouble, and then: "Don't be skeered,
Missy! It's nobuddy. I jes' fell over your doll-ladies."

"Oh, Estralla! You haven't broken my dolls! What were you up here for,
anyway?" and Sylvia quite forgot all her plans to rescue Estralla as
she ran toward her.

The "doll-ladies," as the little darky girl had always called Sylvia's
two china dolls which sat in two small chairs in front of a doll's
table in one corner of the room, were both sprawling on the floor,
their chairs upset, and the little table with its tiny tea-set
overturned. Grace lit the candles on Sylvia's bureau, while Sylvia
picked up her treasured dolls, "Molly" and "Polly," which her
Grandmother Fulton had sent her on her last birthday.

"I wuz up here, jest a-sittin' an' a-lookin' at 'em, Missy," wailed
Estralla. "I never layed hand on 'em. An' when you an' Missy Grace
comes in I da'sent move. An' then when I does move I tumbles over. I
'spec' now I'll get whipped."

"Keep still, Estralla. You know you won't get whipped," replied Sylvia,
finding that Molly and Polly had not been hurt by their fall, and that
none of the little dishes were broken.

"You ought to tell her mother to whip her. She's no business up here,"
said Grace.

"Don't, Grace!" Sylvia exclaimed. "We don't get whipped every time we
make a mistake. And Estralla hasn't anything of her own. Just think,
your Uncle Robert can sell her away from her own mother. You said
yourself that you didn't think that was fair."

Estralla had scrambled to her feet and now stood looking at the little
white girls with a half-frightened look in her big eyes.

"Oh, Missy! I ain't gwine to be sold, be I?" she whispered.

Sylvia put her arm around Estralla's shoulders. "No!" she said, "you
shall not be sold. Now, don't look so frightened. We will have a
tea-party for Molly and Polly, and you shall wait on them. Run down and
ask your mother to give us some little cakes."

Estralla was off in an instant, and while she was away Sylvia and Grace
spread the little table, brought cushions from the window-seats and
advised Molly and Polly to forgive the disturbance.

When Mrs. Fulton came up-stairs a little later to tell Grace that her
black Mammy had come to take her home she found three very happy little
girls. Sylvia and Grace were being entertained at tea by Misses Molly
and Polly, while Estralla with shining eyes and a wide smile carried
tiny cups and little cakes to the guests, and chuckled delightedly over
the clever things which Sylvia and Grace declared Molly and Polly had
said.

"A candle-light tea-party," exclaimed Mrs. Fulton, as she came into the
room and smiled down on the happy group.

"Perhaps Flora will own up," Grace said, as the two girls followed Mrs.
Fulton down the stairs. "Anyway, you are mighty fair about it, and
you're good to that stupid little darky."

"Oh, Estralla isn't stupid. Not a bit," replied Sylvia laughingly.

Estralla, who was carefully putting the little table in order, heard
Sylvia's defense of her, and for a moment she stood very straight,
holding one of the tiny cups in each hand.

"I jes' loves Missy Sylvia, I do, I jes' wish ez how I could do
somethin' so she'd know how I loves her," and two big tears rolled down
the black cheeks of the little slave girl who had known so little of
kindness or of joy.




CHAPTER IX

TROUBLESOME WORDS


It was a week after Sylvia's visit to the Hayes plantation before Flora
returned to school. A heavy rain had made the roads nearly impassable,
and a little scar on Flora's forehead reminded Sylvia and Grace of her
unlucky tumble. On Flora's first appearance at school Sylvia was
confident that she would at once confess her part in "Lady Caroline's"
appearance, and at recess she and Grace were eager to walk with Flora.
It was now the first of November, but the air was warm and the garden
had many blossoming plants and shrubs.

Flora said that she was glad to be back at school. She told the girls
that her father had returned from a northern trip and that he had given
Dinkie and her children to Philip.

