
"What a disagreeable man," thought the doctor's wife, not propitiated by
the compliment. "Herbert," she said, "here are a couple of handkerchiefs
I bought in the village yesterday. I hope you will find them useful."

"Yes; no doubt he will," said Mr. Holden, laughing. "He will think of
you whenever he has a bad cold."

Nobody even smiled at this witty sally, and, Mr. Holden, a little
disappointed, remarked: "Well, time's getting on. I guess we must be
going, as we have a long journey before us."

The whole family accompanied Herbert to the road. After kissing Mary and
Mrs. Kent, and shaking the doctor cordially by the hand, Herbert jumped
into the wagon. Just before the horse started the doctor handed our hero
a sealed envelope, saying, "You can open it after a while."

Though, like most boys of his age, Herbert had a great horror of making
a baby of himself, he could hardly help crying as he rode up the street,
and felt that he had parted from his best friends. His eyes filled with
tears, which he quietly wiped away with the corner of his handkerchief.

"Come, come, don't blubber, boy," said Mr. Holden, coarsely.

Herbert was not weak enough to melt into tears at an unkind word. It
roused his indignation, and he answered, shortly, "When you see me
blubbering, it'll be time enough to speak, Mr. Holden."

"It looked a good deal like it, at any rate," said Abner. "However, I'm
glad if I'm mistaken. There's nothing to cry about that I can see."

"No, perhaps not," said Herbert; "but there's something to be sorry
for."

"Something to be sorry for, is there?" said Abner Holden.

"Yes."

"Well, what is it?"

"I've left my best friends, and I don't know when I shall see them
again."

"Nor I," said Mr. Holden. "But I think it's high time you left them."

"Why?" asked Herbert, indignantly.

"Because they were petting you and making too much of you. You won't get
such treatment as that from me."

"I don't expect it," said our hero.

"That's lucky," said Abner Holden, dryly. "It's well that people
shouldn't expect what they are not likely to get."

Here a sense of the ludicrous came over Herbert as he thought of being
Mr. Holden's pet, and he laughed heartily. Not understanding the reason
of his sudden mirth, that gentleman demanded, in a tone of irritation,
"What are you making a fool of yourself about?"

"What am I laughing at?" said Herbert, not liking the form of the
question.

"Yes," snarled Abner.

"The idea of being your pet," explained Herbert, frankly.

Mr. Holden did not appreciate the joke, and said roughly, "You better
shut up, if you know what's best for yourself."

They rode along in silence for a few minutes. Then Abner Holden,
thinking suddenly of the envelope which Dr. Kent had placed in Herbert's
hand at parting, and feeling curious as to its contents, asked:

"What did the doctor give you just as you were starting?"

"It was an envelope."

"I know that; but what was there in it?"

"I haven't looked," said our hero.

He felt a little satisfaction in snubbing Mr. Holden, whom he saw he
would never like.

"Why don't you open it?"

"I didn't think of it before."

"I suppose there is some present inside."

Herbert decided to open the envelope, out of respect for Dr. Kent. On
opening it, he drew out a five-dollar bill, and a few penciled words,
which were as follows:

"DEAR HERBERT: I would gladly give you more if I had the means. I hope
you will use the inclosed money in any way that may be most serviceable
to you. You must write to me often. Be a good boy, as you always have
been; let your aims be noble; try to do right at all hazards, and may
God bless your efforts, and make you a good and true man. Such is the
prayer of your affectionate friend, GEORGE KENT."

Herbert read these lines with emotion, and inwardly resolved that he
would try to carry out the recommendations laid down. His thoughts were
broken in upon by Mr. Holden, whose sharp eyes detected the bank-note.

"There's money in the letter, isn't there?"

"Yes."

"How much?"

"Five dollars."

"Five dollars, hey?" he said. "You'd better give it to me to keep for
you."

"Thank you, Mr. Holden; I can take care of it, myself."

"It isn't a good plan for boys to have so large a sum of money in their
possession," said Abner Holden, who was anxious to secure it himself.

"Why not?" asked Herbert.

"Because they are likely to spend it improperly."

"Dr. Kent didn't seem to think I was likely to do that."

"No; he trusted you too much."

"I hope it won't prove so."

"You'd better keep out of the way of temptation. You might lose it,
besides."

"I don't often lose things."

"Come, boy," said Mr. Holden, getting impatient; "Dr. Kent, no doubt,
intended that I should take care of the money for you. You'd better give
it up without further trouble."

"Why didn't he give it to you, then?" demanded Herbert.

"He supposed you would give it to me."

Mr. Holden's motive for getting the money into his own hands was
twofold. First, he knew that without money Herbert would be more
helpless and more in his power. Secondly, as he had agreed to supply
Herbert with clothing, he thought he might appropriate the money towards
this purpose, and it would be so much of a saving to his own pocket.
Perhaps Herbert suspected some such design. At any rate, he had no
intention of gratifying Mr. Holden by giving up the money.

"Well, are you going to give me the money?" blustered Abner Holden,
taking out his pocketbook, ready to receive it.

"No," said Herbert.

"You'll repent this conduct, young man," said Holden, scowling.

"I don't think I shall," said our hero. "I don't understand why you are
so anxious to get hold of the money."

"It is for your good," said Abner.

"I'd rather keep it," said Herbert.

Abner Holden hardly knew what to do. The money was by this time safely
stowed away in Herbert's pocket, where he could not very well get at
it. However, he had a plan for getting it which he resolved to put into
practice when they stopped for dinner.




CHAPTER VI

ON THE WAY


By the time they had ridden twenty miles both Herbert and Mr. Holden
felt hungry. The fresh air had produced a similar effect upon both. They
approached a broad, low building with a swinging sign and a long piazza
in front, which it was easy to see was a country tavern.

"Do you feel hungry, boy?" inquired Abner Holden.

"Yes, sir," returned our hero.

"So do I. I think I shall get some dinner here. You can get some, too,
if you like."

"Thank you, sir."

"Oh, there's no occasion to thank me," said Mr. Holden, dryly. "I shall
pay for my dinner, and if you want any, you can pay for yours."

Herbert looked surprised. As he had entered Mr. Holden's employ, he
supposed of course that the latter would feel bound to provide for him,
and it certainly seemed mean that he should be compelled to pay for his
own dinner. However, he was beginning to suspect that his new employer
was essentially a mean man.

"How much will it cost?" asked Herbert, at length.

"Thirty-seven cents," was the reply.

It must be remembered that this was in the day of low prices, when gold
was at par, and board could be obtained at first-class city hotels for
two dollars and a half a day, and in country villages at that amount by
the week.

"Thirty-seven cents!" Herbert hardly liked to break in upon his scanty
hoard, but the morning air had sharpened his appetite, and he felt that
he must have something to eat. Besides, he remembered one thing which
fortunately Mr. Holden did not know, that in addition to the five
dollars which Dr. Kent had given him he had the ten dollars sent him
by his uncle, and not only that, but a little loose change which he had
earned.

"Well, are you going to get out?" asked Abner Holden. "It's nothing to
me whether you take dinner or not."

"Yes, I guess I will."

"Very well," said Holden, who had a reason for being pleased with his
decision.

Both went into the tavern. There were two or three loungers on a settle,
who gazed at them curiously. One of them at once appeared to recognize
Abner Holden.

"How dy do, Holden?" he said. "Who've you got with you?"

"A boy I've taken," said Holden, shortly.

"A pretty smart-looking boy. Where'd you pick him up?"

"Over in Waverley. He's got some pretty high notions, but I guess I'll
take 'em out of him in time."

"Yes," chuckled the other; "I warrant you will."

While this conversation was going on Herbert had entered the tavern, but
he could not avoid hearing what was said, including Mr. Holden's reply.
He was not frightened, but inwardly determined that he would do his
duty, and then if Mr. Holden saw fit to impose upon him, he would make
what resistance he was able.

"I wonder what high notions he means," thought our hero. "If he expects
to make a slave of me, he will be mistaken, that's all."

"Sit down there, and I'll go and order dinner," said Mr. Holden,
entering.

Just then, however, the landlord came in and greeted Abner Holden, whom
he appeared to know.

"I want dinner for two, Mr. Robinson," he said.

"For two! You haven't brought your wife along with you, Holden?" he
said, jocosely.

"No, I haven't come across any such lady yet. I've got a boy here who is
bound to me. And hark you, landlord," he added, in a lower voice,
that Herbert might not hear, "he will pay you for his dinner out of a
five-dollar bill which he has with him. YOU NEEDN'T GIVE BACK THE CHANGE
TO HIM, BUT TO ME."

"Yes, I understand," said the landlord, winking.

"I prefer to keep the money for him. He has refused to give it up and
this will give me a chance to get hold of it without any fuss."

"All right."

"If he kept it himself he'd spend it in some improper way."

"Just so. I'll attend to it."

Now our hero was gifted with pretty sharp ears, and he caught enough of
this conversation to understand Mr. Holden's plot, which he straightway
determined should not succeed.

"You shan't take me in this time, Mr. Holden," he thought.

He opened his pocketbook to see if he had enough small change to pay
for his dinner without intrenching upon his bill. There proved to be a
quarter and two half-dimes, amounting, of course, to thirty-five cents.
This would not be quite sufficient.

"I must change the bill somewhere," he said to himself.

Looking out of the tavern window, he saw the village store nearly
opposite. He took his cap and ran over. There was a clerk leaning with
his elbows upon the counter, appearing unoccupied.

It occurred to Herbert that he might want some paper and envelopes. He
inquired the price.

"We sell the paper at a penny a sheet, and the envelopes will cost you
eight cents a package."

"Then you may give me twelve sheets of paper and a package of
envelopes," said Herbert.

The package was done up for him and in payment he tendered the bill.

The clerk gave him back four dollars and eighty cents in change. He
put the money in his pocketbook, and the paper and envelopes in his
jacket-pocket, and returned to the tavern well pleased with his success.
Mr. Holden was in the barroom, taking a glass of "bitters," and had not
noticed the absence of our hero.

Dinner was soon ready.

There was some beefsteak and coffee and a whole apple pie. Herbert
surveyed the viands with satisfaction, having a decidedly good appetite.
He soon found, however, that hungry as he was, he stood a poor chance
with Abner Holden; that gentleman, being a very rapid eater, managed to
appropriate two-thirds of the beefsteak and three-quarters of the
pie. However, the supply being abundant, Herbert succeeded in making
a satisfactory repast, and did not grudge the amount which he knew he
should have to pay for it before leaving.

"Now," said Abner Holden, his eyes twinkling at the thought of our
hero's coming discomfiture, "we'll go and settle our bill."

"Very well," said Herbert, quietly.

They entered the public room and advanced to the bar.

"This boy wants to pay for his dinner, Mr. Robinson," said Abner,
significantly.

"How much will it be?" asked Herbert.

"Thirty-seven cents."

Herbert took out of his vest pocket a quarter, a dime and two cents, and
handed them over.

To say that Abner Holden looked amazed is not sufficient. He looked
disgusted and wronged, and glared at Herbert as if to inquire how he
could have the face to outrage his feelings in that way.

"Ho! ho!" laughed the landlord, who, having no interest in the matter,
was amused at the course affairs had taken.

Herbert suppressed his desire to laugh, and looked as if he had no
knowledge of Mr. Holden's plans.

"Where did you get that money?" growled Abner, with a scowl.

"Out of my vest pocket," said Herbert, innocently.

"I know that, of course, but I thought you had only a bill."

"Oh, I got that changed at the store."

"How dared you go over there without my permission?" roared Abner.

"I didn't think it necessary to ask your permission to go across the
street."

"Well, you know it now. Don't you go there again without my knowledge."

"Very well, sir."

"Did you buy anything at the store?" continued Mr. Holden.

"Yes, sir."

"What was it?"

"Some paper and envelopes."

"Humph!" muttered Abner, discontentedly.

He proceeded to pay his own bill and in a few minutes got into the wagon
and drove off rather sulkily. Herbert saw that Mr. Holden was disturbed
by the failure of his little plan, and felt amused rather than
otherwise. But when he reflected that he was going to live with this
man, and be, to a considerable extent under his control, he felt
inclined to be sad. One thing he resolved that he would not submit to
tyranny. The world was wide, and he felt able to earn his own living.
He would give Mr. Holden a trial, and if he treated him with reasonable
fairness he would remain with him. But he was not going to be any man's
slave.

Meanwhile they were getting over the road, and a few more hours brought
them to their journey's end.

Abner Holden's house stood in considerable need of paint. It had no
great pretensions to architectural beauty, being about as handsome for
a house as Abner Holden was for a man. There was a dilapidated barn, a
little to one side, and the yard was littered up with a broken wagon, a
woodpile and various odds and ends, giving the whole a very untidy look.

"Is this where you live, Mr. Holden?" asked Herbert, looking about him.

"Yes, and I'm glad to get home. Do you know how to unharness a horse?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then jump out and unharness this horse. A man will come for it
to-morrow."

Herbert did as directed. Then he took his little trunk from the wagon,
and went with it to the back door and knocked.




CHAPTER VII

A NEW HOME


The door was opened by an elderly woman, rather stout, who acted as
Abner Holden's housekeeper. Though decidedly homely, she had a pleasant
look, which impressed Herbert favorably. He had feared she might turn
out another edition of Mr. Holden, and with two such persons he felt
that it would be difficult to get along.

"Come right in," said Mrs. Bickford, for that was her name. "Let me help
you with your trunk. You can set it down here for the present."

"Thank you," said Herbert.

"You must be tired," said the housekeeper.

"No, not very," said our hero. "We rode all the way."

"Well, it's tiresome riding, at any rate, when it's such a long
distance. You came from Waverley, Mr. Holden tells me."

"Yes."
