
There was no dilly-dallying. The most serious kind of business impended,
and all were forced to prepare for it. In a twinkling, as it seemed, the
hurry, bustle, and confusion suddenly ceased. Everything settled down
into quiet, and the defenders, with their loaded rifles, calmly awaited
the assault that was soon to be made.

As the Apaches neared the valley, they gradually slackened their speed,
but all reached the margin, from which they could look down upon the
pioneers, with their steeds upon a gallop, and then, without checking
them, branched still further apart, and, speeding down the slope, began
the battle forthwith.

In an instant the sharp crack! crack! of rifles was heard from different
directions, as the Apaches opened fire upon the whites, who showed an
equal readiness in replying. The Indians never allowed their steeds to
rest. They were constantly in motion, back and forth, round and round,
circling here and there, seemingly at times in inextricable confusion,
but with a certain system, as shown in the evolutions of a large
party upon a stage, and with the result of never interfering with one
another's efficiency.

Some of the Apaches, in the very wantonness of their skillful
horsemanship, threw themselves from side to side upon the backs of their
steeds, firing under the neck or belly with as much accuracy as if from
the saddle. None of them were furnished with the regulation saddle;
some had blankets, while the most were mounted bareback. Their skill
was little short of the marvelous. Again and again, one of the red-skins
would make a lunge over the side of his animal, as though he were going
to plunge headlong into the earth; but, catching his toe over the spine
of his horse, he would sustain himself apparently by no other means,
while he kept up his fusilade. When his horse wheeled, so as to expose
the rider to the fire of the whites, the Indian would quickly swing over
the other side, where he would continue the same demonstrations.

Thus it was that within five minutes after the Apaches came down in the
valley, the settlement was surrounded by the several hundred, who
were circling back and forth, and sending in their shots, whenever the
opportunity presented itself.

The wood to which frequent reference has been made, it will be
remembered, was situated some distance from the settlement, and, as Fred
Munson was perched in a tree upon the other side, many of the gyrating
horsemen were frequently shut out from his view by the intervening
trees; but enough was constantly in view to keep his excitement up to
the highest pitch, and to cause him to forget his own prominence as a
target.

As has been already said, the settlers, from behind their intrenchments,
were prompt in returning the fire of their assailants. The effect upon
persons who had never been brought in collision with Indians would have
been to bewilder and terrify them. It is very probable that such was one
of the principal objects of the Apaches in making their attack as they
did; but it failed utterly in that respect. Carefully avoiding any
exposure of themselves, they popped away right and left, the reports of
the rifles mingling together, while the warriors, as they tumbled to the
ground here and there, showed how effectual the defense of the pioneers
was.

The Apaches scarcely expected such a vigorous defense, and, after losing
several of their best men, they widened their circle so as to avoid such
a close range, and fired more seldom, but with greater care.

New Boston was a peculiarly built, or rather laid out, city. If Caleb
Barnwell committed an absurdity in attempting to plant a settlement in
the valley of the Rio Pecos, when the entire surrounding country was
hostile, he showed some wisdom in the manner in which he conducted
matters after the attempt was made. The town was in an irregular circle,
with a grassy court in the centre, in which were pitched their horses.

Knowing how indispensable these animals were to men in such
circumstances, there could be but little doubt that the Apaches would
make a desperate attempt to stampede them, and the whites were therefore
on the look-out for such an effort. Not only Sut Simpson, but Barnwell
and a number of the principal men, held fire after the first repulse, so
as to meet such an essay at the very instant it was attempted.

The Apaches edged away some distance, under the galling fire of the
pioneers, until the watchful hunter saw them hurriedly massing on the
slope above. He knew the meaning of that the moment he perceived the
action.

"Be ready! they're coming for the animals!" he shouted, in a voice so
loud that the words were distinctly heard by Fred Munson from his perch
in the tree.

All those who held empty rifles hastily reloaded them, and the others,
raising the hammers of their weapons, fixed their eyes upon the
hideously painted forms, which resembled so many demons about to sweep
down upon them. There was barely time for preparation, and in another
minute the horde came rushing down the slope, like a mountain torrent,
their objective point being the square where the horses were secured.
Before they could reach them, however, the settlers poured in their most
murderous volleys, bringing many a glaring red-skin to earth, wounding
a number of their animals, and creating such a panic that the foremost
swerved off to the right and dashed up the valley, followed by the
others, while the property of the whites remained uninjured.

The first attack of the Apaches resulted in a repulse, and that, too,
when led by Lone Wolf; but the peril was not past. That war-chief had
learned the situation fully, and there was no danger of his repeating
this blunder. The next time he was sure to succeed.



CHAPTER VII. IN A TREE

All this passed in much less time than has been necessary to describe
it. Not until Fred Munson saw that the Apaches were repulsed did he
reflect upon the startling fact that there was no one among all the
settlers that was placed in as perilous a position as he.

The red-skins were between him and the houses, or fortifications, as
they may be considered. He was alone, and although he had no gun in his
possession, yet it cannot be supposed that his situation would have been
any less dangerous on that account. In the excitement of interest, he
had climbed to the highest attainable portion of the tree, where he not
only had a good view of the thrilling contest going on under his very
eyes, but where the contestants themselves, had they chosen to glance
toward him, could have obtained an equally good view of him. Whether or
not they had done so remained to be seen.

"My stars! I hope they have n't seen me," muttered the terrified lad, as
he began retreating toward the trunk, with the intent of descending to
the ground. "If they have, I'm a goner, that's certain."

The Apaches, although defeated, and driven beyond range of the settlers'
rifles, did not withdraw altogether. Reaching a point several hundred
yards from the houses, they continued moving about on their horses,
as though reconnoitering from that distance. The red-skins did not go
together, as would have seemed natural under circumstances, but kept up
that peculiar restless movement, as though it were impossible for them
to settle down into anything like quiet. This action upon their part
threw a number of the red horsemen among the woods, where Fred was
perched, so that he had every reason for being alarmed.

He was a skillful climber, however, and when he reached the trunk he
moved down it, with the nimbleness of a monkey, taking care, however,
not to be too rapid or sudden, as the movement might attract notice.
Then, too, he had the benefit of a denser vegetable growth, in which he
thought it quite possible to conceal himself even from an Indian passing
beneath.

"If they have n't noticed me," he reflected, as he crouched upon a limb,
and looked and listened, "I've a good chance of keeping out of their
sight altogether. It's a pity I had n't had enough sense to think of all
this before."

He continued creeping down the tree, until he was within twenty feet or
so of the ground, when he paused, deeming it hardly safe to descend to
the solid earth until matters looked a little less threatening. Fred was
in a bad predicament, and he was sorely puzzled to decide what was best
to do. There could be no doubt that numbers of Indians were in the wood
around him, and if he descended to the ground he ran that much more
danger of falling into their hands. He could not avoid a strong
suspicion that he had been seen, and that his movements had been watched
and understood for some time past.

"I should n't think those Apaches would consider a boy like me of much
account," he muttered; "but if they have a chance to grab me, I s'pose
they will. I'm sure I saw Lone Wolf at the head of the attacking party,
and he'll want to pay me up for that big scare I gave him last night."

The afternoon was well advanced, and he finally concluded to stay where
he was, provided the red-skins permitted him to do so; so he crawled
into the place, where he seemed the best protected by the surrounding
vegetation and branches, and, crouching down, he awaited the coming of
darkness with an anxiety which can scarcely be described.

It will be understood that he had come down so low in the tree that he
could see nothing of his friends on the other side of the wood. He
was so near the margin that his view on the right was comparatively
unobstructed. Occasionally he caught sight of a horseman in the
distance, but the majority of the red-skins were in other directions.
Now and then the crack of a rifle broke the stillness, which was
so perfect that he distinctly caught the sound of the hoofs of the
mustangs, as they whirled and spun hither and thither.

When one is placed in such a position as was Fred, his imagination is
sure to be very active, and, time and again, he was sure that he heard
the stealthy tread of a moccasin upon the leaves below. All this,
however, was not imagination; for he had not been on his perch more
than half an hour, when, peering downward through the leaves, he saw the
unmistakable figure of an Indian, gliding along in the stealthy manner
peculiar to that race. The heart of the lad throbbed violently, and he
grasped the limb more tightly, watching every movement of the red-skin.

"He must be looking for me," was his thought. "He saw me in the tree,
and he has now come to kill or take me away."

He was sure that that particular Apache was not Lone Wolf, although he
could not be certain that any advantage was to be reaped from that. The
chief was not likely to be more devoid of anything like mercy than was
the greatest or humblest of his warriors.

The red-skin was on foot, and bore a rifle in his hand. Instead of
the fanciful scalp-lock ornamenting his crown, his black, wiry hair
straggled down around his shoulders, over which was thrown a dirty army
blanket, that had once belonged to the United States government. The
hideous paint upon his face was easily seen from the perch of the
lad, and the red-skin was as repulsive and dreaded an object as can be
imagined.

The scamp was moving along with that stealthy, cat-like tread which is
characteristic of all his race; but although directly under the tree
when first seen by the lad, he did not look up nor act in any way which
would suggest that he suspected the presence of anyone over him. He did
not hesitate in his movement, and thus it was that he was scarcely seen
when he disappeared in the wood beyond, and the boy was alone.

Fred was now fully satisfied that it would not do to leave the tree so
long as a particle of daylight remained. Apaches were too plentiful in
those parts.

"I s'pose they'll hang around till night, though I can't see what
they're going to make by it," said the boy to himself. "They've tried to
clear out Mr. Barnwell and the rest of them, but could n't begin to
do it, and now it won't do them any good to stay here. It'll be pretty
risky for me to try and get into the house after dark, but they know I
am out here and they will be looking for me. And then Mickey--"

At the mention of the Irishman's name, Fred suddenly stopped with a
start, for he was reminded of a fact which had escaped him until that
moment. Mickey O'Rooney had gone out on a little scout of his own, some
hours before, and he had not yet returned, so that his situation, in one
sense, was like his own. But he manifestly had greater advantage, for
he was not only fully armed, but was mounted on one of the fleetest
mustangs of the West; so that, unless he ran into some trap, he need
fear no disturbance from them.

"I only wish I was with him," reflected Fred, "mounted upon Hurricane.
I wouldn't mind a little run into some of these Apaches that think they
are such wonderful riders."

As has been intimated in another place, young Munson had been furnished
with one of the finest of prairie steeds--one whose speed, endurance,
and intelligence was extraordinary. There was naturally a great
attachment between the two, and Fred would have been off most of the
time, skimming over the prairie, had he been allowed to do so, but
Hurricane was in the group in the centre of the settlement, with the
others, which the Indians had tried so hard to stampede, and he was
as difficult to reach, under the circumstances, as were his friends
themselves.



CHAPTER VIII. THE SWOOP OF THE APACHE

The afternoon dragged slowly by with Fred crouching, as he was, in the
top of the tree and waiting for the time to come when he might descend
and make the attempt to rejoin his friends, who could not but be greatly
concerned over his absence. At rare intervals, the spiteful crack of a
rifle reached his ear as before, and he knew that the white and red men
were watching each other, both ready to seize the first opportunity
that might offer for obtaining the slightest advantage. The occasional
clamping of the hoofs of a galloping horse showed, too, that his dreaded
foes were close at hand.

Finally, the sun disappeared, and darkness slowly settled over wood,
forest, and prairie. There was the moon, shining as bright and unclouded
as on the night before; but the shadow was so dense among the trees that
this was of no particular importance, and so soon as night was fairly
come the impatient lad was resolved upon making the attempt to reach his
friends.

No Apaches had been seen beneath the tree since the departure of the
first stealthy visitor, and the hope was quite strong within the lad
that in the hurry and swirl of the fight the red-skins had failed to
note him in his hiding-place. If such were really the case, it would
seem that there was a chance of his passing through the lines without
detection.

"Anyhow, I am going to try it," he muttered, with set teeth, as he
resumed his cautious descent of the tree.

A moment later he found himself upon the nethermost limb, where he
hesitated a few seconds, peering around in the breathless darkness and
listening for anything that might betray the location of his enemies.
The silence of the tomb seemed to have settled upon the earth, and,
hanging by his hands a moment, he let go and dropped lightly to the
ground. As he did so, he purposely sank upon his hands and knees, in the
belief that he was less liable to be seen in that position than in any
other.

The signs continued favorable, and, without any useless waiting, he
turned his face in the direction of New Boston and began stealing
forward, with the care and caution of a veteran courser of the plains.
There was a fluttering hope that, with the coming of night, the
red-skins had departed, but he knew better than to rely upon any such
chance to reach his friends. If they had really gone, he would have
heard something from Sut Simpson.

No more trying ordeal can be imagined than that which Fred endured
when he attempted thus to steal his way through the Apache lines to his
friends. He crept along upon his hands and knees, for he dared not
trust himself in an upright posture, and he studiously avoided all those
places through which the rays of the moonlight made their way. There was
scarcely a minute in which he did not fancy that he heard the stealthy
movement of some one near him, and stopped and lay flat upon his face,
remaining thus until hopeful that it was safe to move forward again. And
this apprehension was not always imaginary. Two separate times the sound
of footsteps were too distinct to be mistaken, and the glimpse obtained
of a shadowy figure, as it flitted across a partially moonlit space, was
equally conclusive.

Almost an hour had passed, when Fred finally found himself on the edge
of the open area which separated the wood from the settlement. Thus far
he had evaded all danger and only a comparatively small space remained
to be passed over in order to reach the haven of safety.

The boy assumed an upright position, and, standing in the shadow of the
wood, debated with himself as to the best means of getting over that
narrow but dangerous neck of territory which still interposed. It would
be useless to attempt to creep over it, for the moon would be sure to
reveal him to the Indians that were lurking near, and it was not likely
that he could advance a dozen yards without detection. If it were
possible, by drawing himself along on his face, to elude the vigilance
of the Apaches, it would be clearly impossible to escape being discerned
by his own friends. At such a time, the entire company would be on the
look-out for just such insidious advances, and the chances were that he
would be taken for a savage and shot by his own friends.

