
"Yes," replied Jerry Muskrat. "Was it fired at you?"

Mrs. Quack nodded and held up one wing. Peter and Jerry could see
that one of the long feathers was missing. "I thought I was flying
high enough to be safe," said she, "but when I reached the Big
River there was a bang from the bushes on the bank, and something
cut that feather out of my wing, and I felt a sharp pain in my side.
It made me feel quite ill for a while, and the place is very sore
now, but I guess I'm lucky that it was no worse. It is very hard
work to know just how far those terrible guns can throw things at
you. Next time I will fly higher."

"Where have you been since you left us?" asked Peter.

"Eight in the middle of the Big River," replied Mrs. Quack. "It
was the only safe place. I didn't dare go near either shore, and
I'm nearly starved. I haven't had a mouthful to eat to-day."

Peter opened his mouth to tell her of the wheat and corn left by
Farmer Brown's boy and then closed it again. He would let her find
it for herself. If he told her about it, she might suspect a trick
and refuse to go near the place. He never had seen any one so
suspicious, not even Old Man Coyote. But he couldn't blame her,
after all she had been through. So he kept still and waited. He
was learning, was Peter Rabbit. He was learning a great deal about
Mrs. Quack.




VIII

MRS. QUACK HAS A GOOD MEAL AND A REST


There's nothing like a stomach full      To make the heart feel
light;      To chase away the clouds of care      And make the
world seem bright.

That's a fact. A full stomach makes the whole world seem different,
brighter, better, and more worth living in. It is the hardest kind
of hard work to be cheerful and see only the bright side of things
when your stomach is empty. But once fill that empty stomach, and
everything is changed. It was just that way with Mrs. Quack. For
days at a time she hadn't had a full stomach because of the hunters
with their terrible guns, and when just before dark that night she
returned to the Smiling Pool, her stomach was quite empty.

"I don't suppose I'll find much to eat here, but a little in peace
and safety is better than a feast with worry and danger," said she,
swimming over to the brown, broken-down bulrushes on one side of
the Smiling Pool and appearing to stand on her head as she plunged
it under water and searched in the mud on the bottom for food.
Peter Rabbit looked over at Jerry Muskrat sitting on the Big Rock,
and Jerry winked. In a minute up bobbed the head of Mrs. Quack,
and there was both a pleased and a worried look on her face. She
had found some of the corn left there by Farmer Brown's boy. At once
she swam out to the middle of the Smiling Pool, looking suspiciously
this way and that way.

"There is corn over there," said she. "Do you know how it came
there?"

"I saw Farmer Brown's boy throwing something over there," replied
Peter. "Didn't we tell you that he would be good to you?"

"Quack, quack, quack! I've seen that kind of kindness too often to
be fooled by it," snapped Mrs. Quack. "He probably saw me leave in
a hurry and put this corn here, hoping that I would come back and
find it and make up my mind to stay here a while. He thinks that
if I do, he'll have a chance to hide near enough to shoot me. I
didn't believe this could be a safe place for me, and now I know
it.  I'll stay here to-night, but to-morrow I'll try to find some
other place. Oh, dear, it's dreadful not to have any place at all
to feel safe in." There were tears in her eyes.

Peter thought of the dear Old Briar-patch and how safe he always felt
there, and he felt a great pity for poor Mrs. Quack, who couldn't
feel safe anywhere. And then right away he grew indignant that she
should be so distrustful of Farmer Brown's boy, though if he had
stopped to think, he would have remembered that once he was just
as distrustful.

"I should think," said Peter with a great deal of dignity, "that
you might at least believe what Jerry Muskrat and I, who live here
all the time, tell you. We ought to know Farmer Brown's boy if any
one does, and we tell you that he won't harm a feather of you."

"He won't get the chance!" snapped Mrs. Quack.

Jerry Muskrat sniffed in disgust. "I don't doubt you have suffered
a lot from men with terrible guns," said he, "but you don't suppose
Peter and I have lived as long as we have without learning a little,
do you? I wouldn't trust many of those two-legged creatures myself,
but Farmer Brown's boy is different. If all of them were like him,
we wouldn't have a thing to fear from them. He has a heart. Yes,
indeed, he has a heart. Now you take my advice and eat whatever he
has put there for you, be thankful, and stop worrying. Peter and
I will keep watch and warn you if there is any danger."

I don't know as even this would have overcome Mrs. Quack's fears
if it hadn't been for the taste of that good corn in her mouth, and
her empty stomach. She couldn't, she just couldn't resist these,
and presently she was back among the rushes, hunting out the corn
and wheat as fast as ever she could. When at last she could eat no
more, she felt so comfortable that somehow the Smiling Pool didn't
seem such a dangerous place after all, and she quite forgot Farmer
Brown's boy. She found a snug hiding-place among the rushes too
far out from the bank for Reddy Fox to surprise her, and then with
a sleepy "Good night" to Jerry and Peter, she tucked her head under
her wing and soon was fast asleep.

Peter Rabbit tiptoed away, and then he hurried lipperty-lipperty-lip
to the dear Old Briar-patch to tell Mrs. Peter all about Mrs. Quack.




IX

PETER RABBIT MAKES AN EARLY CALL


Peter Rabbit was so full of interest in Mrs. Quack and her troubles
that he was back at the Smiling Pool before Mr. Sun had kicked off
his rosy blankets and begun his daily climb up in the blue, blue
sky. You see, he felt that he had heard only a part of Mrs. Quack's
story, and he was dreadfully afraid that she would get away before
he could hear the rest. With the first bit of daylight, Mrs. Quack
swam out from her hiding-place among the brown rushes. It looked
to Peter as if she sat up on the end of her tail as she stretched
her neck and wings just as far as she could, and he wanted to laugh
right out. Then she quickly ducked her head under water two or
three times so that the water rolled down over her back, and again
Peter wanted to laugh. But he didn't. He kept perfectly still. Mrs.
Quack shook herself and then began to carefully dress her feathers.
That is, she carefully put back in place every feather that had
been rumpled up. She took a great deal of time for this, for Mrs.
Quack is very neat and tidy and takes the greatest pride in looking
as fine as she can.

Of course it was very impolite of Peter to watch her make her
toilet, but he didn't think of that. He didn't mean to be impolite.
And then it was so interesting. "Huh!" said he to himself, "I don't
see what any one wants to waste so much time on their clothes for."

You know Peter doesn't waste any time on his clothes. In fact,
he doesn't seem to care a bit how he looks. He hasn't learned yet
that it always pays to be as neat and clean as possible and that
you must think well of yourself if you want others to think well
of you.

When at last Mrs. Quack had taken a final shower bath and appeared
satisfied that she was looking her best, Peter opened his mouth to
ask her the questions he was so full of, but closed it again as he
remembered people are usually better natured when their stomachs
are full, and Mrs. Quack had not yet breakfasted. So he waited as
patiently as he could, which wasn't patiently at all. At last Mrs.
Quack finished her breakfast, and then she had to make her toilet
all over again. Finally Peter hopped to the edge of the bank where
she would see him.

"Good morning, Mrs. Quack," said he very politely. "I hope you had
a good rest and are feeling very well this morning."

"Thank you," replied Mrs. Quack. "I'm feeling as well as could be
expected. In fact, I'm feeling better than I have felt for some
time in spite of the sore place made by that terrible gun yesterday.
You see, I have had a good rest and two square meals, and these
are things I haven't had since goodness knows when.  This is a very
nice place. Let me see, what is it you call it?"

"The Smiling Pool," said Peter.

"That's a good name for it," returned Mrs. Quack. "If only I could
be sure that none of those hunters would find me here, and if only
Mr. Quack were here, I would be content to stay a while." At the
mention of Mr. Quack, the eyes of Mrs.  Quack suddenly filled with
tears. Peter felt tears of sympathy in his own eyes.

"Where is Mr. Quack?" he asked.

"I don't know," sobbed Mrs. Quack. "I wish I did. I haven't seen
him since one of those terrible guns was fired at us over on the
Big River yesterday morning a little while before Little Joe Otter
told me about the Smiling Pool. Ever since we started for our home
in the far North, I have been fearing that something of this kind
might happen. I ought to be on my way there now, but what is the
use without Mr. Quack? Without him, I would be all alone up there
and wouldn't have any home."

"Won't you tell me all that has happened since you started on your
long journey?" asked Peter. "Perhaps some of us can help you."

"I'm afraid you can't," replied Mrs. Quack sadly, "but I'll tell
you all about it so that you may know just how thankful you ought
to feel that you do not have to suffer what some of us do."




X

HOW MR. AND MRS. QUACK STARTED NORTH


Peter Rabbit was eager to help Mrs. Quack in her trouble, though
he hadn't the least idea how he could help and neither had she. How
any one who dislikes water as Peter does could help one who lives
on the water all the time was more than either one of them could
see. And yet without knowing it, Peter WAS helping Mrs.  Quack.
He was giving her his sympathy, and sympathy often helps others
a great deal more than we even guess. It sometimes is a very good
plan to tell your troubles to some one who will listen with sympathy.
It was so with Mrs. Quack.  She had kept her troubles locked in
her own heart so long that it did her good to pour them all out to
Peter.

"Mr. Quack and I spent a very comfortable winter way down in
the sunny Southland," said she with a far-away look. "It was very
warm and nice down there, and there were a great many other Ducks
