Will, who was watching her even more intently than Hester, now began to
sing only for her. He looked directly at her; and a great many emotions
surging in his own soul must have come to her just now, borne on the
words of the old ballad--

    When he was dead and laid in grave,
      Her heart was struck with sorrow.
    O mother, mother, make my bed,
      For I must die to-morrow.

    Farewell, she said, ye virgins all,
      And shun the fault I fell in;
    Henceforth, take warning by the fall
      Of cruel Barbara Allen.

There was almost a note of warning in Will's voice. It died away with a
quaver which might have been a reproach.

Bet roused herself with a shivering sigh. "Eh," she said, "she was a
cruel one. That was beautiful, Hester. Better than a drink of water
when you are thirsty." She raised her hand to wipe away two tears which
had rolled down her cheeks.

"It seems to me," she added, "that there is nought in all the world
like the music of a grand voice like yours, Hester. It's the only
beautiful thing I ha' met--your voice and Will's; they are just grand
and summut to be thanked for. Well, I am obliged to you both; but I
must say 'goodnight' now, for it is time for me to be going."

"No, no--that you won't, honey," said Hester, bustling forward, and
pushing Bet down again on to the three-legged stool. "You're better,
and the ice is broke a bit, and you must just set there in that cosy
corner and tell me your plans. Oh, you need not mind Will; he'll just
smoke his pipe and not listen more than he need to."

"I'll go out if you like," said Will, half rising.

Bet raised her pathetic eyes to his face. "I don't mind you, Will," she
said, simply. Her words sent a thrill through the young fellow's heart.
He did not know that when she began to speak to Hester she almost
forgot his presence.

"Yes, Hester. They ain't much of plans, but such as they be they're
made. Mother will be buried come Saturday, and then the boys and me we
go away. Father have had fair warning, and he knows me. I'll take the
littl'uns and be the best sort of mother I can to them; father shan't
have 'em. He kick'd the Cap'n last week--he shan't never do it no more.
I promised mother, so there's no argufying on that point--the boys and
me we must go."

"But where will you take them, honey? You must find a place where he
can't follow you--he's sartin sure to do his best if he thinks you are
'arning money, and I suppose the littl'uns are insured for--same as
most of the children around."

"Oh, yes," said Bet, with a short, grim laugh; "he have a price on both
their lives--don't let's talk of it. He shan't find 'em--and they shall
live, if only to spite him."

"But where will you take 'em, my dear? He's a bad, cruel man, but he is
a rare and clever one too, and he will outwit a slip of a lass like
you. If he wants the boys he can claim them, I suppose. I'm main sorry
for you, Bet; but I don't see how you are to hide them--I really don't."

"I have promised mother," said Bet; "there is no use argufying on that
point." Then she added, in a softer voice: "I'm going to the Irish
quarter. I know a woman there who'll be a match for father, but I'd
best not say her name, for if he comes questioning it is better no one
should know. Now, I'll say 'good-night' Hester; thank you for bringing
me home. I'm more comforted than I wor."

When Bet rose, Will knocked the ashes out of his pipe. "I'll see you
home, Bet," he said; and the two went out together.

When they got out on to the docks, Will said, half slyly, "The night's
quite fair; will you come with me, Bet, and I'll show you where the
'Good Queen Anne' is lying at anchor, and all as trim as possible,
ready to sail to-morrow night?"

"The 'Good Queen Anne,'" repeated Bet, "that's your ship, ain't it,
Will?"

"Why, of course; didn't you hear me tell Hester? I am rare and lucky, I
can tell you, to have found a berth in her--good pay and good rations,
and a jolly crew, and a fair-spoken captain. It ain't every fellow has
the luck to find a berthlike mine. And I'll be back in the summer, Bet.
It's a short voyage, and everything just to my mind. You'll wish me
luck, won't you, Bet? for the sake of--well, because we used to be
playmates a while back, you mind."

"A good while back," repeated Bet. "Oh, yes, I wish you luck, Will. And
is that the 'Good Queen Anne?' What is the figure at her bows?"

"A girl," said Will, eagerly, "with her arms over her head and a smile
on her lips. Some people say it's a sort of figure of Queen Anne, after
whom the ship is named, but I don't take her to be that; and now in the
moonlight--you can see her well now, Bet, in the moonlight--with the
smile showing upon her lips, she looks like what I take her to be more
than ever."

"And what is that, Will?"

"Hope--aye, lass, a right good hope--and luck to Will Scarlett comes in
the bonny ship." Bet sighed. Will's blue eyes were looking at her in
the moonlight.

"I'll go home now," she said, gently. She sighed again, and half turned
away her head from her companion.

"There's a many people have things to be thankful for," she said,
presently. "I ain't one of them. I think I'll wish you good-night now,
Will. Good-night, and--yes, good luck." She turned away without even
offering her hand, plunging suddenly down a narrow court which would
lead her out into the front of the town nearest to her home.

Will hesitated for a second; then, the blood surging up into his face,
and his heart beating quickly, he ran after her.

"Bet," he cried. "Bet!" He heard her footsteps hurrying faster and
faster on ahead of him. Presently, hearing his step, she began to run.
He raced after her; he was fleeter than she was, and caught her up by
the lamp-post round the corner.

"What did you do that for?" he said to her, almost angrily. "You had no
call to give me the slip in that fashion. I hadn't said my say."

"I wanted to get home," said Bet--"the boys will be waiting for their
supper, and I have nothing more to talk about."

"But I have," said Will, resolutely--"just a few words, Bet; they won't
take long. I made up my mind long ago, only I did not think I'd speak
until I had summut to offer. Now I have nought but the name of an
honest fellow--only that seems better than nothing at all. Bet, will
you wed me if I can manage it afore I sail in the 'Good Queen Anne'?"

Bet looked up with an angry flash in her red-brown eyes.

"Are you mad, Will Scarlet?" she said, "My mother's lying dead, and
your ship sails to-morrow night."

"No matter that. If a parson, or the registry office, or any power on
God's earth, can make us man and wife to-morrow, Bet why shouldn't we
be mated? You have no one in all the world to look after you. There
ain't a braver nor a more lone lass in all Liverpool, and I love you
with all the strength of my heart. Why shouldn't it be better for me to
be your mate than to have no one to take your part, Bet? The voyage
will soon be made, and I'll come back with money in my pocket, and
while I'm away your father cannot do much agin you if you have wed with
me."

All the time Will was talking Bet walked faster and faster. When he had
done speaking, however, she had relaxed her steps. They had reached a
comparatively deserted place, and, to his surprise and ecstasy, Will
felt her lay a timid hand on his arm.

"But I don't love you," she said, sorrowfully.

"You wouldn't want to mate with a girl what didn't love you, Will."

Will caught her hand and held it tightly between both his own.

"There's nought that I mind, except to be a bit of use to you just now,
Bet," he said. "You are the lonest lass in this city, and it would be a
sight better for you to be wed to me. You ain't afeard, are you? I'll
be faithful to you to my dying day, and we have known each other since
we were little tots."

"Yes," said Bet, slowly, "and mother liked you, and you can sing fit to
wile any lass' heart away; but I don't love you, Will, and I swore long
ago that I'd never, never wed."

"You'd never wed?" repeated Will. "There's more lads than me would have
a word to say agin that. You ask twenty honest fellows who has the
straightest step and bonniest face in the town, and they'd say fast
enough it was Bet Granger. You are but joking me when you talk in that
fashion, Bet."

"No, Will, it is true. It's a vow I made, and it's my way not to go
back of things. When I looked at mother, and see'd the way father
treated her, I made up my mind never to wed with none. I'll be no man's
mate, and I'll trust myself to none. Good-night, Will, You mean it
kindly; and I'd like to ask God, if I was sure that He was there at
all, to bless you. Good-night, goodnight."




CHAPTER V.


As Will Scarlett walked home to the small room which he occupied, not
very far from his cousin Hester Wright, he was overtaken by a young
sailor of about his own age, who linked his arm in his and spoke to him
in a half-tipsy, half-jocular voice.

"You was going to give me the slip, Will. And where be you off to at
this hour of night?"

"To bed, and to sleep," said Will, shortly. He was in no mood for his
companion's idle chatter, and resented the firm grip he had taken of
his arm.

"Then it ain't true what I heard," said Isaac Dent. "You're down on
your luck, and a bit crusty; and you wouldn't be that ef the news were
true."

"What news?" said Will "I'm tired, and that's the truth, Dent. I want
to turn in early; for most like I'll be on the briny ocean this time
to-morrow."

"Then you are going in the 'Good Queen Anne.' Never knew such a fellow!
The best ship in the docks, and you to get a berth in her. I wouldn't
be crusty to a less lucky mate if I was in your shoes."

Will sighed. They had come in front of a brilliantly-lighted
public-house, and a flood of gaslight lit up both faces. For a sailor
Will was tall, slenderly built, with dark clustering curling hair, and
very bright, very honest blue eyes. His companion was short and
thick-set--he had a flat head, large ears set rather higher up, and
small cunning eyes. He was not pleasant-looking, and Will, although one
of the most unsuspicious of mortals, regarded him with small favor.

"Come in, and have a parting drink for good luck," said Dent, pointing
to the gaily-lit public house.

Will shook his hand from his arm.

"You know my mind on that point," he said. "We took a voyage together,
so we needn't talk it all out now. Good-night, Dent, I'm off to bed."

But Dent had no idea of letting Will off so easy.

"Look here," he said--"what shall I pay you for that berth of your'n?
It ain't nothing to the cap'n who sails with him, and I wants to get
away. What will you take?"

Will felt his face flushing; then he laughed indignantly.

"What folly you talk, Dent. Even suppose I were willing, you haven't
sixpence--you know you haven't."

"May I go home with you?" said Dent, "and I'll show you what I have.
I'm in real earnest--I want to get away, and I can pay for it. The
'Good Queen Anne' is quite to my mind--time for sailing, length of
voyage--all just what I wants. I'll give you ten pound if you'll drop
that berth of yours in my favor. There--I can't speak fairer than that."

All the time Dent was speaking Will had walked on stoically. There was
not the faintest appearance of wavering about him; but Dent, who was a
shrewd observer of character, and knew this particular young sailor
well, guessed that Will's teeth were set hard, and that there was a
struggle going on in his breast.

"May I come home with you, mate," he said, "just for a bit, to talk the
matter over quiet like? I ha' got ten pound--no matter how and no
matter where--and it's yours just to let me go to sea this week instead
of next. A handy, neat-looking sailor like you, Will, need never be
long out of a berth, and it's vital for me to get away just now. Ten
pound, just to oblige a mate! You won't get such an offer again in a
hurry, Scarlett."

"Stop!" said Will, suddenly. "What child is that? I'll be back with you
in a minute if you'll wait by the corner, Dent, but I must follow up
that littl'un--he have no call to be out at this hour."

Will made a step or two forward, and found himself in the midst of a
small crowd who were admiring the antics of a very small and grotesque
performer. A little boy with reddish hair and blackened face was
turning somersaults with wonderful rapidity in the centre of the
pathway. Another boy, cap in hand, stood by his side. The boy who
performed and the boy who begged both looked audacious and
disreputable; but, owing to their tiny statures, and the cadaverous
whiteness of their faces, there was something pathetic in the
spectacle. The boy who stood with his cap waiting for stray half-pence
or pence to be dropped into it, had large blue eyes, which were turned
with marvelous rapidity, first in the direction of one spectator, then
in that of another. He could pick out the people who were hopeful, and
whose purse-strings were likely to be loosened, with the swiftest of
glances; and his little cap received many doles, considering the nature
of the crowd who looked on.

Dent, who had come up to Will, tossed the boy a half-penny, and then
began to laugh heartily, at the rapid contortions of the little acrobat.

"Stop that!" said Will, angrily.

He stepped into the middle of the crowd, and caught the revolving boy
suddenly by his shoulder.

"You have no call to be out at this hour, Nat--nor you neither, Thady.
What will your sister say when she finds you not in? Bad boys--run home
this minute. This ain't what your mother would have liked; and you know
it."

The boy called Thady, otherwise the captain, raised his blue eyes, now
swimming in tears, to Will's face.

"We was that 'nngry," he said. "And Bet were out. Yer's a lot of
coppers; we'll do now. Come along home, Gen'ral."

The two scampered away, flying with their bare feet along the slippery
streets, and in a moment were out of sight.

Dent stared hard at Will, whose face showed some agitation.

"So those are the two little Granger lads," he said. "Well, I tell you
what-their sister's far and away the handsomest girl in Liverpool."

"She's well enough," said Will, shortly. "The boys had no call to be
out so late--and to-night of all nights. Their mother is lying dead,
and Bet's in trouble. Good-night, Dent. I ha' made up my mind to sail
in the `Good Queen Anne.' I won't trouble you to come home with me,
although I'm obleeged for your offer."

The light was falling on Will's face. Dent looked up at him sharply.

"So Bet Granger's mother is dead," he said. "Well, she's a handsome
lass. I mean to marry her, if I can, arter next voyage."

"Ef you can," said Will.

Dent noticed his violent stand, and then the quick restraint he put
upon himself.

"Yes," repeated Dent. "And her father's willing, for I spoke to him.
I'll marry her arter this voyage, or maybe I'll marry her afore, ef you
don't let me buy your berth from you, Will. Come, shall I go home with
you? Any one with half an eye can see that you have no mind for the
ocean wave just at present. Let's come in, Scarlett--we're close to
your lodgings now--and finger the bit of gold I ha' by me as
comfortable as we please."

"You worry a fellow almost to death," said Will; but he made no further
