mother, why does one have to eat what the cows get?"

"What do you mean, Mux? What are you talking about?" she asked.

"I saw it in my picture book. The leaves the cows get are just the
same as those in the kitchen," he explained none too clearly, but the
mother understood him directly. She remembered how interestedly he had
looked at the cabbage leaves when the girl had brought them home from
market. She also bore in mind a picture in his favorite book, where
a stable boy was shown giving a glossy brown cow splendid green leaves
to eat.

"So you still have the cabbage in your head, Mux?" said the mother.
"You must not be dissatisfied when there are so many poor children who
have to go hungry. While you get bread and good vegetables, they may
be suffering."

"Oh, can't we send them the rest of the cabbage?" Mux quickly suggested.

"Come and work on the embroidery I have started for you, Mux. We shall
see who can beat to-day. Perhaps that will clear away your thoughts
about the cabbage. Come and sit beside me, Mux."

The mother put a little chair beside hers and placed the work in the
boy's nimble fingers. Now a race with stitches began, and in his zeal
to beat his mother he at last forgot the subject that had troubled him
so much.

The late evening had come and the children's work for school was done.
Mrs. Halm put the big mending basket away and took up her knitting.
The time had come, when, clustering eagerly about their mother, the
children told her all the troubles and joys of the day.

It was the hardest hour of the day for Mux, for it was his bedtime.
His mother always took him by the hand, to lead him to bed, before she
began to talk with the three elder children. Every evening he put up
a fight, for the wily youngster always thought that by obstinate
resistance he could break the rule. His mother, however, knew well
that his success would only result in dreadful yawns and heavy eyes.

This evening he found himself ready for bed before he had had time to
prepare for his fight. His mother seemed anxious to have him in bed
punctually that night. The boy was always reconciled to his fate when
she sat down a moment beside his bed to hear of anything that might
be troubling him. Mux, knowing that all conversation was irrevocably
closed after his prayers were said, would try every night to prolong
this period.

After Mux had climbed into bed, he said thoughtfully: "Don't you think,
mother, that if people planted cherries where cabbage now grows
everybody could eat cherries instead of cabbage?"

"We simply have to stop now, Mux," Mrs. Halm replied to his
astonishment, for he had hoped to start a long conversation.

"Well, Mux, you don't seem to be able to get over the cabbage to-day.
Go to sleep, for you have talked enough about it."

Mux knew then that nothing could be done that day, After his evening
prayer and a kiss from his mother, he lay down and was fast asleep
before his mother had even shut the door.

Agnes had just finished her last task and was throwing her books into
a drawer, each more violently than the other. She was still terribly
excited, and as soon as her mother came back to the room, she burst
forth: "Oh, mother, if I am not allowed to study music any more, I
would rather stop learning anything. Why can't I become a servant girl?
I could do the work well enough. As soon as I have earned enough money,
I'll buy a harp and then I can wander from house to house, singing and
playing. I can easily live like that. Nobody needs to be a dressmaker.
People can wear petticoats and jackets. That is enough, and those can
be woven. All other children are better off than we are. They can learn
what they please and we can't learn anything!" An outburst of tears
choked all further words.

During her sister's speech Nika had been quietly drawing, but she was
holding her head lower and lower over her work without once looking
up. She continued her studies, but her eyes seemed to be filling.
Pushing her work away, she held her handkerchief before her face.

"Oh, children," said the mother, looking sadly at them, "do not be so
desperate right away. You know that your good is my good as well, and
that I am doing and shall keep on doing everything in my power to
fulfill your ambitions. It would be my happiest joy to have your talents
developed, so that you could devote all your lives to music and
painting. If we should find it impossible, however, dear children, we
must firmly believe that it would not have been for the best, had we
succeeded, for God alone knows which way to lead us.

"Do not lose your confidence in a kind Father in Heaven, for that is
our greatest consolation. He won't forget us, if we do not forget Him,
and we must remember that He can see further than we can, for He knows
why and where He is leading us. We cannot look into the future, but
later we shall understand it all and realize why we had to bear our
troubles. Out of them will come the greatest blessings."

"Now let us be happy again and let us sing a song," said Dino, who
loved to be gay and who liked to see everyone about him merry, too.

"Let us sing:

  If winter's storms are wild and long
  We know that spring is coming.
  To Agnes, whom I hear rebel,
  This consolation I here tell."

"Yes, Dino, it is easy enough for you to laugh," Agnes exclaimed. "You
would probably whistle another tune if you had to become a tailor. But
you can learn and study everything you want to."

"I shall certainly not study everything," Dino informed her. "But your
singing is much nicer than your arguing, Agnes, so please begin, and
if you don't like my song, you can start another."

"We shall all sing together later on, children," said the mother. "I
have to speak to you, too, Dino. I am troubled about your cough and
your health. I have looked about for quite a while to find a suitable
place in the country where I could send you. Of course, there are
plenty of places, but I want you to go into some modest house where
you can be looked after. I found a notice in the paper to-day which
might be just what I am looking for. Read it yourself, Dino."

Dino began to read. "Yes, yes, mother, I must go there," he said,
shaking with merriment. "I must go to Martha in Iller-Stream. I am
sure that it is very cosy in Martha Wolf's house, where everything is
so neat and the covers are so fresh."

The sisters now wanted also to see the notice that made Dino laugh so
heartily. He read the paragraph aloud about Martha Wolf in Iller-Stream
and they all agreed that it would be pleasant there. The mother decided
to write to the woman at once and to take Dino there as soon as
possible.

"Now we shall sing a song to end the day," she said, sitting down at
the old piano. Every day the children sang an evening song to her
accompaniment. Opening the book she herself started and the three
children took up the song with their pure, fresh voices:

  When bowed with grief,
  Go seek relief
  Of God, our Lord above.


UP IN THE TOP STORY

  Thy need has grown,
  When left alone,
  For great and helping love.
  Before thou'st said,
  Before thou'st prayed,
  He knows thy inmost need.
  And by His care,
  His love so rare,
  From sorrow thou art freed.




CHAPTER III

NEW APPEARANCES IN ILLER-STREAM



In the Director's house in Iller-Stream reigned great excitement. The
day had come when the two ladies from town were expected to arrive for
their lengthy stay. To celebrate the coming of his guests, the master
of the house had ordered a festive dinner for the middle of the day.
He had been longing for this day, so was in a splendid humor. It was
very important for him to start on his journey right away, and he had
waited only to be able formally to receive his visitors. Also he had
promised his cousin to give the reins of the household into her hands
himself, after which event he had planned to start on his journey.

To Cornelli the preparations for the arrival of the new members of the
household seemed very annoying, everything being different from usual.
She commonly very much enjoyed the prospect of company, for on such
occasions she paid frequent visits to the kitchen, where Esther was
always busy cooking.

As soon as Cornelli appeared in the doorway, Esther would call to her:
"Come and see which you like best, Cornelli; I am sure they are not
so bad." A small yellow apple tart and a round purple plum cake were
ready for the child to taste, for her visit had been anticipated.
Cornelli always assured the cook that the apple tarts were excellent
and the plum cakes even better.

Then Cornelli would go into the pantry, where Miss Mina was fixing
fruit on the crystal platters. Here many a raisin and almond would
drop beside the plate, and from there find its way into Cornelli's
pocket. It was pleasant to have a supply whenever she felt like eating.
The housekeeper dropped many nuts on purpose, for she did not want to
be less sought after than her rival in the kitchen.

To-day Esther was flying around the kitchen violently rattling her
pots and pans, and when Cornelli appeared, to see what was going on,
the cook called to her: "Off with you! I have nothing for you here
to-day. The ladies from town must not think that they have to show me
how to cook a good dinner. I'll show them. Go away and make room here
for me. Make room, Cornelli! I have to fix the vegetables."

Cornelli ran to the pantry.

Mina was just building up a splendid pile of cookies and almond rings.
"Don't come rushing in like that, or it will all tumble down," she
objected. "Don't come so near to the table; this plate is all ready
and nothing must be missing from it. I won't have it said that one can
see there is no mistress in this house, and that nobody here knows how
to set a table."

"If you are all so stingy to-day, I won't bother you any more," said
Cornelli, and with these words she turned around and marched indignantly
out of the house.

That moment, hearing the sound of approaching wheels, and looking down
the road through the open place in front of the house, she spied the
expected carriage with two ladies sitting in it.

"Matthew, Matthew," she called out, in the direction of the large
stable and the barn. These lay a little distance from the house, and
were hidden by trees.

Matthew was the gardener who looked after the horses, and had also to
superintend all the work done by his assistant in the garden and the
stable. He was Cornelli's special friend, whom she had known ever since
she could remember, for he had served her grandfather.

He now came from the stable and mysteriously beckoned to her: "Come
here quickly, run fast!" he said. "We'll still get to the carriage in
time. Only come for a moment."

Cornelli ran to him, and looking into the stable, saw lying on soft
fresh hay a tiny, snow-white kid. It looked like a toy, but was really
alive.

"Oh, where did it come from, Matthew? Oh, how cunning it is! The white
fine fur is just like silk! Can it walk alone? Can it stand, too, if
it wants to? Oh, just see how friendly it is and how it is rubbing its
little head against me."

"Yes, but come, now; the carriage is driving up," Matthew urged. "Come
quickly, you can see it every day. Just think! It was only born to-day."

The carriage had just driven into the court and Matthew was there the
moment the horses stopped. The Director was there, too; not to lose
any time and yet not be tardy, he had put a watcher at the door to let
him know when the carriage was approaching. The Director was very
polite and lifted his cousin out of the carriage, greeting her heartily.
Then he helped Miss Grideelen to dismount, thanking her warmly for
coming. He told her how glad he was that she had been willing to follow
his cousin into this solitude, for otherwise it would have worried him
to leave her alone so long. He appreciated their great sacrifice in
coming and he hoped that his trip, which was very urgent, would not
keep him away too long.

"Where is your daughter, Frederick?" asked Miss Dorner now.

The Director glanced about.

"I saw her just a moment ago. Where are you, Cornelli?" he called
towards the house.

"Here I am!" It sounded from very near, for Cornelli had hidden behind
her father, so as to inspect the new arrivals without being seen
herself.

"Come forward and speak to your cousin and to Miss Grideelen!" ordered
Mr. Hellmut.

Cornelli gave her hand first to her relative and then to the other
lady, saying to each: "How do you do?"

"You can call me cousin, and this lady is called Miss Grideelen," said
the cousin, hoping that the child would repeat her greeting and would
call her and her friend by the names she was just told to use in
speaking to them. But the child did not say another word.

The Director now turned towards the carriage, giving Matthew
instructions for the horses. Then everybody stepped into the house and
soon the whole company sat down at the richly laden dinner table. Miss
Mina earned many praises for the deliciously planned meal. When the
afternoon came the host took the ladies around his place, for his
cousin was anxious to become acquainted with everything she had to
take care of.

"Oh, what an abundance of fruit!" Miss Grideelen exclaimed over and
over again. "How many cherry trees and what enormous apple trees! Oh,
what a row of pear trees! You must be able to fill your bins with fruit
in the autumn, Mr. Hellmut! Where do you have room for it all?"

"I do not know about it; my servants take care of that, for I have no
time."

"It is a great shame, Frederick, that you do not have half a dozen
children. They would help to look after these matters," the cousin
remarked. "By the way, I wonder where your child is. She does not seem
to be very sociable."

"I do not know where she is," replied Mr. Hellmut. "I am generally at
work about this time and Mina probably knows what she is doing. Perhaps
she is busy with her teacher. Cornelli has been alone so much that she
