considerable size, and afforded a delicious shade. At a short
distance behind the house were the houses of the men, and the
corrals, or enclosures, for the cattle.

The interior was handsomely furnished in the European style, except
that the floors were uncarpeted, and were composed of polished
boards. Everywhere were signs that the proprietor was a prosperous
and wealthy man. Mr. Thompson had only one son, a lad of about the
same age as Charles Hardy. To his care Mrs. Thompson now assigned
the boys, while she conducted Mrs. Hardy and her daughters to their
rooms.

In half an hour the party reassembled at dinner, to which they all
did ample justice, for their long row and ride had given them the
keenest of appetites. They were waited upon by an Italian
man-servant; and Mrs. Thompson said that there were a good many of
this nation in Buenos Ayres, and that, although they were not
considered good hands for rough work, they made excellent servants
many of them having been waiters in hotels or stewards on board
ship before coming out.

During dinner the conversation turned chiefly upon English friends
and affairs, and upon the events of the voyage. After it was over
George Thompson proposed to the boys to take a stroll round the
place before it became dark. The gentlemen lit their cigars and
took their seats under the veranda; and the two ladies, with Maud
and Ethel, went out into the garden. The conversation of Mr. Hardy
and his friend turned, of course, upon the country, its position
and prospects, and upon the advantage which the various districts
offered to newcomers. Presently the dusk came on, followed rapidly
by darkness, and in half an hour Ethel came to summon them to tea.
The boys had already come in, and were full of delight at the
immense herds of cattle they had seen. As they sat down to the
tea-table, covered with delicate English china, with a kettle over
a spirit-lamp in the center, and lit with the subdued light of two
shaded moderator lamps, Maud said, "It is not one bit like what I
expected, papa, after all you have told us about hardships and
working; it seems just like England, except the trees and flowers
and butterflies."

"Do not be afraid, Maud," her father said, laughing--for her voice
had a tinge of disappointment in it--"you won't be cheated out of
your hardship and your work, I promise you. Mrs. Thompson will tell
you that it was a very different sort of place when she first came
here."

"Yes, indeed," Mrs. Thompson said, smiling; "this was considered a
very lonely place when we first settled here. We had a little hut
with two rooms, and it was more than six months before I could get
a woman servant to come out, and then it was only one of our
shepherds' wives, who knew nothing of cooking, and who was only
useful in drawing the water and sweeping the floors. In time the
country became more settled, and there are stations now sixty or
seventy miles beyond us."

The next week was spent in riding over the estate, which consisted
of four square leagues--that is to say, was six miles each way--and
in examining the arrangements of the enclosures for the cattle. At
the end of that time Mr. Hardy started on a tour of inspection
through the provinces most likely to suit, provided with numerous
letters of introduction from his host. While he was away the boys
were to assist upon the estate, and to accustom themselves to the
work and duties of the life they were to lead. Into this they
entered with the greatest zest, and were in the saddle from morning
till night, getting more and more sunburnt from constant exposure,
until, as Mr. Thompson told them, they looked like two young
gauchos. The gauchos are the natives of the country. They are
fine-looking men, with Spanish faces. Their dress is very
picturesque. They wear loose calzoncillas or drawers, worked and
fringed round the bottom. Above this is a sort of shawl, so
arranged that it has the effect of very loose trousers. These
shawls are generally of bright colors, woven in stripes, and
sometimes of black cloth edged with scarlet. The white calzoncillas
show below this garment, and above a colored flannel shirt is worn.
The boots are long and are made of undressed leather. They wear a
broad leathern belt, with pockets in it; in this a knife, too, is
always stuck. Upon _fete_ days they come out with gay silver
ornaments upon themselves and their horse-trappings. Their saddles
are very clumsy and heavy, and are seldom used by Europeans, who,
as Mr. Hardy had done, generally bring English saddles from home.
After an absence of a month Mr. Hardy returned with the welcome
news that he had made his choice, and had bought at the public
auction a tract of four square leagues, upon a river some twenty
miles to the south of the town of Rosario, and consequently only a
few days' journey from Buenos Ayres. Mr. Thompson looked a little
grave when he heard the location of the property, but he only said
that he was very glad that his friend had fixed upon a spot which
would make it easy for the families to see something of each other.
After the first greetings were over Mr. Hardy proceeded to satisfy
the curiosity of his hearers as to the new property.

"It is six miles square," he said, "that is, about twenty-five
thousand acres, and I bought it for about sixpence an acre. There
is a good-sized stream runs through it; there are a good many
trees, considering that it is out on the Pampas; there are several
elevations which give a fine view over the plain, and upon one of
these our future home will stand. A small stream falls into the
larger one, and will, I think, be useful. There is an abundance of
game; ducks, geese, and swans swarm upon the river. I saw a good
many ostriches out on the plains. And, lastly, the soil appears to
be excellent. A great point is, that it is only distant twenty
miles from Rosario, a most rising town; so that the value of the
land is sure to increase yearly, as new settlers come around us."

"That is a most important point," Mr. Thompson said. "Rosario is
the most rising town in the country, and the land around it is
certain to be very much sought after in a few years."

"Are there any settlements near, Frank?" Mrs. Hardy asked.

"The next plot to ours belongs to three young Englishmen, and the
ground between us and Rosario is also principally occupied by
English; so that we shall have neighbors near, and I do not suppose
that it will be long before we have them all round us."

"If the advantages of the place are so great, Frank, how is it that
you have got it so very cheaply? I understood from Mr. Thompson
that land in a rising neighborhood, and that was likely to increase
in value, was worth two or three shillings, or even more, an acre."

Mr. Hardy hesitated. "Well, Clara, the land is at present upon the
extreme verge of the settlements, and the Indians are apt sometimes
to be a little troublesome, and to drive off a few horses or
cattle. No doubt the thing has been exaggerated; still there is
something in it, and the consequence is, people are rather afraid
to bid, and I have got this splendid tract of land for about
twenty-five hundred dollars; and, not improbably, in ten years it
may be worth ten times as much."

"A great proportion of these Indian tales are built up upon very
small foundations," Mr. Thompson said cheeringly; and Mrs. Hardy's
face, which had been a little serious, cleared up again, and in
listening to her husband's account of his travels, she forgot all
about the Indians. The boys, however, by no means did so; and as
they were going to bed Charley said: "I think there is some chance
of a row with the Indians, Hubert, for I noticed that Mr. Thompson
looked grave when papa first said where he had bought the land.
Depend upon it, we shall have some fun with them after all." They
would have thought it still more likely had they heard the
conversation between their father and Mr. Thompson after the ladies
had gone to bed.

"Why, my dear Hardy, how came you, with a wife and family, to think
of buying land so exposed to the Indian attacks? Every season, when
they come down, they sweep off the horses and cattle from the
outlying settlements, and murder the people if they get a chance. I
look upon it as madness."

"There is a good deal in what you say, Thompson, and I thought the
whole matter over before I bought it, There is a risk--a great
risk, if you like; but I hear the Indians seldom attack the houses
of the settlers if they are well prepared and armed. They do
occasionally, but very seldom. I shall be well prepared and well
armed, and have therefore no fear at all for our personal safety.
As to our animals, we must protect them as well as we can, and take
our chance. It is only for two or three years at most. After that
we shall have settlements beyond and around us; and if emigration
keeps on, as I anticipate, and if, as I believe, Rosario is to
become a very large and important place, our land will eventually
be worth five dollars an acre, at the very lowest. I shall take
care not to invest my whole capital in animals, so that I cannot be
ruined in one blow. I think that at the end of five years you will
agree with me that I have done wisely."

"I have no doubt that your property will increase very much in
value, as you say, Hardy, and that in the long run your speculation
will be a very successful one; but it is a terrible risk, I think."

"I do not think so, Thompson. We shall be a pretty strong party: we
shall have certainly two men besides ourselves. The boys could
bring down their man at three hundred yards, and I should do
considerable execution among a body of Indians at six or seven; so
I have no fear--not the least in the world."

In another two days Mr. Hardy and the boys, accompanied by Mr.
Thompson, went down to Buenos Ayres, and took up their quarters at
the hotel for a night. At parting, Mr. Thompson presented them with
a couple of fine dogs, which he had bred from English mastiffs: Mr.
Hardy had brought a brace of fine retrievers with him. Then, with a
hearty adieu and much hand-shaking, they said "Good-by" as the
steamer moved off from the shore. The heavy luggage was to follow
in a sailing vessel upon the following day.




CHAPTER IV.

THE PAMPAS.


The voyage up the river Parana was marked by no particular
incident. The distance to Rosario from Buenos Ayres is about two
hundred and fifty miles, which was performed by the steamer in
about a day and a half. The river is nearly twenty miles in
breadth, and is completely studded by islands. The scenery is flat
and uninteresting, and the banks but poorly wooded. Our travelers
were therefore glad when they arrived at Rosario. The boys were
disappointed at the aspect of the town, which, although a rising
place, contained under a thousand inhabitants, and looked miserably
poor and squalid after Buenos Ayres. Here they were met by a
gentleman to whom Mr. Thompson had introduced Mr. Hardy, and with
whom he had stayed on his first visit to Rosario. He had brought
horses for themselves, and bullock carts for their luggage.

"What! are these your boys, Mr. Hardy? I had not expected to have
seen such big fellows. Why, they will be men in no time."

Charley and Hubert deserved Mr. Percy's commendation. They were now
sixteen and fifteen years old respectively, and were remarkably
strong, well-grown lads, looking at least a year older than they
really were. In a few minutes the luggage was packed in two bullock
carts, and they were on their way out to Mr. Percy's station, which
was about halfway to the camp of Mr. Hardy. The word camp in the
pampas means station or property; it is a corruption of the Spanish
word _campos_, literally plains or meadows.

Here they found that Mr. Percy had most satisfactorily performed
the commission with which Mr. Hardy had entrusted him. He had
bought a couple of the rough country bullock carts, three pair of
oxen accustomed to the yoke, half a dozen riding horses, two milch
cows, and a score of sheep and cattle to supply the larder. He had
hired four men--a stock-keeper named Lopez, who was called the
capitaz or head man, a tall, swarthy fellow, whose father was a
Spaniard, and his mother a native woman; two laborers, the one a
German, called Hans, who had been some time in the colony, the
other an Irishman, Terence Kelly, whose face the boys remembered at
once, as having come out in the same ship with themselves. The last
man was an American, one of those wandering fellows who are never
contented to remain anywhere, but are always pushing on, as if they
thought that the further they went the better they should fare. He
was engaged as carpenter and useful man, and there were few things
to which he could not turn his hand. Mr. Hardy was pleased with
their appearance; they were all powerful men, accustomed to work.
Their clothes were of the roughest and most miscellaneous kind, a
mixture of European and Indian garb, with the exception of Terence,
who still clung to the long blue-tailed coat and brass buttons of
the "ould country."

They waited the next day at Mr. Percy's station, and started the
next morning before daylight, as they had still ten miles to
travel, and were desirous of getting as early to the ground as
possible.

The boys were in the highest spirits at being at last really out
upon the pampas, and as day fairly broke they had a hearty laugh at
the appearance of their cavalcade. There was no road or track of
any kind, and consequently, instead of following in a file, as they
would have done in any other country, the party straggled along in
a confused body. First came the animals--the sheep, bullocks, and
cows. Behind these rode Lopez, in, his gaucho dress, and a long
whip in his hand, which he cracked from time to time, with a report
like that of a pistol--not that there was any difficulty in driving
the animals at a pace sufficient to keep well ahead of the bullock
carts, for the sheep of the pampas are very much more active beasts
than their English relations. Accustomed to feed on the open
plains, they travel over large extent of ground, and their ordinary
pace is four miles an hour. When frightened, they can go for many
miles at a speed which will tax a good horse to keep up with. The
first bullock cart was driven by Hans, who sat upon the top of a
heap of baggage, his head covered with a very old and battered
Panama hat, through several broad holes in which his red hair
bristled out in a most comic fashion, and over his blue flannel
shirt a large red beard flowed almost to his waist. Terence was
walking by the side of the second cart in corduroy breeches and
gaiters and blue coat, with a high black hat, battered and bruised
out of all shape, on his head. In his hand he held a favorite
shillalah, which he had brought with him from his native land, and
with the end of which he occasionally poked the ribs of the oxen,
with many Irish ejaculations, which no doubt alarmed the animals
not a little. The Yankee rode sometimes near one, sometimes by
another, seldom exchanging a word with any one. He wore a fur cap
made of fox's skin; a faded blanket, with a hole cut in the middle
for the head to go through, fell from his shoulders to his knees.
He and Lopez each led a couple of spare horses. The mastiffs
trotted along by the horses, and the two fine retrievers, Dash and
Flirt, galloped about over the plains. The plain across which they
were traveling was a flat, broken only by slight swells, and a tree
here and there; and the young Hardys wondered not a little how
Lopez, who acted as guide, knew the direction he was to take.

After three hours' riding Lopez pointed to a rather larger clump of
trees than usual in the distance, and said, "That is the camp."

"Hurrah," shouted the boys. "May we ride on, papa?"

"Yes, boys, I will ride on with you." And off they set, leaving
their party to follow quietly.

"Mind how you gallop, boys; the ground is honeycombed with
armadillo holes, and if your horse treads in one you will go over
his head."

"I don't think that I should do that," Charley, who had a more than
sufficiently good opinion of himself, said; "I can stick on pretty
tightly, and--" he had not time to finish his sentence, for his
horse suddenly seemed to go down on his head, and Charley was sent
flying two or three yards through the air, descending with a heavy
thud upon the soft ground.

He was up in a moment, unhurt, except for a knock on the eye
against his gun, which he was carrying before him; and after a
minute's rueful look he joined heartily in the shouts of laughter
of his father and brother at his expense, "Ah, Charley, brag is a
good dog, but holdfast is a better. I never saw a more literal
proof of the saying. There, jump up again, and I need not say look
out for holes."

They were soon off again, but this time at a more moderate pace.
This fall was not, by a very long way, the only one which they had
before they had been six months upon the plains; for the armadillos
were most abundant, and in the long grass it was impossible to see
their holes. In addition to the armadillos, the ground is in many
paces honeycombed by the bischachas, which somewhat in size and
appearance resemble rabbits, and by a little burrowing owl.

The Hardys soon crossed a little stream, running east to fall into
the main stream, which formed the boundary of the property upon
that side; and Mr. Hardy told the boys that they were now upon
their own land. There was another hurrah, and then, regardless of
the risk of falls, they dashed up to the little clump of trees,
which stood upon slightly rising ground. Here they drew rein, and
looked round upon the country which was to be their home. As far as
the eye could reach a flat plain, with a few slight elevations and
some half-dozen trees, extended. The grass was a brilliant green,
