curiosity prompted him to look under the platform outside of the boat.

The pocketbook was there!

In a space between the planks, a foot above the surface of the
water, and the same distance from the side, the pocketbook was thrust
in. It could not be seen from the inside of the boat, nor from the
platform; and it could not have got there of itself.

Lawry's face turned red, and his heart bounded with emotion, for the
situation of the pocketbook pointed to but one conclusion. It had
been placed there by his father, who had evidently taken it from the
pocket of the coat, and concealed it, either before or after the
garment had fallen into the water. He was appalled and horrified at
the discovery. He knew that his father was discontented with his lot;
that he was indolent and thriftless; but he did not think him capable
of committing a crime.

He reached under the platform, and took the pocketbook from its
hiding-place. It was perfectly dry; it had not been in the water.
John Wilford had probably taken it from the coat pocket, and after
thrusting it into the aperture beneath the drop, had let the platform
fall into the water for the purpose of dislodging the coat, and
making it appear that the money had been lost in the lake.

The pocketbook seemed to burn in Lawry's fingers, and he returned it
to the place where he had found it; for he was confused, and did not
know what to do. He stood, with flushed face and beating heart, on
the shore, considering what course he should take. He could not think
of exposing his father's crime, on the one hand, or of permitting him
to retain the money, on the other.

After long and painful deliberation, he decided to take the
pocketbook, follow Mr. Randall, and return it to him, telling him
that he had found it under the drop of the boat. He was about to
adopt this course when his father came out of the house, and walked
down to the ferry-boat.

"Not gone yet?" said Mr. Wilford.

"No, sir; that money has troubled me so much that I could not go,"
replied Lawry.

"What's the use of bothering your head about that any longer?" added
the father petulantly.

"It troubles me terribly."

"Let it go; it can't be found, and that's the end of it."

"But it can be found."

"Why don't you find it, then?"

"I have found it, father!"

"What!"

"It's in a crack under the platform," replied Lawry.

"You don't mean so!" exclaimed the ferryman.

"It's no use to talk round the barn, father; the pocket-book is just
where you put it."

"Where I put it? What do you mean, Lawry?"

"There it is in the crack under the drop, a foot above the water. It
did not wash in there of itself. Oh, father!"

Lawry, unable longer to control his feelings, burst into tears.

"What are you crying about, Lawry? Do you think I hid the pocketbook?"

"I know you did, father," sobbed Lawry.

"Do you accuse me of stealing?" demanded Mr. Wilford, with a weak
show of indignation.

"I don't accuse you of anything, father; but there it is."

"You mean to say that I stole it?"

"Oh, father!"

"Stop your whining, Lawry! What possessed you to poke round after
what did not concern you? Now, shut up, and go off about your
business."

"You will not keep it, father?"

"I haven't got it. If you have found it, I suppose there is time
enough to think what is best to be done."

"I don't want any time to think of it," replied Lawry; and before
his father could prevent him, he took the pocketbook from its place
of concealment.

"What are you going to do with it?" demanded Mr. Wilford.

"I'm going to find Mr. Randall, and give it back to him, as quick as
I can."

"What's the use of doing that?"

"Because it's the right way to do."

"That isn't the way to get rich."

"But it's the way to keep honest."

"Give it to me, Lawry."

"What are you going to do with it, father?"

"That's my business."

"I shall give it back to the owner."

"No, you won't, Lawry. Do you want to get me into trouble--to have
me sent to jail?"

"If I give it back to Mr. Randall, there will be no trouble."

"Lawry, I've been poor and honest long enough. I'm going to do as
other men do. I'm going to get rich."

"By keeping this money?" exclaimed the son.

"You needn't talk any more about it; I put the money where you found
it."

"I know you did."

"Give it to me."

"I will not, father, if you mean to keep it."

"I do mean to keep it. Do you think I have run all this risk for
nothing? Give me the pocketbook."

"Don't think of such a thing as keeping it, father," pleaded Lawry.

"I'm going to be rich," replied the father doggedly.

"You know what mother said about making haste to be rich: 'Haste
makes waste.'"

"It will make waste if you don't give me the pocket-book."

"Mr. Randall will not be satisfied till he gets his money, and you
will certainly be found out."

"No, I shall not be found out. I'll go to New York and change off
the money this very night."

"But only think of it, father. You will be a thief. You never will
have a moment's peace as long as you live."

"I never did have, and I shall not be any worse off," said Mr.
Wilford coldly. "There comes your steamer. She hasn't got any pilot
on board; I know by the way she steers. You had better go and see to
her, for she is running right for the Goblins."

Lawry glanced at the _Woodville_, as she appeared rounding a
point, two miles distant.

"If you will go and find Mr. Randall, I will give you the
pocketbook, father," replied Lawry.

"Well, I guess you are right, Lawry, and I'll do it."

"He has gone up to the village," added Lawry, as he handed the money
to his father.




CHAPTER V

HASTE AND WASTE


Lawry, satisfied that his father had come to his senses, and would
restore the pocketbook to Mr. Randall, hastened into the boat, and
pulled toward the _Woodville_. He was afraid Mr. Sherwood had
been too venturesome in attempting to pilot the little steamer in
waters with which he was entirely unfamiliar; but he hoped for the
best, and rowed as hard as he could, in order to give him timely
warning of the perils which lay in the path of the beautiful craft.

About half a mile above the landing at Port Rock there was a
dangerous ledge, called the Goblins, some of whose sharp points were
within a foot of the surface of the water when the lake was low. They
were some distance from the usual track of steamers, and there was no
buoy, or other mark, on them. The _Woodville_ was headed toward
the rocks, as the ferryman had said, and it was impossible for Lawry
to get within hailing distance of her before she reached them. He
pulled with all his strength, and had hoped to overhaul her in season
to avert a catastrophe.

Occasionally, as he rowed, he looked behind him to observe the
course of the steamer. She was almost up to the Goblins, while he was
too far off to make himself heard in her wheel-house. He was appalled
at her danger, and the cold sweat stood on his brow, as he saw her
hastening to certain destruction. He could no longer hope to reach
her, and he ceased rowing.

Standing up in his boat, he waved his hat, and made other signs to
warn the imprudent pilot of his danger. With one of the oars he tried
to signify to him that he must keep off; but no notice was taken of
his warning. On the forward deck of the little craft stood three
ladies, who, taking the boatman's energetic gestures for friendly
salutations, were waving their handkerchiefs to him.

"Hard aport your helm!" shouted Lawry.

Mr. Sherwood sounded the whistle, evidently taking the shout as a
cheer of congratulation at his safe arrival.

"Keep off!" roared Lawry.

Again the whistle sounded, and the ladies waved their handkerchiefs
more vigorously than before. The young pilot was in despair. The
_Woodville_ was going at full speed directly upon the rocks,
whose sharp points would grind her to powder if she struck upon them.

"Hard aport!" repeated Lawry desperately.

Once more the supposed cheer was answered by the whistle and the
waving of the ladies' handkerchiefs, and still the fairy craft dashed
on toward the rocks.

"By gracious! she's on them, as sure as the world!" exclaimed Lawry
to himself, hardly able to breathe.

He had hardly uttered the words before he heard the crash which
announced the doom of the _Woodville_. Her sharp bow slid upon
the ledge, and she suddenly stopped in her mad flight.

Lawry bent on his oars again, horrified by the accident. He pulled
as he had never pulled before. A moment or two after the steamer
struck, he was startled by a succession of shrill shrieks from the
ladies, and he turned to see what had happened. The _Woodville_
had filled, rolled off the rock, and sank in deep water, leaving her
passengers floating helplessly on the lake. The upper half of her
smokestack was all that remained in sight of the beautiful craft
which three minutes before had been a thing of beauty.

The young pilot did not pause an instant to contemplate the scene of
destruction. He saw only the helpless persons struggling for life in
the water, and he renewed his labors with a vigor and skill which
soon brought him to the sufferers. Mr. Sherwood was supporting his
wife; but both of them were nearly exhausted. Lawry helped Bertha
into the boat, and told her husband to hold on at the rail.

Ethan French, with his arm around the waist of Fanny Jane, was
holding on at the smokestack, where also the fireman of the boat was
supporting himself.

"Where is Fanny?" gasped Mr. Sherwood.

"I'm afraid she has gone down," replied Ethan French. "I saw her
just there a moment since."

"I see her!" said Lawry, as he dived into the lake.

Fanny, exhausted by her struggles, had sunk, and Lawry, with a
strong arm, bore her to the surface again; but she was too large and
heavy for him, and he could not support her.

Before the arrival of the boat, Ethan was in the act of transferring
his helpless burden to the arms of the fireman, that he might go to
the assistance of Miss Fanny; and, as soon as Lawry appeared, he swam
out to help him. With the aid of the young engineer, the exhausted
lady was lifted into the boat. Fanny Jane was next taken in, but
there was no room for any more.

Though Miss Fanny was in a worse condition than the other ladies,
she still had her senses; and none of the party was in danger. Mr.
Sherwood, Ethan, and the fireman were still in the water, holding on
at the rail of the boat. Lawry took the oars and pulled toward the
ferry-landing.

"Thank God, we are all safe!" said Mr. Sherwood.

"Some of us must have been drowned if Lawry had not come to our
assistance," added Miss Fanny. "I had given up, and was sinking to
the bottom. My senses were leaving me, when I felt his grasp on my
arm."

"You have done bravely, Lawry," added Bertha.

But the party did not feel much like talking. They were all grateful
to God, who had, through the agency of the young pilot, saved them
from their perilous situation. When the boat reached the landing-place,
the ladies were conducted to the cottage of John Wilford,
where everything was done by Mrs. Wilford to promote their comfort.
Lawry hastened up to Mr. Sherwood's house to procure the carriage,
which had fortunately just returned from Port Henry, and the party
were soon conveyed to their home.

Dry clothing and a little rest soon restored Mr. Sherwood and the
ladies to their wonted spirits, and all of them wished to see their
brave deliverer. He was sent for, and presented himself to the ladies
in the drawing-room. Lawry, anxious to learn the condition of the
ladies after their cold bath, and their terrible fright, had followed
the carriage up to the house, and was telling the coachman the
particulars of the catastrophe when he was summoned to the presence
of the family.

Never was a young man more earnestly and sincerely thanked for a
brave and noble deed; and Mr. Sherwood hinted that something more
substantial than thanks would be bestowed upon him.

"Thank you, sir; I don't need anything more," replied Lawry,
blushing. "What will be done with the steamer, now?" he asked.

"I have got enough of her," said Mr. Sherwood. "She has given me a
shock I shall never forget."

"I don't think it was the fault of the boat, sir," suggested Lawry.
"I did all I could to have you keep off the rocks."

"We all thought you were crazy, you shook so in your boat."

"I was trying to warn you of your danger."

"Was that what you meant? We thought you were cheering the
_Woodville_."

"I saw you were going on the rocks, and I shouted and made signs for
you to keep off."

"You certainly did all you could for us, both before and after the
accident," added Mr. Sherwood. "When did you get home, Lawry?"

"To-day noon, just after you went to the house for me. I came right
up to see you; but I found you had gone."

"Yes; I was so impatient to get that little steamer up here, that I
couldn't wait any longer."

"And what a waste your haste has made!" laughed Mrs. Sherwood.
"There is our fine little steamer at the bottom of the lake."

"She may lie there, for all me," added Mr. Sherwood.

"I should not dare to put my foot on board of her again," said Miss
Fanny.

"Nor I," chimed in Fanny Jane.

