will call him Rainbow."

So she caught the pretty fish and put him into the basin in the cave.

The next day Flora went to the forest for wood. She carried some crumbs
of bread which she had saved from her breakfast.

On the way home she stopped at the cave. The fish was waiting for her.
He came to the edge of the basin, and she fed the crumbs to him.

How delighted the girl was! She had been so lonely, and now she had a
playfellow!

Every morning, instead of eating the bread which her sister gave to her,
Flora would save it and feed the crumbs to her pet. The fish would leap
to catch them.

"Here are some crumbs, Rainbow," she would say. "This is all to-day, but
I shall come again to-morrow."

Then she would sing a little song.

Flora began to grow thin, and her sisters wondered what could be the
matter.

One day the oldest sister followed her to the cave and saw her feed the
crumbs of bread to the fish.

While Flora was away in the forest, the oldest sister caught the fish,
carried him home and baked him for supper.

The bones were buried under the kitchen fire.

The next morning, Flora went to the cave as usual, but no fish was
there. She sang her little song, and still he did not come.

"Rainbow cannot be dead," she said, "for I do not see him in the water."

Then Flora hastened home. She threw herself upon her bed and was soon
fast asleep.

The following morning, a rooster flew up to Flora's window and crowed,

  "Cock-a-doodle-doodle-doo!
  The bones of Rainbow wait for you,
  Under the kitchen fire, too."

Flora arose at once and went downstairs. There, under the kitchen fire,
she found the bones of her pet. She wept as she gathered the bones and
placed them in a box.

She went to the forest and buried the box near the cave.

Then Flora sat down on a mossy bank near the cave and sang this song:

  "Rainbow, Rainbow, hear my cry,
   My great wish do not deny.
   If you can't come back to me,
   Pray, O pray, become a tree!"

As the last words of the song echoed through the cave, there sprang up
beside the girl a wonderful Fairy Tree.

Its trunk was of ivory. Its leaves were of silver fringed with pearls.
Its flowers were gold, and its fruit gems from which sparkled the bright
colors of the rainbow.

One day the summer breeze carried a leaf from the Fairy Tree across the
sea to another island. It fell at the feet of the king.

He picked up the wonderful leaf, saying, "I shall never rest until I
find the tree from which this leaf came."

The king set sail with his attendants. He soon landed on the island
where the seven sisters lived.

As the king and his men were marching through the forest, they found the
Fairy Tree growing at the entrance to the cave.

The king tried to pick some of the leaves, but he could not.

Then he heard the sweet voice of a girl. She was singing,

  "Rainbow, Rainbow, speak to me!
  Bend your branches, Fairy Tree!"

And Flora came tripping along the grassy path that led to the cave.

The king said, "Fair maiden, if you can pick a leaf or a flower from
this tree, you shall be my queen."

As Flora reached to pick a flower, the tree bowed low, and every leaf
trembled with delight.

The maiden at once presented the flower to the king.

As he took the flower, the king exclaimed,

  "To you belongs the Fairy Tree;
  Pray be my bride and rule with me."

Flora thought she must be dreaming, but they were married next day,
beneath the branches of the Fairy Tree.

Adapted from "The Lilac Fairy Book" by Andrew Lang




HIAWATHA'S SAILING


Thus the Birch Canoe was builded
In the valley, by the river,
In the bosom of the forest;
And the forest life was in it,
All its mystery and its magic,
All the lightness of the birch tree,
All the toughness of the cedar,
All the larch's supple sinews;
And it floated on the river
Like a yellow leaf in autumn,
Like a yellow water lily.

HENRY W LONGFELLOW




GRAY MOLE AND THE INDIAN


An Indian was once wandering across the prairie. He was tired, and
hungry, and very lonely. He had traveled many miles.

At last he came to a brook, in a meadow at the foot of a hill.

"I will rest here until noon," thought the Indian. He sat down upon the
mossy bank beside the brook.

Presently he heard some one whisper, "Lift me up and carry me with you,
and I will be your friend."

The Indian looked carefully about him, to find who was speaking. He saw
a small, gray animal peeping from out of the moss.

"Ha, ha, Gray Mole!" laughed the Indian. "Why should I carry you?"

"I am far from my island home. If you will carry me to the cliff near
the Place of Breaking Light, I can then reach my burrow safely," replied
Gray Mole.

The Indian placed Gray Mole in his large wampum belt.

"Very well, little friend," he said. "You may travel with me, but I
shall rest here for a time before starting on the journey."

Then, covering himself with his deerskin robe, he lay down upon the
moss. He was soon fast asleep.

At about noon Sun passed overhead. Sun traveled so close to the earth
that his rays scorched and shriveled the deerskin robe.

When the Indian awoke, he found that his deerskin robe had been scorched
and shriveled by Sun. He was furiously angry.

"I will follow Sun and punish him," said the Indian.

Sun had traveled far beyond the meadow and was now fast disappearing
behind the hill. The Indian started to follow.

At last the Indian reached the summit of the hill and could look down
the other side. Sun could no longer be seen. He had hidden in his cave
beyond the Western Sea.

The Indian traveled until he came to the edge of a cliff. The Shining
Big Sea Water beat high against the rocks, and in the distance he could
see the Place of Breaking Light.

"We have come to the cliff, little friend. Jump out of my wampum belt,"
said the Indian. "But how are you going to reach your burrow on the
island yonder?"

"I shall wait here with you until the break of day," replied Gray Mole.

Many trees grew near the cliff. East Wind blew gently through their
branches, rustling the leaves and carrying messages to the Indian.

Oak Tree said proudly, "I am King of the Forest. The Great Chief summons
his warriors beneath my boughs. Here he holds his councils. Of my
branches the strong arrows are made."

Ash Tree whispered, "My pliant branches make the bows which speed the
arrows in their flight."

Maple Tree said softly, "I am the food of the Great Chief. My sap is
sweet and wholesome. People of all nations delight to show me honor."

Red Willow bowed low and said, "My bark is used for the peace pipe of
the Great Chief. Of my branches the women weave baskets and mats for
their wigwams."

Marsh Reeds, growing near Red Willow, chimed sweetly, "Our stalks are
used for the stems of the peace pipes."

Linden Tree swayed to and fro, saying, "I am used for the cradles in
which the children are rocked."

Pine Tree said gently, "My sweet singing lulls the children to sleep."
And she murmured a soft lullaby.

Birch Tree was standing near the path.

"Of what use are you, O Birch Tree?" said the Indian.

Birch Tree replied, "My bark covers the canoes that sail upon the lakes
and rivers. I am used also for the picture-writing of the people."

East Wind again blew gently, stirring the leaves of the trees.

Then Cedar Tree said, "My pliant branches make the canoes strong and
steady."

Larch Tree whispered, "I give my fibrous roots to bind the parts
together."

Fir Tree said, "My rosin closes the seams of the canoes, to make them
safe."

Then the Indian looked at a cluster of alder trees growing near a stream
of water.

"Of what use are you, O Alder Trees?"

The Alder Trees replied, "The Indian Chief comes here to fish in the
cool stream. He finds shelter, beneath our branches, from the hot rays
of Sun!"

All this time, Gray Mole had been busily gathering fibrous roots from
the larch tree. He had made a rope to snare Sun.

Then Gray Mole called to the Indian to look toward the Place of Breaking
Light. There, in a little bay on Gray Mole's island, stood a birch
canoe. Soon the canoe floated to where the Indian stood.

"Follow me," said Gray Mole. "Step into the magic canoe. We will go to
the island and there set a snare for Sun."

The magic canoe carried them safely over the water, and they soon
reached the island. Then the Indian set the snare for Sun.

Presently Sun came out of his cave and was at once caught in the snare.

For seven days the world was dark. The people suffered from hunger and
cold. Then the Indian cried, "Alas, what have I done! Who will unfasten
the rope and set Sun free?"

"I can set Sun free again," said Gray Mole.

The little mole crept to the snare. Nibble, nibble, he went, until the
rope gave way.

Then Sun burst forth in all his might. In his anger he blazed a path
across the sky.

The poor little mole was scorched in the fierce heat, and his eyes were
blinded. Never again could he see well.

The Indian was sorry, but he said, "Gray Mole, you are a true friend.
You shall always live with me, and all the moles shall be my forest
brothers."

Then, placing Gray Mole in his wampum belt once more, he stepped into
the canoe, and together they sailed to the Indian's home.




THE WATER LILIES


Beautiful white flowers with hearts of gold floated on the surface of
the lily pond.

An Indian girl was paddling a canoe gently about among the lily pads.
She reached out to pick one of the flowers. Suddenly there appeared
before her a little man.

The little man sat upon a lily pad. He smiled at the girl and said,
"Listen, and I will tell you the story of the water lilies."

This is the story the little man told:

Once there was a star in the heavens, it shone more brightly than any of
the other stars. An Indian youth watched it for many nights. Each night
it seemed to move nearer to the earth.

One night the young man had a strange dream. In his dream a beautiful
maiden appeared before him and spoke to him. Her words were like music.
She said that she was the star that shone so brightly in the heavens.
She loved the birds and the flowers, and the people of the earth.

"I wish to leave my sister stars and dwell upon the earth," said the
Star Maiden. "What form is the best for me to take, to be loved by all?"

The young man awoke. At once he hastened to tell his dream to the wise
men of the tribe.

"The beautiful maiden is the star that we have seen in the south," said
the wise men.

Again the Star Maiden appeared to the young man in a dream.

Once more she asked him where she might dwell in safety upon the earth,
and what form she should take, to be loved by the Indians.

"Choose for yourself," said the young man.

At first the Star Maiden chose to live in the heart of a white rose that
grew on a mountain side. But there she was hidden from sight, so that no
one could enjoy her beauty.

Then she searched among the flowers of the prairie, until she found the
blossom of a painted cup.

"I will rest here," thought the Star Maiden as she swung to and fro on
the yellow cup.

Alas! She was not safe there, for a herd of buffaloes came rushing over
the prairie.

Finally the Star Maiden thought of a place where she was sure she would
be safe.

"I will live upon the lake," she said. "Canoes glide gently over the
water, and I shall see the children at their play."

In the morning, hundreds of white flowers with hearts of gold floated
upon the water.

The Star Maiden lived upon earth in the form of water lilies.

When the little man had finished telling the story of the lilies, he
jumped into the water and disappeared.

"I shall always love the water lilies," said the Indian girl as she
paddled away.




WHERE GO THE BOATS?


Dark brown is the river,
  Golden is the sand,
It flows along forever,
  With trees on either hand.

Green leaves a-floating,
  Castles of the foam,
Boats of mine a-boating--
  Where will all come home?

On goes the river
  And out past the mill,
Away down the valley,
  Away down the hill;

Away down the river,
  A hundred miles or more;
Other little children
  Shall bring my boats ashore.

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.




WHY THE SEA IS SALT


Long ago, there were two brothers, one rich and one poor. The Rich
Brother was stingy.

It was winter. The wind howled down the chimney, and the snow almost
covered the hut in which the Poor Brother lived.

"We cannot starve," said the Poor Brother to his wife. "I will ask my
brother to help us."

Now it annoyed the Rich Brother to have the Poor Brother ask for help.
When the Poor Brother asked for bread, the Rich Brother said angrily,
"Here, take this ham and go to the dwarfs. They will boil it for you."

So the Poor Brother started out, with the ham under his arm, to find the
home of the dwarfs. He trudged on through the snow until he saw seven
queer little dwarfs rolling a huge snowball, at the foot of a hill.

The dwarfs paid no attention to the Poor Brother, but kept on rolling
the snowball, which grew larger and larger each moment, as they sang,

  "Behind the door
     The Mill you'll find,
   But snow, the Mill
     Will never grind.

   We'll gather snow,
     And still more snow,
   Then roll it down
     To cool Below."

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed the Chief Dwarf. "We have snow enough here to put
out a dozen fires. Come, brothers, let us roll the snowball Below!"

"Heave ho! Heave ho!" cried the other six dwarfs.

In the twinkling of an eye, the seven little dwarfs had rolled the
snowball through an entrance in the side of the hill.

Down, down, the snowball rolled, until it reached the place where the
fires burned.

Then sizzle, sizzle, came the hot steam pouring out of the entrance.

All this time the Poor Brother had stood watching the seven dwarfs, and
saying not a word. But suddenly he thought, "If I do not go Below at
once, there will be no fire left to boil my ham."

So the Poor Brother groped his way through the steam and the smoke, and
at last he found his way into the home of the seven dwarfs.

It certainly was a very queer place! There were great fires burning on
every side. Although the huge snowball had cooled the air, it had not
quenched the fires.

The Chief Dwarf was stirring some fat that was boiling in a kettle. When
he saw the Poor Brother standing before him with the ham under his arm,
he cried, "Ho, ho! Who comes here?"

