woman lay in her Pyrenean grave. But nevertheless, when Cecile was six
years old, and Maurice four, he asked another woman to be his wife. His
home was neglected; his children, now that he was out so much all day,
pined for more care. He married, but not loving his wife, he did not
add to his happiness. The woman who came into the house came with a
sore and broken heart. She brought no love for either father or
children. All the love in her nature was centered on her own lost
child. She came and gave no love, and received none, except from
Cecile. Cecile loved everybody. There was that in the little
half-French, half-Spanish girl's nature--a certain look in her long
almond-shaped blue eyes, a melting look, which could only be caused by
the warmth of a heart brimful of loving kindness. Woe be to anyone who
could hurt the tender heart of this little one! Cecile's stepmother had
often pained her, but Cecile still loved on.

Two years after his second marriage D'Albert died. He died after a
brief fresh cold, rather suddenly at the end, although he had been ill
for years.

To his wife he explained all his worldly affairs, He received fifty
pounds a year from his farm in France. This would continue for the next
few years. There was also a small sum in hand, enough for his funeral
and present expenses. To Cecile he spoke of other things than money--of
his early home in the sunny southern country, of her mother, of little
Maurice. He said that perhaps some day Cecile could go back and take
Maurice with her to see with her own eyes the sunny vineyards of the
south, and he told her what the child had never learned before, that
she had a grandmother living in the Pyrenees, a very old woman now, old
and deaf, and knowing not a single word of the English tongue. "But
with a loving heart, Cecile," added her father, "with a loving mother's
heart. If ever you could find your grandmother, you would get a kiss
from her that would be like a mother's kiss."

Shortly after Maurice D'Albert died, and the children lived on with
their stepmother. Without loving them, the second Mrs. D'Albert was
good to her little stepchildren. She religiously spent all their
father's small income on them, and when she died, she had so arranged
money matters that her sister Lydia would be well paid with the fifty
pounds a year for supporting them at her farm in the country.

This fifty pounds still came regularly every half-year from the French
farm. It would continue to be paid for the next four years, and the
next half-year's allowance was about due when the children left London
and went to the farm in Kent.

The few days that immediately followed Mrs. D'Albert's death were dull
and calm. No one loved the poor woman well enough to fret really for
her. The child she had lost was far away and knew nothing, and Lydia
Purcell shed few tears for her sister. True, Cecile cried a little, and
went into the room where the dead woman lay, and kissed the cold lips,
registering again, as she did so, a vow to find Lovedy, but even
Cecile's loving heart was only stirred on the surface by this death.
The little girl, too, was so oppressed, so overpowered by the care of
the precious purse of money, she lived even already in such hourly
dread of Aunt Lydia finding it, that she had no room in her mind for
other sensations; there was no place in the lodgings in which they
lived to hide the purse of bank notes and gold. Aunt Lydia seemed to be
a woman who had eyes in the back of her head, she saw everything that
anyone could see; she was here, there, and everywhere at once. Cecile
dared not take the bag from inside the bosom of her frock, and its
weight, physical as well as mental, brought added pallor to her thin
cheeks. The kind young doctor, who had been good to Mrs. D'Albert, and
had written to her sister to come to her, paid the children a hasty
visit. He noticed at once Cecile's pale face and languid eyes.

"This child is not well," he said to Lydia Purcell. "What is wrong, my
little one?" he added, drawing the child forward tenderly to sit on his
knee.

"Please, I'm quite well," answered Cecile, "'tis only as father did say
as I was a very dependable little girl. I think being dependable makes
you feel a bit old--don't it, doctor?"

"I have no doubt it does," answered the doctor, laughing. And he went
away relieved about the funny, old-fashioned little foreign girl, and
from that moment Cecile passed out of his busy and useful life.

The next day the children, Toby, and Aunt Lydia went down to the farm
in Kent. Neither Cecile, Maurice, nor their town-bred dog had ever seen
the country, to remember it before, and it is not too much to say that
all three went nearly wild with delight. Not even Aunt Lydia's
sternness could quench the children's mirth when they got away into the
fields, or scrambled over stiles into the woods. Beautiful Kent was
then rich in its autumn tints. The children and dog lived out from
morning to night. Provided they did not trouble her, Lydia Purcell was
quite indifferent as to how the little creatures committed to her care
passed their time. At Cecile's request she would give her some broken
provisions in a basket, and then never see or think of the little trio
again until, footsore and weary after their day of wandering, they
crept into their attic bedroom at night.

It was there and then, during those two delicious months, before the
winter came with its cold and dreariness, that Cecile lost the look of
care which had made her pretty face old before its time. She was a
child again--rather she was a child at last. Oh! the joy of gathering
real, real flowers with her own little brown hands. Oh! the delight of
sitting under the hedges and listening to the birds singing. Maurice
took it as a matter of course; Toby sniffed the country air solemnly,
but with due and reasonable appreciation; but to Cecile these two
months in the country came as the embodiment of the babyhood and
childhood she had never known.

In the country Cecile was only ten years old.

When first they had arrived at the old farm she had discovered a hiding
place for her purse. Back of the attic, were she had and Maurice and
Toby slept, was a little chamber, so narrow--running so completely away
into the roof--that even Cecile could only explore it on her hands and
knees.

This little room she did examine carefully, holding a candle in her
hand, in the dead of night, when every soul on the busy farm was asleep.

Woe for Cecile had Aunt Lydia heard a sound; but Aunt Lydia Purcell
slept heavily, and the child's movements were so gentle and careful
that they would scarcely have aroused a wakeful mouse. Cecile found in
the extreme corner of this tiny attic in the roof an old broken
wash-hand-stand lying on its back. In the wash-hand-stand was a drawer,
and inside the drawer again a tidy little tin box. Cecile seized the
box, sat down on the floor, and taking the purse from the bosom of her
frock, found that it fitted it well. She gave a sigh of relief; the tin
box shut with a click; who would guess that there was a purse of gold
and notes inside!

Now, where should she put it? Back again into the old drawer of the old
wash-stand? No; that hiding place was not safe enough. She explored a
little further, almost lying down now, the roof was so near her head.
Here she found what she had little expected to see--a cupboard
cunningly contrived in the wall. She pushed it open. It was full, but
not quite full, of moldy and forgotten books. Back of the books the tin
box might lie hidden, lie secure; no human being would ever guess that
a treasure lay here.

With trembling hands she pushed it far back into the cupboard, covered
it with some books, and shut the door securely.

Then she crept back to bed a light-hearted child. For the present her
secret was safe and she might be happy.




CHAPTER VI.

MERCY BELL.


The farm in Kent, called Warren's Grove, belonged to an old lady. This
lady was very old; she was also deaf and nearly blind. She left the
management of everything to Lydia Purcell, who, clever and capable, was
well equal to the emergency. There was no steward or overseer of the
little property, but the farm was thoroughly and efficiently worked.
Lydia had been with Mrs. Bell for over twenty years. She was now
trusted absolutely, and was to all intents and purposes the mistress of
Warren's Grove. This had not been so when first she arrived; she had
come at first as a sort of upper servant or nurse. The old lady was
bright and active then. She had a son in Australia, and a bonnie
grandchild to wake echoes in the old place and keep it alive. This
grandchild was a girl of six, and Lydia was its nurse. For a year all
went well; then the child, partly through Lydia's carelessness, caught
a malignant fever, sickened, and died. Lydia had taken her into an
infected house. This knowledge the woman kept to herself. She never
told either doctor or grandmother--she dared not tell--and the grief,
remorse, and pain changed her whole nature.

Before the death of little Mercy Bell, Lydia had been an ordinary young
woman. She had no special predisposition to evil. She was a handsome,
bold-looking creature, and where she chose to give love, that love was
returned. She had loved her pretty little charge, and the child had
loved her and died in her arms. Mrs. Bell, too, had loved Lydia, and
Lydia was bright and happy, and looked forward to a home of her own
some day.

But from the moment the grave had closed over Mercy, and she felt
herself in a measure responsible for her death, all was changed in the
woman. She did not leave her situation; she stayed on, she served
faithfully, she worked hard, and her clever and well-timed services
became more valuable day by day. But no one now loved Lydia, not even
old Mrs. Bell, and certainly she loved nobody. Of course the natural
consequences followed--the woman, loving neither God nor man, grew
harder and harder. At forty-five, the age she was when the children
came to Warren's Grove, she was a very hard woman indeed.

It would be wrong, however, to say that she had _no_ love; she loved
one thing--a base thing--she loved money. Lydia Purcell was saving
money; in her heart she was a close miser.

She was not, however, dishonest; she had never stolen a penny in her
life, never yet. Every farthing of the gains which came in from the
well-stocked and prosperous little farm she sent to the county bank,
there to accumulate for that son in Australia, who, childless as he
was, would one day return to find himself tolerably rich. But still
Lydia, without being dishonest, saved money. When old Mrs. Bell, a
couple of years after her grandchild's death, had a paralytic stroke,
and begged of her faithful Lydia, her dear Lydia, not to leave her, but
to stay and manage the farm which she must give up attending to, Lydia
had made a good compact for herself.

"I will stay with you, Mistress Bell," she had replied, addressing the
old dame in the fashion she loved. "I will stay with you, and tend you,
and work your farm, and you shall pay me my wages."

"And good wages, Lydia--good wages they must be," replied the old lady.

"They shall be fair wages," answered Lydia. "You shall give me a salary
of fifty pounds a year, and I will have in the spring every tenth lamb,
and every tenth calf, to sell for myself, and I will supply fowl and
eggs for our own use at table, and all that are over I will sell on my
own account."

"That is fair--that is very fair," said Mrs. Bell.

On these terms Lydia stayed and worked. She studied farming, and the
little homestead throve and prospered. And Lydia too, without ever
exceeding by the tenth of an inch her contract, managed to put by a
tidy sum of money year by year. She spent next to nothing on dress; all
her wants were supplied. Nearly her whole income, therefore, of fifty
pounds a year could go by untouched; and the tenth of the flock, and
the money made by the overplus of eggs and poultry, were by no means to
be despised.

Lydia was not dishonest, but she so far looked after her own interests
as to see that the hen-houses were warm and snug, that the best breeds
of poultry were kept up, and that those same birds should lay their
golden eggs to the tune of a warm supper. Lydia, however, though very
careful, was not always very wise. Once a quarter she regularly took
her savings to the bank in the little town of F--t, and on one of these
occasions she was tempted to invest one hundred pounds of her savings
in a very risky speculation. Just about the time that the children were
given into her charge this speculation was pronounced in danger, and
Lydia, when she brought Cecile and Maurice home, was very anxious about
her money.

Now, if Mrs. D'Albert did not care for children, still less did Lydia
Purcell. It was a strange fact that in both these sisters their
affection for all such little ones should lie buried in a lost child's
grave. It was true that, as far as she could tell, Mrs. D'Albert's love
might be still alive. But little Mercy Bell's small grave in the
churchyard contained the only child that Lydia Purcell could abide.
That little grave was always green, and remained, summer and winter,
not quite without flowers. But though she clung passionately to Mercy's
memory, yet, because she had been unjust to this little one, she
disliked all other children for her sake.

It had been great pain and annoyance to Lydia to bring the orphan
D'Alberts home, and she had only done so because of their money; for
she reflected that they could live on the farm for next to nothing, and
without in the least imagining herself dishonest, she considered that
any penny she could save from their fifty pounds a year might be
lawfully her own.

Still the children were unpleasant to her, and she wished that her
sister had not died so inopportunely.

As the two children sat opposite to her in the fly, during their short
drive from the country station to the farm, Lydia regarded them
attentively.

Maurice was an absolutely fearless child. No one in all his little life
had ever said a cross word to Maurice, consequently he considered all
the people in the world his slaves, and treated them with lofty
indifference. He chattered as unreservedly to Lydia Purcell as he did
to Cecile or Toby, and for Maurice in consequence Lydia felt no special
dislike; his fearlessness made his charm. But Cecile was different.
Cecile was unfortunate enough to win at once this disagreeable woman's
antipathy. Cecile had timid and pleading eyes. Her eyes said plainly,
"Let me love you."

Now, Mercy's eyes too were pleading; Mercy's eyes too had said, "let me
love you," Lydia saw the likeness between Mercy and Cecile at a glance,
and she almost hated the little foreign girl for resembling her lost
darling.

Old Mrs. Bell further aggravated her dislike; she was so old and
invalidish now that her memory sometimes failed.

The morning after the children's arrival, she spoke to Lydia.

"Lydia, that was Mercy's voice I heard just now in the passage."

"Mercy is dead," answered Lydia, contracting her brows in pain.

"But, Lydia, I _did_ hear her voice."

"She is dead, Mistress Bell. That was another child."

"Another child! Let me see the other child."

Lydia was obliged to call in Cecile, who came forward with a sweet
grave face, and stood gently by the little tremulous old woman, and
took her hand, and then stooped down to kiss her.

Cecile was interested in such great age, and kept saying to herself,
"Perhaps my grandmother away in the Pyrenees is like this very old
woman," and when Mrs. Bell warmly returned her soft little caress,
Cecile wondered to herself if this was like the mother's kiss her
father and told her of when he was dying.

But when Cecile had gone away, Mrs. Bell turned to Lydia and said in a
tone of satisfaction:

"How much our dear Mercy has grown."

After this nothing would ever get the idea out of the old lady's head
that Cecile was Mercy.




CHAPTER VII.

A GUIDE TO THE PYRENEES.


I have said, for the first two months of Cecile's life in the country
she was a happy and light-hearted child. Her purse of money was safe
for the present. Her promise lay in abeyance. Even her dead
step-mother, anxious as she was to have Lovedy found, had counseled
Cecile to delay her search until she was older. Cecile, therefore,
might be happy. She might be indeed what she was--a child of ten. This
happiness was not to last. Clouds were to darken the life of this
little one; but before the clouds and darkness came, she was to possess
a more solid happiness--a happiness that, once it found entrance into
such a heart as hers, could never go away again.
