"I hope they won't wake up the baby," said Phronsie, in gentle alarm.

"Never you fear," said old Mr. King, quite comfortable now in the
camp-chair one of the sailors had brought in response to a request from
Jasper; "that child knows very well by this time, I should imagine,
what noise is."

But after a little, the edge of their curiosity having been worn off,
the small group began to get restive, and to clamour and pull at their
mother for want of something better to do.

"O dear me!" said Phronsie, in distress.

"Dear, dear!" echoed Polly, vainly trying to induce the child next to
the baby to get into her lap; "something must be done. Oh, don't you
want to hear about a funny cat, children? I'm going to tell them about
Grandma Bascom's, Jasper," she said, seeing the piteous look in
Phronsie's eyes.

"Yes, we do," said one of the boys, as spokesman, and he solemnly
bobbed his tow head, whereat all the children then bobbed theirs.

"Sit down, then," said Polly, socially making way for them, "all of you
in a circle, and I'll tell you of that very funny cat." So the whole
bunch of tow-headed children sat down in a ring, and solemnly folded
their hands in their laps. Jasper threw himself down where he could
edge himself in. Old Mr. King leaned back and surveyed them with great
satisfaction. So Polly launched out in her gayest mood, and the big
blue eyes in the round faces before her widened, and the mouths flew
open, showing the white teeth; and the stolid mother leaned forward,
and her eyes and mouth looked just like those of her children, only
they were bigger; and at last Polly drew a long breath and wound up
with a flourish, "And that's all."

"Tell another," said one of the round-eyed, open-mouthed children,
without moving a muscle. All the rest sat perfectly still.

"O dear me," said Polly, with a little laugh, "that was such a good
long one, you can't want another."

"I think you've gotten yourself into business, Polly," said Jasper,
with a laugh. "Hadn't we better go?"

Polly gave a quick glance at Phronsie. "Phronsie dear," she said, "let
us go up to our deck now, dear. Shall we?"

"Oh, no, Polly, please don't go yet," begged Phronsie, in alarm, and
patting the baby softly with a gentle little hand. Polly looked off at
Grandpapa. He was placidly surveying the water, his eyes occasionally
roving over the novel and interesting sights around. On the other side
of the deck a returning immigrant was bringing out a jew's-harp, and
two or three of his fellow-passengers were preparing to pitch quoits.
Old Mr. King was actually smiling at it all. Polly hadn't seen him so
contented since they sailed.

"I guess I'll tell another one, Jasper," she said. "Oh, about a dog,
you wanted, did you?" nodding at the biggest boy.

"Yes," said the boy, bobbing his tow head, "I did;" and he unfolded and
folded his hands back again, then waited patiently.

So Polly flew off on a gay little story about a dog that bade fair to
rival Grandma Bascom's cat for cleverness. He belonged to Mr. Atkins
who kept store in Badgertown, and the Pepper children used to see a
good deal of him, when they took home the sacks and coats that Mamsie
sewed for the storekeeper. And in the midst of the story, when the
stolid steerage children were actually laughing over the antics of that
remarkable dog, Jasper glanced up toward the promenade deck, took a
long look, and started to his feet. "Why, Polly Pepper, see!" He
pointed upward. There, on the curve, were old Mr. Selwyn and Tom
walking arm in arm.




IV

STEAMER LIFE


And after that, it was "My grandson, Thomas," on all occasions, the old
gentleman introducing the boy to the right and to the left, as he
paraded the deck, his old arm within the younger one. And the little,
sharp black eyes snapped proudly and the white head was held up, as he
laughed and chattered away sociably to the passengers and the ship's
crew, at every good opportunity.

"Yes, my grandson, Thomas, is going back to school. We've been running
about in your country a bit, and the boy's mother went home first with
the other children--" Polly heard him say as the two paused in front of
her steamer chair.

"Indeed!" ejaculated Mrs. Vanderburgh, as he addressed her, and raising
her eyebrows with a supercilious glance for his plain, unprepossessing
appearance. "Yes, Madam, and glad shall I be to set my foot on Old
England again Hey, Tom, my boy, don't you say so?"

Tom looked off over the sea, but did not speak.

Neither did Mrs. Vanderburgh answer, but turned her face away in
disdain that was very plainly marked.

"Home is the best place, Madam," declared old Mr. Selwyn emphatically.
"Well, Old England is our home, and nothing will induce me to leave it
again, I can assure you."

Again Mrs. Vanderburgh did not reply, but looked him up and down in
cold silence. Old Mr. Selwyn, not appearing to notice, chattered on. At
last she deliberately turned her back on him.

"Isn't he common and horrid?" whispered Fanny Vanderburgh, in the
steamer chair next to Polly, thrusting her face in between her and her
book. And she gave a little giggle.

"Hush!" said Polly, warningly, "he will hear you."

"Nonsense--it's impossible; he is rattling on so; and do look at
Mamma's face!"

He didn't hear, but Tom did; and he flashed a glance--dark and
wrathful--over at the two girls, and started forward, abruptly pulling
his Grandfather along.

"O dear me!" exclaimed Polly, in distress, dropping her book in her
lap; "now he _has_ heard."

"Oh, that dreadful boy," said Fanny, carelessly, stretching out in her
steamer chair comfortably; "well, who cares? he's worse than his
Grandfather."

"Yes, he has heard," repeated Polly, sorrowfully looking after the two,
Tom still propelling the old gentleman along the deck at a lively rate;
"now, what shall we do?"

"It isn't of the least consequence if he has heard," reiterated Fanny,
"and Mamma has been frightfully bored, I know. Do tell us, Mamma," she
called.

Mrs. Vanderburgh turned away from the rail, where she had paused in her
constitutional when addressed by the old gentleman, and came up to the
girls.

"Do sit down, Mamma, in your steamer chair," begged Fanny; "I'll tuck
you up in your rug." And she jumped lightly out of her own chair.
"There, that's nice," as Mrs. Vanderburgh sank gracefully down, and
Fanny patted and pulled the rug into shape. "Now tell us, wasn't he the
most horrible old bore?"

As she cuddled back into her own nest, Mrs. Vanderburgh laughed in a
very high-bred manner. "He was very amusing," she said.

"Amusing! I should say so!" cried Fanny. "I suppose he would have told
you all his family history if he had stayed. O dear me, he is such a
common, odious old person."

Polly twisted uneasily under her rug.

Mrs. Vanderburgh glanced into the steamer chair on the other side. It
had several books on top of the rug. "I don't believe he can take that
seat," she said; "still, Fanny, I think it would be well for you to
change into it, for that old man may take it into his head, when he
makes the turn of the deck, to drop into it and give us the whole of
his family history."

"Horrors!" ejaculated Fanny, hopping out of her chair again. "I'll make
sure that he doesn't. And yet I did so want to sit next to Polly
Pepper," she mourned, ensconcing herself under the neighbouring rug,
and putting the books on the floor by her side.

"Don't do that; give them to me," said her mother; "I'll put them in
your chair unless Miss Polly will take that place, only I don't like to
disturb you, dear," she said with a sweet smile at Polly.

"Why, that would make matters' worse, Mamma," said Fanny. "Don't you
see, then, that old bore would put himself into Polly's chair, for he
likes her, anyway. Do leave it as it is."

So Mrs. Vanderburgh smiled again. "I don't know but that you are
right," she said, and leaned back her head restfully. "Dear me, yes, he
_is_ amusing."

"They are terribly common people," said Fanny, her aristocratic nose
well in the air, "aren't they, Mamma? And did you ever see such a
clumsy thing as that dreadful boy, and such big hands and feet?" She
held up her own hands as she spoke, and played with her rings, and let
the jingling bracelets run up and down her wrists.

"Fanny, how often must I tell you to wear gloves on shipboard?" said
her mother, in a tone of reproof. "Nothing spoils the hands so much as
a trip at sea. They won't get over it all summer; they're coarsened
already," and she cast an alarmed glance at the long, slender fingers.

"I'm so tired of gloves, Mamma." Fanny gave a restful yawn. "Polly
Pepper doesn't wear them," she cried triumphantly, peering past her
mother to point to Polly's hands.

Mrs. Vanderburgh hesitated. It wouldn't do to say anything that would
reflect against the Peppers--manners, or customs, or bringing up
generally. So she leaned over and touched Polly's fingers with her own
gloved ones.

"You don't wear gloves, do you, my dear?" she said, in gentle surprise,
quite as if the idea had just struck her for the first time.

"No, Mrs. Vanderburgh, I don't," said Polly, "at least not on
shipboard, unless it is cold."

"There, now, Mamma," laughed Fanny, in a pleased way; "you'll stop
teasing me about wearing them, I'm sure."

Mrs. Vanderburgh turned and surveyed her daughter; but she didn't
smile, and Fanny thought it as well to begin again on the old topic.

"They're awfully common people, aren't they, Mamma,--those Selwyns?"

"They are, indeed," replied Mrs. Vanderburgh, "quite commonplace, and
exceedingly tiresome; be sure and not speak to them, Fanny."

"Trust me for that," said Fanny, with a wise little nod. "The old man
stopped me and asked me something this morning, as I was coming out of
the dining room, after breakfast, but I pretended I didn't hear, and I
skipped upstairs and almost fell on my nose."

"You were fortunate to escape," said her mother, with a little laugh.
"Well, let us drop the subject and talk of something else much more
important. Polly, my dear." She turned again and surveyed the young
girl at her side. "You are coming home this autumn, aren't you?"

"Oh, no," said Polly, "Grandpapa expects to stay over in Europe a year."

"Is that so?" said Mrs. Vanderburgh, and her face fell; "I regret it
exceedingly, for I should be glad if you would visit Fanny this winter
in New York."

"Thank you; but I couldn't anyway," said Polly. Then the colour flew up
to her cheek. "I mean I am in school, you know, Mrs. Vanderburgh, but I
thank you, and it is so good of you to want me," she added, hurriedly,
feeling that she hadn't said the right thing at all.

"I do want you very much, my dear child," said Mrs. Vanderburgh, "and I
am very sorry you are to remain abroad over the winter, for your
Grandfather would be persuaded, I feel quite sure, to have you leave
school for a while, and come to us for a visit."

"Oh, no, he wouldn't," cried Polly, quickly. "I beg pardon, Mrs.
Vanderburgh, but I never leave school for anything unless I am sick,
and I am almost never sick."

"Well, then, you could come for the Christmas holidays," said Mrs.
Vanderburgh, with ladylike obstinacy like one accustomed to carrying
her point.

"The Christmas holidays!" exclaimed Polly, starting forward in her
chair. "Oh, I wouldn't leave home for anything, then, Mrs. Vanderburgh.
Why, we have the most beautiful times, and we are all together--the
boys come home from school--and it's just too lovely for anything!" She
clasped her hands and sighed--oh, if she could but see Ben and Joel and
David but once!

Mrs. Vanderburgh was a very tall woman, and she gazed down into the
radiant face, without speaking; Polly was looking off over the sea, and
the colour came and went on her cheek.

"We would soon get her out of all such notions, if we once had her with
us, wouldn't we, Mamma?" said Fanny, in a low tone close to her
mother's ear.

Mrs. Vanderburgh gave her a warning pinch, but Polly's brown eyes were
fastened on the distant horizon, and she hadn't heard a word.

"Well, we'll arrange it sometime," said Fanny's mother, breaking the
silence; "so you must remember, Polly dear, that you are engaged to us
for a good long visit when you do come home."

"I will tell Grandpapa that you asked me," said Polly, bringing her
eyes back with a sigh to look into Mrs. Vanderburgh's face.

"Oh, he will fall into the plan quite readily, I think," said Mrs.
Vanderburgh, lightly. "You know we are all very old friends--that is,
the families are--Mr. Vanderburgh's father and Mr. King were very
intimate. Perhaps you don't know, Polly,"--and Fanny's mamma drew
herself up to her extreme height; it was impossible for her to loll
back in her chair when talking of her family,--"that we are related to
the Earl of Cavendish who owns the old estate in England, and we go
back to William the Conqueror; that is, Fanny does on her father's
side."

Fanny thereupon came up out of her chair depths to sit quite straight
and gaze with importance at Polly's face. But Polly was still thinking
of the boys, and she said nothing.

"And my family is just as important," said Mrs. Vanderburgh, and she
smiled in great satisfaction. "Really, we could make things very
pleasant for you, my child; our set is so exclusive, you could not
possibly meet any one but the very best people. Oh, here is your
mother." She smiled enchantingly up at Mrs. Fisher, and held out her
hand. "Do come and sit here with us, my dear Mrs. Fisher," she begged,
"then we shall be a delightful group, we two mothers and our daughters."

"Thank you, Mrs. Vanderburgh." Mrs. Fisher smiled, but she didn't offer
to take the steamer chair. "I have come after Polly."

"Mamsie, what is it? I'll come," said Polly, tumbling out of her
steamer chair in a twinkling.

"O dear me!" exclaimed Mrs. Vanderburgh, in regret, "don't take Polly
away, I do implore you, my dear Mrs. Fisher--I am _so_ fond of her."

"I must," said Mother Fisher, smiling again, her hand now in Polly's,
and before any more remonstrances were made, they were off.

"Oh, Mamsie!" breathed Polly, hanging to the dear hand, "I am so glad
you came, and took me away."

"Polly," said Mother Fisher, suddenly, "Grandpapa asked me to find you;
he thinks you could cheer old Mr. Selwyn up a bit, perhaps, with
backgammon. I'm afraid Tom has been behaving badly again."

"Oh, Mamsie!" exclaimed Polly, in dismay. And then the story came out.

"Grandpapa," said Phronsie, pulling at his hand gently, as they walked
slowly up and down the deck, "does your head ache?" And she peered
anxiously up into his face.

"No, child--that is, not much," said old Mr. King, trying to smooth his
brows out. He was thinking--for it kept obtruding at all times and
seasons--of that dreadful scrap of paper that Cousin Eunice had imposed
upon him at the last minute before they sailed, announcing that she had
had her way, and would at last compel acceptance of such a gift as she
chose to make to Phronsie Pepper.

"If it aches at all," said Phronsie, decidedly, "I wish you would let
me rub it for you, Grandpapa. I do, truly."

"Well, it doesn't," said Grandpapa; "that is it won't, now that I have
you with me. I was thinking of something unpleasant, Phronsie, and
then, to tell you the truth, that old Mr. Selwyn tires me to death. I
can't talk to him, and his grandson is a cad."

"What is a cad?" asked Phronsie, wonderingly.

"Oh, well, a boy who isn't nice," said Mr. King, carelessly.

"Grandpapa, why isn't that boy nice to that poor old man?" asked
Phronsie, a grieved look coming into her blue eyes.

"Goodness me, child, you ask me too much," said Mr. King, quickly; "oh,
a variety of reasons. Well, we must take things as we find them, and do
what we can to help matters along; but it seems a hopeless
case,--things were in better shape; and now they seem all tangled up
again, thanks to that boy."
