CHAPTER 5

The Miners

It much increased Curdie's feeling of the strangeness of the whole
affair, that, the next morning, when they were at work in the mine, the
party of which he and his father were two, just as if they had known
what had happened to him the night before, began talking about all
manner of wonderful tales that were abroad in the country, chiefly, of
course, those connected with the mines, and the mountains in which they
lay.  Their wives and mothers and grandmothers were their chief
authorities.  For when they sat by their firesides they heard their
wives telling their children the selfsame tales, with little
differences, and here and there one they had not heard before, which
they had heard their mothers and grandmothers tell in one or other of
the same cottages.

At length they came to speak of a certain strange being they called Old
Mother Wotherwop.  Some said their wives had seen her.  It appeared as
they talked that not one had seen her more than once. Some of their
mothers and grandmothers, however, had seen her also, and they all had
told them tales about her when they were children. They said she could
take any shape she liked, but that in reality she was a withered old
woman, so old and so withered that she was as thin as a sieve with a
lamp behind it; that she was never seen except at night, and when
something terrible had taken place, or was going to take place--such as
the falling in of the roof of a mine, or the breaking out of water in
it.

She had more than once been seen--it was always at night--beside some
well, sitting on the brink of it, and leaning over and stirring it with
her forefinger, which was six times as long as any of the rest.  And
whoever for months after drank of that well was sure to be ill.  To
this, one of them, however, added that he remembered his mother saying
that whoever in bad health drank of the well was sure to get better.
But the majority agreed that the former was the right version of the
story--for was she not a witch, an old hating witch, whose delight was
to do mischief?  One said he had heard that she took the shape of a
young woman sometimes, as beautiful as an angel, and then was most
dangerous of all, for she struck every man who looked upon her
stone-blind.

Peter ventured the question whether she might not as likely be an angel
that took the form of an old woman, as an old woman that took the form
of an angel.  But nobody except Curdie, who was holding his peace with
all his might, saw any sense in the question.  They said an old woman
might be very glad to make herself look like a young one, but who ever
heard of a young and beautiful one making herself look old and ugly?

Peter asked why they were so much more ready to believe the bad that
was said of her than the good.  They answered, because she was bad.  He
asked why they believed her to be bad, and they answered, because she
did bad things.  When he asked how they knew that, they said, because
she was a bad creature.  Even if they didn't know it, they said, a
woman like that was so much more likely to be bad than good.  Why did
she go about at night?  Why did she appear only now and then, and on
such occasions?  One went on to tell how one night when his grandfather
had been having a jolly time of it with his friends in the market town,
she had served him so upon his way home that the poor man never drank a
drop of anything stronger than water after it to the day of his death.
She dragged him into a bog, and tumbled him up and down in it till he
was nearly dead.

'I suppose that was her way of teaching him what a good thing water
was,' said Peter; but the man, who liked strong drink, did not see the
joke.

'They do say,' said another, 'that she has lived in the old house over
there ever since the little princess left it.  They say too that the
housekeeper knows all about it, and is hand and glove with the old
witch.  I don't doubt they have many a nice airing together on
broomsticks.  But I don't doubt either it's all nonsense, and there's
no such person at all.'

'When our cow died,' said another, 'she was seen going round and round
the cowhouse the same night.  To be sure she left a fine calf behind
her--I mean the cow did, not the witch.  I wonder she didn't kill that,
too, for she'll be a far finer cow than ever her mother was.'

'My old woman came upon her one night, not long before the water broke
out in the mine, sitting on a stone on the hillside with a whole
congregation of cobs about her.  When they saw my wife they all
scampered off as fast as they could run, and where the witch was
sitting there was nothing to be seen but a withered bracken bush.  I
made no doubt myself she was putting them up to it.'

And so they went on with one foolish tale after another, while Peter
put in a word now and then, and Curdie diligently held his peace.  But
his silence at last drew attention upon it, and one of them said:

'Come, young Curdie, what are you thinking of?'

'How do you know I'm thinking of anything?' asked Curdie.

'Because you're not saying anything.'

'Does it follow then that, as you are saying so much, you're not
thinking at all?' said Curdie.

'I know what he's thinking,' said one who had not yet spoken; 'he's
thinking what a set of fools you are to talk such rubbish; as if ever
there was or could be such an old woman as you say!  I'm sure Curdie
knows better than all that comes to.'

'I think,' said Curdie, 'it would be better that he who says anything
about her should be quite sure it is true, lest she should hear him,
and not like to be slandered.'

'But would she like it any better if it were true?' said the same man.
'If she is What they say--I don't know--but I never knew a man that
wouldn't go in a rage to be called the very thing he was.'

'If bad things were true of her, and I knew it,' said Curdie, 'I would
not hesitate to say them, for I will never give in to being afraid of
anything that's bad.  I suspect that the things they tell, however, if
we knew all about them, would turn out to have nothing but good in
them; and I won't say a word more for fear I should say something that
mightn't be to her mind.'

They all burst into a loud laugh.

'Hear the parson!' they cried.  'He believes in the witch!  Ha! ha!'

'He's afraid of her!'

'And says all she does is good!'

'He wants to make friends with her, that she may help him to find the
silver ore.'

'Give me my own eyes and a good divining rod before all the witches in
the world!  And so I'd advise you too, Master Curdie; that is, when
your eyes have grown to be worth anything, and you have learned to cut
the hazel fork.'

Thus they all mocked and jeered at him, but he did his best to keep his
temper and go quietly on with his work.  He got as close to his father
as he could, however, for that helped him to bear it.  As soon as they
were tired of laughing and mocking, Curdie was friendly with them, and
long before their midday meal all between them was as it had been.

But when the evening came, Peter and Curdie felt that they would rather
walk home together without other company, and therefore lingered behind
when the rest of the men left the mine.



CHAPTER 6

The Emerald

Father and son had seated themselves on a projecting piece of rock at a
corner where three galleries met--the one they had come along from
their work, one to the right leading out of the mountain, and the other
to the left leading far into a portion of it which had been long
disused.  Since the inundation caused by the goblins, it had indeed
been rendered impassable by the settlement of a quantity of the water,
forming a small but very deep lake, in a part where there was a
considerable descent.

They had just risen and were turning to the right, when a gleam caught
their eyes, and made them look along the whole gallery.  Far up they
saw a pale green light, whence issuing they could not tell, about
halfway between floor and roof of the passage.  They saw nothing but
the light, which was like a large star, with a point of darker colour
yet brighter radiance in the heart of it, whence the rest of the light
shot out in rays that faded toward the ends until they vanished.  It
shed hardly any light around it, although in itself it was so bright as
to sting the eyes that beheld it. Wonderful stories had from ages gone
been current in the mines about certain magic gems which gave out light
of themselves, and this light looked just like what might be supposed
to shoot from the heart of such a gem.

They went up the old gallery to find out what it could be.  To their
surprise they found, however, that, after going some distance, they
were no nearer to it, so far as they could judge, than when they
started.  It did not seem to move, and yet they moving did not approach
it.  Still they persevered, for it was far too wonderful a thing to
lose sight of, so long as they could keep it.  At length they drew near
the hollow where the water lay, and still were no nearer the light.
Where they expected to be stopped by the water, however, water was
none: something had taken place in some part of the mine that had
drained it off, and the gallery lay open as in former times.

And now, to their surprise, the light, instead of being in front of
them, was shining at the same distance to the right, where they did not
know there was any passage at all.  Then they discovered, by the light
of the lanterns they carried, that there the water had broken through,
and made an entrance to a part of the mountain of which Peter knew
nothing.  But they were hardly well into it, still following the light,
before Curdie thought he recognized some of the passages he had so
often gone through when he was watching the goblins.

After they had advanced a long way, with many turnings, now to the
right, now to the left, all at once their eyes seemed to come suddenly
to themselves, and they became aware that the light which they had
taken to be a great way from them was in reality almost within reach of
their hands.

The same instant it began to grow larger and thinner, the point of
light grew dim as it spread, the greenness melted away, and in a moment
or two, instead of the star, a dark, dark and yet luminous face was
looking at them with living eyes.  And Curdie felt a great awe swell up
in his heart, for he thought he had seen those eyes before.

'I see you know me, Curdie,' said a voice.

'If your eyes are you, ma'am, then I know you,' said Curdie.  'But I
never saw your face before.'

'Yes, you have seen it, Curdie,' said the voice.  And with that the
darkness of its complexion melted away, and down from the face dawned
out the form that belonged to it, until at last Curdie and his father
beheld a lady, beautiful exceedingly, dressed in something pale green,
like velvet, over which her hair fell in cataracts of a rich golden
colour.  It looked as if it were pouring down from her head, and, like
the water of the Dustbrook, vanishing in a golden vapour ere it reached
the floor.  It came flowing from under the edge of a coronet of gold,
set with alternated pearls and emeralds.  In front of the crown was a
great emerald, which looked somehow as if out of it had come the light
they had followed. There was no ornament else about her, except on her
slippers, which were one mass of gleaming emeralds, of various shades
of green, all mingling lovelily like the waving of grass in the wind
and sun. She looked about five-and-twenty years old.  And for all the
difference, Curdie knew somehow or other, he could not have told how,
that the face before him was that of the old princess, Irene's
great-great-grandmother.

By this time all around them had grown light, and now first they could
see where they were.  They stood in a great splendid cavern, which
Curdie recognized as that in which the goblins held their state
assemblies.  But, strange to tell, the light by which they saw came
streaming, sparkling, and shooting from stones of many colours in the
sides and roof and floor of the cavern--stones of all the colours of
the rainbow, and many more.  It was a glorious sight--the whole rugged
place flashing with colours--in one spot a great light of deep
carbuncular red, in another of sapphirine blue, in another of topaz
yellow; while here and there were groups of stones of all hues and
sizes, and again nebulous spaces of thousands of tiniest spots of
brilliancy of every conceivable shade.  Sometimes the colours ran
together, and made a little river or lake of lambent, interfusing, and
changing tints, which, by their variegation, seemed to imitate the
flowing of water, or waves made by the wind.

Curdie would have gazed entranced, but that all the beauty of the
cavern, yes, of all he knew of the whole creation, seemed gathered in
one centre of harmony and loveliness in the person of the ancient lady
who stood before him in the very summer of beauty and strength.
Turning from the first glance at the circuadjacent splendour, it
dwindled into nothing as he looked again at the lady. Nothing flashed
or glowed or shone about her, and yet it was with a prevision of the
truth that he said,

'I was here once before, ma'am.'

'I know that, Curdie,' she replied.

'The place was full of torches, and the walls gleamed, but nothing as
they do now, and there is no light in the place.'

'You want to know where the light comes from?' she said, smiling.

'Yes, ma'am.'

'Then see: I will go out of the cavern.  Do not be afraid, but watch.'

She went slowly out.  The moment she turned her back to go, the light
began to pale and fade; the moment she was out of their sight the place
was black as night, save that now the smoky yellow-red of their lamps,
which they thought had gone out long ago, cast a dusky glimmer around
them.



CHAPTER 7

What Is in a Name?

For a time that seemed to them long, the two men stood waiting, while
still the Mother of Light did not return.  So long was she absent that
they began to grow anxious: how were they to find their way from the
natural hollows of the mountain crossed by goblin paths, if their lamps
should go out?  To spend the night there would mean to sit and wait
until an earthquake rent the mountain, or the earth herself fell back
into the smelting furnace of the sun whence she had issued--for it was
all night and no faintest dawn in the bosom of the world.

So long did they wait unrevisited, that, had there not been two of
them, either would at length have concluded the vision a home-born
product of his own seething brain.  And their lamps were going out, for
they grew redder and smokier!  But they did not lose courage, for there
is a kind of capillary attraction in the facing of two souls, that
lifts faith quite beyond the level to which either could raise it
alone: they knew that they had seen the lady of emeralds, and it was to
give them their own desire that she had gone from them, and neither
would yield for a moment to the half doubts and half dreads that awoke
in his heart.

And still she who with her absence darkened their air did not return.
They grew weary, and sat down on the rocky floor, for wait they
would--indeed, wait they must.  Each set his lamp by his knee, and
watched it die.  Slowly it sank, dulled, looked lazy and stupid.  But
ever as it sank and dulled, the image in his mind of the Lady of Light
grew stronger and clearer.  Together the two lamps panted and
shuddered.  First one, then the other went out, leaving for a moment a
great, red, evil-smelling snuff.  Then all was the blackness of
darkness up to their very hearts and everywhere around them.  Was it?
No.  Far away--it looked miles away--shone one minute faint point of
green light--where, who could tell?  They only knew that it shone.  It
grew larger, and seemed to draw nearer, until at last, as they watched
with speechless delight and expectation, it seemed once more within
reach of an outstretched hand.  Then it spread and melted away as
before, and there were eyes--and a face--and a lovely form--and lo! the
whole cavern blazing with lights innumerable, and gorgeous, yet soft
and interfused--so blended, indeed, that the eye had to search and see
in order to separate distinct spots of special colour.

The moment they saw the speck in the vast distance they had risen and
stood on their feet.  When it came nearer they bowed their heads.  Yet
