
Some half dozen of the others followed Jack's example, but the rest were
still too sore and angry to be willing to do anything voluntarily.

Jack leaped lightly up on deck and looked round; the cutter was already
under weigh, and with a gentle breeze was running along the smooth
surface of Southampton waters; the ivy covered ruins of Netley Abbey
were abreast of them, and behind was the shipping of the port.

"Well, young un," an old sergeant said, "so I suppose you have agreed to
serve the queen?"

"As her majesty was so pressing," Jack replied with a smile, "you see I
had no choice in the matter."

"That's right," the sergeant said kindly; "always keep up your spirits,
lad. Care killed a cat, you know. You are one of the right sort, I can
see, but you are young to be pressed. How old are you?"

"Sixteen," Jack replied.

"Then they had no right to take you," the sergeant said; "seventeen's
the earliest age, and as a rule soldiers ain't much good till they are
past twenty. You would have a right to get off if you could prove your
age; but of course you could not do that without witnesses or papers,
and it's an old game for recruits who look young to try to pass as under
age."

"I shan't try," Jack answered; "I have made up my mind to it now, and
there's an end to it. But why ain't soldiers any good till they are past
twenty, sergeant? As far as I can see, boys are just as brave as men."

"Just as brave, my lad, and when it comes to fighting the young soldier
is very often every bit as good as the old one; but they can't stand
fatigue and hardship like old soldiers. A boy will start out on as long
a walk as a man can take, but he can't keep it up day after day. When it
comes to long marches, to sleeping on the ground in the wet, bad food,
and fever from the marshes, the young soldier breaks down, the hospital
gets full of boys, and they just die off like flies, while the older men
pull through."

"You are a Job's comforter, I must say," Jack said with a laugh; "but
I must hope that I shan't have long marches, and bad food, and damp
weather, and marsh fever till I get a bit older."

"I don't want to discourage you," the sergeant remarked, "and you know
there are young soldiers and young soldiers. There are the weedy, narrow
chested chaps as seems to be made special for filling a grave; and there
is the sturdy, hardy young chap, whose good health and good spirits
carries him through. That's your sort, I reckon. Good spirits is the
best medicine in the world; it's worth all the doctors and apothecaries
in the army. But how did you come to be pressed? it's generally the
ne'er do well and idle who get picked out as food for powder. That
doesn't look your sort, or I'm mistaken."

"I hope not," Jack said. "I am here because I am a sort of cousin of the
Mayor of Southampton. He wanted me to serve in his shop. I stood it for
a time, but I hated it, and at last I had a row with his foreman and
knocked him down, so I was kicked out into the streets; and I suppose
he didn't like seeing me about, and so took this means of getting rid
of me. He needn't have been in such a hurry, for if he had waited a few
days I should have gone, for I had shipped as a boy on board of a ship
about to sail for the colonies."

"In that case, my lad, you have no reason for ill will against this
precious relation of yours, for he has done you a good turn while
meaning to do you a bad un. The life of a boy on board a ship isn't one
to be envied, I can tell you; he is at every one's beck and call, and
gets more kicks than halfpence. Besides, what comes of it? You get to be
a sailor, and, as far as I can see, the life of a sailor is the life
of a dog. Look at the place where he sleeps--why, it ain't as good as
a decent kennel. Look at his food--salt meat as hard as a stone, and
rotten biscuit that a decent dog would turn up his nose at; his time
is never his own--wet or dry, storm or calm, he's got to work when he's
told. And what's he got to look forward to? A spree on shore when his
voyage is done, and then to work again. Why, my lad, a soldier's life is
a gentleman's life in comparison. Once you have learned your drill and
know your duty you have an easy time of it. Most of your time's your
own. When you are on a campaign you eat, drink, and are jolly at other
folks' expense; and if you do get wet when you are on duty, you can
generally manage to turn in dry when you are relieved. It's not a bad
life, my boy, I can tell you; and if you do your duty well, and you
are steady, and civil, and smart, you are sure to get your stripes,
especially if you can read and write, as I suppose you can."

Jack nodded with a half smile.

"In that case," the sergeant said, "you may even in time get to be an
officer. I can't read nor write--not one in twenty can--but those as
can, of course, has a better chance of promotion if they distinguish
themselves. I should have got it last year in the Low Country, and
Marlborough himself said, 'Well done!' when I, with ten rank and file,
held a bridge across a canal for half an hour against a company of
French. He sent for me after it was over, but when he found I couldn't
read or write he couldn't promote me; but he gave me a purse of twenty
guineas, and I don't know but what that suited me better, for I am
a deal more comfortable as a sergeant than I should have been as an
officer; but you see, if you had been in my place up you would have
gone."

The wind fell in the afternoon, and the cutter dropped her anchor as the
tide was running against her. At night Jack Stilwell and the others
who had accepted their fate slept with the troops on board instead of
returning to rejoin their companions in the hold. Jack was extremely
glad of the change, as there was air and ventilation, whereas in the
hold the atmosphere had been close and oppressive. He was the more glad
next morning when he found that the wind, which had sprung up soon after
midnight, was freshening fast, and was, as one of the sailors said,
likely to blow hard before long. The cutter was already beginning to
feel the effect of the rising sea, and toward the afternoon was pitching
in a lively way and taking the sea over her bows.

"You seem to enjoy it, young un," the sergeant said as Jack, holding
on by a shroud, was facing the wind regardless of the showers of spray
which flew over him. "Half our company are down with seasickness, and as
for those chaps down in the fore hold they must be having a bad time of
it, for I can hear them groaning and cursing through the bulkhead. The
hatchway has been battened down for the last three hours."

"I enjoy it," Jack said; "whenever I got a holiday at Southampton I used
to go out sailing. I knew most of the fishermen there; they were always
ready to take me with them as an extra hand. When do you think we shall
get to Dover?"

"She is walking along fast," the sergeant said; "we shall be there
tomorrow morning. We might be there before, but the sailors say that the
skipper is not likely to run in before daylight, and before it gets dark
he will shorten sail so as not to get there before."

The wind increased until it was blowing a gale; but the cutter was a
good sea boat, and being in light trim made good weather of it. However,
even Jack was pleased when he felt a sudden change in the motion of the
vessel, and knew that she was running into Dover harbor.

Morning was just breaking, and the hatchways being removed the sergeant
shouted down to the pressed men that they could come on deck. It was a
miserable body of men who crawled up in answer to the summons, utterly
worn out and exhausted with the seasickness, the closeness of the air,
and the tossing and buffeting of the last eighteen hours; many had
scarce strength to climb the ladder.

All the spirit and indignation had been knocked out of them--they were
too miserable and dejected to utter a complaint. The sergeant ordered
his men to draw up some buckets of water, and told the recruits to wash
themselves and make themselves as decent as they could, and the order
was sharply enforced by the captain when he came on deck.

"I would not march through the streets of Dover with such a filthy, hang
dog crew," he said; "why, the very boys would throw mud at you. Come, do
what you can to make yourselves clean, or I will have buckets of water
thrown over you. I would rather take you on shore drenched to the skin
than in that state. You have brought it entirely on yourselves by your
obstinacy. Had you enlisted at once without further trouble you would
not have suffered as you have."

The fresh air and cold water soon revived even the most exhausted of
the new recruits, and as soon as all had been made as presentable as
circumstances would admit of, the order was given to land. The party
were formed on the quay, four abreast, the soldiers forming the outside
line, and so they marched through Dover, where but yet a few people
were up and stirring, to the camp formed just outside the walls of the
castle. The colonel of the regiment met them as they marched in.

"Well, Captain Lowther, you have had a rough time of it, I reckon. I
thought the whole camp was going to be blown away last night. These are
the recruits from Southampton, I suppose?"

"Yes, colonel, what there is left of them; they certainly had a baddish
twelve hours of it."

"Form them in line," the colonel said, "and let me have a look at them.
They are all ready and willing to serve her majesty, I hope," he added
with a grim smile.

"They are all ready, no doubt," Captain Lowther replied; "as to their
willingness I can't say so much. Some half dozen or so agreed at once to
join without giving any trouble, foremost among them that lad at the end
of the line, who, Sergeant Edwards tells me, is a fine young fellow and
likely to do credit to the regiment; the rest chose to be sulky, and
have suffered for it by being kept below during the voyage. However, I
think all their nonsense is knocked out of them now."

The colonel walked along the line and examined the men.

"A sturdy set of fellows," he said to the captain, "when they have got
over their buffeting. Now, my lads," he went on, addressing the men,
"you have all been pressed to serve her majesty in accordance with act
of parliament, and though some of you may not like it just at present,
you will soon get over that and take to it kindly enough. I warn you
that the discipline will be strict. In a newly raised regiment like this
it is necessary to keep a tight hand, but if you behave yourselves and
do your duty you will not find the life a hard one.

"Remember, it's no use any of you thinking of deserting; we have got
your names and addresses, so you couldn't go home if you did; and you
would soon be brought back wherever you went, and you know pretty well
what's the punishment for desertion without my telling you. That will
do."

No one raised a voice in reply--each man felt that his position was
hopeless, for, as the colonel said, they had been legally impressed.
They were first taken before the adjutant, who rapidly swore them in,
and they were then set to work, assisted by some more soldiers, in
pitching tents. Clothes were soon served out to them and the work of
drill commenced at once.

Each day brought fresh additions to the force, and in a fortnight its
strength was complete. Jack did not object to the hard drill which they
had to go through, and which occupied them from morning till night, for
the colonel knew that on any day the regiment might receive orders to
embark, and he wanted to get it in something like shape before setting
sail. Jack did, however, shrink from the company in which he found
himself. With a few exceptions the regiment was made up of wild and
worthless fellows, of whom the various magistrates had been only too
glad to clear their towns, and mingled with these were the sweepings of
the jails, rogues and ruffians of every description. The regiment
might eventually be welded into a body of good soldiers, but at present
discipline had not done its work, and it was simply a collection of
reckless men, thieves, and vagabonds.



CHAPTER III: A DOMESTIC STORM


Great was the surprise of Dame Anthony when, on sending down her servant
with a letter to Jack Stilwell, the woman returned, saying that he had
left his lodging two days before and had not returned. All his things
had been left behind, and it was evident that when he went out he had no
intention of leaving. The woman of the house said that Master Stilwell
was a steady and regular lodger, and that she could not but think
something had happened to him. Of course she didn't know, but all the
town were talking of the men who had been taken away by the press gang,
and she thought they must have clapped hands on her lodger.

Dame Anthony at once jumped at that conclusion. The pressing of fifty
men had indeed made a great stir in the town during the last two days.
The mayor's office had been thronged by angry women complaining of their
husbands or sons being dragged away; and the mayor had been the object
of many threats and much indignation, and had the evening before
returned home bespattered with mud, having been pelted on his way from
the town hall by the women, and having only been saved from more serious
assaults by the exertions of the constables.

Dame Anthony had been surprised that her husband had taken these things
so quietly. Some of the women had indeed been seized and set in the
stocks, but the mayor had made light of the affair, and had altogether
seemed in an unusually good state of temper. Dame Anthony at once
connected this with Jack's disappearance. She knew that the list had
been made out by the mayor, and the idea that her husband had taken this
means of getting rid of Jack, and that he was exulting over the success
of his scheme, flashed across her. As the mayor was away at the town
hall she was forced to wait till his return to dinner; but no sooner
had the meal been concluded and Andrew Carson and the two assistants had
left the table than she began:

"Richard, I want to look at the list of the men who were pressed."

The request scarcely came as a surprise upon the clothier. He had made
up his mind that his wife would be sure sooner or later to discover
that Jack was missing, and would connect his disappearance with the
operations of the press gang.

"What do you want to see that for?" he asked shortly.

"I want to see who have been taken," his wife said. "There is no secret
about it, I suppose?"

"No, there is no secret," the mayor replied. "According to the act of
parliament and the request of her majesty's minister I drew up a list
of fifty of the most useless and disreputable of the inhabitants of
this town, and I rejoice to say that the place is rid of them all. The
respectable citizens are all grateful to me for the manner in which
I have fulfilled the task laid upon me, and as to the clamor of a few
angry women, it causes me not a moment's annoyance."

"I don't know why you are telling me all this, Richard," his wife said
calmly. "I did not cast any reflections as to the manner in which you
made your choice. I only said I wished to see the list."

"I do not see that the list concerns you," the mayor said. "Why do you
wish to see it?"

"I wish to see it, Richard, because I suspect that the name of my Cousin
Jack Stilwell is upon it."

"Oh, mother!" cried Alice, who had been listening in surprise to the
conversation, suddenly starting to her feet; "you don't mean that they
have pressed Jack to be a soldier."

"Leave the room, Alice," her father said angrily. "This is no concern of
a child like you." When the door closed behind the girl he said to his
wife:

"Naturally his name is in the list. I selected fifty of the most
worthless fellows in Southampton, and his name was the first which
occurred to me. What then?"

"Then I tell you, Richard," Dame Anthony said, rising, "that you are a
wretch, a mean, cowardly, cruel wretch. You have vented your spite upon
Jack, whom I love as if he were my own son, because he would not put
up with the tyranny of your foreman and yourself. You may be Mayor of
Southampton, you may be a great man in your own way, but I call you a
mean, pitiful fellow. I won't stay in the house with you an hour longer.
The wagon for Basingstoke comes past at three o'clock, and I shall go
and stay with my father and mother there, and take Alice with me."

"I forbid you to do anything of the sort," the mayor said pompously.

