you should take advantage of my absence to creep up to your son's room
and to search it thoroughly, examining every board of the floor to see
if it is loose, and should you find anything concealed, to take it and
hide it, of course I cannot help it. The things, if there are any, might
secretly be packed up by you in a box and sent up to Bow Street, with a
line inside, saying that they are proceeds of robbery, and that you hope
the owners will be traced and their property restored to them. Not, of
course, in your own hand, and without a signature. There might be some
little trouble in managing it, but it could, no doubt, be done."

John Thorndyke went out into the garden without another word. The hour
was nearly up when Mr. Bastow came out; he looked ten years older than
he had done on the previous day. He wrung his friend's hand.

"Thank God I have been up there," he said. "I do not think they will
find anything."

"Say nothing about it, Bastow; I don't want to know whether you found
anything. Now I am going to fetch two or three of the men from the
village, to get them to aid the constable in keeping guard, and another
to go up to the house at once and order a groom to saddle one of my
horses and bring it here."

As it was now past five o'clock, and the Squire found most of the men
getting up, he sent one off to the house with the message, and returned
with two others to the Rectory. He told them briefly that two highwaymen
had been arrested during the night, and that as young Mr. Bastow was in
their company at the time, it had been necessary as a matter of form to
arrest him also. He went upstairs with them.

"I have brought up two men to sit with you, Knapp, until the Reigate
constables come up. You can take those handcuffs off Mr. Bastow, but
see that he does not leave the room, and do you yourself sit in a chair
against the door, and place one of these men at the window. How about
others?"

"The man you hit first, Squire, did not move until a quarter of an hour
ago; he has been muttering to himself since, but I don't think he is
sensible. The other one has been quiet enough, but there is no doubt
that his arm is broken."

"I am going to ride down to Reigate at once, and will bring back a
surgeon with me."

"You will repent this night's business, Thorndyke!" Arthur Bastow said
threateningly.

"I fancy that you will repent it more than I shall, Bastow; it is likely
that you will have plenty of time to do so."

It was not long before the groom with the horse arrived. John Thorndyke
rode at a gallop down to Reigate, and first called on the head
constable.

"Dawney," he said, as the man came down, partially dressed, at his
summons, "has anything taken place during the night?"

"Yes, Squire, the up coach was stopped a mile before it got here, and
the passengers robbed. It was due here at one, and did not come in till
half an hour later. Of course I was sent for. The guard was shot. There
were two of the fellows. He let fly with his blunderbuss, but he does
not seem to have hit either of them, and one rode up and shot him dead;
then they robbed all the passengers. They got six gold watches, some
rings, and, adding up the amounts taken from all the passengers, about a
hundred and fifty pounds in money."

"Well, I fancy I have got your two highwaymen safe, _Dawney_."

"You have, sir?" the constable said in astonishment.

"Yes. I happened to be at the Rectory. Mr. Bastow had had a quarrel with
his son, and had forbidden him the house."

The constable shook his head. "I am afraid he is a very bad one, that
young chap."

"I am afraid he is, Dawney. However, his father was afraid that he might
come in during the night and make a scene, so I said I would stop with
him, and I took our village constable with me. At two o'clock this
morning the young fellow came with two mounted men, who, I have no
doubt, were highwaymen. We had locked up down below. Bastow took a
ladder, and the three got in at a bedroom window on the first floor.
Knapp and I were waiting for them there, and, taking them by surprise,
succeeded in capturing them before the highwaymen could use their
pistols. The constable and two men are looking after them, but as one
has not got over a knock I gave him on the head, and the other has a
broken arm, there is little fear of their making their escape. You had
better go up with two of your men, and take a light cart with you with
some straw in the bottom, and bring them all down here. I will ride
round myself to Mr. Chetwynde, Sir Charles Harris, and Mr. Merchison,
and we will sit at twelve o'clock. You can send round a constable with
the usual letters to the others, but those three will be quite enough
for the preliminary examination."

"Well, Squire, that is good news indeed. We have had the coach held up
so often within five miles of this place during the past three months,
that we have been getting quite a bad name. And to think that young
Bastow was in it! I have heard some queer stories about him, and fancied
before long I should have to put my hand upon his shoulder; but I didn't
expect this."

"There is not a shadow of proof that he had anything to do with the
robbery, Dawney, but he will have difficulty in proving that he did not
afterwards abet them. It is serious enough as it is, and I am terribly
grieved for his father's sake."

"Yes, sir; I have always heard him spoken of as a kind gentleman, and
one who took a lot of trouble whenever anyone was sick. Well, sir, I
will be off in twenty minutes. I will run round at once and send Dr.
Hewett up to the Rectory, and a man shall start on horseback at seven
o'clock with the summons to the other magistrates."

John Thorndyke rode round to his three fellow magistrates, who, living
nearest to the town, were most regular in their attendance at the
meetings. They all listened in surprise to his narrative, and expressed
great pleasure at hearing that the men who had been such a pest to
the neighborhood, and had caused them all personally a great deal of
trouble, had been captured. All had heard tales, too, to Arthur Bastow's
disadvantage, and expressed great commiseration for his father. They
agreed to meet at the court half an hour before business began, to talk
the matter over together.

"It is out of the question that we can release him on bail," the
gentleman who was chairman of the bench said. "Quite so," John Thorndyke
agreed. "In the first place, the matter is too serious; and in the
next, he certainly would not be able to find bail; and lastly, for his
father's sake, it is unadvisable that he should be let out. At the same
time, it appears to me that there is a broad distinction between his
case and the others. I fear that there can be no question that he had
prior acquaintance with these men, and that he was cognizant of the
whole business; something I heard him say, and which, to my regret, I
shall have to repeat in court, almost proves that he was so. Still, let
us hope none of the stolen property will be found upon him; whether they
had intended to pass it over to his care or not is immaterial. If they
had not done so, I doubt whether he could be charged with receiving
stolen goods, and we might make the charge simply one of aiding these
two criminals, and of being so far an accessory after the crime.

"If we could soften it down still further I should, for his father's
sake, be glad; but as far as he himself is concerned, I would do nothing
to lighten his punishment. He is about as bad a specimen of human nature
as I ever came across. His father is in bodily fear of him. I saw the
young fellow yesterday, and urged him to enlist, in order to break
himself loose from the bad companionship he had fallen into. His reply
was insolent and defiant in the highest degree, and it was then that in
his father's name I forbade him the house, and as his father was present
he confirmed what I said, and told him that he would not have anything
more to do with him. This affair may do him good, and save his neck from
a noose. A few years at the hulks or a passage to Botany Bay will do him
no harm; and, at any rate, his father will have rest and peace, which he
never would have if he remained here."

A somewhat similar conversation took place at each house. John Thorndyke
breakfasted at Sir Charles Harris', the last of the three upon whom he
called, and then mounting rode back to Reigate.

"We have found the plunder on them," the head constable said, coming
out of the lockup as he drew rein before it, "and, fortunately for young
Bastow, nothing was found upon him."

"How are the two men?"

"The fellow you hit first is conscious now, sir, but very weak. The
doctor says that if he hadn't had a thick hat on, your blow would have
killed him to a certainty. The other man's arm is set and bandaged, and
he is all right otherwise. We shall be able to have them both in court
at twelve o'clock."

The Squire rode up to his house. He was met at the door by his son, in a
state of great excitement.

"Is it all true, father? The news has come from the village that you
have killed two men, and that they and Arthur Bastow have all been taken
away in a cart, guarded by constables."

"As usual, Mark, rumor has exaggerated matters. There are no dead men;
one certainly got a crack on the head that rendered him insensible for
some time, and another's arm is broken."

"And are they highwaymen, father? They say that two horses were fastened
behind the cart."

"That is what we are going to try, Mark. Until their guilt is proved, no
one knows whether they are highwaymen or not."

"And why is Arthur Bastow taken, father?"

"Simply because he was in company with the others. Now, you need not ask
any more questions, but if you like to get your pony saddled and ride
down with me to Reigate at eleven o'clock, I will get you into the
courthouse, and then you will hear all about it."

At greater length the Squire went into the matter with Mrs. Cunningham,
his lady housekeeper, and his ward's governess.

"It is a bad business, Mr. Thorndyke," she said, "and must be terrible
for poor Mr. Bastow."

"Yes, it is a bad business altogether, except that it will rid him of
this young rascal. If I were in his place I should be ready to suffer a
good deal to obtain such a riddance."

"I suppose that you won't sit upon the bench today?"

"No; at least I shall take no part in the deliberations. I shall, of
course, give evidence. The affair is not likely to last very long; my
story will take the longest to tell. Knapp's will be confirmatory of
mine, and the Reigate constable will depose to finding the watches,
rings, and money upon them; then, of course, the case will be adjourned
for the attendance of the coachman and some of the passengers. I don't
suppose they will be able to swear to their identity, for no doubt
they were masked. But that is immaterial; the discovery of the stolen
property upon them will be sufficient to hang them. No doubt we shall
have some Bow Streets runners down from town tomorrow or next day, and
they will most likely be able to say who the fellows are."

"Will Mr. Bastow have to give evidence against his son?"

"Not before us, I think; but I imagine he will have to appear at the
trial."

"It will be terrible for him."

"Yes, terrible. I sincerely hope that they will not summon him, but I am
afraid that there is very little doubt about it; they are sure to want
to know about his son's general conduct, though possibly the testimony
on that point of the constable at Reigate will be sufficient. My own
hope is that he will get a long sentence; at any rate, one long enough
to insure his not coming back during his father's lifetime. If you had
seen his manner when we were talking to him yesterday, you would believe
that he is capable of anything. I have had a good many bad characters
before me during the year and a half that I have sat upon the bench, but
I am bound to say that I never saw one who was to my eyes so thoroughly
evil as this young fellow. I don't think," he added with a smile, "that
I should feel quite comfortable myself if he were acquitted; it will
be a long time before I shall forget the expression of his face when
he said to me this morning, 'You will repent this night's work,
Thorndyke.'"

"You don't mean that you think he would do you any harm, Mr. Thorndyke?"

"Well, I should not care to meet him in a lonely place if he was armed
and I was not. But you need not be nervous, Mrs. Cunningham, there is
not the smallest chance of his being out for years; and by that time his
blood will have had time to cool down, and he will have learnt, at any
rate, that crimes cannot be committed in this country with impunity."

"It is all very shocking," the lady said. "What will poor Mr. Bastow do?
I should think that he would not like to remain as clergyman here, where
everyone knows about it."

"That must be for him to decide," the Squire said; "but if he wishes to
resign I certainly shall not press him to continue to hold the living.
He is a very old friend of mine. My father presented the living to him
when I was nine or ten years old, and I may say I saw him daily up to
the time when I went down into Sussex. If he resigns I should urge him
to take up his residence here and to act as Mark's tutor; and he might
also relieve you of some of Millicent's lessons. You have plenty to do
in looking after the management of things in general. However, that is
for the future."

At eleven o'clock the Squire drove down to Reigate, taking Mark with
him, as it would save all trouble about putting up the horse and pony.
On arriving he handed Mark over to the head constable, and asked him to
pass him into a seat in the courthouse, before the public were let in.

Reigate was in a state of unusual excitement. That the coach should have
been stopped and robbed was too common an event to excite much interest,
but that two highwaymen should have been captured, and, as was rumored,
a young gentleman brought in on a charge of being in connection with
them, caused a thrill of excitement. Quite a small crowd was assembled
before the courthouse, and the name of Squire Thorndyke passed from
mouth to mouth.

"There is some talk of his being mixed up with it in some way or other,"
one said. "I saw him myself ride in here, about half past five, and
I wondered he was about so early. Some do say as he caught the two
highwaymen single handed; but that don't stand to reason. Besides,
what could he have been doing out at such an hour as that? He is a good
landlord, and they say that Crowswood has been quite a different place
since he came to be master. He is a tight hand as a magistrate, and
cleared out half the village the first two or three months he was there;
but he spent a mint of money on the place, and the people there say that
they could not have a better master. Ah, here is Squire Chetwynd. He was
sure to be here. There is Sir Charles' gig turning the corner. I expect
most of them will be on the bench; they don't get such a case as this
every day."

"It may be there will be nothing for us to hear when the court opens,"
another said. "I hear both the fellows have been shot or knocked about
so bad that they cannot be brought up. Of course the court cannot sit if
they aint before it."

"That is not so, Master Jones. I spoke to one of the constables half an
hour ago--he lives next door to me--and he said that they would be well
enough to appear. Neither of them have been shot, though they have been
hurt pretty bad."

All this added to the desire of those around to get into the court, and
there was quite a rush when the doors were opened two minutes before
twelve, and it was at once crammed, the constable having some difficulty
in getting the doors shut, and in persuading those who could not get in
that there was not standing room for another person. There was a buzz of
talk in court until the door opened and six magistrates came in. It was
observed that John Thorndyke did not seat himself with the others, but
moved his chair a little apart from them, thus confirming the report
that he was in some way connected with the matter, and did not intend to
take any part in the decision. Then another door opened, and the three
prisoners were brought in. The two first were pale and evidently weak;
one had his head wrapped in bandages, the other had the right sleeve of
his coat cut off, and his arm bandaged and supported by a sling. Both
made a resolute effort to preserve a careless demeanor. The third, who
was some years younger than the others, looked round with a smile on his
lips, bowed to the magistrates with an air of insolent bravado when
he was placed in the dock, and then leaned easily in the corner, as
if indifferent to the whole business. A chair was placed between his
comrades for the use of the man whose head was bandaged. Many among
those present knew Arthur Bastow by sight, and his name passed from
mouth to mouth; but the usher called loudly for silence, and then the
magistrates' clerk rose.

"William Smith and John Brown--at least, these are the names given--are
charged with stopping the South Coast coach last night, killing the
guard, and robbing the passengers; and Arthur Bastow is charged with
aiding and abetting the other two prisoners, and with guilty knowledge
of their crime."

It was noticed by those who could see the prisoners' faces that, in
spite of Bastow's air of indifference, there was an expression of
anxiety on his face as the charge was read, and he undoubtedly felt
relief as that against himself was mentioned. The first witness was John
Knapp, and the constable stepped into the witness box.

"What do you know of this business, Knapp?" the chairman asked. "Just
tell it your own way."

"I am constable of Crowswood, your honor, and yesterday Squire Thorndyke
said to me--"

"No, you must not tell it like that, Knapp; you must not repeat what
another person said to you. You can say that from information received
you did so and so."

"Yes, your honor. From information received I went to the Rev. Mr.
Bastow's house, at a quarter to nine last night. At nine o'clock Squire
Thorndyke and the Parson came in together. They sent the servant up to
bed, and then the Squire sent me round to examine the fastenings of the
doors. I found that one back door had been left unfastened, and locked
and bolted it. The Squire told me to lie down until one o'clock, and he
would watch, and Mr. Bastow went up to bed."

"Do you know of your own knowledge why these precautions were taken?"

"Only from what I was told, your honor. At one o'clock the Squire woke
me, and he lay down in the parlor, telling me to call him if I heard
any movement outside. About two o'clock I heard two horses come into the
Parson's yard. I called Squire Thorndyke, who went upstairs to an open
window; presently someone came and tried the back door. I heard voices
outside, but could not hear what was said. The Squire came down and
called me upstairs. I went up and took my place at one side of the
window, and the Squire took his on the other. I had this cudgel in my
hand, and the Squire his riding whip. A ladder was put up against the
window, and then someone came up, lifted the sash up high and got in.
There was light enough for me to see it was young Mr. Bastow. Then the
two other prisoners came up. When the third had got into the room Mr.
Bastow said, 'Follow me, and then you won't tumble over the furniture.'"

"How was it that they did not see you and Mr. Thorndyke?" the chairman
asked.

"We were standing well back, your honor. The moon was on the other side
of the house. There was light enough for us to see them as they got in
at the window, but where we were standing it was quite dark, especially
to chaps who had just come in from the moonlight. As they moved, the
Squire hit the last of them a clout on the head with his hunting crop,
and down he went, as if shot. The man next to him turned, but I did not
see what took place, for, as the Squire had ordered me, I made a rush at
Mr. Bastow and got my arms round him pretty tight, so as to prevent him
using his pistols, if he had any. He struggled hard, but without saying
a word, till I got my heel behind his and threw him on his back. I came
down on the top of him; then I got the pistols out of his belt and threw
them on the bed, slipped the handcuffs onto one wrist, lifted him up a
bit, and then shoved him up against the bedpost, and got the handcuff
onto his other wrist, so that he could not shift away, having the post
in between his arms.

"Then I went to see if the Squire wanted any help, but he didn't. I
first handcuffed the man whose head he had broken, and tied the legs
of the other, and then kept guard over them till morning. When the
constables came up from town we searched the prisoners, and on two
of them found the watches, money, and rings. We found nothing on Mr.
Bastow. I went with the head constable to Mr. Bastow's room and searched
it thoroughly, but found nothing whatever there."

The evidence created a great sensation in court. John Thorndyke had
first intended to ask Knapp not to make any mention of the fact that
Arthur Bastow was carrying pistols unless the question was directly put
to him. But the more he had thought over the matter, the more convinced
was he that the heavier the sentence the better it would be for the
Rector; and when he had heard from the latter that there was nothing
left in his son's room that could be brought against him, and that he
could not be charged with the capital crime of being a receiver, he
thought it best to let matters take their course.

The head constable was the next witness. He deposed to the finding of
the articles produced upon the two elder prisoners and the unsuccessful
search of the younger prisoner's room.

"You did not search the house further?" the chairman inquired.

"No, sir; I wanted to get the prisoners down here as fast as I could,
seeing that two of them were seriously hurt."

The chairman nodded.

"You will, of course, make a careful search of the whole house,
constable."

"Yes, sir; I left one of my men up there with instructions to allow no
one to go upstairs until I returned."

"Quite right."

John Thorndyke was the next witness, and his evidence cleared up what
had hitherto been a mystery to the general body of the public, as to
how he and the constable happened to be in the house on watch when the
highwaymen arrived. The most important part of his evidence was the
repetition of the words young Bastow had used as he mounted the ladder,
as they showed that it was arranged between the prisoners that the
stolen goods should be hidden in the house. The Squire was only asked
one or two questions.

"I suppose, Mr. Thorndyke, that you had no idea whatever that the
younger prisoner would be accompanied by anyone else when he returned
home?"

"Not the slightest," the Squire replied. "I was there simply to prevent
this unfortunate lad from entering the house, when perhaps he might have
used violence towards his father. My intention was to seize him if he
did so, and to give him the choice of enlisting, as I had urged him to
do, or of being brought before this bench for breaking into his father's
house. I felt that anything was better than his continuing in the evil
courses on which he seemed bent."

