wouldn't poison you?"

"I relied on you. You said it wasn't poison when I asked you in the
lab. My faith in you is touching."

"But why did you take any yourself?"

"Sort of idea of diverting suspicion. But the thing isn't finished
yet. Listen."

Linton left the dormitory five minutes later with a look of a young
disciple engaged on some holy mission.


PART 3

"You think the food is unwholesome, then?" said the headmaster after
dinner that night.

"Unwholesome!" said the school doctor. "It must be deadly. It must be
positively lethal. Here we have six ordinary, strong, healthy boys
struck down at one fell swoop as if there were a pestilence raging.
Why----"

"One moment," said the headmaster. "Come in."

A small figure appeared in the doorway.

"Please, sir," said the figure in the strained voice of one speaking a
"piece" which he has committed to memory. "Mr. Seymour says please
would you mind letting the doctor come to his house at once because
Linton is ill."

"What!" exclaimed the doctor. "What's the matter with him?"

"Please, sir, I believe it's buckwheat cakes."

"What! And here's another of them!"

A second small figure had appeared in the doorway.

"Sir, please, sir," said the newcomer, "Mr. Bradfield says may the
doctor----"

"And what boy is it _this_ time?"

"Please, sir, it's Brown. He went to Ring's Stores----"

The headmaster rose.

"Perhaps you had better go at once, Oakes," he said. "This is becoming
serious. That place is a positive menace to the community. I shall put
it out of bounds tomorrow morning."

And when Dunstable and Linton, pale but cheerful, made their way--slowly,
as befitted convalescents--to Cook's two days afterwards, they had to sit
on the counter. All the other seats were occupied.




THE GUARDIAN


In his Sunday suit (with ten shillings in specie in the right-hand
trouser pocket) and a brand-new bowler hat, the youngest of the
Shearnes, Thomas Beauchamp Algernon, was being launched by the
combined strength of the family on his public-school career. It was a
solemn moment. The landscape was dotted with relatives--here a small
sister, awed by the occasion into refraining from insult; there an
aunt, vaguely admonitory. "Well, Tom," said Mr. Shearne, "you'll soon
be off now. You're sure to like Eckleton. Remember to cultivate your
bowling. Everyone can bat nowadays. And play forward, not outside. The
outsides get most of the fun, certainly, but then if you're a forward,
you've got eight chances of getting into a team."

"All right, father."

"Oh, and work hard." This by way of an afterthought.

"All right, father."

"And, Tom," said Mrs. Shearne, "you are sure to be comfortable at
school, because I asked Mrs. Davy to write to her sister, Mrs.
Spencer, who has a son at Eckleton, and tell her to tell him to look
after you when you get there. He is in Mr. Dencroft's house, which is
next door to Mr. Blackburn's, so you will be quite close to one
another. Mind you write directly you get there."

"All right, mother."

"And look here, Tom." His eldest brother stepped to the front and
spoke earnestly. "Look here, don't you forget what I've been telling
you?"

"All right."

"You'll be right enough if you don't go sticking on side. Don't forget
that, however much of a blood you may have been at that rotten little
private school of yours, you're not one at Eckleton."

"All right."

"You look clean, which is the great thing. There's nothing much wrong
with you except cheek. You've got enough of that to float a ship. Keep
it under."

"All right. Keep your hair on."

"There you go," said the expert, with gloomy triumph. "If you say that
sort of thing at Eckleton, you'll get jolly well sat on, by Jove!"

"Bai Jove, old chap!" murmured the younger brother, "we're devils in
the Forty-twoth!"

The other, whose chief sorrow in life was that he could not get the
smaller members of the family to look with proper awe on the fact that
he had just passed into Sandhurst, gazed wistfully at the speaker,
but, realising that there was a locked door between them, tried no
active measures.

"Well, anyhow," he said, "you'll soon get it knocked out of you,
that's one comfort. Look here, if you do get scrapping with anybody,
don't forget all I've taught you. And I should go on boxing there if I
were you, so as to go down to Aldershot some day. You ought to make a
fairly decent featherweight if you practise."

"All right."

"Let's know when Eckleton's playing Haileybury, and I'll come and look
you up. I want to see that match."

"All right."

"Good-bye."

"Good-bye, Tom."

"Good-bye, Tom, dear."

Chorus of aunts and other supers: "Goodbye, Tom."

Tom (comprehensively): "G'bye."

The train left the station.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kennedy, the head of Dencroft's, said that when he wanted his study
turned into a beastly furnace, he would take care to let Spencer know.
He pointed out that just because it was his habit to warm the study
during the winter months, there was no reason why Spencer should light
the gas-stove on an afternoon in the summer term when the thermometer
was in the eighties. Spencer thought he might want some muffins cooked
for tea, did he? Kennedy earnestly advised Spencer to give up
thinking, as Nature had not equipped him for the strain. Thinking
necessitated mental effort, and Spencer, in Kennedy's opinion, had no
mind, but rubbed along on a cheap substitute of mud and putty.

More chatty remarks were exchanged, and then Spencer tore himself away
from the pleasant interview, and went downstairs to the junior study,
where he remarked to his friend Phipps that Life was getting a bit
thick.

"What's up now?" inquired Phipps.

"Everything. We've just had a week of term, and I've been in extra
once already for doing practically nothing, and I've got a hundred
lines, and Kennedy's been slanging me for lighting the stove. How was
I to know he didn't want it lit? Wish I was fagging for somebody
else."

"All the while you're jawing," said Phipps, "there's a letter for you
on the mantelpiece, staring at you?"

"So there is. Hullo!"

"What's up? Hullo! is that a postal order? How much for?"

"Five bob. I say, who's Shearne?"

"New kid in Blackburn's. Why?"

"Great Scott! I remember now. They told me to look after him. I
haven't seen him yet. And listen to this: 'Mrs. Shearne has sent me
the enclosed to give to you. Her son writes to say that he is very
happy and getting on very well, so she is sure you must have been
looking after him.' Why, I don't know the kid by sight. I clean forgot
all about him."

"Well, you'd better go and see him now, just to say you've done it."

Spencer perpended.

"Beastly nuisance having a new kid hanging on to you. He's probably a
frightful rotter."

"Well, anyway, you ought to," said Phipps, who possessed the
_scenario_ of a conscience.

"I can't."

"All right, don't, then. But you ought to send back that postal
order."

"Look here, Phipps," said Spencer plaintively, "you needn't be an
idiot, you know."

And the trivial matter of Thomas B. A. Shearne was shelved.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thomas, as he had stated in his letter to his mother, was exceedingly
happy at Eckleton, and getting on very nicely indeed. It is true that
there had been one or two small unpleasantnesses at first, but those
were over now, and he had settled down completely. The little troubles
alluded to above had begun on his second day at Blackburn's. Thomas,
as the reader may have gathered from his glimpse of him at the station,
was not a diffident youth. He was quite prepared for anything Fate
might have up its sleeve for him, and he entered the junior day-room at
Blackburn's ready for emergencies. On the first day nothing happened.
One or two people asked him his name, but none inquired what his father
was--a question which, he had understood from books of school life, was
invariably put to the new boy. He was thus prevented from replying
"coolly, with his eyes fixed on his questioner's": "A gentleman. What's
yours?" and this, of course, had been a disappointment. But he reconciled
himself to it, and on the whole enjoyed his first day at Eckleton.

On the second there occurred an Episode.

Thomas had inherited from his mother a pleasant, rather meek cast of
countenance. He had pink cheeks and golden hair--almost indecently
golden in one who was not a choirboy.

Now, if you are going to look like a Ministering Child or a Little
Willie, the Sunbeam of the Home, when you go to a public school,
you must take the consequences. As Thomas sat by the window of the
junior day-room reading a magazine, and deeply interested in it,
there fell upon his face such a rapt, angelic expression that the
sight of it, silhouetted against the window, roused Master P. Burge,
his fellow-Blackburnite, as it had been a trumpet-blast. To seize a
Bradley Arnold's Latin Prose Exercises and hurl it across the room
was with Master Burge the work of a moment. It struck Thomas on the
ear. He jumped, and turned some shades pinker. Then he put down his
magazine, picked up the Bradley Arnold, and sat on it. After which he
resumed his magazine.

The acute interest of the junior day-room, always fond of a break in
the monotony of things, induced Burge to go further into the matter.

"You with the face!" said Burge rudely.

Thomas looked up.

"What the dickens are you going with my book? Pass it back!"

"Oh, is this yours?" said Thomas. "Here you are."

He walked towards him, carrying the book. At two yards range he fired
it in. It hit Burge with some force in the waistcoat, and there was a
pause while he collected his wind.

Then the thing may be said to have begun.

Yes, said Burge, interrogated on the point five minutes later, he
_had_ had enough.

"Good," said Thomas pleasantly. "Want a handkerchief?"

That evening he wrote to his mother and, thanking her for kind
inquiries, stated that he was not being bullied. He added, also in
answer to inquiries, that he had not been tossed in a blanket, and
that--so far--no Hulking Senior (with scowl) had let him down from the
dormitory window after midnight by a sheet, in order that he might
procure gin from the local public-house. As far as he could gather,
the seniors were mostly teetotallers. Yes, he had seen Spencer several
times. He did not add that he had seen him from a distance.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I'm so glad I asked Mrs. Davy to get her nephew to look after Tom,"
said Mrs. Shearne, concluding the reading of the epistle at breakfast.
"It makes such a difference to a new boy having somebody to protect
him at first."

"Only drawback is," said his eldest brother gloomily--"won't get cheek
knocked out of him. Tom's kid wh'ought get'sheadsmacked reg'ly. Be no
holding him."

And he helped himself to marmalade, of which delicacy his mouth was
full, with a sort of magnificent despondency.

By the end of the first fortnight of his school career, Thomas
Beauchamp Algernon had overcome all the little ruggednesses which
relieve the path of the new boy from monotony. He had been taken in by
a primaeval "sell" which the junior day-room invariably sprang on the
new-comer. But as he had sat on the head of the engineer of the same
for the space of ten minutes, despite the latter's complaints of pain
and forecasts of what he would do when he got up, the laugh had not
been completely against him. He had received the honourable
distinction of extra lesson for ragging in French. He had been
"touched up" by the prefect of his dormitory for creating a
disturbance in the small hours. In fact, he had gone through all the
usual preliminaries, and become a full-blown Eckletonian.

His letters home were so cheerful at this point that a second postal
order relieved the dwindling fortune of Spencer. And it was this,
coupled with the remonstrances of Phipps, that induced the Dencroftian
to break through his icy reserve.

"Look here, Spencer," said Phipps, his conscience thoroughly stirred
by this second windfall, "it's all rot. You must either send back that
postal order, or go and see the chap. Besides, he's quite a decent
kid. We're in the same game at cricket. He's rather a good bowler. I'm
getting to know him quite well. I've got a jolly sight more right to
those postal orders than you have."

"But he's an awful ass to look at," pleaded Spencer.

"What's wrong with him? Doesn't look nearly such a goat as you," said
Phipps, with the refreshing directness of youth.

"He's got yellow hair," argued Spencer.

"Why shouldn't he have?"

"He looks like a sort of young Sunday-school kid."

"Well, he jolly well isn't, then, because I happen to know that he's
had scraps with some of the fellows in his house, and simply mopped
them."

"Well, all right, then," said Spencer reluctantly.

The historic meeting took place outside the school shop at the quarter
to eleven interval next morning. Thomas was leaning against the wall,
eating a bun. Spencer approached him with half a jam sandwich in his
hand. There was an awkward pause.

"Hullo!" said Spencer at last.

"Hullo!" said Thomas.

Spencer finished his sandwich and brushed the crumbs off his trousers.
Thomas continued operations on the bun with the concentrated
expression of a lunching python.

"I believe your people know my people," said Spencer.

"We have some awfully swell friends," said Thomas. Spencer chewed this
thoughtfully awhile.

"Beastly cheek," he said at last.

"Sorry," said Thomas, not looking it.

Spencer produced a bag of gelatines.

"Have one?" he asked.

"What's wrong with 'em?"

"All right, don't."

He selected a gelatine and consumed it.

"Ever had your head smacked?" he inquired courteously.

A slightly strained look came into Thomas's blue eyes.

"Not often," he replied politely. "Why?"

"Oh, I don't know," said Spencer. "I was only wondering."

"Oh?"

"Look here," said Spencer, "my mater told me to look after you."

"Well, you can look after me now if you want to, because I'm going."

And Thomas dissolved the meeting by walking off in the direction of
