that might arise for every West Saxon to be ready to take his place
in the line of battle. The evenings that he spent at home were by
no means dull. It was only in considerable towns that there were
inns for the accommodation of travellers. Everywhere else these
were dependent upon hospitality, and no door was ever closed in
their faces. It was seldom that less than five or six travellers
rested for the night at Steyning, and often that number was largely
exceeded. Besides the wayfarers there were the professional wanderers,
the minstrels, the story-tellers, and occasionally a troupe of
buffoons.

All these were welcome, for they brought the news from without; the
last rumours in London concerning the quarrels of the earls; the
movements of the Danish ships that were harrying the coast, and
those of the vessels Earl Harold despatched to cope with them; the
prices of wool and hides in the chief markets; and even reports of
what was happening beyond the seas. Leaving the dais, Wulf would
go down and listen to the talk of the travellers, or, when they
were of a degree above the common, have them up beside him, and
question them as to their journeyings, the places they had visited,
and the personages they had seen. Thus his hours were fully occupied
from morning until night. He found far less time than he had expected
for sport, and although he occasionally went out with his falcons
or hunted the stag in the forest, which covered a wide extent of
country beyond the hills, it was but seldom that he could find
leisure for these amusements.

"It seems to me that you are always doing something, Wulf," Osgod
said one day. "It is not at all the sort of life I should have
thought a young thane would live. Why, you work many more hours a
day than I did in my father's forge. It is either books, or the
affairs of the tenants, or visiting the monastery all day when you
are not at work with your sword exercises. When I have done with
my work with Leof I like to lie down in the sun and take it quietly,
and I cannot understand how you can be for ever on foot."

"I have so many things to do, Osgod; there is so much to learn, and
I do not wish to grow up a mere beer swiller like Edmund of Angmering
or Ethelred of Arundel. Their lives are, as far as I can see, no
whit higher or more worthy than that of their own serfs, from whom
they differ only that they eat more, drink more, and sleep on softer
beds. Earl Harold expects better things than that of me, and I want
to make myself worthy of being one of those in whom he can place
confidence and on whom he can depend in case of trouble. I have
heard him say how bad it is for England that our thanes are, in
learning and culture, so far behind the nobles of other countries,
and that if England is ever to take her place among great nations
it must be by her thanes first raising themselves to the level of
the nobles abroad, who are the counsellors of their kings. I can
never hope to be anything like Earl Harold, who is the wisest and
greatest of Englishmen, but I do hope so to fit myself that some
day he may think me worthy of trust and confidence."

"Well, master," Osgod said lazily, "every one to his liking. I
hope to be a good soldier and your true servant, but as for all
this thinking and learning it would weary me to death."




CHAPTER III.


AT COURT.

Two months after Wulf had gone down to Steyning one of Harold's men
brought a short letter from the earl himself. "I am glad to hear,
Wulf," it began, "from my steward, Egbert, that you are applying
yourself so heartily to your work. I have also good accounts of you
from the Prior of Bramber, who sometimes writes to me. He is a good
and wise man, as well as a learned one, and I am right glad to hear
that you are spending your time so well. I told you that you should
hear if there was any alteration in your affair. Some change was
made as soon as you had left; for, two days later, meeting William
of London in the presence of the king, I told him that I had inquired
further into the matter, and had found that you were by no means
the aggressor in the quarrel with young Fitz-Urse, for that he had
fingered his dagger, and would doubtless have drawn it had there
not been many bystanders. I also said that, with all respect to
the bishop, it would have been better had he not inclined his ears
solely to the tale of his page, and that under the circumstances
it was scarcely wonderful that, being but a boy, you had defended
yourself when you were, as you deemed, unjustly accused.

"The prelate sent at once for his page, who stoutly denied that he
had touched the hilt of his dagger, but I too had sent off for
Ulred, the armourer, and he brought with him a gossip who had also
been present. I asked the king's permission to introduce them, and
they entirely confirmed your story. Fitz-Urse exclaimed that it was
a Saxon plot to do him harm, and I could see that the bishop was
of the same opinion; but the king, who is ever anxious to do justice,
declared at once that he was sure that the two craftsmen were but
speaking the truth. He sternly rebuked Fitz-Urse as a liar, and
signified to the bishop that he would do well to punish him severely
by sending him back to Normandy, for that he would not tolerate his
presence at court--an order which the bishop obeyed with very bad
grace. But at any rate the lad was sent away by a ship a week later.

"After the bishop had left the audience-chamber the king said that
he was afraid he had acted with harshness to you, as it seemed that
the fault was by no means wholly on your side, and that I could at
once recall you if I wished to do so. I thanked his majesty
dutifully, but said I thought it were best in all ways that for a
time you should remain away from court. In the first place, you
deserved some punishment for your want of respect for the bishop,
to whom you should have submitted yourself, even if you had thought
him unjust. In the second place, as Fitz-Urse had been sent away,
it would create an animosity against you on the part of his countrymen
at court were you to reappear at once; and lastly, that I considered
it would be to your benefit to pass at least some months on your
estates, learning your duties as thane, and making the acquaintance
of your people. Therefore, I wished you to continue at Steyning.
It will assuredly be pleasant for you to know that you are no longer
to be considered as being there in consequence of having fallen
under the king's displeasure, but simply because it is my wish that
you should for a time dwell among your people, and fit yourself to
be a wise lord to them."

Wulf was much pleased at the receipt of this letter, partly because
the fact that he had been sent away in disgrace stung him, and he
had felt obliged frankly to acknowledge to the neighbouring thanes
that he had been sent down on account of a quarrel with a Norman
page; but chiefly because it showed the kindly interest that Harold
felt in him, and that although absent he had still thought of him.

It was nigh ten months before he heard again. During that time he
had grown a good deal, and although he would never be tall, his
frame had so widened out that it was evident he would grow into an
exceptionally powerful man.

At sixteen he was still a boy, and although his position at Steyning,
where, although still under the nominal tutelage of the earl's
steward, he was practically lord and master, accustomed to play the
part of host within its walls, and that of feudal lord over the
wide estates, had given him the habits of authority and the bearing
of one who respected himself, the merry expression of his face,
aided by a slight upward turn of his nose, showed that in other
respects he was unchanged. He had learned with his weapons all that
Leof could teach him. He could wield a light battle-axe, and with
his sword could turn aside or sever an arrow however sharply shot
at him, provided that he had time to mark its flight. With a
quarter-staff he was a match for any youth on the estate, and he
could hurl a dart with unerring aim.

Osgod had sprung up into a powerful young fellow, taller than his
master by well-nigh a head, and his equal in exercises requiring
strength rather than quickness and skill. His duties at table had
been delegated to another, for there was a certain clumsiness in
Osgod's strength that no teaching could correct; and in his eagerness
to serve his master he so frequently spilled the contents of a cup,
or upset a platter, that even Egbert acknowledged that it was
hopeless to attempt to make a skilful servitor of him.

The earl's second letter contained only the words:

"Come up to London as soon as you receive this. Leave Egbert in
charge of everything as before."

Although the time had not seemed long, and his occupations were so
varied that he had never felt dull since he had come down, Wulf was
delighted to receive the summons. He had, unconsciously to himself,
begun to feel restless, and to wonder whether Earl Harold had
altogether forgotten his existence.

"We are going back to London, Osgod," he shouted.

"I am right glad of it," the young giant said, stretching his arms
lazily. "I am grievously tired of the country, and had it not been
that nothing would induce me to leave your service, I have thought
sometimes that I would gladly be back again in my father's smithy,
hammering away on hot iron. I used to think it would be the grandest
thing possible to have nothing to do, but I have found that one can
have too much of a good thing. Certainly I am glad to be going back,
but I am not sure whether it won't be worse at court than it is
here."

"Perhaps we may not be staying there," Wulf said encouragingly.
"Maybe the earl is going to start on some expedition; though we
have heard of no trouble, either in the North or in Wales. But even
if I stay at court, Osgod, you will often be able to be away, and
can spend some hours a day at the smithy, where, if you like, you
can take off your smock and belabour iron to your heart's content.
I should say you would be a rare help to your father, for, as Leof
says, for a downright solid blow there are not many men who could
surpass you."

Osgod laughed. "Leof has not forgiven that blow I dealt him a month
ago, when I flattened in his helmet with my blunted axe and stretched
him senseless on the ground; in faith, I meant not to hit so hard,
but he had been taunting me with my slowness, and seeing an opening
for a blow at his head I could not resist it, and struck, as he was
always telling me to do, quickly."

"You well-nigh killed him," Wulf said, shaking his head; "he has
not taken an axe in his hand since, at least not with either of us.
He said to me the first time I invited him to a bout, it was high
time a man should give up teaching when he came to be struck senseless
by a boy."

"Not much of a boy," Osgod replied, "seeing that I stand over six
feet high, and got my muscles hardened early at the forge. However,
he bears me no ill-will; all he ever said to me on the matter was,
'I am glad to see that you can shake off your sluggishness sometimes,
Osgod; I should have been less earnest in my advice to you to strike
more quickly if I had thought that you were going to do it at my
expense. Keep those blows for your master's enemies, lad. If you
deal them to his friends you will lessen their number.'"

"Have my horse brought round at once, Osgod, have the wallets packed,
and be ready to start in an hour's time. I cannot go without riding
over to say good-bye to the prior and some of the monks. Do you,
when you have packed, follow me; it is not greatly out of the way,
and I shall meet you on the road. A short half-hour will suffice
for me there."

"So Harold has sent for you, Wulf?" the prior said, when the young
thane told him that he was on the point of starting for London.
"'Tis as well. Come back when you may, you will now be fit to rule
at Steyning, and to rule well, but I foresee that we are likely to
have you but seldom down here. You are in good train to rise high
among Englishmen. You already possess the favour of Earl Harold,
who is, in all respects but name, King of England. You possess far
more learning than most young men of your rank, and as Harold rightly
thinks much of such knowledge, you are likely, if you live, to learn
more. But better than this, so far as your prospects are concerned
in the troubled times that may be coming, you are quick witted and
ready. I hear that you are already very proficient in arms, and a
match for most grown men. Best of all, so far as your future happiness
is concerned, you have a kind heart and a good disposition. You
could scarce be a page of Earl Harold's and not be a true Englishman
and patriot; therefore, my son, I think that I can predict a bright
and honourable future for you if Harold lives and reigns King of
England. Be steadfast and firm, lad. Act ever in what your heart
tells you is the right; be neither hasty nor quarrelsome. But,"--he
broke off with a smile, "you have had one lesson that way already.
Now I will detain you no longer. _Pax vobiscum_, may God keep
and guard you! If opportunity offer, and a messenger comes this
way, write me a few lines; news of you will be always welcome at
Bramber."

Leaving the prior, Wulf paid a hurried visit to the chambers where
the monks were engaged in their various avocations, and then started
at a canter and met Osgod coming along with a sumpter-horse carrying
the wallets, a store of provisions for the way, and Wulf's arms and
armour fastened to the crupper of his saddle.

"You have done well, Osgod," Wulf said as he turned his horse, and
at a quieter pace proceeded beside him. "I forgot to give you any
directions or to speak about your bringing a pack-horse with you,
but I am glad you thought of it, for our steeds would have been
heavily burdened had all that baggage been divided between them."

"We go back more heavily laden than we came," Osgod remarked. "My
wardrobe was then of the scantiest, and your own has been considerably
added to since we came here. Truly, Wulf, I feel that I have changed
mightily in this year, and can scarce believe that it is but a
twelvemonth back since I flung down my hammer and started on my
tramp to Guildford with a change of clothes dangling from the end
of my cudgel. I was glad when you and your party overtook me, for
I was badly scared once or twice when I met a rough fellow or two
on the way, though, fortunately, they did not deem me worth robbing.
We could give a good account of four or five of such knaves now."

"There has been a change indeed, Osgod, and in me as much as in
you, though I have not shot up into such huge proportions. I was a
page then, and had learned but to obey. I am a boy still, but I
have begun to learn to rule; at any rate, to rule myself. I have
not conquered my fault of hastiness altogether."

Osgod smiled broadly.

"You are quick in temper still, Wulf. You remember it was but
yesterday that you rated me soundly because I had fed your hawks
early, and they were too lazy to fly when you wanted them."

"Well, it was annoying," Wulf laughed; "and you deserved rating,
since you have been told over and over again that the hawks were
not to be fed early in the morning. Besides, the rating did you no
harm."

"None at all, master. I know that you mean not what you say, and
hard words break no bones. I should have thought no more of it had
you yourself not remarked that you were still somewhat hasty of
temper."

"I was wrong, Osgod," Wulf said, holding out his hand, "but you
know that I love you, and that though your carelessness and
forgetfulness chafe me sorely at times, I mean not what I say."

"I know it, master, and I would not have you other than you are. I
suppose it is the thickness of my skull that prevents me from taking
in all that I am told, and perhaps if I had more to do I might do
it better. I shall be able to play my part when it comes to hard
blows, and you must remember that no one can excel in all things.
A staghound is trusty and sure when on the chase, but he could not
be taught to fetch and to carry and to perform all sorts of tricks
such as were done by the little mongrel cur that danced to the order
of the mountebank the other evening. My father always said I was a
fool, and that, though for a piece of rough hammering I was by no
means amiss, I should never learn the real intricacies of repairing
fine armour. Everything has its good, you see, Master Wulf; for had
my father thought better of me in his trade, I doubt if he would
ever have given me leave to quit it, and go as your man."

"I have no doubt that is so, Osgod, and heartily glad am I that you
showed no genius for smith's work. Nature evidently intended you
to damage casques and armour rather than to repair them. You have
not got all my clothes with you," he added, as he looked round at
the led horse.

"No indeed, Wulf," Osgod said, "nor a quarter of them, for in truth
your wardrobe has grown prodigiously since we came here. I had to
talk it over with Egbert, having but little faith in my own wits.
He advised me to take the two suits that were most fitted for court,
saying that if he heard you were going to remain there he would
send on the rest in charge of a couple of well-armed men."

"That is the best plan, doubtless," Wulf agreed. "My hawking suit
and some of the others would be useless to me at court, and it would
have been folly to have burdened ourselves with them if we are
likely to return hither shortly."

"Where shall we stop to-night?" Osgod asked.

"At the monastery of the Grey Friars, where we put up on our way
from London. It will not be a long ride, but we started late.
To-morrow we shall of course make a long day's journey to Guildford.
I don't know what travellers would do were it not for the priories."

"Sleep in the woods, Wulf, and be none the worse for it. For myself,
I would rather lie on the sward with a blazing fire and the greenwood
overhead, than sleep on the cold stones in a monk's kitchen,
especially if it happened to be a fast-day and one had gone to rest
on a well-nigh empty stomach."

"It is never so bad as that," Wulf laughed; "as a rule, however
much the monks may fast, they entertain their guests well."

"If it is an English monastery they do," Osgod admitted, "but not
where there is a Norman prior, with his new-fangled notions, and
his vigils and fasts and flagellations. If I ever become a monk,
which I trust is not likely, I will take care to enter a Saxon
house, where a man may laugh without its being held to be a deadly
sin, and can sleep honestly without being wakened up half a dozen
times by the chapel bell."

"You would assuredly make but a bad monk, Osgod, and come what will
I do not think you will ever take to that vocation. But let us urge
on our horses to a better pace, or the kitchen will be closed, and
there will be but a poor chance of supper when we reach the priory."

"Well, Osgod," Wulf asked the next morning as they rode on their
way, "how did you fare last night?"

"Well enough as to the eating, there was a haunch of cold venison
that a king needn't have grumbled at, but truly my bones ache now
with the hardness of my couch. Couch! there was but the barest
handful of rushes on the cold stone floor, and I woke a score of
times feeling as if my bones were coming through the skin."

"You have been spoilt, Osgod, by a year of sleeping softly. I marked
more than once how thickly the rushes were strewn in that corner
in which you always slept. How will it be when you have to stand
the hardships of a soldier's life?"

"I can sleep well on the ground with my cloak round me," Osgod said
steadily, "and if the place be hard you have but to take up a sod
under your hip-bone and another under your shoulder, and you need
not envy one who sleeps on a straw bed. As to cold and wet, I have
never tried sleeping out of doors, but I doubt not that I can stand
it as well as another. As to eating and drinking, they say that
Earl Harold always looks closely after his men, and holds that if
soldiers are to fight well they must be fed well. At any rate,
Master Wulf, I shall be better off than you will, for I have never
been accustomed, as you have, to such luxuries as a straw bed; and
I doubt whether you ever went hungry to bed as I have done many and
many a time, for in the days when my father hoped to make an armourer
of me I was sent off supperless whenever I bungled a job or neglected
his instructions. I wonder what the earl can want you for in such
haste?"

"I do not suppose he wants me in any haste at all. He may have
spoken to the king about me, and when Edward again spoke of my
returning he would simply send for me to come at once."

Such indeed proved to be the case. When he waited on Harold as soon
as he arrived the latter held out his hand; "I am glad to see you
back again, Wulf. A year of country air and exercise has done wonders
for you, and though you are not as tall as you might be, you have
truly widened out into fair proportions, and should be able to swing
a battle-axe of full weight. Thinking it was time for you to return
here, I spoke to the king, who was in high good-humour, for he had
been mightily pleased that morning at some of the figures the monks
have wrought in stone for the adornment of his Church of St. Peter;
therefore he not only consented to your return, but chided me gently
for not having called you up to town before. 'The matter had
altogether slipped my mind,' he said; 'I told you that he might
return directly it was shown that it was the bishop's page who was
in fault, and from that day I have never thought of it.'

"I told the king that I had purposely kept silence, for I thought
the day had come when you should learn your duties down there instead
of dawdling away your time at court. You need not put on a page's
attire any more. You will remain here as my ward, and I have had
so good an account from the good prior of Bramber that in a short
time I shall be able to receive your oath as Thane of Steyning. You
will attend me to court this evening as one of my gentlemen, and I
will then present you to the king, whom it is well that you should
thank for having pardoned you. I hear from the prior that the varlet
you took down with you has grown into a big man, and is well-nigh
as tall as I am already. He must have lodging with my followers
while you are here."

Finding that he was to remain for the present at Westminster, Wulf
sent off a messenger at once to request Egbert to forward the rest
of his clothes immediately. That evening the earl took him into a
chamber, where the king was seated surrounded by a few of his
favourites.

"This is Wulf of Steyning, my lord king," Harold said, "the youth
who was unfortunate enough to incur your royal displeasure a year
since, and who has upon your order returned from his estates. I
have had excellent accounts of him from my good friend the prior
of Bramber, who speaks well alike of his love of study and his
attention to the affairs of his estate. I have also heard from other
hands of his progress in military exercises, and that he bids fair
to become a valiant and skilful soldier of your majesty. He has
prayed me to express his thanks to your majesty for having pardoned
him, and having authorized me to enrol him again in the ranks of
my followers here."
