Hark!  the hymn.  This, at least, is a portion of the service which I
can enjoy better than if I sat within the walls, where the full choir
and the massive melody of the organ, would fall with a weight upon me.
At this distance, it thrills through my frame, and plays upon my
heartstrings, with a pleasure both of the sense and spirit.  Heaven be
praised, I know nothing of music, as a science; and the most elaborate
harmonies, if they please me, please as simply as a nurse's lullaby.
The strain has ceased, but prolongs itself in my mind, with fanciful
echoes, till I start from my revery, and find that the sermon has
commenced.  It is my misfortune seldom to fructify, in a regular way, by
any but printed sermons.  The first strong idea, which the preacher
utters, gives birth to a train of thought, and leads me onward, step by
step, quite out of hearing of the good man's voice, unless he be indeed
a son of thunder.  At my open window, catching now and then a sentence
of the "parson's saw," I am as well situated as at the foot of the
pulpit stairs.  The broken and scattered fragments of this one discourse
will be the texts of many sermons, preached by those  colleague
pastors,--colleagues, but often disputants,--my Mind and Heart.  The
former pretends to be a  scholar, and perplexes me with doctrinal
points; the latter takes me on the score of feeling; and both, like
several other preachers, spend their strength to very little purpose.
I, their sole auditor, cannot always understand them.

Suppose that a few hours have passed, and behold me still behind my
curtain, just before the close of the afternoon service.  The hour-hand
on the dial has passed beyond four o'clock.  The declining sun is hidden
behind the steeple, and throws its shadow straight across the street, so
that my chamber is darkened, as with a cloud.  Around the church-door all
is solitude, and an impenetrable obscurity beyond the threshold.  A
commotion is heard.  The seats are slammed down, and the pew-doors thrown
back,--a multitude of feet are trampling along the unseen aisles,--and
the congregation bursts suddenly through the portal.  Foremost, scampers
a rabble of boys, behind whom moves a dense and dark phalanx of grown
men, and lastly, a crowd of females, with young children, and a few
scattered husbands.  This instantaneous outbreak of life into loneliness
is one of the pleasantest scenes of the day.  Some of the good people are
rubbing their eyes, thereby intimating that they have been wrapped, as it
were, in a sort of holy trance, by the fervor of their devotion.  There
is a young man, a third-rate coxcomb, whose first care is always to
flourish a white handkerchief, and brush the seat of a tight pair of
black silk pantaloons, which shine as if varnished.  They must have been
made of the stuff called "everlasting," or perhaps of the same piece as
Christian's garments in the Pilgrim's Progress, for he put them on two
summers ago, and has not yet worn the gloss off.  I have taken a great
liking to those black silk pantaloons.  But, now, with nods and greetings
among friends, each matron takes her husband's arm, and paces gravely
homeward, while the girls also flutter away, after arranging sunset walks
with their favored bachelors.  The Sabbath eve is the eve of love.  At
length, the whole congregation is dispersed.  No; here, with faces as
glossy as black satin, come two sable ladies and a sable gentleman, and
close in their rear the minister, who softens his severe visage, and
bestows a kind word on each.  Poor souls!  To them the most captivating
picture of bliss in heaven is--"There we shall be white!"

All is solitude again.  But, hark!--a broken warbling of voices, and now,
attuning its grandeur to their sweetness, a stately peal of the organ.
Who are the choristers?  Let me dream that the angels, who came down from
heaven, this blessed morn, to blend themselves with the worship of the
truly good, are playing and singing their farewell to the earth.  On the
wings of that rich melody they were borne upward.

This, gentle reader, is merely a flight of poetry.  A few of the singing
men and singing women had lingered behind their fellows, and raised their
