camp-meeting at Stamford."

Then in my happy youth, and while her pleasant voice yet sounded in my
ears, I sighed; for none but myself, I thought, should have been her
companion in a life which seemed to realize my own wild fancies,
cherished all through visionary boyhood to that hour. To these two
strangers the world was in its golden age, not that indeed it was less
dark and sad than ever, but because its weariness and sorrow had no
community with their ethereal nature. Wherever they might appear in
their pilgrimage of bliss, Youth would echo back their gladness,
care-stricken Maturity would rest a moment from its toil, and Age,
tottering among the graves, would smile in withered joy for their
sakes.  The lonely cot, the narrow and gloomy street, the sombre
shade, would catch a passing gleam like that now shining on ourselves,
as these bright spirits wandered by.  Blessed pair, whose happy home
was throughout all the earth!  I looked at my shoulders, and thought
them broad enough to sustain those pictured towns and mountains; mine,
too, was an elastic foot, as tireless as the wing of the bird of
paradise; mine was then an untroubled heart, that would have gone
singing on its delightful way.

"O maiden!" said I aloud, "why did you not come hither alone?"

While the merry girl and myself were busy with the show-box, the
unceasing rain had driven another wayfarer into the wagon.  He seemed
pretty nearly of the old showman's age, but much smaller, leaner, and
more withered than he, and less respectably clad in a patched suit of
gray; withal, he had a thin, shrewd countenance, and a pair of
diminutive gray eyes, which peeped rather too keenly out of their
puckered sockets.  This old fellow had been joking with the showman,
in a manner which intimated previous acquaintance; but perceiving that
the damsel and I had terminated our affairs, he drew forth a folded
document, and presented it to me.  As I had anticipated, it proved to
be a circular, written in a very fair and legible hand, and signed by
several distinguished gentlemen whom I had never heard of, stating
that the bearer had encountered every variety of misfortune, and
recommending him to the notice of all charitable people.  Previous
disbursements had left me no more than a five-dollar bill, out of
which, however, I offered to make the beggar a donation, provided he
would give me change for it.  The object of my beneficence looked
keenly in my face, and discerned that, I had none of that abominable
spirit, characteristic though it be, of a full-blooded Yankee, which
takes pleasure in detecting every little harmless piece of knavery.

"Why, perhaps," said the ragged old mendicant, "if the bank is in good
standing, I can't say but I may have enough about me to change your
bill."

"It is a bill of the Suffolk Bank," said I, "and better than the
specie."

As the beggar had nothing to object, he now produced a small
buff-leather bag, tied up carefully with a shoe-string.  When this was
opened, there appeared a very comfortable treasure of silver coins of
all sorts and sizes; and I even fancied that I saw, gleaming among
them, the golden plumage of that rare bird in our currency, the
American Eagle.  In this precious heap was my bank, note deposited,
the rate of exchange being considerably against me.  His wants being
thus relieved, the destitute man pulled out of his pocket an old pack
of greasy cards, which had probably contributed to fill the buff
leather bag, in more ways than one.

"Come," said he, "I spy a rare fortune in your face, and for
twenty-five cents more, I'll tell you what it is."

I never refuse to take a glimpse into futurity; so, after shuffling
the cards, and when the fair damsel had cut them, I dealt a portion to
the prophetic beggar.  Like others of his profession, before
predicting the shadowy events that were moving on to meet me, he gave
proof of his preternatural science, by describing scenes through which
I had already passed.  Here let me have credit for a sober fact.  When
the old man had read a page in his book of fate, he bent his keen gray
eyes on mine, and proceeded to relate, in all its minute particulars,
what was then the most singular event of my life.  It was one which I
had no purpose to disclose, till the general unfolding of all secrets;
nor would it be a much stranger instance of inscrutable knowledge, or
fortunate conjecture, if the beggar were to meet me in the street
to-day, and repeat, word for word, the page which I have here written.
The fortune-teller, after predicting a destiny which time seems loath
to make good, put up his cards, secreted his treasure-bag, and began
to converse with the other occupants of the wagon.

"Well, old friend," said the showman, "you have not yet told us which
way your face is turned this afternoon."

"I am taking a trip northward, this warm weather," replied the
conjurer, "across the Connecticut first, and then up through Vermont,
and may be into Canada before the fall.  But I must stop and see the
breaking up of the camp-meeting at Stamford."

I began to think that all the vagrants in New England were converging
to the camp-meeting, and had made this wagon their rendezvous by the
way.  The showman now proposed that, when the shower was over, they
should pursue the road to Stamford together, it being sometimes the
policy of these people to form a sort of league and confederacy.

"And the young lady too," observed the gallant bibliopolist, bowing to
her profoundly, "and this foreign gentleman, as I understand, are on a
jaunt of pleasure to the same spot.  It would add incalculably to my
own enjoyment, and I presume to that of my colleague and his friend,
if they could be prevailed upon to join our party."

This arrangement met with approbation on all hands, nor were any of
those concerned more sensible of its advantages than myself, who had
no title to be included in it.  Having already satisfied myself as to
