themselves, have let the mansion-house go to ruin."

The Old Maid looked slowly round, with a slight gesture of one hand,
and a finger of the other upon her lip, appearing more shadow-like
than ever, in the obscurity of the porch.  But again she lifted the
hammer, and gave, this time, a single rap.  Could it be that a
footstep was now heard, coming down the staircase of the old mansion,
which all conceived to have been so long untenanted?  Slowly, feebly,
yet heavily, like the pace of an aged and infirm person, the step
approached, more distinct on every downward stair, till it reached the
portal.  The bar fell on the inside; the door was opened.  One upward
glance, towards the church-spire, whence the sunshine had just faded,
was the last that the people saw of the "Old Maid in the Winding-Sheet."

"Who undid the door?" asked many.

This question, owing to the depth of shadow beneath the porch, no one
could satisfactorily answer.  Two or three aged men, while protesting
against an inference, which might be drawn, affirmed that the person
within was a negro, and bore a singular resemblance to old Caesar,
formerly a slave in the house, but freed by death some thirty years
before.

"Her summons has waked up a servant of the old family," said one, half
seriously.

"Let us wait here," replied another.   "More guests will knock at the
door, anon.  But the gate of the graveyard should be thrown open!"

Twilight had overspread the town, before the crowd began to separate,
or the comments on this incident were exhausted.  One after another
was wending his way homeward, when a coach--no common spectacle in
those days--drove slowly into the street.  It was an old-fashioned
equipage, hanging close to the ground, with arms on the panels, a
footman behind, and a grave, corpulent coachman seated high in
front,--the whole giving an idea of solemn state and dignity.  There
was something awful, in the heavy rumbling of the wheels.  The coach
rolled down the street, till, coming to the gateway of the deserted
mansion, it drew up, and the footman sprang to the ground.

"Whose grand coach is this?" asked a very inquisitive body.

The footman made no reply, but ascended the steps of the old house,
gave three raps with the iron hammer, and returned to open the
coach-door.  An old man possessed of the heraldic lore so common in
that day examined the shield of arms on the panel.

"Azure, a lion's head erased, between three flower-deluces," said he;
then whispered the name of the family to whom these bearings belonged.
The last inheritor of its honors was recently dead, after a long
residence amid the splendor of the British court, where his birth and
wealth had given him no mean station.  "He left no child," continued
the herald, "and these arms, being in a lozenge, betoken that the
coach appertains to his widow."

Further disclosures, perhaps, might have been made, had not the
speaker suddenly been struck dumb, by the stern eye of an ancient
lady, who thrust forth her head from the coach, preparing to descend.
As she emerged, the people saw that her dress was magnificent, and her
figure dignified, in spite of age and infirmity,--a stately ruin, but
with a look, at once, of pride and wretchedness.  Her strong and rigid
features had an awe about them, unlike that of the white Old Maid, but
as of something evil.  She passed up the steps, leaning on a gold-headed
cane; the door swung open, as she ascended,--and the light of a
torch glittered on the embroidery of her dress, and gleamed on the
pillars of the porch.  After a momentary pause--a glance backwards--and
then a desperate effort--she went in.  The decipherer of the coat
of arms had ventured up the lowest step, and shrinking back
immediately, pale and tremulous, affirmed that the torch was held by
the very image of old Caesar.

"But, such a hideous grin," added he, "was never seen on the face of
mortal man, black or white!  It will haunt me till my dying day."

Meantime, the coach had wheeled round, with a prodigious clatter on
the pavement, and rumbled up the street, disappearing in the twilight,
while the ear still tracked its course.  Scarcely was it gone, when
the people began to question whether the coach and attendants, the
ancient lady, the spectre of old Caesar, and the Old Maid herself,
were not all a strangely combined delusion, with some dark purport in
its mystery.  The whole town was astir, so that, instead of
