which good protection was to be found in rainy weather; the goat-boys
had always spent rainy days there, therefore the stone had been called
from old times the Rain-rock. From there, Moni thought he could climb
across over the rocks and so bring back the little kid.

He quickly whistled the flock together and went with them down to the
place from which he could reach the Rain-rock. There he left them to
graze and went to the rock. Here he immediately saw, just a little bit
above him, the bough of the tree, and the kid hanging to it. He saw very
well that it would not be an easy task to climb up there and then down
again with Maeggerli on his back, but there was no other way to rescue
her. He also thought the dear Lord would surely stand by him, and then
he could not possibly fail. He folded his hands, looked up to heaven and
prayed: "Oh, dear Lord, help me, so that I can save Maeggerli!"

Then he was full of trust that all would go well, and he bravely
clambered up the rock until he reached the bough above. Here he clung
fast with both feet, lifted the trembling, moaning little creature to
his shoulders, and then climbed with great caution back down again.
When he had the firm earth under his feet once more and had saved the
terror-stricken kid, he was so glad he had to offer thanks aloud and
cried up to heaven:

"Oh, dear Lord, I thank Thee a thousand times for having helped us so
well! Oh, we are both so glad for it!" Then he sat down on the ground a
little while, and stroked the kid, for she was still trembling in all
her delicate limbs, and comforted her for enduring so much suffering.

As it was soon time for departure, Moni placed the little goat on his
shoulders again, and said anxiously:

"Come, you poor Maeggerli, you are still trembling; you cannot walk home
to-day, I must carry you--" and so he carried the little creature,
clinging close to him, all the way down.

Paula was standing on the last rise in front of the Bath House,
waiting for the goat-boy. Her aunt had accompanied her. When Moni came
down with his burden on his back, Paula wanted to know if the kid was
sick, and showed great interest. When Moni saw this, he at once sat
down on the ground in front of Paula and told her his day's experience
with Maeggerli.

The young lady showed very keen interest in the affair and stroked the
little rescued creature, which now lay quietly in Moni's lap and looked
very pretty, with its white feet, and the beautiful black pelt on its
back. It was very willing to be stroked by her.

"Now sing your song again for me, while you are sitting here," said
Paula. Moni was in such a gay frame of mind that he willingly and
heartily began and sang his whole song to the end.

This pleased Paula exceptionally well and she said he must sing it to
her often again. Then the whole company went together down to the Bath
House. Here the kid was laid in its bed, Moni said farewell, and Paula
went back to her room to talk with her aunt longer about the goat-boy,
whose merry morning song she had enjoyed again.




CHAPTER III

A VISIT


Thus many days passed by, one as sunny and clear as the other, for it
was an unusually beautiful summer, and the sky remained blue and
cloudless from morning till evening.

Every morning, early, without exception the goat-boy, singing lustily,
went by the Bath House. Every evening he came back again singing
lustily. All the guests were so accustomed to the merry sound that not
one would have willingly missed it.

More than all the others, Paula delighted in Moni's joyfulness and went
out almost every evening to meet him, and talk with him.

One sunny morning Moni had once more reached the Pulpit-rock, and was
about to throw himself down, when he changed his mind. "No, go on! The
last time you had to leave all the nice little plants because we had to
go after Maeggerli; now we will go up there again, so that you can finish
nibbling them!"

The goats all leaped with delight after him, for they knew they were
going up to the lovely bushes on the Dragon-stones. To-day Moni held
his little Maeggerli the whole time fast in his arms, pulled the sweet
plants himself from the rocks and let her eat out of his hand. This
pleased the little goat best of all. She rubbed her head quite
contentedly from time to time against Moni's shoulder and bleated
happily. So the whole morning passed, before Moni noticed, from his own
hunger, that it had grown late before he was aware of it. But he had
left his luncheon below near the Pulpit-rock, in the little hole, for he
had intended to return again at noon.

"Well, you have had your fill of good things, and I have had nothing,"
he said to his goats. "Now I must have something too, and you will find
enough more down below. Come along!" Whereupon he gave a loud whistle,
and the whole flock started away, the liveliest always ahead, and first
of all light-footed Swallow, who was to meet something unexpected to-day.
She sprang down from stone to stone and across many a cleft in the
rocks, but all at once she could go no farther--directly in front of
her suddenly stood a chamois and gazed with curiosity into her face.
This had never happened to Swallow before! She stood still, looked
questioningly at the stranger and waited for the chamois to get out of
her way and let her leap to the boulder, as she intended. But the
chamois did not stir and gazed boldly into Swallow's eyes. So they stood
facing each other, more and more obstinate, and might have stood there
until now, if the big Sultan had not come along in the meantime. As soon
as he saw the state of things, he stepped quite considerately past
Swallow and suddenly pushed the chamois aside so far and with such
violence, that she had to make a daring leap, not to fall down over the
rocks. Swallow went triumphantly on her way, and the Sultan marched
proudly and contentedly behind her, for he felt himself to be the sure
protector of the goats in his flock.

Meanwhile Moni coming down from above, and another goat-boy coming up
from below, met at the same spot and looked at each other in
astonishment. But they were well acquainted, and after the first
surprise greeted each other cordially. It was Joergli from Kueblis. Half
the morning he had been looking in vain for Moni and now he met him up
here, where he had not expected to find him.

"I didn't suppose you came up so high with the goats," said Joergli.

"To be sure I do," replied Moni, "but not always; usually I stay by the
Pulpit-rock and around there. Why have you come up here?"

"To make you a visit," was the reply. "I have something to tell you.
Besides, I have two goats here, that I am bringing to the landlord at
the Baths. He is going to buy one, and so I thought I would come up
to see you."

"Are they your own goats?" asked Moni.

"Surely, they are ours. I don't tend strange ones any longer. I am not
a goat-boy now."

Moni was very much surprised at this, for Joergli had become the goat-boy
of Kueblis at the same time he had been made goat-boy of Fideris, and
Moni did not understand how Joergli could give it up without a single
murmur.

Meanwhile the goat-boys and their flocks had reached the Pulpit-rock.
Moni brought out bread and a small piece of dried meat and invited
Joergli to share his midday meal. They both sat down on the Pulpit-rock
and ate heartily, for it had grown very late and they had excellent
appetites. When everything was eaten and they had drunk a little goat's
milk, Joergli comfortably stretched himself at full length on the ground,
and rested his head on both arms, but Moni remained sitting, for he
always liked to look down into the deep valley below.

