

NOTE.--Let two pupils read or recite the conversational parts of this
selection, omitting the explanatory matter, while the other pupils
simply listen. If done with expressive feeling and in a perfectly
natural tone, it will prove quite an interesting exercise. To play or
act the story of a selection helps to develop the imagination.


       *       *       *       *       *




_14_


scared
swerve
gur' gle
rip' ples
cur' rent
mum' bling ly



THE BROOK SONG.


       Little brook! Little brook!
       You have such a happy look--
       Such a very merry manner, as you swerve and curve and crook--
       And your ripples, one and one,
       Reach each other's hands and run
       Like laughing little children in the sun!

       Little brook, sing to me;
       Sing about the bumblebee
       That tumbled from a lily bell and grumbled mumblingly,
       Because he wet the film
       Of his wings, and had to swim,
       While the water bugs raced round and laughed at him.

       Little brook--sing a song
       Of a leaf that sailed along
       Down the golden-hearted center of your current swift and strong,
       And a dragon fly that lit
       On the tilting rim of it,
       And rode away and wasn't scared a bit.

       And sing--how oft in glee
       Came a truant boy like me,
       Who loved to lean and listen to your lilting melody,
       Till the gurgle and refrain
       Of your music in his brain
       Wrought a happiness as keen to him as pain.

       Little brook--laugh and leap!
       Do not let the dreamer weep:
       Sing him all the songs of summer till he sink in softest sleep;
       And then sing soft and low
       Through his dreams of long ago--
       Sing back to him the rest he used to know!


_James Whitcomb Riley_.

From "Rhymes of Childhood." Used by special permission of the
publishers, The Bobbs-Merrill Co. Copyright, 1900.


       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: BY THE BROOK]


RIPPLES, little curling waves FILM, a thin skin or slight
covering.

CURRENT, the swiftest part of a stream; also applied to _air,
electricity_, etc.

What do the following expressions mean: tilting rim, lilting melody,
softest sleep, gurgle and refrain, a happiness as keen to him as pain?

What is a lullaby? Recite a stanza of one.

Insert _may_ or _can_ properly where you see a dash in the
following: The boy said, "--I leave the room?" "Mother, I--climb the
ladder;--I?"--a dog climb a tree?--I ask a favor?

Copy the following words--they are often misspelled: loving, using,
till, until, queer, fulfil, speech, muscle, quite, scheme, success,
barely, college, villain, salary, visitor, remedy, hurried, forty-four,
enemies, twelfth, marriage, immense, exhaust.

By means of the suffixes, _er, est, ness_, form three new words
from each of the following words: happy, sleepy, lively, greedy,
steady, lovely, gloomy.

Example: From happy,--happier, happiest, happiness. Note the change of
_y_ to _i_.


       *       *       *       *       *




_15_


rag'ged
crin'kly
rub'bish
fil'tered
protect'ed
disor'derly
disturbed'
imme'diately



THE STORY OF THE SEED-DOWN.



I.


High above the earth, over land and sea, floated the seed-down, borne on
the autumn wind's strong arms.

"Here shall you lie, little seed-down," said he at last, and put it down
on the ground, and laid a fallen leaf over it. Then he flew away
immediately, because he had much to look after.

That was in the dark evening, and the seed could not see where it was
placed, and besides, the leaf covered it.

Something heavy came now, and pressed so hard that the seed came near
being destroyed; but the leaf, weak though it was, protected it.

It was a human foot which walked along over the ground, and pressed the
downy seed into the earth. When the foot was withdrawn, the earth fell,
and filled the little pit it had made.

The cold came, and the snow fell several feet deep; but the seed lay
quietly down there, waiting for warmth and light. When the spring came,
and the snow melted away, the plant shot up out of the earth.

There was a little gray cottage beside which it grew up. The tiny plant
could not see very far around, because rubbish and brush-heaps lay near
it, and the little window was so gray and dusty that it could not peep
into the cottage either.

"Who lives here?" asked the little thing.

"Don't you know that?" asked the ragged shoe, which lay near. "Why, the
smith who drinks so much lives here, and his wife who wore me out."

And then she told how it looked inside, how life went on there, and it
was not cheering; no, but fearfully sad. The shoe knew it all well, and
told a whole lot in a few minutes, because she had such a well-hung
tongue.

Now there came a pair of ragged children, running--the smith's boy and
girl; he was six years old and the girl eight, so the shoe said, after
they were gone.

"Oh, see, what a pretty little plant!" said the girl. "So now, I shall
pull it up," said the boy, and the plant trembled to the root's heart.

"No, do not do it!" said the girl. "We must let it grow. Do you not see
what pretty crinkly leaves it has? It will have lovely flowers, I know,
when it grows bigger."

And it was allowed to stay there. The children took a stick and dug up
the earth round about, so it looked like a plowed field. Then they threw
the shoe and the sweepings a little way off, because they thought to
make the place look better.

"You cannot think," said the shoe, after the children had gone, "you
cannot think how in the way folks are!"

"The children have to give themselves airs, and pretend to be very
orderly," said the half of a coffee-cup; and she broke in another place
she was so disturbed.

But the sun shone warmly and the rain filtered down in the upturned
earth. Then leaf after leaf unfolded, and in a few days the plant was
several inches high.

"Oh, see!" said the children, who came again; "see how beautiful it is
getting!"

"Come, father, come! brother and I have discovered such a pretty plant!
Come and see it!" begged the girl.

The father glanced at it. The plant looked so lovely on the little rough
bit of soil which lay between the piles of sweepings.

The smith nodded to the children.

"It looks very disorderly here," he said to himself, and stopped an
instant. "Yes, indeed, it does!" He went along, but thought of the
little green spot, with the lovely plant in the midst of it.


       *       *       *       *       *




II.



pet' als
in' mates
scrubbed
fra' grant



The children ran into the house.

"Mother," said they, "there is such a rare plant growing right by the
window!"

The mother wished to glance out, but the window was so thick with dust
that she could not do so. She wiped off a little spot.

"My! My!" said she, when she noticed how dirty the window looked beside
the cleaned spot; so she wiped the whole window.

"That is an odd plant," said she, looking at it. "But how dreadfully
dirty it is out in the yard!"

Now that the sun shone in through the window it became very light in the
cottage. The mother looked at the ragged children and at the rubbish in
the room, and the blood rushed over her pale cheeks.

"It is a perfect shame!" she murmured. "I have never noticed that it was
so untidy here."

She hurried around, and set the room to rights, and, when that was done,
she washed the dirty floor. She scrubbed it so hard that her hands
smarted as if she had burned them in the fire; she did not stop until
every spot was white.

It was evening; the husband came home from work. The wife sat mending
the girl's ragged dress. The man stopped in the door. It looked so
strange to him within, and the look his wife gave him was brighter than
ever before, he thought.

"Go--God's peace!" he stammered. It was a long time since such a
greeting had been heard in here.

"God's peace!" answered she; "wel--welcome home!" She had not said this
for many years.

The smith stepped forward to the window; on the bed beside it the two
children lay sleeping. He looked at them, then he looked out on the
mound where the little plant stood. After a few minutes he went out.

A deep sigh rose from the woman's breast. She had hoped that he would
stay home that evening. Two great tears fell on the little dress.

In a few minutes she heard a noise outside. She went to the window to
see what it could be. Her husband had not gone away! He was out in the
yard clearing up the brush-heaps and rubbish.

She became more happy than she had been for a long time. He glanced in
through the window and saw her. Then she nodded, he nodded back, and
they both smiled.

"Be careful, above all, of the little plant!" said she.

Warm and sunny days came. The smith stayed at home now every evening. It
was green and lovely round the little cottage, and outside the window
there was a whole flower-bed, with many blossoms; but in the midst stood
the little plant the autumn wind had brought thither.

The smith's family stood around the flower-bed, and talked about the
flowers.

"But the plant that brother and I found is the most beautiful of all,"
said the girl.

"Yes, indeed it is," said the parents.

The smith bent down and took one of the leaves in his hand, but very
carefully, because he was afraid he might hurt it with his thick, coarse
fingers.

Then a bell was heard ringing in the distance. The sound floated out
over field and lake, and rang so peacefully in the eventide, just as the
sun sank behind the tree-tops in the forest. And every one bowed the
head, because it was Saturday evening, and it was a sacred voice that
sounded.

In a little while all was silent in the cottage; the inmates slumbered,
more tired, perhaps, than before, after the week's toils, but also much,
much happier. And round about, all was calm and peaceful.

But when Sunday's sun came up, the plant opened its bud,--and it bore
but a single one. When the cottage folks passed the little
flower-garden, they all stopped and looked at the beautiful, fragrant
blossom.

"It shall go with us to the house of God," said the wife, turning to her
husband. He nodded, and then she broke off the flower. The wife looked
at the husband, and he looked at her, and then their eyes rested on both
children; then their eyes grew dim, but became immediately bright again,
for the tears were not of sorrow, but of happiness.

When the organ's tones swelled and the people sang in the temple, the
flower folded its petals, for it had fulfilled its mission; but on the
waves of song its perfume floated upwards. And in the sweet fragrance
lay a warm thanksgiving from the little seed-down.


From "My Lady Legend," translated from the Swedish by Miss Rydingsvaerd.

Used by the special permission of the publishers, Lothrop, Lee & Shepard
Co.


       *       *       *       *       *


Memory Gem:

I want it to be said of me by those who know me best that I have always
plucked a thistle and planted a flower in its place wherever a flower
would grow.

