the old stone wall.

Very gently and softly Farmer Brown's boy talked to Happy Jack as he
took him to the nearest tree. Then, when Happy Jack was safely up in the
tree, he went over to the stone wall and tried to drive Shadow the
Weasel out. He pulled over the stones until at last Shadow jumped out,
and then Farmer Brown's boy chased him clear into the Green Forest.

"Dee, dee, dee, what did I tell you?" cried Tommy Tit happily, as he
flew over to where Happy Jack was sitting.

Now who really saved Happy Jack--Tommy Tit or Farmer Brown's boy?




CHAPTER XVI

HAPPY JACK MISSES FARMER BROWN'S BOY


    One and one are always two,
      And two and two are four.
    And just as true it is you'll find
      That love and love make more.

    _Happy Jack._


Go ask Happy Jack Squirrel. He knows. He knows because he has proved it.
It began when Farmer Brown's boy saved him from Shadow the Weasel.
Perhaps I should say when Farmer Brown's boy and Tommy Tit saved him,
for if it hadn't been for Tommy, it never would have entered Happy
Jack's head to run to Farmer Brown's boy. After that, of course, Happy
Jack and Farmer Brown's boy became great friends. Farmer Brown's boy
came over to the Green Forest every day to see Happy Jack, and always he
had the most delicious nuts in his pockets. At first Happy Jack had been
a wee bit shy. He couldn't quite get over that old fear he had had so
long. Then he would remember how Farmer Brown's boy had saved him, and
that would make him ashamed, and he would walk right up and take the
nuts.

Farmer Brown's boy would talk to him in the nicest way and tell him that
he loved him, and that there wasn't the least thing in the world to be
afraid of. Pretty soon Happy Jack began to love Farmer Brown's boy a
little. He couldn't help it. He just had to love any one who was so kind
and gentle to him. Now as soon as he began to love a little, and felt
sure in his own heart that Farmer Brown's boy loved him a little, he
found that love and love make more love, and it wasn't any time at all
before he had become very fond of Farmer Brown's boy, so fond of him
that he was almost jealous of Tommy Tit, who had been a friend of Farmer
Brown's boy for a long time. It got so that Happy Jack looked forward
each day to the visit of Farmer Brown's boy, and as soon as he heard his
whistle, he would hasten to meet him. Some folks were unkind enough to
say that it was just because of the nuts and corn he was sure to find in
Farmer Brown's boy's pockets, but that wasn't so at all.

At last there came a day when he missed that cheery whistle. He waited
and waited. At last he went clear to the edge of the Green Forest, but
there was no whistle and no sign of Farmer Brown's boy. It was the same
way the next day and the next. Happy Jack forgot to frisk about the way
he usually does. He lost his appetite. He just sat around and moped.

When Tommy Tit the Chickadee came to call, as he did every day, Happy
Jack found that Tommy was anxious too. Tommy had been up to Farmer
Brown's dooryard several times, and he hadn't seen anything of Farmer
Brown's boy.

"I think he must have gone away," said Tommy.

"He would have come down here first and said good-by," replied Happy
Jack.

"You--you don't suppose something has happened to him, do you?" asked
Tommy.

"I don't know. I don't know what to think," replied Happy Jack, soberly.
"Do you know, Tommy, I've grown very fond of Farmer Brown's boy."

"Of course. Dee, dee, dee, of course. Everybody who really knows him is
fond of him. I've said all along that he is the best friend we've got,
but no one seemed to believe me. I'm glad you've found it out for
yourself. I tell you what, I'll go up to his house and have another look
around." And without waiting for a reply, Tommy was off as fast as his
little wings could take him.

"I hope, I do hope, that nothing has happened to him," mumbled Happy
Jack, as he pretended to hunt for buried nuts while he waited for Tommy
Tit to come back, and by "him" he meant Farmer Brown's boy.




CHAPTER XVII

TOMMY TIT BRINGS NEWS

No one knows too much, but many know too little.

_Happy Jack._


Happy Jack very plainly was not happy. His name was the only happy thing
about him. He fussed about on the edge of the Green Forest. He just
couldn't keep still. When he thought anybody was looking, he pretended
to hunt for some of the nuts he had buried in the fall, and dug holes
down through the snow. But as soon as he thought that no one was
watching, he would scamper up a tree where he could look over to Farmer
Brown's house and look and look. It was very clear that Happy Jack was
watching for some one and that he was anxious, very anxious, indeed.

It was getting late in the afternoon, and soon the Black Shadows would
begin to creep out from the Purple Hills, behind which jolly, round, red
Mr. Sun would go to bed. It would be bedtime for Happy Jack then, for
you know he goes to bed very early, just as soon as it begins to get
dark. The later it got, the more anxious and uneasy Happy Jack grew. He
had just made up his mind that in a few minutes he would have to give up
and go to bed when there was a flit of tiny wings, and Tommy Tit the
Chickadee dropped into the tree beside him.

"Did you find out anything?" asked Happy Jack eagerly, before Tommy had
a chance to say a word.

[Illustration: "DID YOU FIND OUT ANYTHING?" ASKED HAPPY JACK EAGERLY.]

Tommy nodded. "He's there!" he panted, for he was quite out of breath
from hurrying so.

"Where?" Happy Jack fairly shouted the question.

"Over there in the house," replied Tommy Tit.

"Then he hasn't gone away! It's just as I said, he hasn't gone away!"
cried Happy Jack, and he was so relieved that he jumped up and down and
as a result nearly tumbled out of the tree.

"No," replied Tommy, "he hasn't gone away, but I think there is
something the matter with him."

Happy Jack grew very sober. "What makes you think so?" he demanded.

"If you'll give me time to get my breath, I'll tell you all about it,"
retorted Tommy Tit.

"All right, only please hurry," replied Happy Jack, and tried to look
patient even if he wasn't.

Tommy Tit smoothed out some rumpled feathers and was most provokingly
slow about it. "When I left here," he began at last, "I flew straight up
to Farmer Brown's house, as I said I would. I flew all around it, but
all I saw was that horrid Black Pussy on the back doorsteps, and she
looked at me so hungrily that she made me dreadfully uncomfortable. I
don't see what Farmer Brown keeps her about for, anyway."

"Never mind her; go on!" interrupted Happy Jack.

"Then I flew all around the barn, but I didn't see any one there but
that ugly little upstart, Bully the English Sparrow, and he wanted to
pick a fight with me right away." Tommy looked very indignant.

"Never mind him, go on!" cried Happy Jack impatiently.

"After that I flew back to the big maple tree close by the house,"
continued Tommy. "You know Farmer Brown's boy has kept a piece of suet
tied in that tree all winter for me. I was hungry, and I thought I
would get a bite to eat, but there wasn't any suet there. That pig of a
Sammy Jay had managed to get it untied and had carried it all away. Of
course that made me angry, and twice as hungry as before. I was trying
to make up my mind what to do next when I happened to look over on the
window sill, and what do you think I saw there?"

"What?" demanded Happy Jack eagerly.

"A lot of cracked hickory nuts!" declared Tommy. "I just knew that they
were meant for me, and when I was sure that the way was clear, I flew
over there. They tasted so good that I almost forgot about Farmer
Brown's boy, when I just happened to look in the window. You know those
windows are made of some queer stuff that looks like ice and isn't, and
that you can see right through."

Happy Jack didn't know, for he never had been near enough to see, but he
nodded, and Tommy Tit went on.

"There were many queer things inside, and I was wondering what they
could be when all of a sudden I saw _him_. He was lying down, and there
was something the matter with him. I tapped on the window to him and
then I hurried back here."




CHAPTER XVIII

HAPPY JACK DECIDES TO MAKE A CALL

    You'll find when all is said and done
    Two heads are better far than one.

    _Happy Jack._


Happy Jack Squirrel hadn't slept very well. He had had bad dreams. Ever
so many times in the night he had waked up, a very unusual thing for
Happy Jack. The fact is, he had something on his mind. Yes, Sir, Happy
Jack had something on his mind, and that something was Farmer Brown's
boy. He often had had Farmer Brown's boy on his mind before, but in a
very different way. Then it had been in the days when Farmer Brown's boy
hunted through the Green Forest and over the Green Meadows with his
terrible gun. Then everybody had Farmer Brown's boy on their minds most
of the time. Happy Jack had hated him then, hated him because he had
feared him. You know fear almost always leads to hate. But now it was
different. Farmer Brown's boy had put away his terrible gun. Happy Jack
no longer feared him. Love had taken the place of hate in his heart, for
had not Farmer Brown's boy saved him from Shadow the Weasel, and brought
him nuts and corn when food was scarce? And now Tommy Tit had brought
word that some thing was the matter with Farmer Brown's boy. It was this
that was on Happy Jack's mind and had given him such a bad night.

As soon as it was daylight, Happy Jack scrambled out of bed to look for
Tommy Tit. He didn't have long to wait, for Tommy is quite as early a
riser as Happy Jack.


    "Dee, dee, chickadee!
    I hope you feel as well as me!"

sang Tommy merrily, as he flitted over to where Happy Jack was looking
for his breakfast. The very sound of Tommy's voice made Happy Jack feel
better. One must feel very badly indeed not to be a little more cheerful
when Tommy Tit is about. The fact is, Tommy Tit packs about so much
good cheer in that small person of his, that no one can be downhearted
when he is about.

"Hello, Tommy," said Happy Jack. "If I could make other people feel as
good as you do, do you know what I would do?"

"What?" asked Tommy.

"I'd go straight up to Farmer Brown's house and try to cheer up Farmer
Brown's boy," replied Happy Jack.

"That's the very thing I have in mind," chuckled Tommy. "I've come over
here to see if you won't come along with me. I've been up to his house
so often that he won't think half so much of a visit from me as he will
from you. Will you do it?"

Happy Jack looked a little startled. You see, he never had been over to
Farmer Brown's house, and somehow he couldn't get over the idea that it
would be a very dangerous thing to do. "I--I--do you really suppose I
could?" he asked.

"I'm sure of it," replied Tommy Tit. "There's no one to be afraid of but
Black Pussy and Bowser the Hound, and it's easy enough to keep out of
their way. You can hide in the old stone wall until the way is clear and
then run across to the big maple tree close to the house. Then you can
look right in and see Farmer Brown's boy, and he can look out and see
you. Will you do it?"

Happy Jack thought very hard for a few minutes. Then he made up his
mind. "I'll do it!" said he in a very decided tone of voice. "Let's
start right away."

"Good for you! Dee, dee, good for you!" cried Tommy Tit, and started to
lead the way.




CHAPTER XIX

TOMMY TIT AND HAPPY JACK PAY A VISIT

    As grows the mighty elm tree,
    From just a tiny seed,
    So often great things happen
    From just a kindly deed.

    _Happy Jack._


Great things were happening to Happy Jack Squirrel. He was actually on
his way to Farmer Brown's house, and he had a feeling that other things
were likely to happen when he got there. Now you may not think that it
was anything very great that Happy Jack should be on his way to Farmer
Brown's house. Very likely you are saying, "Pooh! that's nothing!" This
may be true, and then again it may not. Suppose you do a little
supposing. Suppose you had all your life been terribly afraid of a great
giant fifty times bigger than you. Suppose that great giant had stopped
hunting you and by little deeds of kindness had at last won your love.
Suppose you learned that something was the matter with him, and you made
up your mind to visit him at his great castle where there were other
great giants whom you did not know. Wouldn't you think that great things
were happening to you?

Well, that is exactly the way it was with Happy Jack Squirrel, as he
and Tommy Tit the Chickadee started to go over to Farmer Brown's house
to look for Farmer Brown's boy. Tommy Tit had been there often, so he
didn't think anything about it, but Happy Jack never had been there, and
if the truth were known, his heart was going pitapat, pitapat, with
excitement and perhaps just a little fear. Through the Old Orchard they
went, Tommy Tit flitting ahead and keeping a sharp watch for danger.
When they reached the old stone wall on the edge of Farmer Brown's
dooryard, Tommy told Happy Jack to hide there while he went to see if
the way was clear. He was back in a few minutes.

