Toni was at first opposed to this, when he heard that he would be away so
long without being able to come home a single time; but his mother
explained to him how easy the work would be, that he would grow stronger
up there, so as to be able to do better things later on, and that the
Matten farmer would give him a new suit and a good bit of money as pay. So
Toni objected no longer, but said he would be glad to do something and not
let his mother work alone.

Then it occurred to Elsbeth that, if Toni was going to be away the whole
summer she could perhaps go to one of the big hotels in Interlaken where
so many strangers go for the summer. There she could earn a good sum of
money and meet the coming winter without anxiety. She was already known in
Interlaken for she had served as chambermaid in one of the hotels for
several summers before her marriage.

When the day came for the big herd of cows to be taken up to the mountain
pasture, Toni's mother gave him his little bundle and said:

"Go now, in God's name! Don't forget to pray, when the day begins, and
when it ends, and the dear Lord will not forget you, and His protection is
better than that of men."

So Toni started off with his little bundle behind the herd up the
mountain.

Immediately after this Elsbeth closed her cottage. She took the goat up to
the Matten farm. When the farmer heard that she was going to Interlaken,
he promised her to take the goat, and thought when Elsbeth came home
again, she would give twice as much milk, and what he made from her, he
would give back to Elsbeth in cheese. Then she started down to Interlaken.

The herd had already been climbing the mountain for several hours. The
herdsman turned off to the left with the big herd, and the man went with
Toni up towards the right, followed by the smaller herd, which consisted
of fewer cows but many young cattle, for not many cows could be kept on
the small mountain pasture, because the milk had to be carried across to
the big one where the herdsman's hut stood.

They now reached the highest point of the pasture. There stood a little
hut. All around there was nothing but pasture, not a tree, not a bush. In
the hut on one side was a narrow seat fastened to the wall in front of
which stood a table. On the other side stood a bed of hay. In the corner
was a little, round stool and on this a wooden jug.

Toni and the man stepped inside. The latter placed on the floor the big
wooden milk-pail, which he had brought up on his back, took out of it a
round loaf of bread and a huge piece of cheese, laid both on the table and
said: "Of course you have a knife," to which Tony assented.

Then the man took the wooden jug, swung the milk-pail on his back and went
out. Toni followed him. The man lifted a wooden basin out of the big pail,
seated himself on the little round stool which he had brought out of the
hut and began to milk one cow after another. If one was too far away, he
would call out: "Drive her here!" and Toni obeyed. When the basin was full
he poured it into the big pail and silently went on until all the cows had
been milked. At the last the man filled the jug with milk, handed it to
Toni, took the pail on his back, the basin in his hand and saying "Good
night!" went down the mountain.

Then Toni was all alone. He put his jug of milk in the hut and came out
again. He looked around on every side. He looked over to the big mountain,
but between that and his pasture was a wide valley so one had to descend
in order to climb up to the big one. But all around both pastures great
dark masses of mountains looked down, some rocky, gray and jagged, others
covered with snow, all reaching up to the sky, so high and mighty and with
such different peaks and horns and some with such broad backs, that it
almost seemed to Toni as if they were enormous giants, each one having his
own face and looking down at him. It was a clear evening. The mountain
opposite was shining in the golden evening light, and now a little star
came into sight above the dark mountains, and looked down to Toni in such
a friendly way that it cheered him very much.

He thought of his mother, where she was now and how she was in the habit
of standing with him at this time in front of the little cottage and
talking so pleasantly. Then suddenly there came over him such a feeling of
loneliness that he ran into the hut, threw himself down on the cot, buried
his face in the hay and sobbed softly, until the weariness of the day
overcame him and he fell asleep.

The bright morning lured him out early. The man was already outside. He
milked the cows, spoke not a word and went away.

Now a long, long day followed. It was perfectly still all around. The cows
grazed and lay down around in the sun-bathed pasture. Tom went into the
hut two or three times, drank some milk and ate some bread and cheese.
Then he came out again, sat down on the ground and carved on a piece of
wood he had in his pocket, for although he no longer dared to cherish the
hope of becoming a wood-carver, yet he could not help carving for himself
as well as he could. At last it was evening again. The man came and went.
He said not a word, and Toni had nothing to say either.

Thus passed one day after another. They were all so long! so long! In the
evening, when it began to grow dark it always seemed terrible to Toni, for
then the high mountains looked so black and threatening, as if they would
suddenly do him some harm. Then he would rush back into the hut and crawl
into his bed of hay.

Many days had passed like this, one exactly the same as the other. The
sun had always shone in a cloudless sky; always at evening the friendly
little star had gleamed above the dark mountain. But one afternoon, thick,
gray clouds began to chase one another across the sky; now and then
blinding lightning flashed, and suddenly frightful thunder-bolts sounded,
which echoed roaring from the mountains, as if there were twice as many
and then a terrible storm broke. It was as dark as night; the rain beat
against the hut, and meanwhile the thunder rolled with fearful
reverberations through the mountains; quivering lightning lighted up the
black, frightful giant-forms, which seemed quite specter-like to come
nearer and look down menacingly. The cattle ran together in alarm and
bellowed loudly, and great birds of prey flapped around with piercing
shrieks.

Toni had long since fled into the hut, but the lightning showed him the
frightful forms and it seemed every minute as if the rolling thunder
would overthrow the hut to the ground. Toni was so alarmed he could
hardly breathe. He climbed up on the table expecting every minute that the
hut would fall and crush him. The storm lasted for hours, and the man
never came over. It was now really night but still the blinding lightning
flashed and new peals of thunder rolled and the storm howled and raged as
if it would sweep the hut away.

Toni stood half the night stiff with fright, clinging to the table, and
with no thought, only a feeling of a frightful power, which was crushing
everything. How he reached his bed he did not know, but in the morning he
lay stretched across the hay, so exhausted he could hardly rise. He looked
anxiously out of the window. How must it look outside after such a night?
Then he went out to see about the cows. The ground was still wet, but the
animals were peacefully grazing.

The sky was gray, and thick, black clouds were passing over it. Gloomy and
frightful the high mountains stood there. They had come so near and
looked more threateningly than ever at Toni. He ran back into the hut.

Many days of thunder storms followed, one after another and if the sun
came out between, it burned unbearably, and new storms followed so
unceasingly and violent, that the herdsman, on the other mountain often
said that he had not known such a summer for years, and if it didn't
change he wouldn't make half so much butter as in former summers, because
the cows gave no milk, as they didn't like the fodder.

During this time the man-servant chose the most favorable time to come
over to the small pasture, milked the cows as quickly as possible and did
not look after the boy at all; only now and then, when he thought Toni had
no more milk, he would bring the jug out quickly, fill it and put it back
again. Then he often saw Toni sitting on his bed of hay, and would call
out in passing:

"You are lazy!"

But then he ran right away in order to get back without being wet, and
did not trouble himself further about the boy.

So June had passed, and already a good part of July. The thunder storms
had become less frequent, but thick fog often so enveloped the mountain
that one could hardly see two steps away, and only here and there a black
head appeared, looking gloomily through the mist. The cattle often
wandered so far that the man found some of them between the two mountains
and brought them up again. This would not do. He called up to the boy, but
received no answer. He ran to the hut and went in. Toni crouched in the
corner was sitting on his bed and staring straight before him.

"Why don't you look after the cows?" asked the man.

He received no answer.

