the young folks he was taking for a trip on the water.

2. The boat was a large one, and could not easily be upset. There were in
it Mr. and Mrs. Rose, the boatman, and several little boys and girls.

3. "Keep still, please, young gentlemen," said the boatman, when Edgar
Rose and Thomas Read began to move from one side to the other.

4. They kept quiet for a short time only. Edgar soon wanted a stick which
Thomas held in his hand. He lost his balance in trying to get the stick,
and fell into the water.


[Illustration: Overturned boat, people clinging to boat and debris.
Another boat approaching.]


5. Mr. and Mrs. Rose both started up, and stretched out their arms to save
him; but in so doing, they upset the boat.

6. Every one fell into the water, and all were in the greatest danger of
being drowned.

7. Another boat was near, with but one man in it. He hastened to them as
quickly as possible, and saved them from drowning.

8. Children should always be careful and quiet when they are in a boat on
the water, and should obey what older people tell them.



LESSON XXXI.

MARY'S LETTER.

[Illustration: Script Exercise:

     Forest Hill, June 25, 1878
My  Dear Fanny:
             This morning while
out rowing, we all came near
being drowned. Brother Ed, in
trying to take a stick from Tom
Reed, tripped and fell out of the
boat. Papa and Mamma caught
at him to save him, and before
we knew it we were all in the
water. The boat upset and how
we were all saved I can hardly
tell. A man in another boat
which was near, picked us up.
Had it not been for this, you
would to-day have no cousin.
                     Mary Rose.

]



LESSON XXXII.

li'on    bod'y     stripes       de light'     Eng'lish

prey     ti'ger    col'lar       ti'gress      fright'ful

seize    chain     un like'      swift'est     an'i mals

roar     gi'ant    slight'est    of'fi cers    whisk'ers

[Illustration: Tigress carrying cub away from tent.
Playing card scattered on ground.]


THE TIGER.

1. The tiger is a giant cat. His body is nearly covered with black
stripes.

2. Unlike the lion, he runs so fast that the swiftest horse can not
overtake him. He goes over the ground by making bounds or springs, one
after another.

3. By night, as well as by day, the tiger watches for his prey. With a
frightful roar, he will seize a man, and carry him off.

4. Have you ever thought what use whiskers are to cats? Lions have great
whiskers, and so have tigers and all other animals of the cat kind.

5. Whenever you find an animal with whiskers like the cat's, you may be
sure that animal steals softly among branches and thick bushes.

6. By the slightest touch on the tiger's whiskers, he knows when there is
anything in his road.

7. A few years ago, some English officers went out to hunt. When coming
home from their day's sport, they found a little tiger kitten.

8. They took it with them and tied it, with a collar and chain, to the
pole of their tent. It played about, to the delight of all who saw it.

9. One evening, just as it was growing dark, they heard a sound that
frightened them greatly. It was the roar of a tiger.

10. The kitten pulled at the chain, and tried to break away. With a sharp
cry, it answered the voice outside.

11. All at once, a large tigress bounded into the middle of the tent. She
caught her kitten by the neck, and broke the chain which bound it.

12. Then turning to the door of the tent, she dashed away as suddenly as
she had come.



LESSON XXXIII.

then      u'su al    cous'in      fire'side    sew'ing (so-)

Ka'tie    bet'ter    crac'kle     knit'ting    per haps'

Jane      rea'son    to-night'    hap'pi er    in struct'ive


THE FIRESIDE.

1. One winter night, Mrs. Lord and her two little girls sat by a bright
fire in their pleasant home. The girls were sewing, and their mother was
busy at her knitting.

[Illustration: Mother and two girls sewing under a lamp.]

2. At last, Katie finished her work, and, looking up, said, "Mother, I
think the fire is brighter than usual. How I love to hear it crackle!"

3. "And I was about to say," cried Mary, "that this is a better light than
we had last night."

4. "My dears," said their mother, "it must be that you feel happier than
usual to-night. Perhaps that is the reason why you think the fire better,
and the light brighter."

5. "But, mother," said Mary, "I do not see why we are happier now than we
were then; for last night cousin Jane was here, and we played 'Puss in the
corner' and 'Blind man' until we all were tired."

6. "I know! I know why!" said Katie. "It is because we have all been doing
something useful to-night. We feel happy because we have been busy."

7. "You are right, my dear," said their mother. "I am glad you have both
learned that there may be something more pleasant than play, and, at the
same time, more instructive."



LESSON XXXIV.

dew'drops    hop'ping     la'zi est    bends    sung

pa'tience    in stead'    dar'ling     ought    rest

slum'ber     my self '    re ply'      miss     lose


BIRDIE'S MORNING SONG.

1. Wake up, little darling, the birdies are out,
   And here you are still in your nest!
   The laziest birdie is hopping about;
     You ought to be up with the rest.
   Wake up, little darling, wake up!

[Illustration: Three birds perched in bush.]

2. Oh, see what you miss when you
     slumber so long--
   The dewdrops, the beautiful sky!
   I can not sing half what you lose in my song;
     And yet, not a word in reply.
   Wake up, little darling, wake up!

3. I've sung myself quite out of patience with you,
   While mother bends o'er your dear head;
   Now birdie has done all that birdie can do:
     Her kisses will wake you instead!
   Wake up, little darling, wake up!
                                        George Cooper.



LESSON XXXV.

sent        store        Bounce    float'ing    load        cir'cle

rip'ples    catch'ing    cake      blocks       strolled    how ev'er


WILLIE AND BOUNCE.

1. Two fast friends were Willie Brown and his little dog Bounce. Willie
could never think of taking a walk without Bounce. Cake and play were
equally shared between them.

2. Willie taught his dog many cunning tricks, and often said that Bounce
could do almost anything in the world but talk.

3. There came a time, however, when Bounce really told Willie's father
something, though he could not talk. Let me tell you how he did this.

[Illustration: Boy and dog walking through forest.]

4. It was on a bright summer afternoon. Willie had strolled with Bounce
down to the river, which was not more than two blocks from his father's
store.

5. Willie began to throw stones into the water, and to watch the ripples
as they made one circle after another.

6. Bounce lay on the grass, watching the flies that buzzed around his
nose, and catching any that came too near.

7. There were some logs floating in the river near the shore. Willie
jumped upon one of them, to see if he could throw a stone across the
river.

8. He drew back, and sent the stone with all his might. just as it left
his hand, the log turned, and he fell into the water.

9. He was very much frightened, for he did not know how to swim, and there
was no one to hear, though he called as loud as he could for help.



LESSON XXXVI.

yelp      loud'ly    against    look'ing     bark'ing

spring    clothes    o'pened    dis'tress    scratched


WILLIE AND BOUNCE.
(CONCLUDED.)

1. Poor little Bounce gave a great yelp of distress. If he had been a big
water dog, he could have jumped in and brought his master out.

[Illustration: Boy in water clinging to log. Dog yelping.]

2. He ran up and down the bank two or three times, barking, looking first
at Willie and then around. Then he started, as fast as he could run, up
the street to the store.

3. When he got there the door was shut, but he scratched against it and
barked loudly, until some one came and opened it.

4. He caught hold of Mr. Brown's clothes, then ran to the door, then back
again, catching at him, barking, and jumping.

5. A friend who was in the store said to Mr. Brown, "Something must be
wrong; I would put on my hat, and go with the dog." Bounce, seeing Mr.
Brown take his hat, started for the river.

6. Then Mr. Brown thought of Willie. As he came to the river, he saw
Willie's hat floating on the water, and his small arm thrown up.

7. He sprang in and caught him just as he was going down for the last
time, and quickly carried him to the bank. "Willie soon got over his
fright, and no one seemed to be more delighted than Bounce.

[Illustration: Father carrying boy from water.]



LESSON XXXVII.

talk'a tive    im prove'    o bli'ging    writ'ten    tick-tock

clock          truth'ful    it self'      kitch'en    fear

reach'es       most

[Illustration: Girl holding younger sister, both watching clock.]


THE KITCHEN CLOCK.

1. Listen to the kitchen clock!
     To itself it ever talks,
     From its place it never walks;
   "Tick-tock-tick-tock: "
     Tell me what it says.

2. "I'm a very patient clock,
     Never moved by hope or fear,
     Though I've stood for many a year;
   Tick-tock-tick-tock: "
     That is what it says.

3. "I'm a very truthful clock:
     People say about the place,
     Truth is written on my face;
   Tick-tock-tick-tock: "
     That is what it says.

4. "I'm a most obliging clock;
     If you wish to hear me strike,
     You may do it when you like;
   Tick-tock-tick-tock: "
     That is what it says.

5. "I'm a very friendly clock;
     For this truth to all I tell,
     Life is short, improve it well;
   Tick-tock-tick-tock: "
     That is what it says.

6. What a talkative old clock!
     Let us see what it will do
     When the hour hand reaches two;
   "Ding-ding--tick-tock: "
     That is what it says.



LESSON XXXVIII.

Her'bert    or'ange    find       post      inch'es    thread

beam        thick      pine       next      groove     scales

hole        peel       gim'let    rib'bon


[Illustration: Boy and girl near table holding balance scale.]


THE NEW SCALES.

I. "Herbert, will you please peel my orange?" said Lucy. Herbert was
reading his new book, but he put it down at once, and took the orange from
his little sister.

2. "Shall I make a pair of scales, Lucy, for you to use when you play
store?"

3. "Oh yes! but how can you do that'!"

4.  "I'll show you. First, we must take the peel off in two little cups,
one just as large as the other. While I do this, see if you can find me
two nice sticks about ten inches long."

5. Lucy ran out to the woodhouse to find the sticks.--" Will these do?"

6. "No, they are too hard. Find some pine sticks if you can."

7.  "Here are some."

8. "These will do nicely. Now I must make a scale beam and a post. Can you
find me a little block for a post, Lucy'!"

9. "Will a ribbon block do, Herbert?"

10.  "Yes, if it is not too thick."

11.  "Here is one an inch thick."

12. "That will be just right. Now get the little gimlet."

[Footnote: gimlet: Hand tool with a spiraled shank, a screw tip, and a
cross handle; used for boring holes.]

13. Herbert worked away until he had made the beam and the post. Then he
made a hole in the middle of the block, and put the post in. Next, he put
the beam into a little groove at the top of the post, so that it would
balance nicely.

14. "Now, Lucy, we must have a needle and some thread. We must put four
threads to each cup; then we will tie the threads to the ends of the beam.


15. "There, Lucy, what do you think of that?"

