Lucy's kind mamma says that they will have a picnic when her papa can get
a tent.



LESSON XXXIII. REVIEW.

James and Robert have gone into the shade of a high wall to play ball.

Mary and Lucy have come up from the pond near by, with brave old Ponto, to
see them play.

When they toss the ball up in the air, and try to catch it, Ponto runs to
get it in his mouth.

Now the ball is lost. They all look for it under the trees and in the
grass; but they can not see it. Where can it be?

See! Ponto has found it. Here he comes with it. He will lay it at little
Lucy's feet, or put it in her hand.



LESSON XXXIV.

boy     our       spoil    hur rah'    own      coil

noise   fourth    such     join        thank    a bout'

hoist   pay       Ju ly'   playing     oi


[Illustration: Five boys carrying a large American flag. Man in background
is smoking a pipe.]


"Papa, may we have the big flag?" said James.

"What can my little boy do with such a big flag?"

"Hoist it on our tent, papa. We are playing Fourth of July."

"Is that what all this noise is about? Why not hoist your own flags?"

"Oh! they are too little."

"You might spoil my flag."

"Then we will all join to pay for it. But we will not spoil it, papa."

"Take it, then, and take the coil of rope with it."

"Oh! thank you. Hurrah for the flag, boys!"



LESSON XXXV.

fin'ished    bon'net    les'son    saved        white     a way'

I've         am         work       scam'per     read'y    gar'den


[Illustration: White kitten lapping milk from a bowl.]


THE WHITE KITTEN.

[Illustration: Script Exercise:

Kitty, my pretty, white kitty.
   Why do you scamper away?
I've finished my work and my lesson
   And now I am ready for play.

Come, kitty, my own little kitty.
   I've saved you some milk come and see.
Now drink while I put on my bonnet,
   And play in the garden with me.
]



LESSON XXXVI.

care    al'ways       line     Frank

row     been (bin)    keeps    home


[Illustration: Boy untying a white boat from post in pond.]


Frank has a pretty boat. It is white, with a black line near the water.

He keeps it in the pond, near his home. He always takes good care of it.

Frank has been at work in the garden, and will now row a while.



LESSON XXXVII.

much    one (wun)     yet     hun'gry

seen    grand'ma      corn    would    o


[Illustration: Two children on porch. Girl is holding a bowl.
Boy is seated on the step holding a model sailboat.]


"What is that?" said Lucy, as she came out on the steps. "Oh, it is a
little boat! What a pretty one it is!"

"I will give it to you when it is finished," said John, kindly. "Would you
like to have it?"

"Yes, very much, thank you, John. Has grandma seen it?"

"Not yet; we will take it to her by and by. What have you in your pan,
Lucy?"

"Some corn for my hens, John; they must be very hungry by this time."



LESSON XXXVIII.

mar'ket    bread     bas'ket    bought    meat

tea        try'ing   tell       which


[Illustration: Woman and boy walking on path next to fence.
Woman is carrying a basket.]


James has been to market with his mamma.

She has bought some bread, some meat, and some tea, which are in the
basket on her arm.

James is trying to tell his mamma what he has seen in the market.



LESSON XXXIX.

reads    so      wears    please    could    hair

fast     love    eas'y    gray      chair    who     glass'es


[Illustration: Girl standing by old woman in rocking chair.]


See my dear, old grandma in her easy-chair! How gray her hair is! She
wears glasses when she reads.

She is always kind, and takes such good care of me that I like to do what
she tells me.

When she says, "Robert, will you get me a drink?"  I run as fast as I can
to get it for her. Then she says, "Thank you, my boy."

Would you not love a dear, good grandma, who is so kind? And would you not
do all yon could to please her?



LESSON XL.

does    won'der    moth'er    oth'er    bee    hon'ey    lis'ten    flow'er


[Illustration: Girl standing next to woman seated on porch.]


"Come here, Lucy, and listen! What is in this flower?"

"O mother! it is a bee. I wonder how it came to be shut up in the flower!"

"It went into the flower for some honey, and it may be it went to sleep.
Then the flower shut it in.

"The bee likes honey as well as we do, but it does not like to be shut up
in the flower.

"Shall we let it out, Lucy?"

"Yes; then it can go to other flowers, and get honey."



LESSON XLI.

best    hitched    their    should     or      rid'ing

live    holds      hay      driv'ing   tight   ear'ly


[Illustration: One boy riding a horse, and another boy riding a cart
pulled by a horse.]


Here come Frank and James White. Do you know where they live?

Frank is riding a horse, and James is driving one hitched to a cart. They
are out very early in the day. How happy they are!

See how well Frank rides, and how tight James holds the lines!

The boys should be kind to their horses. It is not best to whip them.

When they have done riding, they will give the horses some hay or corn.


Slate Work

[Illustration: Script Exercise:

Some horses can trot very
fast. Would you like to ride
fast? One day I saw a dog
