"What an awful ass I've been, sir!" "I don't know quite about the ass, but
you've certainly not been an epitome of all that's wise this term. It was
on that very subject that I came here to have a word with you before we go
for the holidays."

Gus looked blankly into the grate.

"This exhibition of yours, Todd, in the examination is just the answer you
might expect to the problem you've set yourself. 'How can I get something
of value by doing nothing for it?' I must say... etc." Taylor spoke very
much to the point to Todd for about half an hour, taking the ribs out of
Gus's conceit one by one, until he felt very much like a damp, damaged
gamp, and about as helpless. One by one he took him through the catalogue
of the aimless, stupid, footling performances in the term, and Gus blankly
wondered how the dickens Taylor knew quite so much of his doings, He felt
that the house master was not a bad imitation of Corker on a flaying
expedition. I must say that Taylor's performance was a considerable trifle
above the average "beak's wigging," but the sting of his discourse was in
the tail. "Now, Todd, would you like me to ask Dr. Moore to transfer you
to some other house, where your very intimate friends will not absorb so
much of your time?"

Todd blushed purple at this very broad hint.

"I'd rather stay where I am; I am not quite an incapable, sir."

"No; I don't think you are--not quite. Dr. Moore, however, is somewhat out
of patience with you, and proposes drastic measures."

"Home?" inquired Todd, with gloomy conviction.

"Yes," said the house master. "Dr. Moore has written your father. But you
are coming back next term, when you will have the chance of showing that
that awful performance in the Exhibition is not your true form. I hope
you'll take it."

Todd said bitterly, "I will, sir."

"I am glad of that," said Taylor, "and I believe you will. Good night,
Todd."

"Good night, sir."

Todd packed up his portmanteaux that night as gloomily and as savagely as
though his shirts were his deadly enemies. But there was a square,
determined thrust-out of his weak chin which boded ill for Jim Cotton's
classics and mathematics in the future.




CHAPTER VIII

BIFFEN'S CONCERT


It was the inalienable right of the juniors of the cock-house to give a
concert the last night of the term, and to have free and undisputed
possession of the concert-room. Corker made it a rule that the captain of
the school should be there to see there were no riots, which, as the fags
were off home on the morrow, was more than possible. So when I got a
polite note from Grim about half an hour after the results of the Perry
Exhibition had been announced, telling me that Corker had given the
customary consent, I strolled about looking up a cohort of monitors to
help me in maintaining the "sacred cause of order and decency." I knew of
old those junior concerts. "Pandemonium" was nearer the word.

Biffen's juniors, red-hot from their exertions and hoarse from their
shouting in the speech-room, held a meeting in their own private quarters
to deliberate as to their concert.

"I vote Father Grim to the chair," said Wilson.

"Thanks, my son," said Grim, with alacrity "Somebody second that, and
let's get to business."

Somebody obligingly seconded, and Grim enthroned himself with dignity in
the chair, and said cheerfully, "Carried _nem. con._ That's the way
to commence biz. Now, you fellows, I thank you for this unexpected honour,
which has quite taken me by surprise. I shall always--"

"Shut up, Grim," said Brown. "You know jolly well you asked Wilson to
propose you."

"All right, Brown; I'll talk with you afterwards. Sorry your Roman nose is
out of joint; but nobody proposed you, you know, so shut up. Gentlemen--"

"Hear, hear!"

"Biffen's are cock-house at last" (deafening cheers) "and we must make our
concert a stunner. It must go with a bang from start to finish. It must
lick every other fag's concert that ever was, and 'be the bright harbinger
of--' What is the rest of the quote, Wilson?"

"'Of future joys,' you ass."

"'Of future joys,' you asses."

"I'll punch your head, Grim; you said you remembered it."

"All serene, old man, never mind the cackle."

"What about our concert?" asked Brown.

"It's going to be great. Does any one happen to have a programme of that
awful performance of Corker's house last year?"

"Rather!" said half a dozen of Biffen's ornaments. "Did you think we'd
burn a curiosity like that?"

"Cut out and get yours, Rogers, my pet."

"My pet" bolted and came back with the year-old programme of the Corker's
fags.

"Pass the abomination this way, Rogers. Gentlemen," said Grim, with
intense scorn, "those unspeakable Corker asses started off with a
prologue."

"We must go one better--eh, you fellows?" said Rogers.

"Rather!" they all shrieked.

"I vote," said young Cherry, "that we lead off with an epilogue. That will
leave 'em standing."

"Hear, hear!" said Fruity.

"Who'll second that?" said Grim.

"I will," said Rogers, cheerfully.

"Then do it, you ass," said the chairman.

"I second," said Rogers, hurriedly, "and you needn't be so beastly strict,
Grim."

"Gentlemen, the proposal before the meeting is that we lead off with an
epilogue. Item number one on the programme to be 'An Epilogue.' Those in
favour signify. Carried unanimously."

"I say, Grim, what is an epilogue, anyhow?" said a voice.

"Oh, I say," said the chairman, "pass that young ignoramus this way. Lamb,
do you mean to say you don't know what an epilogue is?"

"No, I don't."

"This is sickening," said Grim, with disgust. "A fellow in Biffen's not
know what an epilogue is! Tell him, Fruity," he added, with pathetic
vexation.

"He asked you," said Cherry, hurriedly.

"I'm the chairman," said Grim, in a wax, but with great relief. "Explain
away, Fruity!"

"Oh, every first-class concert starts with one," he said vaguely.

"See now, Lamb?"

Lamb professed himself satisfied, but he did not appear absolutely blinded
by the light either.

"Anyhow," said Wilson, "Fruity will see to that. I propose he does."

"I second it," said Lamb, viciously, whereupon Cherry kicked the seconder
on the shins, for he did not exactly thirst for that honour. "I'm an
ass," he said to himself; "but, anyhow, I'll look up what the blessed word
does mean, and try to do it."

"I see," said Grim, "they've got a poem on 'Cock House' for number two.
That seems all right, eh?"

"Oh yes; it's always done."

"Well, we'll have one too, eh? Who's got to do the poetry, though?
Somebody propose somebody"--thereupon every fag proposed his chiefest
enemy, and the battles raged along the line. "And you call yourselves
gentlemen!" said Grim in disgust--he had been overlooked for the time
being.

"I propose Sharpe," said Wilson, dusting himself. "He does no end swell
construes from 'Ovid.'"

"I second that," said Rogers. "He has long hair. Poets always have. Milton
had."

"That bit is _side,_" said the chairman, judicially. "Those who are
in favour of Sharpe doing the poetry hold--Carried, _nem. con._"

"_Nem. con_. is side too, Grim," said Rogers.

"Shut up, you mule! Sharpe, you'll have to do the poem."

"I say, you fellows, it will be horse work," said Sharpe, disconsolately.
"There isn't a rhyme to Biffen's."

"Oh! isn't there? What about 'spiffing'?"

Sharpe choked.

"Griffin."

"Tiffin."

Lamb squeaked out "stiff 'un," and some one gently led him out--even
Biffen's fags caved in at that.

"Sharpe, you're booked for number two, old man. Gentlemen, I direct your
attention to number three--Corker's did Indian clubs and the gold-fish
dodge."

"Oh, well," said Wilson, "we're not going to copy Corker's, anyhow. Let's
do dumb-bells and something else."

"I propose that Wilson does the something else," said Cherry,
good-naturedly.

Wilson said he was ready to do something to Cherry any time that was
convenient. Rogers suggested that they ask the niggers to do something on
the bars, and Sharpe seconded it, so the dervishes were written to and
promised a scragging if they didn't turn themselves inside out for the
glory of Biffen's concert.

"I say, you fellows," said Grim, "it's to be a concert, you know, and
except for Fruity's epilogue there isn't any music down yet." Cherry
groaned to think he'd been let in for a song.

"What about Thurston?" asked half a dozen of the fags.

"Right, oh! Now, 'Dicky Bird,' hop up to the front, and trot out your
list."

Thurston wasn't shy, and rather fancied his bleat, so he said, "Oh! I
don't mind at all."

"We thought you wouldn't," said the chairman, winking.

"What do you say to 'Alice, where art thou'?"

"We don't fancy your shouting five minutes for her at all. Next, please."

"'Only to see her face again,' then?"

"Whose?" said Sharpe, irreverently.

"Why, the girl's the fellow is singing about," said Thurston, hotly.

"Oh! you'll see her the day after to-morrow, Dicky Bird, so don't you fret
about that now. Do you know 'My first cigar'?"

"Do you mean the one that sent you to hospital, Grimmy?"

"No I don't. None of your cheek. I'm chairman. I mean the one Corney Grain
used to sing."

"Yes."

"Well, you sing that and you'll make the fellows die with laughing. And
mind you illustrate it with plenty of life-like pantomime, do you hear?"

"Carried, _nem. con_.," shouted all the fags with enthusiasm.

"Hear, hear, Grimmy!"

"So that's settled for you, and if you get an encore, Dicky Bird, you can
trot 'Alice' out if you like."

"Which of the fellows have we to invite out of the eleven to help us?"

"Acton," was the universal yell.

"We'll see him, then, to-night."

"Three cheers for Acton," said someone, and the roof echoed.

"Well, we're getting on, and I say, you chaps, I have an idea."

"Hear, hear!" said Cherry, acidly; "Grimmy _has_ an idea."

"A grand idea, Fruity. Your epilogue isn't in it."

"What is it, Grim?"

"We'll have a boxing competition open to St. Amory's juniors only. Rogers
should pull that off, eh?"

"Rather," said they all. "One more feather in Biffen's cap.".

"But, Grimmy," said Rogers, "I don't last, you know."

"Ah!" said the chairman, brilliantly, "we'll only have one two-minutes'
round each draw. It will go by points. You're safe as a house, my pet,
really."

"Who'll be judge about points? I propose you, Grim," said Rogers, with
intent.

"Thanks, old cock, but I really couldn't do the honourable if you were
'rocky' in the last rounds. We'll ask Carr to see us through that part.
You'll be all right, I tell you."

"Who's to accompany on the P and O?"

"Oh, Brown must see to that!"

"I propose Brown key-thumper."

"I second that."

"Carried," said the chair, smartly.

"I say," said Grim, "I propose myself stage manager. I'm the only fellow
who knows a ha'porth about it."

"A ha'porth is an awful lot; besides, a chairman can't propose himself,"
said Cherry, revengefully.

"I second the chairman's proposal," said Wilson, backing up his chum.

"Carried, _nem. con_."

"No, I'm hanged if it was!" said Cherry. "You're a fraud, Grimmy."

"All right now, you chaps, the meeting is over. Wilson and I will go up to
Acton, and see what he'll do for us, and then we'll rough out a swagger
programme."



CHAPTER IX

THE END OF TERM


The two worthies, Grim and Wilson, after seeing Acton, began to get out
their programme. Here it is:--


     BIFFEN'S JUNIORS' CONCERT.

     _Cock House, December, 1898._

     (1) Epilogue.
          B.A.M. CHERRY.

     (2) Poem on the subject of Cock House.
          B. SHARPE.

     (3) Bar Act.

     (4) First Round Junior Boxing Competition.
          PRINCE RUNJIT MEHTAH and RAM SINGH.

     (5) SONG. "My First Cigar."
          R.E. THURSTON.

     (6) PIANOFORTE SOLO. "Oh! listen to the band."
          O. BROWN.

     (7) Second Round Boxing.

     (8) SONG. "Jim."
          J. ACTON, ESQ.

     (9) Third and Concluding Rounds Boxing.

     (10) SONG. "Well, suppose you did?"
          R.E. THURSTON.

          GOD SAVE THE QUEEN.

     ACCOMPANIST           O.E. BROWN.
     _Trinity College (by Examination)._

     STAGE MANAGER         W.E. GRIM.

     N.B.--The Manager begs to state that there will be no Latin
     or classical allusions throughout the evening. No waits. No
     charge for programmes. No antediluvian jokes.


This was printed on paper blushing pink--Biffen's colours--and Grim and
Wilson, when they got the advance proof last thing on Saturday night,
almost embraced in their jubilation. There was such a swagger look about
the "N.B."

Meanwhile B.A.M. Cherry had consulted his dictionary, and therein found
that an "epilogue" was defined as "a concluding speech in an oration or
play." He broke into a cold sweat of horror. That was an epilogue, then!
Where could he find one? What would be the good of one if he did find it?
And supposing he had one and could recite it, it was at the wrong end of
the programme--the programme which had already been printed in such hot
haste? It was too late to tell Grim, who would have instantly summoned all
the strength of Biffen's to scrag him. The wretched Cherry shuddered at
his awful plight.

Nothing could he do or dare he do. In desperation he determined to fall
ill on the concert night. B.A.M. Cherry hadn't the heroic soul, and when
Grim asked him cheerfully how the epilogue was going on, he said
"spiffing," in the tone of a martyr at the stake.
