punishment, and kept him in perpetual anger. Moreover, his presence
about the school door began to incense the master, as the boys in that
neighbourhood neglected their lessons in consequence; and more than once
he issued into the porch, rod in hand, just as Tom beat a hasty retreat.
And he and the wheelwright, laying their heads together, resolved to
acquaint the Squire with Tom's afternoon occupations; but in order to
do it with effect, determined to take him captive and lead him away to
judgment fresh from his evil doings. This they would have found some
difficulty in doing, had Tom continued the war single-handed, or rather
single-footed, for he would have taken to the deepest part of Pebbly
Brook to escape them; but, like other active powers, he was ruined by
his alliances. Poor Jacob Doodle-calf could not go to the school with
the other boys, and one fine afternoon, about three o'clock (the school
broke up at four), Tom found him ambling about the street, and pressed
him into a visit to the school-porch. Jacob, always ready to do what he
was asked, consented, and the two stole down to the school together.
Tom first reconnoitred the wheelwright's shop; and seeing no signs
of activity, thought all safe in that quarter, and ordered at once an
advance of all his troops upon the schoolporch. The door of the school
was ajar, and the boys seated on the nearest bench at once recognized
and opened a correspondence with the invaders. Tom, waxing bold, kept
putting his head into the school and making faces at the master when
his back was turned. Poor Jacob, not in the least comprehending the
situation, and in high glee at finding himself so near the school, which
he had never been allowed to enter, suddenly, in a fit of enthusiasm,
pushed by Tom, and ambling three steps into the school, stood there,
looking round him and nodding with a self-approving smile. The master,
who was stooping over a boy's slate, with his back to the door, became
aware of something unusual, and turned quickly round. Tom rushed at
Jacob, and began dragging him back by his smock-frock, and the master
made at them, scattering forms and boys in his career. Even now they
might have escaped, but that in the porch, barring retreat, appeared the
crafty wheelwright, who had been watching all their proceedings. So they
were seized, the school dismissed, and Tom and Jacob led away to Squire
Brown as lawful prize, the boys following to the gate in groups, and
speculating on the result.

The Squire was very angry at first, but the interview, by Tom's
pleading, ended in a compromise. Tom was not to go near the school till
three o'clock, and only then if he had done his own lessons well, in
which case he was to be the bearer of a note to the master from Squire
Brown; and the master agreed in such case to release ten or twelve of
the best boys an hour before the time of breaking up, to go off and play
in the close. The wheelwright's adzes and swallows were to be for ever
respected; and that hero and the master withdrew to the servants' hall
to drink the Squire's health, well satisfied with their day's work.

The second act of Tom's life may now be said to have begun. The war of
independence had been over for some time: none of the women now--not
even his mother's maid--dared offer to help him in dressing or
washing. Between ourselves, he had often at first to run to Benjy in an
unfinished state of toilet. Charity and the rest of them seemed to take
a delight in putting impossible buttons and ties in the middle of his
back; but he would have gone without nether integuments altogether,
sooner than have had recourse to female valeting. He had a room to
himself, and his father gave him sixpence a week pocket-money. All
this he had achieved by Benjy's advice and assistance. But now he had
conquered another step in life--the step which all real boys so long
to make: he had got amongst his equals in age and strength, and could
measure himself with other boys; he lived with those whose pursuits and
wishes and ways were the same in kind as his own.

The little governess who had lately been installed in the house found
her work grow wondrously easy, for Tom slaved at his lessons, in order
to make sure of his note to the schoolmaster. So there were very few
days in the week in which Tom and the village boys were not playing
in their close by three o'clock. Prisoner's base, rounders,
high-cock-a-lorum, cricket, football--he was soon initiated into the
delights of them all; and though most of the boys were older than
himself, he managed to hold his own very well. He was naturally active
and strong, and quick of eye and hand, and had the advantage of light
shoes and well-fitting dress, so that in a short time he could run and
jump and climb with any of them.

They generally finished their regular games half an hour or so before
tea-time, and then began trials of skill and strength in many ways. Some
of them would catch the Shetland pony who was turned out in the field,
and get two or three together on his back, and the little rogue,
enjoying the fun, would gallop off for fifty yards, and then turn round,
or stop short and shoot them on to the turf, and then graze quietly on
till he felt another load; others played at peg-top or marbles, while
a few of the bigger ones stood up for a bout at wrestling. Tom at first
only looked on at this pastime, but it had peculiar attractions for him,
and he could not long keep out of it. Elbow and collar wrestling, as
practised in the western counties, was, next to back-swording, the way
to fame for the youth of the Vale; and all the boys knew the rules of
it, and were more or less expert. But Job Rudkin and Harry Winburn were
the stars--the former stiff and sturdy, with legs like small towers; the
latter pliant as indiarubber and quick as lightning. Day after day they
stood foot to foot, and offered first one hand and then the other, and
grappled and closed, and swayed and strained, till a well-aimed crook of
the heel or thrust of the loin took effect, and a fair back-fall ended
the matter. And Tom watched with all his eyes, and first challenged one
of the less scientific, and threw him; and so one by one wrestled his
way up to the leaders.

Then indeed for months he had a poor time of it; it was not long indeed
before he could manage to keep his legs against Job, for that hero was
slow of offence, and gained his victories chiefly by allowing others to
throw themselves against his immovable legs and loins. But Harry Winburn
was undeniably his master; from the first clutch of hands when they
stood up, down to the last trip which sent him on to his back on the
turf, he felt that Harry knew more and could do more than he. Luckily
Harry's bright unconsciousness and Tom's natural good temper kept them
from quarrelling; and so Tom worked on and on, and trod more and more
nearly on Harry's heels, and at last mastered all the dodges and falls
except one. This one was Harry's own particular invention and pet; he
scarcely ever used it except when hard pressed, but then out it came,
and as sure as it did, over went poor Tom. He thought about that fall
at his meals, in his walks, when he lay awake in bed, in his dreams, but
all to no purpose, until Harry one day in his open way suggested to him
how he thought it should be met; and in a week from that time the boys
were equal, save only the slight difference of strength in Harry's
favour, which some extra ten months of age gave. Tom had often
afterwards reason to be thankful for that early drilling, and above all,
for having mastered Harry Winburn's fall.

Besides their home games, on Saturdays the boys would wander all over
the neighbourhood; sometimes to the downs, or up to the camp, where
they cut their initials out in the springy turf, and watched the hawks
soaring, and the "peert" bird, as Harry Winburn called the gray plover,
gorgeous in his wedding feathers; and so home, racing down the Manger
with many a roll among the thistles, or through Uffington Wood to watch
the fox cubs playing in the green rides; sometimes to Rosy Brook, to cut
long whispering reeds which grew there, to make pan-pipes of; sometimes
to Moor Mills, where was a piece of old forest land, with short browsed
turf and tufted brambly thickets stretching under the oaks, amongst
which rumour declared that a raven, last of his race, still lingered;
or to the sand-hills, in vain quest of rabbits; and bird-nesting in the
season, anywhere and everywhere.

The few neighbours of the Squire's own rank every now and then would
shrug their shoulders as they drove or rode by a party of boys with Tom
in the middle, carrying along bulrushes or whispering reeds, or great
bundles of cowslip and meadow-sweet, or young starlings or magpies, or
other spoil of wood, brook, or meadow; and Lawyer Red-tape might mutter
to Squire Straight-back at the Board that no good would come of the
young Browns, if they were let run wild with all the dirty village boys,
whom the best farmers' sons even would not play with. And the squire
might reply with a shake of his head that his sons only mixed with
their equals, and never went into the village without the governess or
a footman. But, luckily, Squire Brown was full as stiffbacked as
his neighbours, and so went on his own way; and Tom and his younger
brothers, as they grew up, went on playing with the village boys,
without the idea of equality or inequality (except in wrestling,
running, and climbing) ever entering their heads; as it doesn't till
it's put there by Jack Nastys or fine ladies' maids.

I don't mean to say it would be the case in all villages, but it
certainly was so in this one: the village boys were full as manly and
honest, and certainly purer, than those in a higher rank; and Tom got
more harm from his equals in his first fortnight at a private school,
where he went when he was nine years old, than he had from his village
friends from the day he left Charity's apron-strings.

Great was the grief amongst the village school-boys when Tom drove off
with the Squire, one August morning, to meet the coach on his way to
school. Each of them had given him some little present of the best that
he had, and his small private box was full of peg-taps, white marbles
(called "alley-taws" in the Vale), screws, birds' eggs, whip-cord,
jews-harps, and other miscellaneous boys' wealth. Poor Jacob
Doodle-calf, in floods of tears, had pressed upon him with spluttering
earnestness his lame pet hedgehog (he had always some poor broken-down
beast or bird by him); but this Tom had been obliged to refuse, by the
Squire's order. He had given them all a great tea under the big elm in
their playground, for which Madam Brown had supplied the biggest cake
ever seen in our village; and Tom was really as sorry to leave them
as they to lose him, but his sorrow was not unmixed with the pride and
excitement of making a new step in life.

And this feeling carried him through his first parting with his mother
better than could have been expected. Their love was as fair and whole
as human love can be--perfect self-sacrifice on the one side meeting
a young and true heart on the other. It is not within the scope of my
book, however, to speak of family relations, or I should have much to
say on the subject of English mothers--ay, and of English fathers, and
sisters, and brothers too. Neither have I room to speak of our private
schools. What I have to say is about public schools--those much-abused
and much-belauded institutions peculiar to England. So we must hurry
through Master Tom's year at a private school as fast as we can.

It was a fair average specimen, kept by a gentleman, with another
gentleman as second master; but it was little enough of the real work
they did--merely coming into school when lessons were prepared and all
ready to be heard. The whole discipline of the school out of lesson
hours was in the hands of the two ushers, one of whom was always with
the boys in their playground, in the school, at meals--in fact, at all
times and every where, till they were fairly in bed at night.

Now the theory of private schools is (or was) constant supervision out
of school--therein differing fundamentally from that of public schools.

It may be right or wrong; but if right, this supervision surely ought
to be the especial work of the head-master, the responsible person. The
object of all schools is not to ram Latin and Greek into boys, but to
make them good English boys, good future citizens; and by far the most
important part of that work must be done, or not done, out of school
hours. To leave it, therefore, in the hands of inferior men, is just
giving up the highest and hardest part of the work of education. Were I
a private school-master, I should say, Let who will hear the boys their
lessons, but let me live with them when they are at play and rest.

The two ushers at Tom's first school were not gentlemen, and very poorly
educated, and were only driving their poor trade of usher to get such
living as they could out of it. They were not bad men, but had little
heart for their work, and of course were bent on making it as easy as
possible. One of the methods by which they endeavoured to accomplish
this was by encouraging tale-bearing, which had become a frightfully
common vice in the school in consequence, and had sapped all the
foundations of school morality. Another was, by favouring grossly the
biggest boys, who alone could have given them much trouble; whereby
those young gentlemen became most abominable tyrants, oppressing the
little boys in all the small mean ways which prevail in private schools.

Poor little Tom was made dreadfully unhappy in his first week by a
catastrophe which happened to his first letter home. With huge labour he
had, on the very evening of his arrival, managed to fill two sides of
a sheet of letter-paper with assurances of his love for dear mamma, his
happiness at school, and his resolves to do all she would wish. This
missive, with the help of the boy who sat at the desk next him, also a
new arrival, he managed to fold successfully; but this done, they were
sadly put to it for means of sealing. Envelopes were then unknown;
they had no wax, and dared not disturb the stillness of the evening
school-room by getting up and going to ask the usher for some. At length
Tom's friend, being of an ingenious turn of mind, suggested sealing with
ink; and the letter was accordingly stuck down with a blob of ink, and
duly handed by Tom, on his way to bed, to the housekeeper to be posted.
It was not till four days afterwards that the good dame sent for him,
and produced the precious letter and some wax, saying, "O Master Brown,
I forgot to tell you before, but your letter isn't sealed." Poor Tom
took the wax in silence and sealed his letter, with a huge lump rising
in his throat during the process, and then ran away to a quiet corner of
the playground, and burst into an agony of tears. The idea of his mother
waiting day after day for the letter he had promised her at once, and
perhaps thinking him forgetful of her, when he had done all in his power
to make good his promise, was as bitter a grief as any which he had
to undergo for many a long year. His wrath, then, was proportionately
violent when he was aware of two boys, who stopped close by him, and one
of whom, a fat gaby of a fellow, pointed at him and called him "Young
mammy-sick!" Whereupon Tom arose, and giving vent thus to his grief and
shame and rage, smote his derider on the nose; and made it bleed;
which sent that young worthy howling to the usher, who reported Tom for
violent and unprovoked assault and battery. Hitting in the face was a
felony punishable with flogging, other hitting only a misdemeanour--a
distinction not altogether clear in principle. Tom, however, escaped the
penalty by pleading primum tempus; and having written a second letter
to his mother, inclosing some forget-me-nots, which he picked on their
first half-holiday walk, felt quite happy again, and began to enjoy
vastly a good deal of his new life.

These half-holiday walks were the great events of the week. The whole
fifty boys started after dinner with one of the ushers for Hazeldown,
which was distant some mile or so from the school. Hazeldown measured
some three miles round, and in the neighbourhood were several woods full
of all manner of birds and butterflies. The usher walked slowly round
the down with such boys as liked to accompany him; the rest scattered
in all directions, being only bound to appear again when the usher
had completed his round, and accompany him home. They were forbidden,
however, to go anywhere except on the down and into the woods; the
village had been especially prohibited, where huge bull's-eyes and
unctuous toffy might be procured in exchange for coin of the realm.

Various were the amusements to which the boys then betook themselves. At
the entrance of the down there was a steep hillock, like the barrows of
Tom's own downs. This mound was the weekly scene of terrific combats,
at a game called by the queer name of "mud-patties." The boys who played
divided into sides under different leaders, and one side occupied the
mound. Then, all parties having provided themselves with many sods of
turf, cut with their bread-and-cheese knives, the side which remained
at the bottom proceeded to assault the mound, advancing up on all sides
under cover of a heavy fire of turfs, and then struggling for victory
with the occupants, which was theirs as soon as they could, even for a
moment, clear the summit, when they in turn became the besieged. It
was a good, rough, dirty game, and of great use in counteracting the
sneaking tendencies of the school. Then others of the boys spread over
the downs, looking for the holes of humble-bees and mice, which they
dug up without mercy, often (I regret to say) killing and skinning the
unlucky mice, and (I do not regret to say) getting well stung by the
bumble-bees. Others went after butterflies and birds' eggs in their
seasons; and Tom found on Hazeldown, for the first time, the beautiful
little blue butterfly with golden spots on his wings, which he had never
seen on his own downs, and dug out his first sand-martin's nest. This
latter achievement resulted in a flogging, for the sand-martins built in
a high bank close to the village, consequently out of bounds; but one of
the bolder spirits of the school, who never could be happy unless he
was doing something to which risk was attached, easily persuaded Tom to
break bounds and visit the martins' bank. From whence it being only a
step to the toffy shop, what could be more simple than to go on there
and fill their pockets; or what more certain than that on their return,
a distribution of treasure having been made, the usher should shortly
detect the forbidden smell of bull's-eyes, and, a search ensuing,
discover the state of the breeches-pockets of Tom and his ally?

This ally of Tom's was indeed a desperate hero in the sight of the boys,
and feared as one who dealt in magic, or something approaching thereto.
Which reputation came to him in this wise. The boys went to bed at
eight, and, of course, consequently lay awake in the dark for an hour or
two, telling ghost-stories by turns. One night when it came to his turn,
and he had dried up their souls by his story, he suddenly declared that
he would make a fiery hand appear on the door; and to the astonishment
and terror of the boys in his room, a hand, or something like it, in
pale light, did then and there appear. The fame of this exploit having
spread to the other rooms, and being discredited there, the young
necromancer declared that the same wonder would appear in all the rooms
in turn, which it accordingly did; and the whole circumstances having
been privately reported to one of the ushers as usual, that functionary,
after listening about at the doors of the rooms, by a sudden descent
caught the performer in his night-shirt, with a box of phosphorus in his
guilty hand. Lucifer-matches and all the present facilities for getting
acquainted with fire were then unknown--the very name of phosphorus had
something diabolic in it to the boy-mind; so Tom's ally, at the cost
of a sound flogging, earned what many older folk covet much--the very
decided fear of most of his companions.

He was a remarkable boy, and by no means a bad one. Tom stuck to him
till he left, and got into many scrapes by so doing. But he was the
great opponent of the tale-bearing habits of the school, and the open
enemy of the ushers; and so worthy of all support.

Tom imbibed a fair amount of Latin and Greek at the school, but somehow,
on the whole, it didn't suit him, or he it, and in the holidays he was
constantly working the Squire to send him at once to a public school.
Great was his joy then, when in the middle of his third half-year, in
October 183-, a fever broke out in the village, and the master having
himself slightly sickened of it, the whole of the boys were sent off at
a day's notice to their respective homes.

The Squire was not quite so pleased as Master Tom to see that young
gentleman's brown, merry face appear at home, some two months before the
proper time, for the Christmas holidays; and so, after putting on his
thinking cap, he retired to his study and wrote several letters, the
result of which was that, one morning at the breakfast-table, about a
fortnight after Tom's return, he addressed his wife with--"My dear, I
have arranged that Tom shall go to Rugby at once, for the last six weeks
of this half-year, instead of wasting them in riding and loitering about
home. It is very kind of the doctor to allow it. Will you see that his
things are all ready by Friday, when I shall take him up to town, and
send him down the next day by himself."

Mrs. Brown was prepared for the announcement, and merely suggested a
doubt whether Tom were yet old enough to travel by himself. However,
finding both father and son against her on this point, she gave in, like
a wise woman, and proceeded to prepare Tom's kit for his launch into a
public school.



CHAPTER IV--THE STAGE COACH.


     "Let the steam-pot hiss till it's hot;
     Give me the speed of the Tantivy trot."
     Coaching Song, by R.E.E. Warburton, Esq.

"Now, sir, time to get up, if you please. Tally-ho coach for
Leicester'll be round in half an hour, and don't wait for nobody." So
spake the boots of the Peacock Inn Islington, at half-past two o'clock
