   Such sounds of gladness filled all the air,
   'T was plain St. Nicholas had been there.

6. In rushed Piccola, sweet, half wild--
   Never was seen such a joyful child--
   "See what the good saint brought!" she cried,
   And mother and father must peep inside.

7. Now such a story I never heard!
   There was a little shivering bird!
   A sparrow, that in at the window flew,
   Had crept into Piccola's tiny shoe!

8. "How good poor Piccola must have been!"
   She cried, as happy as any queen,
   While the starving sparrow she fed and warmed,
   And danced with rapture, she was so charmed.

9. Children, this story I tell to you
   Of Piccola sweet and her bird, is true.
   In the far-off land of France, they say,
   Still do they live to this very day.


DEFINITIONS.--3. Dawned, began to grow light. Stir, excite. 4. Be-fall,
happen. 7. Shiv'er-ing, trembling from cold. Ti'ny, very small. 8.
Rapture, great joy. Charmed, greatly.


EXERCISES.--What is meant by "driving the wolf from the door"? In the
third stanza, what does "St." before Nicholas mean? Who is St. Nicholas?
What did Piccola find in her shoe on Christmas morning?



XIV. TRUE MANLINESS. (50)

By MRS. M. O. JOHNSON.--(ADAPTED.)

1. "Please, mother, do sit down and let me try my hand," said Fred Liscom,
a bright, active boy twelve years old. Mrs. Liscom, looking pale and worn,
was moving languidly about, trying to clear away the breakfast she had
scarcely tasted.

2. She smiled, and said, "You, Fred, you wash dishes?" "Yes, indeed,
mother," replied Fred; "I should be a poor scholar if I couldn't, when
I've seen you do it so many times. Just try me."

3. A look of relief came over his mother's face as she seated herself in
her low rocking-chair. Fred washed the dishes, and put them in the closet.
He then swept the kitchen, brought up the potatoes from the cellar for
the dinner and washed them, and then set out for school.

4. Fred's father was away from home, and as there was some cold meat in
the pantry, Mrs. Liscom found it an easy task to prepare dinner. Fred
hurried home from school, set the table, and again washed the dishes.

5. He kept on in this way for two or three days, till his mother was able
to resume her usual work, and he felt amply rewarded when the doctor, who
happened in one day, said, "Well, madam, it's my opinion that you would
have been very sick if you had not kept quiet."

6. The doctor did not know how the "quiet" had been secured, nor how the
boy's heart bounded at his words. Fred had given up a great deal of what
boys hold dear, for the purpose of helping his mother, coasting and
skating being just at this time in perfection.

7. Besides this, his temper and his patience had been severely tried. He
had been in the habit of going early to school, and staying to play after
it was dismissed.

8. The boys missed him, and their curiosity was excited when he would give
no other reason for not coming to school earlier, or staying after school,
than that he was a "wanted at home." "I'll tell you," said Tom Barton,
"I'll find him out, boys--see if I don't!"

9. So he called for Fred to go to school, and on his way to the side door
walked lightly and somewhat nearer the kitchen window than was absolutely
needful. Looking in, he saw Fred standing at the table with a dishcloth in
his hand.

10. Of course he reported this at school, and various were the greetings
poor Fred received at recess. "Well, you're a brave one to stay at home
washing dishes." "Girl boy!" "Pretty Bessie!" "Lost your apron, have n't
you, Polly!"

11. Fred was not wanting either in spirit or courage, and he was strongly
tempted to resent these insults and to fight some of his tormentors. But
his consciousness of right and his love for his mother helped him.

12. While he was struggling for self mastery, his teacher appeared at the
door of the schoolhouse. Fred caught his eye, and it seemed to look, if it
did not say, "Don't give up! Be really brave!" He knew the teacher had
heard the insulting taunts of his thoughtless schoolmates.

13. The boys received notice during the day that Fred must not be taunted
or teased in any manner. They knew that the teacher meant what he said;
and so the brave little boy had no farther trouble.


DEFINITIONS.--1. Lan'guid-ly, feebly. 5. Am'ply, fully. O-pin'ion,
judgment, belief. 9. Ab'so-lute-ly, wholly, entirely. 11. Re-sent', to
consider as an injury. Con'scious-ness, inward feeling, knowledge of what
passes in one's own mind.


EXERCISES.--Why did Fred offer to wash the dishes?
Was it a disgraceful thing to do? How was he rewarded?
How did his schoolmates show their lack of manliness?



XV. TRUE MANLINESS. (52)
(Concluded.)

1. "Fire! fire!" The cry crept out on the still night air, and the fire
bells began to ring. Fred was wakened by the alarm and the red light
streaming into his room. He dressed himself in a moment, almost, and
tapped at the door of his mother's bedroom.

2. "It is Mr. Barton's house, mother. Do let me go," he said in eager,
excited tones. Mrs. Liscom thought a moment. He was young, but she could
trust him, and she knew how much his heart was in the request.

3. "Yes, you may go," she answered; "but be careful, my boy. If you can
help, do so; but do nothing rashly." Fred promised to follow her advice,
and hurried to the fire.

4. Mr. and Mrs. Barton were not at home. The house had been left in charge
of the servants. The fire spread with fearful speed, for there was a high
wind, and it was found impossible to save the house. The servants ran
about, screaming and lamenting, but doing nothing to any purpose.

5. Fred found Tom outside, in safety. "Where is Katy?" he asked. Tom,
trembling with terror, seemed to have had no thought but of his own
escape. He said, "Katy is in the house!" "In what room?" asked Fred. "In
that one," pointing to a window in the upper story.

6. It was no time for words, but for instant, vigorous action. The
staircase was already on fire; there was but one way to reach Katy, and
that full of danger. The second floor might fall at any moment, and Fred
knew it. But he trusted in an arm stronger than his own, and silently
sought help and guidance.

7. A ladder was quickly brought, and placed against the house. Fred
mounted it, followed by the hired man, dashed in the sash of the window,
and pushed his way into the room where the poor child lay nearly
suffocated with smoke.

8. He roused her with some difficulty, carried her to the window, and
placed her upon the sill. She was instantly grasped by strong arms, and
carried down the ladder, Fred following as fast as possible. They had
scarcely reached the ground before a crash of falling timbers told them
that they had barely escaped with their lives.

9. Tom Barton never forgot the lesson of that night; and he came to
believe, and to act upon the belief, in after years, that true manliness
is in harmony with gentleness, kindness, and self-denial.


EXERCISES.--Relate the story of the fire. What is meant
by "to any purpose," in paragraph four? Did Fred show any
lack of manliness when tested? What does this lesson teach?



XVI. THE BROWN THRUSH. (54)

Lucy Larcom, the author of the following poem, was born in 1826, and
passed many years of her life as a factory girl at Lowell, Mass. She died
in 1893.

1. There's a merry brown thrush sitting up in a tree;
     "He's singing to me! he's singing to me!"
   And what does he say, little girl, little boy?
     "Oh, the world's running over with joy!
       Don't You hear? Don't you see?
         Hush! look! In my tree
   I'm as happy as happy can be!"

2. And the brown thrush keeps singing, "A nest do you see,
     And five eggs hid by me in the juniper tree?
   Don't meddle! don't touch! little girl, little boy,
     Or the world will lose some of its joy!
       Now I'm glad! now I'm free!
         And I always shall be,
   If you never bring sorrow to me."

3. So the merry brown thrush sings away in the tree,
     To you and to me, to you and to me;
   And he sings all the day, little girl, little boy,
     "Oh, the world's running over with joy!
       But long it won't be,
         Don't you know? Don't you see?
   Unless we're as good as can be."

EXERCISES.--What is a thrush? Why was the thrush so
happy? Do you think he would have been happy if the little
boy or girl had robbed the nest?



XVII. A SHIP IN A STORM. (55)

1. Did you ever go far out upon the great ocean?  How beautiful it is to
be out at sea, when the sea is smooth and still!

2. Let a storm approach, and the scene is changed. The heavy, black clouds
appear in the distance, and throw a deep, deathlike shade over the world
of waters.

3. The captain and sailors soon see in the clouds the signs of evil. All
hands are then set to work to take in sail.

4. The hoarse notes of the captain, speaking through his trumpet, are
echoed from lip to lip among the rigging. Happy will it be, if all is made
snug before the gale strikes the vessel.

5. At last, the gale comes like a vast moving mountain of air. It strikes
the ship. The vessel heaves and groans under the dreadful weight, and
struggles to escape through the foaming waters.

6. If she is far out at sea, she will be likely to ride out the storm in
safety. But if the wind is driving her upon the shore, the poor sailors
will hardly escape being dashed upon the rocks, and drowned.

7. Once there was a ship in a storm. Some of her masts were already
broken, and her sails lost. While the wind was raging, and the billows
were dashing against her, the cry was heard, "A man has fallen overboard!"

8. Quickly was the boat lowered, and she was soon seen bounding on her way
over the mountain waves. At one moment, the boat seemed lifted to the
skies, and the next, it sank down, and appeared to be lost beneath the
waves!

9. At length, the man was found. He was well nigh drowned; but he was
taken on board, and now they made for the ship. But the ship rolled so
dreadfully, that it seemed certain death to go near her. And now, what
should they do?

10. The captain told one of the men to go aloft and throw down a rope.
This was made fast to the boat, and when the sea was somewhat calm it was
hoisted, and all fell down into the ship with a dreadful crash. It was a
desperate way of getting on board; but fortunately no lives were lost.

11. On the dangerous points along our seacoast are lighthouses, which can
be seen far out at sea, and serve as guides to ships. Sometimes the fog is
so dense that these lights can not be seen, but most lighthouses have
great fog bells or fog horns; some of the latter are made to sound by
steam, and can be heard for a long distance. These bells and horns are
kept sounding as long as the fog lasts.

12. There are also many life-saving stations along the coast where trained
men are ready with lifeboats. "When a ship is driven ashore they at once
go to the rescue of those on board, and thus many valuable lives are
saved.

13. Take it all in all, a sailor's life is a very hard one. Our young
friends owe a debt of gratitude to those whose home is upon the great
waters, and who bring them the luxuries of other countries.


DEFINITIONS.--4. Ech'oed, sounded again. Gale, a wind storm. 5. Heaves,
pitches up and down. 7. Bil'lows, waves. 10. Des'-per-ate, hopeless. 11.
Fog, watery vapor, mist. 13. Grat'i-tude, thankfulness. Lux'u-ries, nice
things.


EXERCISES.--What is this lesson about? When is it dangerous to be at sea?
What do sailors then do? In what situation are they most likely to be
saved? Relate the story of the man overboard. Tell about the lighthouses.
How are vessels warned of danger in a fog? What about the life-saving
stations? What is said of a sailor's life?



XVIII. THE SAILOR'S CONSOLATION. (58)

Charles Dibdin, the author, was born at Southampton, England, in 1745. He
wrote a number of fine sea songs. He died in 1814.

1. One night came on a hurricane,
   The sea was mountains rolling,
   When Barney Buntline turned his quid,
   And said to Billy Bowling:
   "A strong norwester's blowing, Bill;
   Hark! don't ye hear it roar now?
   Lord help 'em, how I pities all
   Unhappy folks on shore now!

2. "Foolhardy chaps who live in town,
   What danger they are all in,
   And now are quaking in their beds,
   For fear the roof shall fall in;
   Poor creatures, how they envy us,
   And wish, as I've a notion,
   For our good luck, in such a storm,
   To be upon the ocean.

3. "But as for them who're out all day,
   On business from their houses,
   And late at night are coming home,
   To cheer the babes and spouses;
   While you and I, Bill, on the deck,
   Are comfortably lying,
   My eyes! what tiles and chimney pots
   About their heads are flying!

4. "And very often have we heard
   How men are killed and undone
   By overturns of carriages,
   By thieves, and fires in London.
   We know what risks all landsmen run,
   From noblemen to tailors;
   Then, Bill, let us thank Providence
   That you and I are sailors."


DEFINITIONS.-l. Hur'ri-cane, a violent windstorm. Quid, a small piece of
tobacco. 2. Fool'har'dy, reckless. Quak'ing, shak-ing with fear. No'tion,
idea. 3. Spous'es, wives. Tiles, thin pieces of baked clay used in roofing
houses. Chim'ney pots, earthenware tops of chimneys. 4. Un-done', injured,
ruined.


NOTES.--l. "Barney Buntline" and "Billy Bowling" are supposed to be two
sailors. "Norwester" is a sailor's name for a northwest storm. 4.
"Landsmen" is a term applied by sailors to all who live on shore.



XIX. TWO WAYS OF TELLING A STORY. (60)
By HENRY K. OLIVER.

1. In one of the most populous cities of New England, a few years ago, a
party of lads, all members of the same school, got up a grand sleigh ride.
The sleigh was a very large one, drawn by six gray horses.

2. On the following day, as the teacher entered the schoolroom, he found
his pupils in high glee, as they chattered about the fun and frolic of
their excursion. In answer to some inquiries, one of the lads gave him an
account of their trip and its various incidents.

3. As he drew near the end of his story, he exclaimed: "Oh, sir! there was
one thing I had almost forgotten. As we were coming home, we saw ahead of
us a queer looking affair in the road. It proved to be a rusty old sleigh,
fastened behind a covered wagon, proceeding at a very slow rate, and
taking up the whole road.

4. "Finding that the owner was not disposed to turn out, we determined
upon a volley of snowballs and a good hurrah. They produced the right
effect, for the crazy machine turned out into the deep snow, and the
skinny old pony started on a full trot.

5. "As we passed, some one gave the horse a good crack, which made him run
faster than he ever did before, I'll warrant.

6. "With that, an old fellow in the wagon, who was buried up under an old
hat, bawled out, 'Why do you frighten my horse?'  'Why don't you turn out,
then?' says the driver. So we gave him three rousing cheers more. His
horse was frightened again, and ran up against a loaded wagon, and, I
believe, almost capsized the old creature--and so we left him."

7. "Well, boys," replied the teacher, "take your seat", and I will tell
you a story, and all about a sleigh ride, too. Yesterday afternoon a very
venerable old clergyman was on his way from Boston to Salem, to pass the
rest of the winter at the house of his son. That he might be prepared for
journeying in the following spring he took with him his wagon, and for the
winter his sleigh, which he fastened behind the wagon.

8. "His sight and hearing were somewhat blunted by age, and he was
proceeding very slowly; for his horse was old and feeble, like his owner.
He was suddenly disturbed by loud hurrahs from behind, and by a furious
pelting of balls of snow and ice upon the top of his wagon.

9. "In his alarm he dropped his reins, and his horse began to run away. In
the midst of the old man's trouble, there rushed by him, with loud shouts,
a large party of boys, in a sleigh drawn by six horses. 'Turn out! turn
out, old fellow!' 'Give us the road!' 'What will you take for your pony?'
'What's the price of oats, old man?' were the various cries that met his
cars.

10. "'Pray, do not frighten my horse!' exclaimed the infirm driver. 'Turn
out, then! turn out!' was the answer, which was followed by repeated
cracks and blows from the long whip of the 'grand sleigh,' with showers of
snowballs, and three tremendous hurrahs from the boys.

11. "The terror of the old man and his horse was increased, and the latter
ran away with him, to the great danger of his life. He contrived, however,
to stop his horse just in season to prevent his being dashed against a
loaded wagon. A short distance brought him to the house of his son. That
son, boys, is your instructor, and that 'old fellow,' was your teacher's
father!"

12. When the boys perceived how rude and unkind their conduct appeared
from another point of view, they were very much ashamed of their
thoughtlessness, and most of them had the manliness to apologize to their
teacher for what they had done.


DEFINITIONS.-l. Pop'u-lous, full of inhabitants. 2. Ex-cur'-sion, a
pleasure trip. In'ci-dents, things that happen, events. 5. War'rant, to
declare with assurance. 6. Cap-sized', upset. 7. Ven'er-a-ble, deserving
of honor and respect. 8. Blunt'ed, dulled.


EXERCISES.--Repeat the boys' story of the sleigh ride. The teacher's
story. Were the boys ill-natured or only thoughtless? Is thoughtlessness
any excuse for rudeness or unkindness?



XX. FREAKS OF THE FROST. (63)

By Hannah Flagg Gould, who was born at Lancaster, Vermont, in 1789. She
published several volumes of poems (one for children) and one collection
of prose articles, entitled "Gathered Leaves." She died in 1865.

1. The Frost looked forth one still, clear night,
   And whispered, "Now I shall be out of sight;
   So through the valley and over the height
     In silence I'll take my way;
   I will not go on, like that blustering train,
   The wind and the snow, the hail and the rain,
   Who make so much bustle and noise in vain,
     But I'll be as busy as they."

2. Then he flew to the mountain, and powdered its crest;
   He lit on the trees, and their boughs he dressed
   In diamond beads; and over the breast
