
WIFE: Just through, my dear.

HEDGEHOG: Well, come out here and let us look at our cabbage patch.

(Wife comes out.)

HEDGEHOG: Fine crop, isn't it? We should be happy.

WIFE: The cabbage is fine enough, but I can't see why we should be so
happy.

[Illustration: The hare and the hedgehog with a cabbage]

HEDGEHOG: Why, my dear, there are tears in your voice. What is the
matter?

WIFE: I suppose I ought not to mind it, but those dreadful hares nearly
worry the life out of me.

HEDGEHOG: What are they doing now?

WIFE: Doing? What are they not doing? Why, yesterday I brought my pretty
babies out here to get some cabbage leaves. We were eating as
well-behaved hedgehogs always eat, and those horrid hares almost made us
cry.

HEDGEHOG: What did they do?

WIFE: They came to our cabbage patch and they giggled and said, "Oh, see
the little duck-legged things! Aren't they funny?" Then one jumped over
a cabbage just to hurt our feelings.

HEDGEHOG: Well, they are mean, I know, but we won't notice them. I'll
get even with them one of these days. Ah, there comes one of them now.

WIFE: Yes, and he laughed at me yesterday. He said, "Good-morning, Madam
Shortlegs." I won't speak to him. I'll hide till he goes by.

(Wife hides behind a cabbage.)

HEDGEHOG: Good-morning, sir.

HARE: Are you speaking to me?

HEDGEHOG: Certainly; do you see any one else around?

HARE: How dare you speak to me?

HEDGEHOG: Oh, just to be neighborly.

HARE: I shall ask you not to speak to me hereafter. I think myself too
good to notice hedgehogs.

HEDGEHOG: Now, that is strange.

HARE: What is strange?

HEDGEHOG: Why, I have just said to my wife that we wouldn't notice you.

HARE: Wouldn't notice me, indeed, you silly, short-legged, duck-legged
thing!

HEDGEHOG: Well, my legs are quite as good as yours, sir.

HARE: As good as mine! Who ever heard of such a thing? Why, you can do
little more than crawl.

HEDGEHOG: That may be as you say, but I'll run a race with you any day.

HARE: Ha, ha, ha! Ho, ho, ho! A race with a hedgehog! Well, well, well!

HEDGEHOG: Are you afraid to run with me?

HARE: Of course not. It will be no race at all, but I'll run just to
show you how silly you are.

HEDGEHOG: Good! You run in that furrow; I will run in this. We shall see
who gets to the fence first. Let's start from the far end of the furrow.

HARE: I will run to the brook and back while you are getting there. Go
ahead.

HEDGEHOG: I wouldn't stay too long if I were you.

HARE: Oh, I'll be back before you reach the end of the furrow.

(The hare runs off to the brook.)


II


HEDGEHOG: Wife, wife, did you hear what I said to the hare?

WIFE: Did I hear? I should say I did. What are you thinking of? Have you
lost your senses?

HEDGEHOG: You shouldn't speak that way to me. What do you know about a
man's business? Come here and let me whisper something to you.

(He whispers and then walks to far end of the furrow. His wife laughs.)

WIFE: Ha, ha! I see. I see. Nothing wrong with your brains.

  "Short legs, long wit,
  Long legs, not a bit,"

as my grandmother used to say. The hare will find that out today.

(She stoops down in the near end of the furrow. The hare returns and
takes his place.)

HARE: Well, are you ready?

HEDGEHOG: Of course I am,--ready and waiting.

  HARE: One for the money,
  Two for the show,
  Three to make ready,
  And here we go!

(The hare runs as swiftly as the wind. The hedgehog starts with him, but
stops and stoops low in the furrow. When the hare reaches the other end,
the hedgehog's wife puts up her head.)

WIFE: Well, here I am.

HARE: What does this mean?

WIFE: It means what it means.

HARE: We'll try again. Are you ready?

WIFE: Of course I am.

  HARE: One for the money,
  Two for the show,
  Three to make ready,
  And here we go!

(The hare runs swiftly back again. Wife starts, but stops and stoops
low. The hare reaches the other end. The hedgehog puts up his head.)

HEDGEHOG: Here I am.

HARE: I can't understand this.

HEDGEHOG: It is very clear to me.

HARE: Well, we'll try again. Are you ready?

HEDGEHOG: I'm always ready.

  HARE: One for the money,
  Two for the show,
  Three to make ready,
  And here we go!

(Again the wife puts up her head and the hare is bewildered.)

[Illustration: The hare racing as the hedhog looks on]

WIFE: You see I am here.

HARE: I just can't believe it.

WIFE: A perfectly simple thing.

HARE: We'll try once more. You can't beat me another time.

WIFE: Don't boast. You had better save your breath for the race; you
will need it.

  HARE: One for the money,
  Two for the show,
  Three to make ready,
  And here we go!

(When the hare reaches the other end of the field, the hedgehog puts up
his head.)

HARE: This is very strange.

HEDGEHOG: Shall we run again? You seem a little tired, but I am
perfectly fresh.

HARE (_panting_): No, no! The race is yours.

HEDGEHOG: Will you call my wife and children names any more?

HARE: No, no! I'll never do that again.

HEDGEHOG: Very well. And if you wish a race at any time, friend hare,
just call by for me.

HARE (_walking off shaking his head_): It's very strange. I hope none of
the other hares will hear of this race.

WIFE (_as she meets the hedgehog_): I thought I should hurt myself
laughing. As my grandmother used to say,

  "Short legs, long wit,
  Long legs, not a bit."

--GRIMM.




EPAMINONDAS


Epaminondas had a good kind granny, who cooked at "the big house."
Epaminondas liked to go to see her, for she always gave him something to
take home with him.

One day when Epaminondas went to see granny, she was baking a cake, and
she gave Epaminondas a piece to eat. As he was leaving, granny said,
"Epaminondas, you may take a slice home to your mammy."

Epaminondas took it in his little hands and squeezing it just as tight
as he could, ran all the way home. When his mammy saw him, she said,
"What's that, Epaminondas?"

"Cake, mammy. Granny sent it to you."

"Cake!" cried his mammy. "Epaminondas, don't you know that's no way to
carry cake? When your granny gives you cake, put it in your hat; then
put your hat on your head and come home. You hear me, Epaminondas?"

"Yes, mammy."

The next time Epaminondas went to see his granny, she was churning, and
she gave him a pat of fresh butter to carry to his mammy.

Epaminondas said to himself, "What was it mammy said? Oh, yes! I know.
She said, 'Put it in your hat and put the hat on your head and come
home.' I'll do just what she told me."

Epaminondas put the pat of butter in his hat, put his hat on his head,
and went home.

It was a hot day, and soon the butter began to melt. Drip, drip, drip,
it went into his ears. Drip, drip, drip, it went into his eyes. Drip,
drip, drip, it went down his back. When Epaminondas reached home, he had
no butter in his hat. It was all on him.

Looking at him hard, his mammy said, "Epaminondas, what in the world is
that dripping from your hat?"

"Butter, mammy. Granny sent it to you."

"Butter!" cried his mammy. "Oh, Epaminondas! Don't you know how to carry
butter? You must wrap it in a cabbage leaf, and take it to the spring.
Then you must cool it in the water, and cool it in the water, and cool
it in the water. When you have done this, take the butter in your hands
and come home. You hear me, Epaminondas?"

"Yes, mammy."

The next time Epaminondas went to see his granny, she wasn't baking cake
and she wasn't churning. She was sitting in a chair knitting.

She said, "Epaminondas, look in the woodshed, and you'll see something
you like."

Epaminondas looked in the woodshed, and there he found four little
puppies. He played with them all the afternoon, and when he started
home, his granny gave him one.

Epaminondas remembered what his mammy had told him. He wrapped the puppy
in a big cabbage leaf, and took it to the spring. He cooled it in the
water, and cooled it in the water, and cooled it in the water. Then he
took it in his hands, and went home.

When his mammy saw him, she said, "Epaminondas, what is that in your
hands?"

"A puppy dog, mammy."

"A puppy dog!" cried his mammy. "Oh, Epaminondas! What makes you act so
foolish? That's no way to carry a puppy. The way to carry a puppy is to
tie a string around his neck and put him on the ground. Then you take
the other end of the string in your hand and come along home. You hear
me, Epaminondas?"

"Yes, mammy."

Epaminondas was going to be right the next time; he got a piece of
string and put it in his pocket to have it ready.

The next day company came to see Epaminondas's mammy, and she had no
bread for dinner. She called Epaminondas and said, "Run to 'the big
house' and ask your granny to send me a loaf of bread for dinner."

"Yes, mammy," said Epaminondas. And off he ran.

Granny gave him a loaf just from the oven--a nice, brown, crusty loaf.
This time Epaminondas was certainly going to do what mammy had told him.

He proudly got out his string and tied it to the loaf. Then he put the
loaf on the ground, and taking the other end of the string in his hand,
he went along home.

When he reached home, his mammy gave one look at the thing tied to the
end of the string.

"What have you brought, Epaminondas?" she cried.

"Bread, mammy. Granny sent it to you."

"Oh, Epaminondas! Epaminondas! How could you be so foolish?" cried his
mammy. "Now I have no bread for dinner. I'll have to go and get some
myself."

She went into the house and got her bonnet. When she came out, she said,
"Epaminondas, do you see those three mince pies I've put on the doorstep
to cool. Well, now, you hear me, Epaminondas. You be careful how you
step on those pies!"

"Yes, mammy."

His mammy went off down the road; Epaminondas went to the door and
looked out. "Mammy told me to be careful how I step on those mince
pies," he said, "so I must be careful how I do it. I'll step right in
the middle of every one."

And he did!

When his mammy came home, there were no pies for dinner.

