the transverse trenches he followed a stream of the Strangers who were
already on the way to their hotel.

The narrow cut led them nearly a mile, and then they came out in a
valley the edges of which were fringed with beeches. But in the wide
space within the valley most of the snow had been cleared away and
enormous automobile kitchens stood giving forth the pleasant odors of
food and drink. At one side officers were already satisfying their
hunger and farther on men were doing the same. They were within easy
range of the German guns, but it was not the habit of either side to
send morning shells unless a direct attack was to be made.

John had no thought of danger. Youth was youth and one could get
hardened to anything. He had been surprised more than once in this war
to find how his spirits could go from the depths to the heights and now
they were of the best. He was full of life and the world was very
beautiful that morning. It was the fair land of France again, but it was
under a thick robe of snow, the golden tint on the white, as the large
yellow sun slowly sailed clear of the high hills on their right.

General Vaugirard stood near the first of the wagons, drinking cup after
cup of hot steaming coffee, and devouring thick slices of bread and
butter. He wore a long blue overcoat over his uniform, and high boots.
But the dominant note was given to his appearance by the thick white
beard which seemed to be touched with a light silver frost. Under the
great thatch of eyebrow the keen little eyes twinkled. He made John
think of a huge, white and inoffensive bear.

The general's roving eye caught sight of Scott and he exclaimed:

"Come here, you young Yankee! I hear that you distinguished yourself
last night by saving the life of one of our enemies, thus enabling him
perhaps to fight against us once more."

"I beg your pardon, General," said John, "but I'm no Yankee."

"What, denying your birthright! I never heard an American do that
before! Everybody knows you're a Yankee."

"Pardon me. General, you and all other Europeans make a mistake about
the Yankees. At home the people of the Southern States generally apply
it to those living in the Northern states, but in the North it is
carried still further and is properly applied to the residents of the
six New England states. I don't come from one of those states, and so
I'm not in a real sense a Yankee."

"What, sir, have I, a Frenchman, to do with your local distinctions?
Yankees you all are and Yankee you shall remain. It's a fine name, and
from what I've seen in this war you're great fighting men, worthy to
stand with Frenchmen."

"Thank you for the compliment, General," said John, smiling. "Hereafter
I shall always remain a Yankee."

"And now do you and your friends take your food there with de Rougemont.
I've had my breakfast, and a big and good one it was. I'm going to the
edge of the hill and use my glasses."

He waddled away, looking more than ever an enormous, good-natured bear.
John's heart, as always, warmed to him. Truly he was the father of his
children, ten thousand or more, who fought around him, and for whose
welfare he had a most vigilant eye and mind.

The three joined a group of the Strangers, Captain Colton at their head,
and they stood there together, eating and drinking, their appetites made
wonderfully keen by the sharp morning and a hard life in the open air.
Bougainville, the little colonel, came from the next valley and remained
with them awhile. He was almost the color of an Indian now, but his
uniform was remarkably trim and clean and he bore himself with dignity.
He was distinctly a personality and John knew that no one would care to
undertake liberties with him.

In the long months following the battle on the Marne Bougainville had
done great deeds. Again and again he had thrown his regiment into some
weak spot in the line just at the right moment. He seemed, like Napoleon
and Stonewall Jackson, to have an extraordinary, intuitive power of
divining the enemy's intentions, and General Vaugirard, to whose command
his regiment belonged, never hesitated to consult him and often took his
advice. "Ah, that child of Montmartre!" he would say. "He will go far,
if he does not meet a shell too soon. He keeps a hand of steel on his
regiment, there is no discipline sterner than his, and yet his men love
him."

Bougainville showed pleasure at seeing John again, and gave him his hand
American fashion.

"We both still live," he said briefly.

"And hope for complete victory."

"We do," said Bougainville, earnestly, "but it will take all the
strength of the allied nations to achieve it. Much has happened,
Monsieur Scott, since we stood that day in the lantern of Basilique du
Sacre-Coeur on the Butte Montmartre and saw the Prussian cavalry riding
toward Paris."

"But what has happened is much less than that which will happen before
this war is over."

"You speak a great truth, Monsieur Scott. And now I must go. Hearing
that the Strangers were in this valley I wished to come and see with my
own eyes that you were alive and well. I have seen and I am glad."

He saluted, Captain Colton and the others saluted in return, and then he
walked over the hill to his own "children."

"An antique! An old Roman! Spirit defying death," said Captain Colton
looking after him.

"He has impressed me that way, too, sir," said John. But his mind
quickly left Bougainville, and turned to the message that Weber had
brought the night before. He was glad that Julie Lannes would be so near
again, and yet he was sorry. He had not been sorry when he first heard
it, but the apprehension had come later. He tried to trace the cause,
and then he remembered the name of Auersperg, the prince whom his
cousin, the Austrian captive, had said was near. He sought to laugh at
himself for his fears. The mental connection was too vague, he said, but
the relieving laughter would not come.

John hoped that a lucky chance might bring Lannes, and involuntarily he
looked up at the heavens. But they were clear of aeroplanes. The heavy
snow of the night before had driven in the hosts of the air, and they
had not reappeared.

Then John resolved to go to Chastel himself. He did not know how he
would go or what he would do when he got there, but the impulse was
strong and it remained with him.




CHAPTER III

JULIE'S COMING


That day, the next night and the next day passed without any event save
the usual desultory firing of cannon and rifles. Many men were killed
and more were wounded by the sharpshooters. Little battles were fought
at distant points along the lines, the Allies winning some while the
Germans were victorious in others, but the result was nothing. The
deadlock was unbroken.

Meanwhile the weather turned somewhat warmer and the melting snow poured
fresh deluges of water into the trenches. Most of it was pumped out, but
it would sink back into the ground and return. John again gave thanks
for the splendid pair of high boots that he wore, and also he often
searched the air for Lannes. But he saw no sign of the lithe and swift
_Arrow_ and his anxiety for Julie increased steadily. She must now be at
Chastel, but he had not yet found any excuse that would release him from
the trenches and let him go there.

He inquired for Weber, but no one had seen or heard of him again. No
doubt he was far away on some perilous mission, serving France on the
ground as Lannes served her in the air.

Young Kratzek in the hospital was improving fast and John secured leave
of absence long enough to see him once. He was fervent in his gratitude
and renewed his promises that somehow and somewhere he would surely
repay young Scott. News that he was alive, but a prisoner, had reached
the German lines and already an exchange for him had been arranged, the
Germans, owing to his rank, being willing to return a French brigadier
in his place. The prospect filled him with happiness and he talked much.
John noticed once more how very young he was, not much more than
seventeen, and with manners decidedly boyish. He had the utmost
confidence in the success of Germany and Austria, despite the check at
the Marne, and talked freely of another advance. John led him adroitly
to his cousin of Auersperg, of whom he wished to hear more. He soon
discovered that Auersperg was a very great prince to Kratzek.

"I stand in some awe of him. I need scarcely tell you that Herr Scott,
my captor," he said, "because he represents so much. Ah, the history and
the legends clustering about our house, that goes far back into the dim
ages! The Auerspergs were counts and princes of the Holy Roman Empire,
and they have been grand dukes. They have decided the choice of more
than one emperor at Frankfort, and they have stood with the highest when
they were crowned at Augsburg. Please don't think I am boasting for
myself, Herr Scott, it is only for my cousin, the august Prince Karl,
_hochwohlgeboren_!"

"I understand," said John, smiling. "But I want to tell you, Leopold
Kratzek, that I'm _hochwohlgeboren_ myself."

"Why, how is that? You are neither German nor Austrian."

"No, I'm American, but I'm very highborn nevertheless. There are a
hundred millions of us and all of us are very highborn not excepting our
colored people, many of whom are descended from African princes who have
a power over their people not approached by either of the kaisers."

The boy smiled.

"Now, I know you jest," he said. "You have no classes, but I've heard
that all of you claim to be kings."

John saw that he had made no impression upon him. Frank, honest and
brave, an Auersperg was nevertheless in the boy's mind an Auersperg,
something superior, a product of untold centuries, a small and
sublimated group of the human race to which nothing else could aspire,
not even talent, learning, courage and honesty. To all Auerspergs,
Napoleon and Shakespeare were mere men of genius, to be patronized. John
smiled, too. He did not feel hurt at all. In his turn he felt a
superiority, a superiority of perception, and a superiority in the sense
of proportion.

"Prince Karl of Auersperg is always resolved to maintain his pride of
blood, is he not?" he asked.

"He considers it his duty. The head of a house that has been princely
for fifteen centuries could not do less. He could never forget or
forgive an insult to his person."

"If he were insulted he would hold that all the Auerspergs who were now
living and all who had lived in the last fifteen hundred years were
insulted also."

"Undoubtedly!" replied Kratzek, with great emphasis.

"I merely wished to know," said John, gravely, "in order that I may know
how to bear myself in case I should meet Prince Karl of Auersperg"--he
had not told that he had met him already--"and now I'm going to tell you
good-by, Leopold. I think it likely that I shall be sent away on a
mission and before I return it is probable that you will be exchanged."

"Good-by, Mr. Scott. Don't forget my promise. If you should ever fall
into our hands please try to communicate with me."

John returned to his trench. He had been very thoughtful that day, and
he had evolved a plan. A considerable body of wounded soldiers were to
be sent to Chastel, and as they must have a guard he had asked Captain
Colton to use his influence with General Vaugirard and have him
appointed a member of the guard.

Now he found Captain Colton sitting in his little alcove smoking one of
his eternal cigarettes and looking very contented. He took an especially
long puff when he saw John and looked at him quizzically.

"Well, Scott!" he said.

"Well, sir!" said John.

"General Vaugirard thinks your desire to guard wounded, see to their
welfare, great credit to you."

"I thank him, sir, through you."

"Approve of such zeal myself."

"I thank you in person."

"Did not tell him--French girl, Mademoiselle Julie Lannes, also going to
Chastel to attend to wounded. Handsome girl, wonderfully handsome girl,
don't you think so, Scott?"

"I do, sir," said John, reddening.

"You and she--going to Chastel about same time. Remarkable coincidence,
but nothing in it, of course, just coincidence."

"It's not a coincidence, sir. You've always been a friend to me. Captain
Colton, and I'm willing to tell you that I've sought this mission to
Chastel because Mademoiselle Julie Lannes is there, or is going there,
and for no other reason whatever. I'm afraid she's in danger, and anyway
I long for a sight of her face as we long for the sun after a storm."

Captain Colton, with his cigarette poised between his thumb and
forefinger, looked John up and down.

"Good!" he said. "Frank statement of truth--I knew already. Nothing for
you to be ashamed of. If girl beautiful and noble as Mademoiselle Julie
Lannes looked at me as she has looked at you I'd break down walls and
run gantlets to reach her. Go, John, boy. Luck to you in all the things
in which you wish luck."

He held out his hand and John wrung it. And so, the terse captain
himself had a soft heart which he seldom showed!

The convoy started the next morning, John with five soldiers in an
armored automobile bringing up the rear. There were other men on the
flank and in front, and a captain commanded. The day was wintry and
gloomy. Heavy clouds obscured the sky, and the slush was deep in the
roads. A desolate wind moaned through the leafless trees, and afar the
cannon grumbled and groaned.

But neither the somber day nor the melancholy convoy affected John's
spirits. Chastel, a village of light--light for him--would be at the end
of his journey.

Despite mud, slush and snow, traveling was pleasant. The automobile had
made wonderful changes. One could go almost anywhere in it, and its
daring drivers whisked it gaily over fields, through forests and up
hills, which in reality could be called mountains. War had merely
increased their enterprise, and they took all kinds of risks, usually
with success.

John was very comfortable now, as he leaned back in the armored car,
driven by a young Frenchman. He wore a heavy blue overcoat over his
uniform, and his only weapon was a powerful automatic revolver in his
belt, but it was enough. The ambulances, filled with wounded, stretched
a half-mile in front of him, but he had grown so used to such sights
that they did not move him long. Moreover in this war a man was not dead
until he _was_ dead. The small bullets of the high-powered rifle either
killed or harmed but little. It was the shrapnel that tore.

The road led across low hills, and down slopes which he knew were kissed
by a warm sun in summer. It was here that the vines flourished, but the
snow could not hide the fact that it was torn and trampled now. Huge
armies had surged back and forth over it, and yet John, who was of a
thoughtful mind, knew that in a few more summers it would be as it had
been before. In this warm and watered France Nature would clothe the
earth in a green robe which winter itself could not wholly drive away.

A reader of history, he knew that Europe had been torn and ravaged by
war, times past counting, and yet geologically it was among the youngest
and freshest of lands. Everything would pass and new youth would take
the place of the youth that the shells and bullets were now carrying
away.

He shook himself. Reflections like these were for men of middle years.
The tide of his own youth flowed back upon him and the world, even under
snow and with stray guns thundering behind him, was full of splendor.
Moreover, there was the village of Chastel before him! Chastel! Chastel!
He had never heard of it until two or three days ago, and yet it now
loomed in his mind as large as Paris or New York. Julie must have
arrived already, and he would see her again after so many months of
hideous war, but deep down in his mind persisted the belief that she
should not have come. Lannes must have had some reason that he could not
surmise, or he would not have written the letter asking her to meet him
at Chastel.

The village, he learned from one of the men in the automobile, was only
ten miles away and it was built upon a broad, low hill at the base of
which a little river flowed. It was very ancient. A town of the Belgae
stood there in Caesar's time, but it contained not more than two thousand
