School."

Grace's rather vehement reflections were cut short by the approach of Miss
Thompson, who stopped to say a word of cheer to the girls before taking
her seat in the gallery.

"Well, Grace," she said, "this is a rather bad day outside, but still
there will be a few loyal souls to cheer you on to victory. May the best
man win. You must put forth every energy if you expect to conquer the
juniors, however. They have held the championship a long time."

"They will not hold it after to-day if we can help it," answered Grace.
"We feel fairly sure that we can whip them."

"That is the right spirit," said Miss Thompson. "Confidence is first
cousin to success, you know."

"Was there ever a teacher quite like Miss Thompson?" asked Nora as the
principal left them to take her seat in the gallery.

"She is a dear," said Marian Barber, "and she's on our side, too."

"There's the referee now!" exclaimed Grace. "Now, girls, make up your
minds to play as you never played before. Remember it's for the honor of
the sophomores."

By this time the gallery was half filled with an audience largely composed
of High School boys and girls. A few outsiders were present. Mrs. Harlowe
had come to see her daughter's team win the game, she said; for she knew
that Grace's heart was set on victory.

The referee, time-keeper and scorer chosen from the senior class took
their places. The whistle blew and the teams lined up. There was a round
of loud applause from the fans of both teams. The players presented a fine
appearance. The earnest, "do or die" expression on every face made the
spectators feel that the coming game would be well worth seeing.

The rival captains faced each other, ready to jump for the ball the
instant it left the referee's hands. There was a moment of expectant
silence; then the referee put the ball in play, the whistle blew and the
game began. Both captains sprang for the ball, but alas for the
sophomores, Julia Crosby caught it and threw it to the junior right
forward. It looked for a minute as though the juniors would score without
effort, but Nora O'Malley, who was left guard, succeeded so effectually in
annoying her opponent that when the bewildered goal-thrower did succeed in
throwing the ball, it fell wide of the basket. It had barely touched the
floor before there was a rush for it, and the fun waxed fast and furious.

During the first five minutes neither side scored; then the tide turned
in favor of the juniors and they netted the ball.

Grace Harlowe set her teeth, resolving to play harder than ever. The
juniors should not score again if she could help it. Nora had the ball and
was dribbling it for dear life. Grace signaled her team, who responded
instantly; but, to their consternation, the juniors seemed to understand
the signal as fully as did their own team, and quickly blocking their
play, scored again.

There was a howl of delight from the junior fans in the gallery. The
sudden triumph of the enemy seemed to daze the sophomores. They looked at
their captain in amazement, then sprang once more to their work. But the
trend the game was taking had affected them, and in their desperate
efforts to score they made mistakes. Miriam Nesbit ran with the ball and a
foul was called, which resulted in the juniors scoring a point.

Nora O'Malley, in her excitement, caught the forward she was guarding by
the arm, and again a foul was called; this time, however, the juniors made
nothing from it. But the precious time was flying and only four minutes of
the first half remained. Again Grace signaled for another secret play, and
again the juniors rose to the occasion and thwarted her.

It was maddening.

The score stood 7 to 0 in favor of the juniors. Miriam Nesbit had the ball
now, and was trying to throw it. She stood near the junior basket. Eluding
her guard, who was dancing about in front of her, she made a wild throw.
Whether by accident or design it was hard to tell, but the ball landed
squarely in the junior basket. A whoop went up from the gallery. The
whistle blew and the first half was over. The score stood 9 to 0 in favor
of the enemy. The last two points had been presented to the juniors.

Up in the gallery discussion ran rife. The admirers of the juniors were
loud in their praise of the superior ability of the team. The junior
class, who were sitting in a body at one end of the gallery, grew
especially noisy, and were laughing derisively at the downfall of the
sophomores.

Miss Thompson was puzzled.

"I cannot imagine what ails my sophomores," she said to the teacher next
to her. "I understood that they were such fine players. Yet they don't
seem to be able to hold their own. It looks as though their defeat were
inevitable, unless they do some remarkable playing during the next half."

Mrs. Harlowe, too, was disappointed. She wondered why Grace had boasted so
much of her team.

"After all, they are little more than children," she thought. "Those
juniors seem older to me."

As for Grace and her team--they were sitting in a room just off the
gymnasium gloomily discussing the situation. Tears of mortification stood
in Nora's eyes, while Grace was putting forth every effort to appear calm.
She knew that if she showed the least sign of faltering all would be lost.
Her players must feel that she still had faith in their ability to win.

"We are not beaten yet, girls," she said, "and I believe we shall make up
in the last half what we lost in the first. Work fast, but keep your wits
about you. Don't give the referee any chance to call a foul, we can't
spare a minute from now on. When I give the signal for a certain play, be
on the alert, and please, please don't any of you present those juniors
with any more points. I'm not blaming you, Miriam, for I know that last
throw of yours was an accident, but I could have cried when that ball went
into the basket."

Miriam's face flushed; then realizing that all eyes were turned toward
her, she said sarcastically:

"Really, Miss Harlowe, it's so kind of you to look at it in that light.
However, anyone with common sense would have known without being told that
I never intended that ball for the juniors."

"I am not so sure of that," muttered Nora, who, seeing the hurt look that
crept into Grace's eyes at Miriam's words, immediately rose in behalf of
her captain.

Miriam whirled on Nora.

"What did you say?" asked Miriam angrily.

Before Nora could answer the whistle blew. Intermission was over and the
second half was on. The teams changed baskets and stood in readiness for
work. Once more Grace and Julia Crosby faced each other. There was a
malicious gleam in Julia's eye and a look of determination in Grace's.
With a spring, Grace caught the ball as it descended and threw it to Nora,
who, eluding her guard, tossed it to Miriam. With unerring aim Miriam sent
the ball into the basket and the sophomores scored for the first time.

Their friends in the gallery applauded vigorously and began to take heart,
but their joy was short-lived, for as the play proceeded the sophomores
steadily lost what little ground they had gained. Try as they might, they
could make no headway. Grace called for play after play, only to find that
in some inexplicable way the enemy seemed to know just what she meant, and
acted accordingly.

The game neared its close and the sophomores fought with the desperation
of the doomed. They knew that they could not win save by a miracle, but
they resolved to die hard. The ball was in Miriam's hands and she made a
feint at throwing it to Nora, but whirled and threw it to Grace, who,
divining her intention, ran forward to receive it. There was a rush on the
part of the juniors. Julia Crosby, crossing in front of Grace, managed
slyly to thrust one foot forward. Grace tripped and fell to the floor,
twisting one leg under her. The ball rolled on, and was caught by the
enemy, who threw it to goal just as the whistle sounded for the last time.
The juniors had won. The score stood 17 to 2 in their favor. The scorer
attempted to announce it, but her voice was lost in the noisy yells of the
junior class in the gallery.

The fact that Grace Harlowe still sat on the gymnasium floor passed for a
moment unnoticed. In the final grand rush for the ball, the other players
failed to see that their valiant captain still occupied the spot where she
fell. Tumbles were not infrequent, and Grace was well able to take care of
herself.

Anne Pierson alone saw Julia Crosby's foot slide out, and, scenting
treachery, hastily left her seat in the gallery. She ran as fast as she
could to where Grace sat, reaching her a few seconds after the whistle
blew.

"Good little Anne," called Grace. "You have come to my rescue even though
the others have deserted me. Perhaps you can help me up. I tried it, but
my ankle hurts every time I try to stand."

Her face was very white, and Anne saw that she was in great pain.

By this time Grace's team, realizing she was not with them, began looking
about, and rushed over to her in a body. David, Reddy and Hippy appeared
on the scene, as did Mrs. Harlowe, accompanied by Miss Thompson.
Excitement reigned. The boys lifted Grace to her feet; but she cried with
pain and would have fallen had they not held her.

"She has sprained her ankle!" exclaimed Miss Thompson. "How did it happen,
Grace? I did not see you fall."

"I don't know, Miss Thompson," said Grace faintly. "It all happened so
quickly I didn't have time to think about it."

"It certainly is a shame," cried Anne. "And I know----"

Just then Grace gave Anne a warning glance and shook her head slightly.
Anne closed her lips and was silent.

"What were you saying, Anne?" asked Miss Thompson.

But Anne had received her orders.

"I am so sorry that Grace has been hurt," she said lamely.

A carriage was ordered and Grace was taken home, Anne and Mrs. Harlowe
accompanying her. Mrs. Harlowe sent for their physician, who bandaged the
swollen ankle, and told Grace that the sprain was not serious. She
refused, however, to go to bed, but lay on the wide lounge in the sitting
room.

"Just keep quiet for a few days, and you'll be all right," said Dr. Gale.
"You girls are as bad as boys about getting hard knocks. It looks as
though basketball were about as barbarous as football."

"It is a dear old game, and I love it in spite of hard knocks," said Grace
emphatically.

"I like your spirit, Grace," laughed Dr. Gale. "Now, remember to treat
that ankle well if you want to appear again in the basketball arena."

"Grace," said Anne, after the doctor had gone. "You know how it happened,
don't you?"

"Yes," answered Grace, after a little hesitation. "I do."

"What are you going to do about it?" asked Anne.

"I don't know," said Grace. "I am not sure it was intentional."

"Grace," said Anne with decision, "it was intentional. I watched her every
minute of the game, for I didn't trust her, and I saw her do it. I was so
angry that when Miss Thompson asked how it happened I felt that I must
tell, then and there. It was you who prevented me. I think such a trick
should be exposed."

"What a vengeful little Anne," said Grace. "You are usually the last one
to tell anything."

She took Anne's hand in hers.

"It's just this way, Anne," she continued. "If I were to tell what Julia
Crosby did, Miss Thompson might forbid basketball. That would be dreadful.
Besides, the juniors would hardly believe me, and would say it was a case
of sour grapes, on account of the sophomores losing the game. So you see I
should gain nothing and perhaps lose a great deal. I believe that people
that do mean things are usually repaid in their own coin. Julia didn't
really intend to hurt me. Her idea was to prevent me from getting the
ball. Of course it was dishonorable and she knew it. It is strictly
forbidden in basketball, and if her own team knew positively that she was
guilty, it would go hard with her. There is honor even among thieves, you
know."

There was a brief silence. Grace lay back among the cushions, looking very
white and tired. Her ankle pained her severely, but the defeat of her
beloved team was a deeper hurt to her proud spirit.

Anne sat apparently wrapped in thought. She nervously clasped and
unclasped her small hands.

"Grace," she said, "don't you think it was queer the way the juniors
seemed to understand our signals. They knew every one of them. I believe
that they found that list and it is all my fault. I had no business to
lose it. I felt when I couldn't find it that it would fall into the wrong
hands and cause trouble. I don't care for myself but if the girls find it
out they will blame you for giving it to me. You know what Miriam said the
other day. Now she will have a chance to be disagreeable to you about it."

Anne was almost in tears.

"Anne, dear," said Grace soothingly, "don't worry about it. I am not
afraid to tell the girls about that list, and I shall certainly do so.
They will understand that it was an accident, and overlook it. Besides, we
are not sure that the juniors found it. I will admit that everything
points that way. You know David warned us that they had some mischief on
hand. If they did find it, the only honorable thing to do was to return
it. They are far more at fault than we are, and the girls will agree with
me, I know."

But Anne was not so confident.

"Miriam will try to make trouble about it, I know she will. And I am to
blame for the whole thing," she said.

Grace was about to reply when Mrs. Harlowe appeared in the door with a
tray of tempting food.

Anne rose and began donning her wraps.

"Won't you stay, Anne, and have supper with my invalid girl?" said Mrs.
Harlowe.

"Please do, Anne," coaxed Grace. "I hate eating alone, and having you here
takes my mind off my pain."

Anne stayed, and the two girls had a merry time over their meal. Grace,
knowing Anne's distress over the lost signals, refused to talk of the
subject. Jessica and Nora, David, Hippy and Reddy dropped in, one after
the other, to inquire for Grace.

"There is nothing like accidents to bring one's friends together,"
declared Grace, as the young people gathered around her.

"I told you to look out for squalls, Grace," said David. "But you didn't
weather the gale very well."

"Those juniors must have been eavesdropping when you made your signal
code. They understood every play you made. By George, I wonder if that
were the meaning of that pow-wow the other day. Some one must have put
Julia Crosby wise, and that's why she called a meeting at the Omnibus
House. It's an out-of-the-way place, and she thought there was no danger
of being disturbed.

"Who could have been mean enough to betray us?" cried Nora. "I am sure
none of the team did, unless----" Nora stopped short.

She had been on the point of using Miriam's name, but remembered just in
time that Miriam's brother was present.

"If we knew the girl who did it, we'd certainly cut her acquaintance,"
said Reddy Brooks.

"Never again should she bask in the light of our society," said Hippy
dramatically.

"None of our friends would do such a thing," said David soberly. Then,
turning to Anne, "What's your opinion on the subject, Queen Anne?"

But Anne could find no answer. She simply shook her head.

Grace, knowing Anne's feelings over the affair, came to the rescue.

"Anne's opinion and mine are the same. We feel sure that they knew our
signals, but we believe they accidentally hit upon the knowledge. There is
no use in crying over spilt milk. We shall have to change all our signals
and take care that it doesn't happen again. And now let's talk of
something more agreeable, for basketball is a sore subject with me in more
than one sense." The talk drifted into other channels much to Anne's
relief.

"I have an idea!" exclaimed Hippy.

"Impossible," said Reddy. "No one would ever accuse you of such a thing."

"Be silent, fellow," commanded Hippy. "I will not brook such idle
babbling." He strutted up and down the room, his chest inflated and one
hand over his heart, presenting such a ridiculous figure that he raised a
general laugh.

"Speak on, fat one. I promise not to make any more remarks," said Reddy.

"I propose," said Hippy, pausing in his march, "that we give an impromptu
vaudeville show for the benefit of Miss Grace Harlowe, once an active
member of this happy band, but now laid on the shelf--couch, I mean--for
repairs."

"Done," was the unanimous reply.
