    Sings for his supper.
  What shall he eat?
    White bread and butter.
  How can he cut it without any knife?
  How can he marry without any wife?




TOMMY TUCKER


One summer Mary went to make Grandma Hall a visit.

Grandma's little girls were all grown up now, and Grandma and Grandpa
lived alone on the farm.

Mary liked to go there to visit because Grandma could tell such
splendid stories, and there were always so many things to do.

It was Saturday and Mary had been busy all the morning helping Grandma
make cookies, and pies, and cakes.

After dinner Grandma and little Mary took their sewing and sat out
under the old apple-tree in the garden.

Grandma was making a cap, and Mary was making a white apron for her
mother.

They had been sitting there only a little while when Mary saw a ragged
boy coming down the road towards the house.

Running along close behind him was a ragged little dog.

The boy had a violin in his hand.

When he saw the little girl and her grandmother he stood still and
began to play.

As he played, the little dog stood up on his hind legs and tried to
sing.

"Bow--wow, wow!" he barked, and oh he did look so funny!

"Please ask the boy to bring that funny dog over here, Grandma," said
Mary.

"Come here, little boy," said Grandma. "What is your name?"

"My name is Tommy," said the boy, "and this is my dog Rags."

"Run and get Tommy and the dog some cookies, Mary," said Grandma, "I
guess they are both hungry."

Tommy looked so tired that Mrs. Hall asked him to sit down and rest.

"Where do you live?" she asked.

"I don't live anywhere," replied Tommy, "I just have my dog Rags, and
he and I sleep wherever we can."

"Well," said Grandma, "you must both stay here to-night. We can find a
place for a boy and a dog somewhere in this big house."

I can't tell you how happy Tommy was.

Rags seemed happy, too.

He did all the tricks he knew, and for every trick he got a big, sweet
cookie.

After supper Tommy wanted to help, so he went out to the barn with
Grandpa Hall.

Rags trotted along behind him, wagging his tail and barking at
everything he saw.

"What can you do, Tommy?" asked Grandpa.

"I can play my violin and sing," said Tommy. "That is all I know how to
do."

  "Little Tommy Tucker,
  Sings for his supper.

"I think we shall have to call you 'Tommy Tucker'," said Grandpa.

But Tommy could do many things besides sing and play.

He helped Grandpa Hall feed the hens and chickens.

He gave them fresh water and found all the eggs.

Then he brought in some wood for Grandma's fire.

There are a great many things for a boy to do on a farm.

That night, after the children had gone to bed, Grandpa said,

"I wish Tommy could live here with us all the time.

"I would like a good boy to help me."

"That is a good idea," said Grandma.

"It is lonely now that all our children are gone.

"And Tommy is just the kind of a boy I like."

So the next morning Grandma asked Tommy if he would like to live with
them.

[Illustration]

"Could Rags stay here, too?" asked Tommy.

"Of course he could," said Grandma.

"You could help Grandpa in the summer, and in the winter you could go
to school."

What do you think Tommy did?

He couldn't say a word.

He threw his arms around Grandma's neck and kissed her.

"Bow-wow," said Rags, jumping up beside them and barking as hard as he
could.

"Bow-wow, this is a good home, Tommy."

And Tommy thought so too.




  This little pig went to market,
  This little pig stayed at home,
  This little pig had bread and butter,
  This little pig had none,
  This little pig cried, "Wee, wee, wee!
  I can't find my way home!"




FIVE LITTLE PIGS


Tommy Tucker and Mary had been busy all day helping Grandpa Hall pick
apples.

Now the supper dishes were done and the lamp was lighted.

"Tell us a story, Grandma," they begged.

"What shall I tell you?" said Grandma. "Shall I tell you about 'The
Three Bears,' or 'Tom Thumb,' or 'Red Riding Hood'?"

"Tell us a new story, please," said Mary.

"Well, I will tell you the story of the 'Five Little Pigs'."

"What five little pigs?" the children asked at the same moment.

"You know," said Grandma.

 "This little pig went to market,
  This little pig stayed at home,
  This little pig had bread and butter,
  This little pig had none,
  This little pig cried, 'Wee, wee, wee!
     'I can't find my way home!'"

"Is there a story about those little pigs?" asked Mary. "I know I
should like that."

So Grandma Hall told the children this story:

Once upon a time there was a mother pig and she had five little pigs.

They were the very prettiest little pigs you ever saw.

They were every one white, with pretty pink noses and very curly tails.

Perhaps the mother pig tied each little tail up at night to make it
curl more tightly.

Curly and Whitey, Pearly and Twisty, and Baby, were the names of the
five little pigs.

One day the mother pig said to Curly: "You must go to market to-day, my
son. I want a nice big cabbage for my soup."

So this little pig went to market.

The market was not very far away,--just down the road and across the
field to Grandpa Hall's cabbage patch.

"Be sure and get a good large one," said the mother pig, as Curly
trotted away.

"Oh, Mother," said Whitey, "may I go to market with Curly?"

"No, Whitey," said his mother, "I want you to stay at home and take
care of Baby.

"I shall be very busy all the morning.

"You may take Baby out into the yard and play with her."

So this little pig stayed at home.

Whitey took Baby and went out into the yard.

Pearly and Twisty were out there, but they were not playing.

I am sorry to have to say that they were quarrelling, for one little
pig had some bread and butter and the other little pig had none.

After a while the two little pigs stopped quarrelling, and then they
all began to play together.

First they played tag, then they played hide and seek.

"Oh, there is Curly!" said Whitey.

"See what a big cabbage he has!"

Sure enough, Curly was coming down the road with a cabbage as big as
his own head.

Mother Pig took the cabbage and put it into her soup.

Oh, how good the dinner did smell to the hungry little pigs!

"Come to dinner, children," called their mother at last; and then what
a scampering there was!

One, two, three, four little pigs.

They almost fell over each other, they were in such a hurry.

"Where is Baby?" cried Mother Pig.

Then all the pigs were so frightened that their noses turned white.

Where was she, indeed?

They had forgotten to watch her while they were playing hide and seek.

Where could she be?

They all ran out of the house faster than they ran in.

"Perhaps she ran after me and got lost," thought Curly, and he ran down
the big road.

Pearly thought she would go to the woods behind the barn.

Twisty ran across the big meadow.

Mother Pig walked slowly up the road, looking behind all the trees and
under all the bushes.

"Baby, Baby, Baby!" you could hear them all calling.

As Twisty ran along beside the brook, she thought she heard a noise.

"Baby, Baby!" she called.

"Wee, wee, wee!" cried Baby Pig, "I can't find my way home."

When Twisty heard this she ran so fast she nearly fell into the brook.

There sat Baby Pig on a stone, wiping the tears out of her eyes with an
oak leaf.

"Oh, Baby!" said Twisty, giving her sister a good hug, "what made you
