you, for I am all alone."

The dragon-fly folded his shining wings beside the Elf, listened to
the tale he told, promised to befriend the lonely one, and strove
to make the forest a happy home to him.

So here dwelt Thistle, and many kind friends gathered round him,
for he spoke gently to them, and they knew nothing of the cruel deeds
he had done; and for a while he was happy and content.  But at length
he grew weary of the gentle birds, and wild-flowers, and sought new
pleasure in destroying the beauty he was tired of; and soon the
friends who had so kindly welcomed him looked upon him as an evil
spirit, and shrunk away as he approached.

At length his friend the dragon-fly besought him to leave the quiet
home he had disturbed.  Then Thistle was very angry, and while the
dragon-fly was sleeping among the flowers that hung over the lake, he
led an ugly spider to the spot, and bade him weave his nets about the
sleeping insect, and bind him fast.  The cruel spider gladly obeyed
the ungrateful Fairy; and soon the poor fly could move neither leg nor
wing.  Then Thistle flew away through the wood, leaving sorrow and
trouble behind him.

He had not journeyed far before he grew weary, and lay down to rest.
Long he slept, and when he awoke, and tried to rise, his hands and
wings were bound; while beside him stood two strange little figures,
with dark faces and garments, that rustled like withered leaves; who
cried to him, as he struggled to get free,--

"Lie still, you naughty Fairy, you are in the Brownies' power, and
shall be well punished for your cruelty ere we let you go."

So poor Thistle lay sorrowfully, wondering what would come of it,
and wishing Lily-Bell would come to help and comfort him; but he had
left her, and she could not help him now.

Soon a troop of Brownies came rustling through the air, and gathered
round him, while one who wore an acorn-cup on his head, and was their
King, said, as he stood beside the trembling Fairy,--

"You have done many cruel things, and caused much sorrow to happy
hearts; now you are in my power, and I shall keep you prisoner
till you have repented.  You cannot dwell on the earth without harming
the fair things given you to enjoy, so you shall live alone in
solitude and darkness, till you have learned to find happiness in
gentle deeds, and forget yourself in giving joy to others.  When you
have learned this, I will set you free."

Then the Brownies bore him to a high, dark rock, and, entering a
little door, led him to a small cell, dimly lighted by a crevice
through which came a single gleam of sunlight; and there, through
long, long days, poor Thistle sat alone, and gazed with wistful eyes
at the little opening, longing to be out on the green earth.  No one
came to him, but the silent Brownies who brought his daily food; and
with bitter tears he wept for Lily-Bell, mourning his cruelty and
selfishness, seeking to do some kindly deed that might atone for his
wrong-doing.

A little vine that grew outside his prison rock came creeping up,
and looked in through the crevice, as if to cheer the lonely Fairy,
who welcomed it most gladly, and daily sprinkled its soft leaves
with his small share of water, that the little vine might live,
even if it darkened more and more his dim cell.

The watchful Brownies saw this kind deed, and brought him fresh
flowers, and many things, which Thistle gratefully received, though
he never knew it was his kindness to the vine that gained for him
these pleasures.

Thus did poor Thistle strive to be more gentle and unselfish, and
grew daily happier and better.

Now while Thistledown was a captive in the lonely cell, Lily-Bell was
seeking him far and wide, and sadly traced him by the sorrowing hearts
he had left behind.

She healed the drooping flowers, cheered the Queen Bee's grief,
brought back her discontented subjects, restored the home to peace
and order, and left them blessing her.

Thus she journeyed on, till she reached the forest where Thistledown
had lost his freedom.  She unbound the starving dragon-fly, and tended
the wounded birds; but though all learned to love her, none could tell
where the Brownies had borne her friend, till a little wind came
whispering by, and told her that a sweet voice had been heard, singing
Fairy songs, deep in a moss-grown rock.

Then Lily-Bell went seeking through the forest, listening for the
voice.  Long she looked and listened in vain; when one day, as she was
wandering through a lonely dell, she heard a faint, low sound of
music, and soon a distant voice mournfully singing,--


 "Bright shines the summer sun,
    Soft is the summer air;
  Gayly the wood-birds sing,
    Flowers are blooming fair.

 "But, deep in the dark, cold rock,
    Sadly I dwell,
  Longing for thee, dear friend,
    Lily-Bell! Lily-Bell!"


"Thistle, dear Thistle, where are you?" joyfully cried Lily-Bell,
as she flew from rock to rock.  But the voice was still, and she
would have looked in vain, had she not seen a little vine, whose green
leaves fluttering to and fro seemed beckoning her to come; and as she
stood among its flowers she sang,--


 "Through sunlight and summer air
    I have sought for thee long,
  Guided by birds and flowers,
    And now by thy song.

 "Thistledown! Thistledown!
    O'er hill and dell
  Hither to comfort thee
    Comes Lily-Bell."


Then from the vine-leaves two little arms were stretched out to her,
and Thistledown was found.  So Lily-Bell made her home in the shadow
of the vine, and brought such joy to Thistle, that his lonely cell
seemed pleasanter to him than all the world beside; and he grew daily
more like his gentle friend.  But it did not last long, for one day
she did not come.  He watched and waited long, for the little face
that used to peep smiling in through the vine-leaves.  He called and
beckoned through the narrow opening, but no Lily-Bell answered; and
he wept sadly as he thought of all she had done for him, and that now
he could not go to seek and help her, for he had lost his freedom
by his own cruel and wicked deeds.

At last he besought the silent Brownie earnestly to tell him
whither she had gone.

"O let me go to her," prayed Thistle; "if she is in sorrow, I will
comfort her, and show my gratitude for all she has done for me:  dear
Brownie, set me free, and when she is found I will come and be your
prisoner again.  I will bear and suffer any danger for her sake."

"Lily-Bell is safe," replied the Brownie; "come, you shall learn
the trial that awaits you."

Then he led the wondering Fairy from his prison, to a group of tall,
drooping ferns, beneath whose shade a large white lily had been
placed, forming a little tent, within which, on a couch of thick green
moss, lay Lily-Bell in a deep sleep; the sunlight stole softly in,
and all was cool and still.

"You cannot wake her," said the Brownie, as Thistle folded his arms
tenderly about her.  "It is a magic slumber, and she will not wake
till you shall bring hither gifts from the Earth, Air, and Water
Spirits.  'T is a long and weary task, for you have made no friends
to help you, and will have to seek for them alone.  This is the trial
we shall give you; and if your love for Lily-Bell be strong enough
to keep you from all cruelty and selfishness, and make you kind and
loving as you should be, she will awake to welcome you, and love you
still more fondly than before."

Then Thistle, with a last look on the little friend he loved so well,
set forth alone to his long task.


The home of the Earth Spirits was the first to find, and no one
would tell him where to look.  So far and wide he wandered, through
gloomy forests and among lonely hills, with none to cheer him when
sad and weary, none to guide him on his way.

On he went, thinking of Lily-Bell, and for her sake bearing all;
for in his quiet prison many gentle feelings and kindly thoughts had
sprung up in his heart, and he now strove to be friends with all, and
win for himself the love and confidence of those whom once he sought
to harm and cruelly destroy.

But few believed him; for they remembered his false promises and
evil deeds, and would not trust him now; so poor Thistle found few
to love or care for him.

Long he wandered, and carefully he sought; but could not find the
Earth Spirits' home.  And when at length he reached the pleasant
garden where he and Lily-Bell first parted, he said within himself,--

"Here I will stay awhile, and try to win by kindly deeds the flowers'
forgiveness for the pain and sorrow I brought them long ago; and they
may learn to love and trust me.  So, even if I never find the Spirits,
I shall be worthier of Lily-Bell's affection if I strive to atone for
the wrong I have done."

Then he went among the flowers, but they closed their leaves, and
shrank away, trembling with fear; while the birds fled to hide
among the leaves as he passed.

This grieved poor Thistle, and he longed to tell them how changed
he had become; but they would not listen.  So he tried to show, by
quiet deeds of kindness, that he meant no harm to them; and soon
the kind-hearted birds pitied the lonely Fairy, and when he came near
sang cheering songs, and dropped ripe berries in his path, for he
no longer broke their eggs, or hurt their little ones.

And when the flowers saw this, and found the once cruel Elf now
watering and tending little buds, feeding hungry insects, and
helping the busy ants to bear their heavy loads, they shared the pity
of the birds, and longed to trust him; but they dared not yet.

He came one day, while wandering through the garden, to the little
rose he had once harmed so sadly.  Many buds now bloomed beside her,
and her soft face glowed with motherly pride, as she bent fondly over
them.  But when Thistle came, he saw with sorrow how she bade them
close their green curtains, and conceal themselves beneath the leaves,
for there was danger near; and, drooping still more closely over them,
she seemed to wait with trembling fear the cruel Fairy's coming.

But no rude hand tore her little ones away, no unkind words were
spoken; but a soft shower of dew fell lightly on them, and Thistle,
bending tenderly above them, said,--

"Dear flower, forgive the sorrow I once brought you, and trust me now
for Lily-Bell's sake.  Her gentleness has changed my cruelty to
kindness, and I would gladly repay all for the harm I have done;
but none will love and trust me now."

Then the little rose looked up, and while the dew-drops shone
like happy tears upon her leaves, she said,--

"I WILL love and trust you, Thistle, for you are indeed much
changed.  Make your home among us, and my sister flowers will soon
learn to love you as you deserve.  Not for sweet Lily-Bell's sake,
but for your own, will I become your friend; for you are kind and
gentle now, and worthy of our love.  Look up, my little ones, there is
no danger near; look up, and welcome Thistle to our home."

Then the little buds raised their rosy faces, danced again upon
their stems, and nodded kindly at Thistle, who smiled on them through
happy tears, and kissed the sweet, forgiving rose, who loved and
trusted him when most forlorn and friendless.

But the other flowers wondered among themselves, and Hyacinth said,--

"If Rose-Leaf is his friend, surely we may be; yet still I fear he may
soon grow weary of this gentleness, and be again the wicked Fairy he
once was, and we shall suffer for our kindness to him now."

"Ah, do not doubt him!" cried warm-hearted little Mignonette; "surely
some good spirit has changed the wicked Thistle into this good little
Elf.  See how tenderly he lifts aside the leaves that overshadow pale
Harebell, and listen now how softly he sings as he rocks little
Eglantine to sleep.  He has done many friendly things, though none
save Rose-Leaf has been kind to him, and he is very sad.  Last night
when I awoke to draw my curtains closer, he sat weeping in the
moonlight, so bitterly, I longed to speak a kindly word to him.
Dear sisters, let us trust him."

And they all said little Mignonette was right; and, spreading wide
their leaves, they bade him come, and drink their dew, and lie among
the fragrant petals, striving to cheer his sorrow.  Thistle told them
all, and, after much whispering together, they said,--

"Yes, we will help you to find the Earth Spirits, for you are striving
to be good, and for love of Lily-Bell we will do much for you."

So they called a little bright-eyed mole, and said, "Downy-Back,
we have given you a pleasant home among our roots, and you are
a grateful little friend; so will you guide dear Thistle to the
Earth Spirits' home?"

Downy-Back said, "Yes," and Thistle, thanking the kindly flowers,
followed his little guide, through long, dark galleries, deeper
and deeper into the ground; while a glow-worm flew before to light
the way.  On they went, and after a while, reached a path lit up by
bright jewels hung upon the walls.  Here Downy-Back, and Glimmer,
the glow-worm, left him, saying,--

"We can lead you no farther; you must now go on alone, and the music
of the Spirits will guide you to their home."

Then they went quickly up the winding path, and Thistle, guided
by the sweet music, went on alone.

He soon reached a lovely spot, whose golden halls were bright
with jewels, which sparkled brightly, and threw many-colored shadows
on the shining garments of the little Spirits, who danced below
to the melody of soft, silvery bells.

Long Thistle stood watching the brilliant forms that flashed and
sparkled round him; but he missed the flowers and the sunlight,
and rejoiced that he was not an Earth Spirit.

At last they spied him out, and, gladly welcoming him, bade him join
in their dance.  But Thistledown was too sad for that, and when he
told them all his story they no longer urged, but sought to comfort
him; and one whom they called little Sparkle (for her crown and robe
shone with the brightest diamonds), said:  "You will have to work
for us, ere you can win a gift to show the Brownies; do you see
those golden bells that make such music, as we wave them to and fro?
We worked long and hard ere they were won, and you can win one of
those, if you will do the task we give you."

And Thistle said, "No task will be too hard for me to do for dear
Lily-Bell's sake."

Then they led him to a strange, dark place, lit up with torches;
where troops of Spirits flew busily to and fro, among damp rocks, and
through dark galleries that led far down into the earth.  "What do
they here?" asked Thistle.

"I will tell," replied little Sparkle, "for I once worked here
myself.  Some of them watch above the flower-roots, and keep them
fresh and strong; others gather the clear drops that trickle from the
damp rocks, and form a little spring, which, growing ever larger,
rises to the light above, and gushes forth in some green field or
lonely forest; where the wild-birds come to drink, and wood-flowers
spread their thirsty leaves above the clear, cool waves, as they go
dancing away, carrying joy and freshness wherever they go.  Others
shape the bright jewels into lovely forms, and make the good-luck
pennies which we give to mortals whom we love.  And here you must toil
till the golden flower is won."

Then Thistle went among the Spirits, and joined in their tasks;
he tended the flower-roots, gathered the water-drops, and formed the
good-luck pennies.  Long and hard he worked, and was often sad and
weary, often tempted by unkind and selfish thoughts; but he thought
of Lily-Bell, and strove to be kind and loving as she had been; and
soon the Spirits learned to love the patient Fairy, who had left his
home to toil among them for the sake of his gentle friend.

At length came little Sparkle to him, saying, "You have done enough;
come now, and dance and feast with us, for the golden flower is won."

But Thistle could not stay, for half his task was not yet done; and
he longed for sunlight and Lily-Bell.  So, taking a kind farewell,
he hastened through the torch-lit path up to the light again; and,
spreading his wings, flew over hill and dale till he reached the
forest where Lily-Bell lay sleeping.

It was early morning, and the rosy light shone brightly through the
lily-leaves upon her, as Thistle entered, and laid his first gift
at the Brownie King's feet.

"You have done well," said he, "we hear good tidings of you from
bird and flower, and you are truly seeking to repair the evil
you have done.  Take now one look at your little friend, and then
go forth to seek from the Air Spirits your second gift."

Then Thistle said farewell again to Lily-Bell, and flew far and wide
among the clouds, seeking the Air Spirits; but though he wandered till
his weary wings could bear him no longer, it was in vain.  So, faint
and sad, he lay down to rest on a broad vine-leaf, that fluttered
gently in the wind; and as he lay, he saw beneath him the home
of the kind bees whom he had so disturbed, and Lily-Bell had helped
and comforted.

"I will seek to win their pardon, and show them that I am no longer
the cruel Fairy who so harmed them," thought Thistle, "and when they
become again my friends, I will ask their help to find the Air
Spirits; and if I deserve it, they will gladly aid me on my way."

So he flew down into the field below, and hastened busily from
flower to flower, till he had filled a tiny blue-bell with sweet,
fresh honey.  Then he stole softly to the hive, and, placing it near
the door, concealed himself to watch.  Soon his friend Nimble-Wing
came flying home, and when he spied the little cup, he hummed with
joy, and called his companions around him.

"Surely, some good Elf has placed it here for us," said they; "let us
bear it to our Queen; it is so fresh and fragrant it will be a fit
gift for her"; and they joyfully took it in, little dreaming who had
placed it there.

So each day Thistle filled a flower-cup, and laid it at the door;
and each day the bees wondered more and more, for many strange things
happened.  The field-flowers told of the good spirit who watched
above them, and the birds sang of the same kind little Elf bringing
soft moss for their nests, and food for their hungry young ones;
while all around the hive had grown fairer since the Fairy came.

But the bees never saw him, for he feared he had not yet done enough
to win their forgiveness and friendship; so he lived alone among the
vines, daily bringing them honey, and doing some kindly action.

At length, as he lay sleeping in a flower-bell, a little bee came
wandering by, and knew him for the wicked Thistle; so he called his
friends, and, as they flew murmuring around him, he awoke.

"What shall we do to you, naughty Elf?" said they.  "You are in
our power, and we will sting you if you are not still."

"Let us close the flower-leaves around him and leave him here
to starve," cried one, who had not yet forgotten all the sorrow
Thistle had caused them long ago.

"No, no, that were very cruel, dear Buzz," said little Hum; "let us
take him to our Queen, and she will tell us how to show our anger for
the wicked deeds he did.  See how bitterly he weeps; be kind to him,
he will not harm us more."

"You good little Hum!" cried a kind-hearted robin who had hopped near
to listen to the bees.  "Dear friends, do you not know that this is
the good Fairy who has dwelt so quietly among us, watching over bird
and blossom, giving joy to all he helps?  It is HE who brings the
honey-cup each day to you, and then goes silently away, that you may
never know who works so faithfully for you.  Be kind to him, for if
he has done wrong, he has repented of it, as you may see."

"Can this be naughty Thistle?" said Nimble-Wing.

"Yes, it is I," said Thistle, "but no longer cruel and unkind.  I have
tried to win your love by patient industry.  Ah, trust me now, and you
shall see I am not naughty Thistle any more."

Then the wondering bees led him to their Queen, and when he had told
his tale, and begged their forgiveness, it was gladly given; and
all strove to show him that he was loved and trusted.  Then he asked
if they could tell him where the Air Spirits dwelt, for he must not
forget dear Lily-Bell; and to his great joy the Queen said, "Yes,"
and bade little Hum guide Thistle to Cloud-Land.

Little Hum joyfully obeyed; and Thistle followed him, as he flew
higher and higher among the soft clouds, till in the distance they saw
a radiant light.

"There is their home, and I must leave you now, dear Thistle," said
the little bee; and, bidding him farewell, he flew singing back; while
Thistle, following the light, soon found himself in the Air Spirits'
home.

