To facilitate matters it was decided that Fred should invite me to
spend Wednesday with him, and to stay all night, for the barge was to
start at half-past six o'clock on Thursday morning.

I was very busy on Wednesday. I wrote a letter to my mother in which I
hoped I made it quite clear that ambition and not discontent was
leading me to run away. I also made a will, dividing my things fairly
between Rupert, Henrietta, and Baby Cecil, in case I should be drowned
at sea. My knife, my prayer-book, the ball of string belonging to my
kite, and my little tool-box I took away with me. I also took the
match-box from the writing-table, but I told Mother of it in the
letter. The captain used to light his fires by rubbing sticks
together, but I had tried it, and thought matches would be much
better, at any rate to begin with.

Rupert was lying under the crab-tree, and Henrietta was reading to
him, when I went away. Rupert was getting much stronger; he could walk
with a stick, and was going back to school next half. I felt a very
unreasonable vexation because they seemed quite cheerful. But as I was
leaving the garden to go over the fields, Baby Cecil came running
after me, with his wooden spade in one hand and a plant of chick weed
in the other, crying: "Charlie, dear! Come and tell Baby Cecil a
story." I kissed him, and tied his hat on, which had come off as he
ran.

"Not now, Baby," I said; "I am going out now, and you are gardening."

"I don't want to garden," he pleaded. "Where are you going? Take me
with you."

"I am going to Fred Johnson's," I said bravely.

Baby Cecil was a very good child, though he was so much petted. He
gave a sigh of disappointment, but only said very gravely, "Will you
promise, _onyer-onner_, to tell me one when you come back?"

"I promise to tell you lots _when I come back_, on my honour," was my
answer.

I had to skirt the garden-hedge for a yard or two before turning off
across the meadow. In a few minutes I heard a voice on the other side.
Baby Cecil had run down the inside, and was poking his face through a
hole, and kissing both hands to me. There came into my head a wonder
whether his face would be much changed next time I saw it. I little
guessed when and how that would be. But when he cried, "Come back
_very soon_, Charlie dear," my imperfect valour utterly gave way, and
hanging my head I ran, with hot tears pouring over my face, all the
way to Johnson's wharf.

When Fred saw my face he offered to give up the idea if I felt
faint-hearted about it. Nothing that he could have said would have
dried my tears so soon. Every spark of pride in me blazed up to reject
the thought of turning craven now. Besides, I longed for a life of
adventure most sincerely; and I was soon quite happy again in the
excitement of being so near to what I had longed for.




CHAPTER VIII.

WE GO ON BOARD--THE PIE--AN EXPLOSION--MR. ROWE THE BARGE-MASTER--THE
'WHITE LION'--TWO LETTERS--WE DOUBT MR. ROWE'S GOOD FAITH.


The dew was still heavy on the grass when Fred and I crossed the
drying-ground about five o'clock on Thursday morning, and scrambled
through a hedge into our "coastguard" corner on the wharf. We did not
want to be seen by the barge-master till we were too far from home to
be put ashore.

The freshness of early morning in summer has some quality which seems
to go straight to the heart. I felt intensely happy. There lay the
barge, the sun shining on the clean deck, and from the dewy edges of
the old ropes, and from the barge-master's zinc basin and pail put out
to sweeten in the air.

"She won't leave us behind this time!" I cried, turning triumphantly
to Fred.

"Take care of the pie," said Fred.

It was a meat-pie which he had taken from the larder this morning;
but he had told Mrs. Johnson about it in the letter he had left behind
him; and had explained that we took it instead of the breakfast we
should otherwise have eaten. We felt that earth-nuts might not be
forthcoming on the canal banks, or even on the wharf at Nine Elms when
we reached London.

At about a quarter to six Johnson's wharf was quite deserted. The
barge-master was having breakfast ashore, and the second man had gone
to the stable. "We had better hide ourselves now," I said. So we crept
out and went on board. We had chosen our hiding-place before. Not in
the cabin, of course, nor among the cargo, where something extra
thrown in at the last moment might smother us if it did not lead to
our discovery, but in the fore part of the boat, in a sort of well or
_hold_, where odd things belonging to the barge itself were stowed
away, and made sheltered nooks into which we could creep out of sight.
Here we found a very convenient corner, and squatted down, with the
pie at our feet, behind a hamper, a box, a coil of rope, a sack of
hay, and a very large ball, crossed four ways with rope, and with a
rope-tail, which puzzled me extremely.

"It's like a giant tadpole," I whispered to Fred.

"Don't nudge me," said Fred. "My pockets are full, and it hurts."

_My_ pockets were far from light. The money-bag was heavily laden
with change--small in value but large in coin. The box of matches was
with it and the knife. String, nails, my prayer-book, a pencil, some
writing-paper, the handbook, and a more useful hammer than the one in
my tool-box filled another pocket. Some gooseberries and a piece of
cake were in my trousers, and I carried the tool-box in my hands. We
each had a change of linen, tied up in a pocket-handkerchief. Fred
would allow of nothing else. He said that when our jackets and
trousers were worn out we must make new clothes out of an old sail.

Waiting is very dull work. After awhile, however, we heard voices, and
the tramp of the horse, and then the barge-master and Mr. Johnson's
foreman and other men kept coming and going on deck, and for a quarter
of an hour we had as many hairbreadth escapes of discovery as the
captain himself could have had in the circumstances. At last somebody
threw the barge-master a bag of something (fortunately soft) which he
was leaving behind, and which he chucked on to the top of my head.
Then the driver called to his horse, and the barge gave a jerk, which
threw Fred on to the pie, and in a moment more we were gliding slowly
and smoothly down the stream.

When we were fairly off we ventured to peep out a little, and stretch
our cramped limbs. There was no one on board but the barge-master,
and he was at the other end of the vessel, smoking and minding his
rudder. The driver was walking on the towing-path by the old grey
horse. The motion of the boat was so smooth that we seemed to be lying
still whilst villages and orchards and green banks and osier-beds went
slowly by, as though the world were coming to show itself to us,
instead of our going out to see the world.

When we passed the town we felt some anxiety for fear we should be
stopped; but there was no one on the bank, and though the towers of S.
Philip and S. James appeared again and again in lessening size as we
looked back, there came at last a bend in the canal, when a high bank
of gorse shut out the distance, and we saw them no more.

In about an hour, having had no breakfast, we began to speak seriously
of the pie. (I had observed Fred breaking little corners from the
crust with an absent air more than once.) Thinking of the first
subdivision under the word Hardships in my handbook, I said, "I'm
afraid we ought to wait till we are _worse hungry_."

But Fred said, "Oh no!" And that out adventure-seeking it was quite
impossible to save and plan and divide your meals exactly, as you
could never tell what might turn up. The captain always said, "Take
good luck and bad luck and pot-luck as they come!" So Fred assured me,
and we resolved to abide by the captain's rule.

"We may have to weigh out our food with a bullet, like Admiral Bligh,
next week," said Fred.

"So we may," said I. And the thought must have given an extra relish
to the beefsteak and hard-boiled eggs, for I never tasted anything so
good.

Whether the smell of the pie went aft, or whether something else made
the barge-master turn round and come forward, I do not know; but when
we were encumbered with open clasp-knives, and full mouths, we saw him
bearing down upon us, and in a hasty movement of retreat I lost my
balance, and went backward with a crash upon a tub of potatoes.

The noise this made was not the worst part of the business. I was
tightly wedged amongst the odds and ends, and the money-bag being
sharply crushed against the match-box, which was by this time well
warmed, the matches exploded in a body, and whilst I was putting as
heroic a face as I could on the pain I was enduring in my right
funny-bone, Fred cried, "Your jacket's smoking. You're on fire!"

Whether Mr. Rowe, the barge-master, had learnt presence of mind out of
a book, I do not know; but before Fred and I could even think of what
to do in the emergency, my jacket was off, the matches were
overboard, and Mr. Rowe was squeezing the smouldering fire out of my
pocket, rather more deliberately than most men brush their hats. Then,
after civilly holding the jacket for me to put it on again, he took
off his hat, took his handkerchief out of it, and wiped his head, and
replacing both, with his eyes upon us, said, more deliberately still,
"Well, young gentlemen, this is a nice start!"

It was impossible to resist the feeling of confidence inspired by Mr.
Rowe's manner, his shrewd and stolid appearance, and his promptness in
an emergency. Besides, we were completely at his mercy. We appealed to
it, and told him our plans. We offered him a share of the pie too,
which he accepted with conscious condescension. When the dish was
empty he brought his handkerchief into use once more, and then said,
in a peculiarly oracular manner, "You just look to me, young
gentlemen, and I'll put you in the way of every think."

The immediate advantage we took of this offer was to ask about
whatever interested us in the landscape constantly passing before our
eyes, or the barge-furniture at our feet. The cord-compressed balls
were shore-fenders, said Mr. Rowe, and were popped over the side when
the barge was likely to grate against the shore, or against another
vessel.

"Them's osier-beds. They cuts 'em every year or so for basket-work.
Wot's that little bird a-hanging head downwards? It's a titmouse
looking for insects, that is. There's scores on 'em in the osier-beds.
Aye, aye, the yellow lilies is pretty enough, but there's a lake the
other way--a mile or two beyond your father's, Master Fred--where
there's white water-lilies. They're pretty, if you like! It's a rum
thing in spring," continued Mr. Rowe, between puffs of his pipe, "to
see them lilies come up from the bottom of the canal; the leaves
packed as neat as any parcel, and when they git to the top, they turns
down and spreads out on the water as flat as you could spread a cloth
upon a table."

As a rule, Mr. Rowe could give us no names for the aquatic plants at
which we clutched as we went by, nor for the shells we got out of the
mud; but his eye for a water-rat was like a terrier's. It was the only
thing which seemed to excite him.

About mid-day we stopped by a village, where Mr. Rowe had business.
The horse was to rest and bait here; and the barge-master told us that
if we had "a shilling or so about" us, we might dine on excellent
bread and cheese at the _White Lion_, or even go so far as poached
eggs and yet more excellent bacon, if our resources allowed of it. We
were not sorry to go ashore. There was absolutely no shelter on the
deck of the barge from the sunshine, which was glaringly reflected by
the water. The inn parlour was low, but it was dark and cool. I felt
doubtful about the luxury even of cheese after that beefsteak-pie but
Fred smacked his lips and ordered eggs and bacon, and I paid for them
out of the canvas-bag.

As we sat together I said, "I wrote a letter to my mother, Fred. Did
you write to Mrs. Johnson?"

Fred nodded, and pulled a scrap of dirty paper from his pocket,
saying, "That's the letter; but I made a tidy copy of it afterwards."

I have said that Fred was below me in class, though he is older; and
he was very bad at spelling. Otherwise the letter did very well,
except for smudges.

     "DEAR MOTHER,

     "Charlie and I are going to run away at least by the time you get
     this we have run away but never mind for wen weve seen the wurld
     were cumming back we took the pi wich I hope you wont mind as we
     had no brekfust and I'll bring back the dish we send our best love
     and I've no more to tell you to-day from your affectionate son
     FRED."

I saw Mr. Rowe myself very busy in the bar of the _White Lion_, with a
sheet of paper and an old steel pen, which looked as if the point had
been attenuated to that hair-like fineness by sheer age. He started
at the sight of me, which caused him to drop a very large blot of ink
from the very sharp point of the pen on to his paper. I left him
wiping it up with his handkerchief. But it never struck me that he was
writing a letter on the same subject as Fred and I had been writing
about. He was, however: and Mr. Johnson keeps it tied up with Fred's
to this day. The spelling was of about the same order.

     "MR. JOHNSON. HONERD SIR.

     "i rites in duty bound to acqaint you that the young genlemen is
     with me, looking out for Advenchurs and asking your pardon i wish
     they may find them as innercent as 2 Babes in the Wood on the
     London and Lancingford Canal were they come aboard quite unknown to
     me and blowed theirselves up with lucifers the fust go off and
     you've no need to trubble yourself sir ill keep my I on them and
     bring em safe to hand with return cargo and hoping you'll excuse
     the stamp not expecting to have to rite from the fust stoppige your
     obedient humble servant

     "SAMUEL ROWE."

As I have said, we did not suspect that Mr. Rowe had betrayed us by
post; but in the course of the afternoon Fred said to me, "I'll tell
you what, Charlie, I know old Rowe well, and he's up to any trick,
and sure to want to keep in with my father. If we don't take care
he'll take us back with him. And what fools we shall look then!"

The idea was intolerable; but I warned Fred to carefully avoid
betraying that we suspected him. The captain had had worse enemies to
outwit, and had kept a pirate in good humour for a much longer voyage
by affability and rum. We had no means of clouding Mr. Rowe's
particularly sharp wits with grog, but we resolved to be amiable and
wary, and when we did get to London to look out for the first
opportunity of giving the barge-master the slip.




CHAPTER IX.

A COASTING VOYAGE--MUSK ISLAND--LINNET FLASH--MR. ROWE AN OLD TAR--THE
DOG-FANCIER AT HOME.


It was a delightful feature of our first voyage--and one which we
could not hope to enjoy so often in voyages to come--that we were
always close to land, and this on both sides. We could touch either
coast without difficulty, and as the barge stopped several times
during the day to rest the horse, Fred and I had more than one chance
of going ashore.

I hope to have many a voyage yet, and to see stranger people and
places than I saw then, but I hardly hope ever to enjoy myself so much
again. I have long ago found out that Fred's stories of the captain's
adventures were not true stories, and as I have read and learned more
about the world than I knew at that time, I know now that there are
only certain things which one can meet with by land or by sea. But
when Fred and I made our first voyage in emulation of his grandfather
there was no limit to my expectations, or to what we were prepared to
see or experience at every fresh bend of the London and Lancingford
Canal.

I remember one of Fred's stories about the captain was of his spending
a year and a day on an island called Musk Island, in the Pacific. He
had left the ship, Fred said, to do a little exploring alone in his
gig. Not knowing at that time that the captain's gig is a boat, I was
a good deal puzzled, I remember, to think of Mrs. Johnson's red-faced
father crossing the sea in a gig like the one Mr. Bustard used to go
his professional "rounds" in. And when Fred spoke of his "pulling
himself" I was yet more bewildered by the unavoidable conclusion that
they had no horse on board, and that the gallant and ever-ready
captain went himself between the shafts. The wonder of his getting to
Musk Island in that fashion was, however, eclipsed by the wonders he
found when he did get there. Musk-hedges and bowers ten feet high,
with flowers as large as bindweed blossoms, and ladies with pale gold
hair all dressed in straw-coloured satin, and with such lovely faces
that the captain vowed that no power on earth should move him till he
had learned enough of the language to propose the health of the Musk
Island beauties in a suitable speech after dinner. "And there he would
have lived and died, I believe," Fred would say, "if that first mate,
who saved his life before, had not rescued him by main force, and
taken him back to his ship."

I am reminded of this story when I think of the island in Linnet Lake,
for we were so deeply charmed by it that we very nearly broke our
voyage, as the captain broke his, to settle on it.

Mr. Rowe called the lake Linnet Flash. Wherever the canal seemed to
spread out, and then go on again narrow and like a river, the
barge-master called these lakes "flashes" of the canal. There is no
other flash on that canal so large or so beautiful as Linnet Lake, and
in the middle of the lake lies the island.

It was about three o'clock, the hottest part of a summer's day, and
Fred and I, rather faint with the heat, were sitting on a coil of rope
holding a clean sheet, which Mr. Rowe had brought up from the cabin to
protect our heads and backs from sunstroke. We had refused to take
shelter below, and sat watching the fields and hedges, which seemed to
palpitate in the heat as they went giddily by, and Mr. Rowe, who stood
quite steady, conversing coolly with the driver. The driver had been
on board for the last hour, the way being clear, and the old horse
quite able to take care of itself and us, and he and the barge-master
had pocket-handkerchiefs under their hats like the sou'-wester flaps
of the captain's sea-friends. Fred had dropped his end of the sheet
to fall asleep, and I was protecting us both, when the driver bawled
some directions to the horse in their common language, and the
barge-master said, "Here's a bit of shade for you, Master Fred;" and
we roused up and found ourselves gliding under the lee of an island
covered with trees.

"Oh, _do_ stop here!" we both cried.

"Well, I don't mind," said Mr. Rowe, removing his hat, and mopping
himself with his very useful pocket-handkerchief. "Jem, there's a bit
of grass there, let her have a mouthful."

"I thought you'd like this," he continued; "there ain't a prettier bit
between here and Pyebridge."

It was so lovely, that the same idea seized both Fred and me: Why not
settle here, at least for a time? It was an uninhabited island, only
waiting to be claimed by some adventurous navigator, and obviously
fertile. The prospect of blackberries on the mainland was particularly
fine, and how they would ripen in this blazing sun! Birds sang in the
trees above; fish leaping after flies broke the still surface of the
water with a musical splash below; and beyond a doubt there must be
the largest and the sweetest of earth-nuts on the island, easy to get
out of the deep beds of untouched leaf-mould. And when Mr. Rowe cried
"Look!" and we saw a water-fowl scud across the lake, leaving a sharp
trail like a line of light behind her, we felt that we might spend all
our savings in getting to the Pacific Ocean, and not find when we got
there a place which offered more natural resources to the desert
