=Fairfax Court House=:--Near Manassas Junction.

=On to Richmond=:--In 1861 the newspapers of the North were violently
demanding an attack on Richmond.

=Faneuil Hall=:--An historic hall in Boston, in which important meetings
were held before the Revolution.

=McDowell=:--Irving McDowell, who commanded the Union troops at Bull
Run.

=McClellan=:--George B. McClellan, commander of the Army of the Potomac.

=Wandering Jew=:--A legendary person said to have been condemned to
wander over the earth, undying, till the Day of Judgment. The legend is
probably founded on a passage in the Bible--John 21:20-23.

=folding its tents=:--A quotation from _The Day is Done_, by Longfellow.
The lines are:--

    And the night shall be filled with music,
      And the cares, that infest the day,
    Shall fold their tents, like the Arabs,
      And as silently steal away.

=Big Bethel=:--The Union troops were defeated here on June 10, 1861.

=Ball's Bluff=:--A place on the Potomac where the Union soldiers were
beaten, October 21, 1861.

=Centreville=:--A small town, the Union base in the first Battle of Bull
Run.

=Lewinsville=:--A small town, north of Centreville.

=Vienna=:--A village in the Bull Run district.

=Blair's Grave=:--Robert Blair, a Scotch writer, published (1743) a poem
in blank verse called "The Grave."

=barbette guns=:--Guns elevated to fire over the top of a turret or
parapet.

=minie-ball=:--A conical ball plugged with iron, named after its
inventor, Captain Minie, of France.


QUESTIONS FOR STUDY

Read the piece through without stopping, so that you can get the story.
Then go back to the beginning and study with the help of the following
questions:--

Compare the first sentence with the first sentence of _Tennessee's
Partner_. What do you think of the method? What is the use of the first
paragraph in _Quite So_? Why the long paragraph giving the setting? Is
this a good method in writing a story? What had become of "Little
Billy"? Who was "Johnny Reb"? What do you think of bringing in humorous
touches when one is dealing with things so serious as war and battles?
What does "Drop that!" refer to? Why does Strong change his tone? Note
what details the author has selected in order to give a clear picture of
"Quite So" in a few words. How does the conversation reveal the
stranger's character? What is shown by the fact that "Quite So" does not
write any letters? What is the purpose of the episode of "Muffin Fan"?
What devices does the author use, in order to bring out the mystery and
the loneliness of "Quite So"? Note how the author emphasizes the passage
of time. Why does Bladburn finally tell his story? How does it reveal
his character? Was Mary right in what she did? Why are some sentences in
the text printed in italics? Was Bladburn right in leaving his home
village without explanation? Why did he do so? What do you get from the
sentence, "He never meant to go back to New England"? What is the
impression made by the last sentence? Do you like the story?


THEME SUBJECTS

A Mysterious Person
The New Girl at School
The Schoolmaster's Romance
A Sudden Departure
A Camp Scene
The G.A.R. on Memorial Day
The Militia in our Town
An Old Soldier
A Story of the Civil War
Some Relics of the Civil War
Watching the Cadets Drill
My Uncle's Experiences in the War
A Sham Battle
A Visit to an Old Battlefield
On Picket Duty
A Daughter of the Confederacy
"Stonewall" Jackson
Modern Ways of Preventing War
The Soldiers' Home
An Escape from a Military Prison
The Women's Relief Corps
Women in the Civil War


SUGGESTIONS FOR WRITING

=An Old Soldier=:--Tell how you happen to know this old soldier. Where
does he live? Do you see him often? What is he doing when you see him?
Describe him as vividly as you can:--his general appearance; his
clothes; his way of walking. Speak particularly of his face and its
expression. If possible, let us hear him talk. Perhaps you can tell some
of his war stories--in his own words.

=A Mysterious Person=:--Imagine a mysterious person appearing in a
little town where everybody knows everybody else. Tell how he (or she)
arrives. How does he look? What does he do? Explain clearly why he is
particularly hard to account for. What do people say about him? Try to
make each person's remarks fit his individual character. How do people
try to find out about the stranger? Does he notice their curiosity? Do
they ask him questions? If so, give some bits of their conversations
with him. You might go on and make a story of some length out of this.
Show whether the stranger really has any reason for concealing his
identity. Does he get into any trouble? Does an accident reveal who he
is and why he is in the town? Does some one find out by spying upon him?
Or does he tell all about himself, when the right time comes?

Perhaps you can put the story into the form of a series of brief
conversations about the stranger or with him.

=An Incident of the Civil War=:--Select some historical incident, or one
that you have heard from an old soldier, and tell it simply and vividly
in your own words.


COLLATERAL READINGS

The Story of a Bad Boy                   Thomas Bailey Aldrich
Marjorie Daw and Other People              "      "      "
The Stillwater Tragedy                     "      "      "
Prudence Palfrey                           "      "      "
From Ponkapog to Pesth                     "      "      "
The Queen of Sheba                         "      "      "
A Sea Turn and Other Matters               "      "      "
For Bravery on the Field of Battle
  (in _Two Bites at a Cherry_)             "      "      "
The Return of a Private
  (in _Main-Travelled Roads_)            Hamlin Garland
On the Eve of the Fourth                 Harold Frederic
Marse Chan                               Thomas Nelson Page
Meh Lady                                   "     "      "
The Burial of the Guns                     "     "      "
Red Rock                                   "     "      "
The Long Roll                            Mary Johnston
Cease Firing                               "      "
The Crisis                               Winston Churchill
Where the Battle was Fought              Mary N. Murfree
The Little Shepherd of Kingdom Come      John Fox, Jr.
Hospital Sketches                        Louisa M. Alcott
A Blockaded Family                       P.A. Hague
He Knew Lincoln[2]                       Ida Tarbell
The Perfect Tribute[3]                   M.R.S. Andrews
The Toy Shop[4]                          M.S. Gerry
Thomas Bailey Aldrich                    Ferris Greenslet
Park Street Papers, pp. 143-70           Bliss Perry
American Writers of To-day, pp. 104-23   H.C. Vedder
American Authors and their Homes,
  pp. 89-98                              F.W. Halsey
American Authors at Home, pp. 3-16       J.L. and J.B. Gilder
Literary Pilgrimages in New England,
  pp. 89-97                              E.M. Bacon
Thomas Bailey Aldrich (poem)             Henry van Dyke

For biographies and criticisms of Thomas B. Aldrich, see also: Outlook,
86:922, August 24, 1907; 84:735, November 24, 1906; 85:737, March 30,
1907. Bookman, 24:317, December, 1906 (Portrait); also 25:218
(Portrait). Current Literature, 42:49, January, 1907 (Portrait).
Chautauquan, 65:168, January, 1912.




PAN IN WALL STREET

A.D. 1867

EDMUND CLARENCE STEDMAN


    Just where the Treasury's marble front
      Looks over Wall Street's mingled nations;
    Where Jews and Gentiles most are wont
      To throng for trade and last quotations;
    Where, hour by hour, the rates of gold
      Outrival, in the ears of people,
    The quarter-chimes, serenely tolled
      From Trinity's undaunted steeple,--

    Even there I heard a strange, wild strain
      Sound high above the modern clamor,
    Above the cries of greed and gain,
      The curbstone war, the auction's hammer;
    And swift, on Music's misty ways,
      It led, from all this strife for millions.
    To ancient, sweet-do-nothing days
      Among the kirtle-robed Sicilians.

    And as it stilled the multitude,
      And yet more joyous rose, and shriller,
    I saw the minstrel where he stood
      At ease against a Doric pillar:
    One hand a droning organ played,
      The other held a Pan's-pipe (fashioned
    Like those of old) to lips that made
      The reeds give out that strain impassioned.

    'Twas Pan himself had wandered here
      A-strolling through this sordid city,
    And piping to the civic ear
      The prelude of some pastoral ditty!
    The demigod had crossed the seas,--
      From haunts of shepherd, nymph, and satyr,
    And Syracusan times,--to these
      Far shores and twenty centuries later.

    A ragged cap was on his head;
      But--hidden thus--there was no doubting
    That, all with crispy locks o'erspread,
      His gnarled horns were somewhere sprouting;
    His club-feet, cased in rusty shoes,
      Were crossed, as on some frieze you see them,
    And trousers, patched of divers hues,
      Concealed his crooked shanks beneath them.

    He filled the quivering reeds with sound,
      And o'er his mouth their changes shifted,
    And with his goat's-eyes looked around
      Where'er the passing current drifted;
    And soon, as on Trinacrian hills
      The nymphs and herdsmen ran to hear him,
    Even now the tradesmen from their tills,
      With clerks and porters, crowded near him.

    The bulls and bears together drew
      From Jauncey Court and New Street Alley,
    As erst, if pastorals be true,
      Came beasts from every wooded valley;
    And random passers stayed to list,--
      A boxer AEgon, rough and merry,
    A Broadway Daphnis, on his tryst
      With Nais at the Brooklyn Ferry.

    A one-eyed Cyclops halted long
      In tattered cloak of army pattern,
    And Galatea joined the throng,--
      A blowsy apple-vending slattern;
    While old Silenus staggered out
      From some new-fangled lunch-house handy,
    And bade the piper, with a shout,
      To strike up Yankee Doodle Dandy!

    A newsboy and a peanut-girl
      Like little Fauns began to caper;
    His hair was all in tangled curl,
      Her tawny legs were bare and taper;
    And still the gathering larger grew,
      And gave its pence and crowded nigher,
    While aye the shepherd-minstrel blew
      His pipe, and struck the gamut higher.

    O heart of Nature, beating still
      With throbs her vernal passion taught her,--
    Even here, as on the vine-clad hill,
      Or by the Arethusan water!
    New forms may fold the speech, new lands
      Arise within these ocean-portals,
    But Music waves eternal wands,--
      Enchantress of the souls of mortals!

    So thought I,--but among us trod
      A man in blue, with legal baton,
    And scoffed the vagrant demigod,
      And pushed him from the step I sat on.
    Doubting I mused upon the cry,
      "Great Pan is dead!"--and all the people
    Went on their ways:--and clear and high
      The quarter sounded from the steeple.


NOTES

=Wall Street=:--An old street in New York faced by the Stock Exchange
and the offices of the wealthiest bankers and brokers.

=the Treasury=:--The Sub-Treasury Building.

=last quotations=:--The latest information on stock values given out
before the Stock Exchange closes.

=Trinity=:--The famous old church that stands at the head of Wall
Street.

=curbstone war=:--The clamorous quoting, auctioning, and bidding of
stock out on the street curb, where the "curb brokers"--brokers who do
not have seats on the Stock Exchange--do business.

=sweet-do-nothing=:--A translation of an Italian expression, _dolce far
niente_.

=Sicilians=:--Theocritus (3rd century before Christ), the Greek pastoral
poet, wrote of the happy life of the shepherds and shepherdesses in
Sicily.

=Doric pillar=:--A heavy marble pillar, such as was used in the
architecture of the Dorians in Greece.

=Pan's pipe=:--Pan was the Greek god of shepherds, and patron of fishing
and hunting. He is represented as having the head and body of a man,
with the legs, horns, and tail of a goat. It was said that he invented
the shepherd's pipe or flute, which he made from reeds plucked on the
bank of a stream.

=pastoral ditty=:--A poem about shepherds and the happy outdoor life.
The word pastoral comes from the Latin _pastor_, shepherd.

=Syracusan times=:--Syracuse was an important city in Sicily. See the
note on Sicilians, above.

=Trinacrian hills=:--Trinacria is an old name for Sicily.

=bulls and bears=:--A bull, on the Stock Exchange, is one who operates
in expectation of a rise in stocks; a bear is a person who sells stocks
in expectation of a fall in the market.

=Jauncey Court=:--The Jauncey family were prominent in the early New
York days. This court was probably named after them.

=AEgon=:--Usually spelled AEgaeon; another name for Briareus, a monster
with a hundred arms.

=Daphnis=:--In Greek myth, a shepherd who loved music.

=Nais=:--In Greek myth, a happy young girl, a nymph.

=Cyclops=:--One of a race of giants having but one eye--in the middle of
the forehead. These giants helped Vulcan at his forge under Aetna.

=Galatea=:--A sea-nymph beloved by the Cyclops Polyphemus.

=Silenus=:--The foster-father and companion of Bacchus, god of wine. In
pictures and sculpture Silenus is usually represented as intoxicated.

=Fauns=:--Fabled beings, half goat and half man.

=Arethusan water=:--Arethusa, in Greek myth, was a wood-nymph, who was
pursued by the river Alpheus. She was changed into a fountain, and ran
under the sea to Sicily, where she rose near the city of Syracuse.
Shelley has a poem on Arethusa.

=baton=:--A rod or wand; here, of course, a policeman's club.


SUGGESTIONS FOR STUDY

The author sees an organ-grinder playing his gay tunes in Wall Street,
New York, among the buildings where enormous financial transactions are
carried on. He (the author) imagines this wandering minstrel to be Pan
himself, assuming a modern form. Read the notes carefully for what is
said about Pan. Notice, in the poem, how skillfully the author brings
out the contrast between the easy-going days of ancient Greece and the
busy, rushing times of modern America. Of what value is the word
_serenely_ in the first stanza? What is the "curbstone war"? Do you
think the old-fashioned Pan's pipe is common now? Could a man play an
organ and a pipe at the same time? Why is the city spoken of as
"sordid"? What is the "civic ear"? In the description of the player, how
is the idea of his being Pan emphasized? How was it that the bulls and
bears drew together? In plain words who were the people whom the author
describes under Greek names? Show how aptly the mythological characters
are fitted to modern persons. Read carefully what is said about the
power of music, in the stanza beginning "O heart of Nature." Who was the
man in blue? Why did he interfere? Why is the organ-grinder called a
"vagrant demigod"? What was it that the author doubted? What is meant
here by "Great Pan is dead"? Does the author mean more than the mere
words seem to express? Do you think that people are any happier in these
commercial times than they were in ancient Greece? After you have
studied the poem and mastered all the references, read the poem through,
thinking of its meaning and its lively measure.

Read Mrs. Browning's poem, _A Musical Instrument_, which is about Pan
and his pipe of reeds.


COLLATERAL READINGS

