flash of fire ran along it.

"Shoulder to shoulder, men," Captain Mallett shouted. "Give them
the bayonet."

With a hoarse roar of rage, for many of their comrades had fallen,
the company rushed forward and burst through the line of mutineers
as if it had been a sheet of paper. Then they divided, and Captain
Mallett with half the company turned to the right. Marshall took
the other wing to the left.

Encouraged by the smallness of the number of their assailants, the
mutineers, cheered on by their officers, resisted stoutly. A
scattering fire opened upon the British from the houses round, and
the shouts of the mutineers rose louder and louder, when a heavy
volley was suddenly poured into them, and the Punjaubies rushed out
from the street facing that by which the British had entered. They
bore to the right, and fell upon the body with which Marshall was
engaged.

The Sepoys, taken wholly by surprise, at once lost heart. Cheering
loudly, the British attacked them with increased ardour, while the
Punjaubies flung themselves into their midst. In an instant, that
flank of the Sepoys was scattered in headlong flight, hotly pursued
by their foes. There was no firing, for the muskets were all empty;
but the bayonet did its work, and the open space and the streets
leading from it were thickly strewn with dead.

The Sepoys attacked by Captain Mallett's party, on the other hand,
though shaken for a moment, stood firm; led by two or three native
officers, who, fighting with the greatest bravery, exhorted their
men to continue their resistance.

"Would you rather be hung than fight?" they shouted. "They are but
a handful; we are five to one against them. Forward, men, and
exterminate these Feringhees before the others can come back to
their assistance."

The Sepoys were now the assailants, and with furious shouts pressed
round the little body of British troops.

"Steady, men, steady," Captain Mallett shouted, as he drove his
sword through the body of one of the rebel leaders who rushed at
him. "Keep together, back to back. We shall have help here in a
minute."

It was longer than that, however, before relief came. For three or
four minutes a desperate struggle went on, then Marshall's voice
was heard shouting:

"This way, men, this way!"

A moment later there was a surging movement in the ranks of the
insurgents, and with a dozen men Marshall burst through them, and
joined the party. These at once fell furiously upon the mutineers,
and the latter were already giving way when some fifty of the
Punjaubies, led by their officers, fell upon them.

The effect was decisive. The Sepoys scattered at once, and fled in
all directions, pursued by the furious soldiers and the Punjaubies.
Reaching the walls, the fugitives leapt recklessly down. Forty or
fifty of them were cut down by the cavalry, but the greater portion
reached the broken ground in safety. Here the cavalry could not
follow them, for the ground was covered with rocks and boulders
concealed by the bushes. In the village itself three hundred and
fifty lay dead.

"Thanks, Marshall," Frank Mallett said, when the fight in the
village was over. "You arrived just in time, for it was going very
hard with us. Altogether it was more than we bargained for, for
they were certainly over a thousand strong. They must have been
joined by a very strong party yesterday."

"I ought not to have gone so far," Marshall replied, "but I had no
idea that all the Punjaubies had come to our side of the fight. The
men were so eager that I had the greatest difficulty in getting
them off the pursuit. Fortunately I met Herbert, and learned that
all his men were with us. Then I gathered a dozen of our fellows,
and rushed off, telling him to follow as soon as he could get some
of his men together.

"You can imagine what agony I felt when, as I entered the open
space, I saw a surging mass of Sepoys, and no sign of any of you;
and how I cursed my own folly, and what delight I felt, as on
cutting our way through we found that you were still on your feet."

"Yes, it was a close shave, Marshall; another two or three minutes
and it would have been all over. The men fought like lions, as you
can see by the piled-up dead there. Half of them were down, and
twenty men cannot hold out long against four or five hundred.

"We owe our lives to you beyond all question. I don't see that you
were in the least to blame in the matter, for naturally you would
suppose that some of the Punjaubies would have joined us. Besides,
it was of course essential that you should not give the Sepoys time
to rally, but should follow them up hotly.

"Where is Anstruther?"

"I don't know. I have not seen him since we entered the square."

"Have any of you seen Mr. Anstruther?" Captain Mallett asked,
turning to some soldiers standing near.

"He is lying over there, sir," one of the men said. "He was just in
front of me when the Pandies fired that volley at us as we came out
of the streets, and he pitched forward and fell like a stone. I
think that he was shot through the head, sir."

They went across to the spot. The ensign lay there shot through the
brain. Four or five soldiers lay round him; one of them was dead,
the others more or less seriously wounded.

"Sound the assembly," Captain Mallett said, as he turned away
sadly, to a bugler. "Let us see what our losses are."



Chapter 4.

The bugle sounded, and in a short time the infantry fell in. They
had been engaged in searching the houses for mutineers. The
Punjaubies had lost but five killed and thirteen wounded, while of
the whites an officer and eighteen men were killed and sixteen
wounded; nine of the former having fallen in the bayonet struggle
with the Sepoys. Nine guns were captured, none of which had been
fired, the attack having been so sudden that the Sepoys had only
had time to fall in before their assailants were upon them.

"It is a creditable victory," Mallett said, "considering that we
had to face more than double the number that we expected. Our
casualties are heavy, but they are nothing to those of the
mutineers.

"Sergeant, take a file of men and go round and count the number of
the enemy who have fallen.

"Ah, here comes a Sowar, and we shall hear what the cavalry have
been doing outside."

The trooper handed him a paper: "Fifty-three of the enemy killed,
the rest escaped into the jungle. On our side two wounded; one
seriously, one slightly."

"That is as well as we could expect, Marshall. Of course, most of
them got over the wall at the back. You see, all our plans were
disarranged by finding them in such unexpected strength. Had we
been able to thrash them by ourselves, the Punjaubies would have
cut off the retreat in that direction. As it was, that part of the
business is a failure."

The Sergeant presently returned.

"There are 340 in the streets, sir," he reported; "and I reckon
there are another 20 or 30 killed in the houses, but I have not
searched them yet."

"That is sufficiently close; upwards of 400 is good enough.

"Now, Mr. Marshall, set the men to work making stretchers to carry
the wounded.

"Mr. Herbert, will you tell off a party of your men to dig a large
grave outside the village for the killed, and a small one apart for
Mr. Anstruther? Poor fellow, I am sorry indeed at his loss; he
would have made a fine officer.

"Sergeant Hugging, take a party and search the village for
provisions. We have got bread, but lay hands on any fowls or goats
that you can find, and there may be some sheep."

While this party was away, another tore down the woodwork of an
empty house, and fires were soon burning, an abundance of fowl and
goats having been obtained. The cavalry had by this time come in.

While the meal was being cooked the British and Punjaub dead were
carried out to the spot where the grave had been dug. The troops
had a hearty meal, and then marched out from the village. They were
drawn up round the graves, and the bodies were laid reverently in
them. Captain Mallett said a few words over them; the earth was
then shovelled in and levelled, and the troops marched to a wood a
mile distant, where they halted until the heat of the day was over.
They returned by the direct road to the camp, which they reached at
midnight.

All concerned gained great credit for the heavy blow that had been
inflicted on the mutineers, and the affair was highly spoken of in
the Brigadier's report to the Commander in Chief. Shortly
afterwards Mallett's name appeared in general orders as promoted to
a brevet Majority, pending a confirmation by the home authorities.

Two days after the return of the little column, the brigade marched
and joined the force collected at Cawnpore for the final operation
against Lucknow, and on the 3rd of March reached the Commander in
Chief at the Dil Koosha, which had been captured with the same ease
as on the occasion of the former advance.

They found that while the main body had gathered there, 6,000 men
under Sir James Outram had crossed the Goomtee from the Alum Bagh,
and, after defeating two serious attacks by the enemy, had taken up
a position at Chinhut. On the 9th, Sir Colin Campbell captured the
Martiniere with trifling loss. On the 11th General Outram pushed
his advance as far as the iron bridge, and established batteries
commanding the passage of the stone bridge also. On the 12th the
Imambarra was breached and stormed, and the troops pressed so hotly
on the flying enemy that they entered the Kaiser Bagh, the
strongest fortified palace in the city, and drove the enemy from
it.

The  ----th was engaged in this action, and Major Mallett was leading
his company to the assault on the Imambarra when a shot brought him
to the ground. When he recovered his senses he found himself in a
chamber that had been hastily converted into a hospital, with the
regimental doctor leaning over him.

"What has happened?" he asked.

"You have been hit, Mallett, and have had a very close shave of it,
indeed; but as it is, you will soon be about again."

"Where was I hit? I don't feel any pain."

"You were hit in the neck, about half an inch above the collarbone,
and the ball has gone through the muscles of the neck; and beyond
the fact that you won't be able to turn your head for some time,
you will be none the worse for it. An inch further to the right, or
an inch lower or higher, and it would have been fatal. It was not
one of the enemy who did you this service, for the ball went up
from behind, and came out in front; it is evidently a random shot
from one of our own fellows."

"I am always more afraid of a shot from behind than I am of one in
front when I am leading the company, doctor. The men get so excited
that they blaze away anyhow, and in the smoke are just as likely to
hit an officer two or three paces ahead of them as an enemy. How
long have I been insensible?"

"You were brought in here half an hour ago, and I don't suppose
that you had lain many minutes on the ground before you were picked
up."

"Have we taken the Imambarra?"

"Yes, and what is better still, our fellows rushed into the Kaiser
Bagh at the heels of the enemy. We got the news ten minutes ago."

"That is good indeed. We anticipated desperate fighting before we
took that."

"Yes, it was an unlucky shot, Mallett, that knocked you out of your
share in the loot. We have always heard that the place was full of
treasure and jewels."

"If there is no one else who wants your attention, doctor, I advise
you to join the regiment there for an hour or two. As for me, I
care nothing about the loot. There are plenty of fellows who will
benefit by it more than I should, and I give up my share
willingly."

The doctor shook his head.

"I am afraid I cannot do that; but, between ourselves, I have let
Ferguson slip away, and he is to divide what he gets with me."

"Have we any wounded?"

"I don't know yet. The whole thing was done so suddenly that the
loss cannot have been heavy. I was in the rear of the brigade when
you were brought in, and as the case at first looked bad, I got
some of the stretcher men with me to burst open the door of this
house and established a dozen temporary beds here. As you see,
there are only four others tenanted, and they are all hopeless
cases. No doubt the rest have all been carried off to the rear, as
only the men who helped me would have known of this place.

"Now that you have come round, I will send a couple of hospital
orderlies in here and be off myself to the hospital in the rear. I
will look in again this evening."

In a short time the doctor returned with an orderly.

"I cannot find another now," he said, "but one will be enough. Here
is a flask of brandy, and he will find you water somewhere. There
is nothing to be done for any of you at present, except to give you
drink when you want it."

Two hours later Marshall came in.

"Thank God you are not dangerously hurt, Mallett," he said. "I only
heard that you were down three-quarters of an hour ago, when I ran
against Armstrong in the Kaiser Bagh. He told me that he had seen
you fall at the beginning of the fight, and I got leave from the
Colonel to look for you. At the hospital, no one seemed to know
anything about you, but I luckily came across Jefferies, who told
me where to find you, and that your wound was not serious, so I
hurried back here. He said that you would be taken to the hospital
this evening."

"Yes, I am in luck again. Like the last it is only a flesh wound,
though it is rather worse, for I expect that I shall have to go
about with a stiff neck for some weeks to come, and it is
disgusting being laid up in the middle of an affair like this. Have
we lost many fellows?"

"No. Scobell is the only officer killed. Hunter, Groves and
Parkinson are wounded--Parkinson, they say, seriously. We have
twenty-two rank and file killed, and twenty or thirty wounded. I
have not seen the returns."

"And how about the loot, Marshall?" Mallett said, with a smile.
"Was that all humbug?"

"It is stupendous. We were among the first at the Kaiser Bagh, and
I don't believe that there is a man who has not got his pockets
stuffed with gold coins. There were chests and chests full. They
did not bother about the jewels--I think they took them for
coloured glass. I kept my eyes open, and picked up enough to pay my
debt to you five times over."

"I am heartily glad of that, Marshall. Don't let it slip through
your fingers again."

"That you may be sure I won't. I shall send them all home to our
agent to sell, and have the money put by for purchasing my next
step. I have had my lesson, and it will last me for life.

"Well, I must be going now, old man. The Colonel did not like
letting me go, as of course the men want looking after, and the
Pandies may make an effort to drive us out of the Kaiser Bagh
again; so goodbye. If I can get away this evening I will come to
see you at the hospital."

A week later Frank Mallett was sitting in a chair by his bedside.
The fighting was all over, and a strange quiet had succeeded the
long roar of battle. His neck was strapped up with bandages, and
save that he was unable to move his head in the slightest degree,
he felt well enough to take his place with the regiment again. Many
of his fellow officers dropped in from time to time for a short
chat, but the duty was heavy. All open resistance had ceased, but
the troops were engaged in searching the houses, and turning out
all rough characters who had made Lucknow their centre, and had no
visible means of subsistence. Large gangs of the lower class
population were set to work to bury the dead, which would otherwise
have rendered the city uninhabitable. Strong guards were posted at
night, alike to prevent soldiers from wandering in search of loot
and to prevent fanatics from making sudden attacks.

"There is a wounded man in the hospital across the road who wants
to see you, Mallett," the surgeon said one morning. "He belongs to
your company, but as he only came out with the last draft, and was
transferred only on the day that the fighting began, I don't
suppose you know him. He said I was to tell you his name was George
Lechmere, though he enlisted as John Hilton."

"I seem to know the name, doctor, though I don't remember at
present where I came across him. I suppose I can go in to see him?"

"Oh, yes, there is no objection whatever. Your wound is doing as
well as can be; though, of course, you are still weak from loss of
blood. I shall send you up this afternoon to the hospital just
established in the park of the Dil Koosha. We shall get you all out
as soon as we can, for the stench of this town at present is
dreadful, and wounds cannot be expected to do well in such a
poisoned atmosphere."

"Is this man badly hit, doctor?"

"Very dangerously. I have scarcely a hope of saving him, and think
it probable that he may not live another twenty-four hours. Of
course, he may take a change for the better. I will take you to
him. I have finished here now."

"It must have been a bad time for you, doctor," Mallett said, as
they went across.

"Tremendously hard, but most interesting. I had not had more than
two hours' sleep at a time since the fighting began, till last
night, and then I could not keep up any longer. Of course, it has
been the same with us all, and the heat has made it very trying. I
am particularly anxious to get the wounded well out of the place,
for now that the excitement is over I expect an outbreak of fever
or dysentery.

"There, that is your man in the corner bed over there."

Mallett went over to the bedside, and looked at the wounded man.
His face was drawn and pinched, his eyes sunken in his head, his
face deadly pale, and his hair matted with perspiration.

"Do you know me, Captain Mallett?"

"No, lad, I cannot say that I do, though when the doctor told me
your name it seemed familiar to me. Very likely I should have
recognised you if I had met you a week since, but, you see, we are
both altered a good deal from the effect of our wounds."

"I am the son of Farmer Lechmere, your tenant."

"Good heavens! man. You don't mean to say you are Lechmere's eldest
son, George! What in the world brought you to this?"

"You did," the man said, sternly. "Your villainy brought me here."

Frank Mallett gave a start of astonishment that cost him so violent
a twinge in his wound that he almost cried out with sudden pain.

"What wild idea have you got into your head, my poor fellow?" he
said soothingly. "I am conscious of having done no wrong to you or
yours. I saw your father and mother on the afternoon before I came
away. They made no complaint of anything."

"No, they were contented enough. Do you know, Captain Mallett, that
I loved Martha Bennett?"

