that hateful old wretch, the sorority could adopt her. She could stay
with each one of us for a month. That would be eight months, and at the
end of that time she would have finished her sophomore year. Then she
could get something pleasant to do through the summer vacation. That
would give her some money for clothes for next year. Perhaps by that
time we could find some nice people for her to stay with, or if we
liked her well enough, we could go on having her with us. I'll ask my
mother to-morrow, and you girls might do the same."

"Miriam Nesbit, what a perfectly lovely plan!" exclaimed Grace Harlowe
with rapture. "I feel sure mother would let me have her."

"She can come here any time," said Jessica. "Papa allows me to do as
I like."

"'First catch your bird,'" said Nora wisely. "Don't plan too much, until
you find out whether you can snatch her from the dragon's claws."

"I feel sure we shall win," replied Grace confidently. "What do you
girls think of it?" she asked, turning to Eva, Marian and Eleanor, who
had so far expressed no opinion.

"Count us in," said Eva and Marian in a breath.

"And you, Eleanor?" asked Grace.

"She can live at our house forever, if she doesn't disturb me," replied
Eleanor lazily. "My aunt won't care, either. When we lived in Spain she
used to help every beggar we came across, and Spain is a land of
beggars. She never can resist an appeal for charity."

There was a sudden silence. Then Grace said gently, although she felt
irritated at Eleanor's careless speech: "I don't think Mabel Allison
could really be called a beggar; and if we adopt her, we ought never to
let her think that we consider her a dependent. Of course we know very
little about her yet, but I think she will prove worthy. I am to see her
to-morrow, and perhaps it would be better to talk a little more with her
before we tell Jessica's father about it."

Eleanor looked at Grace with an amused smile.

"How serious you girls are," she said. "Is it school that makes you so?
If it is, I don't think I shall stay long. I like to drift along and do
only what my inclination prompts me to do. I hate responsibility of any
sort."

"Perhaps you will feel differently about school after a while," said
Anne quietly. "This is my third year in Oakdale High School, and I never
had any good times until I came here. As for responsibility, it is a
good thing to learn to be responsible for one's self, if for no one
else."

"Well, perhaps you are right, but I am sure that if you had never lived
long enough in one country to become acclimated, you wouldn't feel very
responsible, either," said Eleanor in such rueful tones that the girls
laughed, although they secretly disapproved of Eleanor's inconsequential
attitude.

"Did you think the examinations hard?" asked Jessica of Eleanor.

"Oh, no," replied Eleanor lightly. "I had an English governess who was
with us for five years. She drilled me thoroughly in English and
mathematics. I loathed them both, but studied them merely to show her
that I could master them. Miss Thompson said my work was good, and that
if I were ambitious she would put me in the senior class, but I held out
for the juniors and finally got my own way. If you are going to take
such a serious view of this gay world, however, perhaps I'll wish
I had joined the seniors, after all. No, I don't mean that. I'm awfully
glad to know you, and feel honored at being a member of your sorority.
Only I don't expect to ever be a very useful one. My aunt has spoiled
me, and I frankly admit it. So, you see, there is no hope for me." She
spread out both hands in a deprecating manner and shrugged her shoulders
exactly as a French woman might have done.

"I am sure we like you, just as you are," said Eva Allen warmly. She had
been rather impressed with Eleanor.

"Do you see the time?" said Nora, suddenly pointing to the old-fashioned
clock in the corner. "Half past ten! I must go this minute. Sister will
be worried."

She immediately made for her hat and coat, the others following suit,
with the exception of Eleanor, who was to wait until the coachman came
for her.

Once the girls were outside the gate, Marian Barber broke out with:
"What a queer girl that Eleanor Savell is. She is beautiful and
fascinating, but I don't know whether I like her or not."

"You must like her," said Grace. "You know the members of this society
must stand by each other."

"But why did you ask her to join, Grace?" persisted Marian. "She is
different from the rest of us. I don't believe we shall get along with
her very well."

"I'll tell you girls a secret," replied Grace. "Anne and Nora already
know it. Mrs. Gray wants us to be nice to Eleanor for a number of
reasons, and, of course, we wish to please her. Anne, Jessica, Nora and
I were talking about it the other day, and while we were laying plans
for this sorority, we decided to ask Eleanor to join. We thought we
could learn to know her better, and she would eventually become a good
comrade."

"It sounds ridiculous to talk about helping a clever girl like Eleanor,
but from her conversation to-night you can see that she needs some
wholesome advice occasionally," said Nora bluntly. "Mrs. Gray seems to
think we can be of some use in that direction, so we are trying to carry
out her theory."

"I think I understand the situation," said Miriam Nesbit, "and will do
all I can to be nice to her, if she doesn't attempt to patronize me.
I couldn't stand that. I know I used to do it. I suppose that's why it
seems so unendurable to me now."

"David Nesbit didn't disturb us, after all," remarked Eva Allen. "It's a
wonder those boys didn't put tick-tacks on the windows or do something
like that."

The girls had come to the turn of the street, and were about to pass the
only really lonely spot during their walk. It was an old colonial
residence, the surrounding grounds extending for a block. It had been
untenanted for some time, as the owners were in Europe, although both
house and grounds were looked after by a care-taker. On the other side
of the street was a field where the small fry of Oakdale usually held
their ball games.

"I always hate passing this old house," said Marian Barber. "It is so
terribly still back there among those pines. I don't----"

She stopped short, an expression of terror overspreading her
good-natured face, as she mutely pointed toward the old house. Three
ghostly figures swathed in white stole out from the shadow of the pines
and glided down the wide, graveled drive toward the gate. Their
appearance was terrifying. Their faces were white as their robes, and
blue flames played about their eyes. They carried out in every
particular the description of the regulation churchyard ghost.

For an instant the six girls stood still, regarding those strange
apparitions with fascinated terror. Then Eva Allen and Marian Barber
shrieked in unison and fled down the street as fast as their legs would
carry them. Grace, Nora, Anne and Miriam stood their ground and awaited
the oncoming spectres, who halted when they saw that the girls did not
intend to run.

"High School boys, on a lark," whispered Grace to her friends. "Let's
charge them in a body."

With a bound she reached the drive, closely followed by the other girls.
The ghostly three evidently considering discretion the better part of
valor, left the drive and took to their heels across the lawn. But
Grace, who was well in the lead, caught the last fleeing ghost by its
robe and held on for dear life. There was a sound of rending cloth as
the apparition bounded forward, then it caught its spectre toe on a
tuft of long grass and fell forward with a decidedly human thud.

The girls surrounded it in an instant. Before it had time to rise, Grace
snatched off a white mask smeared around the eye-holes with phosphorus,
which explained the flamelike effect, and disclosed the sheepish face of
James Gardiner, one of the sophomore class.

"Oh, let a fellow up, will you?" he said, with a sickly grin.

"You bad boy!" exclaimed Grace. "What do you mean by dressing up like
this? Don't you know you might frighten some timid person terribly?"

"Initiation," said the youth, with a grin, rising on his elbow and
looking as though he would like to make a sudden break for liberty.
"Part of the sacred obligations of the 'Knights and Squires' frat. Three
fellows of us were initiated to-night. This was the last stunt."

"Well, I suppose under those circumstances we shall have to forgive you.
Did you appear to any one else?" asked Grace.

"Only to that old crank Miss Brant. She was scared out of her wits,"
replied James, laughing. "Two of your crowd got out in a hurry, too,
didn't they?"

"I suppose I shall have to confess that they did," replied Grace. "If
I were you, James, I'd take off that costume and hurry away. Miss Brant
is liable to inform the police, and they might not look at initiation
stunts as we do."

"That's right," said James, looking a trifle alarmed. "Wonder where the
fellows went. I'd better put them on. We never thought of that. If you
girls will excuse me, I'll hunt them up."

"Certainly," said the girls. "Good night, James."

"Good night," replied the youth. "You girls are all right. Can't scare
you." With a nod to them he started across the grass on the run, his
ghostly garments trailing behind him.

"I'm glad that wasn't David," said Anne as James disappeared. "I was
afraid when first I saw them that they might be our boys. I didn't feel
frightened at all, after what Grace had said about meeting David."

"Eva and Marian didn't show any great amount of courage," said Nora,
laughing. "I wonder if they ran all the way home."

"There they are ahead of us," said Anne.

True enough, the two girls stood on the corner waiting for the others to
come up.

"Why don't you hurry on home?" called Nora. "'The goblins will git you,
ef you don't watch out.'"

"Don't tease," said Marian Barber, looking rather foolish. "We are
awfully sorry we ran away, but when I saw those awful white figures
coming toward us, I just had to run and so did Eva. Who on earth were
they, and where did they go?"

In a few words Grace told her what had happened.

"That horrid James Gardiner. I'll never speak to him again," cried Eva
Allen. "I hope he didn't recognize us. He'll tell every one in school
about it."

"I don't think he did," replied Grace. "Oh, look, girls! Here comes
Officer Donavan! I was right when I said that Miss Brant would notify
the police."

"I hope she got a good scare," remarked Nora wickedly. "As for the
ghosts, they are very likely at home by this time."




CHAPTER VI

A VISIT TO ELEANOR


The next day, when Grace, in company with her chums, left the school
building, they beheld the shabby little figure of Mabel Allison waiting
for them just outside the campus. She looked shy and embarrassed when
she saw the four girls bearing down upon her, and seemed half inclined
to run away. Grace greeted her cordially and introduced her to her
chums, whose simple and unaffected manners soon put her at her ease.

"I am so glad you waited," said Grace cordially. "I have told my three
friends about you, as I knew they would be as much interested in you as
I am. We have made a plan and if we can carry it out, you will be able
to go to school until you graduate."

"You are very good to take so much trouble for me," said Mabel, the
tears springing to her eyes; "but I'm afraid it won't do any good."

"Don't be down-hearted," said Nora sympathetically. "You don't know
Grace Harlowe. She always does whatever she sets out to do."

"She's a regular fairy godmother," said Anne softly. "I know from
experience."

"Such flattery is overwhelming," murmured Grace. "I regret that I'm too
busy to bow my thanks. But to get down to the business of the hour--tell
me, Mabel, dear--did this Miss Brant legally adopt you when she took you
from the orphanage, or are you bound to her in any way?"

"I don't know," said the girl, her eyes growing big with wonder. "I never
thought about it. I don't believe, however, that she has any legal claim
upon me."

"Is there any way in which you can find out?" asked Anne.

"Why, yes," replied Mabel. "I could write the woman at the orphanage who
was good to me. She is still there, and several times she has written to
me, but Miss Brant read her letters first and then tore them up. Her
name is Mary Stevens, and she would surely know!"

"Then write to her at once," said Grace, "and tell her to send her
letter in an outside envelope addressed to me. Your whole future depends
upon her answer."

Grace thereupon related to her their conversation of the previous night.

"As soon as you find out about Miss Brant's claim, we shall take the
matter to Jessica's father, who is a lawyer. He will help us," Grace
concluded. "Then when you are free, we shall have something else to
tell you. Just be patient for a few days, and don't be afraid.
Everything will come right."

"How can I ever thank you all?" said Mabel, taking one of Grace's hands
between hers and looking at her with a world of gratitude in her eyes.
"I will write to-night. I must go now or I shall be home late. Forgive
me for hurrying away, but I daren't stay," she added piteously. "You
know that I should like to. Good-bye, and thank you again."

"Good-bye," called Grace. "I'll let you know as soon as I hear from Mary
Stevens."

"What a sweet little girl she is," said Jessica. "I should like to keep
her with me all the time."

"She is a nice child," said Grace, "and she deserves something better
than her present fate."

"To change the subject," said Nora, "has any one seen Eleanor to-day?
She was not in English or geometry, although she may have come in late."

"I don't believe she was in school at all," said Anne. "Maybe the
initiation was too much for her."

"Oh, I don't know. She didn't seem to mind it," remarked Jessica. "She
will hear from Miss Thompson if she makes a practice of staying out of
school. Attendance is one of the chief requisites in Miss Thompson's
eyes."

"I suppose we ought to call on Eleanor before long," mused Grace. "She
has invited us, and it's our duty to call on her first. Anne has already
been there. Suppose we go over now; that is, unless you girls have
something else to do."

It was decided at once that they could go, and soon the four chums were
walking briskly down the street in the direction of "Heartsease." It was
an Indian summer day and the girls congratulated themselves on having
taken advantage of it. As school had closed at half past two, it was not
yet four o'clock. They would have plenty of time for their call without
hurrying themselves. So they strolled along, laughing and chatting in
the care-free manner that belongs alone to the school girl.

As they neared the house one and all exclaimed at the beauty of the
grounds. The lawn looked like a great stretch of green velvet, while the
trees were gorgeous in their autumn glory of crimson and gold, with here
and there a patch of russet by way of contrast. Over at one side were
clumps of pink and white anemones; while all around the house and in the
garden beds that dotted the lawn many-colored chrysanthemums stood up in
brave array.

"What a delightful place 'Heartsease' is," cried Grace as she paused
just inside the gate to feast her eyes upon its beauty. "Sometimes
I think that autumn is the finest season of the year, and then again
I like spring better."

"What difference does the season make, so long as we have a good time?"
said Nora blithely. "I haven't any preference. They're all good."

"Eleanor will be surprised to see us," remarked Grace, as she rang the
bell.

"Let's hope she will appreciate the honor of having four such
distinguished persons descend upon her at one time," said Anne.

"Is Miss Savell in?" asked Grace to the trim maid who answered her ring.

"Yes, miss," replied the maid. "Come in. Who shall I say is here?"

"Say to Miss Savell that Grace Harlowe and her friends would like to see
her."

The maid soon reappeared and led the girls down the wide, old-fashioned
hall, and, somewhat to their surprise, ushered them into the dining
room, where they beheld Eleanor, arrayed in a dainty white house gown,
dining alone.

She arose as they entered and came forward with both hands outstretched.
"How are the Phi Sigma Taus to-day?" she asked. "It was awfully nice of
you to come and see me."
