        Sporting round the fairy queen.

    2.  Like the seasons of the year
        Round we circle in a sphere;
        I'll be Summer, you'll be Spring,
        Dancing in a fairy ring.

    3.  Spring and Summer glide away,
        Autumn comes with tresses gay;
        Winter, hand-in-hand with Spring,
        Dancing in a fairy ring.

    4.  Faster, faster round we go,
        While our cheeks with roses glow,
        Free as birds upon the wing,
        Dancing in a fairy ring.




NEEDLES.

PART 1.


    treat
    hol'-i-days
    aunt
    nee'-dles
    coils
    steel
    wire
    wrapped
    stretched
    straight
    ma-chine'
    un'-cle
    mid'-dle
    chop'-ping
    dropped
    e-nough'

1. Harry and Dora once had a great treat.

They went in the holidays to stay with an uncle and aunt who lived at a
town where needles were made. We may call it Needle-town.

2. While they were there, they were taken to the mills to see the
needles made.

3. The first room into which they went was very warm. It was called the
wire-room. A workman who was there told them that it was filled with hot
air night and day, so that no damp should come in and spoil the steel.

4. All round the room coils of steel-wire were hanging. They were
wrapped up in paper, but the man took some of them down and let them
look in. They saw that one coil was of very thick wire, while another
was of wire as fine as a hair.

5. 'One of these coils would be more than a mile long if it were
stretched out straight,' the man told Harry. 'Would you like to take
hold of this one?'

But Harry found it too heavy, and it was hung up again on the wall.

6. Then they went into another room, where a machine was cutting a coil
of wire into bits.

'They are much too long for needles,' said Dora, softly, to her uncle;
but one of the workmen heard her, and said:

7. 'So they are! Each bit is going to be two needles. The two ends are
to be the points, and the heads lie in the middle of the wire.'

8. But no heads were to be seen yet. And the wire was not even straight,
for it had long been rolled up in a coil. As the machine went on
chopping, and the wire-strips dropped, a man picked them up and put them
on a shelf in a sort of oven.

9. There they were kept till they were red-hot, and then they were soft
enough to be made straight.




NEEDLES.

PART 2.

[Illustration: 'Now you see the points of the needles.']


    points
    heads
    eyes
    un'-cle
    block
    heav'-y
    ham'-mer
    al-lowed'
    laugh'-ing
    watched
    piece
    sharp

1. The next thing that the children saw was a grindstone turning round
very, very fast.

2. A man put the bits of wire into a thing which was fixed just over the
grindstone, and both ends were quickly rubbed sharp.

3. 'Now you see the points of the needles,' said the man, as the wire
came out again.

'But there are no heads yet!' said Harry.

'And no eyes!' said Dora.

'Well, come along to the stamping-room,' said their uncle.

4. In this room they found a block of stone that had iron on the top of
it. Over it hung a heavy hammer. A man who stood there took one of the
wires, put it on the block, and made the hammer come down upon it.

5. The moment the hammer went up again the wire fell into a pan, and the
children were allowed to look at it.

6. Still there were no eyes or heads! All that could be seen were two
little dents, one on each side of the middle of the wire.

7. 'But, look again!' said uncle. 'Don't you see a tiny dot in each
dent? That is where the eye is going to be.'

8. In the next room they found a great number of boys at work.

'Oh, uncle,' said Harry, 'do you think I could come here and help to
make needles?'

'You would soon be tired of it,' said his uncle, laughing.

9. They went up to one of the boys, and watched him for some time. He
took some wires that had come from the stamping-room, and laid them on a
piece of iron, but held the two ends in his hands.

10. Then a heavy thing with two hard, sharp, steel points under it came
down on the middle part of the wires, and made two holes just where the
dots had been.

[Illustration]

'Now we see the eyes, at last!' cried Dora.




NEEDLES.

PART 3.


    thread'-ing
    to-geth'-er
    tooth'-comb
    smooth
    rough
    edg'-es
    nee'-dle
    thought
    ov'-en
    sec'-ond
    steam'-ing
    e-nough'
    break'-ing
    bench
    ham'-mer
    straight

1. They went on into another room. Here there were boys again! And what
were the boys doing? They were threading the wires together.

2. When they were all strung together, they looked like a long
tooth-comb. The heads were in the middle, and the points lay on either
side.

3. The boys took them to some of the workmen, and these men made the
middle part quite smooth. Rough edges had been left along the tiny
dents, and had to be rubbed down.

4. When this was done, a man made a line along the middle of the 'comb,'
and then gently bent it backwards and forwards till it broke right in
the middle.

[Illustration]

5. Harry and Dora were glad to see this. Each bit of wire looked like a
needle now. It had a head of its own, and an eye, and a point.

6. The next thing was to make the needles hard. Dora and Harry thought
they looked quite hard already, but they did not know.

7. How were they hardened? They were first laid on iron plates and put
into a kind of oven.

'This is the second baking they have had,' said Harry.

They were kept in till they were white-hot.

8. When the needles came out, they were put into cold water! What a
hissing and steaming they made! But they had to lie there till they were
quite cool.

9. Then they were taken out and dried. The man said they were hard
enough now, but something else must be done to them to make them able to
bend well without breaking.

10. They were put on an iron plate over a fire, and gently moved about.
Some of them curled up, and had to be taken off.

11. They were given to a woman, who was sitting on a bench with a little
hammer in her hand and a small steel block in front of her. She laid a
curly needle on the block, and hammered it till it was straight, and
then another, and another.




NEEDLES.

PART 4.


    clean'-ing
    piece
    can'-vas
    soap
    oil
    em'-er-y
    pow'-der
    bun'-dle
    man'-gle
    a-fraid'
    brok'-en
    sec'-ond
    Fri'-day
    points
    hun'-gry
    laugh'-ing

1. The cleaning of the needles came next.

2. A great many were laid side by side on a piece of canvas, and covered
with paste.

'What is the paste made of?' Harry wanted to know.

'Soft soap, my lad,' said the workman, 'and oil, and emery-powder.'

3. He rolled them all up in the canvas, tied string round the bundle,
and put it between the rollers of a thing that looked like a mangle.

4. Dora and Harry opened their eyes wide. 'Think of needles being
mangled! This will be something to tell mother!'

5. When the bundle was unrolled, they were afraid that the needles would
be broken. But they were all right, and they were taken out and washed
in warm soap-suds.

6. 'Now they must be clean!' said Dora.

'Not yet,' said the man; 'they have to be rolled up again with more
paste, and put between those rollers again, and again, and again. It
takes eight days to clean the best needles.

7. 'And it takes six days to clean the second-best,' said the man.

'Then even the second-best won't be done till Friday!' said Harry.

8. 'But we can go and see some needles that have been cleaned,' said his
uncle. 'Let us go up-stairs again.'

9. And they went up into a room where many girls were sitting at a long
table with heaps of bright needles before them. They were putting them
in order, side by side, heads all one way, points another.

Dora was sure that she could not pick them out so quickly.

10. They were going on into another room to see the eyes of the needles
made smooth, when Dora said, 'Oh, uncle, I am so tired!'

'So am I,' said Harry, 'and hungry, too.'

11. 'Come along, then,' said uncle, laughing. 'We all want our dinners,
I think.' He took Dora's hand in his, and away they went.




THE KNIFE.


    ro'-ley
    po'-ley
    thought
    morn'-ing
    knife
    least
    blade
    han'-dle
    aunt'-ie
    edg'-es
    rath'-er
    clock

1. There was not much talking at dinner, till after the second helping
of roley-poley.

2. Then Dora and Harry felt happy again, and began to tell their aunt
all about the needle-making. She had seen it once, but it was a long
time ago, and she thought she should like to see it again.

3. 'But if I had gone this morning,' she said, 'you would not have had
your pudding.'

'That would have been sad,' said Dora.

4. 'What a lot of steel we have seen,' said Harry. 'I never knew there
was so much in the world.'

5. 'You can see some on this table now.'

'Where?'

'What have I cut the pudding with?'

[Illustration]

'Oh, the knife! Yes, I see; that must be steel; at least, that part of
it. What do you call that part?'

'The blade.'

6. 'And what about the handle?'

'I don't know. It is yellow, and smooth, and hard.'

'It is bone,' said his uncle, 'part of an ox-bone. But some handles are
made of wood.'

7. 'May I look at that knife near you, auntie? I mean the clean one.
Thank you!'

8. Then Dora wanted one to look at too; and they felt the edges softly
and found them very sharp. They looked at the blunt backs of the blades,
and then tried to read the maker's name.

9. 'There is no room to put the maker's name on a needle,' said Harry.
'But how do they get it on here?'

'It is stamped on when the blade is red-hot and rather soft.'

10. They could not make out how the handle was put on, so their aunt
went to the knife-box and got out an old knife that had lost its handle.
They saw that the blade had a long thin piece of iron at the end of it.

11. 'A long hole is made inside the handle, and this iron thing is put
into it, and made fast.'

So their uncle said, and then looked at the clock and saw that it was
time for him to go.




THE HEN.

[Illustration: Setting out for the Farm.]


    bas'-ket
    fetch
    friends
    fowls
    watch
    thought
    charge
    pair
    ban'-tams
    know
    proud
    peck'-ing
    greed'-y
    gray
    swal'-lowed
    laughed

1. The day after Dora and Harry came home, their mother gave them a
basket and sent them up to the farm to fetch eggs.

2. Rover went with them, and all three were glad to go, for they had
many friends at the farm.

3. There was the great dog, Watch, and there were the cart-horses and
the pony, the ducks and the fowls. And there were five girls and
boys--Mary, Tom, Johnny, Annie, and Kate.

4. When these five, and Watch, saw Harry, Dora, and Rover coming, they
ran down the lane to meet them. They were soon all in the farm-yard,
talking as fast as they could talk.

5. Two had to tell about their visit to Needle-town, and five about the
doings at the farm, so it was some time before the eggs were thought of.

6. Mary had charge of the eggs, and went every morning to look for new
ones.

'Since you went away,' she said, 'I have had a pair of bantams given me,
for my very own. Here they are!'

'What little things! and how very pretty!' cried Dora. 'Do they know
you, Mary?'

7. 'Yes; I feed them every day. Here comes the big black hen. She has
been laying an egg. See how proud she is! She calls out in that way to
let the rest know what she has done.'

8. 'Now she is pecking about for food,' said Harry.

Tom said that fowls were always eating.

'They are greedy things,' said Kate.

9. 'Oh, look at this gray hen!' said Harry, 'she picked up a bit of
stone just now and ate it! Does she know no better?'

10. 'It is not for food,' Mary told him; 'she takes it to grind up the
hard seeds she has swallowed. They all go into a strong little bag, and
the stones rub and press on the seeds.'

11. 'I never heard of such a thing! She keeps a mill inside to grind her
food!'

12. The others laughed, and then Mary went in to get some eggs. After
the basket was filled, the two children said good-bye to their friends,
and went home.




THE SPARROW.


    shoots
    spar'-rows
    steal
    fruit
    thou'-sand
    ba'-bies
    build
    spoil
    beaks
    ap'-ple
    blos'-som
    fruit
    clean
    thirst'-y
    wheat
    throw

1. 'Mother,' cried Harry, running in one day, 'Jack Denny says he shoots
sparrows!'

'I am very sorry to hear it. Why does he shoot them?'

'"They steal fruit and corn," he says. He wanted me to throw stones at
them!'

2. 'Well, you can tell him about some silly men who killed the sparrows
and other birds, and the next year their fruit and corn were eaten up by
grubs. Even the leaves on the trees were eaten.'

3. 'Is this true?'

'Quite true. They had to send for little birds from other places to live
in their fields and gardens. Do you know that a sparrow kills four
thousand grubs in one day when her babies are in the nest?

4. 'One wise man who grows fruit says that his best friends are the
