
Within, the master's desk is seen,
  Deep scarred by raps official;
The warping floor, the battered seats,
  The jack-knife's carved initial;

The charcoal frescoes on its wall;
  Its door's worn sill, betraying
The feet that, creeping slow to school,
  Went storming out to playing!

Long years ago a winter sun
  Shone over it at setting;
Lit up its western window-panes,
  And low eaves' icy fretting.

It touched the tangled golden curls,
  And brown eyes full of grieving,
Of one who still her steps delayed
  When all the school were leaving.

For near her stood the little boy
  Her childish favor singled:
His cap pulled low upon a face
  Where pride and shame were mingled.

Pushing with restless feet the snow
  To right and left, he lingered;--
As restlessly her tiny hands
  The blue-checked apron fingered.

He saw her lift her eyes; he felt
  The soft hand's light caressing,
And heard the tremble of her voice,
  As if a fault confessing.

"I'm sorry that I spelt the word:
  I hate to go above you,
Because,"--the brown eyes lower fell,--
  "Because, you see, I love you!"

Still memory to a gray-haired man
  That sweet child-face is showing.
Dear girl: the grasses on her grave
  Have forty years been growing!

He lives to learn, in life's hard school,
  How few who pass above him
Lament their triumph and his loss,
  Like her,--because they love him.

    _John Greenleaf Whittier._




Mother's Fool


"Tis plain to see," said a farmer's wife,
"These boys will make their mark in life;
They were never made to handle a hoe,
And at once to a college ought to go;
There's Fred, he's little better than a fool,
But John and Henry must go to school."

"Well, really, wife," quoth Farmer Brown,
As he set his mug of cider down,
"Fred does more work in a day for me
Than both his brothers do in three.
Book larnin' will never plant one's corn,
Nor hoe potatoes, sure's you're born;
Nor mend a rod of broken fence--
For my part, give me common sense."

But his wife was bound the roost to rule,
And John and Henry were sent to school,
While Fred, of course, was left behind,
Because his mother said he had no mind.

Five years at school the students spent;
Then into business each one went.
John learned to play the flute and fiddle,
And parted his hair, of course, in the middle;
While his brother looked rather higher than he,
And hung out a sign, "H. Brown, M.D."

Meanwhile, at home, their brother Fred
Had taken a notion into his head;
But he quietly trimmed his apple trees,
And weeded onions and planted peas,
While somehow or other, by hook or crook,
He managed to read full many a book;
Until at last his father said
He was getting "book larnin'" into his head;
"But for all that," added Farmer Brown,
"He's the smartest boy there is in town."

The war broke out, and Captain Fred
A hundred men to battle led,
And when the rebel flag came down,
Went marching home as General Brown.
But he went to work on the farm again,
And planted corn and sowed his grain;
He shingled the barn and mended the fence,
Till people declared he had common sense.

Now common sense was very rare,
And the State House needed a portion there;
So the "family dunce" moved into town--
The people called him Governor Brown;
And the brothers who went to the city school
Came home to live with "mother's fool."




Kentucky Philosophy


You Wi'yam, cum 'ere, suh, dis instunce.
  Wu' dat you got under dat box?
I do' want no foolin'--you hear me?
  Wut you say? Ain't nu'h'n but _rocks_?
'Peah ter me you's owdashus p'ticler. S'posin' dey's uv a new kine.
I'll des take a look at dem rocks. Hi yi! der you think dat I's bline?

_I_ calls dat a plain water-million, you scamp, en I knows whah it
          growed;
It come fum de Jimmerson cawn fiel', dah on ter side er de road.
You stole it, you rascal--you stole it! I watched you fum down in de lot.
En time I gets th'ough wid you, nigger, you won't eb'n be a grease spot!

I'll fix you. Mirandy! Mir_an_dy! go cut me a hick'ry--make 'ase!
En cut me de toughes' en keenes' you c'n fine anywhah on de place.
I'll larn you, Mr. Wi'yam Joe Vetters, ter steal en ter lie, you young
          sinner,
Disgracin' yo' ole Christian mammy, en makin' her leave cookin' dinner!

Now ain't you ashamed er yo'se'lf sur? I is, I's 'shamed you's my son!
En de holy accorjan angel he's 'shamed er wut you has done;
En he's tuk it down up yander in coal-black, blood-red letters--
"One water-million stoled by Wi'yam Josephus Vetters."

En wut you s'posen Brer Bascom, yo' teacher at Sunday school,
'Ud say ef he knowed how you's broke de good Lawd's Gol'n Rule?
Boy, whah's de raisin' I give you? Is you boun' fuh ter be a black
          villiun?
I's s'prised dat a chile er yo mammy 'ud steal any man's water-million.

En I's now gwinter cut it right open, en you shain't have nary bite,
Fuh a boy who'll steal water-millions--en dat in de day's broad light--
Ain't--_Lawdy!_ it's _green!_ Mirandy!
Mi-ran-dy! come on wi' dat switch!
Well, stealin' a g-r-e-e-n water-million! who ever yeered tell er des
          sich?

Cain't tell w'en dey's ripe? W'y you thump 'um, en w'en dey go pank dey
          is green;
But w'en dey go _punk_, now you mine me, dey's ripe--en dat's des wut
          I mean.
En nex' time you hook water-millions--_you_ heered me, you ign'ant, you
          hunk,
Ef you do' want a lickin' all over, be sho dat dey allers go "punk"!

    _Harrison Robertson._




Give Us Men


God give us men; a time like this demands
Strong minds, great hearts, true faith and ready hands.
Men whom the lust of office cannot kill;
Men whom the spoils of office cannot buy;
Men who possess opinions and a will;
Men who have honor; men who will not lie;
Men who can stand before a demagogue,
And brave his treacherous flatteries without winking;
Tall men, sun-crowned, who live above the fog,
In public duty and in private thinking;
For while the rabble, with its thumb-worn creeds,
Its large professions, and its little deeds,
Mingle in selfish strife--lo! Freedom weeps,
Wrong rules the land, and waiting Justice sleeps.

    _J.G. Holland._




Never Trouble Trouble


My good man is a clever man, which no one will gainsay;
He lies awake to plot and plan 'gainst lions in the way,
While I, without a thought of ill, sleep sound enough for three,
For I never trouble trouble till trouble troubles me.

A holiday we never fix but he is sure 'twill rain;
And when the sky is clear at six he knows it won't remain.
He is always prophesying ill to which I won't agree,
For I never trouble trouble till trouble troubles me.

The wheat will never show a top--but soon how green the field!
We will not harvest half a crop--yet have a famous yield!
It will not sell, it never will! but I will wait and see,
For I never trouble trouble till trouble troubles me.

We have a good share of worldly gear, and fortune seems secure,
Yet my good man is full of fear--misfortune's coming sure!
He points me out the almshouse hill, but cannot make me see,
For I never trouble trouble till trouble troubles me.

He has a sort of second sights and when the fit is strong,
He sees beyond the good and right the evil and the wrong.
Heaven's cop of joy he'll surely spill unless I with him be,
For I never trouble trouble till trouble troubles me.

    _Fannie Windsor._




What is Good


"What is the real good?" I asked in musing mood.
Order, said the law court;
Knowledge, said the school;
Truth, said the wise man;
Pleasure, said the fool;
Love, said the maiden;
Beauty, said the page;
Freedom, said the dreamer;
Home, said the sage;
Fame, said the soldier;
Equity, the seer.
Spake my heart full sadly:
"The answer is not here."
Then within my bosom
Softly this I heard:
"Each heart holds the secret:
Kindness is the word."

    _John Boyle O'Reilly._




The Penny Ye Mean to Gie


There's a funny tale 'of a stingy man,
  Who was none too good but might have been worse,
Who went to his church, on a Sunday night
  And carried along his well-filled purse.

When the sexton came with the begging plate,
  The church was but dim with the candle's light;
The stingy man fumbled all thro' his purse,
  And chose a coin by touch and not by sight.

It's an odd thing now that guineas should be
  So like unto pennies in shape and size.
"I'll gie a penny," the stingy man said:
  "The poor must not gifts of pennies despise."

The penny fell down with a clatter and ring!
  And back in his seat leaned the stingy man.
"The world is full of the poor," he thought,
  "I can't help them all--I give what I can."

Ha! ha! how the sexton smiled, to be sure,
  To see the gold guinea fall in the plate;
Ha! ha! how the stingy man's heart was wrung,
  Perceiving his blunder--but just too late!

"No matter," he said; "in the Lord's account
  That guinea of gold is set down to me--
They lend to him who give to the poor;
  It will not so bad an investment be."

"Na, na, mon," the chuckling sexton cried out,
  "The Lord is na cheated--he kens thee well;
He knew it was only by accident
  That out o' thy fingers the guinea fell!

"He keeps an account, na doubt, for the puir;
  But in that account He'll set down to thee
Na mair o' that golden guinea, my mon,
  Than the one bare penny ye mean to gie!"

There's comfort, too, in the little tale--
  A serious side as well as a joke--
A comfort for all the generous poor
  In the comical words the sexton spoke;

A comfort to think that the good Lord knows
  How generous we really desire to be,
And will give us credit in his account,
  For all the pennies we long "to gie."




Leedle Yawcob Strauss


I haf von funny leedle poy
  Vot gomes shust to my knee,--
Der queerest schap, der createst rogue
  As efer you dit see.
He runs, und schumps, und schmashes dings
  In all barts off der house.
But vot off dot? He vas mine son,
  Mine leedle Yawcob Strauss.

He gets der measels und der mumbs,
  Und eferyding dot's oudt;
He sbills mine glass off lager bier,
  Poots schnuff indo mine kraut;
He fills mine pipe mit Limburg cheese--
  Dot vas der roughest chouse;
I'd dake dot vrom no oder poy
  But leedle Yawcob Strauss.

He dakes der milkban for a dhrum,
  Und cuts mine cane in dwo
To make der schticks to beat it mit--
  Mine cracious, dot vas drue!
I dinks mine hed vas schplit abart
  He kicks oup sooch a touse;
But nefer mind der poys vas few
  Like dot young Yawcob Strauss.

He asks me questions sooch as dese:
  Who baints mine nose so red?
Who vos it cuts dot schmoodth blace oudt
  Vrom der hair ubon mine hed?
Und vhere der plaze goes vrom der lamp
  Vene'er der glim I douse?
How gan I all dese dings eggsblain
  To dot schmall Yawcob Strauss?

I somedimes dink I schall go vild
  Mit sooch a grazy poy,
Und vish vonce more I gould haf rest
  Und beaceful dimes enshoy.
But ven he vas asleep in ped,
  So quiet as a mouse,
I prays der Lord, "Dake any dings,
  But leaf dot Yawcob Strauss."

    _Charles F. Adams._




To-day


We shall do so much in the years to come,
  But what have we done to-day?
We shall give out gold in princely sum,
  But what did we give to-day?
We shall lift the heart and dry the tear,
We shall plant a hope in the place of fear,
We shall speak with words of love and cheer,
  But what have we done to-day?
We shall be so kind in the after while,
  But what have we been to-day?
We shall bring to each lonely life a smile,
  But what have we brought to-day?
We shall give to truth a grander birth,
And to steadfast faith a deeper worth,
We shall feed the hungering souls of earth,
  But whom have we fed to-day?

    _Nixon Waterman._




So Was I


My name is Tommy, an' I hates
That feller of my sister Kate's,
He's bigger'n I am an' you see
He's sorter lookin' down on me,
An' I resents it with a vim;
I think I am just as good as him.
He's older, an' he's mighty fly,
But's he's a kid, an' so am I.

One time he came,--down by the gate,
I guess it must have been awful late,--
An' Katie, she was there, an' they
Was feelin' very nice and gay,
An' he was talkin' all the while
About her sweet an' lovin' smile,
An' everythin' was as nice as pie,
An' they was there, an' so was I.

They didn't see me, 'cause I slid
Down underneath a bush, an' hid,
An' he was sayin' that his love
Was greater'n all the stars above
Up in the glorious heavens placed;
An' then His arms got 'round her waist,
An' clouds were floatin' in the sky,
And they was there, an' so was I.

I didn't hear just all they said,
But by an' by my sister's head
Was droopin' on his shoulder, an'
I seen him holdin' Katie's hand,
An' then he hugged her closer, some,
An' then I heerd a kiss--yum, yum;
An' Katie blushed an' drew a sigh,
An' sorter coughed,--an' so did I.

An' then that feller looked around
An' seed me there, down on the ground,
An'--was he mad? well, betcher boots
I gets right out of there an' scoots.
An' he just left my sister Kate
A-standin' right there by the gate;
An' I seen blood was in his eye,
An' he runned fast--an' so did I.

I runned the very best I could,
But he cotched up--I's 'fraid he would--
An' then he said he'd teach me how
To know my manners, he'd allow;
An' then he shaked me awful. Gee!
He jest--he frashed the ground with me.
An' then he stopped it by and by,
'Cause he was tired--an' so was I,

An' then he went back to the gate
An' couldn't find my sister Kate
'Cause she went in to bed, while he
Was runnin' 'round an' thumpin' me.
I got round in a shadder dim,
An' made a face, an' guffed at him;
An' then the moon larfed, in the sky,
'Cause he was there, an' so was I.

    _Joseph Bert Smiley._




Is It Worth While?


Is it worth while that we jostle a brother.
  Bearing his load on the rough road of life?
Is it worth while that we jeer at each other
  In blackness of heart that we war to the knife?
  God pity us all in our pitiful strife.

God pity as all as we jostle each other;
  God pardon us all for the triumph we feel
When a fellow goes down 'neath his load on the heather,
  Pierced to the heart: Words are keener than steel,
  And mightier far for woe than for weal,

Were it not well, in this brief little journey
  On over the isthmus, down into the tide,
We give him a fish instead of a serpent,
  Ere folding the hands to be and abide
  Forever and aye in dust at his side?

Look at the roses saluting each other;
  Look at the herds all at peace on the plain;
Man, and man only, makes war on his brother,
  And laughs in his heart at his peril and pain,
  Shamed by the beasts that go down on the plain.

Is it worth while that we battle to humble
  Some poor fellow down into the dust?
God pity us all! Time too soon will tumble
  All of us together, like leaves in a gust,
  Humbled, indeed, down into the dust.

    _Joaquin Miller._




Life's Mirror


There are loyal hearts, there are spirits brave,
  There are souls that are pure and true;
Then give to the world the best you have,
  And the best will come back to you.

Give love, and love to your life will flow,
  A strength in your utmost need;
Have faith, and a score of hearts will show
  Their faith in your work and deed.

Give truth, and your gift will be paid in kind;
  And honor will honor meet,
And the smile which is sweet will surely find
  A smile that is just as sweet.

Give pity and sorrow to those who mourn;
  You will gather in flowers again
The scattered seeds from your thought outborne,
  Though the sowing seemed in vain.

For life is the mirror of king and slave;
  'Tis just what we are and do;
Then give to the world the best you have,
  And the best will come back to you.

    _Madeline S. Bridges._




The Little Black-Eyed Rebel


A boy drove into the city, his wagon loaded down
With food to feed the people of the British-governed town;
