
Many things now came floating down on the water. Young trees,
branches, parts of railings and fences, broken bridges and
planks, all went hurrying along, and the water foamed, and
roared, and surged, and looked quite fearful.

While they all stood looking on, the gardener still lamenting
over his pea-sticks, they saw something that looked like a large
covered basket come floating along. It chanced that it passed
very near the bank on which they stood, and little Robert cried
out, "Stop it!" and began to try to reach it with a long pole he
had in his hands, with which he had been pretending to be a ship,
and holding this up for the mast. He could not reach it; but the
gardener took the pole, and after failing once or twice, managed
to push and poke at the basket till he got it so near that the
dairy-maid and nurse reached it with their hands, and pulled it
to the bank. It was only covered with a few arched sticks, over
which a white cloth was fastened.

They all crowded round it to see what it contained. They lifted
up the white cloth. O, wonder and surprise! What did they see?

"What was it? _What_ did they see?" cried Mary and Willie both at
once.

They saw a pretty little baby fast asleep, and at its feet a cat
coiled up comfortably.

"And was the baby not hurt, mamma?"

No, it was quite safe, and did not awake directly. Puss awoke and
jumped out, and ran off before any one could stop her.

The gardener said, that the basket, which they now saw to be a
cradle, must have floated away from some cottage in the village
just above. "Some poor woman is perhaps now in great grief about
her child," said he.

[Illustration]

"But we've got it safe," said Charlotte. "We'll take great care
of it, and give it back to her. Let us take it into a warm room."

As she said this the baby opened its eyes and began to cry. Nurse
lifted it up and tried to quiet it, and they all went in with it,
the children kissing its poor little red arms, and saying all
sorts of soothing things to it. When they got into the house,
nurse asked for some warm whey with a little sugar in it. She
said that was the best thing for such a little baby; and it
sucked it in, and seemed to like it, and soon began to smile, and
crow, and kick about its feet, and throw about its arms. The
children were quite delighted at this; and now being happy about
the baby they began to think of poor puss; and Robert and Helen
went out to look for her. They found her just outside the house
door, mewing and making a great fuss. Helen ran away and got a
saucer full of milk, and put it down in the lobby. At this, puss
began to walk slowly in, and then ran up to it and lapped it all
up; and then she let Helen take her up, and carry her into the
room where the baby was.

While they were all engaged in this way, they heard sounds of
voices shouting and calling out near the river, and ran to the
window to see what it was. They saw far out, on the other side of
the water, near the edge of the meadow, five or six men and a
woman, and the gardener was making signs and calling out to them.

"O!" said nurse, "you may be sure that is the poor mother of the
baby."

"Let us run out and hold up the baby, to show her it is safe!"
cried Charlotte. "Come quick! O, how happy she will be!"

Nurse wrapped up the baby in a warm shawl, and out they went.
Helen carried the cat, and little Robert came bustling after them
with the cradle, shouting as loud as he could, "They're all safe!
here they are! look here!"

When the gardener saw them coming, he ran and caught up little
Charlotte in his arms, and nurse gave her the baby, and she held it
up as high as she could. The poor woman, who was indeed the mother,
saw it directly, and seemed hardly able to bear so much joy, for
her husband who was by her, threw his arm round her as if to
prevent her falling down. She clasped her hands together--then held
them out towards her child--then raised them upwards.

Mary and Willie could not sit still any longer, they both jumped
up, and began to clap their hands and dance for joy.

"Did she come to the house to bring away her baby?" asked Mary.

Yes; she walked about two miles off, to a part of the river where
there was a stone bridge; it was impossible to get across
nearer, so she came in about an hour.

"But did she see that puss was there?" said Willie.

O, yes; I forgot to tell you that after she had a little
recovered of the first joy of seeing her child safe, nurse held
up Helen with puss in her arms, and Robert climbed up on the
stump of a tree, and held up the cradle as high as he could.

"And then what did they do when the mother came?" said Mary.

She kissed her baby, and cried over it, and held it a long time
in her arms; and her husband, who came also, told them that the
flood had risen so suddenly that it had carried away part of the
wall of their cottage, and swept away everything they had, while
he and his wife were trying to save their stack of wood; and that
when they turned round, at the sound of the rushing water, they
