for they might hurt them."

"Let us go away now," said Rock, in a whisper. "The poor mother bird is
flying around, and is so troubled. She doesn't know that we wouldn't
harm her little ones for anything." So they tiptoed away and left the
mother in possession.

"What kind of bird was it?" Florence asked, in a low voice.

"Why, don't you know? That was Jenny Wren," returned Dimple, more
accustomed to creatures of woods and fields.

"Was it really Jenny Wren?" exclaimed Florence, delightedly. "I'm so
glad I've seen her."

"Didn't you ever see her before? You have heard Mr. Wren sing, haven't
you? Oh, how he sings! I think house-wrens are such dear, dear birds. We
always put up boxes and cans and such things for them, for we like to
have them around, and they can build their nests in quite small places.
The other big birds try to drive them away sometimes, but we always try
to protect them. Mamma says Jenny Wren is a very neat housekeeper, and
takes excellent care of her family. They are such friendly little birds.
I love them better than any others."

"Do you believe you have any wrens' nests near the house, this year?"
Florence asked.

"Yes, indeed, ever so many. I know just where to look for them. I'll
show you some to-morrow. There's one in the funniest place. You know
where the bamboo shade is rolled up at the side of the front porch:
well, in one end of that a wren has built a nest, and mamma will not
have the shade let down till the little birds are ready to fly."

Florence gave a sigh of content. She enjoyed such things so heartily,
and saw none of them in her city home.

"I like the robins," put in Rock, "they are such cheerful fellows.
Listen to that one whistle. Doesn't it remind you of juicy cherries?"

Dimple laughed. "Yes, and don't they love cherries! I believe they eat
half on our trees, and they always pick out the very finest ones."

"Of course. So would you, if you were a robin," Rock returned. "Speaking
of birds, Florence, have you ever watched the swallows--the chimney
swifts--come home? It's a sight."

"No, I never saw them. Are there any here?" returned Florence, eagerly.

"Lots of them. They build in that old chimney, and they come every year
on a certain day of the month. They seem to have a sort of system in the
way they circle around, and go down the chimney; just as if they were
regularly drilled for it. It's about time for them now. Suppose we sit
here and watch them."

This they did, and when the last belated swallow had dropped down into
the tall old chimney, they went up to the house where Mrs. Hardy was
waiting for them, and where they were glad to listen to her tales of
California; its big trees, its fine fruits, and the lovely flowers that
grow wild there; and she told many funny tales of the Chinese, till Mr.
Dallas made his appearance, and with regretful good-byes they took their
leave.

All this time the girls had not once remembered Bubbles. They were
having such a good time, and it was not till they were on their way
home, when Mr. Dallas questioned them, that they thought of how they had
left her on the roof.

"Mrs. Hardy is just lovely, mamma," said Dimple, when they reached home.
"I hope she liked me, for I liked her, and, oh mamma! I am so sorry
about Bubbles."

"I am glad you like Mrs. Hardy," said her mother, "but the next time
Bubbles does wrong, I hope you will tell me, and not punish her
yourself. You must remember that she is only a little ignorant, colored
girl, and that it is no wonder she wants what you have, for you have
played with her, and been with her so much. Of course it was wrong for
her to take anything without leave. Were you and Florence good girls?"

"Yes, I think so. Mamma, what did Rock mean when he said he was more
likely to be my cousin than my brother?"

"Did he say that?" said Mrs. Dallas, smiling. "Well, so you are."

"Mamma, I don't understand."

"No. I know you don't. You will in a few days. Now go to bed."

"Florence," said Dimple, after they were in bed. "There is another
secret somewhere, and I cannot puzzle it out. Mamma wants Mrs. Hardy to
be fond of me, and Rock is likely to be my cousin, and all that."

"I can't imagine," answered Florence, sleepily.

"I don't see into it," said Dimple, after thinking a while. "Florence,
are you asleep?"

But Florence made no answer, having by that time arrived in dreamland,
and Dimple soon followed her, dreaming that she was feeding the little
wrens on croquettes, and was taking her doll to drive in California,
when a big tree came up to her, and insisted on shaking hands, because
it said it was her cousin. She laughed right out in her sleep, and
frightened a little mouse back into its hole.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the two little girls ran down to breakfast the next morning, they
wore very happy faces, for Dimple had just discovered that her birthday
was only a week off, and she and Florence had been planning for it.

"Papa always does something very specially nice for me," Dimple had just
announced, "and I always have a lovely birthday-cake with icing and
candles. Mamma makes it herself, because I always think it tastes better
when she does. And she lets me choose what we are to have for dinner.
You tell what you like best, Florence, and we'll have that."

"I like fried chicken better than anything, except, of course, ice cream
and cake."

"So do I. I'm so glad you like what I do, and I'm very glad my birthday
is in June, for it is such a rosy month, and we can have strawberries
with the ice cream. There are so many good things to eat in June;
strawberries, and peas, and asparagus and--oh, I don't know what all."
This conversation took place before breakfast, and Dimple was sitting on
the floor hugging her knees, and looking as contented as it was possible
to be.

They were still talking on the important subject when they entered the
dining-room.

"What's all this about birthdays?" asked Mr. Dallas, looking up from his
morning paper.

"Why, papa, don't you know my birthday will be next week?" returned
Dimple, as she went up to give him his morning kiss. "Aren't you glad?"
she added.

"Is it an occasion for great joyfulness? I'm not so sure of that. Don't
you know it makes mamma feel very serious to have a daughter eight--or
is it nine--years old? And as for myself, I begin to feel the grey hairs
popping out all over my head at the very thought of it."

"I shall be nine years old. But, papa, you are always making out that
you are old and that makes me feel sorry. I don't see a single grey
hair. People are not very old till they are forty, at least, are they?"

"Well, no, but they are rather decrepit when they reach such extreme old
age as that--Uncle Heath is forty you know, and see what a tottering old
man he is."

"Now, papa, you are laughing at me. I don't believe you'll have grey
hairs for years and years."

"They are starting, I am sure. However, we'll change the subject, if you
wish. What do you expect me to give you on that festal day? Not another
doll, surely?"

"No--I don't know--perhaps."

"Oh, you are insatiable as to dolls. I believe if any one were to give
you a dozen at Christmas you would be glad to have a dozen more on New
Years. I don't believe Florence is so doll-crazy."

"Yes, she is. Aren't you, Florence?"

Florence nodded.

"Nevertheless," continued Mr. Dallas, "I'll promise no doll this time.
Shall it be books? Perhaps we'd better consult mamma. Come to think of
it, I had an idea about this same birthday. It seems to me I thought it
wouldn't be a bad plan to provide some amusement for rainy days."

The two little girls looked at each other, and Dimple hung her head.

"What do you think?" Mr. Dallas asked, quizzically. "It seems to me that
I have heard that the rain produces a singularly bad effect upon two
little girls I know."

"Yes, papa, we were horrid, especially one time. We didn't know what to
do, and so--and so----"

    "'Satan found some mischief still
    For idle hands to do;'

was that the way of it?"

Dimple glanced at Florence shamefacedly. "Yes, papa, I'm afraid it was
just that way," she replied, meekly.

"Well, as I said before, I think it wouldn't be a bad plan to provide
against such trouble. Perhaps that birthday will show you a way out of
future difficulty."

And so it proved, for on her birthday morning the secret of the little
house was revealed.

"You must wait till after breakfast to see your birthday gifts,
daughter," Mrs. Dallas said, as Dimple came bounding into the room to
receive her nine kisses.

"Oh, mamma, why? I always have them the first thing. Do tell me where
they are. Downstairs or up here?"

"Downstairs, in one sense, but they are not in the house at all."

Dimple's eyes opened wide. "Not in the house? Florence, just listen.
There is a great secret. Oh, dear, how can I wait?"

"Well, dearie," returned her mother, "the sooner you are dressed the
sooner the secret will come. See, I am nearly ready to go down."

"Please help me, just this morning, mamma. It will make it so much
easier, and it's my birthday, you know."

"Very well, since you are the person of importance to-day, I will help
you."

"Hurry up, Florence," cried Dimple. "Come in here and I'll fasten your
buttons while mamma does mine; then we'll get through all the sooner."

Although Dimple, the day before, had carefully selected the day's bill
of fare, the breakfast was scarcely tasted, her favorite waffles
offering no inducement for her to linger over them, so great was her
excitement, and she watched eagerly till her father pushed back his
chair, and declared himself ready for orders. It seemed to Dimple that
he had never had such an appetite before, and she watched with anxious
interest as he helped himself to waffles from each plateful that Bubbles
brought in. There was a twinkle in his eyes as Dimple at last heaved a
long sigh, and he immediately arose and led the way through the garden
to the little new house between the house and the stable.

"We'll look in here," he remarked, as he unlocked the door.

Although Dimple had been quite curious to see the inside of the "house
for little chicks," she was rather disappointed at the delay, for she
thought, perhaps, her papa had something for her in the stable, a fox
terrier, or maybe a goat, since she had expressed a wish for both. But
when the door of the little house was opened her surprise was so great
that she gave expression to one long-drawn "Oh-h!" and looked from one
to the other half bewildered.

For, instead of a brooder and an "inkybator," she saw before her the
dearest little room with white curtains at the window, a rug upon the
floor, a small cooking stove in one corner, a table, chairs, and all to
suit a little girl. Upon the shelves were ranged plates, cups, saucers
and dishes, and a cupboard in the corner looked as if it might hold
other necessary things for housekeeping. Moreover, her family of dolls
sat along in a row on the window-seat, looking as expectant as is the
nature of dolls to look.

"Well, Dot, how do you like it?" asked Mr. Dallas, smiling down at the
child whose color came and went in her fair little face.

"Oh, papa! Oh, papa! is it truly my house?" she asked, clasping him
closely.

"Yes, it is truly yours. I thought a rainy day house might help to keep
our little chicks out of mischief, because here they can peep as loud as
they choose and it will not disturb any one."

"You said it was for little chicks, and I never once thought you meant
us. Did you, Florence? It is lovely, lovely. Oh, papa, you are too
good."

"I think it is a matter of self-defence, for if you and Florence are so
ambitious as to take violent possession of your neighbors' houses, it
seemed to me there would be no end of complaints, and the best way to
prevent further housebreaking was to give you a house where you could
cook and sweep and exercise your domestic tastes to your hearts'
content."

Dimple understood all this banter, and she laughingly said, "Florence,
we are like the birds that try to take the wrens' houses to live in. But
now we have a nest of our own we won't do it any more, papa. Thank you
so much. It is the most lovely surprise I ever had in all my life."

"I'm glad you like your house, Mistress Eleanor Dallas; but, dear me, I
can't stand here chattering. I must be off."

Dimple gave him an ecstatic parting hug, and returned to a survey of her
house.

"Papa gives you the house, and I the furniture," her mother told her.
"You must try to keep the place neat and clean. Of course, Bubbles can
help you, sometimes, but I want you to learn to take care of it yourself
and to be a good housekeeper."

"Like Jenny Wren. Oh, yes, mamma, I will try. Florence, we'll put up
boxes for the wrens, up there by the door, and maybe they will come and
build. Mamma, may we have our ice cream and cake out here this
afternoon?"

"Yes, if you like, and you may go over and ask Rock Hardy to come, and
Leila and Eugene Clark too, if you like to have them. That will make
quite a nice little party. You can use your own dishes, and have all the
fun you choose."

"Won't that be fine!" cried Dimple, softly clapping her hands. "Shall we
go now?" she asked.

"Yes, unless you would rather wait."

"No, I'd rather go now, so I won't have to think about it, for I shall
not want to leave my house to-day; it is so dear and cunning. And,
Florence, when we come back, we'll gather some flowers and make
everything look as pretty as possible. Just think, we'll be like
grown-up ladies, with a house, and a servant, and--oh, mamma, please let
Bubbles wear a cap."

Mrs. Dallas laughed. "I don't believe we will insist upon that, but you
can rig up one for her if you like, when she is out here. Now I must go
in."

"Come, Florence, we'll go and invite the company, and get that over
with, and then we'll have nothing to interrupt us the rest of the day,"
said Dimple. "Won't it be fine to come out here on rainy days and make
all the noise we want. What time shall we tell the children to come?"
she called after her mother, who was just stepping off the little porch.

"At four o'clock, I think."

"That's the time Rock had his tea-party," said Dimple. "I am glad we can
invite him to our feast, because we had such a nice time over there. I
wonder if he knows anything about this being our little house. If he
doesn't, won't he be surprised!"

It proved that Rock didn't know, and he was as interested as any one
could wish;--so much so, indeed, that he begged to go over at once to
see it, and his mother allowed him to do so.

"My! but it's fine," he declared, examining both outside and in. "You
might have a pretty little garden out here, and plant some vines to grow
over the porch."

"So we might," Dimple responded, "I never thought of that. It will make
the little porch so much prettier. Just think, I never dreamed that it
was being built for me."

"Your father is awfully good," returned Rock, adding soberly, "I hope it
runs in the family."

Dimple laughed, but looked sober herself, immediately after. "I'm afraid
I'll never be as good as papa and mamma, for I do horrid things," she
said. She looked at Florence wistfully, then lifted one of her cousin's
soft auburn curls, and laid her cheek against it; to which Florence
responded by giving her a sudden kiss. They both remembered that day in
the garret.

Rock became so interested in the idea of a garden, that, after Mrs.
Dallas's consent was gained, he spent most of the day in digging up a
little patch in which the children planted a remarkable collection of
plants, both wild and cultivated. They even put in some corn, so as to
have roasting ears, Dimple said, and a pumpkin seed, because she liked
pumpkin pies.

They were so busy all day that they were scarcely willing to go in to
prepare for their feast.

Leila and Eugene Clark were properly impressed with the new house; yet,
with the others, were quite ready to stop their play that they might do
justice to the big cake with its nine candles, and its wreath of
flowers; while the amount of ice cream eaten showed plainly that the
refreshments were quite to the taste of the guests. Leila brought Dimple
a box of candy, and Eugene presented her with a bunch of beautiful
roses. Rock, too, although he hardly could spare the time to rush home
and get his gift for her, had something to donate; an exquisite little
fan with carved ivory sticks, that he said was made in China, and which
his mother had bought in California. Mrs. Hardy added to the gift a
dainty pink sash, and Florence had struggled in secret to make Rubina a
new frock, and had succeeded very well. So Dimple felt herself
bountifully remembered.

"It's been just the very happiest day I ever had," said the little girl
as she stood in her white night gown, ready for bed.

"I ought to be a very, very good girl, mamma; and I have done so many
naughty things lately, but I didn't think."

"Didn't Think is a bad enemy to most little girls," said Mrs. Dallas,
holding her daughter's fair head against her shoulder.

"Did _you_ have to fight him?"

"I did, indeed."

"That's a comfort. Perhaps when I grow up, I may be a little weeny,
weeny bit like you, darling mamsey. Please give me nine more kisses."

"One on your forehead; one on each cheek; one on each eyelid; one
between the eyes; one on your chin; one on your mouth, and where shall I
put the other?"

"Here, in the tickley place under my chin. Now say 'my blessed child';
that always makes me feel good, and then I'll pop into bed."

But the head was no sooner on the pillow than it was bobbed up again,
and there came the whisper, "Mamma, please kiss Florence more than one
time, and call her something nice." And when this was done, two very
tired, but very happy, little girls kissed each other, and in a few
moments were fast asleep.




CHAPTER VII

Housekeepers


"Mamma," said Dimple, with her elbows on the arm of her mother's chair,
"what are you thinking about so hard? You have a little puckery frown
between your eyes, whenever you look at Florence and me. What have we
been doing?"

"Nothing," replied Mrs. Dallas, smiling. "I was wondering if it would be
wise to leave you two alone here with Bubbles for a day. Mrs. Hardy
wants me to go to the city with her to-morrow, and I promised Sylvy some
time ago that she should have the day; she wants to go off on an
excursion, and has been making great preparations. I could not have the
heart to disappoint her, and your papa will not be at home for another
week, so I am very doubtful about leaving you."

"Oh! do go, mamma," cried Dimple, clapping her hands. "We can keep house
beautifully, can't we, Florence?--and it will be such fun. Do go,
there's a darling. We'll be just as grown-up as possible, and do
anything you tell us."

"And you will not be afraid?"

"Not in the least. We'll have Bubbles, you know, and she can run awfully
fast, if we get ill, and want the doctor," replied Dimple, cheerfully.

"I hope no such effort will be needed on Bubbles' part. You must not
turn the house upside down, nor empty all the trunks and chests upon the
floor of the attic."

"Now, mamma," exclaimed Dimple, reproachfully, "why do you remind us of
that?"

Mrs. Dallas laughed at the woe-begone tone.

"That you may remember not to do it again," she replied; then she added,
"Well, I'll think about it a little longer. I promised to let Mrs. Hardy
know this afternoon. Now run along and let me think."

"You will tell us as soon as you make up your mind," said Dimple, as she
left the room with Florence.

"Yes, yes; don't keep me any longer from my 'think.'"

"Don't you hope she will go?" asked Florence. "I think it would be lots
of fun to have the house all to ourselves for a whole day. What shall we
do, Dimple?"

"Oh, there will be lots to do," replied Dimple, importantly. "There will
be the beds to make, and the house to put in order, and dinner to get.
Oh, Florence! What shall we have for dinner? What should you like?"

"I don't know, exactly; baked custards are nice."

"Yes," assented Dimple, doubtfully, "but I'm afraid we couldn't manage
to make them just right; they seem sort of hard; and you don't like
huckleberry pudding."

"Then let's have apple 'cobbler;' we both like that."

"Yes, and it is easy, at least I think it is, just crust and apples.
Well, we'll have that. I do wish mamma would hurry up and tell us."

The two established themselves on the lowest step, as near as possible
to the library, where Mrs. Dallas was sitting.

"Don't make such a noise," said Dimple, as Florence, to while away the
time, began to sing; "you will keep mamma from thinking. Just let's
whisper." So for a half hour or more a little whispering sound went on,
interspersed by stifled laughter. Then at the noise of Mrs. Dallas' hand
upon the door knob, the two girls sprang to their feet.

"Hurry up, mamma, tell us," cried Dimple, as the door opened.

"When you give me a chance," replied Mrs. Dallas, smiling. "I am going.
Does that please you?"

"Oh! oh!" cried the two, dancing up and down.

"How flattering you are," said Mrs. Dallas, laughing; "I never had
pleasure so fully shown for such a cause. So you will be delighted to
get rid of me?"

"Now mamma! Now auntie!" came in chorus. "It isn't that at all, but it
will be such fun, and we are going to make an 'apple cobbler' for
dinner."

"Are you! Who said so?"

"Why, mayn't we?" asked Dimple, somewhat taken aback.

"Who will make it?"

"Why, we will, of course. I've seen Sylvy do it often, and I know
exactly how. Do, do let us, mamma."

It seemed too bad to dampen their ardor, and Mrs. Dallas, rather
dubiously, consented, but charged them not to eat under cooked dough, or
raw apples.

Every one was up betimes the next morning. Sylvy had set everything in
readiness for breakfast, and had taken an early departure, and Mrs.
Dallas was to leave on the nine o'clock train.

"I shall be back by eight o'clock," she told the children. "Don't set
the house afire, and don't make yourselves ill."

"Now, don't worry over us," said Dimple, loftily; "we shall do finely."

But she did feel a little sinking of heart as her mamma's form was lost
to view, and the two girls turned from the gate.

"I wish Rock were not going with them," remarked Dimple. "It would be
nice to have him here."

"I don't think it would," replied Florence; "we'd have to entertain him,
and maybe he doesn't like 'apple cobbler.'"

"That is true," returned Dimple, her spirits rising at the suggestion
of some active employment. "Now let us go and make the beds, while
Bubbles does the dishes." And they set to work, with much chattering, to
follow out this duty.

"There, now, it looks as neat as possible," pronounced Dimple, as she
closed the shutters to keep out the glaring sun. "Just hang up that
towel that has fallen down, Florence, and then we'll go downstairs and
shut up the rest of the house; by that time Bubbles will be through her
work, and we can all play till it is time to get dinner."

Bubbles had just emptied her dish-pan and was about to scour the knives
when they entered the kitchen.

"Hurry up, Bubbles," said Dimple, "so we can all go out and play. We
want you to take care of Celestine and Rubina, while we go out shopping.
Mamma said we might use the pieces in this," holding out a calico bag.
"That is, we are just going to roll them up and have them for dry goods.
The dry goods shop is to be at the end of the porch, where the bench is.
We have cut out a great big newspaper man to sell the goods. We'll have
to pin him against the railing, Florence, or he won't stand up, he is so
limp. Isn't he fine and tall? His name is Mr. Star, because we cut him
out of the _Evening Star_."

Their play proved to be so very interesting that it was after twelve
o'clock before the little housekeepers remembered that they had a dinner
to prepare, and that the making and baking of their apple pie would take
some time. Then it appeared that Bubbles, in her haste to join the play,
had forgotten the fire, which was nearly out.

"Never mind, we'll put in some wood," concluded Dimple, cheerfully.
"I've seen Sylvy do it lots of times, to hurry up the oven. Run,
Bubbles, and get some wood. Then you can pare the apples, while I make
the crust."

"Let me pare the apples," suggested Florence; "it is such fun to put
them on that little thing and turn the crank, while the skin comes off
so easily."

"Well, you do that," agreed Dimple. "And Bubbles can set the table."

"Why doesn't this apple go right?" said Florence. "It wabbles around so
and--there!--it has gone bouncing off to the other side of the kitchen;
how provoking!"

"It is a sort of 'skew-jawed' one," pronounced Dimple. "I can never do
anything with those on the parer. Pick out the ones that are perfectly
round and smooth, and they will go all right. I wonder how much
shortening I ought to put in. Does that look like enough to you?"

Florence viewed the pan critically. "I don't know," she replied,
doubtfully. "I don't believe I know much about it; it looks like a
pretty big lump."

"Oh, I'll call it enough," decided Dimple. "There, it is ready to roll
out. Somehow, it doesn't roll very easily."

"Let me try," offered Florence, who, having finished paring the apples,
was watching her cousin.

"It is not easy," she said, after banging away with the rolling-pin.
"Maybe Bubbles can do it; her arms are stronger;" and, after this third
effort, some sort of crust was ready, with which to line the pan.

"It seems pretty thick," Dimple declared, looking at it with a
dissatisfied eye; "but it is the best we can do."

"Oh, it will taste all right," encouraged Florence. "Now for the apples;
