serious wound. Ned was standing near him, and observed him stagger.

"Are you hit, sir?" he asked anxiously.

"Tush, my boy," he replied, "it is a scratch; say nothing of it.

"Now, forward to the Treasury. The town is in your hands, my lads.
It only remains to you to sack as much treasure as you can carry;
but remember, do not lose your discipline, and keep together. If we
straggle, we are lost.

"Now, light at once the torches which you have brought with you,
and shout aloud to the inhabitants, you that can speak Spanish,
that if any more resistance is offered, we will burn the whole town
to the ground."

This threat mightily alarmed the inhabitants, and the firing ceased
altogether; for as these were not regular soldiers, and knew that
the object of the English attack was to plunder the public
treasuries, rather than private property, the townsmen readily
deemed it to their interest to hold aloof, rather than to bring
upon their city and themselves so grievous a calamity as that
threatened by the English.

In the advance, two or three Spaniards had fallen into the hands of
the men and, these being threatened with instant death if they
hesitated, at once led the way to the governor's house, where the
silver, brought down on mules from Panama, was stored. A party were
placed at the door of this building, and Captain Drake, with the
rest, entered.

The governor had fled, with his attendants. The house was richly
furnished; full of silk hangings, of vessels of gold and silver,
and of all kinds of beautiful things. These, however, attracted
little attention from the English, although Ned and his young
comrades marveled much. Never had they seen, in England, anything
approaching to the wealth and beauty of this furnishing. It seemed
to them, indeed, as if they had entered one of the houses of the
magicians and enchanters, of whom they had read in books during
their childhood.

Captain Drake, however, passed through these gorgeous rooms with
scarce a glance and, led by the Spaniards, descended some steps
into a vast cellar.

A cry of astonishment and admiration burst from the whole party, as
they entered this treasury. Here, piled up twelve feet high, lay a
mighty mass of bars of silver, carefully packed. This heap was no
less than 70 feet long and 10 feet wide, and the bars each weighed
from 35 to 40 pounds.

"My lads," Captain Drake said, "here is money enough to make us all
rich for our lives; but we must leave it for the present, and make
for the Treasury House, which is as full of gold and of precious
stones as this is of silver."

The men followed Captain Drake and his brother, feeling quite
astonished, and almost stupefied at the sight of this pile of
silver; but they felt, moreover, the impossibility of their
carrying off so vast a weight, unless the town were completely in
their hands.

This, indeed, was very far from being the case, for the whole town
was now rising. The troops, who had at the first panic fled, were
now being brought forward; and as the day lightened, the Spaniards,
sorely ashamed that so small a body of men should have made
themselves masters of so great and rich a city, were plucking up
heart and preparing to attack them.

Ill was it, then, for the success of the adventure, that Captain
Francis had suffered so heavy a wound in the marketplace. Up to
this time he had kept bravely on, and none except Ned, all being
full of the prospect of vast plunder, had noticed his pale face, or
seen the blood which streamed down from him, and marked every
footstep as he went; but nature could now do no more and, with his
body well nigh drained of all its blood, he suddenly fell down
fainting.

Great was the cry that rose from the men, as they saw the admiral
thus fall. Hastily gathering round him, they lifted his body from
the ground, and shuddered at seeing how great a pool of blood was
gathered where he had been standing. It seemed almost as if, with
the fall of their captain, the courage which had animated these
men, and would animate them again in fighting against ever so great
odds, had for the moment deserted them.

In spite of the orders of Captain John, that four or five should
carry his brother to the boats; and that the rest should seize,
without delay, the treasures of gold and diamonds in the Treasury,
and carry off as great a weight as they might bear, none paid
attention. They gathered round the body of Captain Francis and,
lifting him on their shoulders, they hurried to the boats, careless
of the promised treasures, and thinking only to escape, and bear
with them their beloved commander from the forces of the Spaniards;
who, as they saw the party fall back, with great shouting fell upon
them, shooting hotly.

The swoon of the admiral had lasted but a few moments. As cordial
was poured down his throat he opened his eyes and, seeing what the
men were minded to do, protested with all his force against their
retreat. His words, however, had no weight with them and, in spite
of his resistance, they carried him down to the battery; and there,
placing him in a pinnace, the whole took to their boats, and rowed
on board ship.

Wonderful to relate, although many were wounded, but one man, and
he Giles Taunton the armorer, was killed in this attack upon the
great city, in which they only missed making themselves masters of
one of the greatest treasures upon earth by the accident of their
commander fainting, at a critical moment, and to the men being
seized by an unaccountable panic. Some of the crew had, indeed,
carried off certain plunder, which they had snatched in passing
through the governor's house, and in such short searches as they
had been able to make in private dwellings; but the men, in
general, had been so struck with amazement and sorrow at the sight
of their general's wound, that although this wealth was virtually
at their mercy, they put off with him without casting a thought
upon what they were leaving behind.

The boats now rowed without pausing to the isle, which they called
the Isle of Victuals; and there they stayed two days, nursing their
wounds, and supporting themselves with poultry, of which there was
a great abundance found in the island, and with vegetables and
fruits from the gardens. There was great joy among them when it was
found that Captain Drake's wound, although severe enough, was yet
not likely to imperil his life; and that it was loss of blood,
alone, which had caused him to faint. At this news the men all took
heart, and rejoiced so exceedingly that a stranger would have
supposed that they had attained some great victory, rather than
have come out unsuccessful from an adventure which promised to make
each man wealthy.

Upon the second day after their arrival at the Isle of Victuals,
they saw a boat rowing out from the direction of Nombre de Dios. As
they knew that there was no fleet in that harbor which would
venture to attack them, the English had no fear of the approaching
boat; although, indeed, they wondered much what message could have
been sent them. On board the boat was an hidalgo, or Spanish noble,
who was rowed by four negroes. He said that he had come from the
mainland to make inquiries as to the gallant men who had performed
so great a feat, and that he cherished no malice, whatever, against
them. He wished to know whether the Captain Drake who commanded
them was the same who had been there before, and especially did he
inquire whether the arrows used by the English were poisoned; for,
he said, great fear and alarm reigned in the town, many believing
that all who had been struck by the English shafts would certainly
die.

Upon this head he was soon reassured; and the English were, indeed,
mightily indignant at its being supposed that they would use such
cowardly weapons as poisoned arrows.

Then the hidalgo inquired why the English had so suddenly retreated
from the town, when it was in their hands, and why they had
abstained from carrying off the three hundred and sixty tons of
silver which lay at the governor's house, and the still greater
value of gold in the treasure house--the gold, indeed, being far
more valuable than the silver, insomuch as it was more portable.
The answers to all these questions were freely given, for in those
days there was a curious mixture of peace and war, of desperate
violence and of great courtesy, between combatants; and whereas,
now, an enemy arriving with a view merely to obtain information
would be roughly treated, in those days he was courteously
entertained, and his questions as freely answered as if he had been
a friend and ally.

When he heard of the wound of Captain Drake he expressed great
sorrow; and, after many compliments were exchanged, he returned to
Nombre de Dios; while, the next day, Captain Drake and the English
rowed away to the Isle of Pines, where Captain Rause was remaining
in charge of the ships. He was mightily glad to see them return, as
were their comrades who had remained; for their long absence had
caused great fear and anxiety, as it was thought that Captain Drake
must have fallen into some ambuscade, and that ill had come to the
party.

Although there was some regret at the thought that the chance of
gaining such vast booty had been missed, yet the joy at the safe
return overpowered this feeling; and, for a day or two, the crews
feasted merrily and held festival. Captain Rause then determined to
continue the adventure no further, but to separate with his ship
and men from Captain Drake. He was of opinion, firmly, that now the
Spaniards had discovered their presence in the island, such
measures of defense would be taken, at every port, as to place
these beyond the hazard of attack by so small a body as those
carried by the three ships. He therefore, receiving full
satisfaction for the use of his men and for guarding the ships,
sailed away on the 7th August, leaving the Swanne and the Pacha to
proceed upon the adventure, alone.

Captain Drake sent his brother and Ellis Hickson to examine the
river Chagres; and on their return Captain Drake, with his two
ships and three pinnaces, sailed for Carthagena, where he arrived
on the 13th day of August. While on the voyage thither he captured
two Spanish ships, each of 240 tons, with rich cargoes, neither of
them striking so much as a blow in resistance.

At evening he anchored between the Island of Cara and Saint
Bernardo, and the three pinnaces entered the harbor of Carthagena.

Lying at the entrance they found a frigate, which in those days
meant a very small craft, not much larger than a rowing boat. She
had but one old man on board, who said that the rest of the company
had gone ashore, to fight a duel about a quarrel which they had had
overnight. He said, too, what was much more important to the
English--that, an hour before nightfall, a pinnace had passed him,
and that the man who was steering had shouted out that the English
were at hand, and that he had better up anchor and go into the
port. He said, moreover, that when the pinnace reached Carthagena
guns were fired, and he could see that all the shipping hauled in
under shelter of the castle.

This was bad news indeed, and there was much hard language among
the sailors, when they heard it. It was clear that the castle of
Carthagena, if prepared, was not to be carried by some thirty or
forty men, however gallant and determined they might be. There was,
too, but little hope that the old man had spoken falsely, for they
had themselves heard guns, shortly before their arrival there. With
much bitterness, it was determined to abandon the plan of attack;
and thus Carthagena, as well as Nombre de Dios, escaped from the
hands of the English.

They did not, however, go out empty handed; for they succeeded in
capturing, by boarding, four pinnaces, each laden with cargo; and
as they turned their heads to go out to sea, a great ship of
Seville came sailing in. Her they laid alongside and captured
easily, she having just arrived from Spain, having no thoughts of
meeting a foe, just as she reached her port of destination.

This lightened the hearts of the crew, and with their prizes in
tow, they sailed out in good spirits. The ship contained large
stores of goods from Spain, with sherries, and merchandise of every
kind. They went back to the Isle of Pines, their usual rendezvous,
and on adding up the goods that they had taken from various prizes,
found that, even now, they had made no bad thing of their voyage.

They were now much reduced in fighting strength by illness, and
Captain Drake determined in his mind that the crews were no longer
strong enough for the manning of two ships, and that it would be
better to take to one, alone. He knew, however, that even his
authority would not suffice to persuade the sailors to abandon one
of the vessels, for sailors have a great love for their ships. He
therefore determined to do it by a sudden stroke, and that known
only to himself and another. Therefore he called to him Thomas
Moore, the carpenter of the Swanne; and, taking him aside, told him
to make auger holes in the bottom of that ship. Moore, who was a
good sailor, made a great resistance to the orders; but upon the
admiral assuring him that it was necessary, for the success of the
enterprise, that one of the ships should be destroyed, he very
reluctantly undertook the task.

Previous to this Captain Drake had ordered all the booty, and a
considerable portion of the stores of both ships, to be hauled on
shore; so that they might lose nothing of value to them.

The next morning, Ned and his friends were sitting on the bulwark
of the vessel, watching the fish playing about in the depths of the
clear blue water.

"We seem to be lower in the water than usual," Ned said. "Does not
it seem to you that we are not so high above the sea as we are wont
to be?"

The others agreed that the vessel had that appearance; but as it
seemed clearly impossible that it should be so, especially when she
was lighter than usual, they thought that they must be mistaken,
and the subject was put aside. Half an hour later Captain Drake
himself, rowing alongside, called to his brother, who came to the
side.

"I am going to fish," he said; "are you disposed to come, also?"

Captain John expressed his willingness to do so.

"I will wait for you," his brother said.

Captain John was turning to go into his cabin to get his cap and
cloak, when Captain Francis cried out:

"Is not your ship very low in the water this morning?"

"The same as usual, I suppose," Captain John said, laughing; but
looking over the side himself, he said, "Methinks she does lie deep
in the water;" and, calling the carpenter, he bade him sound the
well.

The latter, after doing so, cried out loudly that there were four
feet of water in the ship.

A great astonishment seized upon both officers and crew, at this
unexpected news. All hands were at once set to work, the pumps were
rigged and, with buckets and all sorts of gear, they strove
manfully and hard to get rid of the water. It soon, however, became
plain that it entered faster than they could pump it forth, and
that the vessel must have sprung a bad leak.

When it was clear that the Swanne could not be saved, the boats of
the Pacha were brought alongside, and all the goods that remained
in her were removed, together with the arms and ammunition. Then
the crew, taking to the boats, lay by, until in a few minutes the
Swanne sank, among the tears of many of her crew, who had made
three voyages in her, and loved her well.

It was not, for a long time afterwards, known that the loss of this
ship was the effect of the orders of the admiral; who, indeed,
acted with his usual wisdom in keeping the matter secret; for
assuredly, although the men would have obeyed his orders, he would
have lost much favor and popularity among them, had the truth been
at that time known.

The next day the news was spread, among the men, that it was
determined to fill the Pacha with all the stores that were on
shore; and, leaving a party there with her, to embark the crews in
the pinnaces, for service in the river Chagres and along the coast;
until, at any rate, they could capture another ship to replace the
Swanne. Next day they rowed on into the Gulf of Darien. There the
ship was laid up in a good place, and they remained quiet for
fifteen days, amusing and refreshing themselves. By this means they
hoped to throw all the Spaniards off their guard, and to cause a
report to be spread that they had left the island.

The Simeroons living near had been warned, by those who had been
landed from the Isle of Pines, of their coming; and received them
with good cheer, and promised all aid that could be required. Then
the pinnaces were sent out, to catch any passing ships which might
be cruising along the coast.

It happened, one day, that two of them had set off in pursuit of a
great ship, which they saw passing in the distance. The wind was
light, and they had little doubt that they should overhaul her.
Ned, who was one of those who remained behind, was much angered at
missing so good an enterprise; but some four hours afterwards
another ship was seen to pass along.

The remaining pinnace was at once manned, Captain John Drake taking
the command; and, with fourteen men, she set out to take the
Spanish galleon. Gallant as are the exploits which have been
performed in modern times by British tars, in their attacks upon
slavers, yet in none of these cases does the disparity of force at
all approach that which often existed between the English boats and
the Spanish galleons; indeed, the only possible reason that can be
given, for the success of the English, is the fear that their enemy
entertained for them. Both the Spanish captains and crews had come
to look upon them as utterly invincible, and they seemed, when
attacked by the English buccaneers, altogether paralyzed.

As the boat rowed up towards the great ship, her size became
gradually more apparent, and her deck could be seen crowded with
men; even Ned, who was not greatly given to reflection, could not
but feel a passing doubt as to the possibility of one small boat,
with fourteen men, attacking a floating castle like this.

Presently the boom of a cannon from the forecastle of the vessel
was heard, and a ball whizzed over their heads; then shot after
shot was fired, and soon a rattle of small arms broke out, and the
water all round was cut up by bullets and balls. The rough seamen
cared little for this demonstration. With a cheer they bent their
backs to the oars and, although some were wounded, they rowed up to
the side of the ship without hesitation or doubt. Then from above a
shower of missiles were hurled upon them--darts, stones, hot water,
and even boiling tar.

It would have gone hard with the English, had not the Spanish
carelessly left a porthole open near the water level; through this
the English clambered, eager to get at their foe, and many of them
raging with the pain caused by the boiling materials. As they
rushed on to the deck, the Spaniards were ranged, in two ranks, on
either side of the hatchway; and fell upon them at once; but so
great was the fury of the English that, facing either way, with a
roar like beasts springing on their prey, they fell with axe and
sword upon the Spaniards.

It was the wild rage with which the English buccaneers fought that
was the secret of their success. The Spaniards are a people given
to ceremony, and even in matters of battle are somewhat formal and
pedantic. The combat, then, between them and the English, was one
which presented no familiar conditions to their minds. These rough
sailors, hardened by exposure, skilled in the use of arms, were no
doubt formidable enough, individually; but this alone would not
have intimidated the Spaniards, or have gone any great distance
towards equalizing the tremendous odds between them.

It was the fury with which they fought that was the secret of their
success. It was as when a cat, furious with passion, flies at a dog
many times larger and heavier than itself. The latter may be as
brave, in many matters, as the cat; and ready to face a creature
much larger even than itself, under ordinary circumstances. It is
the fury of the cat which appalls, and turns it into a very coward.

Thus, when the band of English fell upon the Spaniards in the
galleon--who were some six times as numerous as themselves--naked
to the waist, with hair streaming back, with all their faces wild
with pain, brandishing their heavy axes, and with a shout rushed
upon their foes drawn up in regular order; the latter, after a
moment or two of resistance, began rapidly to fall back. Their
officers, in vain, shouted to them to stand firm. In vain they
taunted them with falling back before a handful of men. In vain
even turned their swords against their own soldiers.

It was useless. Those in front, unable indeed to retreat, were cut
down by the heavy axes. Those behind recoiled, and after but a few
minutes' fighting, some began to leap down the hatchways; and
