saw myself. Once more I attempted to make expressive eyes, but the
result was not favourable to vanity. Then I drew back to the door, and,
advancing upon the mirror with mincing steps, I threw all the grace and
graciousness of which I was conscious into my manner, and holding out my
hand, said, in a "company voice," "_Charmed_ to see you, I'm sure!"

"_Mais c'est bien drole!_" said a soft voice close behind me.

I had not heard the door open, and yet there stood Aunt Theresa on the
threshold, and with her a little old lady. The little old lady had a
bright, delicately cut face, eyes of whose expressiveness there could be
no question, and large grey curls. She wore a large hat, with large bows
tied under her chin, and a dark-green satin driving-cloak lined with
white and grey fur.

She looked like a fairy godmother, like the ghost of an ancestor--like
"somebody out of a picture." She was my great-grandmother.




CHAPTER VII.

MY GREAT-GRANDMOTHER--THE DUCHESS'S CARRIAGE--MRS. O'CONNOR IS CURIOUS.


I was much discomfited. My position was not a dignified one at the best,
and in childhood such small shames seem too terrible ever to be
outlived. My great-grandmother laughed heartily, and Mrs. Buller, whose
sense of humour was small, looked annoyed.

"What in the world are you doing here, Margery?" she said.

I had little or no moral courage, and I had not been trained in high
principles. If I could have thought of a plausible lie, I fear I should
have told it in my dilemma. As it was, I could not; I only put my hand
to my burning cheek, and said:

"Let me see!"

I must certainly have presented a very comical appearance, but the
little old lady's smiles died away, and her eyes filled with tears.

"It is strange, is it not," she said to Aunt Theresa, "that, after all,
I should laugh at this meeting?"

Then, sitting down on a box by the door, she held out her hands to me,
saying:

"Come, little Margery, there is no sin in practising one's good manners
before the mirror. Come and kiss me, dear child; I am your father's
father's mother. Is not that to be an old woman? I am your
great-grandmother."

My great-grandmother's voice was very soft, her cheek was soft, her
cloak was soft. I buried my face in the fur, and cried quietly to myself
with shame and excitement; she stroking my head, and saying:

"_Pauvre petite!_--thou an orphan, and I doubly childless! It is thus we
meet at last to join our hands across the graves of two generations of
those we love!"

"It was a dreadful thing!" said Mrs. Buller, rummaging in her pocket for
a clean handkerchief. "I'm sure I never should forget it, if I lived a
thousand years. I never seemed able to realize that they were gone; it
was all so sudden."

The old lady made no answer, and we all wept in silence.

Aunt Theresa was the first to recover herself, and she insisted on our
coming down-stairs. A young regimental surgeon and his wife dropped in
to lunch, for which my great-grandmother stayed. We were sitting in the
drawing-room afterwards, when "Mrs. Vandaleur's carriage" was announced.
As my great-grandmother took leave of me, she took off a watch and chain
and hung them on my neck. It was a small French watch with an enamelled
back of dark blue, on which was the word "Souvenir" in small pearls.

"I gave it to your grandfather long years ago, my child, and he gave it
back to me--before he sailed. I would only part with it to his son's
child. Farewell, _petite_! Be good, dear child--try to be good. Adieu,
Mrs. Buller, and a thousand thanks! Major Buller, I am at your service."

Major Buller took the hand she held out to him and led the old lady to
the front door, whither we all followed them.

Mrs. Vandaleur's carriage was before the steps. It was a very quaint
little box on two wheels, in by no means good repair. It was drawn by a
pony, white, old, and shaggy. At the pony's head stood a small boy in
decent, but not smart, plain clothes.

"Put the mat over the wheel to save my dress, Adolphe," said the old
lady; and as the little boy obeyed her order she stepped nimbly into
the carriage, assisted by the Major. "The silk is old," she observed
complacently; "but it is my best, of course, or it would not have been
worn to-day," and she gave a graceful little bow towards Aunt Theresa;
"and I hope that, with care, it will serve as such for the rest of my
life, which cannot be very long."

"If it wears as well as you do, Madam," said Major Buller, tucking her
in, "it may; not otherwise."

The Surgeon was leaning over the other side of the little cart, and
seemed also to be making polite speeches. It recalled the way that men
used to hang upon my mother's carriage. The old lady smiled, and made
gracious little replies, and meanwhile deliberately took off her kid
gloves, folded, and put them into her pocket. She then drew on a pair of
old worsted ones.

"Economy, economy," she said, smiling, and giving a hand on each side of
her to the two gentlemen. "May I trouble you for the reins? Many thanks.
Farewell, gentlemen! I cannot pretend to fear that my horse will catch
cold--his coat is too thick; but you may. Adieu, Mrs. Buller, once more.
Farewell, little one, I wish you good-morning, Madam. Adolphe, seat
yourself; make your bow, Adolphe. Adieu, dear friends!"

She gave a flick with the whip, which the pony resented by shaking his
head; after which he seemed, so to speak, to snatch up the little cart,
my great-grandmother, and Adolphe, and to run off with them at a good
round pace.

"What an extraordinary turn-out!" said the Surgeon's wife. (She was an
Irish attorney's daughter, with the commonest of faces, and the most
unprecedented of bonnets. She and her husband had lately "set up" a
waggonette, the expense of which just made it difficult for them to live
upon their means, and the varnish of which added a care to life.) "Fancy
driving down High Street in that!" she continued; "and just when
everybody is going out, too!"

"Uncommon sensible little affair, I think," said the Surgeon. "Suits the
old lady capitally."

"Mrs. Vandaleur," said Major Buller, "can afford to be independent of
appearances to an extent that would not perhaps be safe for most of us."

"You're right there, Buller," said the Surgeon. "Wonderfully queenly she
is! That fur cloak looks like an ermine robe on her."

"I don't think you'd like to see me in it!" tittered his wife.

"I don't say I should," returned the Surgeon, rather smartly.

"My dear," said Mrs. Buller, "you must make up your mind to be jealous
of the Duchess. All gentlemen are mad about her."

"The Duchess!" said Mrs. O'Connor, in a tone of respect. "I thought you
said----"

"Oh, she is not really a duchess, my dear; it's only a nickname. I'll
tell you all about it some day. It's a long story."

Discovering that Mrs. Vandaleur was a family connection, and not a
chance visitor from the neighbourhood, Mrs. O'Connor apologized for her
remarks, and tried to extract the Duchess's history from Aunt Theresa
then and there. But Mrs. Buller would only promise to tell it "another
time."

"I'm dying with curiosity," said Mrs. O'Connor, as she took leave, "I
shall run in to-morrow afternoon on purpose to hear all about it. Can
you do with me, dear Mrs. Buller?"

"Pray come," said Aunt Theresa warmly, with an amiable disregard of two
engagements and some arrears of domestic business.

I was in the drawing-room next day when Mrs. O'Connor arrived.

"May I come in, dear Mrs. Buller?" she said, "I won't stay two minutes;
but I _must_ hear about the Duchess. Now, _are_ you busy?"

"Not at all," said Aunt Theresa, who was in the midst of making up her
tradesmen's books. "Pray sit down, and take off your bonnet."

"It's hardly worth while, for I _can't_ stay," said Mrs. O'Connor,
taking her bonnet off, and setting it down so as not to crush the
flowers.

As Mrs. O'Connor stayed two hours and a half, and as Aunt Theresa
granted my request to be allowed to hear her narrative, I learnt a good
deal of the history of my great-grandmother.




CHAPTER VIII.

A FAMILY HISTORY.


"We are not really connected," Mrs. Buller began. "She is Margery's
great-grandmother, and Margery and I are second cousins. That's all. But
I knew her long ago, before my poor cousin Alice married Captain
Vandaleur. And I have heard the whole story over and over again."

I have heard the story more than once also. I listened with open mouth
to Aunt Theresa at this time, and often afterwards questioned her about
my "ancestors," as I may almost call them.

Years later I used to repeat these histories to girls I was with. When
we were on good terms they were interested to hear, as I was proud to
tell, and would say, "Tell us about your ancestors, Margery." And if we
fell out there was no surer method of annoying me than to slight the
memory of my great-great-grandparents.

I have told their story pretty often. I shall put it down here in my own
way, for Aunt Theresa told a story rather disconnectedly.

The de Vandaleurs (we have dropped the _de_ now) were an old French
family. There was a Duke in it who was killed in the Revolution of '92,
and most of the family emigrated, and were very poor. The title was
restored afterwards, and some of the property. It went to a cousin of
the Duke who was murdered, he having no surviving children; but they say
it went in the wrong line. The cousin who had remained in France, and
always managed to keep the favour of the ruling powers, got the title,
and remade his fortunes; the others remained in England, very poor and
very proud. They would not have accepted any favours from the new royal
family, but still they considered themselves deprived of their rights.
One of these Vandaleur _emigres_ (the one who ought to have been the
Duke) had married his cousin. They suffered great hardships in their
escape, I fancy, and on the birth of their son, shortly after their
arrival in England, the wife died.

There was an old woman, Aunt Theresa said, who used to be her nurse when
she was a child, in London, who had lived, as a girl, in the wretched
lodgings where these poor people were when they came over, and she used
to tell her wonderful stories about them. How, in her delirium (she was
insane for some little time before her son was born), Madame de
Vandaleur fancied herself in her old home, "with all her finery about
her," as Nurse Brown used to say.

Nurse Brown seems to have had very little sympathy with nervous
diseases. She could understand a broken leg, or a fever, "when folks
kept their beds"; but the disordered fancies of a brain tried just too
far, the mad whims of a lady who could "go about," and who insisted upon
going about, and changing her dress two or three times a day, and
receiving imaginary visitors, and ordering her faithful nurse up and
down under the names of half-a-dozen servants she no longer possessed,
were beyond her comprehension.

Aunt Theresa said that she and her brothers and sisters had the deepest
pity for the poor lady. They thought it so romantic that she should cry
for fresh flowers and dress herself to meet the Queen in a dirty little
lodging at the back of Leicester Square, and they were always begging to
hear "what else she did." But Nurse Brown seems to have been fondest of
relating the smart speeches in which she endeavoured to "put sense into"
the devoted French servant who toiled to humour every whim of her
unhappy mistress, instead of being "sharp with her," as Nurse Brown
advised. Aunt Theresa had some doubts whether Mrs. Brown ever did make
the speeches she reported; but when people say they said this or that,
they often only mean that this or that is what they wish they had said.

"If she's mad, I says, shave her head, instead of dressing her hair all
day long. I've knowed mad people as foamed at the mouth and rolled their
eyes, and would have done themselves a injury but for a strait-jacket;
and I've knowed folks in fevers unreasonable enough, but they kept their
beds in a dark room, and didn't know their own mothers. Madame's ways is
beyond me, I says. _You_ calls it madness: _I_ calls it temper.
Tem--per, and no--thing else."

Aunt Theresa used to make us laugh by repeating Nurse Brown's sayings,
and the little shake of herself with which she emphasized the last
sentence.

If she had no sympathy for Madame de Vandaleur, she had a double share
for the poor lady's husband: "a _good_ soul," as she used to call him.
It was in vain that Jeanette spoke of the sweet temper and
unselfishness of her mistress "before these terrible days"; her conduct
towards her husband then was "enough for" Nurse Brown, so she said. No
sooner had the poor gentleman gone off on some errand for her pleasure
than she called for him to be with her, and was only to be pacified by a
fable of Jeanette's devising, who always said that "the King" had
summoned Monsieur de Vandaleur. Jeanette was well aware that, the
childless old Duke being dead, her master had succeeded to the title,
and she often spoke of him as Monsieur le Duc to his wife, which seems
to have pleased the poor lady. When he was absent, Jeanette's ready
excuse, "_Eh, Madame! Pour Monsieur le Duc--le Roi l'a fait appeller_,"
was enough, and she waited patiently for his return.

Ever-changing as her whims and fancies were, the poor gentleman
sacrificed everything to gratify them. His watch, his rings, his
buckles, the lace from his shirt, and all the few trifles secured in
their hasty flight, were sold one by one. His face was familiar to the
keepers of certain stalls near to where Covent Garden Market now stands.
He bought flowers for Madame when he could not afford himself food. He
sold his waistcoat, and buttoned his coat across him--and looked thinner
than ever.

Then the day came when Madame wished, and he could not gratify her
wish. Everything was gone. He said, "This will kill me, Jeanette;" and
Jeanette believed him.

Nurse Brown (according to her own account) assured Jeanette that it
would not. "Folk doesn't die of such things, says I."

But, in spite of common-sense and experience, Monsieur de Vandaleur did
die of grief, or something very like it, within twenty-four hours of the
death of his wife, and the birth of their only son.

For some years the faithful Jeanette supported this child by her own
industry. She was an exquisite laundress, and she throve where the Duke
and Duchess would have starved. As the boy grew up she kept him as far
as possible from common companions, treated him with as much deference
as if he had succeeded to the family honours, and filled his head with
traditions of the deserts and dignity of the de Vandaleurs.

At last a cousin of Monsieur de Vandaleur found them out. He also was an
exile, but he had prospered better, had got a small civil appointment,
and had married a Scotch lady. It was after he had come to the help of
his young kinsman, I think, that an old French lady took a fancy to the
boy, and sent him to school in France at her own expense. He was just
nineteen when she died, and left him what little money she possessed.
He then returned to England, and paid his respects to his cousin and the
Scotch Mrs. Vandaleur.

She congratulated herself, I have heard, that her only child, a
daughter, was from home when this visit was paid.

Mrs. Janet Vandaleur was a high-minded, hard-headed, north-country
woman. She valued long descent, and noble blood, and loyalty to a fallen
dynasty like a Scotchwoman, but, like a Scotchwoman, she also respected
capability and energy and endurance. She combined a romantic heart with
a practical head in a way peculiar to her nation. She knew the pedigree
of every family (who had a pedigree) north of the Tweed, and was,
probably, the best housekeeper in Great Britain. She devoutly believed
her own husband to be as perfect as mortal man may be here below, whilst
in some separate compartment of her brain she had the keenest sense of
the defects and weaknesses which he inherited, and dreaded nothing more
than to see her daughter mated with one of the helpless Vandaleurs.

This daughter, with much of her mother's strong will and practical
capacity, had got her father's _physique_ and a good deal of his
artistic temperament. Dreading the development of _de Vandaleur_
qualities in her, the mother made her education studiously practical
and orderly. She had, like most Scotch matrons of her type, too good a
gift for telling family stories, and too high a respect for ancestral
traditions, to have quite kept herself from amusing her daughter's
childhood with tales of the de Vandaleur greatness. But after her
husband discovered his young relative, and as their daughter grew up,
she purposely avoided the subject, which had, probably, the sole effect
of increasing her daughter's interest in the family romance. Mrs. Janet
knew the de Vandaleur pedigree as well as her own, and had shown a
miniature of the late Duke in his youth to her daughter as a child on
many occasions; when she had also alluded to the fact that the title by
birth was undoubtedly in the exiled branch of the family. Miss Vandaleur
was not ignorant that the young gentleman who had just completed his
education was, if every one had their rights, Monsieur le Duc; and she
was as much disappointed to have missed seeing him as her mother was
glad that they had not met.

For Bertrand de Vandaleur had all the virtues and the weaknesses of his
family in intense proportions. He had a hopeless ignorance of the value
of money, which was his strongest condemnation before his Scotch cousin.
He was high-minded, chivalrous, in some points accomplished, charming,
and tender-hearted. But he was weak of will, merely passive in
endurance, and quite without energy. He had a graceful, fanciful, but
almost weak intellect. I mean, it just bordered on mental deficiency;
and at times his dreamy eyes took a wildness that was said to make him
painfully like his mother in her last days. He was an absurd but
gracefully romantic idea of his family consequence. He was very
handsome, and very like the miniature of the late Duke. It was most
desirable that his cousin should not meet him, especially as she was of
the sentimental age of seventeen. So Mrs. Janet Vandaleur hastened their
return from London to their small property in Scotland.

But there was no law to hinder Monsieur de Vandaleur from making a
Scotch tour.

One summer's afternoon, when she had just finished the making of some
preserves, Miss Vandaleur strolled down through a little wood behind the
house towards a favourite beck that ran in a gorge below. She was
singing an old French song in praise of the beauty of a fair lady of the
de Vandaleurs of olden time. As she finished the first verse, a voice
from a short distance took up the refrain--

     "Victoire de Vandaleur! Victoire! Victoire!"

It was her own name as well as that of her ancestress, and she blushed
as her eyes met those of a strange young gentleman, with a sketch-book
in his hand, and a French poodle at his heels.

"Place aux dames!" said the stranger. On which the white poodle sat up,
and his master bowed till his head nearly touched the ground.

They had met once as children, which was introduction enough in the
