eyes, and when they see a Mouse they drop suddenly down and catch him.
They fly in the daytime."

"Tell me about Owls."

"They are big birds who fly by night without making any noise. They can
see from far away, and they catch Mice."

"Tell me about Weasels."

"They are slender little animals, nearly twice as long as a Mouse. They
have small heads, four short legs, and sharp claws; have brown fur on
their backs and white underneath, and sometimes, when the weather is
very cold, they turn white all over."

"Tell me about Cats."

"Cats are very much bigger than Weasels, and are of many colors. They
have long tails and whiskers, and dreadful great eyes. They walk on four
legs, but make no noise because they have cushions on their feet."

"Tell me about men."

"Men are very big, two-legged people, and when they are fully grown are
taller than Cows. They make noise in walking, and they can neither smell
nor see us from afar."

"And what are you to do when you see these dangers coming?"

"We are to run away as fast as we can from Hawks, Weasels, Owls, and
Cats. If a man comes near us, we are to lie perfectly still and watch
him, and are not to move unless we are sure that he sees us or is likely
to step on us. Men do not know so much about Mice as the other dangers
do."

"And what if you are not sure that some creature is a Hawk, an Owl, a
Weasel, or a Cat?"

"If we even think it may be, we are to run."

"When are you to run?"

"At once."

"Say that again."

"We are to run at once."

"Very good. That is all for to-day."

You can see how well the Meadow Mouse mother brought up her children,
and how carefully she taught them about life. If they had been wise and
always minded her, they would have saved themselves much trouble.

Seven of them were dutiful and obedient, but the largest of the eight,
and the finest-looking, liked to decide things for himself, and often
laughed at his brothers and sisters for being afraid. Because he was so
big and handsome, and spoke in such a dashing way, they sometimes
wondered if he didn't know as much as their mother.

One sunshiny day, when all the eight children were playing and feeding
together in the short grass, one of them saw a great black bird in the
air. "Oh, look!" she cried. "That may be a Hawk. We'd better run."

"Pooh!" said the biggest little Meadow Mouse. "Who's afraid?"

"Mother said to run," they squeaked, and seven long bare tails whisked
out of sight under a stump.

"Ho-ho!" said the biggest little Meadow Mouse. "Before I'd be so scared!
I dare you to come back! I dare you to----"

Just then the Hawk swooped down. And that is the end of the story, for
after that, there was no foolish little Meadow Mouse to tell about.




THE LONELY LITTLE PIG


One day the Brown Hog called to her twelve young Pigs and their ten
older brothers and sisters, "Look! look! What is in that cage?"

The twenty-two stubby snouts that were thrust through the opening of the
rail-fence were quivering with eagerness and impatience. Their owners
wished to know all that was happening, and the old mother's eyes were
not so sharp as they had once been, so if the Pigs wanted to know the
news, they must stop their rooting to find it out. Bits of the soft
brown earth clung to their snouts and trembled as they breathed.

"It looks like a Pig," they said, "only it is white."

"It is a Pig then," grunted their mother, as she lay in the shade of an
oak tree. "There are white Pigs, although I never fancied the color. It
looks too cold and clean. Brown is more to my taste, brown or black.
Your poor father was brown and black, and a finer looking Hog I never
saw. Ugh! Ugh!" And she buried her eyes in the loose earth. The Pigs
looked at her and then at each other. They did not often speak of their
father. Indeed the younger ones did not remember him at all. One of the
Cows said he had such a bad temper that the farmer sent him away, and it
is certain that none of them had seen him since the day he was driven
down the lane.

While they were thinking of this and feeling rather sad, the wagon
turned into their lane and they could plainly see the Pig inside. She
was white and quite beautiful in her piggish way. Her ears stood up
stiffly, her snout was as stubby as though it had been broken off, her
eyes were very small, and her tail had the right curl. When she squealed
they could see her sharp teeth, and when she put her feet up on the
wooden bars of her rough cage, they noticed the fine hoofs on the two
big toes of each foot and the two little toes high on the back of her
legs, each with its tiny hoof. She was riding in great style, and it is
no wonder that the twenty-two Brown Pigs with black spots and black feet
opened their eyes very wide. They did not know that the farmer brought
her in this way because he was in a hurry, and Pigs will not make haste
when farmers want them to. The Hogs are a queer family, and the Off Ox
spoke truly when he said that the only way to make one hurry ahead is to
tie a rope to his leg and pull back, they are so sure to be contrary.

"She's coming here!" the Brown Pigs cried. "Oh, Mother, she's coming
here! We're going to see the men take her out of her cage."

The old Hog grunted and staggered to her feet to go with them, but she
was fat and slow of motion, so that by the time she was fairly standing,
they were far down the field and running helter-skelter by the side of
the fence. As she stared dully after them she could see the twenty-two
curly tails bobbing along, and she heard the soft patter of eighty-eight
sharp little double hoofs on the earth.

"Ugh!" she grunted. "Ugh! Ugh! I am too late to go. Never mind! They
will tell me all about it, and I can take a nap. I haven't slept half
the time to-day, and I need rest."

Just as the Mother Hog lay down again, the men lifted the White Pig from
the wagon, cage and all, so she began to squeal, and she squealed and
squealed and squealed and squealed until she was set free in the field
with the Brown Pigs. Nobody had touched her and nobody had hurt her,
but it was all so strange and new that she thought it would make her
feel better to squeal. When she was out of her cage and in the field,
she planted her hoofs firmly in the ground, looked squarely at the Brown
Pigs, and grunted a pleasant, good-natured grunt. The Brown Pigs planted
their hoofs in the ground and grunted and stared. They didn't ask her to
go rooting with them, and not one of the ten big Pigs or the twelve
little Pigs said, "We are glad to see you."

There is no telling how long they would have stood there if the Horses
had not turned the wagon just then. The minute the wheels began to grate
on the side of the box, every Brown Pig whirled around and ran off.

The poor little White Pig did not know what to make of it. She knew that
she had not done anything wrong. She wondered if they didn't mean to
speak to her.

[Illustration: EVERY BROWN PIG RAN OFF.]

At first she thought she would run after them and ask to root with them,
but then she remembered something her mother had told her when she was
so young that she was pink. It was this: "When you don't know what to
do, go to sleep." So she lay down and took a nap.

The Brown Pigs did not awaken their mother, and when they stopped in the
fence-corner one of them said to their big sister, "What made you run?"

"Oh, nothing," said she.

"And why did you run?" the little Pigs asked their big brother.

"Because," he answered.

After a while somebody said, "Let's go back to where the White Pig is."

"Oh, no," said somebody else, "don't let's! She can come over here if
she wants to, and it isn't nearly so nice there."

You see, they were very rude Pigs and not at all well brought up. Their
mother should have taught them to think of others and be kind, which is
really all there is to politeness. But then, she had very little time
left from sleeping, and it took her all of that for eating, so her
children had no manners at all.

At last the White Pig opened her round eyes and saw all the Brown Pigs
at the farther end of the field. "Ugh!" said she to herself, "Ugh! I
must decide what to do before they see that I am awake." She lay there
and tried to think what her mother, who came of a very fine family, had
told her before she left. "If you have nobody to play with," her mother
had said, "don't stop to think about it, and don't act as though you
cared. Have a good time by yourself and you will soon have company. If
you cannot enjoy yourself, you must not expect others to enjoy you."

"That is what I will do," exclaimed the White Pig. "My mother always
gives her children good advice when they go out into the world, and she
is right when she says that Pigs of fine family should have fine
manners. I will never forget that I am a Yorkshire. I'm glad I didn't
say anything mean."

So the White Pig rooted in the sunshine and wallowed in the warm brown
earth that she had stirred up with her pink snout. Once in a while she
would run to the fence to watch somebody in the lane, and before she
knew it she was grunting contentedly to herself. "Really," she said, "I
am almost having a good time. I will keep on making believe that I would
rather do this than anything else."

       *       *       *       *       *

The big sister of the Brown Pigs looked over to the White Pig and said,
"She's having lots of fun all by herself, it seems to me."

Big brother raised his head. "Let's call her over here," he answered.

"Oh, do!" cried the twelve little Pigs, wriggling their tails. "She
looks so full of fun."

"Call her yourself," said the big sister to the big brother.

"Ugh!" called he. "Ugh! Ugh! Don't you want to come over with us, White
Pig?"

You can imagine how the White Pig felt when she heard this; how her
small eyes twinkled and the corners of her mouth turned up more than
ever. She was just about to scamper over and root with them, when she
remembered something else that her mother had told her: "Never run after
other Pigs. Let them run after you. Then they will think more of you."

She called back, "I'm having too good a time here to leave my
rooting-ground. Won't you come over here?"

"Come on," cried all the little Pigs to each other. "Beat you there!"

They ate and talked and slept together all afternoon, and when the Brown
Hog called her children home, they and the White Pig were the best of
friends. "Just think," they said to their mother, "the White Pig let us
visit her, and she is just as nice as she can be."

The White Pig in her corner of the pen heard this and smiled to herself.
"My mother was right," she said; "'Have a good time alone, and everybody
will want to come.'"




THE KITTEN WHO LOST HERSELF


"I think," said the Blind Horse, "that something is the matter with my
ears." He and the Dappled Gray had been doing field-work all the
morning, and were now eating a hearty dinner in their stalls. They were
the only people on the first floor of the barn. Even the stray Doves who
had wandered in the open door were out in the sunshine once more. Once
in a while the whirr of wings told that some Swallow darted through the
window into the loft above and flew to her nest under the roof. There
was a deep and restful quiet in the sun-warmed air, and yet the Blind
Horse had seemed to be listening to something which the other did not
hear.

The Dappled Gray stopped eating at once. "Your ears?" said he. "What is
wrong with them? I thought your hearing was very good."

"It always has been," was the answer, "and finer than ever since I lost
my sight. You know it is always so with us blind people. We learn to
hear better than we could before losing our sight. But ever since we
came in from the field I have had a queer sound in my ears, and I think
there is something the matter with them."

The Dappled Gray stopped eating and stood perfectly still to listen. He
did not even switch his tail, although at that minute there were three
Flies on his left side and one on his neck. He was trying as hard as he
could to hear the queer sound also, for if he did, it would prove that
the noise was real and that the Blind Horse's hearing was all right.

He could not hear a thing. "What is it like?" he asked.

"Like the loud purring of a Cat," was the answer, "but everybody knows
that the Cat is not purring anywhere around here."

"She might be," said the Dappled Gray. "Where does the sound seem to
be?"

"Above my head," said the Blind Horse; "and she certainly would not be
purring up there at this time. She would either be sound asleep, or off
hunting, or else out in the sunshine, where she loves to sit."

The Dappled Gray felt that this was so, and he could not say a word. He
was very sorry for his friend. He thought how dreadful it would seem to
be both blind and deaf, and he choked on the oats he was swallowing.

"Now don't worry," said the Blind Horse; "if I should be deaf, I could
still feel the soft touch of the breeze on my skin, and could taste my
good food, and rub noses with my friends. I wouldn't have spoken of it,
only I hoped that you could hear the noise also, and then I would know
that it was real." That was just like him. He was always patient and
sweet-tempered. In all the years he had been blind, he had never once
complained of it, and many times when the other Horses were about to say
or do some ill-natured thing, they thought of him and stopped. They were
ashamed to be impatient when they were so much better off than he.

The Horses kept on eating their oats and resting from their hard work.
In the hay-loft above their heads, the Cat lay and purred and purred and
purred, never dreaming that her doing so made trouble for her friends
downstairs.

She had been hunting all the night before, creeping softly through the
barn and hiding behind bags and boxes to watch for careless Mice and
young Rats. They were night-runners as well as she, and many things
happened in the barn and farmyard while the larger four-legged people
were sound asleep and the fowls were dreaming with their heads tucked
under their wings. Sometimes there were not so many Mice in the morning
as there had been the evening before, and when this was so, the Cat
would walk slowly through the barn and look for a comfortable
resting-place. When she found it, she would turn around three times, as
her great-great-great-great-great-great-grandmother used to do to
trample a bed in the jungle, and then lie down for a long nap. She said
she always slept better when her stomach was full, and that was the
habit of all Cats.

Sometimes she hunted in the fields, and many a morning at sunrise the
Cows had seen her walking toward the barn on the top of the fences. She
did not like to wet her feet on the dewy grass when it could be helped;
so, as soon as she was through hunting, she jumped on to the nearest
fence and went home in that way.

Yes, last night she had been hunting, yet she was not thinking of it
now. Neither was she asleep. A Rat gnawed at the boards near her, and
she hardly turned her head. A Mouse ran across the floor in plain sight,
and she watched him without moving. What did she care about them now?
Her first Kittens lay on the hay beside her, and she would not leave
them on this first day of their lives unless she really had to.

Of course she had seen little Kittens before--Kittens that belonged to
other Cats--but she was certain that none of them had looked at all like
her three charming babies. She could not decide which one of them was
the most beautiful. She was a Tortoise-shell Cat herself, and her fur
was spotted with white, black, and yellow. The babies had the same
colors on their soft coats, but not in just the same way as hers.

At first she thought her largest daughter was the beauty of the family;
she was such a clear yellow, with not a hair of any other color on her.
"I always did like yellow Cats," said the young mother, "and they are
said to be very strong."

Then she looked at her smaller daughter, who was white with tiny yellow
and black spots on neck and head. "Such a clean-looking baby," she
exclaimed, "and I am sure that when her eyes are open I shall find them
blue like my own."

Just at this moment, the warm, dark little bunch of fur between her
forepaws moved, and she looked lovingly down upon him, her only son. "He
is certainly a very remarkable one," she said. "I never before saw such
a fine mixture of yellow and black, first a hair of one and then a hair
of the other, so that, unless one is very close to him it looks like a
rich brown. And then his feet!" She gave him a loving little poke with
one forefoot and turned him onto his back. This made him wave his tiny
paws in the air. The thick cushions of skin on each were as black as
black could be, and that is very uncommon. They are usually pink, like
those of his sisters.

The little fellow lay there, wriggling very feebly, until his mother
gave him another poke that turned him over. Then he stretched and
crawled toward her, reaching his head first one way and then another. He
was so weak that he could not raise his body from the hay, but dragged
it along by taking short and uncertain steps with his four shaking legs.
It was only a short time since he found that he had legs, and he hadn't
any idea how to use them. He just moved whichever one seemed most in his
way.

He didn't know where he was going, or what he was going for, but his
little stomach was empty and he was cold. Something, he didn't know
what, made him drag himself toward the big, warm creature near by. When
his black nose touched the fur of her body, he stopped pushing ahead and
began to feel from side to side. He did not know now for what he was
feeling, yet when he found something his tiny mouth closed around it and
a stream of sweet warm milk began to flow down his throat and into his
empty stomach. He did not know that it was milk. He did not know
anything except that it was good, and then he fell asleep. His sisters
did in the same way, and soon the happy mother could look down and see
her three babies in a row beside her, all sound asleep. Their pointed
little tails lay straight out behind them, and their soft ears were bent
forward close to their heads.

"I wonder," said she, "if I was ever as small as they are, and if my
mother loved me as I love them." She stretched out one of her forepaws
and looked at it. It was so much larger, so very much larger, than the
paws of the Kittens. Such a soft and dainty paw as it was, and so
perfectly clean. She stretched it even more, and saw five long, curved,
sharp claws slide out of their sheaths or cases. She quickly slid them
back into their sheaths, for fear that in some way they might happen to
touch and hurt her babies.

A Swallow flew down from his nest and passed over her head, then out of
the open window. "Kittens!" said he. "Kittens!" He flew over the fields
and saw two Horses standing by the fence while the farmer was oiling his
machine. "We have new neighbors in the barn," said he, "and the Cat is
purring louder than ever."

"Who are the neighbors?" asked the Dappled Gray.

"Kittens!" sang the Swallow. "Oh, tittle-ittle-ittle-ee."

The Blind Horse drew a long breath. "Then I did hear her purr," said he;
"I am so glad." He never made a fuss about his troubles, for he was
brave and unselfish, yet the Dappled Gray knew without being told how
much lighter his heart was since he heard that the Cat had really been
purring above his head.

The days passed by, and the Kittens grew finely. They got their eyes
open, first in narrow cracks, and then wider and wider, until they were
round and staring. The White Kitten had blue ones, the others brown. In
the daytime, they had long, narrow black spots in the middle of their
eyes, and as the bright light faded, these black spots spread out
sideways until they were quite round. When it was very dark, these spots
glowed like great Fireflies in the night. Then the Mice, who often
scampered through the loft when the Cat was away, would see three pairs
of eyes glowing in the hay, and they would squeak to each other: "See!
The Kittens are watching us."

And the Kittens, who were not yet old enough to go hunting, and who were
afraid of everything that stirred, would crowd up against each other,
arch their little backs, raise their pointed tails, stand their fur on
end, and say, "Pst! Ha-a-ah!"

Sometimes they did this when there was not a person in sight and what
frightened them was nothing but a wisp of hay, blown down by the wind.
Afterward, when anything moved, they sprang at it, held it down with
their sharp little claws, and chewed on it with their pointed white
teeth. When they were tired of this game, they played hide-and-seek, and
when they were tired of that they chased their tails. It was so nice
always to have playthings with them. Sometimes, too, they chased each
other's tails, and caught them and bit them hard, until the Kitten who
owned the tail cried, "Mieow!" and tumbled the biter over.

They were allowed to play all through the loft except over the mangers.
Their mother was afraid that if they went there they would fall through
the holes which had been left in the floor. During the winter, the
farmer used to throw hay down through these to the hungry Horses. When
the Cat saw her children going toward these places, she called them back
and scolded them. Sometimes she struck them lightly on the ears with her
forepaw. "I don't like to," said she, "but they must learn to keep away.
It is not safe for them to go there."

One morning when she was away, they were playing hide-and-seek, and the
White Kitten was hunting for a good hiding-place. "I'll hide near one of
these holes," she said, "and they won't dare come there to look. Then,
after they have hunted a long, long time, I'll get another place and
let them find me." She did hide there, and after a long, long time, when
her brother and sister were in the farther end of the loft, she tried to
run over to another dark corner. Instead of that, the hay began to slip
and slide under her and she went down, down, down, through a long dark
box, and hit with a hard thud at the bottom.

She was so scared that she couldn't have told how many toes she had on
her forefeet. Of course, she had five on each, like all Kittens, and
four on each hind-foot, but if anybody had asked her then, she would
have been quite likely to say "three."

She was sore, too, and when she felt a warm breath on her and opened her
eyes, she saw that some great creature had thrust his nose through a
hole in the side of the dark box. "It must be a Horse," she thought,
"and my mother says that they are kind to Cats. I think I'd better tell
him who I am. I don't want him to take me for a Pig, because he may not
