"Now or never."

All this pantomime, I suppose, meant that Bobby had some misgivings as
to the ultimate success of his mission at Squire Lee's, and that when
he struck his breast and uttered his favorite expression, they were
conquered and driven out.

Marching with a bold and determined step up to the squire's back
door,--Bobby's ideas of etiquette would not have answered for the
meridian of fashionable society,--he gave three smart raps.

Bobby's heart beat a little wildly as he awaited a response to his
summons. It seemed that he still had some doubts as to the
practicability of his mission; but they were not permitted to disturb
him long, for the door was opened by the squire's pretty daughter
Annie, a young miss of twelve.

"O, Bobby, is it you? I am so glad you have come!" exclaimed the
little lady.

Bobby blushed--he didn't know why, unless it was that the young lady
desired to see him. He stammered out a reply, and for the moment
forgot the object of his visit.

"I want you to go down to the village for me, and get some books the
expressman was to bring up from Boston for me. Will you go?"

"Certainly, Miss Annie, I shall be very glad to go for _you_,"
replied Bobby, with an emphasis that made the little maiden blush in
her turn.

"You are real good, Bobby; but I will give you something for going."

"I don't want anything," said Bobby, stoutly.

"You are too generous! Ah, I heard what you did this forenoon; and pa
says that a great many men would not have dared to do what you did. I
always thought you were as brave as a lion; now I know it."

"The books are at the express office, I suppose," said Bobby, turning
as red as a blood beet.

"Yes, Bobby; I am so anxious to get them that I can't wait till pa
goes down this evening."

"I will not be gone long."

"O, you needn't run, Bobby; take your time."

"I will go very quick. But, Miss Annie, is your father at home?"

"Not now; he has gone over to the wood lot; but he will be back by the
time you return."

"Will you please to tell him that I want to see him about something
very particular, when he gets back?"

"I will, Bobby."

"Thank you, Miss Annie;" and Bobby hastened to the village to execute
his commission.

"I wonder what he wants to see pa so very particularly for," said the
young lady to herself, as she watched his receding form. "In my
opinion, something has happened at the little black house, for I could
see that he looked very sober."

Either Bobby had a very great regard for the young lady, and wished to
relieve her impatience to behold the coveted books, or he was in a
hurry to see Squire Lee; for the squire's old roan horse could hardly
have gone quicker.

"You should not have run, Bobby," said the little maiden, when he
placed the books in her hand; "I would not have asked you to go if I
had thought you would run all the way. You must be very tired."

"Not at all; I didn't run, only walked very quick," replied he; but
his quick breathing indicated that his words or his walk had been very
much exaggerated. "Has your father returned?"

"He has; he is waiting for you in the sitting room. Come in, Bobby."

Bobby followed her into the room, and took the chair which Annie
offered him.

"How do you do, Bobby? I am glad to see you," said the squire, taking
him by the hand, and bestowing a benignant smile upon him--a smile
which cheered his heart more than anything else could at that
moment. "I have heard of you before, to-day."

"Have you?"

"I have, Bobby; you are a brave little fellow."

"I came over to see you, sir, about something very particular,"
replied Bobby, whose natural modesty induced him to change the topic.

"Indeed; well, what can I do for you?"

"A great deal, sir; perhaps you will think I am very bold, sir, but I
can't help it."

"I know you are a very bold little fellow, or you would not have done
what you did this forenoon," laughed the squire.

"I didn't mean that, sir," answered Bobby, blushing up to the eyes.

"I know you didn't; but go on."

"I only meant that you would think me presuming, or impudent, or
something of that kind."

"O, no, far from it. You cannot be presuming or impudent. Speak out,
Bobby; anything under the heavens that I can do for you, I shall be
glad to do."

"Well, sir, I am going to leave Riverdale."

"Leave Riverdale!"

"Yes, sir; I am going to Boston, where I mean to do something to help
mother."

"Bravo! you are a good lad. What do you mean to do?"

"I was thinking I should go into the book business."

"Indeed!" and Squire Lee was much amused by the matter-of-fact manner
of the young aspirant.

"I was talking with a young fellow who went through the place last
spring, selling books. He told me that some days he made three or
four dollars, and that he averaged twelve dollars a week."

"He did well; perhaps, though, only a few of them make so much."

"I know I can make twelve dollars a week," replied Bobby, confidently,
for that something within him made him feel capable of great things.

"I dare say you can. You have energy and perseverance, and people take
a liking to you."

"But I wanted to see you about another matter. To speak out at once,
I want to borrow sixty dollars of you;" and Bobby blushed, and seemed
very much embarrassed by his own boldness.

"Sixty dollars!" exclaimed the squire.

"I knew you would think me impudent," replied our hero, his heart
sinking within him.

"But I don't, Bobby. You want the money to go into business with--to
buy your stock of books?"

"O, no, sir; I am going to apply to Mr. Bayard for that."

"Just so; Mr. Bayard is the gentleman whose daughter you saved?"

"Yes, sir. I want this money to pay off Mr. Hardhand. We owe him but
sixty dollars now, and he has threatened to turn us out, if it is not
paid by to-morrow noon."

"The old hunks!"

Bobby briefly related to the squire the events of the morning, much to
the indignation and disgust of the honest, kind-hearted man. The
courageous boy detailed more clearly his purpose, and doubted not he
should be able to pay the loan in a few months.

"Very well, Bobby, here is the money;" and the squire took it from his
wallet, and gave it to him.

"Thank you, sir. May Heaven bless you! I shall certainly pay you."

"Don't worry about it, Bobby. Pay it when you get ready."

"I will give you my note, and----"

The squire laughed heartily at this, and told him that, as he was a
minor, his note was not good for anything.

"You shall see whether it is, or not," returned Bobby. "Let me give it
to you, at least, so that we can tell how much I owe you from time to
time."

"You shall have your own way."

Annie Lee, as much amused as her father at Bobby's big talk, got the
writing materials, and the little merchant in embryo wrote and signed
the note.

"Good, Bobby! Now promise that you will come and see me every time you
come home, and tell me how you are getting along."

"I will, sir, with the greatest pleasure;" and with a light heart
Bobby tripped away home.




CHAPTER VI

IN WHICH BOBBY SETS OUT ON HIS TRAVELS


Squire Lee, though only a plain farmer, was the richest man in
Riverdale. He had taken a great fancy to Bobby, and often employed him
to do errands, ride the horse to plough in the cornfields, and such
chores about the place as a boy could do. He liked to talk with Bobby
because there was a great deal of good sense in him, for one with a
small head.

If there was any one thing upon which the squire particularly prided
himself, it was his knowledge of human nature. He declared that he
only wanted to look a man in the face to know what he was; and as for
Bobby Bright, he had summered him and wintered him, and he was
satisfied that he would make something in good time.

He was not much astonished when Bobby opened his ambitious scheme of
going into business for himself. But he had full faith in his ability
to work out a useful and profitable, if not a brilliant, life. He
often said that Bobby was worth his weight in gold, and that he would
trust him with anything he had. Perhaps he did not suspect that the
time was at hand when he would be called upon to verify his words
practically; for it was only that morning, when one of the neighbors
told him about Bobby's stopping the horse, that he had repeated the
expression for the twentieth time.

It was not an idle remark. Sixty dollars was hardly worth mentioning
with a man of his wealth and liberal views, though so careful a man as
he was would not have been likely to throw away that amount. But as a
matter of investment,--Bobby had made the note read "with
interest,"--he would as readily have let him have it, as the next
richest man in the place, so much confidence had he in our hero's
integrity, and so sure was he that he would soon have the means of
paying him.

Bobby was overjoyed at the fortunate issue of his mission, and he
walked into the room where his mother was closing shoes, with a
dignity worthy a banker or a great merchant. Mrs. Bright was very
sad. Perhaps she felt a little grieved that her son, whom she loved so
much, had so thoughtlessly plunged her into a new difficulty.

"Come, cheer up, mother; it is all right," said Bobby, in his usual
elastic and gay tones; and at the same time he took the sixty dollars
from his pocket and handed it to her. "There is the money, and you
will be forever quit of Mr. Hardhand to-morrow."

"What, Bobby! Why, where did you get all this money?" asked
Mrs. Bright, utterly astonished.

In a few words the ambitious boy told his story, and then informed his
mother that he was going to Boston the next Monday morning, to
commence business for himself.

"Why, what can you do, Bobby?"

"Do? I can do a great many things;" and he unfolded his scheme of
becoming a little book merchant.

"You are a courageous fellow! Who would have thought of such a thing?"

"I should, and did."

"But you are not old enough."

"O, yes, I am."

"You had better wait a while."

"Now or never, mother! You see I have given my note, and my paper will
be dishonored, if I am not up and doing."

"Your paper!" said Mrs. Bright, with a smile.

"That is what Mr. Wing, the boot manufacturer, calls it."

"You needn't go away to earn this money; I can pay it myself."

"This note is my affair, and I mean to pay it myself with my own
earnings. No objections, mother."

Like a sensible woman as she was, she did not make any objections. She
was conscious of Bobby's talents; she knew that he had a strong mind
of his own, and could take care of himself. It is true, she feared the
influence of the great world, and especially of the great city, upon
the tender mind of her son; but if he was never tempted, he would
never be a conqueror over the foes that beset him.

She determined to do her whole duty towards him; and she carefully
pointed out to him the sins and the moral danger to which he would be
exposed, and warned him always to resist temptation. She counselled
him to think of her when he felt like going astray.

Bobby declared that he would try to be a good boy. He did not speak
contemptuously of the anticipated perils, as many boys would have
done, because he knew that his mother would not make bug-bears out of
things which she knew had no real existence.

The next day, Mr. Hardhand came; and my young readers can judge how
astonished and chagrined he was, when the widow Bright offered him the
sixty dollars. The Lord was with the widow and the fatherless, and the
wretch was cheated out of his revenge. The note was given up, and the
mortgage cancelled.

Mr. Hardhand insisted that she should pay the interest on the sixty
dollars for one day, as it was then the second day of July; but when
Bobby reckoned it up, and found it was less than one cent, even the
wretched miser seemed ashamed of himself, and changed the subject of
conversation.

He did not dare to say anything saucy to the widow this time. He had
lost his power over her, and there stood Bobby, who had come to look
just like a young lion to him, coward and knave as he was.

The business was all settled now, and Bobby spent the rest of the week
in getting ready for his great enterprise. He visited all his friends,
and went each day to talk with Squire Lee and Annie. The little maiden
promised to buy a great many books of him, if he would bring his stock
to Riverdale, for she was quite as much interested in him as her
father was.

Monday morning came, and Bobby was out of bed with the first streak of
dawn. The excitement of the great event which was about to happen had
not permitted him to sleep for the two hours preceding; yet when he
got up, he could not help feeling sad. He was going to leave the
little black house, going to leave his mother, going to leave the
children, to depart for the great city.

His mother was up before him. She was even more sad than he was, for
she could see plainer than he the perils that environed him, and her
maternal heart, in spite of the reasonable confidence she had in his
integrity and good principles, trembled for his safety.

As he ate his breakfast, his mother repeated the warnings and the good
lessons she had before imparted. She particularly cautioned him to
keep out of bad company. If he found that his companions would lie and
swear, he might depend upon it they would steal, and he had better
forsake them at once. This was excellent advice, and Bobby had
occasion at a later period to call it to his sorrowing heart.

"Here is three dollars, Bobby; it is all the money I have. Your fare
to Boston will be one dollar, and you will have two left to pay the
expenses of your first trip. It is all I have now," said Mrs. Bright.

"I will not take the whole of it. You will want it yourself. One
dollar is enough. When I find Mr. Bayard, I shall do very well."

"Yes, Bobby, take the whole of it."

"I will take just one dollar, and no more," replied Bobby, resolutely,
as he handed her the other two dollars.
