Saturday morning and come back on Monday morning, and he knew that his
father would enjoy even this brief visit. But he was destined to go home
quicker.

On Thursday afternoon a boy came up to the main entrance of Dr. Benton's
school.

"It's the boy from the telegraph office," said Wilder to Jasper.

"I wonder whether he's got a message for the doctor or one of us boys?"
said Jasper, not suspecting that it was for himself.

"I'll ask," said Wilder. "Here, you, boy! who's your telegram for?"

"For Jasper Kent," said the boy. "Will you call him?"

"I am he," said Jasper, hurrying forward, with pale face and beating
heart, for a telegram always inspires fear.

"Then here it is. Just sign the book," said the boy.

Jasper scrawled his name hurriedly and tore open the envelope.

These were the brief words of the dispatch:

    "Come home, for the Lord's sake, Master Jasper. Your father's dying.

    "Margaret Bower."

The paper swam before Jasper's eyes.

"What is it, Jasper--bad news?" asked Wilder; but Jasper did not wait to
answer. He rushed to Dr. Benton's office, got his permission to go home,
packed his valise, and in five minutes was on his way to the depot.

He was just in time for the afternoon train. At seven o'clock in the
evening he entered the avenue that led to his father's house. Throwing
open the front door, he met Margaret in the hall.

"I'm glad you're here, Master Jasper," said the faithful handmaiden,
heartily.

"Is it too late?"

"I hope not; indeed, I hope not."

Jasper waited for no more, but rushed up stairs and into his father's
room.

There were two persons there--the step-mother and a man of thirty, with
black whiskers and sallow complexion, with whom she was talking
earnestly. They, started when Jasper entered, and looked discouraged.
Mrs. Kent looked displeased and annoyed.

"How is my father?" exclaimed Jasper, excitedly.

"Hush! He is very low," said Mrs. Kent "You shouldn't have dashed in
here so abruptly."

"Is there no hope for him?" asked the boy, sorrowfully.

"No, my young friend," said the man, smoothly. "All has been done that
human skill can do, but without avail."

"Are you the doctor?"

"I am."

"Where is Dr. Graham, my father's old doctor?"

"I dismissed him," said his step-mother, "He was not competent to attend
so critical a case. This is Dr. Kenyon."

"I never before heard Dr. Graham's skill doubted," said Jasper. "Is my
father conscious?"

"No; he is under the influence of morphine. Do not wake him up."

"Was he, then, in great pain?"

"Yes, in great pain."

Quietly Jasper drew near the bedside.

His father lay unconscious, his form rigid, his face thin and betraying
marks of weariness and suffering. The tears rose to the eyes of Jasper
as he realized that his father was passing away. As he looked on there
was a slight convulsive movement; then repose. In that one moment his
father had passed on to another world.

The doctor had approached the bedside also, and he, too, saw the
movement.

"He is dead!" he announced.

"Dead!" repeated Mrs. Kent, in a voice rather of surprise than of
sorrow.

"Yes."

"Well," she said, coolly, "we must all die. We have the satisfaction of
knowing that we have done all we could do to preserve his life."

"Certainly, my dear madam; you may comfort yourself by that thought,"
said the physician.

"Why did you not send for me before?" asked Jasper, turning with moist
eyes to his step-mother, "that I might see my father before he died?"

"We could not foresee his sudden death," said Mrs. Kent. "How do you
happen to be here this afternoon?"

"Didn't you direct Margaret to telegraph for me?" asked Jasper,
surprised.

"Did Margaret take upon herself to telegraph to you?" asked Mrs. Kent,
in a tone of displeasure.

"Yes," said Jasper, bitterly. "Did you mean to keep me wholly
unacquainted with my father's illness?"

"No; I wrote a line this afternoon, which I should have sent to the
office at once."

"When it was too late!"

"Your reproaches are unseemly and uncalled for," said his step-mother,
quite coldly.

"I think differently," said Jasper, bitterly. "You should have sent for
me as soon as my father got worse than usual."

"In consideration of your grief I will overlook your impertinence," said
Mrs. Kent, compressing her thin lips, as she left the room.

The doctor followed her out, and Jasper was left alone with the dead.

He did not realize it, but his father's death was to seriously affect
his fortunes.




CHAPTER IX.

A DECLARATION OF WAR.


Half an hour later Jasper left the room where his father lay dead. He
did not seek the presence of his step-mother, who, he felt, had done him
wrong in keeping from him his father's condition. He went instead to the
kitchen, where he found Margaret.

"This is a sad day for you, Master Jasper," said the sympathizing
servant.

"It is, indeed, Margaret. I have lost my best friend."

"True for you."

"But for your telegram, I should not have known even now that he was
dangerously ill, I thought at first Mrs. Kent asked you to telegraph."

"No, she didn't. I asked her would she send for you, and she told me it
was none of my business."

"It was lucky you didn't heed her," said Jasper. "She is a cold,
unfeeling woman."

"That she is, Master Jasper," assented Margaret, with emphasis.

"How long has my father been so sick?"

"For a week or more, but he took a sudden turn at the last. I think he
got worse after the new doctor came."

"I wanted to ask you about that. Why was Dr. Graham dismissed? He has
attended my father for years."

"Shall I tell you what I think, Master Jasper?" said Margaret, stopping
short in her work, and looking mysterious.

"Yes."

"Let me whisper it, then. Come nearer, Master Jasper."

Rather surprised at her manner, Jasper obeyed.

"It's my belief," she whispered, "that your step-mother didn't want your
father to get well."

Jasper looked horror-struck.

"Are you crazy, Margaret?" he ejaculated.

She nodded her head positively.

"I know what I'm saying," she answered.

"But what can make you believe such a horrible thing?" he asked.

She answered in the same low voice:

"A month ago she got your father to make his will. What there is in it I
don't know, but it is likely it suits her. After that she had nothing to
gain by his living."

"You don't think she'd--" Jasper hesitated to proceed.

"Poison him? No, I don't. It wasn't needful; but your papa was that
delicate, it would be enough if he was not rightly treated, and I don't
believe this new doctor did the right thing by him. Dr. Graham and Mrs.
Kent never could agree, but she and the new doctor have been as thick as
can be. They understand one another, I'll be bound."

Jasper looked shocked, and was silent for a moment.

"I don't like Mrs. Kent," he said, "but, Margaret, I hope you're wrong
in this. That any one could wish my dear, gentle father dead I find it
hard to believe."

"You haven't seen as much of your step-mother as I have, Master Jasper."

"Heaven grant you are wrong, Margaret! If I thought it were true I
should never want to look at the woman again."

"Hush!" said Margaret, suddenly putting her hand on her lip.

Jasper understood her caution, when he saw his step-mother enter the
kitchen. She looked from one to the other with a suspicious glance.

"This is a strange place for you, Jasper," said she, in slow, cold
accents.

"I don't see why, madam," he answered, in a voice equally cold.

"I find you--a young gentleman--conferring with a servant."

"With a trusted servant, who has been in our family for years. Nothing
could be more natural."

"I don't agree with you," said Mrs. Kent, in a chilly tone.

"I am unfortunate in not winning your approbation," said Jasper, not
caring to suppress the sarcasm.

"It strikes me you are impertinent," said Mrs. Kent.

She had thrown off the mask. During her husband's life she had taken
special pains to be polite to Jasper, though in so doing she did
violence to her feelings. There was no more to be gained by it, and she
had changed suddenly. Jasper could not help alluding to it.

"How happens it, madam," he said, "that your treatment of me has changed
so entirely since my father's death? Brief as the interval is, you have
lost no time."

There was hatred in the glance she shot at him.

"I was silent out of regard to your father, who was blind to your
faults," she answered. "You must not expect me to be equally blind."

"I don't, madam."

"Do you intend to remain in the kitchen?" demanded Mrs. Kent

"I was questioning Margaret about my father's last days."

"I am the proper one to question."

"Would you have afforded me the information I desired?"

"If the questions you asked were of a proper character."

"Mrs. Kent, I will take you at your word. How does it happen that you
dismissed Dr. Graham, my father's old family physician?"

His step-mother hesitated and looked angry, but she replied, after a
brief pause:

"He did not understand the case."

"What makes you think so? He certainly ought to understand my father's
constitution."

"Perhaps he ought, but he didn't," said Mrs. Kent, sharply.

"You haven't given any reason."

"I have given all I choose. I don't mean to be catechised by a boy."

"Who is this Dr. Kenyon whom you called in afterward?"

"A very skilful physician."

"He looks young."

"He has a high reputation."

"When did he assume charge of my father's case?"

"A week ago."

"And since then he has grown steadily worse."

"Who told you that?" demanded Mrs. Kent, sharply.

"Is it not true?"

"Did Margaret tell you this?"

"I did," said Margaret, quietly.

"I shall remember this," said Mrs. Kent, spitefully.

"I didn't need to ask Margaret," said Jasper, "when my father lies dead
after a week's treatment by this skilful physician."

Mrs. Kent was white with anger.

"You ought to know that life and death are in the power of no doctor,"
she said, for, angry as she was, she saw that it was necessary to reply
to what Jasper said. "In sending for Dr. Kenyon I did not much expect
that he would cure your father, but I felt that it was my duty to give
him this last chance. Unfortunately he was too far gone."

"You thought that matters were as bad as that a week ago, and yet you
didn't send for me?" exclaimed Jasper.

"It would have done no good," said she, coldly.

"But it would have been a satisfaction to me to see something of him in
his last sickness. Mrs. Kent, you haven't treated me right in this
matter."

"Is that the way for a boy to talk to his--elder?"

"Yes, if he says only what is strictly true."

"I shall not continue this conversation," said Mrs. Kent, haughtily,
"nor shall I submit to be talked to in this style. It is not for your
interest to make me your enemy," she added, significantly.

Jasper was frank and fearless by temperament, and anything in the shape
of a menace roused his high spirit.

"That consideration doesn't weigh with me a particle," he said, hastily.

"We will see," she retorted, and with a look of anger she swept from the
room.

"Margaret," said Jasper, abruptly, "did you go into my father's
sick-chamber at any time?"

"Yes, Master Jasper."

"Did you ever hear my father inquire after me?"

"I heard him say more than once, with a sigh like, that he wished to see
you."

"And she wouldn't send for me!" exclaimed Jasper, bitterly.

"She always opposed it, saying it wouldn't do no good, and would only
take you off your studies."

"Much she cared for my studies! Margaret, I will never forgive that
woman, never!"

"Well, I can't blame you, Master Jasper."

Here Margaret heard her name called in a loud voice, and was forced to
obey.

"She wants to separate us," thought Jasper, as he slowly and sadly went
up to his own chamber.




CHAPTER X.

NICHOLAS APPEARS UPON THE SCENE.


The funeral was over. Mrs. Kent was considered by those present to
display a great deal of fortitude. As she felt no real grief for the
death of her husband, this was not remarkable. Jasper looked pale and
sorrowful, but gave way to no violent demonstrations of sorrow, though
he began to understand that he had not only lost his best friend, but
become at the same time exposed to the machinations of a resolute and
relentless enemy.

In due time the will was read.

It was very brief, and clear in its provisions.

To Mrs. Kent was left one-third of the estate, real and personal, of
which the deceased was possessed, and the balance was willed to his only
child and dear son Jasper, of whom his step-mother was left guardian.

When this clause was read Mrs. Kent directed a brief and triumphant
glance at Jasper. He met the glance, and understood what it meant. He
knew that it boded him no good.

The company assembled gradually dispersed, and Jasper was left alone
with his step-mother.

"You see that I am left your guardian," she said.

"Yes," answered Jasper, briefly.

"Perhaps you would have chosen a different one if the choice had been
left to you," she continued, with a sneer.

"I should," said Jasper, promptly.

"Well, that is plain language."

"I suppose you expected a plain answer," said the boy, firmly.

"I did not expect a polite one. You appear to forget that I am a lady."

"You are mistaken, madam. I am ready to treat you as well as you treat
me. I won't pretend that I like your guardianship, as I fear that we
shall not agree."

"If we don't, you will have to yield," said his step-mother.

"I would rather not dispute till it is absolutely necessary," said
Jasper. "May I ask whether you desire me to return to school?"

"I have not made up my mind. I may be able to tell you to-morrow."

"Until you make up your mind you expect me to remain at home, I
suppose?"

"Yes."

Jasper bowed and turned away. He went down stairs into the hall just as
the front door was opened, and the familiar voice of Nicholas Thorne was
heard. Jasper stared in some surprise at the intruder, not knowing that
he was expected.
