
"Red."

"Is Lollo your pony?"

"No. My father's." And the Gipsy boy led Lollo away.

At the first opportunity Jackanapes stole away again to the common.
This time he saw the Gipsy-father, smoking a dirty pipe.

"Lollo is your pony, isn't he?" said Jackanapes.

"Yes."

"He's a very nice one."

"He's a racer."

"You don't want to sell him, do you?"

"Fifteen pounds," said the Gipsy-father; and Jackanapes sighed and
went home again. That very afternoon he and Tony rode the two donkeys,
and Tony managed to get thrown, and even Jackanapes' donkey kicked.
But it was jolting, clumsy work after the elastic swiftness and the
dainty mischief of the red-haired pony.

A few days later Miss Jessamine spoke very seriously to Jackanapes.
She was a good deal agitated as she told him that his grandfather, the
General, was coming to the Green, and that he must be on his very best
behavior during the visit. If it had been feasible to leave off
calling him Jackanapes and to get used to his baptismal name of
Theodore before the day after to-morrow (when the General was due), it
would have been satisfactory. But Miss Jessamine feared it would be
impossible in practice, and she had scruples about it on principle. It
would not seem quite truthful, although she had always most fully
intended that he should be called Theodore when he had outgrown the
ridiculous appropriateness of his nickname. The fact was that he had
not outgrown it, but he must take care to remember who was meant when
his grandfather said Theodore.

Indeed for that matter he must take care all along.

"You are apt to be giddy, Jackanapes," said Miss Jessamine.

"Yes aunt," said Jackanapes, thinking of the hobby-horses.

"You are a good boy, Jackanapes. Thank GOD, I can tell your
grandfather that. An obedient boy, an honorable boy, and a
kind-hearted boy. But you are--in short, you _are_ a Boy, Jackanapes.
And I hope,"--added Miss Jessamine, desperate with the results of
experience--"that the General knows that Boys will be Boys."

What mischief could be foreseen, Jackanapes promised to guard against.
He was to keep his clothes and his hands clean, to look over his
catechism, not to put sticky things in his pockets, to keep that hair
of his smooth--("It's the wind that blows it, Aunty," said
Jackanapes--"I'll send by the coach for some bear's-grease," said Miss
Jessamine, tying a knot in her pocket-handkerchief)--not to burst in
at the parlor door, not to talk at the top of his voice, not to
crumple his Sunday frill, and to sit quite quiet during the sermon, to
be sure to say "sir" to the General, to be careful about rubbing his
shoes on the doormat, and to bring his lesson-books to his aunt at
once that she might iron down the dogs' ears. The General arrived, and
for the first day all went well, except that Jackanapes' hair was as
wild as usual, for the hair-dresser had no bear's-grease left. He
began to feel more at ease with his grandfather, and disposed to talk
confidentially with him, as he did with the Postman. All that the
General felt it would take too long to tell, but the result was the
same. He was disposed to talk confidentially with Jackanapes.

[Illustration]

"Mons'ous pretty place this," he said, looking out of the lattice on
to the Green, where the grass was vivid with sunset, and the shadows
were long and peaceful.

"You should see it in Fair-week, sir," said Jackanapes, shaking his
yellow mop, and leaning back in his one of the two Chippendale
arm-chairs in which they sat.

"A fine time that, eh?" said the General, with a twinkle in his left
eye. (The other was glass.)

Jackanapes shook his hair once more. "I enjoyed this last one the best
of all," he said. "I'd so much money."

"By George, it's not a common complaint in these bad times. How much
had ye?"

"I'd two shillings. A new shilling Aunty gave me, and elevenpence I
had saved up, and a penny from the Postman--_sir_!" added Jackanapes
with a jerk, having forgotten it.

"And how did ye spend it--_sir_?" inquired the General. Jackanapes
spread his ten fingers on the arms of his chair, and shut his eyes
that he might count the more conscientiously.

"Watch-stand for Aunty, threepence. Trumpet for myself, twopence,
that's fivepence. Ginger-nuts for Tony, twopence, and a mug with a
Grenadier on for the Postman, fourpence, that's elevenpence.
Shooting-gallery a penny, that's a shilling. Giddy-go-round, a penny,
that's one and a penny. Treating Tony, one and twopence. Flying Boats
(Tony paid for himself), a penny, one and threepence. Shooting-gallery
again, one and fourpence; Fat Woman a penny, one and fivepence.
Giddy-go-round again, one and sixpence. Shooting-gallery, one and
sevenpence. Treating Tony, and then he wouldn't shoot, so I did, one
and eightpence. Living Skeleton, a penny--no, Tony treated me, the
Living Skeleton doesn't count. Skittles, a penny, one and ninepence.
Mermaid (but when we got inside she was dead), a penny, one and
tenpence. Theatre, a penny (Priscilla Partington, or the Green Lane
Murder. A beautiful young lady, sir, with pink cheeks and a real
pistol), that's one and elevenpence. Ginger beer, a penny (I _was_ so
thirsty!) two shillings. And then the Shooting-gallery man gave me a
turn for nothing, because, he said, I was a real gentleman, and spent
my money like a man."

"So you do, sir, so you do!" cried the General. "Why, sir, you spend
it like a prince.--And now I suppose you've not got a penny in your
pocket?"

"Yes I have," said Jackanapes. "Two pennies. They are saving up." And
Jackanapes jingled them with his hand.

"You don't want money except at fair-times, I suppose?" said the
General.

Jackanapes shook his mop.

"If I could have as much as I want, I should know what to buy," said
he.

"And how much do you want, if you could get it?"

"Wait a minute, sir, till I think what twopence from fifteen pounds
leaves. Two from nothing you can't, but borrow twelve. Two from
twelve, ten, and carry one. Please remember ten, sir, when I ask you.
One from nothing you can't, borrow twenty. One from twenty, nineteen,
and carry one. One from fifteen, fourteen. Fourteen pounds nineteen
and--what did I tell you to remember?"

"Ten," said the General.

"Fourteen pounds nineteen shillings and tenpence then, is what I
want," said Jackanapes.

"Bless my soul, what for?"

"To buy Lollo with. Lollo means red, sir. The Gipsy's red-haired pony,
sir. Oh, he is beautiful! You should see his coat in the sunshine! You
should see his mane! You should see his tail! Such little feet, sir,
and they go like lightning! Such a dear face, too, and eyes like a
mouse! But he's a racer, and the Gipsy wants fifteen pounds for him."

"If he's a racer, you couldn't ride him. Could you?"

"No--o, sir, but I can stick to him. I did the other day."

"You did, did you? Well, I'm fond of riding myself, and if the beast
is as good as you say, he might suit me."

"You're too tall for Lollo, I think," said Jackanapes, measuring his
grandfather with his eye.

"I can double up my legs, I suppose. We'll have a look at him
to-morrow."

"Don't you weigh a good deal?" asked Jackanapes.

"Chiefly waistcoats," said the General, slapping the breast of his
military frock-coat. "We'll have the little racer on the Green the
first thing in the morning. Glad you mentioned it, grandson. Glad you
mentioned it."

The General was as good as his word. Next morning the Gipsy and Lollo,
Miss Jessamine, Jackanapes and his grandfather and his dog Spitfire,
were all gathered at one end of the Green in a group, which so aroused
the innocent curiosity of Mrs. Johnson, as she saw it from one of her
upper windows, that she and the children took their early promenade
rather earlier than usual. The General talked to the Gipsy, and
Jackanapes fondled Lollo's mane, and did not know whether he should be
more glad or miserable if his grandfather bought him.
