and go round_].

While we are joined in heart and hand,
A gallant and courageous band,
If e'er a foe dares look awry,
We'll one and all poke out his eye.

[_Enter_ SALADIN.]

SALADIN. Don't vaunt thus, my courageous knights,
For I, as you, have seen some sights
In Palestine, in days of yore.
'Gainst prowess strong I bravely bore
The sway, when all the world in arms
Shook Holy Land with war's alarms.
I for the crescent, you the cross,
Each mighty host oft won and lost.
I many a thousand men did slay,
And ate two hundred twice a day,
And now I come, a giant great,
Just waiting for another meat.

ST. GEORGE. Oh! Saladin! Art thou come with sword in hand,
Against St. George and Christendom so rashly to withstand?

SALADIN. Yes, yes, St. George, with thee I mean to fight,
And with one blow, I'll let thee know
I am not the Turkish Knight.

ST. GEORGE. Ah, Saladin, St. George is in this very room,
Thou'rt come this unlucky hour to seek thy fatal doom.

[_Enter_ LITTLE PAGE.]

LITTLE PAGE. Hold, hold, St. George, I pray thee stand by,
I'll conquer him, or else I'll die;
Long with that Pagan champion will I engage,
Although I am but the Little Page.

ST. GEORGE. Fight on, my little page, and conquer!
  And don't thee be perplext,
For if thou discourage in the field,
  Fight him will I next.

[_They fight._ THE LITTLE PAGE _falls._]

SALADIN. Though but a little man, they were great words he said.

ST. GEORGE. Ah! cruel monster. What havoc hast thou made?
See where the lovely stripling all on the floor is laid.
A doctor! A doctor! Ten pounds for a doctor!

[DAME DOLLY _dances forward, bobbing as before._]

DAME DOLLY. Here comes I, little Dame Dorothy,
Flap front, and good-morrow to ye;
My head is big, my body is small,
I'm the prettiest little jade of you all.
Call not the Doctor for to make him worse,
But give the boy into my hand to nurse.

[_To_ LITTLE PAGE.] Rise up, my pretty page, and come with me,
And by kindness and kitchen physic, I'll cure thee without fee.

[PAGE _rises. Exeunt_ PAGE _and_ DAME DOLLY.]

[ST. GEORGE _and_ SALADIN _fight_. Saladin _is slain._]

[_Enter_ FATHER CHRISTMAS.]

ST. GEORGE. Carry away the dead, Father.

FATHER CHRISTMAS. Let's see whether he's dead or no, first, Georgy.
Yes; I think he's dead enough, Georgy.

ST. GEORGE. Carry him away then, Father.

FATHER CHRISTMAS [_vainly tries to move the_ GIANT'S _body_].

Thou killed him; thou carry him away.

ST. GEORGE. If you can't carry him, call for help.

FATHER CHRISTMAS [_to audience_].
Three or four of you great logger-headed fellows,
Come and carry him away.

[DOCTOR _and_ FOOL _raise the_ GIANT _by his arms. Exit_ GIANT.]

[_Enter_ LITTLE MAN JACK.]

LITTLE MAN JACK. Here comes I, Little Man Jack,
The Master of Giants;
If I could but conquer thee, St. George,
I'd bid the world defiance.

ST. GEORGE. And if thou beest Little Man Jack, the Master of all Giants,
I'll take thee up on my back, and carry thee without violence.

[_Lifts him over his shoulder._]

FOOL. Now brave St. George, he rules the roast;
Britons triumphant be the toast;
Let cheerful song and dance abound,
Whene'er the Mummers' time comes round.

[_All sing._]

Rule, Britannia; Britannia rules the waves,
Britons never, never, never will be slaves.

GRAND SWORD DANCE.

Cut 1 and cross.

Cut 2 and cross partner (which is R. and L.).

Same back again.

The two Knights at opposite corners R. H. Cut 1 and cross, and Cut 2
with opposite Knights.

Same back (which is Ladies' Chain).

Four sword-points up in the centre.

All go round--all Cut 6--and come to bridle-arm protect, and round to
places.

Repeat the first figure.

[_All go round, and then out, singing._]

[Illustration: Musical Score]

_Allegro_,

And a mumming we will go, will go, and a mumming we will go, With a

bright cock-ade  in  all our hats, We'll go with a  gal-lant show.

[_Exeunt omnes._]

GOD SAVE THE QUEEN.




HINTS FOR PRIVATE THEATRICALS.




HINTS FOR PRIVATE THEATRICALS.--I.

IN A LETTER FROM BURNT CORK TO ROUGE POT.


MY DEAR ROUGE POT,--You say that you all want to have "theatricals"
these holidays, and beg me to give you some useful rules and hints to
study before the Christmas Play comes out in the December Number of
_Aunt Judy_.

I will do my best. But--to begin with--_do_ you "all" want them? At
least, do you all want them enough to keep in the same mind for ten
days or a fortnight, to take a good deal of trouble, whether it is
pleasant or not, and to give up some time and some of your own way, in
order that the theatricals may be successful?

If you say Yes, we will proceed at once to the first--and perhaps the
most important--point, on which you will have to display two of an
actor's greatest virtues--self-denial and good temper:--

THE STAGE-MANAGER.

If your numbers are limited, you may have to choose the one who knows
most about theatricals, and he or she may have to act a leading part
as well. But by rights _the stage-manager ought not to act_;
especially as in juvenile theatricals he will probably be prompter,
property-man, and scene-shifter into the bargain.

If your "company" consists of very young performers, an elder sister
is probably the best stage-manager you could have. But _when once your
stage-manager is chosen, all the actors must make up their minds to
obey him implicitly_. They must take the parts he gives them, and
about any point in dispute the stage-manager's decision must be final.
It is quite likely that now and then he may be wrong. The leading
gentleman may be more in the right, the leading lady may have another
plan quite as good, or better; but as there would be "no end to it" if
everybody's ideas had to be listened to and discussed, it is
absolutely necessary that there should be one head, and one plan
loyally supported by the rest.

Truism as it is, my dear Rouge Pot, I am bound to beg you never to
forget that _everybody can't have everything_ in this world, and that
_everybody can't be everything_ on the stage. What you (and I, and
every other actor!) would really like, would be to choose the play, to
act the best part, to wear the nicest dress, to pick the people you
want to act with, to have the rehearsal on those days, and that part
of the day, when you do not happen to want to go out, or do something
else, to have the power of making all the others do as you tell them,
without the bother of hearing any grumbles, and to be well clapped and
complimented at the conclusion of the performance. But as this very
leading part could only be played by one person at the expense of all
the rest, private theatricals--like so many other affairs of this
life--must for everybody concerned be a compromise of pains and
pleasures, of making strict rules and large allowances, of giving and
taking, bearing and forbearing, learning to find one's own happiness
in seeing other people happy, aiming at perfection with all one's
might, and making the best of imperfection in the end.

At this point, I foresee that you will very naturally exclaim that you
asked me for stage-directions, and that I am sending you a sermon. I
am very sorry; but the truth really is, that as the best of plays and
the cleverest of actors will not ensure success, if the actors quarrel
about the parts, and are unwilling to suppress themselves for the
common good, one is obliged to set out with a good stock of philosophy
as well as of "properties."

Now, in case it should strike you as "unfair" that any one of your
party should have so much of his own way as I have given to the
stage-manager, you must let me say that no one has more need of
philosophy than that all-powerful person.

_The stage-manager will have his own way, but he will have nothing
else._

He will certainly have "no peace" from the first cry of "Let us have
some private theatricals" till the day when the performance ceases to
be discussed. If there are ten actors, it is quite possible that ten
different plays will be warmly recommended to him, and that, whichever
he selects, he will choose it against the gloomy forebodings of nine
members of his company. Nine actors will feel a natural disappointment
at not having the best part, and as it is obviously impossible to fix
rehearsals so as to be equally convenient for everybody, the
stage-manager, whose duty it is to fix them, will be very fortunate if
he suits the convenience of the majority. You will easily believe that
it is his painful duty to insist upon regular attendance, and even to
enforce it by fines or by expulsion from the part, if such stringent
laws have been agreed to by the company beforehand. But at the end he
will have to bear in mind that private theatricals are an amusement,
not a business; that it is said to be a pity to "make a toil of a
pleasure"; that "boys will be boys"; that "Christmas comes but once a
year," and holidays not much oftener--and in a general way to console
himself for the absence of defaulters, with the proverbial philosophy
of everyday life, and the more reliable panacea of resolute good
temper.

He must (without a thought of self) do his best to give the right
parts to the right people, and he must try to combine a proper "cast"
with pleasing everybody--so far as that impossible task is possible!

He must not only be ready to meet his own difficulties with each
separate actor, but he must be prepared to be confidant, if not
umpire, in all the squabbles which the actors and actresses may have
among themselves.

If the performance is a great success, the actors will have the credit
of it, and will probably be receiving compliments amongst the audience
whilst the stage-manager is blowing out the guttering footlights, or
showing the youngest performer how to get the paint off his cheeks,
without taking the skin off into the bargain. And if the performance
is a failure, nine of the performers will have nine separate sets of
proofs that it was due to the stage-manager's unfortunate selection of
the piece, or mistaken judgment as to the characters.

He will, however, have the satisfaction (and when one has a head to
plan and a heart in one's work, it _is_ a satisfaction) of carrying
through the thing in his own way, and sooner or later, and here and
there, he will find some people who know the difficulties of his
position, and will give him ample credit and _kudos_ if he keeps his
company in good humour, and carries out his plans without a breakdown.

By this time, my dear Rouge Pot, you will see that the stage-manager,
like all rulers, pays dearly for his power; but it is to be hoped that
the difficulties inseparable from his office will not be wilfully
increased by


THE ACTORS.

They are a touchy race at any time. Amateur actors are said to
have--one and all--a belief that each and every one can play any part
of any kind. Shakespeare found that some of them thought they could
play _every_ part also! But besides this general error, each actor has
his own peculiarities, which the stage-manager ought to acquaint
himself with as soon as possible.

It is a painful fact that there are some people who "come forward"
readily, do not seem at all nervous, are willing to play anything, and
are either well provided with anecdotes of previous successes, or
quite amazingly ready for leading parts, though they "never tried
acting," and are only "quite sure they shall like it"--but who, when
the time comes, fail completely. I fear that there is absolutely
nothing to be done with such actors, but to avoid them for the
future. On the other hand, there are many people who are nervous and
awkward at first, and even more or less so through every rehearsal,
but who _do not fail at the pinch_. Once fairly in their clothes, and
pledged to their parts, they forget themselves in the sense of what
they have undertaken, and their courage is stimulated by the crisis.
Their knees may shake, but their minds see no alternative but to do
their best, and the best, with characters of this conscientious type,
is seldom bad.

It is quite true, also, that some actors are never at their best till
they are dressed, and that some others can put off learning their
parts till the last moment, and then "study" them at a push, and
acquit themselves creditably in the play. _But these peculiarities are
no excuse for neglecting rehearsals, or for not learning parts, or for
rehearsing in a slovenly manner._

_Actors should never forget that rehearsals are not only for the
benefit of each actor individually, but also of all the characters of
the piece as a whole._

A. and B. may be able to learn their parts in a day, and to act fairly
under the inspiration of the moment, but if they neglect rehearsals on
this account, they deal very selfishly by C. and D., who have not the
same facility, and who rehearse at great disadvantage if the other
parts are not properly represented too.

And now a word or two to the actors of the small parts. It _is_ a
disappointment to find yourself "cast" for a footman, with no more to
do than to announce and usher in the principal personages of the
piece, when you feel a strong (and perhaps well-grounded) conviction
that you would have "made a hit" as the Prince in blank verse and blue
velvet. Well! one must fall back on one's principles. Be loyal to the
stage-manager. Help the piece through, whether it is or is not a
pleasure and a triumph for you yourself. Set an example of willingness
and good-humour. If to these first principles you add the amiable
quality of finding pleasure in the happiness of others, you will be
partly consoled for not playing the Prince yourself by sympathizing
with Jack's unfeigned pride in his part and his finery, and if Jack
has a heart under his velvet doublet, he will not forget your
generosity. It may also be laid down as an axiom that _a good actor
will take a pride in making the most of a small part_. There are many
plays in which small parts have been raised to the rank of principal
ones by the spirit put into them by a good actor, who "made" his part
instead of grumbling at it. And the credit gained by a triumph of this
kind is very often even beyond the actor's deserts. _From those who
play the principal parts much is expected, and it is difficult to
satisfy ones audience, but if any secondary character is made pathetic
or amusing, the audience (having expected nothing) are willing to
believe that if the actor can surprise them with a small part, he
would take the house by storm with a big one._

I will conclude my letter with a few general rules for young actors.

_Say nothing whatever on the stage but your part._ This is a rule for
rehearsals, and if it could be attended to, every rehearsal would have
more than double its usual effect. People chatter from nervousness,
explain or apologize for their mistakes, and waste quite three-fourths
of the time in words which are not in the piece.

_Speak very slowly and very clearly._ All young actors speak too fast,
and do not allow the audience time to digest each sentence. _Speak
louder than usual, but clearness of enunciation is even more
important. Do not be slovenly with the muscles of the lips, or talk
from behind shut teeth._

_Keep your face to the audience as a rule._

If two people talking together have to cross each other so as to
change their places on the stage, _the one who has just spoken should
cross before the one who is going to speak_.

_Learn to stand still._

As a rule, _do not speak when you are crossing the stage_, but cross
first and then speak.

_Let the last speaker get his sentence well out before you begin
yours._

If you are a comic actor, _don't run away with the piece by over-doing
your fun. Never spoil another actor's points by trying to make the
audience laugh whilst he is speaking._ It is inexcusably bad
stage-manners.

If the audience applauds, _wait till the noise of the clapping is over
to finish your speech_.

_Rehearse without your book in the last rehearsals_, so as to get into
the way of hearing the prompter, and catching the word from him when
your memory fails you.

_Practise your part before a looking-glass, and say it out aloud._ A
part may be pat in your head, and very stiff on your tongue.

The Green-room is generally a scene of great confusion in private
theatricals. Besides getting everything belonging to your dress
together _yourself_ and in _good time_, I advise you to have _a little
hand-basket_, such as you may have used at the seaside or in the
garden, and into this to put _pins_, _hair-pins_, _a burnt cork_,
_needles and thread_, _a pair of scissors_, _a pencil_, _your part_,
_and any small things you may require_. It is easy to drop them into
the basket again. Small things get mislaid under bigger ones when one
is dressing in a hurry; and a hero who is flustered by his moustache
having fallen under the washstand well out of sight is apt to forget
his part when he has found the moustache.

Remember that _Right and Left in stage directions mean the right and
left hand of the actor as he faces the audience_.

I will not burden you with any further advice for yourself, and I will
reserve a few hints as to rough and ready scenery, properties, &c.,
for another letter.

Meanwhile--whatever else you omit--get your parts well by rote; and if
you cannot find or spare a stage-manager, you must find good-humour
and common agreement in proportion; prompt by turns, and each look
strictly after his own "properties."

Yours, &c.,

BURNT CORK.


HINTS FOR PRIVATE THEATRICALS.--II.

MY DEAR ROUGE POT,--I promised to say a few words about _rough and
ready properties_.

The most indispensable of all is _the curtain_, which can be made (at
small expense) to roll up and come down in orthodox fashion. Even
better are two curtains, with the rings and strings so arranged that
the curtains can be pulled apart or together by some one in the wings.
Any upholsterer will do this. A double drawing-room with folding doors
is of course "made for theatricals." The difficulty of having only one
exit from the stage--the door of the room--may be met by having a
screen on the other side. But then _the actors who go out behind the
screen, must be those who will not have to come in again till the
curtain has been drawn_.

If, however, the room, or part of a room, devoted to the stage is
large enough for an amateur proscenium, with "wings" at the sides, and
space behind the "scenes" to conceal the actors, and enable them to
go round, of course there can be as many exits as are needed.

A proscenium is quite a possibility. _The framework in which the
curtain falls need not be an expensive or complicated concern._ Two
wooden uprights, firmly fastened to the floor by bolt and socket, each
upright being four or five feet from the wall on either side; a
cross-bar resting on the top, but the whole width of the room, to
which (if it draws up) the curtain is to be nailed; a curtain, with a
wooden pole in the hem at the bottom to steady it (like a
window-blind); long, narrow, fixed curtains to fall from the cross-bar
at each end where it projects beyond the uprights, so as to fill the
space between each upright and the wall of the room, and hide the
wings; some bright wall-paper border to fasten on to the uprights and
cross-bar, as decoration;--these are not expensive matters, and the
little carpentry needed could be done in a very short time by a
village carpenter.

And here, my dear Rouge Pot, I feel inclined to say a word to "Parents
and Guardians." _I wish that a small annual outlay on little pleasures
were oftener reckoned among legitimate expenses in middle-class
British families._ But little pleasures and alms are apt to be left
till they are asked for, and then grudged. Though, if the annual
expenses under these two heads were summed up at the end of the year,
we should perhaps be more inclined to blush than to bewail our
extravagances. As to little pleasures, I am not speaking of toys and
books and presents, of which children have commonly six times as many
