
"Russians, by the look of them," answered Marteau.

"You say well.  I have seen those green caps and green overcoats
before.  Umph," answered Bullet-Stopper, making for him an
extraordinarily long speech, "it was colder then than it is now, but we
always beat them.  At Friedland, at Eylau, at Borodino, aye, even at
the Beresina.  It was the cold and hunger that beat us.  What wouldn't
the guard give to be where we are now.  Look at them.  They are so sure
of themselves that they haven't thrown out a picket or sentries."

In fact, neither Bluecher nor any of his commanders apprehended any
danger whatsoever.  That Napoleon would dare to fall on them was
unthinkable.  That there could be a single French soldier in their
vicinity save those under Macdonald, being hard pressed by Yorck, never
entered anybody's head.

"What Russians are they, do you think?" asked Marteau of his comrade.

"How should I know?" growled the other.  "All Russians are alike to me,
and----"

Marteau, however, had heard discussions during the time he had been on
duty in Napoleon's headquarters.

"That will be Sacken's corps, unless I am very much mistaken," he said.

"And those up yonder toward Epernay, where the firing comes from?"
asked the grenadier.

Marteau shook his head.

"We must find out," was the answer.

"Yes, but how?"

"I don't know."

"There is only one way," continued Bal-Arret.

"And that is?"

"To go over there, and----"

"In these uniforms?" observed the young officer.  "We should be shot as
soon as we should appear, and questioned afterward."

"Yes, if there was anything left to question," growled the grenadier.
"The Russians will do some scouting.  Perhaps some of them will come
here.  If so, we will knock them on the head and take their uniforms,
wait until nightfall, slip through the lines, find out what we can, and
go back and tell the Emperor.  It is very simple."

"Quite so," laughed the young officer; "if we can catch two Russians,
if their uniforms will fit us, if we can get through, if we can find
out, if we can get back.  Do you speak Russian, Bal-Arret?"

"Not a word."

"Prussian?"

"Enough to pass myself through I guess, and----"

"Hush," said the young man, as three Russians suddenly appeared out of
a little ravine on the edge of the wood.

They had come on a foraging expedition, and had been successful,
apparently, for, tied to a musket and carried between two of the men
was a dead pig.  How it had escaped the Cossack raiders of the day
before was a mystery.  They were apparently coming farther into the
forest for firewood with which to roast the animal.  Perhaps, as the
pig was small, and, as they were doubtless hungry, they did not wish
their capture to be widely known.  At any rate, they came cautiously up
a ravine and had not been noticed until their heads rose above it.
They saw the two Frenchmen just about as soon as they were seen.  The
third man, whose arms were free, immediately presented his piece and
pulled the trigger.  Fortunately it missed fire.  If it had gone off it
might have attracted the attention of the Russian outposts,
investigations would have been instituted, and all chance of passing
the lines there would have been over.

At the same time he pulled the trigger he fell like a log.  The
grenadier, who had thrust into his belt a heavy knife, picked up from
some murdered woodsman on the journey, had drawn it, seized it by the
blade, and, with a skill born of olden peasant days, had hurled it at
the Russian.  The blade struck the man fairly in the face, and the
sharp weapon plunged into the man to the hilt.  He threw up his hands,
his gun dropped, he crashed down into the ravine stone dead.  The next
second the two Frenchmen had seized the two Russians.  The latter were
taken at a disadvantage.  They had retained their clutch on the
gun-sling carrying the pig, and, before they realized what was
toward--they were slow thinkers both--a pair of hands was clasped
around each throat.  The Russians were big men, and they struggled
hard.  A silent, terrible battle was waged under the trees, but, try as
they would, the Russians could not get release from the terrible grasp
of the Frenchmen.  The breath left their bodies, their eyes protruded,
their faces turned black.

Marteau suddenly released his prisoner, who dropped heavily to the
ground.  To bind him with his own breast and gun straps and belt was a
work of a few moments.  When he had finished he tore a piece of cloth
from the coat of the soldier and thrust it into his mouth to gag him.
The grenadier had a harder time with his enemy, who was the bigger of
the two men, but he, too, mastered him, and presently both prisoners
lay helpless, bound and gagged.  The two Frenchmen rose and stared at
each other, a merry twinkle in the eyes of old Bullet-Stopper, a very
puzzled expression in those of the young soldier.

"Well, here's our disguise," said the old soldier.

"Quite so," interposed the officer.  "But what shall we do with these
two?"

"Nothing simpler.  Knock them in the head after we have found out what
we can from them, and----"

But Marteau shook his head.

"I can't murder helpless prisoners," he said decisively.

"If you had seen what they did to us in Russia you wouldn't have any
hesitation on that score," growled the grenadier.  "I had comrades whom
they stripped naked and turned loose in the snow.  Some of them they
buried alive, some they gave to the wolves, some they burned to death.
I have no more feeling for them than I have for reptiles or devils."

"I can't do it," said the younger soldier stubbornly.  "We must think
of some other way."

Old Bullet-Stopper stood frowning, trying to think of some argument by
which to overcome these foolish scruples, when an idea came to his
friend.

"About half a mile back we passed a deserted house.  Let's take them
there and leave them.  There will probably be ropes or straps.  We can
bind them.  They will be sheltered and perhaps somebody may come along
and release them."

"Yes, doubtless somebody will," said the grenadier gravely, thinking
that if somebody proved to be a peasant their release would be an
eternal one, and glad in the thought.  "Very well, you are in command.
Give your order."

At Marteau's direction the straps around the feet of the men were
loosened, they were compelled to get up; they had been disarmed, of
course, and by signs they were made to march in the required direction.
Casting a backward glance over the encampment, to see whether the
absence of the three had been noticed, and, discerning no excitement of
any sort, Marteau followed the grenadier and the two prisoners.  Half a
mile back in the woods stood the hut.  It was a stoutly built
structure, of logs and stone.  A little clearing lay around it.  For a
wonder it had not been burned or broken down, although everything had
been cleaned out of it by raiders.  The door swung idly on its hinges.
The two Russians were forced to enter the hut.  They were bound with
ropes, of which there happened to be some hanging from a nail, the door
was closed, huge sticks from a surrounding fence were driven into the
ground against it, so that it could not be opened from the inside, and
the men were left to their own devices.

As neither Frenchman spoke Russian, and as the Russians understood
neither French nor Prussian, conversation was impossible.  Everything
had to be done by signs.

"I wouldn't give much for their chance, shut up in that house in this
wood," said the grenadier, as the two walked away.

"Nor I," answered Marteau.  "But at least we haven't killed them."

The two Frenchmen now presented a very different appearance.  Before
they left the hut they had taken off their own great coats, the
bearskin shako of the grenadier, and the high, flat-topped,
bell-crowned cap of the line regiment of the officer.  In place of
these they wore the flat Russian caps and the long Russian overcoats.
Bal-Arret might serve for a passable Russian, but no one could mistake
Marteau for anything but a Frenchman.  Still, it had to be chanced.

The two retraced their steps and came to the ravine, where the dead
Russian lay.  They had no interest in him, save the grenadier's desire
to get his knife back.  It had served him well, it might be useful
again.  But they had a great interest in the pig.  Their exhausted
horses were now useless, and they had thought they would have to kill
one to get something to eat.  But the pig, albeit he was a lean one,
was a treasure indeed.  To advance upon the Russian line in broad
daylight would have been madness.  Darkness was their only hope.
Reaching down into the ravine, the grenadier hoisted the body of the
poor pig to his comrade, and the two of them lugged it back far in the
woods where it was safe to kindle a fire.  With flint and steel and
tinder, they soon had a blaze going in the sequestered hollow they had
chosen, and the smell of savory roast presently delighted their fancy.
They ate their fill for the first time in weeks be it remarked.  If
they only had a bottle of the famous wine of the country to wash it
down they would have feasted like kings.

"So far," said the grenadier, when he could eat no more, "our
expedition has been successful.  If those youngsters down at Nogent
could only smell this pig there would be no holding them."

"I think it would be well to cook as much of it as we can carry with
us.  I don't know when we may get any more."

"That is well thought on," agreed the old soldier.  "Always provide for
the next meal when you can."

"And, with what's left, as we can't be far from the hut, we'll give
those two poor Russians something to eat."

"You're too tender-hearted, my lad," said Bullet-Stopper, his face
clouded, "ever to be a great soldier, I am afraid."

On an expedition of this kind rank was forgotten, and the humble
subordinate again assumed the role of the advisor.  Marteau laughed.

"Rather than let them starve I would knock them in the head," he said.

"That's what I wanted to do," growled the other savagely.

When it came to the issue, however, he really did respect the rank of
his young friend.  Accordingly, pieces of the roast pig were taken to
the hut and placed in reach of the prisoners, who were found bound as
before and looking very miserable.  Yet there was something suspicious
in their attitude.  The old grenadier turned one of them over and
discovered that one had endeavored to free the other by gnawing at the
ropes.  Not much progress had been made in the few hours that had
elapsed, but still it was evident that the rope would eventually be
bitten through and the men freed.  He pointed this out to his officer.

"Better finish them now," he said.

But Marteau shook his head.

"It will take them all day and night to get free at that rate; by that
time we will be far away, and it will be too late."

"But if they should tell what they have seen?"

"What can they tell?  Only that two Frenchmen fell upon them.  No, let
them be.  Set the food on the floor here.  If they get hungry they can
roll over toward it and eat it."

The gags had been taken out of the mouths of the men.  If they did give
the alarm there would be none to hear them, save perhaps a French
peasant passing that way, and at his hands they would meet short shrift.

Having stuffed their haversacks full of roast pig, they retraced their
steps and reached the edge of the clearing.  It was noon by this time,
so much of the day had been spent in the various undertakings that have
been described, but the Russians were still there.  Evidently they
intended to encamp for the day and rest.  Probably it was part of the
program.  These would move on, presumably on the morrow, and another
division of the army would come up and take their places.  The firing
still continued on the horizon.

Marteau, who had a soldierly instinct, divined that the cavalry, which
had long since disappeared to the westward, would try to outflank
Macdonald, perhaps get in his rear, and this Russian division would
move up and join Yorck's attacking force.  The whole proceeding was
leisurely.  There was no especial hurry.  There was no use tiring out
the men and fighting desperate battles when maneuvering would serve.

The two made a more careful investigation and discovered that trees led
across the road about half a mile to the left, and, although the roads
were filled with galloping couriers and many straggling men and small
commands, yet they decided that by going to the edge of the wood that
touched the road and watching their opportunity they could get across
unnoticed.

While they stared deliberating a squadron of cavalry, not of Cossacks,
but of Russian cuirassiers left the camp and moved off down the
cross-road that led to the south and west--the road, indeed, that led
to the Chateau d'Aumenier.  The officer in command rode in front and
with him were several civilians, at least, while they were covered with
heavy fur cloaks, no uniform was visible, and among the civilians was
one unmistakably a woman.  A Frenchman always had an eye for a woman.
The party was too far away to distinguish features, but the two men
noted the air of distinction about the party and the way the woman rode
her horse, the deference that appeared to be paid to her, and they
wasted no little time in wondering what might be toward.  However, no
explanation presenting itself to their minds, and, the matter being of
no great importance after all, they turned their attention to the
business in hand.

Working their way through the trees they reached a little coppice close
to the road.  They lay down on the ground back of the coppice, wormed
their way into it, and waited.

"Here we part," said Marteau.  "There are but two of us.  We must get
all the information we can.  I will find out what division this is in
front of us, and I will go back along the road to the eastward and
ascertain where the other divisions are, and by nightfall I will return
to Sezanne to report to the Emperor."

"And what am I to do?" asked the grenadier.  "Remain here?"

"You will cross the road and proceed in the direction of the firing.
Find out, if you can, how the battle goes, what troops are there, what
Marshal Macdonald is doing, and at nightfall retrace your steps and
hasten back to Sezanne."

"Where shall I meet you?"

"Let me think," answered Marteau.  "I shall first go east and then
west, if I can get around that division ahead yonder.  Let us take the
road to d'Aumenier.  I will meet you at the old chateau at ten o'clock,
or not later than midnight.  There is a by-road over the marsh and
through the forest by the bank of the river to Sezanne."

"I know it."

"Very well, then.  It is understood?"

Old Bullet-Stopper nodded.

"The road is clear," he said.  "Good luck."

The two men rose to their feet, shook hands.

"We had better go separately," said Marteau.  "You have the longer
distance.  You first.  I will follow."

The officer watched the old grenadier anxiously.  He passed the road
safely, ran across the intervening space, and disappeared in a little
clump of fruit trees surrounding a deserted farmhouse.  The young man
waited, listening intently for the sound of a shot or struggle, but he
heard nothing.  Then he turned, stepped out into the road, saw it was
empty for the moment, set his face eastward, and moved across it to see
what he could find out beyond.




CHAPTER V

WHEN THE COSSACKS PASSED

For the first time in years the great hall of the Chateau d'Aumenier
was brightly lighted.  The ancient house stood in the midst of a wooded
park adjacent to the village, overlooking one of the little lakes whose
outlets flowed into the Morin.  In former days it had been the scene of
much hospitality, and, even after the revolution in the period of the
consulate and the early empire, representatives of the ancient house
had resided there, albeit quietly and in greatly diminished style.  The
old Marquis Henri, as uncompromising a royalist soldier as ever lived,
had fled to England and had remained there.  His younger brother,
Robert, compromising his dignity and his principles alike, had finally
made his submission to Napoleon and received back the estates, or what
had not been sequestrated.  But he had lived there quietly, had sought
no preferment of the government--even rejecting many offers--and had
confined his recognition to as narrow limits as possible.  He had
married and there had been born to him a daughter, whom he had named
after the ancient dames of his honorable house, Laure.

The Count d'Aumenier, living thus retired, had fallen into rather
careless habits after the death of his wife, and the little demoiselle
