that,' and awoke to a room full of sunshine, but empty of ponies.

'Oh, well,' said Philip, 'I suppose I'd better get up.' He looked at his
new silver watch, one of Helen's parting presents, and saw that it
marked ten o'clock.

'I say, you know,' said he to the watch, 'you can't be right.' And he
shook it to encourage it to think over the matter. But the watch still
said 'ten' quite plainly and unmistakably.

Now the Grange breakfast time was at eight. And Philip was certain he
had not been called.

'This is jolly rum,' he remarked. 'It must be the watch. Perhaps it's
stopped.'

But it hadn't stopped. Therefore it must be two hours past breakfast
time. The moment he had thought this he became extremely hungry. He got
out of bed as soon as he knew exactly how hungry he was.

There was no one about, so he made his way to the bath-room and spent a
happy hour with the hot water and the cold water, and the brown Windsor
soap and the shaving soap and the nail brush and the flesh brush and the
loofahs and the shower bath and the three sponges. He had not, so far,
been able thoroughly to investigate and enjoy all these things. But now
there was no one to interfere, and he enjoyed himself to that degree
that he quite forgot to wonder why he hadn't been called. He thought of
a piece of poetry that Helen had made for him, about the bath; and when
he had done playing he lay on his back in water that was very hot
indeed, trying to remember the poetry. The water was very nearly cold by
the time he had remembered the poetry. It was called Dreams of a Giant
Life, and this was it.


DREAMS OF A GIANT LIFE

          What was I once--in ages long ago?
          I look back, and I see myself. We grow
          So changed through changing years, I hardly see
          How that which I look back on could be me?[1]

          Glorious and splendid, giant-like I stood
          On a white cliff, topped by a darkling wood.
          Below me, placid, bright and sparkling, lay
          The equal waters of a lovely bay.
          White cliffs surrounded it--and calm and fair
          It lay asleep, in warm and silent air.

          I stood alone--naked and strong, upright
          My limbs gleamed in the clear pure golden light.
          I saw below me all the water lie
          Expecting something, and that thing was I.[2]

          I leaned, I plunged, the waves splashed over me.
          I lay, a giant in a little sea.

          White cliffs all round, wood-crowned, and as I lay
          I saw the glories of the dying day;
          No wind disturbed my sea; the sunlight was
          As though it came through windows of gold glass.
          The white cliffs rose above me, and around
          The clear sea lay, pure, perfect and profound;
          And I was master of the cliffs, the sea,
          And the gold light that brightened over me.

          Far miles away my giant feet showed plain,
          Rising, like rocks out of the quiet main.
          On them a lighthouse could be built, to show
          Wayfaring ships the way they must not go.

          I was the master of that cliff-girt sea.
          I splashed my hands, the waves went over me,
          And in the dimples of my body lay
          Little rock-pools, where small sea-beasts might play.

          I found a boat, its deck was perforate;
          I launched it, and it dared the storms of fate.
          Its woollen sail stood out against the sky,
          Supported by a mast of ivory.

          Another boat rode proudly to my hand,
          Upon its deck a thousand spears did stand;
          I launched it, and it sped full fierce and fast
          Against the boat that had the ivory mast
          And woollen sail and perforated deck.
          The two went down in one stupendous wreck!

          Beneath the waves I chased with joyous hand
          Upon the bed of an imagined sand
          The slippery brown sea mouse, that still escaped,
          Where the deep cave beneath my knee was shaped.
          Caught it at last and caged it into rest
          Upon the shallows of my submerged breast.

          Then, as I lay, wrapped as in some kind arm
          By the sweet world of waters soft and warm,
          A great voice cried, from some far unseen shore,
          And I was not a giant any more.

          'Come out, come out,' cried out the voice of power,
          'You've been in for a quarter of an hour.
          The water's cold--come, Master Pip--your head
          'S all wet, and it is time you were in bed.'

          I rose all dripping from the magic sea
          And left the ships that had been slaves to me--
          The soap-dish, with its perforated deck,
          The nail-brush, that had rushed to loss and wreck,
          The flannel sail, the tooth-brush that was mast,
          The sleek soap-mouse--I left them all at last.

          I went out of that magic sea and cried
          Because the time came when I must be dried
          And leave the splendour of a giant's joy
          And go to bed--a little well-washed boy.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Never mind grammar.

[2] This is correct grammar, but never mind.


When he had quite remembered the poetry he had another shower-bath, and
then when he had enjoyed the hot rough towels out of the hot cupboard he
went back to his room to dress. He now felt how deeply he wanted his
breakfast, so he dressed himself with all possible speed, even
forgetting to fasten his bootlaces properly. He was in such a hurry that
he dropped his collar-stud, and it was as he stooped to pick it up that
he remembered his dream. Do you know that was really the first time he
had thought of it. The dream--that indeed would be something to think
about.

Breakfast was the really important thing. He went down very hungry
indeed. 'I shall ask for my breakfast directly I get down,' he said. 'I
shall ask the first person I meet.' And he met no one.

There was no one on the stairs, or in the hall, or in the dining-room,
or in the drawing-room. The library and billiard-room were empty of
living people, and the door of the nursery was locked. So then Philip
made his way into the regions beyond the baize door, where the servants'
quarters were. And there was no one in the kitchen, or in the servants'
hall, or in the butler's pantry, or in the scullery, or the washhouse,
or the larder. In all that big house, and it was much bigger than it
looked from the front because of the long wings that ran out on each
side of its back--in all that big house there was no one but Philip. He
felt certain of this before he ran upstairs and looked in all the
bedrooms and in the little picture gallery and the music-room, and then
in the servants' bedrooms and the very attics. There were interesting
things in those attics, but Philip only remembered that afterwards. Now
he tore down the stairs three at a time. All the room doors were open as
he had left them, and somehow those open doors frightened him more than
anything else. He ran along the corridors, down more stairs, past more
open doors and out through the back kitchen, along the moss-grown walk
by the brick wall and so round by the three yew trees and the mounting
block to the stable-yard. And there was no one there. Neither coachman
nor groom nor stable-boys. And there was no one in the stables, or the
coach-house, or the harness-room, or the loft.

Philip felt that he could not go back into the house. Something terrible
must have happened. Was it possible that any one could want the Grange
servants enough to kidnap them? Philip thought of the nurse and felt
that, at least as far as she was concerned, it was _not_ possible. Or
perhaps it was magic! A sort of Sleeping-Beauty happening! Only every
one had vanished instead of just being put to sleep for a hundred years.

He was alone in the middle of the stable-yard when the thought came to
him.

'Perhaps they're only made invisible. Perhaps they're all here and
watching me and making fun of me.'

He stood still to think this. It was not a pleasant thought.

Suddenly he straightened his little back, and threw back his head.

'They shan't see I'm frightened anyway,' he told himself. And then he
remembered the larder.

'I haven't had any breakfast,' he explained aloud, so as to be plainly
heard by any invisible people who might be about. 'I ought to have my
breakfast. If nobody gives it to me I shall take my breakfast.'

He waited for an answer. But none came. It was very quiet in the
stable-yard. Only the rattle of a halter ring against a manger, the
sound of a hoof on stable stones, the cooing of pigeons and the rustle
of straw in the loose-box broke the silence.

'Very well,' said Philip. 'I don't know what _you_ think I ought to have
for breakfast, so I shall take what _I_ think.'

He drew a long breath, trying to draw courage in with it, threw back his
shoulders more soldierly than ever, and marched in through the back door
and straight to the larder. Then he took what he thought he ought to
have for breakfast. This is what he thought:

          1 cherry pie,
          2 custards in cups,
          1 cold sausage,
          2 pieces of cold toast,
          1 piece of cheese,
          2 lemon cheese-cakes,
          1 small jam tart (there was only one left),
          Butter, 1 pat.

'What jolly things the servants have to eat,' he said. 'I never knew. I
thought that nothing but mutton and rice grew here.'

He put all the food on a silver tray and carried it out on to the
terrace, which lies between the two wings at the back of the house. Then
he went back for milk, but there was none to be seen so he got a white
jug full of water. The spoons he couldn't find, but he found a
carving-fork and a fish-slice. Did you ever try to eat cherry pie with a
fish-slice?

'Whatever's happened,' said Philip to himself, through the cherry pie,
'and whatever happens it's as well to have had your breakfast.' And he
bit a generous inch off the cold sausage which he had speared with the
carving-fork.

And now, sitting out in the good sunshine, and growing less and less
hungry as he plied fish-slice and carving-fork, his mind went back to
his dream, which began to seem more and more real. Suppose it really
_had_ happened? It might have; magic things did happen, it seemed. Look
how all the people had vanished out of the house--out of the world too,
perhaps.

'Suppose every one's vanished,' said Philip. 'Suppose I'm the only
person left in the world who hasn't vanished. Then everything in the
world would belong to me. Then I could have everything that's in all the
toy shops.' And his mind for a moment dwelt fondly on this beautiful
idea.

Then he went on. 'But suppose I vanished too? Perhaps if I were to
vanish I could see the other people who have. I wonder how it's done.'

He held his breath and tried hard to vanish. Have you ever tried this?
It is not at all easy to do. Philip could not do it at all. He held his
breath and he tried and he tried, but he only felt fatter and fatter and
more and more as though in one more moment he should burst. So he let
his breath go.

'No,' he said, looking at his hands; 'I'm not any more invisible than I
was before. Not so much I think,' he added thoughtfully, looking at what
was left of the cherry pie. 'But that dream----'

He plunged deep in the remembrance of it that was, to him, like swimming
in the waters of a fairy lake.

He was hooked out of his lake suddenly by voices. It was like waking up.
There, away across the green park beyond the sunk fence, were people
coming.

'So every one hasn't vanished,' he said, caught up the tray and took it
in. He hid it under the pantry shelf. He didn't know who the people were
who were coming and you can't be too careful. Then he went out and made
himself small in the shadow of a red buttress, heard their voices coming
nearer and nearer. They were all talking at once, in that quick
interested way that makes you certain something unusual has happened.

He could not hear exactly what they were saying, but he caught the
words: 'No.'

'Of course I've asked.'

'Police.'

'Telegram.'

'Yes, of course.'

'Better make quite sure.'

Then every one began speaking all at once, and you could not hear
anything that anybody said. Philip was too busy keeping behind the
buttress to see who they were who were talking. He was glad _something_
had happened.

'Now I shall have something to think about besides the nurse and my
beautiful city that she has pulled down.'

But what was it that had happened? He hoped nobody was hurt--or had done
anything wrong. The word police had always made him uncomfortable ever
since he had seen a boy no bigger than himself pulled along the road by
a very large policeman. The boy had stolen a loaf, Philip was told.
Philip could never forget that boy's face; he always thought of it in
church when it said 'prisoners and captives,' and still more when it
said 'desolate and oppressed.'

'I do hope it's not _that_,' he said.

And slowly he got himself to leave the shelter of the red-brick buttress
and to follow to the house those voices and those footsteps that had
gone by him.

He followed the sound of them to the kitchen. The cook was there in
tears and a Windsor arm-chair. The kitchenmaid, her cap all on one side,
was crying down most dirty cheeks. The coachman was there, very red in
the face, and the groom, without his gaiters. The nurse was there, neat
as ever she seemed at first, but Philip was delighted when a more
careful inspection showed him that there was mud on her large shoes and
on the bottom of her skirt, and that her dress had a large
three-cornered tear in it.

'I wouldn't have had it happen for a twenty-pun note,' the coachman was
saying.

'George,' said the nurse to the groom, 'you go and get a horse ready.
I'll write the telegram.'

'You'd best take Peppermint,' said the coachman. 'She's the fastest.'

The groom went out, saying under his breath, 'Teach your grandmother,'
which Philip thought rude and unmeaning.

Philip was standing unnoticed by the door. He felt that thrill--if it
isn't pleasure it is more like it than anything else--which we all feel
when something real has happened.

But what _had_ happened. What?

'I wish I'd never come back,' said the nurse. 'Then nobody could pretend
it was _my_ fault.'

'It don't matter what they pretend,' the cook stopped crying to say.
'The thing is what's happened. Oh, my goodness. I'd rather have been
turned away without a character than have had this happen.'

'And I'd rather _any_thing,' said the nurse. 'Oh, my goodness me. I wish
I'd never been born.'

And then and there, before the astonished eyes of Philip, she began to
behave as any nice person might--she began to cry.

'It wouldn't have happened,' said the cook, 'if the master hadn't been
away. He's a Justice of the Peace, he is, and a terror to gipsies. It
wouldn't never have happened if----'

Philip could not bear it any longer.

'_What_ wouldn't have happened if?' he asked, startling everybody to a
quick jump of surprise.

The nurse stopped crying and turned to look at him.

'Oh, _you_!' she said slowly. 'I forgot _you_. You want your breakfast,
I suppose, no matter what's happened?'

'No, I don't,' said Philip, with extreme truth. 'I want to know what
_has_ happened?'

'Miss Lucy's lost,' said the cook heavily, 'that's what's happened. So
now you know. You run along and play, like a good little boy, and don't
make extry trouble for us in the trouble we're in.'

'Lost?' repeated Philip.

'Yes, lost. I expect you're glad,' said the nurse, 'the way you treated
her. You hold your tongue and don't let me so much as hear you breathe
the next twenty-four hours. I'll go and write that telegram.'

Philip thought it best not to let any one hear him breathe. By this
means he heard the telegram when nurse read it aloud to the cook.

          'Peter Graham, Esq.,
                      Hotel Wagram,
                               Brussels.

          Miss Lucy lost. Please come home immediately.

                                               PHILKINS.

That's all right, isn't it?'

'I don't see why you sign it Philkins. You're only the nurse--I'm the
head of the house when the family's away, and my name's Bobson,' the
cook said.

There was a sound of torn paper.

'There--the paper's tore. I'd just as soon your name went to it,' said
the nurse. 'I don't want to be the one to tell such news.'

'Oh, my good gracious, what a thing to happen,' sighed the cook. 'Poor
little darling!'

Then somebody wrote the telegram again, and the nurse took it out to
the stable-yard, where Peppermint was already saddled.

'I thought,' said Philip, bold in the nurse's absence, 'I thought Lucy
was with her aunt.'

'She came back yesterday,' said the cook. 'Yes, after you'd gone to bed.
And this morning that nurse went into the night nursery and she wasn't
there. Her bed all empty and cold, and her clothes gone. Though how the
gipsies could have got in without waking that nurse is a mystery to me
and ever will be. She must sleep like a pig.'

'Or the seven sleepers,' said the coachman.
