
"Of course not," answered Caleb, "and with reason."

"Ah! With how much reason!" cried the Blind Girl. With such fervency,
that Caleb, though his motives were so pure, could not endure to meet
her face; but dropped his eyes, as if she could have read in them his
innocent deceit.

"Then tell me again about him, dear father," said Bertha. "Many times
again! His face is benevolent, kind, and tender. Honest and true, I am
sure it is. The manly heart that tries to cloak all favours with a show
of roughness and unwillingness, beats in its every look and glance."

"And makes it noble," added Caleb in his quiet desperation.

"And makes it noble," cried the Blind Girl. "He is older than May,
father."

"Ye-es," said Caleb reluctantly. "He's a little older than May. But that
don't signify."

"Oh, father, yes! To be his patient companion in infirmity and age; to
be his gentle nurse in sickness, and his constant friend in suffering
and sorrow; to know no weariness in working for his sake; to watch him,
tend him, sit beside his bed and talk to him awake, and pray for him
asleep; what privileges these would be! What opportunities for proving
all her truth and her devotion to him! Would she do all this, dear
father?"

"No doubt of it," said Caleb.

"I love her, father; I can love her from my soul!" exclaimed the Blind
Girl. And, saying so, she laid her poor blind face on Caleb's shoulder,
and so wept and wept, that he was almost sorry to have brought that
tearful happiness upon her.

In the meantime there had been a pretty sharp commotion at John
Peerybingle's, for little Mrs. Peerybingle naturally couldn't think of
going anywhere without the Baby; and to get the Baby under way took
time. Not that there was much of the Baby, speaking of it as a thing of
weight and measure, but there was a vast deal to do about and about it,
and it all had to be done by easy stages. For instance, when the Baby
was got, by hook and by crook, to a certain point of dressing, and you
might have rationally supposed that another touch or two would finish
him off, and turn him out a tiptop Baby challenging the world, he was
unexpectedly extinguished in a flannel cap, and hustled off to bed;
where he simmered (so to speak) between two blankets for the best part
of an hour. From this state of inaction he was then recalled, shining
very much and roaring violently, to partake of--well? I would rather
say, if you'll permit me to speak generally--of a slight repast. After
which he went to sleep again. Mrs. Peerybingle took advantage of this
interval, to make herself as smart in a small way as ever you saw
anybody in all your life; and, during the same short truce, Miss Slowboy
insinuated herself into a spencer of a fashion so surprising and
ingenious, that it had no connection with herself, or anything else in
the universe, but was a shrunken, dog's-eared, independent fact,
pursuing its lonely course without the least regard to anybody. By this
time, the Baby, being all alive again, was invested, by the united
efforts of Mrs. Peerybingle and Miss Slowboy, with a cream-coloured
mantle for its body, and a sort of nankeen raised pie for its head; and
so, in course of time, they all three got down to the door, where the
old horse had already taken more than the full value of his day's toll
out of the Turnpike Trust, by tearing up the road with his impatient
autographs; and whence Boxer might be dimly seen in the remote
perspective, standing looking back, and tempting him to come on without
orders.

As to a chair, or anything of that kind for helping Mrs. Peerybingle
into the cart, you know very little of John, if you think _that_ was
necessary. Before you could have seen him lift her from the ground,
there she was in her place, fresh and rosy, saying, "John! How _can_
you? Think of Tilly!"

If I might be allowed to mention a young lady's legs on any terms, I
would observe of Miss Slowboy's that there was a fatality about them
which rendered them singularly liable to be grazed; and that she never
effected the smallest ascent or descent without recording the
circumstance upon them with a notch, as Robinson Crusoe marked the days
upon his wooden calendar. But, as this might be considered ungenteel,
I'll think of it.

"John! You've got the basket with the Veal and Ham Pie and things, and
the bottles of Beer?" said Dot. "If you haven't you must turn round
again this very minute."

"You're a nice little article," returned the Carrier, "to be talking
about turning round, after keeping me a full quarter of an hour behind
my time."

"I am sorry for it, John," said Dot in a great bustle, "but I really
could not think of going to Bertha's--I would not do it, John, on any
account--without the Veal and Ham Pie and things, and the bottles of
Beer. Way!"

This monosyllable was addressed to the horse, who didn't mind it at all.

"Oh, _do_ way, John!" said Mrs. Peerybingle. "Please!"

"It'll be time enough to do that," returned John, "when I begin to leave
things behind me. The basket's safe enough."

"What a hard-hearted monster you must be, John, not to have said so at
once, and save me such a turn! I declare I wouldn't go to Bertha's
without the Veal and Ham Pie and things, and the bottles of Beer, for
any money. Regularly once a fortnight ever since we have been married,
John, have we made our little Picnic there. If anything was to go wrong
with it, I should almost think we were never to be lucky again."

"It was a kind thought in the first instance," said the Carrier; "and I
honour you for it, little woman."

"My dear John!" replied Dot, turning very red. "Don't talk about
honouring _me_. Good gracious!"

"By-the-bye"--observed the Carrier--"that old gentleman----"

Again so visibly and instantly embarrassed!

"He's an odd fish," said the Carrier, looking straight along the road
before them. "I can't make him out. I don't believe there's any harm in
him."

"None at all. I'm--I'm sure there's none at all."

"Yes," said the Carrier, with his eyes attracted to her face by the
great earnestness of her manner. "I am glad you feel so certain of it,
because it's a confirmation to me. It's curious that he should have
taken it into his head to ask leave to go on lodging with us; an't it?
Things come about so strangely."

"So very strangely," she rejoined in a low voice, scarcely audible.

"However, he's a good-natured old gentleman," said John, "and pays as a
gentleman, and I think his word is to be relied upon, like a
gentleman's. I had quite a long talk with him this morning: he can hear
me better already, he says, as he gets more used to my voice. He told me
a great deal about himself, and I told him a good deal about myself, and
a rare lot of questions he asked me. I gave him information about my
having two beats, you know, in my business; one day to the right from
our house and back again; another day to the left from our house and
back again (for he's a stranger, and don't know the names of places
about here); and he seemed quite pleased. 'Why, then I shall be
returning home to-night your way,' he says, 'when I thought you'd be
coming in an exactly opposite direction. That's capital! I may trouble
you for another lift, perhaps, but I'll engage not to fall so sound
asleep again.' He _was_ sound asleep, sure-ly!--Dot! what are you
thinking of?"

"Thinking of, John? I--I was listening to you."

"Oh! That's all right!" said the honest Carrier. "I was afraid, from the
look of your face, that I had gone rambling on so long as to set you
thinking about something else. I was very near it, I'll be bound."

Dot making no reply, they jogged on, for some little time, in silence.
But, it was not easy to remain silent very long in John Peerybingle's
cart, for everybody on the road had something to say. Though it might
only be "How are you?" and, indeed, it was very often nothing else,
still, to give that back again in the right spirit of cordiality,
required, not merely a nod and a smile, but as wholesome an action of
the lungs withal as a long-winded Parliamentary speech. Sometimes,
passengers on foot, or horseback, plodded on a little way beside the
cart, for the express purpose of having a chat; and then there was a
great deal to be said on both sides.

Then, Boxer gave occasion to more good-natured recognitions of, and by,
the Carrier, than half-a-dozen Christians could have done! Everybody
knew him all along the road--especially the fowls and pigs, who, when
they saw him approaching, with his body all on one side, and his ears
pricked up inquisitively, and that knob of a tail making the most of
itself in the air, immediately withdrew into remote back-settlements,
without waiting for the honour of a nearer acquaintance. He had business
elsewhere; going down all the turnings, looking into all the wells,
bolting in and out of all the cottages, dashing into the midst of all
the Dame Schools, fluttering all the pigeons, magnifying the tails of
all the cats, and trotting into the public-houses like a regular
customer. Wherever he went, somebody or other might have been heard to
cry, "Halloa! here's Boxer!" and out came that somebody forthwith,
accompanied by at least two or three other somebodies, to give John
Peerybingle and his pretty wife Good day.

The packages and parcels for the errand cart were numerous; and there
were many stoppages to take them in and give them out, which were not by
any means the worst parts of the journey. Some people were so full of
expectation about their parcels, and other people were so full of wonder
about their parcels, and other people were so full of inexhaustible
directions about their parcels, and John had such a lively interest in
all the parcels, that it was as good as a play. Likewise, there were
articles to carry, which required to be considered and discussed, and in
reference to the adjustment and disposition of which councils had to be
holden by the Carrier and the senders: at which Boxer usually assisted,
in short fits of the closest attention, and long fits of tearing round
and round the assembled sages, and barking himself hoarse. Of all these
little incidents, Dot was the amused and open-eyed spectatress from her
chair in the cart; and as she sat there, looking on--a charming little
portrait framed to admiration by the tilt--there was no lack of nudgings
and glancings and whisperings and envyings among the younger men. And
this delighted John the Carrier beyond measure; for he was proud to have
his little wife admired, knowing that she didn't mind it--that, if
anything, she rather liked it perhaps.

The trip was a little foggy, to be sure, in the January weather; and was
raw and cold. But who cared for such trifles? Not Dot, decidedly. Not
Tilly Slowboy, for she deemed sitting in a cart, on any terms, to be the
highest point of human joys; the crowning circumstance of earthly hope.
Not the Baby, I'll be sworn; for it's not in Baby nature to be warmer or
more sound asleep, though its capacity is great in both respects, than
that blessed young Peerybingle was, all the way.

You couldn't see very far in the fog, of course; but you could see a
great deal! It's astonishing how much you may see in a thicker fog than
that, if you will only take the trouble to look for it. Why, even to sit
watching for the Fairyrings in the fields, and for the patches of hoar
frost still lingering in the shade, near hedges and by trees, was a
pleasant occupation, to make no mention of the unexpected shapes in
which the trees themselves came starting out of the mist, and glided
into it again. The hedges were tangled and bare, and waved a multitude
of blighted garlands in the wind; but there was no discouragement in
this. It was agreeable to contemplate; for it made the fireside warmer
in possession, and the summer greener in expectancy. The river looked
chilly; but it was in motion, and moving at a good pace--which was a
great point. The canal was rather slow and torpid; that must be
admitted. Never mind. It would freeze the sooner when the frost set
fairly in, and then there would be skating and sliding; and the heavy
old barges, frozen up somewhere near a wharf, would smoke their rusty
iron chimney-pipes all day, and have a lazy time of it.

In one place there was a great mound of weeds or stubble burning; and
they watched the fire, so white in the daytime, flaring through the fog,
with only here and there a dash of red in it, until, in consequence, as
she observed, of the smoke "getting up her nose," Miss Slowboy
choked--she could do anything of that sort, on the smallest
provocation--and woke the Baby, who wouldn't go to sleep again. But
Boxer, who was in advance some quarter of a mile or so, had already
passed the outposts of the town, and gained the corner of the street
where Caleb and his daughter lived; and, long before they had reached
the door, he and the Blind Girl were on the pavement waiting to receive
them.

Boxer, by the way, made certain delicate distinctions of his own, in his
communication with Bertha, which persuade me fully that he knew her to
be blind. He never sought to attract her attention by looking at her, as
he often did with other people, but touched her invariably. What
experience he could ever have had of blind people or blind dogs I don't
know. He had never lived with a blind master; nor had Mr. Boxer the
elder, nor Mrs. Boxer, nor any of his respectable family on either side,
ever been visited with blindness, that I am aware of. He may have found
it out for himself, perhaps, but he had got hold of it somehow; and
therefore he had hold of Bertha too, by the skirt, and kept hold, until
Mrs. Peerybingle and the Baby, and Miss Slowboy and the basket, were all
got safely within doors.

May Fielding was already come; and so was her mother--a little querulous
chip of an old lady with a peevish face, who, in right of having
preserved a waist like a bedpost, was supposed to be a most transcendent
figure; and who, in consequence of having once been better off, or of
labouring under an impression that she might have been, if something had
happened which never did happen, and seemed to have never been
particularly likely to come to pass--but it's all the same--was very
genteel and patronising indeed. Gruff and Tackleton was also there,
doing the agreeable, with the evident sensation of being as perfectly at
home, and as unquestionably in his own element, as a fresh young salmon
on the top of the Great Pyramid.

"May! My dear old friend!" cried Dot, running up to meet her. "What a
happiness to see you!"

Her old friend was, to the full, as hearty and as glad as she; and it
really was, if you'll believe me, quite a pleasant sight to see them
embrace. Tackleton was a man of taste, beyond all question. May was very
pretty.

You know sometimes, when you are used to a pretty face, how, when it
comes into contact and comparison with another pretty face, it seems for
the moment to be homely and faded, and hardly to deserve the high
opinion you have had of it. Now, this was not at all the case, either
with Dot or May; for May's face set off Dot's, and Dot's face set off
May's, so naturally and agreeably, that, as John Peerybingle was very
near saying when he came into the room, they ought to have been born
sisters--which was the only improvement you could have suggested.

Tackleton had brought his leg of mutton, and, wonderful to relate, a
tart besides--but we don't mind a little dissipation when our brides are
in the case; we don't get married every day--and, in addition to these
dainties, there were the Veal and Ham Pie, and "things," as Mrs.
Peerybingle called them; which were chiefly nuts and oranges, and cakes,
and such small deer. When the repast was set forth on the board, flanked
by Caleb's contribution, which was a great wooden bowl of smoking
potatoes (he was prohibited, by solemn compact, from producing any other
viands), Tackleton led his intended mother-in-law to the post of honour.
For the better gracing of this place at the high festival, the majestic
old soul had adorned herself with a cap, calculated to inspire the
thoughtless with sentiments of awe. She also wore her gloves. But let us
be genteel, or die!

Caleb sat next his daughter; Dot and her old schoolfellow were side by
side; the good Carrier took care of the bottom of the table. Miss
Slowboy was isolated, for the time being, from every article of
furniture but the chair she sat on, that she might have nothing else to
knock the Baby's head against.

As Tilly stared about her at the dolls and toys, they stared at her and
at the company. The venerable old gentlemen at the street-doors (who
were all in full action) showed especial interest in the party, pausing
occasionally before leaping, as if they were listening to the
conversation, and then plunging wildly over and over, a great many
times, without halting for breath--as in a frantic state of delight with
the whole proceedings.

Certainly, if these old gentlemen were inclined to have a fiendish joy
in the contemplation of Tackleton's discomfiture, they had good reason
to be satisfied. Tackleton couldn't get on at all; and the more cheerful
his intended bride became in Dot's society, the less he liked it, though
he had brought them together for that purpose. For he was a regular dog
in the manger, was Tackleton; and, when they laughed and he couldn't, he
took it into his head, immediately, that they must be laughing at him.

"Ah, May!" said Dot. "Dear, dear, what changes! To talk of those merry
school days makes one young again."

"Why, you an't particularly old at any time, are you?" said Tackleton.

"Look at my sober, plodding husband there," returned Dot. "He adds
twenty years to my age at least. Don't you, John?"

"Forty," John replied.

"How many _you_'ll add to Mary's, I am sure I don't know," said Dot,
laughing. "But she can't be much less than a hundred years of age on her
next birthday."

"Ha, ha!" laughed Tackleton. Hollow as a drum that laugh, though. And he
looked as if he could have twisted Dot's neck comfortably.

"Dear, dear!" said Dot. "Only to remember how we used to talk, at
school, about the husbands we would choose. I don't know how young, and
how handsome, and how gay, and how lively mine was not to be! And as to
May's!--Ah dear! I don't know whether to laugh or cry, when I think what
silly girls we were."

May seemed to know which to do; for the colour flashed into her face,
and tears stood in her eyes.

"Even the very persons themselves--real live young men--we fixed on
sometimes," said Dot. "We little thought how things would come about. I
never fixed on John, I'm sure; I never so much as thought of him. And,
if I had told you you were ever to be married to Mr. Tackleton, why,
you'd have slapped me. Wouldn't you, May?"

Though May didn't say yes, she certainly didn't say no, or express no,
by any means.

Tackleton laughed--quite shouted, he laughed so loud. John Peerybingle
laughed too, in his ordinary good-natured and contented manner; but his
was a mere whisper of a laugh to Tackleton's.

"You couldn't help yourselves, for all that. You couldn't resist us, you
see," said Tackleton. "Here we are! Here we are! Where are your gay
young bridegrooms now?"

"Some of them are dead," said Dot; "and some of them forgotten. Some of
them, if they could stand among us at this moment, would not believe we
were the same creatures; would not believe that what they saw and heard
was real, and we _could_ forget them so. No! they would not believe one
word of it!"

"Why, Dot!" exclaimed the Carrier. "Little woman!"

She had spoken with such earnestness and fire, that she stood in need of
some recalling to herself, without doubt. Her husband's check was very
gentle, for he merely interfered, as he supposed, to shield old
Tackleton; but it proved effectual, for she stopped, and said no more.
There was an uncommon agitation, even in her silence, which the wary
Tackleton, who had brought his half-shut eye to bear upon her, noted
closely, and remembered to some purpose too.

May uttered no word, good or bad, but sat quite still, with her eyes
cast down, and made no sign of interest in what had passed. The good
lady her mother now interposed, observing, in the first instance, that
girls were girls, and bygones bygones, and that, so long as young people
were young and thoughtless, they would probably conduct themselves like
young and thoughtless persons: with two or three other positions of a no
less sound and incontrovertible character. She then remarked, in a
devout spirit, that she thanked Heaven she had always found in her
daughter May a dutiful and obedient child: for which she took no credit
to herself, though she had every reason to believe it was entirely owing
to herself. With regard to Mr. Tackleton, she said, That he was in a
moral point of view an undeniable individual, and That he was in an
eligible point of view a son-in-law to be desired, no one in their
senses could doubt. (She was very emphatic here.) With regard to the
family into which he was so soon about, after some solicitation, to be
admitted, she believed Mr. Tackleton knew that, although reduced in
purse, it had some pretensions to gentility; and that if certain
circumstances, not wholly unconnected, she would go so far as to say,
with the Indigo Trade, but to which she would not more particularly
refer, had happened differently, it might perhaps have been in
possession of wealth. She then remarked that she would not allude to the
past, and would not mention that her daughter had for some time rejected
the suit of Mr. Tackleton; and that she would not say a great many other
things which she did say at great length. Finally, she delivered it as
the general result of her observation and experience, that those
marriages in which there was least of what was romantically and sillily
called love, were always the happiest; and that she anticipated the
greatest possible amount of bliss--not rapturous bliss; but the solid,
