
My, how his short legs did fly and his stout little claws dug into the
soft earth!  His little forepaws flew so fast that if you had been
there you could hardly have seen them at all.  And with his strong hind
legs he kicked the sand right back into the face of Reddy Fox.

All the little meadow people gathered around the hole where Johnny
Chuck and Reddy Fox had disappeared.  They were very anxious, very
anxious indeed.  Would Reddy Fox catch Johnny Chuck?  And what would he
do to him?  Was all their fun to end in something terrible to
sunny-hearted, merry Johnny Chuck, whom everybody loved?

All of a sudden, pop! right out of the solid earth among the daisies
and buttercups, just like a jack-in-the-box, came Johnny Chuck!  He
looked very warm and a little tired, but he was still chuckling as he
scampered across to another hole of Grandfather Chuck's.

By and by something else crawled out of the hole Johnny Chuck had made.
Could it be Reddy Fox?  Where were his white waistcoat and beautiful
red coat?  And was that thing dragging behind him his splendid tail?

He crept out of the hole and then just lay down and panted for breath.
He was almost too tired to move.  Then he began to spit sand out of his
mouth and blow it out of his nose and try to wipe it out of his eyes.
The long hair of his fine coat was filled full of sand and no one would
ever have guessed that this was Reddy Fox.

"Haw! haw! haw!" shouted Blacky the Crow.

Then everybody shouted "Haw! haw! haw!" and began to roll in the grass
and hold on to their sides once more; everybody but Reddy Fox.  When he
could get his breath he didn't look this way or that way, but just
sneaked off to his home under the big hickory.

[Illustration: Then everybody shouted "Haw! haw! haw!"]

And when Old Mother West Wind came with her big bag to take the Merry
Little Breezes to their home behind the Purple Hills, Johnny Chuck
waddled back up the Lone Little Path chuckling to himself, for that
little feeling of discontent was all gone.  He had found that after all
he could do something better than anybody else on the Green Meadows,
for in his heart he knew that none could dig so fast as he.




VII

JOHNNY CHUCK'S SECRET

Johnny Chuck pushed up the last bit of gravel from the hole he had dug
between the roots of the old apple tree in a corner of the Green
Meadows.  He smoothed it down on the big, yellow mound he had made in
front of his door.  Then he sat up very straight on top of the mound,
brushed his coat, shook the sand from his trousers and carefully
cleaned his hands.

After he had rested a bit, he turned around and looked at his new home,
for that is what it was, although he had not come there to live yet,
and no one knew of it, no one but jolly, round, red Mr. Sun, who,
peeping between the branches of the old apple tree, had caught Johnny
Chuck at work.  But _he_ wouldn't tell, not jolly Mr. Sun!  Looking
down from the blue sky every day he sees all sorts of queer things and
he learns all kinds of secrets, does Mr. Sun, but he never, never
tells.  No, Sir!  Mr. Sun never tells one of them, not even to Old
Mother West Wind when at night they go down together behind the Purple
Hills.

So jolly, round, red Mr. Sun just smiled and smiled when he discovered
Johnny Chuck's secret, for that is just what the new home under the
apple tree was--a secret.  Not even the Merry Little Breezes, who find
out almost everything, had discovered it.

Johnny Chuck chuckled to himself as he planned a back door, a beautiful
back door, hidden behind a tall clump of meadow grass where no one
would think to look for a door.  When he had satisfied himself as to
just where he would put it, he once more sat up very straight on his
nice, new mound and looked this way and looked that way to be sure that
no one was near.  Then he started for his old home along a secret
little path he had made for himself.

Pretty soon he came to the Lone Little Path that went past his own
home.  He danced and he skipped along the Lone Little Path, and,
because he was so happy, he tried to turn a somersault.  But Johnny
Chuck was so round and fat and rolly-poly that he just tumbled over in
a heap.

"Well, well, well!  What's the matter with you?" said a voice close
beside him before he could pick himself up.  It was Jimmy Skunk, who
was out looking for some beetles for his dinner.

Johnny Chuck scrambled to his feet and looked foolish, very foolish
indeed.

"There's nothing the matter with me, Jimmy Skunk," said Johnny.
"There's nothing the matter with me.  It's just because I've got a
secret."

"A secret!" cried Jimmy Skunk.  "What is it?"

"Yes, a secret, a really, truly secret," said Johnny Chuck, and looked
very important.

"Tell me, Johnny Chuck.  Come on, tell just _me_, and then we'll have
the secret together," begged Jimmy Skunk.

Now Johnny Chuck was so tickled with his secret that it seemed as if he
_must_ share it with some one.  He just couldn't keep it to himself any
longer.

"You won't tell any one?" said Johnny Chuck.

Jimmy Skunk promised that he wouldn't tell a soul.

"Cross your heart," commanded Johnny Chuck.

Jimmy Skunk crossed his heart.

Then Johnny Chuck looked this way and looked that way to be sure that
no one was listening.  Finally he whispered in Jimmy Skunk's ear:

"I've got a new home under the old apple tree in a corner of the Green
Meadows," said Johnny Chuck.

Of course Jimmy Skunk was very much surprised and very much interested,
so Johnny Chuck told him all about it.

"Now, remember, it's a secret," said Johnny Chuck, as Jimmy Skunk
started off down the Lone Little Path across the Green Meadows, to look
for some beetles.

"I'll remember," said Jimmy Skunk.

"And don't tell!" called Johnny Chuck.

Jimmy Skunk promised that he wouldn't tell.  Then Johnny Chuck started
off up the Lone Little Path, whistling, and Jimmy Skunk trotted down
the Lone Little Path onto the Green Meadows.

Jimmy Skunk was thinking so much about Johnny Chuck's new home that he
quite forgot to look for beetles, and he almost ran into Peter Rabbit.

"Hello, Jimmy Skunk," said Peter Rabbit, "can't you see where you are
going?  It must be you have something on your mind; what is it?"

"I was thinking of Johnny Chuck's new home," said Jimmy Skunk.

"Johnny Chuck's new home!" exclaimed Peter Rabbit.  "Has Johnny Chuck
got a new home?  Where is it?"

"Under the roots of the old apple tree in a corner of the Green
Meadows," said Jimmy Skunk, and then he clapped both hands over his
mouth.  You see he hadn't really meant to tell.  It just slipped out.

"Oh, but it's a secret!" cried Jimmy Skunk.  "It's a secret, and you
mustn't tell.  I guess Johnny Chuck won't mind if you know, Peter
Rabbit, but you mustn't tell any one else."  Peter Rabbit promised he
wouldn't.

Now Peter Rabbit is very inquisitive, very inquisitive indeed.  So as
soon as he had parted from Jimmy Skunk he made up his mind that he must
see the new home of Johnny Chuck.  So off he started as fast as he
could go towards the old apple tree in a corner of the Green Meadows.
Half way there he met Reddy Fox.

"Hello, Peter Rabbit!  Where are you going in such a hurry?" asked
Reddy Fox.

"Over to the old apple tree to see Johnny Chuck's new home," replied
Peter Rabbit as he tried to dodge past Reddy Fox.  Then of a sudden he
remembered and clapped both hands over his mouth.

"Oh, but it's a secret, Reddy Fox.  It's a secret, and you mustn't
tell!" cried Peter Rabbit.

But Reddy Fox wouldn't promise that he wouldn't tell, for in spite of
his handsome coat and fine manners, Reddy Fox is a scamp.  And,
besides, he has no love for Johnny Chuck, for he has not forgotten how
Johnny Chuck once made him run and called him a "'fraid cat."

So when Reddy Fox left Peter Rabbit he grinned a wicked grin and
hurried off to find Bobby Coon.  He met him on his way to the Laughing
Brook.  Reddy Fox told Bobby Coon all about Johnny Chuck's secret and
then hurried away after Peter Rabbit, for Reddy Fox also is very
inquisitive.

Bobby Coon went on down to the Laughing Brook.  There he met Billy Mink
and told him about the new home Johnny Chuck had made under the old
apple tree in a corner of the Green Meadows.

Pretty soon Billy Mink met Little Joe Otter and told him.

Then Little Joe Otter met Jerry Muskrat and told him.

Jerry Muskrat saw Blacky the Crow and told him, and Great-Grandfather
Frog heard him.

Blacky the Crow met his first cousin, Sammy Jay, and told him.

Sammy Jay met Happy Jack Squirrel and told him.

Happy Jack met his cousin, Striped Chipmunk, and told him.

Striped Chipmunk passed the house of old Mr. Toad and told him.

The next morning, very early, before Old Mother West Wind had come down
from the Purple Hills, Johnny Chuck stole over to his new home to begin
work on his new back door.  He had hardly begun to dig when he heard
some one cough right behind him.  He whirled around and there sat Peter
Rabbit looking as innocent and surprised as if he had really just
discovered the new home for the first time.

"What a splendid new home you have, Johnny Chuck!" said Peter Rabbit.

"Y--e--s," said Johnny Chuck, slowly.  "It's a secret," he added
suddenly.  "You won't tell, will you, Peter Rabbit?"

Peter Rabbit promised that he wouldn't tell.  Then Johnny Chuck felt
better and went back to work as soon as Peter Rabbit left.

He had hardly begun, however, when some one just above him said: "Good
morning, Johnny Chuck."

Johnny Chuck looked up and there in the old apple tree sat Blacky the
Crow and his cousin, Sammy Jay.

Just then there was a rustle in the grass and out popped Billy Mink and
Little Joe Otter and Jerry Muskrat and Happy Jack Squirrel and Striped
Chipmunk and Bobby Coon.  When Johnny Chuck had recovered from his
surprise and looked over to the doorway of his new home there sat Reddy
Fox on Johnny Chuck's precious new mound.  It seemed as if all the
little meadow people were there, all but Jimmy Skunk, who wisely stayed
away.

"We've come to see your new home," said Striped Chipmunk, "and we think
it's the nicest home we've seen for a long time."

"It's so nicely hidden away, it's really quite secret," said Reddy Fox,
grinning wickedly.

Just then up raced the Merry Little Breezes and one of them had a
message for Johnny Chuck from Great-Grandfather Frog.  It was this:

"Whisper a secret to a friend and you shout it in the ear of the whole
world."

After every one had admired the new home, they said good-bye and
scattered over the Green Meadows.  Then Johnny Chuck began to dig
again, but this time he wasn't making his new back door.  No indeed!
Johnny Chuck was digging at that new mound of yellow gravel of which he
had been so proud.  Jolly, round, red Mr. Sun blinked to be sure that
he saw aright, for Johnny Chuck was _filling up his new home_ between
the roots of the old apple tree.  When he got through, there wasn't any
new home.

Then Johnny Chuck brushed his coat carefully, shook the sand out of his
trousers, wiped his hands and started off for his old home.  And this
time he didn't take his special hidden path, for Johnny Chuck didn't
care who saw him go.

Late that afternoon, Johnny Chuck sat on his old doorstep, with his
chin in his hands, watching Old Mother West Wind gathering her Merry
Little Breezes into the big bag in which she carries them to their home
behind the Purple Hills.

"'Whisper a secret to a friend and you shout it in the ear of the whole
world.'  Now what did Grandfather Frog mean by that?" thought Johnny
Chuck.  "Now I didn't tell anybody but Jimmy Skunk and Jimmy Skunk
didn't tell anyone but Peter Rabbit and--and--"

Then Johnny Chuck began to chuckle and finally to laugh.  "'Whisper a
secret to a friend and you shout it in the ear of the whole world.'  My
gracious, what a loud voice I must have had and didn't know it!" said
Johnny Chuck, wiping the tears of laughter from his eyes.

And the next day Johnny Chuck started to make a new home.  Where?  Oh,
that's Johnny Chuck's secret.  And no one but jolly, round, red Mr. Sun
has found it out yet.




VIII

JOHNNY CHUCK'S GREAT FIGHT

Johnny Chuck sat on the doorstep of his new home, looking away across
the Green Meadows.  Johnny Chuck felt very well satisfied with himself
and with all the world.  He yawned lazily and stretched and stretched
and then settled himself comfortably to watch the Merry Little Breezes
playing down by the Smiling Pool.

By and by he saw Peter Rabbit go bobbing along down the Lone Little
Path.  Lipperty, lipperty, lip, went Peter Rabbit and every other jump
he looked behind him.

"Now what is Peter Rabbit up to?" said Johnny Chuck to himself, "and
what does he keep looking behind him for?"

Johnny Chuck sat up a little straighter to watch Peter Rabbit hop down
the Lone Little Path.  Then of a sudden he caught sight of something
that made him sit up straighter than ever and open his eyes very wide.
Something was following Peter Rabbit.  Yes, Sir, something was bobbing
along right at Peter Rabbit's heels.

Johnny Chuck forgot the Merry Little Breezes.  He forgot how warm it
was and how lazy he felt.  He forgot everything else in his curiosity
to learn what it could be following so closely at Peter Rabbit's heels.

Presently Peter Rabbit stopped and sat up very straight and
then--Johnny Chuck nearly tumbled over in sheer surprise!  He rubbed
his eyes to make sure that he saw aright, for there were two Peter
Rabbits!  Yes, Sir, there were _two_ Peter Rabbits, only one was very
small, very small indeed.

"Oh!" said Johnny Chuck, "that must be Peter Rabbit's baby brother!"

Then he began to chuckle till his fat sides shook.  There sat Peter
Rabbit with his funny long ears standing straight up, and there right
behind him, dressed exactly like him, sat Peter Rabbit's baby brother
with _his_ funny little long ears standing straight up.  When Peter
Rabbit wiggled _his_ right ear, his baby brother wiggled his right ear.
When Peter Rabbit scratched his left ear, his baby brother scratched
_his_ left ear.  Whatever Peter Rabbit did, his baby brother did too.

Presently Peter Rabbit started on down the Lone Little Path--lipperty,
lipperty, lip, and right at his heels went his baby brother--lipperty,
lipperty, lip.  Johnny Chuck watched them out of sight, and then he
settled himself on his doorstep once more to enjoy a sun bath.  Every
once in a while he chuckled to himself as he remembered how funny Peter
Rabbit's baby brother had looked.  Presently Johnny Chuck fell asleep.

Jolly, round, red Mr. Sun had climbed quite high in the sky when Johnny
Chuck awoke.  He yawned and stretched and stretched and yawned, and
then he sat up to look over the Green Meadows.  Then he became wide
awake, very wide awake indeed!  Way down on the Green Meadows he caught
a glimpse of something red jumping about in the long meadow grass.

"That must be Reddy Fox," thought Johnny Chuck.  "Yes, it surely is
Reddy Fox.  Now I wonder what mischief he is up to."

Then he saw all the Merry Little Breezes racing towards Reddy Fox as
fast as they could go.  And there was Sammy Jay screaming at the top of
his voice, and his cousin, Blacky the Crow.  Happy Jack Squirrel was
dancing up and down excitedly on the branch of an old elm close by.

Johnny Chuck waited to see no more, but started down the Lone Little
Path to find out what it all was about.  Half way down the Lone Little
Path he met Peter Rabbit running as hard as he could.  His long ears
were laid flat back, his big eyes seemed to pop right out of his head,
and he was running as Johnny Chuck had never seen him run before.

"What are you running so for, Peter Rabbit?" asked Johnny Chuck.

"To get Bowser the Hound," shouted Peter Rabbit over his shoulder, as
he tried to run faster.

"Now what can be the matter?" said Johnny Chuck to himself, "to send
Peter Rabbit after Bowser the Hound?"  He knew that, like all the other
little meadow people, there was nothing of which Peter Rabbit was so
afraid as Farmer Brown's great dog, Bowser the Hound.

Johnny Chuck hurried down the Lone Little Path as fast as his short
legs could take his fat, rolly-poly self.

Presently he came out onto the Green Meadows, and there he saw a sight
that set every nerve in his round little body a-tingle with rage.

Reddy Fox had found Peter Rabbit's baby brother and was doing his best
to frighten him to death.

"I'm going to eat you now," shouted Reddy Fox, and then he sprang on
Peter Rabbit's baby brother and gave him a cuff that sent him heels
over head sprawling in the grass.

"Coward!  Coward, Reddy Fox!" shrieked Sammy Jay.

"Shame!  Shame!" shouted the Merry Little Breezes.

