among the juniors of his own house.

What was their dismay, therefore, at the accident of that unlucky
afternoon, and with what doleful faces did they present themselves in a
melancholy procession at the door of his room at the appointed hour!

"Come in," said Mr Parrett, who was still in his flannels, and had not
quite done tea.  "Oh, you are the boys that I met on the river this
afternoon.  All except one belonging to my house, I see."

"Yes, sir," exclaimed Telson, who was the distinguished exception,
"they're all Parretts except me, and it was all my fault, sir, and
I'm--"

"No," interrupted Parson, "it was all my fault; I was steering."

"It was all our faults," said Lawkins.

"Oh," said Mr Parrett, who could not help looking a little amused at
the eager faces of the young culprits.  "Perhaps it was my fault for not
looking where I was coming to."

"Oh, sir," said Parson, "that wouldn't have been any good.  We ran you
down on purpose."

"Eh?" said Mr Parrett, not quite sure whether he had heard correctly.

"That is, we didn't know it was you, sir; we thought it was a
schoolhouse--" (here Telson looked threatening)--"I mean we thought it
was some one else.  We wouldn't have done it if we thought it was you,
sir--indeed we wouldn't."

"No, sir, that we wouldn't," chimed in the chorus.

"And who did you think it was, pray?" inquired Mr Parrett.

"A schoolhouse fellow," replied Parson, avoiding Telson's glances.

"Which schoolhouse boy?" asked the master.

"Any one, sir.  It didn't matter much which."

"Indeed.  And what has the schoolhouse done to you?" said Mr Parrett,
leaning back in his chair and pushing his plate away.

It wasn't an easy question, but Parson felt something ought to be said.

"Some of them are rather cads, sir," he said.

("Parson," whispered Telson.  "I'll fight you when you get outside.")

"I mean, sir," said Parson, hurriedly, "that is--(I beg pardon, Telson,
old man, I didn't mean)--they don't like us, and--"

"And we don't like them," said Lawkins.

"And you think they ought to like you?" asked Mr Parrett, severely.

This was a poser.  The Parrett juniors had never asked themselves the
question before.

"Now listen to me," said Mr Parrett.  "I'm angry with you, and I'm
going to punish you.  I am not angry with you for capsizing me this
afternoon.  You did it by mistake, you say, and no harm was done.  And
I'm not going to punish you for being out late, for that the captain
will do.  But boys who make nuisances of themselves and then complain
that other boys don't like them are not to be put up with in Willoughby.
You five have had a lesson already.  You might have caused a much worse
accident than you did by your folly.  You may be thankful you did not.
For a week neither of you is to go on to the river at all, and after
that till the end of the term you will only be allowed to go with the
captain's permission, or in the company of a senior.  You can go."

The party turned to obey, when Mr Parrett added, "Three of you, Telson,
Parson, and Lawkins, remain a moment."

The other two went off, leaving their three comrades standing at the end
of the table, wondering what on earth was coming next.

Mr Parrett's manner changed as he turned to them.  He became
embarrassed, and spoke almost nervously.

"You three," he said, "jumped in after me this afternoon, did you not?"

"Yes, please, sir," said Telson; "Parson was first, sir."

Mr Parrett rose from his seat, and, without saying a word, shook hands
with each one of them, greatly to their astonishment and confusion.

"You can go now," said the master, when the ceremony was concluded;
"good-night, boys."

"Good-night, sir," said they, and filed out of the room.

It was some time before Parson and Telson, as they walked slowly back
along the passage, could find words suitable to the occasion.  Then
Telson said, "Well, that was a rum thing of him to do!"

"What did he mean?" asked Parson.

"Goodness knows.  But, I say, it's a jolly soak being stopped the river,
though."

"Yes, and having to get a `permit' when the time is up.  I'd sooner not
go on than beg a `permit' of the captain."

"I wonder what he'll say to us to-morrow," said Telson.  "He won't lick
us, eh?"

"He'd better not," said Parson.  "You and I could lick him easy."

"I suppose he'll give us a howling impot.  I say I'm getting fagged of
impots.  I've had four this week."

"I've had three," sighed Telson.  "Heigho!  Willoughby's going to the
dogs.  I've a good mind to cut the whole concern."

And so in rather desponding mood the two friends separated, and Telson
had an exciting chase across the quadrangle to avoid two monitors who
were prowling about there (as he concluded) for the express purpose of
"potting" him.

In this, however, he was mistaken.  The two monitors were Gilks of the
schoolhouse and Silk of Welch's, who were taking the air this hot summer
evening, and thinking and talking of anything but Master Telson.

"I tell you," said Gilks, "I detest the fellow."

"You detest such a lot of fellows, Gilks," said Silk.

"I know I do," said Gilks, "but I hate Riddell more than the lot put
together."

"I should have thought he was rather an inoffensive duffer," suggested
Silk.

"That's just the worst of it.  I'd give anything to catch him out in
anything that wasn't quite square, just to pay him out for his sickening
priggishness.  Why," he exclaimed, with increasing anger in his tone,
"what do you think he did the other day, long before he was captain, or
had any pretence to give himself airs?  He pulled me up before all the
fellows for--well, for using--"

"For swearing?" said Silk.

"Yes, if you like.  For swearing.  What business is it of his what I
say?  I should like to know."

"Usen't Wyndham to be down on fellows for swearing too?" asked Silk.

"Yes, he was," said Gilks (who had good reason to know); "but he had a
right to do it.  This cub hasn't."

"What did Riddell say?"

"What did he say?  He said it didn't make what I said any better worth
hearing for sticking in an oath, and that-- Oh, I don't know what
precious impudence he didn't give me."

"Ha, ha," said Silk, "it wasn't bad.  But I agree with you, the fellow
is a prig--"

"I know I mean to make a stand now," said Gilks.  "He shan't stick up
his sanctimonious nose over us all, now he's captain, if I can help it."

"Why, what will you do?" asked Silk.

"Do!  I'll punch his head the first time he dare lecture me."

"My dear fellow," said Silk, "don't be such a fool.  You won't do a bit
of good by that.  If you do want to pay him out, pay him out in his own
coin."

"How do you mean?" inquired Gilks.

"I mean, keep a sharp lookout till you catch his holiness tripping."

"But the beggar never does trip.  He's so vilely careful, he never gives
a chance," growled Gilks.

"Awfully uncivil of him, when he knows how grateful we should be to
him," said Silk, laughing.  "Never mind, old man, keep in with him if
you can.  Something's sure to turn up.  He won't suspect you, as you're
in the schoolhouse; and we ought to be able to manage to put a spoke in
his wheel somehow."

"Wish you may do it," said Gilks.  "Anyhow, I dare say you are right;
it's no use flaring up too soon, if there is a chance of doing him.  By
the way, Fairbairn's pretty nearly as bad as Riddell; they're a pair,
you know."

"Yes, but Fairbairn's in the boat," said Silk.

"So he is; and what's more, he's got a spite against me, and wants to
turn me out of it."

"Why?"

"He says I don't do enough work.  I should like to know how a fellow is
to work behind a sanctimonious ass like him?"

"I hear the schoolhouse boat isn't a bad one, even without Wyndham,"
said Silk.

"Pretty fair.  But if I'm in it I'll see it doesn't win," said Gilks.

"What a nice boy you are, to be sure!  I suppose you've a bet on
Parrett's, like me?"

"No, I haven't," said Gilks, "but I want it to win all the same, because
of Bloomfield.  If Parrett's gets to the head of the river, there's all
the better chance of getting Bloomfield for captain next term; and
things would be far pleasanter then."

"Yes.  I don't suppose Bloomfield's very particular," said Silk.

"Not he.  You can make him do what you like.  He's not all the notions
of his own that the Reverend Riddell has, hang him!"

"Well, old man," said Silk, "as I said before, you're a nice boy, and a
sweet companion for a tender youth like me.  Ha, ha!  Good-night.  Are
you one of the deputation that's going to present the petition in the
morning?"

"Yes, I am," said Gilks.

"Take my advice and back out of it.  It won't come to anything, and if
you're not mixed up in it our pious friends will think you are one of
them, and that'll pay.  Do you twig?  Good-night.  You _are_ a nice
boy!"

So saying these two worthies separated.

Gilks acted on his friend's advice, and contrived to be absent after
chapel next morning, when it was proposed to present the petition to the
doctor.  He managed to invent some excuse for his desertion which made
it appear it was unavoidable.  Nevertheless it was a good deal
complained of, because he had been the only representative of the
schoolhouse who had promised to go with the others to the doctor.

However it was decided not to postpone the ceremony any further.  As it
was, one or two were beginning to have their doubts as to its wisdom,
and Game and those like him, who were the prime movers in the matter,
began to fear the whole thing might fall through.

So, directly after morning chapel, the deputation, consisting of three,
marched boldly to the doctor's library and knocked at the door.

"Come in," said Dr Patrick.

He was surprised to see three monitors obey the invitation.  It was very
rarely that a petition was presented from the school to the head master
at Willoughby.  Once, some years ago, a petition signed by the entire
school, from the captain down to the junior fag, praying for a holiday
in honour of an old Willoughbite having led the British troops to
victory in a great battle, had been presented and granted.  And once
since then, a petition from the monitors of each house requesting that
the head of each house might be allowed to use the cane when necessary,
instead of the captain of the school only, had been presented and
declined.

Now came a third petition, signed by certain monitors of two houses,
asking the doctor to withdraw one captain and substitute another.

"What is it?" asked the head master.

"A petition, sir," said Game, handing the momentous document in.

The doctor opened it and glanced at it with a puzzled look, which soon
darkened into a frown.

"What is all this?" he asked, looking up.

His aspect was not promising.  Nevertheless it was necessary for some
one to speak, and Game therefore blurted out, "We don't think Riddell
will make a good captain, sir, and--" and here stopped.

"And what, sir?" demanded the doctor.

"And," said Game, in rather a faltering voice, "we thought you would not
be angry if we petitioned you about it."

"Do you speak for yourself, Game," said the doctor, "or for others?"

"For the monitors, sir; that is, for those who have signed that paper."

The doctor folded up the petition and handed it back to Game without
reading it.

"I am glad you have told me what it is all about," said he, sternly, "in
time to prevent my reading either the petition or the names attached.
It does not do you credit as monitors, and I hope you will soon see the
matter in the same light.  I did not expect it of you, but I regret it
less on your account than on account of the school, to whom you have set
a bad example.  You may go."

The doctor spoke in tones of unwonted anger, not unmixed with scorn.  He
rarely "flared up," but when he did it was always uncomfortable for
those against whom his wrath was roused.

The deputation slunk off sheepishly, carrying their petition with them,
and too glad to get out of the angry presence of the head master to
think of anything else.

The doctor may have been right, and probably was right in thus summarily
extinguishing the petition and the petitioners.  But he had done it in a
manner which was hardly calculated to smooth matters.

Indeed, when the deputation reported their bad success to the monitors
who awaited them, the general feeling was far more one of anger at being
snubbed than of repentance for having done a foolish thing.

"If Paddy had only taken the trouble to read the thing through," said
Ashley, "and honour us with one or two reasons for not doing what we
asked, it wouldn't have been so bad."

"As it is he's as good as told us to mind our own business and he'll
mind his," said Tipper, little thinking how exactly he had described the
case.

"If we're not to be allowed to say a word about the management of the
school," said Game, "I don't see what right he has to expect us to do
his work for him, and keep order."

"Oh, it won't do to resign or anything of that sort," said Ashley.
"That would be like funking it altogether."

"He'll soon find his mistake out, never fear," said another.  "He won't
listen to us, but he can't help believing his own eyes."

"Yes, it can't go on for long," said Tipper.  "Riddell's bound to show
that he's not up to his work sooner or later, and I won't interfere to
prevent it."

"Meanwhile," said Game, who of all the malcontents was the most honest,
"what's to become of Willoughby?  We must keep some sort of order,
whoever is captain."

"Why, whatever authority can we have when the most we can do is to
report fellows to that milksop?" said Tipper.

"I'll tell you what," said Ashley, "if we're compelled to _call_ Riddell
captain, there's nothing to prevent us considering another fellow so."

"What do you mean?" asked some one.

"He means," said Game, "and it's not half a bad idea, that if Bloomfield
will help us to keep order, we can consider him captain whether he's
called so or not.  If once the fellows know they'll get reported to him,
we shall have some sort of authority."

"Of course," said Bloomfield, who had not yet spoken, "I'll do my best
to keep order and all that; but as I'm not captain, it's no use to
pretend being it."

"Oh, we'll see about that," said Ashley.  "If you choose to work for the
school after what has happened, all I can say is you deserve to be
backed up, and I'll back you up for one."

"So will I," said Wibberly.

Bloomfield could not resist flattery.  As soon as it was represented to
him that the hope of Willoughby centred in him, and that he was acting a
beautiful and Christian part in still taking an interest in its welfare
after the way he had been treated, he felt as if he really ought to meet
his admirers half-way.

"Already a lot of the kids consider you as captain," said Game.  "Didn't
you hear a boatful of them cheering you yesterday?"

"Yes," said Bloomfield, "I heard that."

"Very well, they're much more likely to keep order for you than for that
other fellow.  We'll try it anyhow."

"I know a lot of the schoolhouse monitors think just the same as we do,"
said Tipper, "but they're so precious jealous for their house.  They'd
sooner stick to Riddell than allow a Parrett's fellow to be cock of the
school."

"A Parrett's fellow is cock of the school all the same," said Wibberly.
"I wish the regatta was over.  That will put things right."

"Yes; when once Parrett's boat is at the head of the river the
schoolhouse won't have much to crow for," said Ashley.

"For all that," replied Bloomfield, "they seem to be grinding a bit with
the crew they have got."

"Let them grind," said Game, laughing.  "I'd as soon back Welch's boat
as theirs.  Fairbairn's the only man that does any work, and he's no
form at all.  Why don't they put the new captain in the boat, I wonder?"

The bare idea was sufficient to set the company laughing, in the midst
of which the assembly-dispersed.

"By the way," said Game to Ashley, as they went into the "Big," "to-
night is the opening meeting of the School Parliament.  I mean to
propose Bloomfield for president; will you second it?"

"Rather," said Ashley.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

THE NEW CAPTAIN ENTERS ON HIS DUTIES.

The morning that witnessed the collapse of the famous Monitors' Petition
had not been idly spent by the new captain.  He had made the worst
possible preparation for his new duties by lying awake half the night,
brooding over his difficulties and working himself into a state of
nervous misery very unlike what one would expect of the captain of a
great public school.

What worried him was not so much that he felt himself unpopular, or that
he knew all Willoughby was in arms against him.  That wasn't cheerful,
certainly, or precisely solacing to a fellow's self-esteem; but it was
not nearly so disheartening as the feeling that he himself was unequal
to cope with the difficulties he would have to face.  How could he cope
with them?  He had never succeeded yet in keeping Telson, his own fag,
in order.  How was he to expect to administer discipline to all the
scapegraces of Willoughby?  It would be bad enough, even if the monitors
as a body were working with him, but when he was left almost single-
handed, as seemed probable, what chance was there?  Whatever would he do
supposing a boy was reported to him for some offence, such as going out
of bounds or--

By the way!  And here a horrible thought flashed across his mind.  He
had been so flurried last night with one thing and another that he had
hardly noticed a message sent him after call-over by the Register Clerk.
But it occurred to him now that it was about some boys who had not
answered to their names.

He got out of bed with a groan and searched the mantelpiece for the
note.  Ah! here it was:

"Co.  Fr. p.m., Telson (S.H.), Bosher, King, Lawkins, Parson (P), Abs.
Go Capt. 81/2 Sa.  (Telson 2, Bosher 1, Parson 2.)"

After a great deal of puzzling and cogitation Riddell managed to
translate this lucid document into ordinary English as follows:

"Call-Over, Friday evening, Telson (schoolhouse), Bosher, King, Lawkins,
Parson (Parrett's), absent.  To go to the captain at half-past eight on
Saturday.  (Telson has already been absent twice this week, Bosher once,
Parson twice.)" And with the discovery the unhappy captain found his
worst fears realised.

Whatever would he do?  It was now half-past five.  In three hours they
would be here.  What would Wyndham have done?  Caned them, no doubt.
Riddell had no cane.  Ruler?  He might break one of their ringers, or
they might resist; or worse still baffle him with some ingenious excuse
which he would not know how to deal with.

He sat by his bed staring hopelessly at the paper and wishing himself
anywhere but head of the school--and then as no new light appeared to
dawn on the question, and as going back to bed would be a farce, he
proceeded to dress.

He had just completed his toilet when he heard some one moving in the
next study.

"There's Fairbairn getting up," he said to himself.  "I wonder if he
could help me?"

He thought he could.  And yet, under the nervous exterior of this boy
there lurked a certain pride which held him back from acting on the
impulse.  After all, if he was to do the work, why should he try to
shunt part of his responsibility on to another?

So, though he went to his friend's study, he said nothing about the
batch of juniors from whom he expected a morning call.

Fairbairn was arraying himself in his boating things, and greeted his
friend cheerily.

"Hullo, Riddell, here's an early start for you!"

"Yes," said Riddell; "I couldn't sleep very well, so I thought I might
as well get up."

"Best thing for you.  But why haven't you your flannels on?"

"I'm not going out," said Riddell.  "Besides, I don't believe I have
flannels," added he.

"What, a Willoughby captain and no flannels!  You'll have to get a suit
at once, do you hear?  But, I say, why don't you come down to the river
with Porter and me?  We're going to have a little practice spin, and you
could steer us.  It would do you more good than sticking indoors.  Come
along."

Riddell protested he would rather not, and that he couldn't steer; but
Fairbairn pooh-poohed both objections, and finally carried off his man
to the river, where his unwonted appearance in the stern of the
schoolhouse pair-oar caused no little astonishment and merriment among
the various early visitors who usually frequented the waters of the
Craydle.

Despite these unflattering remarks, and despite the constant terror he
was in of piloting his boat into the bank, or running foul of other
boats, Riddell decidedly enjoyed his little outing, the more so as the
exercise and occupation drove away entirely for a time all thoughts of
the coming visit of the ill-behaved juniors.

But as soon as he returned to the school the prospect of this ordeal
began again to haunt him, and spoilt morning chapel for him completely.

As he stood during the service in his captain's place he could not
prevent his eye wandering hurriedly down the ranks of boys opposite and
wondering how many of them he would be called upon to interview in his
study before the term was over.  As he reached the end of the array his
eye rested on Telson close to the door, talking and laughing behind his
hand with Parson, who listened in an unconcerned way, and looked about
him as if he felt himself to be the monarch of all he surveyed.  These
were two of the boys who would wait upon him in his study immediately
after prayers!  Riddell turned quite miserable at the idea.

Prayers ended at last, and while the other monitors repaired to the
Sixth Form room to discuss the presentation of the petition as narrated
in our last chapter, Riddell walked dejectedly to his study and prepared
to receive company.

No one came for a long time, and Riddell was beginning to hope that,
after all, the dreaded interview was not to come off, or that there was
a mistake somewhere, and some one else was to deal with the culprits
instead of himself, when a scuttling of footsteps down the passage made
his blood run cold and his heart sink into his boots.

"I _must_ be cool," he said to himself, fiercely, as a knock sounded at
the door, "or I shall make a fool of myself.  Come in."

In response to this somewhat tremulous invitation, Telson, Parson,
Bosher, Lawkins, King, trooped into his study, the picture of
satisfaction and assurance, and stood lounging about the room with their
hands in their pockets as though curiosity was the sole motive of their
visit.

Riddell, while waiting for them, had hastily considered what he ought to
say or do.  But now, any ideas he ever had darted from his mind, and he
gazed nervously at the small company.

"Oh!" said he at length, breaking silence by a tremendous effort, and
