regret to say, we were wont to designate Dr Rogers, our head master)
"would like it," I said; "he's got some notion into his head about
currents and tides, and that makes him fidgety."

"Currents and fiddlesticks!" broke in Hall, with a laugh; "what does
_he_ know about them?  I tell you, a day like this, with a good sailing
breeze, and four of us to row, in case it dropped, there'd be no more
difficulty in going over there and back than there would in rowing from
here back to Parkhurst."

"How long would it take to get to Shargle?" inquired Hutton.

"Why, only two hours, and perhaps less.  The wind's exactly right for
going and coming back too.  We can be back by four easily, and that
allows us an hour or two to land there."

It certainly was tempting; the day was perfection, and Colveston Bay had
never looked more fascinating.  The headlands stood out so distinctly in
the clear air that it was hard to imagine Shargle Head was five miles
distant from where we sat.

When the proposition had first been made I had felt a passing
uncomfortableness as to the lawfulness of such an expedition without the
distinct sanction of the head master; but the more I gazed on the bay,
and the more Hall talked in his enthusiastic manner of the delights of a
cruise, and the longer I watched the fairy-like progress of the little
white-sailed fishing-boat, the less I thought of anything but the
pleasure which the scheme offered.

So when Hall said, "Shall we go, boys?  What do you say?"  I for one
replied, "All serene."

All this while one of our party had been silent, watching the fishing-
boat, but taking no part in our discussion.  He was Charlie Archer, a
new boy at Parkhurst, and some years our junior.  But from the first I
had taken a remarkable fancy to this clever, good-humoured, plucky boy,
who henceforth had become my frequent companion, and with me the
companion of the others who now composed our party.  He now looked up
and said, greatly to our surprise--

"I say, I don't want to go!"

"Why not?" we all asked.

"Oh, it doesn't matter," he replied, in evident confusion.  "I don't
want to spoil your fun, you know, but I'd rather not go myself."

"Why, what on earth's the matter with you, Charlie?"  I asked.  "I
thought you were always ready for an adventure."

"I'd rather not go, please," he repeated.  "You can put me ashore."

"Why not?" again inquired Hall, this time testily.  He never liked
Charlie quite as much as Hutton and I did, and was evidently displeased
to have him now putting forward objections to a proposition of his own
making.  "Why not?"

"Because--because," began the boy hesitatingly--"because I don't want to
go."

Hall became angry.  Like most boys not sure of the honesty of their own
motives, he disliked to have it suggested that what he was urging was
wrong.  He therefore replied, with a taunt keener than any persuasion--

"Poor little milksop, I suppose he's afraid of getting drowned, or of
doing something his mamma, or his grandmamma, or somebody wouldn't like
their little pet to do.  We'd better put him ashore, boys; and mind his
precious little boots don't get wet while we're about it!"

It was a cruel blow, and struck home at Archer's one weak point.

Plucky and adventurous as he was, the one thing he could not endure was
to be laughed at.  And his face flushed, and his lips quivered, as he
heard Hall's brutal speech, and marked the smile with which, I am
ashamed to say, we received it.

"I'm _not_ afraid," he exclaimed.

"Then why don't you want to go?"

He was silent for some time.  A struggle was evidently going on in his
mind.  But the sneer on Hall's face determined him.

"I do want to go.  I've changed my mind!"

"That's the style," said Hutton, patting him on the back.  "I knew you
were one of the right sort."

Hall, too, condescended to approve of his decision, and at once began to
busy himself with preparations for our immediate start.

I, however, was by no means comfortable at what had taken place.  It was
plain to see Charlie had yielded against his better judgment, and that
with whatever alacrity he might now throw himself into the scheme, his
mind was not easy.  Had I been less selfishly inclined towards my own
pleasure, I should have sided with him in his desire not to engage in a
questionable proceeding; but, alas! my wishes in this case had ruled my
conscience.  Still, I made one feeble effort on Archer's behalf.

"Hall," whispered I, as I stooped with him to disengage the ropes at the
bottom of the boat, "what's the use of taking Charlie when he doesn't
want to go?  We may as well put him ashore if he'd sooner not go."

"Archer," said Hall, looking up from his ropes, "did you say you wanted
to go, or not?"

The question was accompanied by a look which made it hard for the boy to
reply anything but--

"I want to go."

"And it's your own free will, eh?"

"Yes."

So ended my weak effort.  If only I had been more determined to do
right; if, alas!  I had imagined a thousandth part of what that day was
to bring forth, I would have set Archer ashore, whether he would or not,
even if to do so had cost me my life.

But this is anticipating.

For half an hour we were busy getting our boat trim for her voyage.  She
was a somewhat old craft, in which for many years past we had been wont
to cruise down the seaward reaches of the Colven, carrying one lug-sail,
and with thwarts for two pairs of oars.  She was steady on her keel,
and, as far as we had been able to judge, sound in every respect, and a
good sailor.  Certainly, on a day like this, a cockleshell would have
had nothing to fear, and we were half sorry we had not a lighter boat
than the one we were in to take us across to Shargle.

Hall, who assumed the command from the first, impressed us not a little
by the businesslike way in which he set to work to get everything ship-
shape before starting.  He knew clearly the use of each rope and pulley;
he knew precisely the necessary amount of ballast to be taken, and the
proper place for stowing it; he discoursed learnedly on knots and
hitches, and aroused our sympathy by his laments on the absence of a
bowsprit and foresail.  Hutton was sent ashore to buy provisions.
Charlie was set to baling out the boat.  I occupied myself with mopping
the seats, and generally "swabbing her up," as Hall called it, so that
in due time we were ready to sail, well provisioned and well equipped,
on our eventful voyage.

Up went the sail; we watched it first flap wildly, and then swell
proudly in the wind as the sheet rope was drawn in, and Hall's hand put
round the helm.  Then, after a little coquetting, as if she were loth to
act as desired without coaxing, she rose lightly to the rippling waves,
and glided forward on her way.

"Adams," said Hall, "you'd better make yourself snug up in the bows;
Hutton, sit where you are, and be ready to help me with the sail when we
tack.  Charlie, old boy, come down astern, beside me; sit a little
farther over, Hutton.  Now she's trim."

Trim she was, and a strange feeling of exhilaration filled my breast as
we now darted forward before the steady breeze, dancing over the waves
with a merry splash, tossing them to either side of our prow, and
listening to them as they gurgled musically under our keel.

"There's Neil!" cried Charlie, as we passed the coastguards' boathouse,
"spying at us through the telescope."

"Let him spy," laughed Hall; "I dare say he'd like to be coming too.
It's slow work for those fellows, always hanging about doing nothing."

"What's he waving about?" inquired I from the bows, for we could see
that the sailor had put down his glass, and was apparently trying to
catch our attention by his gesticulations.

Hall looked attentively for a moment, and then said--

"Oh, I see, he's pointing up at the flagstaff to show us the wind's in
the north-east.  I suppose he thinks no one knows that but himself."

"Let's see," said Hutton, "we are going north-west, aren't we?"

"Yes, so we shall be able to make use of the wind both ways, with a
little tacking."

"He's shouting something now," said Charlie, with his eyes still on
Neil.

"Oh, he's an old woman," said Hall, laughing; "he's always wanting to
tell you this and that, as if no one knew anything about sailing but
himself."  And he took off his hat and waved it ceremoniously to the old
sailor, who continued shouting and beckoning all the while, though
without avail, for the only words that came to us across the water were
"fresh" and "afternoon," and we were not much enlightened by them.

"I'm afraid he's fresh in the morning," laughed Hutton.

A short sail brought us to the bar mouth, over which, as the tide was in
and the sea quiet, we passed without difficulty, although Hall had bade
us have the oars ready in case of emergency, should it be necessary to
lower our sail in crossing.  But of this there was no need, and in a
minute we were at last in the bay, and fairly at sea.

"Do you see Parkhurst over the trees there, you fellows?" cried Charlie,
pointing behind us.  "I never saw the place from the bay before."

"Nor I," I answered; "it looks better here than from any other side."

We were all proud of the old school-house, and fully impressed with its
superiority over any other building of the kind in the kingdom.

The view in the bay was extremely beautiful, Shargle Head stood out
opposite us, distinct and grand, towering up from the water, and
sweeping back to join the moorland hills behind.  On our left, close
beside the bar mouth, rose Raven Cliff, where we so often had been wont
to lie and look out on this very bay; and one by one we recognised the
familiar spots from our new point of view, and agreed that from no side
does a grand coast look so grand as from the sea.

Our boat scudded along merrily, Hall keeping her a steady course, well
up to the wind.  After a few lessons we got to know our respective
duties (so we thought) with all the regularity of a trained ship's crew.
With the wind as it was, right across our course, we had not much need
to tack; but when the order to "stand by" did arrive, we prided
ourselves that we knew how to act.

Hall let go the sheet, and Hutton lowered the sail, Charlie put round
the helm, and I in the bows was ready to aid the others in shifting the
canvas to the other side of the mast and hauling up the sail again.
Then Hall resumed charge of the helm and drew in the sheet, Charlie and
Hutton "trimmed" over to the other side of the boat, and once again our
little craft darted forward.

We were all in exuberant spirits that lovely summer morning; even
Charlie seemed to have forgotten his uneasiness at first starting, for
he was now the life and soul of our party.

He told us wonderful stories about this very bay, gathered from some of
his favourite histories.  How, after the defeat of the Spanish Armada,
when the proud vessels of Spain were driven partly by tempest, partly by
the pursuit of our admiral, headlong along: this very coast, one of them
had got into Colveston Bay, and there been driven ashore at the base of
Raven Cliff, not one man of all her crew surviving that awful wreck.
And he repeated one after another the legends connected with Druce
Castle, whose ruined turrets we could discern away behind us, and of all
the coves and crags and caves as we passed them, till, in our
imagination, the bay became alive once more with ships and battle, and
we seemed to watch the gleam of armour on the castle walls, and the
glare of beacons on the headlands, and to hear the thunder of cannon
from the beach; when presently Hall's cheery call to "stand by" wakened
us into a sudden recollection of our present circumstances.  And then
what songs we sang! what famous sea stories Hall told us! how Hutton
made us roar with his recitations! how the time seemed to fly, and the
boat too, and we in it, until at last we found the Great Shargle
towering over our heads, and knew we had all but reached our
destination.

Hall looked at his watch.

"That was a good run, boys," said he; "not quite two hours--an
uncommonly good run for an old tub like this.  Now where shall we land?"

"I vote we land on Welkin Island," said Charlie.

Welkin Island was separate about three-quarters of a mile from the
mainland, famous for its caves and shells.

"All serene," said Hall, putting the boat about; "stand by."

So we made our last tack, and very soon were close up at the island.
After some cruising we selected an eligible creek for landing, into
which Hall ran our boat as neatly as the most experienced helmsman in
Her Majesty's Navy.

Then we landed, and dragging ashore our hamper of provisions, picnicked
at the edge of the rocks, with the water on three sides of us, with
Shargle Head across the narrow channel rising majestically above us, and
the great amphitheatre of the bay extended like a picture beyond.

Need I say what a jovial repast it was; what appetites we had, what zest
our situation lent to our meal, how each vied with each in merriment!
But Charlie was the blithest of us all.

Then we wandered over that wonderful island.  We waded into the caves,
and climbed to the cliff tops; we filled our pockets with shells, we
bathed, we aimed stones into the sea, we raced along the strand, we cut
our names in a row on the highest point of the island, in commemoration
of our expedition, and there they remain to this day.

"I say, I hope it's not going to rain," said Hutton, looking up at the
clouds, which had for some time been obscuring the sun.

"Who cares if it does?" shouted Charlie.  "Hullo, there goes my roof!"
cried he, as a sudden gust of wind lifted his hat from his head, and
sent it skimming down the rocks.

"I think it's time we started home," said Hall hurriedly.

There was something in the uneasy look of his face as he said this which
made me uncomfortable.

So we turned to embark once more in our boat.

We could not conceal from ourselves, as we made our way to the creek
where we had left her moored, that the weather, which had thus far been
so propitious to our expedition, was not holding out as we could have
wished.  The wind, which had been little more than a steady breeze
during the morning, now met us in frequent gusts, which made us raise
our hands to our hats.  A few ugly-looking black clouds on the horizon
had come up and obscured the sun, threatening not only to shut out his
rays, but to break over the bay in a heavy downpour of rain.  Even on
the half-sheltered side of the island where we were, the water, which
had hitherto moved only in ripples, now began to heave restlessly in
waves, which curled over as they met the breeze, and covered the sea
with little white breakers.  There was an uncanny sort of moan about the
wind as it swept down the hollows of the rocks, and even the seagulls,
as they skimmed past us on the surface of the now sombre water, seemed
uncomfortable.

However, the sea was not rough, and though the sun happened to be hidden
from us, we could see it shining brightly away in the direction of
Parkhurst.  The wind, too, though stronger than it had been in the
morning, was still not violent, and we had little doubt of making as
quick, if not a quicker passage back than we had already made.

So, although in our secret hearts each one of us would perhaps have
preferred the weather of the earlier part of the day to have continued,
we did not let our uneasiness appear to our fellows, or allow it to
interfere with our show of good spirits.

"I tell you what," said Charlie, laughing, as we came down to our boat,
"it would be a real spree to have a little rough water going back, just
for the fun of seeing old Hutton seasick."

"I shall be very pleased to give you some amusement," replied Hutton;
"and perhaps Adams will assist, for I saw him looking anxiously over the
bows once or twice as we were coming."

"So did I," said Charlie; "he must have seen a ghost in the water, for
he looked awfully pale."

"Shut up, you fellows," cried I, who was notoriously a bad sailor, and
easily disturbed by a rough sea; "perhaps we shall all--"

"I say," called out Hall from the boat, where he was busy tying up a
reef in our sail, "I wish you fellows would lend a hand here, instead of
standing and chaffing there."

We obeyed with alacrity, and very soon had our boat ready for starting.

"Now, Adams and Hutton, take the oars, will you? and pull her out of
this creek: we had better not hoist our sail till we are clear of these
rocks."

As we emerged from our little harbour the boat "lumped" heavily over the
waves that broke upon the rocks, and we had a hard pull to get her clear
of these and turn her with her stern to Shargle.

"Now stand by," shouted Hall.

We shipped our oars, and in a moment the sail, shortened by one reef,
was hauled up, and the boat began to scud swiftly forward.

"You'll have to sit right over, you two," said Hall to Hutton and me,
"to keep her trim.  Look sharp about it!"

As he spoke a gust took the sail, and caused the boat to heel over far
on to her side.  She righted herself in an instant, however, and on we
went, flying through the water.

"How do you feel, Adams?" called out Charlie mischievously, from his end
of the boat.

"Pleasant motion, isn't it?" put in Hutton, laughing.

"Look here, you fellows," said Hall abruptly, "stop fooling now, and
look after the boat."

"Why, what's the row?" said Hutton, struck with his unusually serious
tone.  "It's all right, isn't it?"

"It's all right," said Hall curtly, "if you'll only attend to the
sailing."

Our merriment died away on our lips, for it was plain to be seen Hall
was in no jesting humour.

Then several things struck us which we had not previously noticed.  One
was that the wind had shifted farther north, and was blowing hard right
into the bay, gathering strength every minute.  Hall, we noticed, was
sailing as close as possible up to it, thus making our course far wider
than that which had brought us in the morning.

"Why are you steering out like that?"  I ventured to ask.

"Because if I didn't-- Look out!" he exclaimed, as a sudden gust caught
the boat, making her stagger and reel like a drunken man.  In an instant
he had released the sheet rope, and the sail flapped with a tremendous
noise about the mast.  It was but an instant, however, and then we saw
him coolly tighten the cord again, and put back the helm to its former
