themselves: for I suppose they don't leave the nest till they are pretty
well grown?  Come! good shikaree; let us have no more circumlocution
about the matter, but explain all these apparently inexplicable
circumstances."

The shikaree, thus appealed to, proceeded to give the explanation
demanded.

The hornbill, he said, when about to bring forth its young, selects a
hollow in some tree, just large enough conveniently to hold the nest
which it builds, and also its own body.  As soon as the nest is
constructed and the eggs all laid, the female bird takes her seat upon
them, and there remains; not only until the eggs are hatched, but for a
long time afterwards--in fact, until the young are nearly fledged and
able to take care of themselves.  In order that she may be protected
during the period of her incubation against weasels, polecats,
ichneumons, and all such vermin, a design exhibiting either wonderful
instinct or sagacity, is carried into execution by the male.  As soon as
his mate has squatted upon her eggs, he goes to work at the masonic art;
and using his great horned mandibles, first as a hod, and afterwards as
a trowel, he walls up the entrance to the nest--leaving an aperture just
large enough to be filled up by the beak of the female.  The material
employed by him for this purpose is a kind of agglutinated mud, which he
procures from the neighbouring watercourse or quagmire, and somewhat
similar to that used by the common house-swallow for constructing _its_
peculiar nest.  When dried, this mud becomes exceedingly hard--bidding
defiance to the teeth and claws of all would-be intruders, whether bird
or quadruped; and with the horny beak of the old hen projected outward,
and quite filling up the aperture, even the slippery tree-snake cannot
find room enough to squeeze his body through.  The female, thus free
from all fear of being molested, quietly continues her incubation!

When Ossaroo had got thus far with his explanation, Caspar interrupted
him with a query.

"What!" said he, "sit all the time--for weeks, I suppose--without ever
coming out--without taking an airing?  And how does she get her food?"

As Caspar put this question, and before Ossaroo had time to answer, a
noise reached their ears which appeared to proceed from the sky above
them.  It was a noise well calculated to inspire terror in those who had
never before heard it, or did not know what was causing it.  It was a
sort of fluttering, clattering sound, or rather a series of sounds,
resembling the quickly repeated gusts of a violent storm.

The moment Ossaroo heard it, he knew what it was; and instead of giving
a direct answer to Caspar's question, he simply said--

"Wait a bit, sahib.  Here come old cockee horneebill; he show you how de
hen getee her food."

The words had scarcely passed from the lips of the shikaree, when the
cause of that singular noise became known to his companions.  The maker
of it appeared before them in the form of a great bird, that with a
strong flapping of its wings flew past the tree in which they were
seated, towards that which contained the nest.

In an instant afterwards, it was seen resting on a spur-like projection
of the trunk, just below the aperture; and it needed not Ossaroo to tell
them that it was the cock hornbill that had there alighted.  The large
beak--the tip of it resembling that which they had already seen sticking
out of the hole, and which was once more visible and in motion--
surmounted by an immense helmet-like protuberance, rising upon the
crown, and running several inches along the top of the upper mandible,
which might have been taken for a second beak--this singular appendage
could belong to no other bird than the _hornbill_.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

THE HORNBILL.

Karl, although he had never seen one of these birds alive, had yet
examined stuffed specimens of them in museums, and he had no difficulty
in recognising the bird.  He was able even to identify the species, for
there are many species of hornbill, known under the generic name,
_Bucerus_.  That before their eyes was the _Bucerus rhinoceros_, or
"rhinoceros hornbill," called also the "topau," and sometimes the
"horned Indian raven," from a sort of resemblance which it bears both in
shape and habits to the well-known bird of this name.

Ossaroo had not exaggerated the size of these birds when he compared it
to that of a goose.  On the contrary, he had rather moderated the
dimensions: for the one in question looked much larger than either goose
or gander.  It was rather more than three feet in length--reckoning from
the tip of its tail to the point of its curving beak, which of itself
was nearly a foot long!  Its colour was black above, and yellowish-white
underneath, the tail feathers being a clear white, with a broad black
band crossing them near the middle.  Its bill, like that of its mate
already observed, was of a yellowish-white, the upper mandible being
reddish around the base, while the casque-like protuberance exhibited a
mottled surface of white and black.

Ossaroo had to tell them pretty nearly all he knew in relation to this
curious bird; for although there are several species of hornbills
natives of India, it is by no means a common creature, even at home in
its own country.

Karl could have told them much more about its species and habits, and no
doubt he would have done so had they been otherwise engaged.  But
situated as they were, with an angry elephant besieging them in the
tree, and now for a while interested in observing the movements of the
bird itself, Karl was in no humour to deliver an ornithological lecture.
He might have told them that ornithologists have differed much about
the classification of the hornbill--some of them placing it among the
toucans, while others assert that it belongs to the crow family.  Its
immense beak--out of all proportion to its body--is not the only point
of resemblance it bears to the toucans.  Like them, it flings its food
into the air, catching and swallowing it as it comes down.  Unlike the
toucans, however, it cannot climb trees, and is therefore not of the
Scansorial order.  It is said to be omnivorous in its food; and in this
it resembles the crows and ravens: but, indeed, as already stated, there
are many species of hornbills, and the habits of the different kinds, by
no means uniform or alike, have been confounded by most writers.  There
are species in Africa, others in India and the Indian islands, and New
Guinea is known to have one or two distinct species of its own.  All
these differ not only in size, colour, shape of their beak, and the
protuberance that surmounts it; but also in the kind of food which they
live upon.  For instance, the African hornbills, and one or more of the
Asiatic species, are carnivorous, and some even carrion-eaters.  These
are filthy birds, their flesh and feathers smelling rank as those of
vultures.  On the other hand, there is a species in the Indian islands--
the Moluccas more particularly--whose sole food is the nutmeg, which
gives to its flesh an exquisite aromatic flavour, causing it to be much
relished at the tables of Oriental epicures.  The bill of this species
after a certain time appears with a number of grooves or furrows in it.
As these furrows are observed only on the beaks of the old birds, the
Dutch colonists established in the Moluccas believe them to indicate
their age, each wrinkle standing for a year.  Hence the hornbill has
obtained among the colonists the name of _Yerrvogel_ (year bird).

Karl, as I have said, was acquainted with all these facts in the natural
history of the hornbill; but just then he did not think of making them
known to his companions--all three being too much occupied in watching
the movements of the male bird.  It was evident that he was not one of
the vegetable feeders: for on his alighting they could see hanging from
his beak a long cylindrical object, which they were able to identify as
a portion--the head and part of the body--of a dead snake.  It was
equally evident that his mate was not accustomed to a vegetable diet:
for from the way in which he was manoeuvring, the spectators saw that
the mutilated reptile was intended for her.  No doubt it was her dinner,
for it had now got to that hour of the day.

She was not to be kept waiting any longer.  Almost on the instant her
provider alighted on the projecting spur, with a toss of his head he
jerked the piece of snake up into the air, and then caught it as it came
down again--not with the intention to swallow it, but only to get a
better grip, in order that he might deliver it the more adroitly into
the mandibles of his mate--now protruding through the aperture, and
opened to receive it.

In another instant the savoury morsel was transferred from the beak of
the male to that of the female; and then the ivory forceps of the
latter, with the snake held tightly between them, disappeared within the
cavity.

The old cock stayed not a moment longer upon the tree.  He had served
his mate with her dinner, and perhaps he had yet to bring on the
dessert.  Whether or not, he rose immediately afterwards into the air,
with the same clangorous clapping of his wings; but this time the noise
was accompanied by the clattering of his horny mandibles, like a pair of
castanets, causing a sound not only singular, but, if heard by
strangers, calculated to beget within them a considerable feeling of
alarm.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

A FOUR-FOOTED BURGLAR.

After the departure of the bird, that had taught our young adventurers
so interesting a chapter of natural history, the elephant once more
engrossed their attention.  Not that there was anything new in the
movements of the latter--for it was acting just as before--but simply
because they knew that, so long as it remained upon the ground, they
would have to stay in the tree; and they naturally bent their eyes upon
it, to see if it was showing any signs of moving off.  They could
perceive none.  Not the slightest appearance to indicate its intention
of departing from the spot.

While engaged in regarding the besieger, their eyes were of course
removed from the sycamore; nor might they have been again turned towards
that tree--at least, not for a good while--but for a sound that reached
their ears, and which appeared to proceed from the direction of the
hornbill's nest.  It was a soft and rather plaintive sound--unlike any
that had been made by the rhinoceros bird; nor was it at all like the
voice of a bird, of any kind.  It was more like the utterance of some
four-footed creature; or it might even have been a human voice
pronouncing the syllable "wha," several times repeated.

That it was neither bird nor human being, Ossaroo could tell the moment
he heard the first "wha."  Almost as soon were the others convinced that
it was neither: for on turning their eyes to the sycamore, they saw upon
the projecting spur that had been so lately occupied by the hornbill, a
creature of a very different kind--in short, a quadruped.

Had it been in an American forest, they might have taken the creature
for a racoon though a very large one.  On closer scrutiny, many points
of resemblance, and also of difference, would have become apparent.
Like the racoon, it had plantigrade feet, a burly, rounded body, and a
very thick hairy tail--ringed also like that of the American animal--but
unlike the latter, its muzzle, instead of being long and slender, was
short, round, and somewhat cat-like; while its hair, or more properly
its fur, formed a thick even coat all over its body, limbs, and tail,
and presented a smooth and shining surface.  Its general colour was a
very dark brown, streaked and mottled with golden yellow; and Caspar
remarked, upon the moment of seeing it, that it was one of the
handsomest creatures he had ever beheld.

The naturalist Cuvier had made the same remark long before Caspar's
time.  So said Karl, on hearing the observation escape from the lips of
his brother.

Ossaroo knew that the animal was the "wha," a name derived from its
ordinary call; and that it was sometimes known as the "chetwa," and also
the "panda."

Karl, on hearing Ossaroo's name for it, and indeed, on hearing it
pronounced by the creature itself, was able to identify the animal, and
to give it still another name--that which has been bestowed upon it by
Frederick Cuvier--_ailurus_.  This is the generic name, of which, up to
the present time, it has been left in undisturbed possession.  Since
only one species has been discovered, it has the name all to itself; and
therefore would not require any specific appellation.  But for all that,
one has been given to it.  On account of its shining coat, it has been
called the _ailurus fulgens_.

Though the closet naturalists, in following out their pedantic
propensities, have created a genus expressly for this animal, there is
nothing either in its appearance or habits to separate it from the
badgers, the racoons, the coatimondis, and such other predatory
creatures.  Like them it preys upon birds and their eggs, as also on the
smaller kinds of quadrupeds, and like the racoon, it is a nimble
tree-climber.

The situation in which the particular panda, of which we are writing,
first appeared to the eyes of Karl and Caspar, proved this capacity, and
its actions the moment after testified to its fondness for birds'-eggs.
It had not been a minute under the eyes of the spectators, when they saw
that it was after the eggs of the hornbill; perhaps, too, it might have
had a design of tasting the flesh of their owner.

Resting its thick plantigrade hind feet upon the projection of the tree,
it erected itself like a little bear; and with its fore-paws commenced
scraping at the barrier wall which the male bird had spent so much time
and taken so much pains in building.  It is possible that if it had been
left to itself, it might in time have succeeded in forcing an entrance
into the nest, and highly probable too--or it would scarcely have
entered upon the task.  But it was not left to itself.  Not that the
sitter inside could have done much to hinder it: though it was evident
from the way in which her beak was repeatedly projected and drawn back
through the hole, and also from her angry hissing, that she knew there
was danger without, and that an enemy was assailing her citadel.

Most likely after a time, and by constant scraping, the clay wall would
eventually have been pulled down; but before that event came to pass, a
loud flapping and fluttering, and cracking and clattering, was heard
among the tops of the trees; and in an instant afterwards the broad,
shadowy wings of the old male hornbill were swashing about the ears of
the four-footed robber, where the long cutlass-like beak, armed at its
edges, at once interrupted the intent.

The panda, taken by surprise, quailed at this first onset: for like any
other _paterfamilias_ who on returning home finds a burglar breaking
into his house, the cock bird charged in the full tide of impetuous
fury.

The robber, however, evidently used to this sort of thing, soon
recovered his self-possession; and instead of retreating from the tree,
he only planted himself more firmly upon the projection; and, facing
towards his feathery assailant, prepared to show fight.

And fight was instantly shown on both sides--the bird swooping
repeatedly at its adversary, striking with its strong wings and
thrusting with its ensiform beak; while the quadruped played back both
with teeth and claws--several times plucking a mouthful of feathers from
the breast of its winged adversary.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

FRITZ INTERFERES.

How the affair might have ended had the panda and the hornbill been the
only parties to the combat, can but be guessed at.  In all likelihood
the quadruped would have triumphed over the biped: the entrance would
have been forced; the old hen dragged off her nest--perhaps killed and
eaten--and the eggs after her.

But it was not written in the book of destiny that this should be the
_denouement_ of that little drama: for at that moment an incident
occurred which changed the whole character of the contest--followed by a
series of other incidents which brought the affair to a termination
unexpected by all parties engaged, as well as by those who witnessed it.

The first of these incidents--and that which formed the key to this
change in the circumstances of the combat, was one of a very ludicrous
character--so much so as to elicit laughter from the spectators in the
tree.

It chanced that the eyes of the panda, as the animal stood erect on its
hind quarters, were directly opposite the little aperture that
represented the entrance to the nest.  Not dreaming of any danger in
that direction, the robber only thought of guarding his "daylights"
against the hornbill upon the wing.  But the hen bird inside the nest--
who could see well enough what was passing outside--had no idea of
remaining a passive spectator; and perceiving her opportunity--for she
was within striking distance--she quietly drew back her long ivory beak,
and, throwing all the strength of her neck into the effort--assisted by
the weight of her heavy helmeted head--as if with the blow of a
pick-axe, she struck the panda right in the eye--the sharp point
penetrating almost to its skull.

Terror-stricken, partly by surprise at this unexpected stroke, and
partly by the pain caused by it, the quadruped uttered a shrill cry; and
at once scrambling down from the tree, seemed only anxious to make his
escape.  In this design he, no doubt, would have succeeded, with only
the loss of an eye; but the eye of still another enemy had been upon
him--one whom he had yet to encounter.  Fritz, from his position near
the bottom of the tree, attracted by the noise of the strife, had drawn
nearer; and looking up, had been watching the combat throughout.  It is
scarcely probable that the sympathies of honest Fritz could have been
otherwise than in favour of the innocent bird, and against the guilty
beast; but whatever way they may have been inclined, certain it is that
as the panda came to "grass," the dog "jumped" it upon the instant, and
commenced worrying it, as if the creature had been the oldest and
bitterest of his enemies!

Despite the suddenness of this new attack--equally unexpected as the
peck in the eye--the fierce panda showed no signs of yielding without a
struggle; and, although far overmatched by its canine antagonist, it was
likely to give the latter a scratch or two, as souvenirs that he would
carry to his grave.

But at this moment a much greater danger was threatening Fritz than any
harm he might suffer from the claws of the panda; and had chance not
favoured him, as he jumped about in the struggle, by turning his eyes in
a particular direction, he would have found himself in the clutches of
an antagonist, that would have shown him as little mercy as he was
himself extending to the poor panda.

But he was favoured by chance: for it was nothing more that directed his
glance towards his old pursuer, the elephant; and showed him the latter,
at that moment advancing upon him at a charging pace, with eyes
sparkling in silent vengeance, and trunk extended to seize him.  Under
the circumstances, it did not cost Fritz a moment's calculation as to
what course he should pursue.  Suddenly dropping the panda--as if he had
discovered the quadruped to be a lump of poison--he bounded from the
spot in a direction the very opposite to that by which the elephant was
approaching; and in less than a score of seconds the only part of him to
be seen was the tip of his tail just disappearing into the thicket.

Of all the creatures that had borne part in this curious affray, the
poor panda was perhaps the most to be pitied.  At all events he was the
most unfortunate: for with the drama ended also his life.  In every one
encountered by him he had found an enemy; and in the last he met with a
dread foe that soon made a finish of him.  This last was the elephant.
The great animal, rushing forward upon Fritz, seeing that the latter had
escaped, was determined this time not to be baulked of a victim.
Instead of carrying out the design it had only partially resolved upon--
that of following Fritz into the forest--it suddenly altered its plan,
and transferred its hostility to the panda.  It saw that the latter was
within reach: for half blinded by the beak of the bird, and half worried
to death by the dog, the creature did not perceive, as Fritz had done,
the approach of the elephant.  It is possible it may have seen the
danger, but not until the elephant had got in such dangerous proximity
as left it no chance of escape.

Before the panda could make the slightest effort to get away from the
ground, the elephant had lapped its prehensile proboscis around it, and
lifted it into the air as if its body had been no heavier than a
feather.  Holding it aloft, the merciless monster took several long
strides in the direction of the fallen obelisk; and then, as if choosing
a spot suitable for its design, it placed the still struggling body of
the panda upon the ground, set its huge fore-feet upon it, and using
them alternately, continued to trample it until the only vestige left of
the crushed creature was a shapeless mass of fur and flesh!

It was a painful spectacle to those in the tree; but it was succeeded by
a sight that was pleasant to all three--the sight of the elephant's hind
quarters as it walked off toward the woods, evidently with the intention
of retiring from the ground.

Whether its vengeance had been satisfied by the destruction of the
panda, or whether it had gone off in search of Fritz, none of the three
could conjecture; but whatever may have been the motive, certain it is
that it guided the rogue from the spot, and raised a siege that was on
the point of becoming exceedingly irksome.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

"DEATH TO THE ROGUE."

As soon as the elephant was fairly out of sight, the besieged took
counsel among themselves about descending to the earth.  They were
sorely tired of the positions which they had been so long constrained to
keep; for, to tell the truth, sitting astride upon the hard branch of a
tree, though easy enough for a short spell, becomes in time so painful
as to be almost unendurable.  Caspar especially had grown impatient of
this irksome inaction; and highly exasperated at the _rogue_ who was
forcing it upon them.  Several times had he been on the point of
forsaking his perch, and stealing down for his gun; but Karl, each time
perceiving his design, very prudently persuaded him to forego it.

All were anxious enough to get out of the tree; and they would have
vacated their sents at once on the disappearance of their dreaded enemy,
had they been certain that he was gone for good; but they were
suspicious that it might be only a temporary absence--perhaps some
_ruse_ of the rogue to decoy them down: for elephants of this character
have been known to practise tricks with almost as much cunning as rogues
among men.

While holding counsel as to how they had best act, Ossaroo cut short
their deliberations by volunteering to descend first; and by stealing a
short way along the track which the elephant had taken, ascertain
whether he was really gone from the ground, or only tying in ambush near
the skirt of the forest.

As the shikaree could creep through underwood as silently as a snake,
there could be no great danger in his doing this, provided he did not go
too far.  He could not fail to see the elephant before approaching too
near to it; and in the event of its turning and pursuing him, he could
once more flee to their tree-fortress.

