     The smallest?

     What laws has your state made about birds?

     Ought the "government to own" the birds? (That is, make laws
     for their protection.)

     Is the blue jay wicked?

     What birds walk?

     Do birds travel at night, during their migrations?

Beginning in March, note for several days the different kinds of birds
you see, which were not seen the day before. Make at least two
observations daily, one in the morning and one after school. When is
the greater number of new birds seen, in the morning or in the
afternoon? Or, if you live in a comparatively quiet neighborhood, even
in a large city, go out at night and listen for bird sounds in the
air. You need not go far to make this trial--your own back door "opens
into all outdoors."

     What states have established a Bird Day by law?

     Is woman cruel or only thoughtless?

     Do robins raise more than one brood in a season? If so, do
     they use the same nest twice? If they raise two broods, what
     becomes of the first, while the mother is sitting upon the
     eggs for the second?

Watch for a robin leading out his family. Notice the feeding, after
the birds are large enough to run and fly fairly well. The young birds
are placed apart, and kept apart by the parent, who visits each one in
turn, and rebukes any who tries to be piggish, sometimes rapping it
with his bill when it runs out of turn. Notice this parent teaching
the young to sing. It is a very interesting sight.

     What birds have you heard sing at night?

More birds sing at night than is commonly supposed. The female robin
calls to her mate frequently during the night, and he responds with a
song. The catbird also sings at night. Last May one was heard to sing
three nights in succession from eleven o'clock until daylight in
response to little complaining calls from his mate. The song sparrow,
warblers, and many other birds sing at night. Their songs at these
times sound as if the bird were sleepy and reluctant to sing, or as if
he were startled and were hurrying through the performance. Make a
note of songs heard at night and try to determine the cause. Learn to
distinguish the call of the female from the song of the male.

_The kinds of nests._--What birds are weavers? What ones are masons or
plasterers? What ones are tailors, in the construction of their nests?

Find a pair of birds engaged in nest building; robins may generally be
found. Learn to distinguish the male from the female in appearance, as
well as voice. Notice what materials they are using. Which bird takes
the lead in building? What does the other bird do? Does he ever carry
material, or does he simply act as escort? Does he ever protect his
mate from other birds?

Write this out, carefully drawing your conclusions from your own
observations. After the young birds have left the nest and have no
further use for it, you may take the nest and examine it closely. You
will find that while there is a similarity in the nests of the same
kind of birds, they differ considerably in the materials of which they
are composed. For example, the typical robin's nest consists of straws
and hairs plastered together with mud and lined with some soft
material, but others have been found made entirely of raveled rope;
others of carpet rags. The bird evidently is not guided in this matter
by blind instinct, but uses its reason in adapting materials that are
at hand.

If you are fortunate you may find a pair of orioles building their
nest. Place some bright-colored yarn or string in pieces of convenient
length where the birds will see them. Some of them are almost sure to
be woven into the nest. The oriole's nest may be attached to a limb by
two or more cords; if it is, notice how it is prevented from swinging
by side ropes. You will find it guyed against the prevailing winds.
The oriole frequently ties several twigs together, and so uses these
to suspend his nest. Notice the nest pouch; those built near houses
are quite shallow; those near forests are much deeper. Can you tell
why?

_The wings of birds._--Describe the different kinds, as short and
round, or long and slender, and the effect of the wing-shape upon the
bird's motion in the air. Describe the flights of different birds.

_Songs of birds._--Write the syllables which seem to you to express
the different songs of birds. Notice the different songs of the same
bird. A song sparrow was observed to have twelve different songs. He
sang each one several times over, as if each song had a number of
verses. Then changing his position, he would sing another. To most
ears the robin's song is always the same, but close attention
discovers that there are variations. Many birds are genuine musicians
and compose as they sing, not having formal songs.

_Free description of birds._--Write description of some bird of your
acquaintance, noting the following:--

_Its appearance._--Color, gait, flight, size from tip of beak to end
of tail, spread of wings.

_Its common name._--Why given?

_Time of arrival and departure._

_Character._--Is it trustful, or shy and retiring?

_Song._--Season when song is most frequent, also times of day. Does it
consist of many or only a few notes? Is it cheery, like the robin's,
or tuneful, like the thrush's, or rollicking and rapturous, like the
bobolink's, or a Romanza, like the catbird's? Notice the different
emotion sounds, the notes of fear, of parental or conjugal reprimand,
of joy, of anger, of deep sorrow, made by the bird at times.

_Food._--Insects (kinds), seeds, fruit, etc.

_Nest._--Where placed, how made?

_Incidents._--From the writer's knowledge of the bird.

_This bird in literature._--What writers have described, what poets
have immortalized him? How did they characterize him?

Some of the following books are almost indispensable to one who wishes
to know the birds:--

"Wake Robin," John Burroughs; "Birds and Poets," John Burroughs; "The
Birds and Seasons of New England," Wilson Flagg; "Upland and Meadow,"
Charles C. Abbott; "Bird Ways," Olive Thorne Miller; "Birds through an
Opera Glass," Florence A. Merriam; "Birds in the Bush," Bradford
Torrey; "The Birds About Us," Charles C. Abbott; "From Blomidon to
Smoky," Frank Bolles.

Recent magazines should be searched and the current ones scrutinized
for articles by any of the above-named writers.

_Destruction of birds._--Find out how many birds are annually
slaughtered in the United States, and for what purposes.

In the report of the American Ornithologist Union published in 1886,
it was estimated that about five million birds were annually required
to fill the demand for the ornamentation of the hats of the American
women. In 1896 it was estimated that the number thus used was ten
million. "The slaughter is not confined to song-birds; everything that
wears feathers is a target for the bird butcher. The destruction of
40,000 terns in a single season on Cape Cod, a million rail and reed
birds (bobolinks) killed in a single month near Philadelphia, are
facts that may well furnish food for reflection. The swamps and
marshes of Florida are well known to have become depopulated of their
egrets and herons, while the state at large has been for years a
favorite slaughter ground of the milliners' emissaries." An article in
_Forest and Stream_, speaking of the destruction of birds on Long
Island, states that during a short period of four months 20,000 were
supplied to the New York dealers from a single village.

The Audubon Society of Massachusetts has looked up the figures and
reports that "it is proved that into England alone between 25,000,000
and 30,000,000 birds are imported yearly, and that for Europe the
number reaches 150,000,000. Hence, the fashionable craze has annually
demanded between 200,000,000 and 300,000,000 birds. From the East
Indies alone a dealer in London received 400,000 humming birds, 6,000
birds of paradise, and 400,000 miscellaneous birds. In an auction
room, also in London, within four months, over 800,000 East and West
Indian and Brazilian bird skins, besides thousands of pheasants and
birds of paradise, were put up for sale."

This demand for birds has been going on for a quarter of a century,
and billions of rich-plumaged creatures have been slaughtered to meet
it, and several of the feathered tribes have been exterminated.

Write to the following for literature upon the destruction of birds:--

Humane Education Committee, 61 Westminster Street, Providence, R. I.;
George T. Angell, Boston, Mass.; Secretary of the Massachusetts
Audubon Society, Boston, Mass.; Secretary of the New York Audubon
Society at New York; Secretary of the Department of Agriculture,
Washington, D. C.; Secretary of the Audubon Society of Pennsylvania at
Philadelphia; also write to the Department of Agriculture of your own
state.




VII

PROGRAMS FOR BIRD DAY


A Bird Day exercise, in order to have much value educationally, should
be largely the result of the pupils' previous work, and should not be
the mere repetition of a prepared program taken verbatim from some
paper or leaflet. It is, of course, better to have the pupils recite
this leaflet or list of statements than it would be to have it ground
out of a phonograph. The program should be prepared by the pupils
under direction of the teacher.

The following general suggestions are offered:--

1. For the first observance of this day by a school it would be well
to have some pupil read Senator Hoar's petition of the birds to the
Legislature of Massachusetts.

PETITION OF THE BIRDS

_Written by Senator Hoar to the Massachusetts Legislature_

The petition which was instrumental in getting the Massachusetts law
passed, prohibiting the wearing of song and insectivorous birds on
women's hats, was written by Senator Hoar. The petition read as
follows:--

     To the Great and General Court of the Commonwealth of
     Massachusetts: We, the song birds of Massachusetts and their
     playfellows, make this our humble petition. We know more
     about you than you think we do. We know how good you are. We
     have hopped about the roofs and looked in at your windows of
     the houses you have built for poor and sick and hungry
     people, and little lame and deaf and blind children. We have
     built our nests in the trees and sung many a song as we flew
     about the gardens and parks you have made so beautiful for
     your children, especially your poor children to play in.
     Every year we fly a great way over the country, keeping all
     the time where the sun is bright and warm. And we know that
     whenever you do anything the other people all over this
     great land between the seas and the Great Lakes find it out,
     and pretty soon will try to do the same. We know. We know.

     We are Americans just the same as you are. Some of us, like
     you, came across the great sea. But most of the birds like
     us have lived here a long while; and the birds like us
     welcomed your fathers when they came here many, many years
     ago. Our fathers and mothers have always done their best to
     please your fathers and mothers.

     Now we have a sad story to tell you. Thoughtless or bad
     people are trying to destroy us. They kill us because our
     feathers are beautiful. Even pretty and sweet girls, who we
     should think would be our best friends, kill our brothers
     and children so that they may wear our plumage on their
     hats. Sometimes people kill us for mere wantonness. Cruel
     boys destroy our nests and steal our eggs and our young
     ones. People with guns and snares lie in wait to kill us; as
     if the place for a bird were not in the sky, alive, but in a
     shop window or in a glass case. If this goes on much longer
     all our song birds will be gone. Already we are told in some
     other countries that used to be full of birds, they are now
     almost gone. Even the nightingales are being killed in
     Italy.

     Now we humbly pray that you will stop all this and will save
     us from this sad fate. You have already made a law that no
     one shall kill a harmless song bird or destroy our nests or
     our eggs. Will you please make another one that no one shall
     wear our feathers, so that no one shall kill us to get them?
     We want them all ourselves. Your pretty girls are pretty
     enough without them. We are told that it is as easy for you
     to do it as for a blackbird to whistle.

     If you will, we know how to pay you a hundred times over. We
     will teach your children to keep themselves clean and neat.
     We will show them how to live together in peace and love and
     to agree as we do in our nests. We will build pretty houses
     which you will like to see. We will play about your garden
     and flower beds--ourselves like flowers on wings, without
     any cost to you. We will destroy the wicked insects and
     worms that spoil your cherries and currants and plums and
     apples and roses. We will give you our best songs, and make
     the spring more beautiful and the summer sweeter to you.
     Every June morning when you go out into the field, oriole
     and bluebird and blackbird and bobolink will fly after you
     and make the day more delightful to you. And when you go
     home tired after sundown, vesper sparrow will tell you how
     grateful we are. When you sit down on your porch after dark,
     fifebird and hermit thrush and wood thrush will sing to you;
     and even whip-poor-will will cheer you up a little. We know
     where we are safe. In a little while all the birds will come
     to live in Massachusetts again, and everybody who loves
     music will like to make a summer home with you.

The signers are:--

Brown Thrasher,
Robert o' Lincoln,
Hermit Thrush,
Vesper Sparrow,
Robin Redbreast,
Song Sparrow,
Scarlet Tanager,
Summer Redbird,
Blue Heron,
Humming Bird,
Yellowbird,
Whip-poor-will,
Water Wagtail,
Woodpecker,
Pigeon Woodpecker,
Indigo Bird,
Yellowthroat,
Wilson's Thrush,
Chickadee,
Kingbird,
Swallow,
