cooling-tanks.  It was the duty of two other men to dip it out of these
tanks into casks, which were then headed up by our cooper, and stowed
away in the hold.

As the night advanced the fires became redder and brighter by contrast,
the light shone and glittered on the bloody decks, and, as we plied our
dirty work, I could not help thinking, "what would my mother say, if
she could get a peep at me now?"

The ship's crew worked and slept by watches, for the fires were not
allowed to go out all night.  About midnight I sat down on the windlass
to take a short rest, and began talking to one of the men, Fred Borders
by name.  He was one of the quietest and most active men in the ship,
and, being quite a young man, not more than nineteen, he and I drew to
one another, and became very intimate.

"I think we're goin' to have a breeze, Bob," said he, as a sharp puff
of wind crossed the deck, driving the black smoke to leeward, and
making the fire flare up in the try-works.

"I hope it won't be a storm, then," said I, "for it will oblige us to
put out the fires."

Just then Tom Lokins came up, ordered Fred to go and attend to the
fires, sat down opposite to me on the windlass, and began to "lay down
the law" in regard to storms.

"You see, Bob Ledbury," said he, beginning to fill his pipe, "young
fellers like you don't know nothin' about the weather--'cause why?
you've got no experience.  Now, I'll put you up to a dodge consarning
this very thing."

I never found out what was the dodge that Tom, in his wisdom, was to
have put me up to, for at that moment the captain came on deck, and
gave orders to furl the top-gallant sails.

Three or four of us ran up the rigging like monkeys, and in a few
minutes the sails were lashed to the yards.

The wind now began to blow steadily from the nor'-west; but not so hard
as to stop our tryworks for more than an hour.  After that it blew
stiff enough to raise a heavy sea, and we were compelled to slack the
fires.  This was all the harm it did to us, however, for although the
breeze was stiffish, it was nothing like a gale.

As the captain and the first mate walked the quarter-deck together, I
heard the former say to the latter, "I think we had as well take in a
reef in the topsails.  All hereabouts the fishing-ground is good, we
don't need to carry on."

The order was given to reduce sail, and the men lay out on the topsail
yards.  I noticed that my friend Fred Borders was the first man to
spring up the shrouds and lay out on the main-topsail yard.  It was so
dark that I could scarcely see the masts.  While I was gazing up, I
thought I observed a dark object drop from the yard; at the same moment
there was a loud shriek, followed by a plunge in the sea.  This was
succeeded by the sudden cry, "man overboard!" and instantly the whole
ship was in an uproar.

No one who has not heard that cry can understand the dreadful feelings
that are raised in the human breast by it.  My heart at first seemed to
leap into my mouth and almost choke me.  Then a terrible fear, which I
cannot describe, shot through me, when I thought it might be my comrade
Fred Borders.  But these thoughts and feelings passed like
lightning--in a far shorter time than it takes to write them down.  The
shriek was still ringing in my ears when the captain roared--

"Down your helm! stand by to lower away the boats."

At the same moment he seized a light hen-coop and tossed it overboard,
and the mate did the same with an oar in the twinkling of an eye.
Almost without knowing what I did, or why I did it, I seized a great
mass of oakum and rubbish that lay on the deck saturated with oil, I
thrust it into the embers of the fire in the try-works, and hurled it
blazing into the sea.

[Illustration: "HURLED IT BLAZING INTO THE SEA"]

The ship's head was thrown into the wind, and we were brought to as
quickly as possible.  A gleam of hope arose within me on observing that
the mass I had thrown overboard continued still to burn; but when I saw
how quickly it went astern, notwithstanding our vigorous efforts to
stop the ship, my heart began to sink, and when, a few moments after,
the light suddenly disappeared, despair seized upon me, and I gave my
friend up for lost.

At that moment, strange to say, thoughts of my mother came into my
mind, I remembered her words, "Call upon the Lord, my dear boy, when
you are in trouble."  Although I had given but little heed to prayer,
or to my Maker, up to that time, I did pray, then and there, most
earnestly that my messmate might be saved.  I cannot say that I had
much hope that my prayer would be answered--indeed I think I had
none,--still, the mere act of crying in my distress to the Almighty
afforded me a little relief, and it was with a good deal of energy that
I threw myself into the first boat that was lowered, and pulled at the
oar as if my own life depended on it.

A lantern had been fastened to the end of an oar and set up in the
boat, and by its faint light I could see that the men looked very
grave.  Tom Lokins was steering, and I sat near him, pulling the aft
oar.

"Do you think we've any chance, Tom?" said I.

A shake of the head was his only reply.

"It must have been here away," said the mate, who stood up in the bow
with a coil of rope at his feet, and a boat-hook in his hand.  "Hold
on, lads, did anyone hear a cry?"

No one answered.  We all ceased pulling, and listened intently; but the
noise of the waves and the whistling of the winds were all the sounds
we heard.

"What's that floating on the water?" said one of the men, suddenly.

"Where away?" cried everyone eagerly.

"Right off the lee-bow--there, don't you see it?"

At that moment a faint cry came floating over the black water, and died
away in the breeze.

The single word "Hurrah!" burst from our throats with all the power of
our lungs, and we bent to our oars till we wellnigh tore the rollicks
out of the boat.

"Hold hard! stern all!" roared the mate, as we went flying down to
leeward, and almost ran over the hen-coop, to which a human form was
seen to be clinging with the tenacity of a drowning man.  We had swept
down so quickly, that we shot past it.  In an agony of fear lest my
friend should be again lost in the darkness, I leaped up and sprang
into the sea.  Tom Lokins, however, had noticed what I was about; he
seized me by the collar of my jacket just as I reached the water, and
held me with a grip like a vice till one of the men came to his
assistance, and dragged me back into the boat.  In a few moments more
we reached the hen-coop, and Fred was saved!

He was half dead with cold and exhaustion, poor fellow, but in a few
minutes he began to recover, and before we reached the ship he could
speak.  His first words were to thank God for his deliverance.  Then he
added:

"And, thanks to the man that flung that light overboard.  I should have
gone down but for that.  It showed me where the hen-coop was."

I cannot describe the feeling of joy that filled my heart when he said
this.

"Aye, who wos it that throw'd that fire overboard?" enquired one of the
men.

"Don't know," replied another, "I think it wos the cap'n."

"You'll find that out when we get aboard," cried the mate; "pull away,
lads."

In five minutes Fred Borders was passed up the side and taken down
below.  In two minutes more we had him stripped naked, rubbed dry,
wrapped in hot blankets, and set down on one of the lockers, with a hot
brick at his feet, and a stiff can of hot rum and water in his hand.




CHAPTER VI

THE WHALE--FIGHTING BULLS, ETC.

As the reader may, perhaps, have been asking a few questions about the
whale in his own mind, I shall try to answer them, by telling a few
things concerning that creature which, I think, are worth knowing.

In the first place, the whale is not a fish!  I have applied that name
to it, no doubt, because it is the custom to do so; but there are great
differences between the whales and the fishes.  The mere fact that the
whale lives in water is not sufficient to prove it to be a fish.  The
frog lives very much in water--he is born in the water, and, when very
young, he lives in it altogether--would die, in fact, if he were taken
out of it; yet a frog is not a fish.

The following are some of the differences existing between a whale and
a fish:--The whale is a warm-blooded animal; the fish is cold-blooded.
The whale brings forth its young alive; while most fishes lay eggs or
spawn.  Moreover, the fish lives entirely under water, but the whale
cannot do so.  He breathes air through enormous lungs, not gills.  If
you were to hold a whale's head under water for much longer than an
hour, it would certainly be drowned; and this is the reason why it
comes so frequently to the surface of the sea to take breath.  Whales
seldom stay more than an hour under water, and when they come up to
breathe, they discharge the last breath they took through their
nostrils or blowholes, mixed with large quantities of water which they
have taken in while feeding.  But the most remarkable point of
difference between the whale and fishes of all kinds is, that it
suckles its young.

The calf of one kind of whale is about fourteen feet long when it is
born, and it weighs about a ton.  The cow-whale usually brings forth
only one calf at a time, and the manner in which she behaves to her
gigantic baby shows that she is affected by feelings of anxiety and
affection such as are never seen in fishes, which heartless creatures
forsake their eggs when they are laid, and I am pretty sure they would
not know their own children if they happened to meet with them.

The whale, on the contrary, takes care of her little one, gives it
suck, and sports playfully with it in the waves; its enormous heart
throbbing all the while, no doubt, with satisfaction.

I have heard of a whale which was once driven into shoal water with its
calf and nearly stranded.  The huge dam seemed to become anxious for
the safety of her child, for she was seen to swim eagerly round it,
embrace it with her fins, and roll it over in the waves, trying to make
it follow her into deep water.  But the calf was obstinate; it would
not go, and the result was that the boat of a whaler pulled up and
harpooned it.  The poor little whale darted away like lightning on
receiving the terrible iron, and ran out a hundred fathoms of line; but
it was soon overhauled and killed.  All this time the dam kept close to
the side of its calf, and not until a harpoon was plunged into her own
side would she move away.  Two boats were after her.  With a single rap
of her tail she cut one of the boats in two, and then darted off.  But
in a short time she turned and came back.  Her feelings of anxiety had
returned, no doubt, after the first sting of pain was over, and she
died at last close to the side of her young one.

There are various kinds of whales, but the two sorts that are most
sought after are the common whale of the Greenland Seas, which is
called the "right whale", and the sperm whale of the South Sea.  Both
kinds are found in the south; but the sperm whale never goes to the
North Seas.  Both kinds grow to an enormous size--sometimes to seventy
feet in length, but there is considerable difference in their
appearance, especially about the head.  In a former chapter I have
partly described the head of a _right_ whale, which has whalebone
instead of teeth, with its blowholes on the back of the head.  The
sperm whale has large white teeth in its lower jaw and none at all in
the upper.  It has only one blowhole, and that a little one, much
farther forward on its head, so that sailors can tell, at a great
distance, what kind of whales they see simply by their manner of
spouting.

The most remarkable feature about the sperm whale is the bluntness of
its clumsy head, which looks somewhat like a big log with the end sawn
square off, and this head is about one-third of its entire body.

The sperm whale feeds differently from the right whale.  He seizes his
prey with his powerful teeth, and lives, to a great extent, on large
cuttle-fish.  Some of them have been seen to vomit lumps of these
cuttle-fish as long as a whale-boat.  He is much fiercer, too, than the
right whale, which almost always takes to flight when struck, but the
sperm whale will sometimes turn on its foes and smash their boat with a
blow of his blunt head or tail.

Fighting-whales, as they are called, are not uncommon.  These are
generally old bulls, which have become wise from experience, and give
the whalers great trouble--sometimes carrying away several harpoons and
lines.  The lower jaw of one old bull of this kind was found to be
sixteen feet long, and it had forty-eight teeth, some of them a foot
long.  A number of scars about his head showed that this fellow had
been in the wars.  When two bull-whales take to fighting, their great
effort is to catch each other by the lower jaw, and, when locked
together, they struggle with a degree of fury that cannot be described.

It is not often that the sperm whale actually attacks a ship; but there
are a few cases of this kind which cannot be doubted.  The following
story is certainly true; and while it shows how powerful a creature the
whale is, it also shows what terrible risk and sufferings the whaleman
has frequently to encounter.

In the month of August, 1819, the American whaleship _Essex_ sailed
from Nantucket for the Pacific Ocean.  She was commanded by Captain
Pollard.  Late in the autumn of the same year, when in latitude 40
degrees of the South Pacific, a shoal, or "school", of sperm whales was
discovered, and three boats were immediately lowered and sent in
pursuit.  The mate's boat was struck by one of the fish during the
chase, and it was found necessary to return to the ship to repair
damages.

While the men were employed at this, an enormous whale suddenly rose
quite close to the ship.  He was going at nearly the same rate with the
ship--about three miles an hour; and the men, who were good judges of
the size of whales, thought that it could not have been less than
eighty-five feet long.  All at once he ran against the ship, striking
her bows, and causing her to tremble like a leaf.  The whale
immediately dived and passed under the ship, and grazed her keel in
doing so.  This evidently hurt his back, for he suddenly rose to the
surface about fifty yards off, and commenced lashing the sea with his
tail and fins as if suffering great agony.  It was truly an awful sight
to behold that great monster lashing the sea into foam at so short a
distance.

In a short time he seemed to recover, and started off at great speed to
windward.  Meanwhile the men discovered that the blow received by the
ship had done her so much damage, that she began to fill and settle
