gorge would give them a path to the upper plain; for Wilder had only a
doubtful recollection of what some trapper had told him.  But even if it
did, the Indians, expert climbers as they were, would soon be after
them, close upon their heels.  The ruse could not remain long
undetected.

They had plunged into the chasm as drowning men grasp at the nearest
thing afloat--a slender branch or bunch of grass, a straw.

As they now ascended the rock-strewn gorge both had their reflections,
which, though unspoken, were very similar.  And from these came a gleam
of hope.  If they could but reach the summit-level of the cliff!  Their
pursuers could, of course, do the same; but not on horseback.  It would
then be a contest of pedestrian speed.  The white men felt confidence in
their swiftness of foot; in this respect believing themselves superior
to their savage pursuers.  They knew that the Comanches were horse
Indians--a significant fact.  These centaurs of the central plateaux,
scarce ever setting foot upon the earth, when afoot are almost as
helpless as birds with their wings plucked or pinioned.

If they could reach the crest of the cliff, then all might yet be well;
and, cheered by this reflection, they rushed up the rock-strewn ravine,
now gliding along ledges, now squeezing their bodies between great
boulders, or springing from one to the other--in the audacity of their
bounds rivalling a brace of bighorns.

They had got more than half-way up, when cries came pealing up the glen
behind them.  Still were they hidden from the eyes of the pursuers.
Jutting points of rock and huge masses that lay loose in the bed of the
ravine had hitherto concealed them.  But for these, bullets and arrows
would have already whistled about their ears, and perhaps put an end to
their flight.  The savages were near enough to send either gun-shot or
shaft, and their voices, borne upward on the air, sounded as clear as if
they were close at hand.

The fugitives, as already said, had reached more than halfway up the
slope, and were beginning to congratulate themselves on the prospect of
escape.  They even thought of the course they should take on arriving at
the summit-level, for they knew that there was an open plain above.  All
at once they were brought to a stop, though not by anything that
obstructed their path.  On the contrary, it only seemed easier; for
there were now two ways open to them instead of one, the ravine at this
point forking into two distinct branches.  There was a choice of which
to take, and it was this that caused them to make a stop, at the same
time creating embarrassment.

The pause, however, was but for a brief space of time--only long enough
to make a hasty reconnoissance.  In the promise of an easy ascent there
seemed but little difference between the two paths, and the guide soon
came to a determination.

"It's a toss up atween 'em," he said; "but let's take the one to the
right.  It looks a little the likest."

Of course his fellow-fugitive did not dissent, and they struck into the
right-hand ravine; but not until Walt Wilder had plucked the red
kerchief from his head, and flung it as far as he could up the left one,
where it was left lying in a conspicuous position among the rocks.

He did not say why he had thus strangely abandoned the remnant of his
head-gear; but his companion, sufficiently experienced in the ways and
wiles of prairie life, stood in no need of an explanation.

The track they had now taken was of comparatively easy ascent; and it
was this, perhaps, that had tempted Wilder to take it.  But like most
things within the moral and physical world, its easiness proved a
delusion.  They had not gone twenty paces further up when the sloping
chasm terminated.  It debouched on a little platform, covered with large
loose stones, and there rested after having fallen from the cliff above.
But at a single glance they saw that this cliff could not be scaled.

They had entered into a trap, out of which there was no chance of escape
or retreat without throwing themselves back upon the breasts of their
pursuers.

The Indians were already ascending the main ravine.  By their voices it
could be told that they had reached the point where it divided; for
there was a momentary suspension of their cries, as with the baying of
hounds thrown suddenly off the scent.

It would not be for long.  They would likely first follow up the chasm
where the kerchief had been cast, but, should that also prove a
_cul-de-sac_, they would return and try the other.

The fugitives saw that it was too late to retrace their steps.  They
sprang together upon the platform, and commenced searching among the
loose rocks, with a faint hope of finding some place of concealment.

It was but a despairing sort of search, again like two drowning men who
clutch at a straw.

All at once an exclamation from the guide called his companion to his
side.  It was accompanied by a gesture, and followed by words low
muttered.

"Look hyar, Frank!  Look at this hole!  Let's git into it!"

As Hamersley came close he perceived a dark cavity among the stones, to
which Wilder was pointing.  It opened vertically downward, and was of an
irregular, roundish shape, somewhat resembling the mouth of a well,
half-coped with slabs.

Dare they enter it?  Could they?  What depth was it?

Wilder took up a pebble and flung it down.  They could hear it
descending, not at a single drop, but striking and ricochetting from
side to side.

It was long before it reached the bottom and lay silent.  No matter for
that.  The noise made in its descent told them of projecting points or
ledges that might give them a foothold.

They lost not a moment of time, but commenced letting themselves down
into the funnel-shaped shaft, the guide going first.

Slowly and silently they went down--like ghosts through the stage of a
theatre--soon disappearing in the gloom below, and leaving upon the
rock-strewn platform no trace to show that human foot had ever trodden
it.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

A STORM OF STONES.

Fortunately for the fugitives, the cavity into which they had crept was
a shaft of but slight diameter, otherwise they could not have gone down
without dropping far enough to cause death, for the echoes from the
pebbles betokened a vast vertical depth.

As it was, the void turned out to be somewhat like that of a stone-built
chimney with here and there a point left projecting.  It was so narrow,
moreover, that they were able to use both hands and knees in the
descent, and by this means they accomplished it.

They went but slowly, and took care to proceed with caution.  They knew
that a false step, the slipping of a foot or finger, or the breaking of
a fragment that gave hold to their hands, would precipitate them to an
unknown depth.

They did not go farther than was necessary for quick concealment.  There
was noise made in their descent, and they knew that the Indians would
soon be above, and might hear them.  Their only hope lay in their
pursuers believing them to have gone by the left hand path to the plain
above.  In time the Indians would surely explore both branches of the
ravine, and if the cunning savages should suspect their presence in the
shaft there would be no hope for them.  These thoughts decided them to
come to a stop as soon as they could find foothold.

About thirty feet from the top they found this, on a point of rock or
ledge that jutted horizontally.  It was broad enough to give both
standing room, and as they were now in the midst of amorphous darkness,
they took stand upon it.

The Indians might at any moment arrive on the platform above.  They felt
confident they could not be seen, but they might be heard.  The
slightest sound borne upwards to the ears of the savages might betray
them, and, knowing this, they stood still, scarce exchanging a whisper,
and almost afraid to breathe.

It was not long before they saw that which justified their caution--the
plumed head of a savage, with his neck craned over the edge of the
aperture, outlined conspicuously against the blue sky above.  And soon
half a dozen similar silhouettes beside it, while they could hear
distinctly the talk that was passing overhead.

Wilder had some knowledge of the Comanche tongue, and could make out
most of what was being said.  Amidst exclamations that spoke of
vengeance there were words in a calmer tone--discussion, inquiry, and
conjecture.

From these it could be understood that the pursuers had separated into
two parties, one following on the false track, by the path which the
guide had baited for them, the other coming direct up the right and true
one.

There were bitter exclamations of disappointment and threats of an
implacable vengeance; and the fugitives, as they listened, might have
reflected how fortunate they had been in discovering that unfathomed
hole.  But for it they would have already been in the clutches of a
cruel enemy.

However, they had little time for reflection.  The talk overhead at
first expressed doubts as to their having descended the shaft, but
doubts readily to be set at rest.

The eyes of the Indians having failed to inform them, their heads were
withdrawn; and soon after a stone came tumbling down the cavity.

Something of this kind, Wilder had predicted; for he flattened himself
against the wall behind, and stood as "small" as his colossal frame
would permit, having cautioned his companion to do the same.

The stone passed without striking them, and went crashing on till it
struck on the bottom below.

Another followed, and another; the third creasing Hamersley on the
breast, and tearing a couple of buttons from his coat.

This was shaving close--too close to be comfortable.  Perhaps the next
boulder might rebound from the wall above and strike one or both of them
dead.

In fear of this result, they commenced groping to ascertain if the ledge
offered any better screen from the dangerous shower, which promised to
fall for some time longer.

Good!  Hamersley felt his hand entering a hole that opened horizontally.
It proved big enough to admit his body, as also the larger frame of his
companion.  Both were soon inside it.  It was a sort of grotto they had
discovered; and, crouching within it, they could laugh to scorn the
storm that still came pouring from above; the stones, as they passed
close to their faces, hissing and hurtling like aerolites.

The rocky rain at length ended.  The Indians had evidently come to the
conclusion that it was either barren in result, or must have effectually
performed the purpose intended by it, and for a short time there was
silence above and below.

They who were hidden in the shaft might have supposed that their
persecutors, satisfied at what they had accomplished, were returning to
the plain, and had retired from the spot.

Hamersley did think so; but Walt, an old prairie man, more skilled in
the Indian character, could not console himself with such a fancy.

"Ne'er a bit o' it," he whisperingly said to his companion.  "They ain't
agoin' to leave us that easy--not if Horned Lizard be amongst 'em.
They'll either stay thar till we climb out agin, or try to smoke us.  Ye
may take my word for it, Frank, thar's some'ut to come yet.  Look up!
Didn't I tell ye so?"

Wilder drew back out of the narrow aperture, through which he had been
craning his neck and shoulders in order to get a view of what was
passing above.

The hole leading into the grotto that held them was barely large enough
to admit the body of a man.  Hamersley took his place, and, turning his
eyes upward, at once saw what his comrade referred to.  It was the smoke
of a fire, that appeared in the act of being kindled near the edge of
the aperture above.  The smoke was ascending towards the sky, diagonally
drifting across the blue disc outlined by the rim of rock.

He had barely time to make the observation when a swishing sound
admonished him to draw back his head; then there passed before his face
a ruck of falling stalks and faggots.  Some of them settled upon the
ledge, the rest sweeping on to the bottom of the abyss.

In a moment after the shaft was filled with smoke, but not that of an
ordinary wood fire.  Even this would have been sufficient to stifle them
where they were; but the fumes now entering their nostrils were of a
kind to cause suffocation almost instantaneously.

The faggots set on fire were the stalks of the creosote plant--the
_ideodondo_ of the Mexican table lands, well known for its power to
cause asphyxia.  Walt Wilder recognised it at the first whiff.

"It's the stink-weed!" he exclaimed.  "That darned stink-weed o' New
Mexico!  It'll kill us if we can't keep it out.  Off wi' your coat,
Frank; it are bigger than my hunting skirt.  Let's spread it across the
hole, an' see if that'll do."

His companion obeyed with alacrity, stripping off his coat as quickly as
the circumscribed space would permit.  Fortunately, it was a garment of
the sack specialty, without any split in the tail, and when extended
offered a good breadth of surface.

It proved sufficient for the purpose, and, before the little grotto had
become so filled with smoke as to be absolutely untenable, its entrance
was closed by a curtain of broadcloth, held so hermetically over the
aperture that even the fumes of Assafoetida could not possibly have
found their way inside.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

BURIED ALIVE.

For nearly half an hour they kept the coat spread, holding it close
around the edges of the aperture with their heads, hands, knees, and
elbows.  Withal some of the bitter smoke found ingress, torturing their
eyes, and half stifling them.

They bore it with philosophic fortitude and in profound silence, using
their utmost efforts to refrain from sneezing or coughing.

They knew that the least noise heard by the Indians above--anything to
indicate their presence in the shaft--would ensure their destruction.
The fumigation would be continued till the savages were certain of its
having had a fatal effect.  If they could hold out long enough, even
Indian astuteness might be baffled.

From what Wilder had heard, their persecutors were in doubt about their
having descended into the shaft; and this uncertainty promised to be
their salvation.  Unless sure that they were taking all this trouble to
some purpose, the red men would not dally long over their work.
Besides, there was the rich booty to be drawn from the captured waggons,
which would attract the Indians back to them, each having an interest in
being present at the distribution.

Thus reasoned Walt Wilder as they listened to detect a change in the
performance, making use of all their ears.

Of course they could see nothing, no more than if they had been immured
in the darkest cell of an Inquisitorial dungeon.  Only by their ears
might they make any guess at what was going on.  These admonished them
that more of the burning brush was being heaved into the hole.  Every
now and then they could hear it as it went swishing past the door of
their curtained chamber, the stalks and sticks rasping against the rocks
in their descent.

After a time these sounds ceased to be heard; the Indians no doubt
thinking that sufficient of the inflammatory matter had been cast in to
cause their complete destruction.  If inside the cavern, they must by
this time be stifled--asphyxiated--dead.

So must have reasoned the red-skinned fumigators; for after a while they
desisted from their hellish task.  But, as if to make assurance doubly
sure, before taking departure from the spot, they performed another act
indicative of an equally merciless intention.

During the short period of silence their victims could not tell what
they were about.  They only knew, by occasional sounds reaching them
from above, that there was some change in the performance; but what it
was they could not even shape a conjecture.

The interregnum at length ended with a loud rumbling noise, that was
itself suddenly terminated by a grand crash, as if a portion of the
impending cliff had become detached, and fallen down upon the platform.

Then succeeded a silence, unbroken by the slightest sound.  No longer
was heard either noise or voice--not the murmur of one.

It was a silence that resembled death; as if the vindictive savages had
one and all met a deserved doom by being crushed under the falling
cliff.

For some time after hearing this mysterious noise, which had caused the
rock to tremble around them, the two men remained motionless within
their place of concealment.

At length Wilder cautiously and deliberately pushed aside the curtain.
At first only a small portion of it--a corner, so as to make sure about
the smoke.

It still oozed in, but not so voluminously as at first.  It had
evidently become attenuated, and was growing thinner.  It appeared also
to be ascending with rapidity, as up the funnel of a chimney having a
good draught.  For this reason it was carried past the mouth of the
grotto without much of it drifting in, and they saw that they could soon
safely withdraw the curtain.  It was a welcome relaxation from the
irksome task that had been so long imposed upon them, and the coat was
at length permitted to drop down upon the ledge.

Although there were no longer any sounds heard, or other signs to
indicate the presence of the Indians, the fugitives did not feel sure of
their having gone; and it was some time before they made any attempt to
reascend the shaft.  Some of the pursuers might still be lurking near,
or straying within sight.  They had so far escaped death, as if by a
miracle, and they were cautious of again tempting fate.  They determined
that for some time yet they would not venture out upon the ledge, but
keep inside the grotto that had given them such well-timed shelter.
Some sulky savage, disappointed at not getting their scalps, might take
it into his head to return and hurl down into the hole another shower of
stones.  Such a whim was probable to a prairie Indian.

Cautious against all like contingencies, the guide counselled his
younger companion to patience, and for a considerable time they remained
without stirring out of their obscure chamber.

At length, however, perceiving that the tranquillity continued, they no
longer deemed it rash to make a reconnoissance; and for this purpose
Walt Wilder crawled out upon the ledge and looked upward.  A feeling of
surprise, mingled with apprehension, at once seized upon him.

"Kin it be night?" he asked, whispering the words back into the grotto.

"Not yet, I should think?" answered Hamersley.  "The fight was begun
before daybreak.  The day can't all have passed yet.  But why do you
ask, Walt?"

"Because thar's no light comin' from above.  Whar's the bit o' blue sky
we seed?  Thar ain't the breadth o' a hand visible.  It can't a be the
smoke as hides it.  That seems most cleared off.  Darned if I can see a
steim o' the sky.  'Bove as below, everything's as black as the ten o'
spades.  What kin it mean?"

Without waiting a reply, or staying for his companion to come out upon
the ledge, Wilder rose to his feet, and, grasping the projecting points
above his head, commenced swarming up the shaft, in a similar manner as
that by which he had made the descent.

Hamersley, who by this time had crept out of the grotto, stood upon the
ledge listening.

He could hear his comrade as he scrambled up; the rasping of his feet
against the rocks, and his stentorian breathing.

At length Walt appeared to have reached the top, when Hamersley heard
words that sent a thrill of horror throughout his whole frame.

"Oh!" cried the guide, in his surprise, forgetting to subdue the tone of
his voice, "they've built us up!  Thar's a stone over the mouth o' the
hole--shettin' it like a pot lid.  A stone--a rock that no mortal ked
move.  Frank Hamersley, it's all over wi' us; we're buried alive!"



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

A SAVAGE SATURNAL.

Only for a short while had Wilder's trick held the pursuers in check.
Habituated to such wiles, the Indians, at first suspecting it to be one,
soon became certain.  For, as they scattered to each side of the cleft,
the steel tube no longer kept turning towards them, while the coonskin
cap remained equally without motion.

At length, becoming convinced, and urged on by the Red Cross chief and
the bearded savage by his side, they dashed boldly up, and, dismounting,
entered the chine over the body of the butchered horse.

Only staying to take possession of the relinquished rifle, they
continued on up the ravine fast as their feet could carry them.  A
moment's pause where the red kerchief lay on the rock, suspecting this
also a ruse to mislead them as to the track taken by the fugitives.  To
make certain, they separated into two parties--one going up the gulch,
that led left, the other proceeding by that which conducted to the place
where the two men had concealed themselves.

Arriving upon the little platform, the pursuers at once discovered the
cavity, at the same time conjecturing that the pursued had gone into it.
Becoming sure of this, they who took the left-hand path rejoined them,
these bringing the report that they had ascended to the summit of the
cliff, and seen nothing of the two men who were chased.

Then the stones were cast in; after them the burning stalks of the
_ideodondo_; when, finally, to make destruction sure, the rock was
rolled over, closing up the shaft as securely as if the cliff itself had
fallen face downward upon the spot.

The savages stayed no longer there.  All were too eager to return to the
waggons to make sure of their share in the captured spoils.

One alone remained--he with the bushed beard.  After the others were
gone he stepped up to the boulder, and, stooping down, placed his ear
close to it.  He appeared as if trying to catch some sound that might
come from the cavity underneath.

None came--no noise, even the slightest.  Within the shut shaft all was
still as death.  For death itself must be down there, if there ever was
life.

For some time he crouched beside the rock, listening.  Then rising to
his feet, with a smile of satisfaction upon his grim, sinister features,
he said, in soliloquy,--

"They're down there, no doubt of it; and dead long before this.  One of
the two must have been he.  Who the other matters not _Carrai_!  I'd
like to have had a look at him too, and let him see who has given him
his quietus.  Bah! what does it signify?  It's all over now, and I've
had my revenge.  _Vamos_!  I must get back to the waggons, or my friend
the Horned Lizard may be taking his pick of the plunder.  Luckily these
redskins don't know the different values of the goods; so I shall bestow
the cotton prints with a liberal hand, keeping the better sorts to
myself.  And now to assist in the partition of spoils."

So saying, he strode away from the rock, and, gliding back down the
