presented it to the invalid, who ate it with relish.  Then the man began
to relate how he had been attacked a few days before by a party of
robbers in one of the mountain passes, who had cut the throats of all
his party in cold blood, and had almost killed himself, when he was
rescued by the opportune arrival of some travellers.

Lawrence was much disgusted at first by the man's falsehood.  Observing
the poor fellow's extreme weakness, however, and his evident anxiety
lest he should be recognised, the feeling changed to pity.  Laying his
hand gently on the man's shoulder, he said, with a look of solemnity
which perchance made, up to some extent for the baldness of the
phraseology--

"Antonio, tell not lies; you are dying!"

The startled man looked at his visitor earnestly.  "Am I dying?" he
asked, in a low tone.

"You are, perhaps; I know not.  I will save you if possible."

These words were accompanied by a kind look and a comforting pat on the
shoulder, which, it may be, did more for the sick man than the best of
physic.  At all events the result was a sudden grasp of the hand and a
look of gratitude which spoke volumes.  The robber was about to give
vent to his feelings in speech when the door opened, and the burly host,
putting his head in, announced that supper was ready.

Giving his patient another reassuring pat, the young doctor left him and
returned to the banqueting-hall of the mountain farm, where he found
that Manuela, Pedro, and Quashy were more or less earnestly engaged with
the contents of the iron pot.



CHAPTER FIVE.

LAWRENCE AND QUASHY BECOME "FLOSUFFICAL," AND THEY CAMP OUT BESIDE THE
"GIANT'S CASTLE."

While the party were at supper the first gusts of a storm, which had for
some time been brewing, shook the little hut, and before they had all
fallen into the profound slumber which usually followed their day's
journey, a heavy gale was howling among the mountain gorges with a noise
like the roaring of a thousand lions.  For two days the gale raged so
furiously that travelling--especially in the higher regions of the
Andes--became impossible.  The Indian girl, Pedro, and the negro, bore
their detention with that stoicism which is not an infrequent
characteristic of mountaineers, guides, and savages.  As for our hero,
he devoted himself and all his skill to his patient--to which duty he
was the more reconciled that it afforded him a good opportunity at once
for improving his Spanish and pointing out to the bandit the error of
his ways.

To do the man justice, he seemed to be fully sensible of the young
doctor's kindness, and thanked him, with tears in his eyes, not only for
his previous intention to save him from the tremendous fall over the
cliff, but for his subsequent efforts to alleviate the evil consequences
thereof.

It mattered nothing to the great warm-hearted, loose-jointed Englishman
that when he mentioned these hopeful signs in his patient to Pedro, that
worthy shook his head and smiled sarcastically, or that Quashy received
the same information with a closing of the eyes and an expansion of the
jaws which revealed the red recesses of his throat to their darkest
deeps!  Lawrence, being a man of strong opinions, was not to be shaken
out of them either by sarcasm or good-humoured contempt.

Turning to the Indian girl for sympathy, he related the matter to her at
a time when the other inhabitants of the hut had gone out and left them
alone.

"You see,--Manuela," he said, with the frown of meditation on his brow,
and his eyes fixed on the ceiling, "I have no belief in the very common
idea that there is a soft spot in the heart of every man, however bad;
but I do believe that the heart of the very worst of men may be made
soft by the Spirit of God, and that He employs us, who call ourselves
Christians, as His agents in bringing about the result.  It is quite
possible that I may have been thrown in the way of this robber for the
very purpose of touching his heart through kindness--God's own
motive-power--and that the Spirit will soften his heart to receive the
touch."

He paused, and, withdrawing his gaze from the ceiling, observed that the
girl's eyes were fixed on his face with an expression of perplexity and
earnestness.

It then suddenly occurred to him that, having spoken in English, she
could not have understood him.

"But you _do_ look as if you had some idea of what I have been saying,
Manuela.  Have you?"

"Si, senhor, some," was the reply, as she dropped her eyes with an
embarrassed look and blushed so as to make her pretty brown face look
alarmingly red.

Endeavouring to convey the same ideas through the medium of Spanish,
Lawrence made such a bungle of it that Manuela, instead of expressing
sympathy, began to struggle so obviously with her feelings that the poor
Englishman gave up the attempt, and good-naturedly joined his companion
in a little burst of laughter.  They were in the midst of this when the
door opened and Quashy entered.

"You 'pears to be jolly," observed the genial negro, with every wrinkle
of his black visage ready to join in sympathetically, "was de jok a
desprit good un?"

"Not very desperate, Quashy," said Lawrence, "it was only my bad Spanish
which made Manuela laugh.  If you had been here to interpret we might
have got on better with our philosophical discourse."

"O massa!" returned the black--solemn remonstrance, both in manner and
tone, putting to sudden flight the beaming look of sympathy--"don't
speak of me 'terpretin' Spinich.  Nebber could take kindly to dat stuff.
Ob course I kin talk wid de peons an' de gauchos, whose conv'sation am
mostly 'bout grub, an' hosses, an' cattle, an' dollars, an' murder, but
when I tries to go in for flosuffy, an' sitch like, I breaks down
altogidder."

At this point the Indian girl's tendency to laugh increased, but whether
because of fresh views of the absurdity of what had passed, or because
of some faint perception of the negro's meaning, Lawrence had no power
to decide.

"I should have thought, Quashy," he said, with a return of his wonted
gravity, "that a man of a thoughtful and contemplative turn of mind like
you would have acquired the power of expressing almost any idea in
Spanish by this time."

"T'ank you for de compl'ment, massa," replied Quashy, "but I not so
clebber as you t'ink.  Der am some tings in flosuffy dat beats me.  When
I tries to putt 'em afore oder peepil in Spinich, I somehow gits de
brain-pan into sitch a conglomeration ob fumbustication dat I not able
to see quite clar what I mean myself--dough, ob course, I knows dat I'm
right."

"Indeed!"

"Yis; but de great consolation I has is dat de peepil I'm talkin' to
don't onderstand me a mossel better nor myself; an', ob course, as
noting in de wurl could show dem dey was wrong, it don't much matter."

"That is good philosophy, at all events.  Isn't it, Manuela?" asked
Lawrence in Spanish.

"Si, senhor," replied the girl, with sparkling eyes and a dazzling
display of little teeth which seemed to indicate that she fully
appreciated what was said.

"Strange," thought Lawrence--"so grave and pensive, yet at times so
sprightly; so intelligent, yet, of course, so ignorant; so very brown,
and yet so pretty.  What a pity she is not white!"

He only said, however, with a sigh, "Is the gale abating, Quashy?"

To which the negro replied, with a responsive sigh, "Yis, massa,--it
am."

After two days' delay our travellers were enabled to proceed.  While
their host was busy saddling the mules Lawrence took Pedro aside.

"I am anxious about that bandit," he said.  "It is not his power of
recovering I am afraid of, but our host's willingness to take care of
him."

"Have you not spoken to him about it, senhor, and paid him in advance,
like the good Samaritan?"

"Truly I have, but that does not secure fidelity in our host, and the
man's life may depend on his treatment during the next few days.  I
almost wish that we might delay our journey a little."

"That cannot be," returned Pedro, with decision.  "Besides, it is
unnecessary, for I have spoken to our host, and told him to take good
care of the fellow."

Lawrence could scarcely forbear smiling at the quiet assurance with
which Pedro spoke.

"Surely," he said, "you cannot count on his being influenced by your
commands after you are gone?"

"Yes, senhor, I can count on that, for he knows me, and I occasionally
pass this way."

Pedro turned away as he spoke and went towards the mules, the fastenings
of whose loads he carefully inspected.  Lawrence went to look after his
own animal with his mind much relieved, for the manner of Pedro was such
as to inspire irresistible, almost blind, confidence.

During the first mile or two, as they rode along, our hero puzzled
himself in a vain attempt to analyse the cause of this confidence.  Was
it the result of that imperturbable self-possession and invariable
readiness of resource which marked the guide; or was it the stern
truthfulness of his dark eyes, coupled with the retiring modesty and
gravity of his demeanour?  Perhaps it was the union of these
characteristics.  He could not tell.

While thus engaged in profound thought he was roused by Manuela riding
alongside of him, and pointing upwards with animated looks while she
exclaimed--

"See--look--senhor!"

Much surprised, for this was the first time during the journey that the
girl had ventured to attract his attention, the youth looked in the
direction indicated, and certainly the view that met his eyes was
calculated to banish not only the surprise, but all other feelings save
those of admiration of Nature and reverence for Nature's God.

They had just rounded one of those rocky bluffs which so frequently
interrupted their view during their upward journey, and had come upon a
scene which they could not find words adequately to describe.  As
interjectional phrases alone could indicate something of their emotions
to each other, so fragmentary sentences alone will convey a faint
semblance of the truth to the intelligence of the reader.

Mountains, glens, and mighty cliffs; hideous precipices and yawning
gulfs; snow-clad summits high above them, and rock-riven gorges far
below.  Distance upon distance ranging backward and upward to infinity,
where all was mingled with cloudland; sunlit here, darkest shadowed
there--wildness, weirdness, grandeur, and magnificence everywhere!

In the immediate foreground the serpentine path wound upward among
rugged rocks, and the riders, picking their steps, as it were, midway up
the face of a stupendous precipice, looked upward on the left at an
apparently summitless wall, and downward on the right into an almost
bottomless valley, through which a river roared as if mad with joy at
having escaped its glacier-prison; though its roaring was softened
well-nigh to silence by distance, while in appearance it seemed little
larger than a silver thread.

"I could almost believe that to be a giant's castle," remarked Lawrence,
pointing to the opposite side of the ravine, where a huge perpendicular
mountain of porphyry was so broken into turrets, towers, and
battlements, that it was difficult, except for its size, to believe it
other than the work of man.  There were even holes and formations about
it that had the appearance of antique windows, gates, and drawbridges!

"Yes, it is a strange place," said the guide, checking his mule;
"moreover, we must spend the night under its shadow, for it is
impossible to reach a better place of shelter to-night; and, by good
fortune, yonder is something fresh for supper."

Pedro pointed to a spot about seven or eight hundred yards distant,
where a group of guanacos stood gazing at the intruders with profound
attention.

"How will you get near enough for a shot?" asked Lawrence; "they will be
gone before you can get across the ravine, and there is little or no
cover."

"You shall see," said Pedro, cocking his rifle.

"But--but no weapon short of a cannon will carry so far--at least with
accuracy," exclaimed Lawrence in surprise, for at the time of which we
write breech-loaders and the long-range weapons of precision had not
been introduced in those regions.  Indeed, the armies of South America,
and of Europe also, still slew each other with the familiar Brown Bess
and the clumsy flint-lock at that time.

Pedro paid no attention to the remark, but, dismounting, slowly raised
the rifle to his shoulder.  The guide was one of those men who seem to
live in advance of their age.  He had thought out, and carried out in a
rough-and-ready manner, ideas which have since been scientifically
reduced to practice.  Being well aware that any projectile is drawn
downward in its flight by the law of gravitation, and that if you want
to hit a distant point you must aim considerably above it, he had, by
careful experiment, found out how high above an object at a given
distance one must aim in order to hit, and, by constant practice in
judging distance, as well as in taking aim above his mark, he had
attained to such skill as a long-range marksman that his friends almost
believed it impossible for game to get beyond the range of his deadly
weapon, and foes never felt easy till they were entirely out of his
sight.  The comparative slowness, too, of the flint-lock in discharging
a rifle, had necessitated in him a degree of steadiness, not only while
taking aim, but even after pulling the trigger, which rendered him what
we might term statuesque in his action as he levelled his piece.

For a few seconds the rock beside him was not more steady.  Then the
cliffs burst into a fusillade of echoes, and the guanacos leaped wildly
up the mountain-side, leaving one of their number on the rocks behind
them.

It was some time before the young Englishman could get over his
astonishment at this feat, for Pedro had pointed his weapon so high that
he did not appear to be aiming at the animal at all, and he maintained
an animated discussion with the mountaineer until they reached a part of
the pass which proved to be somewhat dangerous.

And here they met with a party of muleteers crossing the mountains in
the opposite direction.  They were still far above them when first
observed descending the same steep and narrow road.

"We will wait here till they pass," said the guide, pulling up at a
point where the width of the track was considerable.  "I see by the
escort that they carry something of value--probably bars of silver from
one of the mines.  They have reached the worst part of the pass.  I
shouldn't wonder to see one of the mules go over--they often do."

"And always get killed, I suppose," said Lawrence.

"Not always.  Now and then they have wonderful escapes, but many
hundreds have been lost here.  See!"

As he spoke one of the baggage-mules of the party touched the cliff with
its load.  This caused the animal to stagger; his hind-legs actually
went over the precipice, and the loose stones began to roll away from
under his hoofs.  With his fore-feet, however, still on the narrow
track, he held on bravely, even sticking his nose on the ground, so that
he had the appearance of holding on by his teeth!  Two of the peons
rushed to render assistance, but before they reached him he had slipped,
and rolled down the awful slope which ended in a sheer perpendicular
precipice.  Here he bounded off into space, and next moment fell,
baggage and all, with a tremendous splash into the river.

It seemed impossible that the poor animal could have escaped with life,
but in another moment his head reappeared above water, and he made a
brave struggle to gain the bank.  The current, however, was too strong
for him.  Down he went below the foaming water, his scraggy tail making
a farewell flourish as he disappeared.  But again his head appeared, and
once again he struggled for the bank.  This time with success, for he
had been swept into a shallow in which he was able to maintain his
foothold and slowly drag himself out of the river.  When in safety, he
stood with drooping head and tail, as if in a state of the most thorough
dejection at having made such an exhibition of himself.

"Clebber beast!" shouted Quashy, who had stood with his ten fingers
expanded, his great mouth open, and his whole emotional soul glaring out
of his monstrous eyes.

"Well done!" echoed Lawrence, who was scarcely less pleased than his
servant.

The party now drew near, and very striking was their appearance--the
variously coloured mules, following the bell-mare which went in advance
as a leader, winding slowly down the crooked path, and the peons in
their picturesque costumes shouting, laughing, or singing wild snatches
of song as they were moved by fury, fun, or fancy.

The men, who numbered a dozen or so, and were well-armed, were
apparently relieved to find that our travellers were not bandits, in
regard to whom their questions showed that they felt some anxiety.  They
had witnessed Pedro's shot from the heights above, and looked upon him
with no little surprise and much respect as they commented on his power
with the rifle.

A few questions were asked, a few compliments paid, and then the two
parties, passing each other, proceeded on their respective ways.

Crossing the mountain torrent at a rather dangerous ford, towards
evening Pedro led his companions to a spot not far from the ramparts of
what Lawrence styled the giant's castle.

It was not an inviting spot at first.  There was little pasture for the
wearied mules on the almost naked rocks, and the stunted trees and
gnarled roots told eloquently of the severity of winter in those high
regions.  There was, however, a good spring of water and an over-arching
rock, which promised some degree of refreshment and shelter, and when
firewood was collected, a ruddy blaze sent up, the kettle put on to
boil, and several fine cuts of the guanaco set up to roast, the feelings
of sadness which had at first influenced Lawrence were put to flight,
and he felt more satisfaction in his lodging than he could have
experienced if it had been a palatial hotel with its confined air and
feather beds and cloying luxuries.

There was a species of natural recess in the cliff which Pedro screened
off as a chamber for Manuela, while she assisted Quashy to prepare the
supper.

"There's nothing like fresh mountain air," exclaimed Lawrence, with a
glow of enthusiasm, after the first attack on the guanaco steaks had
subsided.
