thirty--although she must have been four or five years older--greeted
her husband affectionately.

"My dear," he said, "in the exuberance of your feelings, you forget
that I have brought you home a visitor. This is Mr. Robert Repton.
While he is resident in the house, he may be greeted as Bob. We had
a race, and he runs faster than Jack; fifty yards, in four hundred
and twenty, is the utmost I can give him."

"What nonsense you do talk, Will!" his wife said, laughing. "I am
sure Master Repton must think you out of your mind."

"It is a very jolly way of being out of his mind, Mrs. Medlin. You
don't know how pleased I am."

"He thought I was an ogre, my dear, and that you were an ogress.

"Now let the banquet be served; for I am hungry, and I expect Bob
is, too. As for the children, they are always hungry--at least, it
seems so."

It was a merry meal, and Bob thought he had never enjoyed one as
much, except at his sister's. After tea they had music; and he
found that Mr. Medlin performed admirably on the violin, his wife
played the spinet, Jack the clarionet, and Sophy--the eldest
girl--the piccolo.

"She is going to learn the harp, presently," Mr. Medlin explained;
"but for the present, when we have no visitors--and I don't count
you one, after this evening--she plays the piccolo. She is a little
shy about it, but shyness is the failing of my family."

"It is very jolly," Bob said. "I wish I could play an instrument."

"We will see about it, in time, Bob. We want a French horn; but I
don't see, at present, where you are to practise."

"Has uncle ever been here?" Bob asked, late in the evening.

"Yes, he came here the evening we got back from our fishing
expedition. He wanted to see the place, before he finally settled
about you coming here. My wife was a little afraid of him; but
there was no occasion, and everything went off capitally--except
that Sophy would not produce her piccolo. I walked back with him,
till he came upon a hackney coach.

"He said as he got in, 'I have spent a most pleasant evening,
Medlin. You are a very lucky fellow.'

"I went back to work the next morning, and we both dropt into the
old groove; and nothing more was said until yesterday, when he
informed me that you would come, today."

"Oh, dear!" Bob said, as he started with the clerk, at eight
o'clock on the following morning. "Now I am going to begin at that
wretched counting house."

"No, you are not, Bob. You are not coming in there, at present.
When your uncle and I were talking--when we were fishing, you
know--he said that he saw no use in your going in there, at
present; and thought it would be quite time for you to learn how
the books are kept, in another three or four years; and that, till
then, you could go into the cellar. You will learn bottling, and
packing, and blending, and something about the quality and value of
wines. You will find it much more pleasant than being shut up in a
counting house, making out bills and keeping ledgers."

"A great deal," Bob said, joyfully. "I sha'n't mind that at all."

Bob observed a noticeable change in his companion's demeanour, when
he arrived at the tree and, on passing the last garden, his face
assumed a stolid expression; his brisk, springy walk settled down
into a business pace; his words became few; and he was again a
steady, and mechanical, clerk.

A fortnight later, Bob was summoned to the counting house.

"Mr. Bale wishes to see you," Mr. Medlin said.

Bob entered, wondering what he was wanted for.

"I received a subpoena, a week ago, Robert, for you to attend as a
witness at Kingston tomorrow. These interruptions to business are
very annoying. I did not mention it to you before for, if I had
done so, you would be thinking of nothing else.

"This morning I have received a letter from Admiral Langton,
requesting me to allow you to go down by the stage, this afternoon,
and to sleep at his house. He will take you over, in the morning;
and you will sleep there again, tomorrow night, and come back by
the early stage.

"I trust that you will endeavour to curb your exuberance of
spirits. This is a very grave matter, and anything like levity
would be altogether out of place.

"The letter says that the stage leaves the Bell Tavern at four
o'clock."

Bob replied, gravely, that he would be there in time; and went off
to his work again, until twelve o'clock.

When he arrived at the admiral's, at a quarter to six, a lad in
midshipman's uniform came rushing out into the hall.

"Hulloa, Bob!"

"Why, Jim!--but no, I suppose I ought to say Mr. James Sankey, to
an officer of your importance. How comes it, sir, that you are so
soon attired in His Majesty's uniform?"

"I will punch your head, Bob, if you go on with that nonsense.

"But I say, isn't it jolly? The very afternoon after you left came
down a big letter, with a tremendous seal; and therein I was
informed that I was appointed to His Majesty's ship Brilliant, and
was ordered to join immediately. Of course, I did not know what to
do, so I came up here; and who do you think I found here? Captain
Langton, the admiral's son, who is in command of the Brilliant.

"Of course, it was he who had got me the appointment. He was very
kind, and told me that I could not join until after this trial; so
that I could go down home, and stop there, till today; and the
admiral sent me straight off, to be measured for my uniform. When I
started, next day, he gave me a letter to my father--an awfully
nice letter it was, saying that he intended to present me with my
first outfit. I got here about an hour ago, and have been putting
on my uniform, to see how it fitted."

"You mean to see how you looked in it, Jim? It looks first rate. I
wish I was in one too, and was going with you, instead of sticking
in Philpot Lane."

"I am awfully sorry for you, Bob. It must be beastly."

"Well, it is not so bad as I expected, Jim, and uncle is turning
out much better; and I don't live there, but with the head clerk,
out at Hackney. He is an awfully jolly sort of fellow--you never
saw such a rum chap. I will tell you all about it, afterwards.

"I suppose I ought to go in, and see the admiral."

"He is out, at present, Bob. He will be back at eight o'clock to
supper, so you can come up and tell me all about it. Captain
Langton is here, too."

Captain Langton spoke very kindly to Bob, when the two boys came
down to supper; and told him that if, at any time, he changed his
mind, and there was a vacancy for a midshipman on board his ship,
he would give him the berth.

"I should be very glad to have you with me," he said, "after the
service you rendered my father and sister."

On the following morning, Fullarton and Wharton came up from the
school, and two carriages conveyed the witnesses over to Kingston.
The prisoners, Bob heard, were notorious and desperate criminals,
whom the authorities had long been anxious to lay hands on. The
butler was one of the gang, and had obtained his post by means of a
forged character. The trial only occupied two hours for, taken in
the act as the men were, there was no defence whatever. All four
were sentenced to be hung, and the judge warmly complimented the
four boys upon their conduct in the matter.

The next morning, Bob returned to his work in the city.

For the next three months, his existence was a regular one. On
arriving in the cellar, he took off his jacket and put on a large
apron, that completely covered him; and from that time until five
o'clock he worked with the other boys: bottling, packing, storing
the bottles away in the bins, or taking them down as required. He
learned, from the foreman, something of the localities from which
the wine came, their value and prices; but had not begun to
distinguish them by taste, or bouquet. Mr. Bale, the foreman said,
had given strict orders that he was not to begin tasting, at
present.

Three days before Christmas, one of the clerks brought him down
word that Mr. Bale wished to see him in the office, at five
o'clock.

During the three, months he had scarcely spoken to his uncle. The
latter had nodded to him, whenever he came into the cellar; and had
regularly said, "Well, Robert, how are you getting on?"

To which he had, as regularly, replied, "Very well, uncle."

He supposed that the present meeting was for the purpose of
inviting him to dine at Philpot Lane, on Christmas Day; and
although he knew that he should enjoy the festivity more, at
Hackney, he was prepared to accept it very willingly.

"I have sent for you, Robert," Mr. Bale said, when he entered his
office, "to say that your sister has written to ask me to go down
to spend Christmas with her, at Portsmouth. As her husband's
regiment is on the point of going abroad, I have decided on
accepting her invitation and, for the same reason, I shall take you
down with me. You will therefore have your box packed, tonight. I
shall send down a cart to fetch it, tomorrow. You will sleep here
tomorrow night, and we start the next morning."

"Thank you very much, uncle," Bob said, in delight; and then,
seeing that nothing further was expected of him, he ran off to join
Mr. Medlin, who was waiting for him outside.

"What do you think, Mr. Medlin? I am going down to spend Christmas
at my sister's."

"Ah!" the clerk said, in a dull unsympathetic voice. "Well, mind
how you walk, Mr. Robert. It does not look well, coming out from a
place of business as if you were rushing out of school."

Bob knew well enough that it was no use, whatever, trying to get
his companion to take any interest in matters unconnected with
business, at present; so he dropped into his regular pace, and did
not open his lips again, until they had passed the usual boundary.

Then Mr. Medlin said, briskly, "So you are going down to your
sister's, Bob!"

"Yes, that will be first rate, won't it? Of course, I went down in
the summer to Canterbury, and hardly expected to go again this
year. As I have only been three months here, I did not even think
of going.

"It will be the last holiday I shall have, for some time. You know
Carrie said, when she wrote to me a month ago, that the regiment
expected to be ordered abroad soon; and uncle said it is on the
point of going, now.

"He is coming down with me."

His voice fell a little, at this part of the announcement.

"He is, eh? You think you will have to be on your best behaviour,
Bob?"

"Before you told me about him, Mr. Medlin, I should have thought it
would quite spoil the holiday. But I do not feel it so bad, now."

"He will be all right, Bob. You have never seen him outside the
city, yet. Still, I shouldn't be up to any tricks with him, you
know, if I were you--shouldn't put cobbler's wax on his pigtail, or
anything of that sort."

"As if I should think of such a thing, Mr. Medlin!"

"Well, I don't know, Bob. You have made Jack pretty nearly as wild
as you are, yourself. You are quite a scandal to the neighbourhood,
you two. You nearly frightened those two ladies next door into
fits, last week, by carrying in that snowman, and sticking it up in
their garden, when you knew they were out. I thought they were both
going to have fits, when they rushed in to tell me there was a
ghost in their garden."

"I believe you suggested it yourself, Mr. Medlin," Bob said,
indignantly. "Besides, it served them right, for coming in to
complain that we had thrown stones and broken their window, when we
had done nothing of the sort."

"It was rather lucky for you that they did so, Bob; for you see, we
were all so indignant, then, that they didn't venture to accuse you
of the snowman business--though I have no doubt they were
convinced, in their own minds, that it was you. But that is only
one out of twenty pranks that you and Jack have been up to."

"Jack and I and someone else, Mr Medlin. We carry them out, but I
think someone else always suggests them."

"Not suggest, Bob--far from it. If I happen to say that it would be
a most reprehensible thing if anyone were to do something, somehow
or other that is the very thing that Jack and you do. It was only
last week I said that it would be a very objectionable trick if
anyone was to tie paper bands round the neck of the clergyman's
black cat--who is always stealing our chickens--and to my surprise,
the next morning, when we started for business, there was quite a
crowd outside his house, watching the cat calmly sitting over the
porch, with white bands round its neck. Now, that is an example of
what I mean."

"Quite so, Mr. Medlin, that is just what I meant, too; and it was
much better than throwing stones at him. It is a savage beast,
though it does look so demure; and scratched Jack's hand and mine,
horribly, when we were tying on the bands."

At the tree the others met them, and they laughed and chatted all
the way back; the young ones expressing much regret, however, that
Bob was to be away at Christmas.

At the appointed time, Mr. Bale and Bob took their places on the
coach. The latter felt a little oppressed; for his uncle had, the
evening before, been putting him through a sort of examination as
to the value of wines; and had been exceedingly severe when Bob had
not acquitted himself to his satisfaction, but had mixed up Malaga
with Madeira, and had stated that a French wine was grown near
Cadiz.

"I expect I shall know them better when I get to taste them," Bob
had urged, in excuse. "When you don't know anything about the
wines, it is very difficult to take an interest in them. It is like
learning that a town in India is on the Ganges. You don't care
anything about the town, and you don't care anything about the
Ganges; and you are sure to mix it up, next time, with some other
town on some other river."

"If those are your ideas, Robert, I think you had better go to
bed," Mr. Bale had said, sternly; and Bob had gone to bed, and had
thought what a nuisance it was that his uncle was going down to
Portsmouth, just when he wanted to be jolly with Carrie and her
husband for the last time.

Little had been said at breakfast, and it was not until the coach
was rattling along the high road, and the last house had been left
behind him, that Bob's spirits began to rise. There had been a
thaw, a few days before, and the snow had disappeared; but it was
now freezing sharply again.

"The air is brisk. Do you feel it cold, Robert?" Mr. Bale said,
breaking silence for the first time.

"I feel cold about the toes, and about the ears and nose, uncle,"
Bob said, "but I am not very likely to feel cold, anywhere else."

His uncle looked down at the boy, who was wedged in between him and
a stout woman.

"Well, no," he agreed; "you are pretty closely packed. You had
better pull that muffler over your ears more. It was rather
different weather when you went down to Canterbury in the summer."

"That it was," Bob replied, heartily. "It was hot and dusty, just;
and there were a man and woman, sitting opposite, who kept on
drinking out of a bottle, every five minutes. She had a baby with
her, too, who screamed almost all the way. I consider I saved that
baby's life."

"How was that, Robert?"

"Well you see, uncle, they had finished their bottle by the time we
got to Sevenoaks; and we all got down for dinner there and, before
we sat down, the man went to the bar and got it filled up again. A
pint of gin, filled up with water--I heard him order it. He put it
in the pocket of his coat, and hung the coat up on a peg when he
sat down to dinner.

"I was not long over my dinner, and finished before they did; and I
took the bottle out, and ran out to the yard and emptied it, and
filled it up with water, and put it back in the pocket again,
without his noticing it.

"You should have seen what a rage he was in, when he took his first
sip from the bottle, after we had started. He thought the man at
the inn had played him a trick, and he stood up and shouted to the
coachman to turn back again; but of course he wasn't going to do
that, and every one laughed--except the woman. I think she had had
more than was good for her, already, and she cried for about an
hour.

"The next two places where we changed horses, we did it so quick
that the man hadn't time to get down. The third place he did and,
though the guard said we shouldn't stop a minute, he went into the
public house. The guard shouted, but he didn't come out, and off we
went without him. Then he came out running, and waving his arms,
but the coachman wouldn't stop. The woman got down, with the child,
at the next place we changed horses; and I suppose they went on
next day and, if they started sober, they did perhaps get to Dover
all right."

"That was a very nasty trick," the woman, who was sitting next to
Bob, said sharply.

Bob had noticed that she had already opened a basket on her lap,
and had partaken of liquid refreshment.

"But you see, I saved the baby, ma'am," Bob said, humbly. "The
woman was sitting at the end and, if she had taken her share of the
second bottle, the chances are she would have dropped the baby. It
was a question of saving life, you see."

Bob felt a sudden convulsion in his uncle's figure.

"It is all very well to talk in that way," the woman said, angrily.
"It was just a piece of impudence, and you ought to have been
flogged for it. I have no patience with such impudent doings. A
wasting of good liquor, too."

"I don't think, madam," Mr. Bale said, "it was as much wasted as it
would have been, had they swallowed it; for at least it did no
harm. I cannot see myself why, because people get outside a coach,
they should consider it necessary to turn themselves into hogs."

"I will trouble you to keep your insinuations to yourself," the
woman said, in great indignation. "You ought to be ashamed of
yourself, at your age, encouraging a boy in such ways. There is
them as can stand the cold, and there's them as can't; and a little
good liquor helps them, wonderful. I am sich, myself."

And she defiantly took out her bottle from her basket, and applied
it to her lips.

"I was not speaking personally, my good woman," Mr. Bale said.

"I would have you to know," the woman snapped, "that I ain't your
good woman. I wouldn't demean myself to the like. I will ask this
company if it is right as a unprotected female should be insulted,
on the outside of one of His Majesty's mails?"

The other passengers, who had been struggling with their laughter,
endeavoured to pacify her with the assurance that no insult had
been meant; and as Mr. Bale made no reply, she subsided into
silence, grumbling occasionally to herself.

"I am a-going down," she broke out, presently, "to meet my husband,
and I don't mind who knows it. He is a warrant officer, he is, on
board the Latona, as came in last week with two prizes. There ain't
nothing to be ashamed of, in that.

"And I will thank you, boy," she said, turning sharply upon Bob,
"not to be a-scrouging me so. I pay for my place, I do."

"I think you ought to pay for two places," Bob said. "I am sure you
have got twice as much room as I have. And if there is any
scrouging, it isn't me."

"Would you have any objection, sir," the woman said majestically,
to a man sitting on the other side of her, "to change places with
me? I ain't a-going to bear no longer with the insults of this boy,
and of the person as calls himself a man, a-sitting next to him."

The change was effected, to Bob's great satisfaction.

"You see, Robert, what you have brought down upon me," Mr. Bale
said. "This comes of your telling stories about bottles, when there
is a woman with one in her basket next to you."

"I really was not thinking of her when I spoke, uncle. But I am
glad, now, for I really could hardly breathe, before.

"Why, uncle, I had no idea you smoked!" he added, as Mr. Bale took
a cigar case from his pocket.

"I do not smoke, when I am in the city, Robert; but I see no harm
in a cigar--in fact I like one--at other times. I observed a long
pipe on the mantelpiece, at Mr. Medlin's; and indeed, I have seen
that gentleman smoke, when we have been out together, but I have
never observed him indulging in that habit, in the city."

"Oh, yes! He smokes at home," Bob said.

"I have great confidence in Mr. Medlin, Robert. You have been
comfortable with him, I hope?"

"Could not be more comfortable, sir."

"An excellent man of business, Robert, and most trustworthy. A
serious-minded man."

Bob was looking up, and saw a little twinkle in Mr. Bale's eye.

"You don't find it dull, I hope?"

"Not at all dull, sir. Mr. Medlin and his family are very musical."

"Musical, are they, Robert?" Mr. Bale said, in a tone of surprise.
"As far as I have seen in the counting house, I should not have
taken him to be musical."

"No, I don't think you would, uncle. Just the same way as one
wouldn't think it likely that you would smoke a cigar."

"Well, no, Robert. You see, one must not always go by appearances."

"No, sir; that is just what Mr. Medlin says," Bob replied, smiling.

"Oh, he says that, does he? I suppose he has been telling you that
