other things, he somehow thought of bread and butter.  He even fell into
a species of argument with himself as to whether it would not be
uncommonly pleasant in various supposable circumstances, to eat bread
without butter.  Then he found himself meditating on the delights of
butter and jam together, which somehow suggested the scriptural figure
of a land flowing with milk and honey.

"Oh!" he sighed at this point, "if the sea was only milk and honey--milk
even without honey!--what a glorious prospect!"

He looked at it as if he half thought it would be transformed under the
power of his intense wish.  Then he looked again at the floating fish
and shuddered.  Well might he shudder, for they were contemptible little
fish, most of them, with unnaturally large heads, and great staring
eyes, as if they had failed, even in death, to get rid of their surprise
at being caught.  With their mouths opened to the uttermost, they seemed
to wish to shout, but couldn't.

"I may as well take them out of the dirty water anyhow," he muttered,
suiting the action to the word, and spreading the fish on the thwart in
front of him.  Liking their appearance still less in that position, he
put them on the thwart behind him, and tried to forget them.
Impossible!  He might as well have tried to forget his own existence.
At last, after holding out as long as possible, the poor boy made up his
mind to eat a little.  Then he thought, "If I could only cook them; oh!
for only one small lump of live coal from the camp fire on--"

The thought was checked abruptly, for he suddenly remembered that he had
a burning-glass in his trousers pocket.  He might perhaps be able to
roast them with that--in a somewhat underdone fashion, no doubt--still,
any sort of cooking would be better than none!

It need scarcely be said that the attempt failed.  The only results were
a burnt spot or two and a faint odour that served to intensify his
hunger.  At last he bit a mouthful out of the back of one of the fish,
chewed it viciously, swallowed it in a hurry, and felt very sick.  The
ice was broken, however, and he got on better than he had expected.  But
when hunger was appeased, there came gradually upon him the far less
endurable condition of thirst.  He really felt as if he should choke,
and once or twice he dipped his baling-dish over the side, but
restrained himself on remembering the journal of the skeleton, wherein
it was recorded that one of the men had gone mad after drinking salt
water.

Towards the afternoon hope was revived in his breast by the appearance
of clouds indicating rain.  It came at last, in a soft gentle shower--
far too gentle, indeed, for it could not be collected.  What dropped
upon the wooden baling-dish seemed to sink into or evaporate off it.
The few drops that fell upon his patiently protruded tongue served only
to tantalise him.  But Watty was not prone to give way to despair; at
least, not to remain in that condition.  He took off his jacket, spread
it out so as to form a basin, and eagerly watched the result.  Alas! the
cloth was too soft.  It acted like a sponge, into which the rain-drops
disappeared.

When it became evident that the coat was a failure--refusing even to
part with a single drop when wrung,--Watty chanced to cast down his
eyes, and they naturally fell on his trousers.  They were stiff canvas
trousers, and very greasy from much service among the dishes.  Instantly
he had them off, and spread out as the coat had been.  Joy
inexpressible--they held water!  To convert the body of them into a lake
and the legs into two water-courses was not difficult for one whose
ingenuity was beyond the average.  But oh! the lake basin was slow to
gather the precious drops!  He caused the two legs to debouch into the
baling-dish, and watched eagerly for half an hour, at the end of which
period about a wineglassful was collected.  He sucked it in, to the last
drop, and waited for more.  It seemed as if the very sky sympathised
with the boy's distress, for soon afterwards the rain increased, then it
poured, and finally, Watty Wilkins was more than satisfied, he was
drenched.  Fortunately the downpour was short-lived.  It ceased
suddenly; the clouds broke up, and the evening sun came out in full
splendour, enabling him to partially dry his garments.

In the Southern Seas at that time, the weather was particularly warm, so
that our castaway felt no inconvenience from his ducking, and spent the
second night in comparative comfort, his dreams--if he had any--being
untroubled with visions of food or drink.  Once, indeed, he awoke, and,
looking up, recalled so vividly the fate of the man who had been cast
alone and dying on the Coral Island, that he became deeply depressed by
the thought of meeting a similar fate; but the text of the previous day
again recurred to him.  Clinging to it, he again fell asleep, and did
not wake till morning.

Looking over the side, he saw what sent a gush of hope and joy to his
heart.  A ship, under full sail, not half a mile off!  He rubbed his
eyes and looked again.  Was he dreaming?  Could it be?

He sprang up with a cry of delight and gave vent to a long, loud cheer,
as much to relieve his feelings as to attract attention.  It was almost
too good to be true, he thought.  Then a voice within whispered, "Did
you not ask for deliverance?" and the boy mentally responded, "Yes,
thank God, I did."

While he was thinking, his hands were busy refastening his jacket (which
he had taken down to sleep in) by a sleeve to its former place at the
end of an oar.  But there was no occasion to signal.  The vessel, a
barque, was running straight towards him before a light breeze under
full sail--as Baldwin Burr would have said, with "stuns'ls slow and
aloft."  Believing that he had been observed, he ceased waving his flag
of distress.

But soon a new idea sent a thrill through his heart.  No sign of
recognition was made to him as the ship drew near.  Evidently the
look-out was careless.

Leaping up, Watty seized the oar, waved his flag frantically, and yelled
out his alarm.  Still the ship bore majestically down on him, her huge
bow bulking larger and higher as she drew near.  Again Watty yelled,
loud and long, and waved his flag furiously.  The ship was close upon
him--seemed almost towering over him.  He saw a sailor appear lazily at
the bow with his hands in his pockets.  He saw the eyes of that seaman
suddenly display their whites, and his hands, with the ten fingers
extended, fly upwards.  He heard a tremendous "Starboard ha-a-a-rd!"
followed by a terrific "Starboard it is!"  Then there was a crashing of
rotten wood, a fearful rushing of water in his ears, a bursting desire
to breathe, and a dreadful thrusting downwards into a dark abyss.  Even
in that moment of extremity the text of the morning flashed through his
whirling brain--then all was still.

When Watty's mind resumed its office, its owner found himself in a
comfortable berth between warm blankets with a hot bottle at his feet,
and the taste of hot brandy-and-water in his mouth.  A man with a rough
hairy visage was gazing earnestly into his face.

"Wall, youngster, I guess," said the man, "that you'd pretty nigh
slipped your cable."

Watty felt thankful that he had not quite slipped his cable, and said
so.

"You went over me, I think," he added.

"Over you!  Yes, I just think we did.  You went down at the bows--I
see'd you myself--and came up at the starn.  The cap'n, he see'd you
come up, an' said you bounced out o' the water like the cork of a
soda-water bottle.  But here he comes himself.  He told me I wasn't to
speak much to you."

The captain, who was an American, with a sharp-featured and firm but
kindly countenance, entered the berth at the moment.

"Well, my boy, glad to see you revived.  You had a narrow escape.
Wouldn't have been so if it hadn't chanced that one of our worst men was
the look-out--or rather wasn't the look-out.  However, you're all right
now.  Your ship went down, I expect, not long since?"

"About three or four months ago," answered Watty.

"Come, boy, your mind hasn't got quite on the balance yet.  It ain't
possible that you could be as fat as a young pig after bein' three or
four months at sea in an open boat.  What was the name of your ship?"

"The _Lively Poll_."

"What! a Scotch ship?"

"Yes; part owned and commanded by Captain Samson."

"_I_ know him; met him once in Glasgow.  A big, rough-bearded, hearty
fellow--six foot two or thereabouts.  Didn't go down with his ship, did
he?" asked the captain with a look of anxiety.

"No," replied Watty with increasing interest in the American; "we
escaped on a raft to an island, off which I was blown, while alone in my
boat only two days ago."

"Only two days ago, boy!" echoed the captain, starting up; "d'you happen
to know the direction of that island?"

Watty did not know, of course, having had no compass in his boat; but he
fortunately remembered what Captain Samson had said when he had
ascertained the latitude and longitude of it.

"Mr Barnes," shouted the captain to the first mate, who stood on deck
near the open skylight, "how's her head?"

"Sou'-sou'-west, sir."

"Put her about and lay your course west and by north.  Now," said the
captain, turning again to Watty, with a look of satisfaction, "we'll
soon rescue Captain Samson and his crew.  I'm sorry I won't be able to
take you all back to England, because we are bound for San Francisco,
but a trip to California is preferable to life on a coral island.  Now,
boy, I've talked enough to you.  The steward will bring you some dinner.
If you feel disposed, you may get up after that.  Here are dry clothes
for you.  We ripped up your own to save time after hauling you out of
the sea."

It was not usual for the gentle Polly Samson to alarm the camp with a
shriek that would have done credit to a mad cockatoo, nevertheless, she
did commit this outrage on the feelings of her companions on the
afternoon of the day on which Watty was run down and rescued.

Her father and all the others were seated around the camp fire among the
bushes at the time.  Polly had left them, intending to pay a visit to
one of her beautiful water-gardens on the beach, and had just emerged
from the bushes and cast her eyes upon the sea, when she beheld the
sight that drew from her the shriek referred to.  She gave it forth in
an ascending scale.

"Oh!  Oh!!  Oh!!! father! come here! quick! quick! oh!"

Never since he was a boy had the captain jumped so sharply from a
sitting posture to his legs.  Every man followed suit like a
Jack-in-the-box.  There was a rush as if of a tempest through the
bushes, and next moment the whole party burst upon the scene, to find
Polly--not as they had feared in some deadly peril, but--with flashing
eyes and glowing cheeks waving her arms like a windmill, and shrieking
with joy at a ship which was making straight for the island under full
sail.

The captain greeted the sight with a bass roar, Philosopher Jack with a
stentorian shout.  Ben Trench did his best to follow Jack's example.
Simon O'Rook uttered an Irish howl, threw his cap into the air, and
forthwith began an impromptu hornpipe, in which he was joined by Bob
Corkey.  Baldwin Burr and his comrades vented their feelings in
prolonged British cheers, and Mr Luke, uttering a squeak like a wounded
rabbit, went about wanting to embrace everybody, but nobody would let
him.  In short every one went more or less mad with joy at this sudden
realisation of "hope long deferred."  Only then did they become fully
aware of the depth of anxiety which had oppressed them at the thought of
being left, perhaps for years, it might be to the end of their days, on
that unknown island.

As the vessel approached, it became apparent that there was some one on
board whose temporary insanity was as demonstrative as their own, so
wild were his gesticulations.

"It's too fur off," said Baldwin, "to make out the crittur's phisog; but
if it warn't for his size, I'd say he was a monkey."

"P'r'aps it's an ourang-outang," suggested Corkey.

"Or a gorilla," said O'Rook.

"Oh!" exclaimed Polly, in a low, eager voice of surprise, "I do believe
it is Watty Wilkins!"

"Polly is right," said Philosopher Jack; "I'd know Watty's action among
a thousand."

As he spoke, the vessel rounded-to outside the reef, backed her
top-sails, and lowered a boat.  At the same time the excited figure
disappeared from her bow, and reappeared, wilder than ever, in the stern
of the boat.  As it crossed the lagoon, the voice of Watty became
audible, and was responded to by a succession of hearty cheers, in the
midst of which the boat was run ashore.  The excited lad sprang on the
beach, and was almost annihilated by the species of miscellaneous
embracing that he immediately underwent.

Need we say that Captain Samson and his men were only too thankful to
have such an opportunity of deliverance?  They at once accepted the
offer of the American captain, embarked in his ship the following
morning, passed Cape Horn not long after, sailed up the coast of South
America, and, in course of time, cast anchor in the renowned harbour of
San Francisco.

At the time of which we write, the excitement about the gold-fields of
California was at its highest pitch.  Men were flocking to that region
from all parts of the earth.  Fortunes were being made by some in a few
months, and lost by others, at the gaming-tables, in a few days, or even
hours.  While a few gained a competence, many gained only a bare
subsistence; thousands lost their health, and not a few their lives.  It
was a strange play that men enacted there, embracing all the confusion,
glitter, rapid change of scene, burlesque, and comedy of a pantomime,
with many a dash of darkest tragedy intermingled.  Tents were pitched in
all directions, houses were hastily run up, restaurants of all kinds
were opened, boats were turned keel up and converted into cottages,
while ships were stranded or lying idle at their anchors for want of
crews, who had made off to that mighty centre of attraction, the
diggings.

Arrived at San Francisco, Captain Samson and his crew were landed one
fine morning at an early hour, and went up to a modest-looking hotel,
without any definite idea as to what was best to be done in their
peculiar circumstances.  Feeling a strange sensation of helplessness in
the midst of so much turmoil and human energy, after their quiet sojourn
on the Coral Island, they kept together like a flock of sheep, and
wandered about the town.  Then they returned to their hotel and had
luncheon, for which so large a sum was demanded, that they resolved to
return on board at once, and ask the American captain's advice.

They found their deliverer pacing his quarterdeck, with his hands in his
pockets, and a stern frown on his countenance.  He was quite alone, and
the vessel wore an unusually quiet air.

"Nothing wrong, I hope," said Captain Samson, as he stepped over the
gangway.

"Everything wrong," replied the American; "crew skedaddled."

"What! bolted?"

"Ay, every man, to the diggin's."

"What will you do?" asked Captain Samson, in a sympathetic tone.

"Sell off the ship and cargo for what they'll fetch, and go to the
diggin's too," replied the other.  "Moreover, I'd strongly recommend you
to do the same."

"What say you to that advice, Philosopher Jack?" asked Captain Samson,
turning to our hero, with a peculiar smile.

"I say," answered the philosopher, returning the smile, "that the advice
requires consideration."

"Cautiously replied; and what says my Polly?" continued the captain.

"I say whatever you say, father."

"Ah!  Poll, Poll, that sort of answer don't help one much.  However,
we'll call a council of war, and discuss the matter seriously; but,
first of all, let's see how the wind blows.  How do _you_ feel inclined,
Ben Trench?  Bein' the invalid of our party, so to speak, you're
entitled, I think, to speak first."

"I say, Go," replied Ben.

"And I say ditto," burst from Watty Wilkins with powerful emphasis.

"You wasn't axed yet," observed Bob Corkey.  "Besides, stowaways have no
right to speak at all."

"What says Mr Luke!" continued the captain.

"Don't go," answered Mr Luke feebly.

"Now, lads," said the captain, after putting the question to the others,
"we'll go in for the pros and cons."

They went in for the pros and cons accordingly, and after an animated
debate, resolved that the path of duty, as well as that of interest and
propriety, lay in the direction of the diggings.

Having settled the matter, and gathered together into a common fund the
small amount of cash and property which each had saved from the wreck,
they went ashore, purchased the articles necessary for their expedition,
and followed the great stream of Californian gold-diggers.

We shall join them, but let not the reader suppose that we intend to
bore him or her with the statistics and details of Californian
gold-digging.  It is our purpose only to touch lightly on those salient
points in the adventures of our wanderers which had a more or less
direct bearing on the great issues of their lives.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

FAILURE.

There are times, probably, in the life of all when everything seems to
go against one,--when plans and efforts turn out ill, or go wrong, and
prospects look utterly black and hopeless.  Such a time fell upon
Philosopher Jack and his friends some months after their arrival at the
gold-diggings.

At first they were moderately successful, and at that time what
amazingly golden visions they did indulge!

"A carriage and pair," soliloquised Watty Wilkins, one evening at
supper, while his eyes rested complacently on the proceeds of the day's
labour--a little heap of nuggets and gold-dust, which lay on a sheet of
paper beside him; "a carriage and pair, a town house in London, a
country house near Bath or Tunbridge Wells, and a shooting-box in the
Scotch Highlands.  Such is my reasonable ambition."

"Not bad," said Philosopher Jack, "if you throw in a salmon river near
the shooting-box, and the right to wear the bonnet, plaid, and kilt at
pleasure."

"Not to mention bare legs an' rheumatiz," remarked Simon O'Rook, who was
busy with the frying-pan.  "Sure, if the good Queen herself was to order
me to putt on such things, I'd take off me bonnet an' plaid in excuse
that I'd be kilt entirely if she held me to it.  All the same I'd obey
her, for I'm a loyal subject."

"You're a bad cook, anyhow," said Baldwin Burr, "to burn the bacon like
that."

"Burn it!" retorted O'Rook with an air of annoyance, "man alive, how can
I help it?  It hasn't fat enough to slide in, much less to swim.  It's
my belief that the pig as owned it was fed on mahogany-sawdust and steel
filin's.  There, ait it, an' howld yer tongue.  It's good enough for a
goold-digger, anyhow."

"In regard to that little bit of ambition o' your'n," said Bob Corkey,
as the party continued their meal, "seems to me, Watty, that you might
go in for a carriage an' four, or six, when you're at it."

"No, Corkey, no," returned the other, "that would be imitating the
foibles of the great, which I scorn.  What is _your_ particular
ambition, now, Mr Luke?  What will you buy when you've dug up your
fortune?"

The cadaverous individual addressed, who had become thinner and more
cadaverous than ever, looked up from his pewter plate, and, with a
sickly smile, replied that he would give all the gold in the mines to
purchase peace of mind.

This was received with a look of surprise, which was followed by a burst
of laughter.

"Why, you ain't an escaped convict, are you?" exclaimed Baldwin Burr.

"No, I'm only an escaped man of business, escaped from the toils, and
worries, and confinements of city life," returned Mr Luke, with another
sickly smile, as he returned to his tough bacon.

"Well, Mr Luke, if contrast brings any blessing with it," said Edwin
Jack, "you ought to revive here, for you have splendid fresh country
air--by night as well as by day--a fine laborious occupation with pick
and shovel, a healthy appetite, wet feet continually, mud up to the
eyes, and gold to your heart's content.  What more can you desire?"

"Nothing," replied the cadaverous man with a sigh.

The state of prosperity to which Jack referred did not last.  Their
first "claim," though rich, was soon worked out, and they were obliged
to seek another.  This turned out to be a poor one, yielding barely
enough of the precious metal to enable them to pay their way, every
article of clothing, tools, and food being excessively dear at the
mines.  Nevertheless, they worked on in hope, but what was termed their
"luck" became worse and worse every day, so that at last they were
obliged to run into debt.

This was not difficult to do, for the principal store-keeper, Higgins by
name, saw that they were respectable, trustworthy men, and felt pretty
safe in giving them supplies on credit.  One bad result of the debt thus
incurred was that the whole tone and spirit of the party was lowered.

"It's too bad," growled Philosopher Jack one evening, as he strode into
the tent and flung down his tools; "got barely enough to keep the pot
boiling."

"Better that than nothing," remarked Watty Wilkins, who was in the act
of taking off his wet boots.  "_I_ haven't got as much dust as would
gild the end of a bumbee's nose.  Hope some of the others have been more
successful.  None of them have come in yet except O'Rook, who is as
unlucky as myself.  He's off to the store for something for supper."

Watty sat down before the fire which burned in front of the tent, and
sadly toasted his toes.

"I'll tell you what," said Jack, sitting down beside him, "I fear we
were fools to come here."

"Not so sure of that" returned Wilkins, with a dubious shake of the
head.  "Every one, you know, cannot be lucky.  Some succeed and some
don't.  We are down just now, that's all.  The wheel of fortune is going
round, and something will be sure to turn up soon."

"Nothing will turn up unless we turn it up for ourselves, you may depend
upon that" said Philosopher Jack.

"The captain seemed to preach a different doctrine from that last
Sunday, didn't he, when he remarked that God sometimes sends prosperity
and riches to those who neither ask, work for, nor deserve them?"

"True, Watty, but these, he told us, were exceptional cases; the rule
being, that those who labour with body or mind acquire possessions,
while those who don't labour fall into poverty.  The simple truth of
that rule is partially veiled by the fact that thousands of laborious
men labour unwisely, on the one hand, while, on the other hand,
thousands of idle men live on the product of their forefathers' labours.
Besides, didn't the captain also impress upon us that success is not
success when it leads to evil, and failure is not failure when it
results in good?"

"From all which," retorted Watty, "you bring forward strong proof that
your present growling at bad luck is most unphilosophic, you
cross-grained philosopher."

"Not at all," returned Jack.  "The captain's principles may, or may not
be correct.  The mere statement of them does not prove that my ill luck
just now is going to result in good.  But the worst of it is, that
during the time of our good fortune, I had been hoarding up in order to
be able to send money to my poor father, and now it has all melted
away."

"I'm sorry for you, Jack," said Watty, "but that is not the worst of it
to my mind, bad though it be.  What grieves me most is, that my dear
friend and chum, Ben Trench, is surely losing his health under the
strain of anxiety and hard work.  You see, he is not gifted with the
gutta-percha feelings and cast-iron frame of Philosopher Jack, neither
has he the happy-go-lucky spirit and tough little corpus of Watty
Wilkins, so that it tells on him heavily--very heavily."

Poor Watty said this half jestingly, yet with such a look of genuine
feeling that Jack forgot his own troubles for the moment.

"Something _must_ be done," he said, gazing with a concerned look at the
fire.  "Did you observe that man Conway last night up at the store?"

"Yes; what of him?"

"He staked largely at the gaming-table last night--and won."

Little Wilkins glanced quickly in his friend's face.  "Jack," he said,
with a look and tone of earnestness quite unusual to him, "we must not
think of _that_.  Whatever straits we are reduced to, we must not
gamble--I repeat, we _must_ not!"

"Why not, little man?" asked Jack, with an amused smile at what he
considered an uncalled-for burst of seriousness.

"Because it is dishonourable," said Wilkins, promptly.

"I don't see it to be so," returned Jack.  "If I am willing to stake my
money on a chance of black or red turning up, and the banker is willing
to take his chance, why should we not do it? the chances are equal; both
willing to win or to lose, nothing dishonourable in that!  Or, if I bet
with you and you bet with me, we both agree to accept the consequences,
having a right, of course, to do what we please with our own."

"Now, Jack," said Wilkins, "I'm not going to set up for a little
preacher, or attempt to argue with a big philosopher, but I'll tell you
what my father has impressed on me about this matter.  One day, when we
were passing some ragged boys playing pitch-and-toss on the street, he
said to me, `Watty, my boy, no man should gamble, because it is
dishonourable.  To want money that does not belong to you is greedy.  To
try to get it from your neighbour without working for it is mean.  To
risk your money in the hope of increasing it by trade, or other fair
means, and so benefit yourself and others, is right; but to risk it for
nothing, with the certainty of impoverishing some one else if you win,
or injuring yourself if you lose, is foolish and unfeeling.  The fact
that some one else is willing to bet with you, only proves that you have
met with one as foolish and unfeeling as yourself, and the agreement of
two unfeeling fools does not result in wisdom.  You will hear it said,
my boy, that a man has a right to do what he will with his own.  That is
not true.  As far as the world at large is concerned, it is, indeed,
partially true, but a man may only do what God allows with what He has
lent him.  He is strictly accountable to God for the spending of every
penny.  He is accountable, also, to his wife and his children, in a
certain degree, ay, and to his tradesmen, if he owes them anything.
Yes, Watty, gambling for money is dishonourable, believe me!'  Now,
Jack, I did, and I do believe him, from the bottom of my heart."

What Jack would have replied we cannot tell, for the conversation was
interrupted at that moment by the abrupt appearance of Captain Samson.
He led Polly by the hand.  The child had an unwonted expression of
sadness on her face.

"Come into the tent.  Now then, darling," said the captain; "sit on my
knee, and tell me all about it.  Polly has seen something in her rambles
that has made her cry," he explained to Jack, Wilkins, and the rest of
the party who chanced to come in while he was speaking.  "Let us hear
about it."

"Oh! it is _so_ sad," said Polly, whimpering.  "You know that good kind
man Jacob Buckley, who lives up in Redman's Gap with his sick brother
Daniel, who is so fond of me; well, I went up to the Gap this afternoon,
when I had done cleaning up, to sit with the sick brother for a little.
I found him in great anxiety and very ill.  He told me that Jacob, who
had always been such a good nurse to him, is much cast down by his bad
luck, and has taken to drink, and that he has lost or spent all his
money, and can't get credit at the store.  He went out quite drunk last
night, and has not returned since.  Of course poor Daniel has had
nothing to eat, for he can't leave his bed without help, and even if he
could, there isn't a morsel of food in the house."

This story created much sympathy in the hearts of Polly's hearers.

"Well now, messmates, what's to be done in this case?" asked Captain
Samson, looking round.

"Make a c'lection," said O'Rook.

"Here you are," said Watty, taking up his cap and dropping several small
nuggets into it as he handed it to Jack.
