like that of a drowning man; but his mate made no other effort to save
himself.

"Help here, two of you," cried Bowers.

Another moment, and six brawny arms embraced Jeff, and lifted him into
the boat.

"Not hurt, I hope, Jeff?"

"Not much, Davy--at least not to speak of; only I'm a bit stunned.  Just
let me lie here.  One o' the _North Star's_ men can take my oar."

There was no time for delicate attentions or inquiries in the
circumstances, for the wreck of the mainmast had already given the boat,
strong though it was, some damaging lunges as it shot wildly to and fro
in the mad sea.

"All there?" demanded the coxswain of the saved men, who had been
rapidly counting their numbers.

"All here, thank God!" answered Captain Millet.

"Haul off, lads!"

The men laid hold of the hawser, and hauled with a will--not a moment
too soon, for the wreck was breaking up, and the sea around was strewn
with heavy timbers.  Having hauled the boat up to her anchor, the latter
was got in, and the oars were shipped.  These last being made fast to
the boat with strong lines, had not been lost in all the turmoil, though
two of them were broken.  They were replaced, however, by spare oars;
and then the lifeboat, being pulled out of danger, hoisted her scrap of
sail and scudded away gaily before the wind for the shore with her
rescued freight.

Of course the news spread like wildfire that the lifeboat had come in
with the crew of the wrecked _North Star_--some said the whole crew,
others, part of the crew; for verbal reports of this kind never do
coincide after travelling a short way.

"Jeff, I must go straight to my sister, and be first wi' the news," said
Captain Millet on landing.  "You said my Rosebud is with her just now?"

"Yes, I'll go with 'ee, captain."

"Come along, then, lad; but I fear you've got hurt.  You're sure it
isn't broken ribs?"

"Oh, nothing to speak of," replied the youth, with a light laugh.

"First however, I must telegraph to the owners," said the captain.

This duty performed, and his men comfortably housed in a neighbouring
inn, Captain Millet and Jeff went off to the cottage.  It was about two
in the morning when they reached it.  No one had yet been there.  In his
excited state of mind, the captain, who had no nerves, thundered at the
door.

If there was one thing that Miss Millet had a horror of, it was
housebreakers.  She leaped out of bed, and began to dress in terror,
having roused Rose, who slept with her.

"Burglars never thunder like that, auntie," suggested Rose, as she
hastily threw on her garments.

Miss Millet admitted the force of the argument and then, somewhat
relieved, concluded that it must be tipsy men.  Under this impression
she raised the window-sash--her bedroom being on the upper floor--and
looked timidly out.

"Go away, bad, naughty men!" she said, in a remonstrative tone.  "If you
don't I shall send for the police!"

"Why, Molly, don't you know me?"

"Brother!" shrieked Miss Millet.

"Father!" exclaimed the Rosebud.

Need we say that, after a few more hurried touches to costume, the door
was opened, and the untimely visitors were admitted?  Need we add that
when Rose, with a little cry of joy, leaped into her father's arms and
received a paternal hug, she leaped out of them again with a little
shriek of surprise?

"Father, you're all wet! a perfect sponge!"

"True, darling, I forgot!  I've just been wrecked, and rescued by the
lifeboat through God's great mercy, 'long with all my crew; and there,"
he added, pointing to Jeff, "stands the man that saved my life."

If Rose loved the young coastguardsman before, she absolutely idolised
him now.  Something of the feeling must have betrayed itself on her fair
face, for Jeff made a step towards her, as if under an irresistible
impulse to seize her hand.

But at that moment he experienced an agonising sensation of pain, and,
staggering backwards, sat down--almost fell--upon the sofa.

"Nothing--nothing," he replied, to the anxious inquiries of Miss Millet.
"Only a little pain, caused by the rap I got from that mast.  Come now,
auntie, don't fuss about me, but sit down and hear what the captain has
got to say."



CHAPTER FIVE.

MISS MILLET RECEIVES A SURPRISE, ROSEBUD A DISAPPOINTMENT, AND OUR HERO
ANOTHER BLOW.

Miss Millet was one of those cheery, unselfish, active-minded women who
are not easily thrown off their balance--deranged, as the French say--by
untoward circumstances.

The arrival of any two friends at two in the morning would have failed
to disturb the good nature or weaken the hospitality of that amiable
creature.  Her joy, therefore, at the sudden, though untimely,
appearance of her brother and friend was not marred by selfish
considerations; and although she was eager to bear what the captain had
to say, she would not let him begin until he and Jeff had retired to an
attic chamber and put on dry habiliments.

How male attire came to be so handy in a spinster's house is easily
accounted for by the fact that her regard for the memory of her departed
father was so great as to have induced her to leave his hat and stick in
the passage in their wonted places after his death, and to leave
undisturbed the chest of drawers which contained the greater part of his
wardrobe.  Nothing short of absolute necessity would have induced Miss
Millet to disturb these sacred relics; but she knew that death might
result from sitting in drenched clothes, and her well-balanced mind at
once pointed out that here was a case which demanded a sacrifice.  She
therefore bowed to the inevitable, and handed her brother the key of the
chest of drawers.

As the late Mr Millet had been a large man, the result was that her
visitors were admirably fitted out--the only disadvantage being that the
captain had to turn up the legs of the trousers and the cuffs of the
coat.

Meanwhile Miss Millet lighted a gas-stove, which she had always ready
for invalid purposes, and Rose arranged the table, so that when their
visitors returned to the parlour, they were greeted with the sight of
food and the singing of the tea-kettle.

"I can offer you brandy, brother," said the little hostess, "_as a
medicine_!"

"Thankee, Molly--not even as a medicine," said the captain, with a
benignant look; "tea is better in the circumstances.  I can speak from a
vast amount of experience.  But of course I speak only for myself.  I
don't know what Jeff's principles--"

"My principles," interrupted the coastguardsman, "are to leave every man
to judge for himself.  My judgment for myself is, that, as I don't
require strong drink, I'm much better without it."

"My principles go much further than that," said Miss Millet who was an
enthusiastic total abstainer.  "The Bible justifies me in denying myself
the use of wine and all spirituous liquors _for my brother's sake_, so
that I may set him an example, and also have more weight when I reason
with him, and try to get him to adopt my views."

"Why, Molly, to hear you talk like that about giving up drink for your
brother's sake, one would think that I had bin a tippler all my life!"

"You know that I refer to my brother--man, brother."

"Ah, of course--of course; and also your sister-woman, I suppose," cried
the captain, seizing the loaf and beginning to cut it into
inch-and-a-half slices.  "What's _your_ opinion, Rosebud, on the drink
question?"

Rose, whose cheeks emulated her namesake flower, replied that, never
having tasted wine or spirits in her life, or thought upon the drink
question at all, she had no opinion to express.

"Long may you continue in that innocent and humble state of mind, my
Rosebud," cried the captain, with a laugh which caused him to choke on
his first mouthful of tea.  After recovering himself and wiping his
eyes, he said--

"Now, Moll, I must tell you all about the wreck;" on which he launched
out into a graphic description of what the reader already knows.

You may be sure that he did not underrate the services and heroism of
Jeff, who sat wonderfully silent during the recital, and only
acknowledged references to himself with a faint smile.

"But, brother," exclaimed Miss Millet, with sudden energy when he had
finished, "what will the consequences of this wreck be?"

"The consequences, my dear, will be that the owners will lose a good
many thousand pounds, for neither ship nor cargo were insured.  An' it
sarves 'em right for the vessel was not fit to go to sea; an' they knew
it, but were too graspin' to go to the expense o' refittin'.  Besides,
they've bin what they call so lucky in past years that they thought, I
fancy, there was no fear o' their luck departin'."

"But I was not thinking of the owners, brother; I was thinking of the
consequences to yourself."

"Why, as to that, Molly, as I've lost my ship, I'm pretty safe to lose
my situation; for, from what I know of the owners, they are sure to lay
all the blame they can upon my shoulders, so that I won't find it easy
to get another ship.  Worse than all, I had made a little private
adventure of my own, which was very successful, and the result o' which
I was bringin' home in gold-dust; and now every nugget o' that is at the
bottom o' the sea.  So you see, Molly, it's loss an' disaster
everywhere--nothin' but a black horizon all round."

Jeff glanced quickly at Miss Millet.  This seemed to bear somewhat on
their recent discussions.  Miss Millet as quickly returned the glance.

"I know what you are thinking, Jeff," she said, with an intelligent
look.

"Well, auntie," returned the youth, "it does seem hard to think that any
good can come out of all this--doesn't it?"

"Young man," said the captain, regarding Jeff with an almost stern look,
"if a savage were taken into a factory and shown the whirling wheels and
bands and rollers working in all directions, and saw filthy old rags
boiled and mixed up with grass and evil-smelling substances, and torn to
shreds and reduced to pulp in the midst of dirt and clattering noise and
apparent confusion; and if that savage were to say, `Surely nothin' good
can come out of all this!' wouldn't you--knowin' that great rolls of
fair and spotless paper were to come out of it--pronounce that savage a
fool, or, at least, a presumptuous fellow?"

"True, captain; I accept the rebuke," said Jeff, with a short laugh and
a swift glance at Rose, who, however, was gazing demurely at her
tea-cup, as if lost in the contemplation of its pattern.  Possibly she
was thinking of the absurdity of taking tea at all at such an hour!

"Well, then, Jeff," continued the captain, "don't you go and judge
unfinished work.  Perfect men and women are, in this world, only in
process of manufacture.  When you see them finished, you'll be better
able to judge of the process."

Jeff did not quite agree with his friend; for, gazing at Rose, he could
not help feeling that at least one woman had, to his mind, been almost
perfectly finished even here!  However, he said nothing.

At this point the conversation was turned by Miss Millet suddenly
recalling to mind her brother's generous friend in China.

"You have no idea, Dick, how much good I have been able to do with that
money.  Of course it could not pay for the swimming-bath, or the church,
or but here, I have a note of it all."

She pulled a soiled red note-book from her pocket and was about to refer
to it, when she was arrested by the grave, sad expression that had
overspread her brother's countenance.

"Ah, Molly," he said, "dear Clara Nibsworth was dying when I last saw
her, and I fear her father won't survive her long.  You remember, I told
you the poor girl was delicate and her father old, and the excitement
and exertion of that night of the fire was too much for both of them.
When I arrived this time in China, I took a run up to their place to see
them, and found Clara almost at the point of death.  I had little time
to spare, and meant to have returned the next day; but the poor
broken-down father entreated me so earnestly to remain that I at last
agreed to spend three days wi' them.  Durin' that time I read the Bible
