passing notice here.  It was raised by the late Sir Charles Reed, in
1867, the proceeds to be distributed annually among the seamen who save
life on that coast.  The following particulars of this fund were
supplied by Sir Charles Reed himself:--

"Eight boatmen of Broadstairs were interested in a lugger--the
Dreadnought--which had for years done good service on the Goodwins.  One
night they went off in a tremendous sea to save a French barque; but
though they secured the crew, a steam-tug claimed the prize and towed
her into Ramsgate Harbour.  The Broadstairs men instituted proceedings
to secure the salvage, but they were beaten in a London law court, where
they were overpowered by the advocacy of a powerful company.  In the
meantime they lost their lugger off the coast of Normandy, and in this
emergency the lawyers they had employed demanded their costs.  The poor
men had no means, and not being able to pay they were taken from their
homes and lodged in Maidstone Gaol.  He (Sir Charles) was then staying
in Broadstairs, and an appeal being made to him, he wrote to the
`Times', and in one week received nearly twice the amount required.  The
bill was paid, the men were liberated and brought home to their
families, and the balance of the amount, a considerable sum, was
invested, the interest to be applied to the rewarding of boatmen who, by
personal bravery, had distinguished themselves by saving life on the
coast."



CHAPTER FOUR.

CONSTRUCTION AND QUALITIES OF THE LIFEBOAT.

In previous chapters enough has been told, I think, to prove that our
lifeboats deserve earnest and thoughtful attention, not only as regards
their work, but in reference to their details of construction.  It has
been said that the lifeboat possesses special qualities which
distinguish it from all other boats.  Chief among these are the
self-righting and self-emptying principles.  Stability, resulting from
breadth of beam, etcetera, will do much to render a boat safe in rough
seas and tempestuous weather, but when a boat has to face mighty rollers
which turn it up until it stands straight on end, like a rearing horse,
and even tumble it right over, or when it has to plunge into horrible
maelstroms which seethe, leap, and fume in the mad contention of cross
seas, no device that man has yet fallen upon will save it from turning
keel up and throwing its contents into the water.

Instead therefore, of attempting to build a boat which cannot upset, men
have deemed it wiser to attempt the construction of one which will not
remain in that position, but which will, of necessity, right itself.
The end aimed at has been achieved, and the boat now in use by the
Lifeboat Institution is absolutely perfect in this respect.  What more
could be desired in any boat than that, after being upset, it should
right itself in a _few seconds_, and empty itself of water in less than
one minute?

A boat which does not right itself when overturned is only a lifeboat so
long as it maintains its proper position on the water.

Let its self-emptying and buoyant qualities be ever so good, you have
only to upset it to render it no better than any other boat;--indeed, in
a sense, it is worse than other boats, because it leads men to face
danger which they would not dare to encounter in an ordinary boat.

Doubtless, lifeboats on the non-self-righting principle possess great
stability, and are seldom overturned; nevertheless they occasionally
are, and with fatal results.  Here is one example.  In the month of
January, 1865, the Liverpool lifeboat, when out on service, was upset,
and seven men of her crew were drowned.  This was not a self-righting
boat, and it did not belong to the Lifeboat Institution, most of whose
boats are now built on the self-righting principle.  Moreover, the
unfortunate men had not put on lifebelts.  It may be added that the men
who work the boats of the Institution are not allowed to go off without
their cork lifebelts on.

Take another case.  On the 4th January, 1857, the Point of Ayr lifeboat,
when under sail in a gale, upset at a distance from the land.  The
accident was seen from the shore, but no aid could be rendered, and the
whole boat's crew--thirteen in number--were drowned.  This boat was
considered a good lifeboat, and doubtless it was so in many respects,
but it was not a self-righting one.  Two or three of the poor fellows
were seen clinging to the keel for twenty minutes, by which time they
became exhausted, were washed off, and, having no lifebelts on,
perished.

Again in February, 1858, the Southwold lifeboat--a large sailing boat,
esteemed one of the finest in the kingdom, but not on the self-righting
principle--went out for exercise, and was running before a heavy surf
with all sail set, when she suddenly ran on the top of a sea, turned
broadside to the waves, and was upset.  The crew in this case were
fortunately near the shore, had on their lifebelts, and, although some
of them could not swim, were all saved--no thanks, however, to their
boat, which remained keel up--but three unfortunate gentlemen who had
been permitted to go off in the boat without lifebelts, and one of whom
was a good swimmer, lost their lives.

Let it be noted here that the above three instances of disaster occurred
in the day time, and the contrast of the following case will appear all
the stronger.

One very dark and stormy night in October, 1858, the small lifeboat of
Dungeness put off through a heavy sea to a wreck three-quarters of a
mile from the shore.  Eight stout men of the coastguard composed her
crew.  She was a self-righting, self-emptying boat, belonging to the
Lifeboat Institution.  The wreck was reached soon after midnight, and
found to have been abandoned.  The boat, therefore, returned towards the
shore.  Now, there is a greater danger in rowing before a gale than in
rowing against it.  For the first half mile all went well, though the
sea was heavy and broken, but, on crossing a deep channel between two
shoals, the little lifeboat was caught up and struck by three heavy seas
in succession.  The coxswain lost command of the rudder, and she was
carried away before a sea, broached to, and upset, throwing her crew out
of her.  _Immediately_ she righted herself, cleared herself of water,
and was brought up by her anchor which had fallen out when she was
overturned.  The crew meanwhile having on lifebelts, floated and swam to
the boat, caught hold of the life-lines festooned round her sides,
clambered into her, cut the cable, and returned to the shore in safety!
What more need be said in favour of the self-righting boats?

The self-emptying principle is quite equal to the self-righting in
importance.

In _every_ case of putting off to a wreck in a gale, a lifeboat ships a
great deal of water.  In most cases she fills more than once.
Frequently she is overwhelmed by tons of water by every sea.  A boat
full of water cannot advance, therefore baling becomes necessary; but
baling, besides being very exhausting work, is so slow that it would be
useless labour in most cases.  Besides, when men have to bale they
cannot give that undivided attention to the oars which is needful.  To
overcome this difficulty the self-emptying plan was devised.

As, I doubt not, the reader is now sufficiently interested to ask the
questions, How are self-righting and self-emptying accomplished?  I will
try to throw some light on these subjects.

First, as to self-righting.  You are aware, no doubt, that the buoyancy
of our lifeboat is due chiefly to large air-cases at the ends, and all
round the sides from stem to stern.  The accompanying drawing and
diagrams will aid us in the description.  On the opposite page you have
a portrait of, let us say, a thirty-three feet, ten-oared lifeboat, of
the Royal National Lifeboat Institution, on its transporting carriage,
ready for launching, and, on page 95, two diagrams representing
respectively a section and a deck view of the same (Figures 1, 2, and
3).

The breadth of this boat is eight feet; its stowage-room sufficient for
thirty passengers, besides its crew of twelve men--forty-two in all.  It
is double-banked; that is, each of its five banks, benches, or thwarts,
accommodates two rowers sitting side by side.  The lines festooned round
the side dip into the water, so that anyone swimming alongside may
easily grasp them, and in the middle part of the boat--just where the
large wheels come in the engraving--two of the lines are longer than the
others, so that a man might use them as stirrups, and thus be enabled to
clamber into the boat even without assistance.  The rudder descends
considerably below the keel--to give it more power--and has to be raised
when the boat is being launched.

The shaded parts of the diagrams show the position and form of the
air-cases which prevent a lifeboat from sinking.  The white oblong space
in Figure 2 is the free space available for crew and passengers.  In
Figure 3 is seen the depth to which the air-chambers descend, and the
height to which the bow and stern-chambers rise.

It is to these large air-chambers in bow and stern, coupled with great
sheer--or rise fore and aft--of gunwale, and a very heavy keel, that the
boat owes its self-righting power.  The two air-chambers are rounded on
the top.  Now, it is obvious that if you were to take a model of such a
boat, turn it upside down on a table, and try to make it rest on its two
_rounded_ air-chambers, you would encounter as much difficulty as did
the friends of Columbus when they sought to make an egg stand on its
end.  The boat would infallibly fall to one side or the other.  In the
water the tendency is precisely the same, and that tendency is increased
by the heavy iron keel, which drags the boat violently round to its
right position.

The self-righting principle was discovered--at all events for the first
time exhibited--at the end of last century, by the Reverend James
Bremner, of Orkney.  He first suggested in the year 1792 that an
ordinary boat might be made self-righting by placing two watertight
casks in the head and sternsheets of it, and fastening three
hundredweight of iron to the keel.  Afterwards he tried the experiment
at Leith, and with such success that in 1810 the Society of Arts voted
him a silver medal and twenty guineas.  But nothing further was done
until half a century later, when twenty out of twenty-four pilots lost
their lives by the upsetting of the non-self-righting Shields lifeboat.

Then (1850) the late Duke of Northumberland offered a prize of 100
guineas for the best lifeboat that could be produced.  No fewer than 280
models and drawings were sent in, and the plans, specifications, and
descriptions of these formed five folio manuscript volumes!  The various
models were in the shape of pontoons, catamarans or rafts, north-country
cobles, and ordinary boats, slightly modified.  The committee appointed
to decide on their respective merits had a difficult task to perform.
After six months' careful, patient investigation and experiment, they
awarded the prize to Mr James Beeching, of Great Yarmouth.  Beeching's
boat, although the best, was not, however, deemed perfect.

The committee therefore set Mr James Peake, one of their number, and
assistant master-shipwright at Woolwich Dockyard, to incorporate as many
as possible of the good qualities of all the other models with
Beeching's boat.  From time to time various important improvements have
been made, and the result is the present magnificent boat of the
Institution, by means of which hundreds of lives are saved every year.

The self-discharge of water from a lifeboat is not so easy to explain.
It will be the more readily comprehended if the reader understands, and
will bear in remembrance, the physical fact that water will, and must,
find its level.  That is--no portion of water, small or great, in tub,
pond, or sea, can for a moment remain above its flat and level surface,
except when forced into motion, or commotion.  Left to itself it
infallibly flattens out, becomes calm, lies still in the lowest
attainable position--in other words, finds its level.  Bearing this in
mind, let us look again at Figure 3.

The dotted double line about the middle of the boat, extending from stem
to stern, represents the _floor_ of the boat, on which the men's feet
rest when standing or sitting in it.  It also represents, or very nearly
so, the waterline outside, that is, the depth to which the boat will
sink when afloat, manned and loaded.  Therefore, the _boat's floor_ and
the _ocean_ _surface_ are on the same level.  Observe that!  The space
between the floor and the keel is filled up with cork or other ballast.
Now, there are six large holes in the boat's floor--each hole six inches
in diameter--into which are fitted six metal tubes, which pass down by
the side of the cork ballast, and right through the bottom of the boat
itself; thus making six large openings into the sea.

"But hallo!" you exclaim, "won't the water from below rush up through
these holes and fill the boat?"

It will indeed rush up into these holes, but it will not fill the boat
because it will have found its level--the level of ocean--on reaching
the floor.  Well, besides having reached its level, the water in the
tubes has reached six valves, which will open downwards to let water
out, but which won't open upwards to let it in.  Now, suppose a huge
billow topples into the boat and fills it quite full, is it not obvious
that all the water in the boat stands _above_ the ocean's level--being
above the boat's floor?  Like a wise element, it immediately seeks its
own level by the only mode of egress--the discharging tubes; and when it
has found its level, it has also found the floor of the boat.  In other
words, it is all gone! moreover, it rushes out so violently that a
lifeboat, filled to overflowing, frees itself, as I have already said,
in less than one minute!

The _buoyancy_, therefore, of a lifeboat is not affected for more than a
few seconds by the tons of water which occasionally and frequently break
into her.  To prove this, let me refer you again to the account of the
Constance, given by its gallant coxswain, as recorded in the third
chapter.  He speaks of the lifeboat being "buried," "sunk" by the wave
that burst over the bow of the Stanley, and "immediately," he adds, "the
men made a grasp for the spare oars!"  There is no such remark as "when
we recovered ourselves," etcetera.  The sinking and leaping to the
surface were evidently the work of a few seconds; and this is indeed the
case, for when the force that sinks a lifeboat is removed, she rises
that instant to the surface like a cork, and when she tumbles over she
recovers herself with the agility of an acrobat!

The transporting-carriage is a most essential part of a lifeboat
establishment, because wrecks frequently take place at some distance
from a station, and prompt assistance is of the utmost importance in all
cases of rescue.  It is drawn by horses, and, with its exceedingly broad
and strong wheels, can be dragged over any kind of road or across soft
sand.  It is always backed into the surf so deep that the boat may be
launched from it, with her crew seated, and the oars out, ready to pull
with might and main the instant the plunge is made.  These first strokes
of a lifeboat's crew are of immense importance.  Want of union or energy
on the part of steersman or crew at this critical point may be fatal.
The boat must be made to cut the breakers end-on, so as to prevent her
turning broadside on and being rolled back on the beach.  Even after
these initial strokes have been made successfully, there still remains
the possibility of an unusually monstrous wave hurling the boat back end
over end.

The boat resting on its carriage on the sands (Figure 1) shows the
relative position of the two.  It will be seen, from that position, that
a very slight tip will suffice to cause the bow of the boat to drop
towards the sea.  As its keel rests on rollers, comparatively little
force is required to launch it.  Such force is applied by means of ropes
attached to the stern, passing through pulleys at the outer end of the
carriage, so that people on shore haul the ropes inland in order to
