That day, Jack Robinson had a somewhat rough and remarkable experience
of life.

He began by overhauling the nets at the mouth of the river, and these
were so prolific that the small flat-bottomed boat used by the fishermen
was soon half filled with glittering salmon, varying from ten to fifteen
pounds in weight.  In order to avoid having his mocassins and nether
garments soiled, Jack, who pulled the sculls, sat with bare feet and
tucked-up trousers.  In less than an hour he rowed back to the
landing-place, literally up to the knees in salmon!  Among these were a
few young seals that had got entangled in the nets, while in pursuit of
the fish, and been drowned.  These last were filled with water to such
an extent, that they resembled inflated bladders!

"Breakfast is ready, sir," said one of the men, as the boat-party leaped
ashore.

"Very good," replied Jack; turning to Ladoc, "now, my man, are you ready
to start for the upper fishery?"

"Eh? ah--oui, monsieur."

There was a titter amongst the men at the expression of their big
comrade's face, for Ladoc was ravenously hungry, and felt inclined to
rebel at the idea of being obliged to start on a six-miles' walk without
food; but as his young master was about to do the same he felt that it
was beneath his dignity to complain.  Besides, there was a _something_
peculiar about Jack's manner that puzzled and overawed the man.

The fact was, that Jack Robinson wanted to know what his bullies were
made of, and took rather eccentric methods of finding it out.  He
accordingly set off at his best pace, and pushed Ladoc so hard, that he
arrived at the upper fishery in a state of profuse perspiration, with a
very red face, and with a disagreeably vacuous feeling about the pit of
his stomach.

They found the men at the station just landing with a boat-load of fish.
They were all clean-run, and shone in the bright sunshine like bars of
burnished silver.

"Now, Ladoc," said Jack, "get breakfast ready, while I look over matters
here."

It need not be said that the man obeyed most willingly.  His master went
to examine into details.  Half-an-hour sufficed to make him pretty well
acquainted with the state of matters at the station, and, during
breakfast, he soon obtained from the men all the knowledge they
possessed about the fishery, the natives, and the region.

One of the men was a half-caste, a fine-looking, grave, earnest fellow,
who spoke English pretty well.  His name was Marteau.

"The seals and the bears are our worst enemies, sir," said Marteau, in
the course of conversation.

"Indeed! and which of the two are worst?" inquired Jack.  "Another slice
of pork, Ladoc, your appetite appears to be sharp this morning; thank
you, go on, Marteau, you were saying something about the bears and
seals."

"It's not easy to say which of them is worst, sir.  I think the bears
is, for the seals eat the bits that they bite out o' the fish, and so
get some good of it; but the bears, they goes to the vats and pulls out
the salt fish with their claws, for you see, sir, they can't resist the
smell, but when they tries to eat 'em--ah, you should see the faces they
do make!  You see, they can't stand the salt, so they don't eat much,
but they hauls about and tears up an uncommon lot of fish."

"It must make him ver' t'irsty," observed Ladoc, swallowing a can of tea
at a draught.

"It makes one thirsty to think of it," said Jack, imitating Ladoc's
example; "now, lads, we'll go and overhaul the nets."

Just as he spoke, Ladoc sprang from his seat, seized Jack's gun, which
leant against the wall, shouted, "A bear!" and, levelling the piece
through the open doorway, took aim at the bushes in front of the hut.

At the same moment Jack leaped forward, struck up the muzzle of the gun
just as it exploded, and, seizing Ladoc by the collar, hurled him with
extraordinary violence, considering his size, against the wall.

"Make yourself a better hunter," said he, sternly, "before you presume
to lay hands again on my gun.  Look there!"

Jack pointed, as he spoke, in the direction in which the man had fired,
where the object that had been mistaken for a bear appeared in the form
of a man, crawling out of the bushes on all-fours.  He seemed to move
unsteadily, as if he were in pain.

Running to his assistance, they found that he was an Indian, and, from
the blood that bespattered his dress and hand, it was evident that he
had been wounded.  He was a pitiable object, in the last stage of
exhaustion.  When the party ran towards him, he looked up in their faces
with lustreless eyes, and then sank fainting on the ground.

"Poor fellow!" said Jack, as they carried him into the hut and placed
him on one of the low beds; "he must have met with an accident, for
there is no warfare in this region among the Indians to account for his
being wounded."

"'Tis a strange accident," said Marteau, when the man's clothes were
stripped off and the wounds exposed.  "An accident sometimes puts _one_
bullet through a man, but seldom puts _two_!"

"True," said Jack, "this looks bad, here is a hole clean through the
fleshy part of his right arm, and another through his right thigh.  An
enemy must have done this."

On farther examination it was found that the bone of the man's leg had
been smashed by the bullet, which, after passing through to the other
side of the limb, was arrested by the skin.  It was easily extracted,
and the wounds were dressed by Jack, who, to his many useful qualities,
added a considerable knowledge of medicine and surgery.

When the Indian recovered sufficiently to give an account of himself to
Marteau, who understood his language perfectly, he told him, to the
surprise of all, that his double wound was indeed the result of an
accident, and, moreover, that he had done the deed with his own hand.
Doubtless it will puzzle the reader to imagine how a man could so twist
himself, that with an unusually long gun he could send a bullet at one
shot through his right arm and right thigh.  It puzzled Jack and his men
so much, that they were half inclined to think the Indian was not
telling the truth, until he explained that about a mile above the hut,
while walking through the bushes, he tripped and fell.  He was carrying
the gun over his shoulder in the customary Indian fashion, that is, by
the muzzle, with the stock behind him.  He fell on his hands and knees;
the gun was thrown forward and struck against a tree so violently, that
it exploded; in its flight it had turned completely round, so that, at
the moment of discharge, the barrel was in a line with the man's arm and
leg, and thus the extraordinary wound was inflicted.

To crawl from the spot where the accident occurred took the poor fellow
nearly twelve hours, and he performed this trying journey during the
night and morning over a rugged country and without food.

The surgical operation engaged Jack's attention the greater part of the
forenoon.  When it was completed and the Indian made as comfortable as
possible, he went out with the men to visit the nets which were set at
the rapids about two miles higher up the river.



CHAPTER SIX.

JACK HAS A DESPERATE ENCOUNTER.

We never can tell what a day or an hour may bring forth.  This is a
solemn fact on which young and old might frequently ponder with
advantage, and on which we might enlarge to an unlimited extent; but our
space will not admit of moralising very much, therefore we beg the
reader to moralise on that, for him--or herself.  The subject is none
the less important, that circumstances require that it should be touched
on in a slight, almost flippant, manner.

Had Jack Robinson known what lay before him that evening, he would--he
would have been a wiser man!  Nothing more appropriate than that occurs
to us at this moment.  But, to be more particular:--

When the party reached the nets, Jack left them to attend to their work,
and went off alone to the vats, some of which, measuring about six feet
in diameter, were nearly full of fish in pickle.

As he walked along the slight track which guided him towards them, he
pondered the circumstances in which he then found himself, and,
indulging in a habit which he had acquired in his frequent and prolonged
periods of solitude, began to mutter his thoughts aloud.

"So, so, Jack, you left your farm because you were tired of solitude,
and now you find yourself in the midst of society.  Pleasant society,
truly!--bullies and geese, without a sympathetic mind to rub against.
Humph! a pleasant fix you've got into, old fellow."

Jack was wrong in this to some extent, as he afterwards came to confess
to himself, for among his men there were two or three minds worth
cultivating, noble and shrewd, and deep, too, though not educated or
refined.  But at the time of which we write, Jack did not know this.  He
went on to soliloquise:

"Yes, you've got a pretty set to deal with; elements that will cause you
enough of trouble before you have done with them.  Well, well, don't
give in, old chap.  Never say die.  If solitude is to be your lot, meet
it like a man.  Why, they say that solitude of the worst kind is to be
found where most people dwell.  Has it not been said, that in the great
city of London itself a man may be more solitary than in the heart of
the wilderness?  I've read it, but I can't very well believe it.  Yet,
there _may_ be something in it.  Humph!  Well, well, Jack, you're not a
philosopher, so don't try to go too deep; take it easy, and do the best
you can."

At this point Jack came suddenly in sight of the vats.  They stood in
the centre of a cleared space in the forest.  On the edge of the largest
vat was perched an object which induced our hero to throw forward his
fowling-piece hastily.  It was a black bear, or rather the hind-quarters
of a black bear, for the head and one paw and shoulder of the animal
were far down in the vat.  He was holding firmly to its edge by the hind
legs and one fore-leg, while with the other he was straining his utmost
to reach the fish.

Jack's first impulse was to fire, but reflecting that the portion of the
bear then in view was not a very vulnerable part, he hesitated, and
finally crept behind a tree to consider, feeling confident that whatever
should occur he would be pretty sure of getting a favourable opportunity
to fire with effect.

Quite unconscious of his danger, bruin continued to reach down into the
vat with unwearied determination.  His efforts were rewarded with
success, for he presently appeared on the edge of the vat with a fine
salmon in his embrace.  Now was Jack's opportunity.  He raised his
piece, but remembering Marteau's remark about the bear's difficulty in
eating salt salmon, he postponed the fatal shot until he should have
studied this point in natural history.

His forbearance met with a reward, for the bear kept him during the next
five minutes in such a state of suppressed laughter, that he could not
have taken a steady aim to have saved his life.  Its sense of smell was
evidently gratified, for on leaping to the ground it took a powerful
snuff, and then began to devour the salmon with immense gusto.  But the
first mouthful produced an expression of countenance that could not be
misunderstood.  It coughed, spluttered, and sneezed, or at least gave
vent to something resembling these sounds, and drew back from the fish
with a snarl; then it snuffed again.  There was no mistaking the smell.
It was delicious!  Bruin, disbelieving his sense of taste, and
displaying unwise faith in his sense of smell, made another attempt.  He
had tried the head first; with some show of reason he now tried the
tail.  Faugh! it was worse than the other; "as salt as fire," as we have
heard it sometimes expressed.  The spluttering at this point became
excessive, and it was clear that the bear was getting angry.  Once
again, with an amount of perseverance that deserved better fortune, the
bear snuffed heartily at the fish, tore it to shreds with his claws, and
then tried another mouthful, which it spat out instantly.  Displaying
all its teeth and gums, it shut its eyes, and, raising its head in the
air, fairly howled with disappointment.

Jack now deemed it prudent to bring the scene to a close, so, calming
himself as well as he could, he took a steady aim, and, watching his
opportunity, fired.

The bear did not fall.  It faced round in a moment, and, uttering a
fierce growl, very unlike to its previous tones, rushed upon its enemy,
who fired his second barrel at the creature's breast.  Whether it was
