
"Be mine! Only be mine!" continued the enraptured Woggle-Bug.

The Chinaman did not quite understand.

"Two dlolla a day," he answered, cautiously.

"Oh, joy," exclaimed the insect in delight; "I can then own you for a
day and a half--for I have three dollars left. May I feel your
exquisite texture, my dearest Fabric?"

"No flabic. No feelee. You too flesh. I _man_ Chinaman!" returned the
Oriental calmly.

"Never mind that! 'Tis your beautiful garment I love. Every check in
that entrancing dress is a joy and a delight to my heart!"

While the Woggle-Bug thus raved, the Chinaman's wife (who was Mattie De
Forest before she married him) heard the conversation, and decided this
love affair had gone far enough. So she suddenly appeared with a
broomstick, and with it began pounding the Woggle-Bug as fiercely as
possible--and Mattie was no weakling, I assure you.

The first blow knocked the Insect's hat so far over his eyes that he
was blinded; but, resolving not to be again cheated out of his darling,
he grasped firmly hold of the Wagnerian plaids with all four hands, and
tore a goodly portion of it from the frightened Celestial's body.

Next moment he was dashing down the street, with the precious cloth
tucked securely underneath an arm, and Mattie, being in slight
dishabile, did not think best to follow him.

The triumphant joy of the Woggle-Bug can well be imagined. No more need
he chase the fleeting vision of his love--no more submit to countless
disappointments in his efforts to approach the object of his affection.
The gorgeous plaids were now his own (or a large part of them, anyway),
and upon reaching the quiet room wherein he lodged he gloated long and
happily over its vivid coloring and violent contrasts of its glowing
hues. To the eyes of the Woggle-Bug nothing could be more beautiful,
and he positively regretted the necessity of ever turning his gaze from
this bewitching treasure.

That he might never in the future be separated from the checks, he
folded them, with many loving caresses, into compact form, and wrapped
them in a sheet of stout paper tied with cotton cord that had a
love-knot at the end. Wherever he went, thereafter, he carried the
parcel underneath his left upper arm, pressed as closely to his heart
as possible. And this sense of possession was so delightful that our
Woggle-Bug was happy as the day is long.

In the evening his fortunes changed with cruel abruptness.

He walked out to take the air, and noticing a crowd people standing in
an open space and surrounding a huge brown object, our Woggle-Bug
stopped to learn what the excitement was about.

Pushing his way through the crowd, and hugging his precious parcel, he
soon reached the inner circle of spectators and found they had
assembled to watch a balloon ascension. The Professor who was to go up
with the balloon had not yet arrived; but the balloon itself was fully
inflated and tugging hard at the rope that held it, as if anxious to
escape the blended breaths of the people that crowded around. Just
below the balloon was a small basket, attached to the netting of the
gas-bag, and the Woggle-Bug was bending over the edge of this, to see
what it contained, when a warning cry from the crowd caused him to
pause and glance over his shoulder.

Great horrors and crumpled creeps! Springing toward him, with a scowl
on his face and a long knife with a zig-zag blade in his uplifted hand,
was that very Chinaman from whose body he had torn the Wagnerian
plaids!

The plundered Celestial was evidently vindictive, and intended to push
the wicked knife into the Woggle-Bug's body.

Our hero was a brave bug, as can easily be proved; but he did not wait
for the knife to arrive at the broad of his back. Instead, he gave a
yell (to show he was not afraid) and leaped nimbly into the basket of
the balloon. The descending knife, missing its intended victim, fell
upon the rope and severed it, and instantly the great balloon from the
crowd and soared majestically toward the heavens.

The Woggle-Bug had escaped the Chinaman, but he didn't know whether to
be glad or not.

For the balloon was earning him into the clouds, and he had no idea how
to manage it, or to make it descend to earth again. When he peered over
the edge of the basket he could hear the faint murmur of the crowd, and
dimly see the enraged Professor (who had come too late) pounding the
Chinaman, while the Chinaman tried to dissect the Professor with his
knife.

Then all was blotted out; clouds rolled about him; night fell. The man
in the moon laughed at him; the stars winked at each other as if
delighted at the Woggle-Bug's plight, and a witch riding by on her
broomstick yelled at him to keep on the right side of the road, and not
run her down.

But the Woggle-Bug, squatted in the bottom of the basket and hugging
his precious parcel to his bosom, paid no attention to anything but his
own thoughts.

He had often ridden in the Gump; but never had he been so high as this,
and the distance to the ground made him nervous.

When morning came he saw a strange country far beneath him, and longed
to tread the earth again.

Now all woggle-bugs are born with wings, and our highly-magnified one
had a beautiful, broad pair of floppers concealed beneath ample
coat-tails. But long ago he had learned that his wings were not strong
enough to lift his big body from the ground, so he had never tried to
fly with them.

Here, however, was an occasion when he might put these wings to good
use, for if he spread them in the air and then leaped over the side of
the basket they would act in the same way a parachute does, and bear
him gently to the ground.

No sooner did this thought occur to him than he put it into practice.

Disentangling his wings from his coat-tails, he spread them as wide as
possible and then jumped from the car of the balloon.

Down, down the Woggle-Bug sank; but so slowly that there was no danger
in the flight. He began to see the earth again, lying beneath him like
a sun-kissed panorama of mud and frog-ponds and rocks and brushwood.

There were few trees, yet it was our insect's fate to drop directly
above what trees there were, so that presently he came ker-plunk into a
mass of tangled branches--and stuck there, with his legs dangling
helplessly between two limbs and his wings caught in the foliage at
