watching, John read his Bible and several books which had been given to
him by Mr Rudyerd; or, in fine weather, paced round and round the
gallery, just outside the lantern, in profound meditation.  Dorkin also,
during his watches, meditated much; he likewise grumbled a good deal,
and smoked continuously.  He was not a bad fellow at bottom, however,
and sometimes he and Potter got on very amicably.  At such seasons John
tried to draw his mate into religious talk, but without success.  Thus,
from day to day and year to year, these two men stuck to their post,
until eleven years had passed away.

One day, about the end of that period, John Potter, who, having attained
to the age of fifty-two, was getting somewhat grey, though still in full
strength and vigour, sat at his chimney corner beside his buxom and
still blooming wife.  His fireside was a better one than in days of
yore,--thanks to Tommy, who had become a flourishing engineer: Mrs
Potter's costume was likewise much better in condition and quality than
it used to be; thanks, again, to Tommy, who was a grateful and loving
son.

"Well, Martha, I've had a pleasant month ashore, lass: I wish that I
hadn't to go off on relief to-morrow."

"Why not leave it altogether, then, John?  You've no occasion to
continue a light-keeper now that you've laid by so much, and Tommy is so
well off and able to help us, an' willin' too--God bless him!"

"Amen to that, Martha.  I have just bin thinkin' over the matter, and
I've made up my mind that this is to be my last trip off to the Rock.  I
spoke to the superintendent last week, and it's all settled.  Who d'ye
think is to take my place?"

"I never could guess nothink, John: who?"

"Teddy Maroon: no less."

"What? an' 'im a' older man than yourself?"

"Ah, but it ain't the same Teddy.  It's his eldest son, named after
himself; an' so like what his father was when I last saw him, that I
don't think I'd be able to tell which was which."

"Well, John, I'm glad to 'ear it; an' be sure that ye git 'ome, next
relief before the thirty-first of October, for that's Tommy's wedding
day, an' you know we fixed it a purpose to suit your time of being at
'ome.  A sweet pair they'll make.  Nora was born to be a lady: nobody
would think but she is one, with 'er pretty winsome ways; and Tommy, who
was twenty-five 'is very last birthday, is one of the 'andsomest men in
Plymouth.  I've a settled conviction, John, that he'll live to be a
great man."

"You once had a settled conviction that he would come to a bad end,"
said Potter, with an arch smile.

"Go along with you, John!" retorted Mrs Potter.

"I'm just going," said John, rising and kissing his wife as he put on
his hat; "and you may depend on it that I'll not miss dancing at our
Tommy's wedding, if I can help it."

That night saw John Potter at his old post again--snuffing the candles
on the Eddystone, and chatting with his old mate Dorkin beside the
kitchen fire.  One evening towards the end of October, John Potter and
Isaac, having "lighted up," sat down to a game of draughts.  It was
blowing hard outside, and heavy breakers were bursting on the rock and
sending thin spray as high as the lantern, but all was peace and comfort
inside; even Isaac's grumpy spirit was calmer than usual.

"You seem dull to-night, mate," observed John, as they re-arranged the
pieces for another game.

"I don't feel very well," said Dorkin, passing his hand over his brow
languidly.

"You'd better turn in, then; an' I'll take half of your watch as well as
my own."

"Thank 'ee kindly," said Dorkin in a subdued voice: "I'll take yer
advice.  Perhaps," he added slowly, "you'll read me a bit out o' _the
Book_."

This was the first time that Isaac had expressed a desire to touch on
religious subjects, or to hear the Bible read; and John, you may be
sure, was only too glad to comply.  After his mate had lain down, he
read a small portion; but, observing that he seemed very restless, he
closed the Bible and contented himself with quoting the following words
of our Lord Jesus: "Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest;" and, "The blood of Jesus Christ God's
Son, cleanseth us from all sin."  Then in a sentence or two he prayed
fervently that the Holy Spirit might apply these words.

John had a suspicion that his mate was on the verge of a serious
illness, and he was not wrong.  Next day, Dorkin was stricken with a
raging fever, and John Potter had not only to nurse him day and night,
but to give constant attention to the lantern as well.  Fortunately, the
day after that the relief boat would be out, so he consoled himself with
that thought; but the gale, which had been blowing for some days,
increased that night until it blew a perfect hurricane.  The sea round
the Eddystone became a tremendous whirlpool of foam, and all hope of
communication with the shore was cut off.  Of course the unfortunate
lighthouse-keeper hung out a signal of distress, although he knew full
well that it could not be replied to.

Meanwhile a wedding party assembled in Plymouth.  The bride was blooming
and young; the bridegroom--strong and happy; but there was a shade upon
his brow as he approached a stout elderly female, and said, sadly, "I
can't tell you, mother, how grieved I am that father is not with us
to-day.  I would be quite willing to put it off, and so would Nora, for
a few days, but there is no appearance of the storm abating; and,
indeed, if even it stopped this moment, I don't think the relief-boat
could get off in less than a week."

"I know it, Tommy."  (It seemed ridiculous to call a strapping,
curly-haired, bewhiskered, six-foot man "Tommy"!) "I know it, Tommy; but
it ain't of no use puttin' of it off.  I've always 'ad a settled
conviction that anythink as is put off is as good as given up
altogether.  No, no, my son; go on with the weddin'."

So the wedding went on, and Nora Vining, a dark-haired Plymouth maiden,
became Mrs Thomas Potter; and the breakfast was eaten, and the healths
were drunk, and the speeches made, and Mrs Potter, senior, wept
profusely (for joy) nearly all the time, into a white cotton
handkerchief, which was so large and strong that some of the guests
entertained the belief to the end of their lives that the worthy woman
had had it manufactured for her own special use on that great occasion.

Meanwhile the father, whose absence was regretted so much, and whose
heart would have rejoiced so much to have been there, remained in his
lonely dwelling, out among the mad whirlpools in the wildest past of the
raging sea.  All day, and every day, his signal of distress streamed
horizontally in the furious gale, and fishermen stood on the shore and
wondered what was wrong, and wished so earnestly that the gale would go
down; but no one, not even the boldest among them all, imagined for a
moment that a boat could venture to leave the shore, much less encounter
the seething billows on the Eddystone.  As each night drew on, one by
one the lights glimmered out above the rock, until the bright beams of
the fully illuminated lantern poured like a flood through the murky air,
and then men went home to their firesides, relieved to know that,
whatever might be wrong, the keepers were at all events able to attend
to their important duties.

Day after day Isaac Dorkin grew worse: he soon became delirious, and,
strong though he was, John Potter was scarcely able to hold him down in
bed.  When the delirium first came on, John chanced to be in the lantern
just commencing to light up.  When he was about to apply the light, he
heard a noise behind him, and, turning hastily round, beheld the flushed
face and blazing eyes of his mate rising through the trap door that
communicated with the rooms below.  Leaving his work, John hastened to
his friend, and with some difficulty persuaded him to return to his bed;
but no sooner had he got him into it and covered him up, than a new
paroxysm came on, and the sick man arose in the strength of his agony
and hurled his friend to the other side of the apartment.  John sprang
up, and grappled with him while he was rushing towards the door.  It was
an awful struggle that ensued.  Both were large and powerful men; the
one strong in a resolute purpose to meet boldly a desperate case, the
other mad with fever.  They swayed to and fro, and fell on and smashed
the homely furniture of the place; sometimes the one and sometimes the
other prevailing, while both gasped for breath and panted vehemently;
suddenly Dorkin sank down exhausted.  He appeared to collapse, and John
lifted him with difficulty again into his bed; but in a few seconds he
attempted to renew the struggle, while the whole building was filled
with his terrific cries.

While this was going on, the shades of night had been falling fast, and
John Potter remembered that none of the candles had been lit, and that
in a few minutes more the rock would be a source of greater danger to
shipping than if no lighthouse had been there, because vessels would be
making for the light from all quarters of the world, in the full faith
of its being kept up!  Filled with horror at the thought that perhaps
even at that moment vessels might be hurrying on to their doom, he
seized a piece of rope that lay at hand, and managed to wind it so
firmly round his mate as to render him helpless.  Bounding back to the
lantern, he quickly lighted it up, but did not feel his heart relieved
until he had gazed out at the snowy billows below, and made sure that no
vessel was in view.  Then he took a long draught of water, wiped his
brow, and returned to his friend.

Two days after that Isaac Dorkin died.  And now John Potter found
himself in a more horrible situation than before.  The storm continued:
no sooner did one gale abate than another broke out, so as to render
approach to the rock impossible; while, day after day, and night after
night, the keeper had to pass the dead body of his mate several times in
attending to the duties of the lantern.  And still the signal of
distress continued to fly from the lighthouse, and still the people on
shore continued to wonder what was wrong, to long for moderate weather,
and to feel relief when they saw the faithful light beam forth each
evening at sunset.

At last the corpse began to decay, and John felt that it was necessary
to get rid of it, but he dared not venture to throw it into the sea.  It
was well known that Dorkin had been a quarrelsome man, and he feared
that if he could not produce the body when the relief came, he might be
deemed a _murderer_.  He therefore let it lie until it became so
overpoweringly offensive that the whole building, from foundation to
cupola, was filled with the horrible stench.  The feelings of the
solitary man can neither be conceived nor described.  Well was it for
John that he had the Word of God in his hand, and the grace of God in
his heart during that awful period.

For nearly a month his agony lasted.  At last the weather moderated.
The boat came off; the "relief" was effected; and poor Dorkin's body,
which was in such a condition that it could not be carried on shore, was
thrown into the sea.  Then John Potter returned home, and left the
lighthouse service for ever.

From that time forward it has been the custom to station not fewer than
three men at a time on all out-lying lighthouses of the kingdom.

Note.  Reader, we have not drawn here on our imagination.  This story is
founded on unquestionable fact.



CHAPTER SIX.

THE END OF RUDYERD'S LIGHTHOUSE.

Thirty-Four years passed away, and still Rudyerd's lighthouse stood firm
as the rock on which it was founded.  True, during that period it had to
undergo occasional repairs, because the timber uprights at the base,
where exposed to the full violence of the waves, had become
weather-worn, and required renewing in part; but this was only
equivalent to a ship being overhauled and having some of her planks
renewed.  The main fabric of the lighthouse remained as sound and
steadfast at the end of that long period as it was at the beginning, and
it would in all probability have remained on the Eddystone Rock till the
present day, had not a foe assailed it, whose nature was very different
indeed from that with which it had been built to contend.

The lighthouse was at this time in charge of Teddy Maroon: not the Teddy
who had bewailed his fate so disconsolately in the French prison in days
gone by, but his youngest son, who was now getting to be an elderly man.
We may, however, relieve the mind of the sympathetic reader, by saying
that Teddy, senior, was not dead.  He was still alive and hearty; though
bent nearly double with extreme age; and dwelt on the borders of one of
the Irish bogs, at the head of an extensive colony of Maroons.

One night Teddy the younger ascended to the lantern to trim the candles;
he snuffed them all round and returned to the kitchen to have a pipe,
his two mates being a-bed at the time.  No one now knows how the thing
happened, but certain it is that Teddy either dropped some of the
burning snuff on the floor, or in some other way introduced more light
into his lantern that night than it had ever been meant to contain, so
that while he and his mates were smoking comfortably below, the
lighthouse was smoking quietly, but ominously, above.

On shore, late that night, an elderly gentleman stood looking out of the
window of a charmingly situated cottage in the village of Cawsand Bay,
near Plymouth, which commanded a magnificent prospect of the channel.

"Father," he said, turning to a very old man seated beside the fire,
who, although shrunken and wrinkled and bald, was ruddy in complexion,
and evidently in the enjoyment of a green old age, "Father, the
lighthouse is beautifully bright to-night; shall I help you to the
window to look at it?"

"Yes, Tommy: I'm fond o' the old light.  It minds me of days gone by,
when you and I were young, Martha."

The old man gave a chuckle as he looked across the hearthstone, where,
in a chair similar to his own, sat a very stout and very deaf and very
old lady, smoothing the head of her grandchild, a little girl, who was
the youngest of a family of ten.

Old Martha did not hear John Potter's remark, but she saw his kindly
smile, and nodded her head with much gravity in reply.  Martha had grown
intellectually slow when she partially lost her hearing, and although
she was not sad she had evidently become solemn.  An English Dictionary
and the Bible were the only books that Martha would look at now.  She
did not use the former as a help to the understanding of the latter.  No
one knew why she was so partial to the dictionary; but as she not
unfrequently had it on her knee upside down while poring over it, her
grandchild, little Nora, took up the idea that she had resolved to
devote the latter days of her life to learning to read backwards!
Perhaps the fact that the dictionary had once belonged to her son James
who was wrecked and drowned on the Norfolk coast, may have had something
to do with it.

With the aid of his son's arm and a stick old John managed to hobble to
the window.

"It is very bright.  Why, Tommy," he exclaimed, with a start, "it's too
bright: the lighthouse must be on fire!"

At that moment, "Tommy's" wife, now "fat, fair, and _fifty_" (or
thereabouts), entered the room hurriedly, exclaiming, "Oh, Tom, what
_can_ be the matter with the lighthouse, I never saw it so bright
before?"

Tom, who had hastily placed his father in a chair, so that he could see
the Eddystone, seized his hat, and exclaiming, "I'll go and see, my
dear," ran out and proceeded to the shore.

"What's the matter?" cried Mrs Potter in a querulous voice, when little
Nora rushed from her side.

Nora, senior, went to her at once, and, bending down, said, in a musical
voice that retained much of its clearness and all its former sweetness:
"I fear that the lighthouse is on fire, grandma!"

Mrs Potter gazed straight before her with vacant solemnity, and Nora,
supposing that she had not heard, repeated the information.

Still Mrs Potter made no reply; but, after a few moments, she turned
her eyes on her daughter-in-law with owlish gravity, and said; "I knew
it!  I said long ago to your father, my dear, I had a settled conviction
that that lighthouse would come to a bad end."

It did indeed appear as though old Martha's prophecy were about to come
true!

Out at the lighthouse Teddy Maroon, having finished his pipe, went up to
the lantern to trim the candles again.  He had no sooner opened the
hatch of the lantern than a dense cloud of smoke burst out.  He shouted
to his comrades, one of whom, Henry Hall, was old and not fit for much
violent exertion; the other, James Wilkie, was a young man, but a heavy
