"She is.  Although a Gordon, and born in the Argyll Highlands, she was
sent to school in London, where she was married at the age of seventeen,
and has lived there ever since.  Her husband is dead, and nothing that I
have been able to say has yet tempted her to pay me a visit.  She
regards my home here as a wild, uninhabitable region, though she has
never seen it, and besides, is getting too old and feeble to venture, as
she says, on a long voyage.  Certes, she is not yet feeble in mind,
whatever she may be in body; but she's a good, amiable, affectionate
woman, and I have no fault to find with her, except in regard to her
severe conditions about Milly, and her anxiety to get her home again.
After all, it is not to be wondered at, for Milly is her only child; and
I am quite sure if I had not gone to London, and made all sorts of
promises to be extremely careful of Milly and personally take her home
again, she never would have let her come at all.  See, there is one of
Milly's favourite views," said the laird, pulling up, and pointing with
his whip to the scene in front, where a range of purple hills formed a
fine background to the loch, with its foreground of tangle-covered
stones; "she revels in depicting that sort of thing."

Barret, after expressing his thorough approval of the young girl's taste
in the matter of scenery, asked if Milly's delicate health was the cause
of her mother's anxiety.

"Delicate health!" exclaimed the laird.  "Why, man, sylph-like though
she appears, she has got the health of an Amazon.  No, no, there's
nothing wrong with my niece, save in the imagination of my sister.  We
will stop at this cottage for a few minutes.  I want to see one of my
men, who is not very well."

He pulled up at the door of a little stone hut by the roadside, which
possessed only one small window and one chimney, the top of which
consisted of an old cask, with the two ends knocked out.  A bare-legged
boy ran out of the hut to hold the horse.

"Is your brother better to-day?" asked the laird.

"No, sir; he's jist the same."

"Mind your head," said the laird, as he stooped to pass the low doorway,
and led his friend into the hut.

The interior consisted of one extremely dirty room, in which the
confined air was further vitiated by tobacco smoke, and the fumes of
whisky.  One entire side of it was occupied by two box-beds, in one of
which lay a brawny, broad-shouldered man, with fiery red hair and
scarcely less fiery red eyes, which seemed to glare out of the dark den
in which he lay.

"Well, Ivor, are ye not better to-day, man?"

There was a sternness in Mr Gordon's query, which not only surprised
but grieved his young companion; and the surprise was increased when the
sick man replied in a surly tone--

"Na, laird, I'm not better; an' what's more, I'll not be better till my
heed's under the sod."

"I'm afraid you are right, Ivor," returned the laird, in a somewhat
softer tone; "for when a man won't help himself, no one else can help
him."

"Help myself!" exclaimed the man, starting up on one elbow, and gazing
fiercely from under his shaggy brows.  "Help myself!" he repeated.  And
then, as if resolving suddenly to say no more, he sank down and laid his
head on the pillow, with a short groan.

"Here, Ivor, is a bottle o' physic that my wife sends to ye," said Mr
Gordon, pulling a pint bottle from his pocket, and handing it to the
man, who clutched it eagerly, and was raising it to his mouth when his
visitor arrested his hand.

"Hoot, man," he said, with a short laugh, "it's not whisky!  She bid me
say ye were to take only half a glass at a time, every two hours."

"Poor't oot, then, laird--poor't oot," said the man, impatiently.
"Ye'll fin' a glass i' the wundy."

Fetching a wine-glass from the window Mr Gordon half filled it with a
liquid of a dark brown colour, which the sick man quaffed with almost
fierce satisfaction, and then lay down with a sigh.

"It seems to have done ye good already, man," said the laird, putting
the bottle and glass on that convenient shelf--the window-sill.  "I've
no idea what the physic is, but my good wife seems to know, and that's
enough for me; and for you, too, I think."

"Ay, she's a good wumin.  Thank her for me," responded Ivor.

Remounting the dog-cart the old gentleman explained, as they drove
along, that Ivor Donaldson's illness was the result of intemperance.

"He is my gamekeeper," said the laird; "and there is not a better or
more trustworthy man in the island, when he is sober; but when he takes
one of his drinking fits, he seems to lose all control over himself, and
goes from bad to worse, till a fit of _delirium tremens_ almost kills
him.  He usually goes for a good while after that without touching a
drop, and at such times he is a most respectful, painstaking man,
willing to take any amount of trouble to serve one, but when he breaks
down he is as bad as ever--nay, even worse.  My wife and I have done
what we could for him, and have tried to get him to take the temperance
pledge, but hitherto without avail.  My wife has even gone the length of
becoming a total abstainer, in order to have more influence over him;
but I don't quite see my way to do that myself."

"Then _you_ have not yet done all that you could for the man, though
your wife has," thought Barret; but he did not venture to say so.

At this point in the conversation they reached a place where the road
left the shores of the loch and ascended into the hills.  Being rather
steep at its lower end, they alighted and walked; the laird pointing
out, as they ascended, features in the landscape which he thought would
interest his young guest.

"Yonder," he said, pointing to a wood on the opposite side of the
valley, "yonder is a good piece of cover for deer.  The last time we had
a drive there we got three, one o' them a stag with very fine antlers.
It was there that a young friend of mine, who was not much accustomed to
sporting, shot a red cow in mistake for a deer!  The same friend knocked
over five or six of my tame ducks, under the impression that they were
wild ones, because he found them among the heather!  Are you fond of
sport?"

"Not particularly," answered Barret; "that is, I am not personally much
of a sportsman, though I have great enjoyment in going out with my
sporting friends and watching their proceedings.  My own tastes are
rather scientific.  I am a student of natural history--a botanist and
geologist--though I lay no claim to extensive knowledge of science."

"Ah! my young friend, then you will find a powerful sympathiser in my
niece Milly--that is, when the poor child gets well--for she is half mad
on botany.  Although only two weeks have passed since she came to us,
she has almost filled her room with specimens of what she calls rare
plants.  I sometimes tease her by saying it is fortunate that bracken
does not come under that head, else she'd pull it all up and leave no
cover for the poor rabbits.  She has also half-filled several huge books
with gummed-in specimens innumerable, though I can't see that she does
more than write their names below them."

"And that is no small advance in the science, let me tell you," returned
Barret, who was stirred up to defend his co-scientist.  "No one can
succeed in anything who does not take the first steps, and undergo the
drudgery manfully."

"Womanfully, in this case, my friend; but do not imagine that I
underrate my little niece.  My remark was to the effect that I do not
see that she _does_ more, though I have no manner of doubt that her
pretty little head _thinks_ a great deal more.  Now we will get up here,
as the road is more level for a bit.  D'you see the group of alders down
in the hollow yonder, where the little stream that runs through the
valley takes a sudden bend?  There's a deep pool there, where a good
many sea-trout congregate.  You shall try it soon--that is, if you care
for fishing."

"Oh, yes, I like fishing," said Barret.  "It is a quiet, contemplative
kind of sport."

"Contemplative!" exclaimed the old gentleman with a laugh; "well, yes,
it is, a little.  Sometimes you get down into the bed of the stream with
considerable difficulty, and you have to contemplate the banks a long
time, occasionally, before deciding as to which precipice is least
likely to give you a broken neck.  Yes, it is a contemplative sport.  As
to quiet, that depends very much on what your idea of quietude may be.
Our burn descends for two or three miles in succession of leaps and
bounds.  If the roaring of cataracts is quieting to you, there is no end
of it down there.  See, the pool that I speak of is partly visible now,
with the waterfall above it.  You see it?"

"Yes, I see it."

"We call it Mac's pool," continued the laird, driving on, "because it is
a favourite pool of an old school companion of mine, named MacRummle,
who is staying with us just now.  He tumbles into it about once a week."

"Is that considered a necessary part of the process of fishing?" asked
Barret.

"No, it may rather be regarded as an eccentric addition peculiar to
MacRummle.  The fact is, that my good friend is rather too old to fish
now; but his spirit is still so juvenile, and his sporting instincts are
so keen, that he is continually running into dangerous positions and
getting into scrapes.  Fortunately he is very punctual in returning to
meals; so if he fails to appear at the right time, I send off one of my
men to look for him.  I have offered him a boy as an attendant, but he
prefers to be alone."

"There seems to be some one down at the pool now," remarked Barret,
looking back.

"No doubt it is MacRummle himself," said the laird, pulling up.  "Ay,
and he seems to be making signals to us."

"Shall I run down and see what he wants?" asked Barret.

"Do; you are active, and your legs are strong.  It will do you good to
scramble a little."

Leaping the ditch that skirted the road, the youth soon crossed the belt
of furze and heather that lay between him and the river, about which he
and his host had been conversing.  Being unaccustomed to the nature of
the Western Isles, he was a little surprised to find the country he had
to cross extremely rugged and broken, and it taxed all the activity for
which the laird had given him credit, as well as his strength of limb,
to leap some of the peat-hags and water-courses that came in his way.
He was too proud of his youthful vigour to pick his steps round them!
Only once did he make a slip in his kangaroo-like bounds, but that slip
landed him knee-deep in a bog of brown mud, out of which he dragged his
legs with difficulty.

Gaining the bank of the river at last, he soon came up to the fisher,
who was of sturdy build, though somewhat frail from age, and dressed in
brown tweed garments, with a dirty white wideawake, the crown of which
was richly decorated with casting-lines and hooks, ranging from small
brown hackle to salmon-fly.  But the striking thing about him was that
his whole person was soaking wet.  Water dripped from the pockets of his
shooting coat, dribbled from the battered brim of his wideawake, and,
flowing from his straightened locks, trickled off the end of his Roman
nose.

"You have been in the water, I fear," said Barret, in a tone of pity.

"And you have been in the mud, young man," said the fisher, in a tone of
good-humoured sarcasm.

The youth burst into a laugh at this, and the old fisherman's mouth
expanded into a broad grin, which betrayed the fact that age had failed
to damage his teeth, though it had played some havoc with his legs.

"These are what I style Highland boots," said the old man, pointing to
the muddy legs.

"Indeed!" returned Barret.  "Well, you see I have put them on at once,
for I have only arrived a few hours since.  My name is Barret.  I
believe I have the pleasure of addressing Mr MacRummle?"

"You have that pleasure, Mr Barret; and now, if you will do me the
kindness to carry my rod and basket, I will lead you back to the
dog-cart by a path which will not necessitate an additional pair of
native boots!  I would not have hailed you, but having tumbled into the
river, as you see, I thought it would be more prudent to get driven home
as quickly as possible."

"You have a good basket of fish, I see, or rather, feel," remarked
Barret, as he followed the old man, who walked rather slowly, for his
physical strength was not equal to his spirits.

"Ay, it is not so bad; but I lost the best one.  Fishers always do, you
know!  He was a grilse, a six-pounder at the least, if he was an ounce,
for I had him within an inch of my gaff when I overbalanced myself, and
shot into the stream head foremost with such force, that I verily
believe I drove him to the very bottom of the pool.  Strange to say the
rod was not broken; but when I scrambled ashore, I found that the grilse
was gone!"

"How unfortunate!  You were not hurt, I hope?"

"Not in the least.  There was plenty of depth for a dive; besides, I'm
used to it."

It became quite evident to John Barret that his new friend was "used to"
a good many more things besides tumbling into the river, for as they
went slowly along the winding footpath that led them through the
peat-hags, MacRummle tripped over a variety of stumps, roots, and other
excrescences which presented themselves in the track, and which on
several occasions brought him to the ground.  The old gentleman,
however, had a fine facility in falling.  Being slow in all his
movements, he usually subsided rather than fell; a result, perhaps, of
laziness as well as of unwillingness to struggle against fate.  His
frequent staggerings, also, on the verge of dark peat holes, caused his
companion many a shock of alarm and many a start forward to prevent a
catastrophe, before they gained the high road.  They reached it at last,
however, rather breathless, but safe.

MacRummle's speech, like his movements, was slow.  His personal courage,
considering the dangers he constantly and voluntarily encountered, was
great.

"You've been in again, Mac, I see," exclaimed the laird heartily,
extending his hand to his old friend with the view of hauling him up on
the seat beside him.  "Mind the step.  Now then!"

"Yes, I've been in, but the weather is warm!  Stop, stop!  Don't pull
quite so hard, Allan; mind my rheumatic shoulder.  Give a shove behind,
Mr Barret--gently--there.  Thankee."

The old man sat down with something of a crash beside his friend.
Barret handed him his rod, put the basket under his feet, and sprang up
on the seat behind.

Returning at a swift pace by the road they had come, they soon reached
Kinlossie, where the laird drove into the back yard, so as to deliver
the still dripping MacRummle at the back door, and thus prevent his
leaving a moist track from the front hall to his bedroom.  Having got
rid of him, and given the dog-cart in charge to the groom, Mr Gordon
led his young friend round to the front of the house.

"I see your friends have already arrived," said the laird, pointing to
the waggonette which stood in the yard.  "No doubt we shall find them
about somewhere."

They turned the corner of the mansion as he spoke, and certainly did
come on Barret's friends, in circumstances, however, which seemed quite
unaccountable at first sight, for there, in front of the open door, were
not only Bob Mabberly, Giles Jackman, Skipper McPherson, James McGregor,
Pat Quin, and Robin Tips, but also Mrs Gordon, the two boy Gordons--
named respectively, Eddie and Junkie--Duncan, the butler, and little
Flora, with a black wooden doll in her arms, all standing in more or
less awkward attitudes, motionless and staring straight before them as
if petrified with surprise or some kindred feeling.

Barret looked at his host with a slight elevation of his eyebrows.

"Hush!" said the laird, softly, holding up a finger of caution.  "My boy
Archie is behind that laurel bush.  He's photographing them!"

"That'll do," in a loud voice from Archie, disenchanted the party; and
while the operator rushed off to his "dark closet," the laird hurried
forward to be introduced to the new arrivals, and give them hospitable
greeting.

That evening the host and his wife entertained their guests to a genuine
Highland feast in the trophied hall, and at a somewhat later hour
Duncan, the butler, and Elsie, the cook, assisted by Roderick, the
groom, and Mary, the housemaid, held their share of high revelry in the
kitchen, with Quin, Tips, and "Shames" McGregor.

"You have come to the right place for sport, gentlemen," said the laird,
as he carved with vigour at a splendid haunch of venison.  "In their
seasons we have deer and grouse on the hills; rabbits, hares,
partridges, and pheasants on the low grounds.  What'll you have, Mr
Mabberly?  My dear, what have you got there?"

"Pigeon pie," answered Mrs Gordon.

"Mac, that will suit your taste, I know," cried the host with a laugh.

"Yes, it will," slowly returned MacRummle, whose ruddy face and smooth
bald head seemed to glow with satisfaction now that he had got into dry
garments.  "Yes, I'm almost as fond of pie as my old friend Robinson
used to be.  He was so fond of it that, strange though it may seem to
you, gentlemen, he had a curious predilection for pie-bald horses."

"Come, now, Mac, don't begin upon your friend Robinson till after
dinner."

"Has Archie's photography turned out well?" asked Mabberly at this
point.  "I do a little in that way myself, and am interested as to the
result of his efforts to-day."

"We cannot know that before to-morrow, I fear," replied Mrs Gordon.

"Did I hear you ask about Archie's work, Mabberly?" said the laird,
interrupting.  "Oh! it'll turn out well, I have no doubt.  He does
everything well.  In fact, all the boys are smartish fellows; a little
self-willed and noisy, perhaps, like all boys, but--"

A tremendous crash in the room above, which was the nursery, caused the
laird to drop his knife and fork and quickly leave the room, with a look
of anxiety, for he was a tender-hearted, excitable man; while his quiet
and delicate-looking wife sat still, with a look of serenity not
unmingled with humour.

"Something overturned, I suppose," she remarked.

In a few minutes her husband returned with a bland smile.

"Yes," he said, resuming his knife and fork; "it was Junkie, as usual,
fighting with Flo for the black doll.  No mischief would have followed,
I daresay, but Archie and Eddie joined in the scrimmage, and between
them they managed to upset the table.  I found them wallowing in a sea
of porridge and milk--that was all!"



CHAPTER FIVE.

PLANS, PROSPECTS, AND A GREAT FIGHT.

There is something very enjoyable in awaking in a strange bedroom with a
feeling of physical strength and abounding health about one, with a
glorious, early sunbeam irradiating the room--especially if it does not
shine upon one's face--with a window opposite, through which you can see
a mountain rising through the morning mists, until its summit appears to
claim kindred with the skies, and with the consciousness that work is
over for a time, and recreation is the order of the day.

Some such thoughts and feelings caused John Barret to smile as he lay
flat on his back, the morning after his arrival, with his hands under
his head, surveying the low-roofed but cosy apartment which had been
allotted to him in the mansion of Kinlossie.  But the smile gave place
to a grave, earnest expression as his eyes fell upon a framed card, on
which was printed, in scarlet and blue and gold, "The earth is the Lords
and the fulness thereof."

"So it is," thought the youth; "and my power to enjoy it comes from the
Lord--my health, my strength, myself.  Yet how seldom do I thank Him for
the mere fact of a happy existence.  God forgive me!"

Although Barret thus condemned himself, we would not have it supposed
that he had been a careless unbeliever.  His temperament was grave (not
by any means gloomy) by nature, and a Christian mother's love and
teaching had, before her early death, deepened his religious
impressions.

He was beginning to wonder whether it was Mrs Gordon who had hung the
text there, and whether it had been executed by Milly Moss, when the
"get up" gong sent forth a sonorous peal, causing him to bound out of
bed.  The act brought before his eyes another bed--a small one--in a
corner of the room reminding him of what he had forgotten, that, the
house being full to overflow by the recent accession of visitors, little
Joseph, better known as Junkie, shared the room with him.

Junkie was at the moment sleeping soundly, after the manner of the
hedgehog--that is, curled up in the form of a ball.  It was plain that
neither dressing gongs nor breakfast-bells had any effect upon him, for
he lay still in motionless slumber.

"Hallo!  Junkie, did you hear the gong?" said Barret, pushing the boy
gently.

But Junkie answered not, and he had to push him three or four times
gently, and twice roughly, before he could awaken the youngster.
Uncoiling himself and turning on the other side, Junkie heaved a deep
sigh, and murmured,--"Leave m' 'lone."

"Junkie!  Junkie! you'll be late for breakfast," shouted Barret in his
ear.

"Don'--wan'--any--br'kf'st," murmured the boy.  "Leave m' 'lone, I say--
or'll wallop you!"
