was to lessen the distance between her and the Sea Foam; they were abeam
of each other, with the Phantom in the same line. The Christabel was
about a cable's length ahead of them.

"She's game yet," said Gus Barker, his disappointment evident in the
tones of his voice, as the Skylark came up to the Sea Foam.

"This is a new boat, and I haven't got the hang of her yet," Donald
explained. "Haul up that fin a little, Dick."

"What fin?"

"The centre-board."

"Ay, ay," replied Dick, as he obeyed the order.

"Steady! that's enough," continued Donald, who now narrowly watched the
sailing of the Sea Foam, to assure himself that she did not make too
much leeway.

"That was what she wanted!" exclaimed Gus, when the yacht began to gain
again, and in a few minutes was half a length ahead.

[Illustration: THE START. Page 51.]

"But not quite so much of it," replied Donald, when he saw that his
craft was sliding off a very little. "Give her just three inches more
fin, Dick."

The centre-board was dropped this distance, and the tendency to make
leeway thus corrected.

"She is gaining still!" cried Gus, delighted.

"Not much; it is a pretty even thing," added Donald.

"No matter; we beat her, and I don't care if it's only half an inch in a
mile."

"But the Christabel is leading us all. She is sure of all the first
prizes."

"Not a bit of it. She has to reef when there's a capful of wind. In a
calm she will beat us, but when it blows we shall wax her all to
pieces."

"Hallo!" shouted Mr. Laud Cavendish, whose small sail-boat was
overhauled about half way over to Turtle Head. "Is that you, Don John?"

"I believe so," replied Donald.

"Where you going?"

"Over to Turtle Head. Want us to give you a tow?"

"No; you needn't brag about your old tub. She don't belong to you; and
I'm going to have a boat that will beat that one all to splinters,"
replied Laud.

"All right; fetch her along."

"I say, Don John, I'm going to stop over Sunday on Turtle Head. Won't
you stay with me?"

"No, I thank you. I must go home to-night," answered Donald.

Mr. Laud Cavendish knew very well that Donald would not spend Sunday in
boating and fishing; and he did not ask because he wanted him. Besides,
for more reasons than one, he did not desire his company. The Sea Foam
ran out of talking distance of the sail-boat in a moment. Robert
Montague was doing his best to keep up the reputation of the Skylark;
but when the fleet came up to Turtle Head, she was more than a length
behind. The jib was hauled down, the yachts came up into the wind, and
the anchors were let go.

"Beat you," shouted Gus Barker.

"Not much," replied Robert. "We will try that over again some time."

"We are willing," added Donald.

The mainsails were lowered, and the young yachtmen embarked in the
tenders for the shore. Turtle Head is a rocky point at the northern
extremity of Long Island, in Penobscot Bay. There were a few trees near
the shore, and under these the party purposed to hold their meeting.
Though the weather was intensely hot on shore, it was comfortably cool
at the Head, where the wind came over five or six miles of salt water
cool from the ocean. The boys leaped ashore, and hauled up their boats
where the rising tide could not float them off. There were over twenty
of them, all members of the High School.

"The Sea Foam sails well," said Robert Montague, as he walked over to
the little grove with Donald.

"Very well, indeed. This is the first time she has been out, and I find
she works first rate," replied Donald.

"I want to try it with her some day, when everything is right."

"Wasn't everything right to-day?" asked Donald, smiling, for he was well
aware that every boatman has a good excuse for the shortcomings of his
craft.

"No; my tender is twice as heavy as yours," added Robert. "I must get
your father to build me one like that of the Sea Foam."

"We will try it without any tenders, which we don't want in a race."

"Of course I don't know but the Sea Foam can beat me; but I haven't seen
the boat of her inches before that could show her stern to the Skylark,"
said Robert; and it was plain that he was a little nettled at the slight
advantage which the new yacht had gained.

"I should like to sail her when you try it, for I have great hopes of
the Sea Foam. If my father has built a boat that will beat the Skylark
in all weathers, he has done a big thing, and it will make business good
for him."

"For his sake I might be almost willing to be whipped," replied Robert,
good-naturedly, as they halted in the grove.

Charley Armstrong was the oldest member of the party, and he was to call
the meeting to order, which he did with a brief speech, explaining the
object of the gathering, though everybody present knew it perfectly
well. Charles was then chosen chairman, and Dick Adams secretary. It was
voted to form a club, and the secretary was called upon to read the
constitution of the "Dorchester Yacht Club." The name was changed to
Belfast, and the document was adopted as the constitution of the Belfast
Yacht Club. The second article declared that the officers should consist
of a "Commodore, Vice-Commodore, Captain of the Fleet, Secretary,
Treasurer, Measurer, a Board of Trustees, and a Regatta Committee;" and
the next business was to elect them, which had to be done by written or
printed ballots. As the first three officers were required to be owners
in whole, or in part, of yachts enrolled in the club, there was found to
be an alarming scarcity of yachts. The Skylark, Sea Foam, Phantom, and
Christabel were on hand. Edward Patterdale and Samuel Rodman had
signified their intention to join, though they were unable to be present
at the first meeting. The Maud, as Samuel Rodman's new yacht was to be
called, was to be built at once: she was duly enrolled, thus making a
total of five, from whom the first three officers must be chosen.

The secretary had come supplied with stationery, and a slip was handed
to each member, after the constitution had been signed. A ballot was
taken for commodore; Robert B. Montague had twenty votes, and Charles
Armstrong one. Robert accepted the office in a "neat little speech,"
and took the chair, which was a sharp rock. Edward Patterdale was
elected vice-commodore, and Joseph Guilford captain of the fleet. Donald
was chosen measurer, and the other offices filled to the satisfaction of
those elected, if not of the others. It was then agreed to have a review
and excursion on the following Saturday, to which the ladies were to be
invited.

The important business of the day was happily finished, and the fleet
sailed for Belfast. Having secured the Sea Foam at her mooring, Donald
hastened home. As he approached the cottage, he saw a doctor's sulky at
the door, and the neighbors going in and out. His heart rose into his
throat, for there was not one living beneath that humble roof whom he
did not love better than himself.




CHAPTER IV.

A SAD EVENT IN THE RAMSAY FAMILY.


Donald's heart beat violently as he hastened towards the cottage. Before
he could reach it, another doctor drew up at the door, and it was
painfully certain that one of the family was very sick--dangerously so,
or two physicians would not have been summoned. It might be his father,
his mother, or his sister Barbara; and whichever it was, it was terrible
to think of. His legs almost gave away under him, when he staggered up
to the cottage. As he did so, he recalled the fact that his father had
been ailing when he went away in the Sea Foam. It must be his father,
therefore, who was now so desperately ill as to require the attendance
of two doctors.

The cottage was a small affair, with a pretty flower garden in front of
it, and a whitewashed fence around it. But small as it was, it was not
owned by the boat-builder, who, though not in debt, had hardly anything
of this world's goods--possibly a hundred dollars in the savings' bank,
and the furniture in the cottage. Though he was as prudent and thrifty
as Scotchmen generally are, and was not beset by their "often
infirmity," he had not been very prosperous. The business of
ship-building had been almost entirely suspended, and for several years
only a few small vessels had been built in the city. Ramsay had always
obtained work; but he lived well, and gave his daughter and his son an
excellent education.

Alexander Ramsay's specialty was the building of yachts and boats, and
he determined to make a better use of his skill than selling it with his
labor for day wages. He went into business for himself as a
boat-builder. When he established himself, he had several hundred
dollars, with which he purchased stock and tools. He had built several
sail-boats, but the Sea Foam was the largest job he had obtained.
Doubtless with life and health he would have done a good business.
Donald had always been interested in boats, and he knew the name and
shape of every timber and plank in the hull of a vessel, as well as
every spar and rope. Though only sixteen, he was an excellent mechanic
himself. His father had taken great pains to instruct him in the use of
tools, and in draughting and modelling boats and larger craft. He not
only studied the art in theory, but he worked with his own hands. In the
parlor of the little cottage was a full-rigged brig, made entirely by
him. The hull was not a log, shaped and dug out, but regularly
constructed, with timbers and planking. When he finished it, only a few
months before his introduction to the reader, he felt competent to build
a yacht like the Sea Foam, without any assistance; but boys are
generally over-confident, and possibly he overrated his ability.

With his heart rising up into his throat, Donald walked towards the
cottage. As he passed the whitewashed gate, one of the neighbors came
out at the front door. She was an elderly woman, and she looked very sad
as she glanced at the boy.

"I'm glad you have come, Donald; but I'm afraid he'll never speak to you
again," said she.

"Is it my father?" gasped the poor fellow.

"It is; and he's very sick indeed."

"What ails him?"

"That's more than the doctors can tell yet," added the woman. "They say
it's very like the cholera; and I suppose it's cholera-morbus. He has
been ailing for several days, and he didn't take care of himself. But go
in, Donald, and see him while you may."

The young man entered the cottage. The doctors, his mother and sister,
were all doing what they could for the sufferer, who was enduring, with
what patience he could, the most agonizing pain. Donald went into the
chamber where his father lay writhing upon the bed. The physicians were
at work upon him; but he saw his son as he entered the room and held out
his hand to him. The boy took it in his own. It was cold and convulsed.

"I'm glad you've come, Donald," groaned he, uttering the words with
great difficulty. "Be a good boy always, and take care of your mother
and sister."

"I will, father," sobbed Donald, pressing the cold hand he held.

"I was afraid I might never see you again," gasped Mr. Ramsay.

"O, don't give up, my man," said Dr. Wadman. "You may be all right in a
few hours."

The sick man said no more. He was in too much pain to speak again, and
Dr. Wadman sent Donald to the kitchen for some hot water. When he
returned with it he was directed to go to the apothecary's for an ounce
of chloroform, which the doctors were using internally and externally,
and had exhausted their supply. Donald ran all the way as though the
life of his father depended upon his speed. He was absent only a few
minutes, but when he came back there was weeping and wailing in the
little cottage by the sea-side. His father had breathed his last, even
while the doctors were hopefully working to save him.

"O, Donald, Donald!" cried Mrs. Ramsay, as she threw her arms around his
neck. "Your poor father is gone!"

The boy could not speak; he could not even weep, though his grief was
not less intense than that of his mother and sister. They groaned, and
sobbed, and sighed together, till kind neighbors led them from the
chamber of death, vainly endeavoring to comfort them. It was hours
before they were even tolerably calm; but they could speak of nothing,
think of nothing, but him who was gone. The neighbors did all that it
was necessary to do, and spent the night with the afflicted ones, who
could not separate to seek their beds. The rising sun of the Sabbath
found them still up, and still weeping--those who could weep. It was a
long, long Sunday to them, and every moment of it was given to him who
had been a devoted husband and a tender father. On Monday, all too soon,
was the funeral; and all that was mortal of Alexander Ramsay was laid in
the silent grave, never more to be looked upon by those who had loved
him, and whom he had loved.

The little cottage was like a casket robbed of its single jewel to those
who were left. Earth and life seemed like a terrible blank to them. They
could not accustom themselves to the empty chair at the window where he
sat when his day's work was done; to the vacant place at the table,
where he had always invoked the blessing of God on the frugal fare
before them; and to the silent and deserted shop on the other side of
the street, from which the noise of his hammer and the clip of his adze
had come to them. A week wore away and nothing was done but the most
necessary offices of the household. The neighbors came frequently to
beguile their grief, and the minister made several visits, bearing to
them the consolations of the gospel, and the tender message of a genuine
sympathy.

But it is not for poor people long to waste themselves in idle
lamentations. The problem of the future was forced upon Mrs. Ramsay for
solution. If they had been able only to live comfortably on the earnings
of the dead husband, what should they do now when the strong arm that
delved for them was silent in the cold embrace of death? They must all
work now; but even then the poor woman could hardly see how she could
keep her family together. Barbara was eighteen, but she had never done
anything except to assist her mother, whose health was not very good,
about the house. She was a graduate of the High School, and competent,
so far as education was concerned, to teach a school if she could obtain
a situation. Mrs. Ramsay might obtain work to be done at home, but it
was only a pittance she could earn besides doing her housework. She
wished to have Donald finish his education at the High School, but she
was afraid this was impossible.

Donald, still mourning for his father, who had so constantly been his
companion in the cottage and in the shop, that he could not reconcile
