happiest.  Well, well, I'll say no more about that, as we're gettin'
near mother's door.  But tell me, Isa, has Uncle Martin been worrying
mother again when I was away?"

"No.  When he found out that you had got the money that was left to her,
and had bought an annuity for her with it, he went away, and I've not
seen him since."

"That's well.  I'm glad of that."

"But am I to hear nothing more about this smack, not even her name?"

"Nothing more just now, Isa.  As to her name, it's not yet fixed.  But,
trust me, you shall know all in good time."

As they had now reached the foot of Mrs Martin's stair, the subject was
dropped.

They found the good woman in the act of supplying Granny Martin with a
cup of tea.  There was obvious improvement in the attic.  Sundry little
articles of luxury were there which had not been there before.

"You see, my boy," said Mrs Martin to Fred, as they sat round the
social board, "now that the Lord has sent me enough to get along without
slavin' as I used--to do, I takes more time to make granny comfortable,
an' I've got her a noo chair, and noo specs, which she was much in want
of, for the old uns was scratched to that extent you could hardly see
through 'em, besides bein' cracked across both eyes.  Ain't they much
better, dear?"

The old woman, seated in the attic window, turned her head towards the
tea-table and nodded benignantly once or twice; but the kind look soon
faded into the wonted air of patient contentment, and the old head
turned to the sea as the needle turns to the pole, and the soft murmur
was heard, "He'll come soon now."



CHAPTER SEVEN.

A RESCUE.

Never was there a fishing smack more inappropriately named than the
_Fairy_,--that unwieldy iron vessel which the fleet, in facetious
content, had dubbed the "Ironclad," and which had the honour of being
commanded by that free and easy, sociable--almost too sociable--skipper,
Ned Bryce.

She was steered by Dick Martin on the day of which we now write.  Dick,
as he stood at the helm, with stern visage, bloodshot eyes, and
dissipated look, was not a pleasant object of contemplation, but as he
played a prominent part in the proceedings of that memorable day, we are
bound to draw attention to him.  Although he had spent a considerable
portion of the night with his skipper in testing the quality of some
schnapps which they had recently procured from a _coper_, he had
retained his physical and mental powers sufficiently for the performance
of his duties.  Indeed, he was one of those so-called seasoned casks,
who are seldom or never completely disabled by drink, although
thoroughly enslaved, and he was now quite competent to steer the _Fairy_
in safety through the mazes of that complex dance which the deep-sea
trawlers usually perform on the arrival of the carrying-steamer.

What Bryce called a chopping and a lumpy sea was running.  It was
decidedly rough, though the breeze was moderate, so that the smacks all
round were alternately presenting sterns and bowsprits to the sky in a
violent manner that might have suggested the idea of a rearing and
kicking dance.  When the carrier steamed up to the Admiral, and lay to
beside him, and the smacks drew towards her from all points of the
compass, the mazes of the dance became intricate, and the risk of
collisions called for careful steering.

Being aware of this, and being himself not quite so steady about the
head as he could wish, Skipper Bryce looked at Martin for a few seconds,
and then ordered him to go help to launch the boat and get the trunks
out, and send Phil Morgan aft.

Phil was not a better seaman than Dick, but he was a more temperate man,
therefore clearer brained and more dependable.

Soon the smacks were waltzing and kicking round each other on every
possible tack, crossing and re-crossing bows and sterns; sometimes close
shaving, out and in, down-the-middle-and-up-again fashion, which, to a
landsman, might have been suggestive of the 'bus, cab, and van throng in
the neighbourhood of that heart of the world, the Bank of England.

Sounds of hailing and chaffing now began to roll over the North Sea from
many stentorian lungs.

"What cheer? what cheer?" cried some in passing.

"Hallo, Tim! how are 'ee, old man!  What luck?"

"All right, Jim; on'y six trunks."

"Ha! that's 'cause ye fished up a dead man yesterday."

"Is that you, Ted?"

"Ay, ay, what's left o' me--worse luck.  I thought your mother was goin'
to keep you at home this trip to mind the babby."

"So she was, boy, but the babby fell into a can o' buttermilk an' got
drownded, so I had to come off again, d'ee see?"

"What cheer, Groggy Fox?  Have 'ee hoisted the blue ribbon yet?"

"No, Stephen Lockley, I haven't, nor don't mean to, but one o' the fleet
seems to have hoisted the blue flag."

Groggy Fox pointed to one of the surrounding vessels as he swept past in
the _Cormorant_.

Lockley looked round in haste, and, to his surprise, saw floating among
the smaller flags, at a short distance, the great twenty-feet flag of a
mission vessel, with the letters MDSF (Mission to Deep-Sea Fishermen) on
it, in white on a blue ground.

"She must have lost her reckoning," muttered Lockley, as he tried to
catch sight of the vessel to which the flag belonged--which was not
easy, owing to the crowd of smacks passing to and fro between it and
him.

Just at that moment a hearty cheer was heard to issue from the Admiral's
smack, the _Cherub_.  At the same time the boat of the _Lively Poll_ was
launched into the sea, Duffy and Freeman and another hand tumbled into
her, and the skipper had to give his undivided attention to the
all-important matter of transhipping the fish.

Dozens of boats were by that time bobbing like corks on the heaving sea,
all making for the attendant steamer.  Other dozens, which had already
reached her, were clinging on--the men heaving the fish-boxes aboard,--
while yet others were pushing off from the smacks last arrived to join
the busy swarm.

Among these was the boat of the _Fairy_, with Dick Martin and two men
aboard.  It was heavily laden--too heavily for such a sea--for their
haul on the previous night had been very successful.

North Sea fishermen are so used to danger that they are apt to despise
it.  Both Bryce and Martin knew they had too many trunks in the boat,
but they thought it a pity to leave five or six behind, and be obliged
to make two trips for so small a number, where one might do.  Besides,
they could be careful.  And so they were--very careful; yet despite all
their care they shipped a good deal of water, and the skipper stood on
the deck of the _Fairy_ watching them with some anxiety.  Well he might,
for so high were the waves that not only his own boat but all the others
kept disappearing and re-appearing continually, as they rose on the
crests or sank into the hollows.

But Skipper Bryce had eyes for only one boat.  He saw it rise to view
and disappear steadily, regularly, until it was about half-way to the
steamer; then suddenly it failed to rise, and next moment three heads
were seen amid the tumultuous waters where the boat should have been.

With a tremendous shout Bryce sprang to the tiller and altered the
vessel's course, but, as the wind blew, he knew well it was not in his
power to render timely aid.  That peculiar cry which tells so
unmistakably of deadly disaster was raised from the boats nearest to
that which had sunk, and they were rowed towards the drowning men, but
the boats were heavy and slow of motion.  Already they were too late,
for two out of the three men had sunk to rise no more--dragged down by
their heavy boots and winter clothing.  Only one continued the struggle.
It was Dick Martin.  He had grasped an oar, and, being able to swim,
kept his head up.  The intense cold of the sea, however, would soon have
relaxed even his iron grip, and he would certainly have perished, had it
not been that the recently arrived mission vessel chanced to be a very
short distance to windward of him.  A slight touch of the helm sent her
swiftly to his side.  A rope was thrown.  Martin caught it.  Ready hands
and eager hearts were there to grasp and rescue.  In another moment he
was saved, and the vessel swept on to mingle with the other smacks--for
Martin was at first almost insensible, and could not tell to which
vessel of the fleet he belonged.

Yes, the bad man was rescued, though no one would have sustained much
loss by his death; but in Yarmouth that night there was one woman, who
little thought that she was a widow, and several little ones who knew
not that they were fatherless.  The other man who perished was an
unmarried youth, but he left an invalid mother to lifelong mourning over
the insatiable greed of the cold North Sea.

Little note was taken of this event in the fleet.  It was, in truth, a
by no means unusual disaster.  If fish are to be found, fair weather or
foul, for the tables on land, lives must be risked and lost in the
waters of the sea.  Loss of life in ferrying the fish being of almost
daily occurrence, men unavoidably get used to it, as surgeons do to
suffering and soldiers to bloodshed.  Besides, on such occasions, in the
great turmoil of winds and waves, and crowds of trawlers and shouting,
it may be only a small portion of the fleet which is at first aware that
disaster has occurred, and even these must not, cannot, turn aside from
business at such times to think about the woes of their fellow-men.

Meanwhile Dick Martin had fallen, as the saying is, upon his feet.  He
was carried into a neatly furnished cabin, put between warm blankets in
a comfortable berth, and had a cup of steaming hot coffee urged upon him
by a pleasant-voiced sailor, who, while he inquired earnestly as to how
he felt, at the same time thanked the Lord fervently that they had been
the means of saving his life.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

TELLS OF MORE THAN ONE SURPRISE.

"Was that your boat that went down?" shouted Groggy Fox of the
_Cormorant_, as he sailed past the _Fairy_, after the carrying-steamer
had left, and the numerous fishing-smacks were gradually falling into
order for another attack on the finny hosts of the sea.

They were almost too far apart for the reply to be heard, and possibly
Bryce's state of mind prevented his raising his voice sufficiently, but
it was believed that the answer was "Yes."

"Poor fellows!" muttered Fox, who was a man of tender feelings, although
apt to feel more for himself than for any one else.

"I think Dick Martin was in the boat," said the mate of the _Cormorant_,
who stood beside his skipper.  "I saw them when they shoved off, and
though it was a longish distance, I could make him out by his size, an'
the fur cap he wore."

"Well, the world won't lose much if he's gone," returned Fox; "he was a
bad lot."

It did not occur to the skipper at that time that he himself was nearly,
if not quite, as bad a "lot."  But bad men are proverbially blind to
their own faults.

"He was a cross-grained fellow," returned the mate, "specially when in
liquor, but I never heard no worse of 'im than that."

"Didn't you?" said Fox; "didn't you hear what they said of 'im at
Gorleston?--that he tried to do his sister out of a lot o' money as was
left her by some cove or other in furrin parts.  An' some folk are quite
sure that it was him as stole the little savin's o' that poor widdy,
Mrs Mooney, though they can't just prove it agin him.  Ah, he is a bad
lot, an' no mistake.  But I may say that o' the whole bilin' o' the
Martins.  Look at Fred, now."

"Well, wot of him?" asked the mate, in a somewhat gruff tone.

"What of him!" repeated the skipper, "ain't he a hypocrite, with his
smooth tongue an' his sly ways, as if butter wouldn't melt in his mouth,
an' now--where is he?"

"Well, _where_ is he!" demanded the mate, with increasing gruffness.

"Why, in course nobody knows where he is," retorted the skipper; "that's
where it is.  No sooner does he get a small windfall--leastwise, his
mother gets it--than he cuts the trawlers, an' all his old friends
without so much as sayin' `Good-bye,' an' goes off to Lunnon or
somewheres, to set up for a gentleman, I suppose."

"I don't believe nothin' o' the sort," returned the mate indignantly.
"Fred Martin may be smooth-tongued and shy if you like, but he's no
hypercrite--"

"Hallo! there's that mission ship on the lee bow," cried Fox,
interrupting his mate, and going over to the lee side of the smack,
whence he could see the vessel with the great blue flag clearly.  "Port
your helm," he added in a deep growl to the man who steered.  "I'll give
her a wide berth."

"If she was the _coper_ you'd steer the other way," remarked the mate,
with a laugh.

"In course I would," retorted Fox, "for there I'd find cheap baccy and
brandy."

"Ay, bad brandy," said the mate; "but, skipper, you can get baccy
cheaper aboard the mission ships now than aboard the _coper_."

"What! at a shillin' a pound?"

"Ay, at a shillin' a pound."

"I don't believe it."

"But it's a fact," returned the mate firmly, "for Simon Brooks, as was
in the Short-Blue fleet last week, told me it's a noo regulation--
they've started the sale o' baccy in the Gospel ships, just to keep us
from going to the _copers_."

"That'll not keep _me_ from going to the _copers_," said Groggy Fox,
with an oath.

"Nor me," said his mate, with a laugh; "but, skipper, as we are pretty
nigh out o' baccy just now, an' as the mission ship is near us, an' the
breeze down, I don't see no reason why we shouldn't go aboard an' see
whether the reports be true.  We go to buy baccy, you know, an' we're
not bound to buy everything the shop has to sell!  We don't want their
religion, an' they can't force it down our throats whether we will or
no."

Groggy Fox vented a loud laugh at the bare supposition of such treatment
of his throat, admitted that his mate was right, and gave orders to
launch the boat.  In a few minutes they were rowing over the still
heaving but now somewhat calmer sea, for the wind had fallen suddenly,
and the smacks lay knocking about at no great distance from each other.

It was evident from the bustle on board many of them, and the launching
of boats over their bulwarks, that not a few of the men intended to take
advantage of this unexpected visit of a mission vessel.  No doubt their
motives were various.  Probably some went, like the men of the
_Cormorant_, merely for baccy; some for medicine; others, perhaps, out
of curiosity; while a few, no doubt, went with more or less of desire
after the "good tidings," which they were aware had been carried to
several of the other fleets that laboured on the same fishing-grounds.

Whatever the reasons, it was evident that a goodly number of men were
making for the vessel with the great blue flag.  Some had already
reached her; more were on their way.  The _Cormorant's_ boat was among
the last to arrive.

"What does MDSF stand for?" asked Skipper Fox, as they drew near.

"Mission to Deep-Sea Fishermen," answered the mate, whose knowledge on
this and other points of the Mission were due to his intercourse with
his friend Simon Brooks of the Short-Blue.  "But it means more than
that," he continued.  "When we are close enough to make 'em out, you'll
see little letters _above_ the MDSF which make the words I've just told
you, an' there are little letters _below_ the MDSF which make the words
Mighty Deliverer, Saviour, Friend."

"Ay!  That's a clever dodge," observed Groggy Fox, who, it need hardly
be said, was more impressed with the ingenuity of the device than with
the grand truth conveyed.

"But I say, mate, they seems to be uncommonly lively aboard of her."

This was obviously the case, for by that time the boat of the
_Cormorant_ had come so near to the vessel that they could not only
perceive the actions of those on board, but could hear their voices.
The curiosity of Skipper Fox and his men was greatly roused, for they
felt convinced that the mere visit of a passing mission ship did not
fully account for the vigorous hand-shakings of those on the deck, and
the hearty hailing of newcomers, and the enthusiastic cheers of some at
least of the little boats' crews as they pulled alongside.

"Seems to me as if they've all gone mad," remarked Groggy Fox, with a
sarcastic grin.

"I would say they was all drunk, or half-seas over," observed the mate,
"if it was a _coper_, but in a Gospel ship that's impossible, 'cause
they're teetotal, you know.  Isn't that the boat o' the Admiral that's
pullin' alongside just now, skipper?"

"Looks like it, mate.  Ay, an' that's Stephen Lockley of the _Lively
Poll_ close astarn of 'im--an' ain't they kickin' up a rumpus now!"

Fox was right, for when the two little boats referred to ranged
alongside of the vessel, and the men scrambled up the side on to her
deck, there was an amount of greeting, and hand-shaking, and exclaiming
in joyful surprise, which threw all previous exhibitions in that way
quite into the shade, and culminated in a mighty cheer, the power of
which soft people with shore-going throats and lungs and imaginations
cannot hope to emulate or comprehend!

The cheer was mildly repeated with mingled laughter when the crowd on
deck turned to observe the arrival of the _Cormorant's_ boat.

"Why, it's the skipper o' the _Ironclad_!" exclaimed a voice.  "No, it's
not.  It's the skipper o' the _Cormorant_," cried another.

"What cheer? what cheer, Groggy Fox?" cried a third, as the boat swooped
alongside, and several strong arms were extended.  "Who'd have looked
for _you_ here?  There ain't no schnapps."

"All right, mates," replied Fox, with an apologetic smile, as he
alighted on the deck and looked round; "I've come for _baccy_."

A short laugh greeted this reply, but it was instantly checked, for at
the moment Fred Martin stepped forward, grasped the skipper's horny
hand, and shook it warmly, as well as powerfully, for Fred was a
muscular man, and had fully recovered his strength.

"You've come to the right shop for baccy," he said; "I've got plenty o'
that, besides many other things much better.  I bid you heartily welcome
on board of the _Sunbeam_ in the name of the Lord!"

For a few seconds the skipper of the _Cormorant_ could not utter a word.
He gazed at Fred Martin with his mouth partially, and his eyes wide,
open.  The thought that he was thus cordially received by the very man
whose character he had so lately and so ungenerously traduced had
something, perhaps, to do with his silence.

"A-are--are _you_ the skipper o' this here wessel!" he stammered.

"Ay, through God's goodness I am."

"A _mission_ wessel!" said Fox, his amazement not a whit abated as he
looked round.

"Just so, a Gospel ship," answered Fred, giving the skipper another
shake of the hand.

"You didn't mistake it for a _coper_, did 'ee?" asked David Duffy, who
was one of the visitors.

The laugh which followed this question drowned Groggy Fox's reply.

"And you'll be glad to hear," said Fred, still addressing Fox, "that the
_Sunbeam_ is a new mission ship, and has been appointed to do service
for God in _this_ fleet and no other; so you'll always be able to have
books and baccy, mitts, helmets, comforters, medicines, and, best of
all, Bibles and advice for body and soul, free gratis when you want
'em."

"But where's the doctor to give out the medicines," asked Fox, who began
to moderate his gaze as he recovered self-possession.

"Well, mate," answered Fred, with a bashful air, "I am doctor as well as
skipper.  Indeed, I'm parson too--a sort of Jack-of-all-trades!  I'm not
full fledged of course, but on the principle, I fancy, that `half a loaf
is better than no bread,' I've been sent here after goin' through a
short course o' trainin' in surgery--also in divinity; something like
city missionaries and Scripture-readers; not that trainin', much or
little, would fit any man for the great work unless he had the love of
