bacon into his no less enormous mouth.  "It's raison I have too," he
added thickly, but quite audibly, "for she nursed my poor wife through a
long illness, an' it's my belaif she wouldn't ha' bin alive this day but
for the care and attintion she got from Elise."

The demon fled horrified out at the key-hole--the window being shut--and
Le Rue, feeling the deepest regard for Rooney, relieved his feelings
with a sigh and more "pig."

While the Irishman and Canadian were entertaining each other thus in the
kitchen, the Highlanders and Englishman were no less cordial and busy in
the hall.  Rough and ready the hospitality indeed was, for the board was
not only uncovered but unplaned, and the dishes were cracked and
dinted--according to their nature; but the heartiness of the welcome,
the solidity of the simple viands, the strength of appetite, and, above
all, the presence of bright eyes and gentle spirits threw a luxurious
halo round the humble apartment, in the light of which Reginald Redding
revelled.

Tea,--the cup which cheers but does not inebriate,--was used at that
board as if it had been brandy and water.  The men not only drank it
during the progress of the meal, but afterwards sat long over it, and
dallied with it, and urged each other to "have some more" of it, and
quaffed it to the health of absent friends, and told stories, and cut
jokes, and sang songs over it, and replenished it with hot water to such
an extent that it gradually changed its nature and became that harmless
beverage loved by Frenchmen, _eau sucre_.

That it cheered was evident, for laughter was often loud and sometimes
long.  That it did not inebriate was equally clear, for the talk of the
party was frequently grave as well as gay.

It was especially grave when, towards the end of the evening, McLeod
senior, in answer to some allusion of his guest as to the beauties of
Partridge Bay, became confidential, and told how he had once dwelt in
that settlement for many years, in a happy home which he had specially
built for himself, or rather, as he said, with a kindly glance at his
pretty daughter, which he had built specially for his wife and child.
How it had pleased God to take from him his dear partner before they had
been long in the new house; how the failure of a friend had involved him
in ruin, and compelled him to sell off all he had possessed and begin
life anew with the scanty remnants of his fortune; how he had taken the
advice of another friend, and come to Jenkins Creek to set up a
saw-mill, having previously invested nearly all his funds in an order
for goods from England, for the purpose of setting up a general store,
as it was highly probable the country would go on prospering, and the
demand for such a store become great; how he had had letters from his
youngest son, Roderick,--a lad of nineteen who had been educated in the
"old country,"--telling him that the goods had been bought and shipped
in the _Betsy_ of Plymouth, and how that he, Roderick, intended to take
passage in the same ship the week following, and join his father and
brothers in their new sphere of labour; how that, sometimes, he felt
depressed by the sudden reverse of fortune, but was always cheered and
raised up again by his daughter Flo, who had a wonderful way--somewhat
like her mother--of inducing him, when things looked darkest, to turn
his eyes to the source of all light, and comfort, and hope, and
prosperity.

You may be sure that Reginald Redding listened to all this with the
deepest interest and sympathy, for as he glanced at Flora's speaking
countenance--and he did glance at it pretty frequently--he observed new
beauty in her expression, and bright tear-drops in her eyes.

"Ah, Flo," said her father, when he had finished, "no one has such good
cause to regret the loss of our old home as yourself, for I don't think
Mr Gambart could have planned it without your aid."

"What!" exclaimed Redding, with a look of sudden surprise, "what was the
name of your place in Partridge Bay?"

"I gave it a Highland name," said McLeod, with a sad smile, "after a
place in Scotland that once belonged to my mother's family,--Loch Dhu."

For a moment or two the young fur-trader remained speechless.  He looked
first at Flora and then at her father, and after that at her brothers,
without being able to make up his mind how to act.  He now understood
the reason of Gambart's silence as to the former owners of Loch Dhu, and
he would have given worlds at that moment if he had never seen or heard
of the place, for it seemed such a heartless position to be placed in--
the fortunate owner of the lovely spot, over the loss of which Flora and
her family evidently mourned so deeply.  He could not bear the thought
of having to reveal the truth; still less could he bear the thought of
concealing it.  He was therefore about to make the disagreeable
confession, when the thoughts of the whole party were suddenly diverted
to another channel, by the opening of the door and the entrance of one
of those gaunt sons of the forest who were wont to hang on the skirts of
civilisation, as it advanced to wrest from them their native wilderness.

The Indian stalked into the room, handed a dirty piece of folded paper
to McLeod, and sat down beside the fire, after the fashion of his race,
in solemn silence.



CHAPTER SIX.

OUT IN THE SNOW.

When Jonas Bellew set off in search of the rumoured wreck, as related in
a previous chapter, he passed the Cliff Fort without calling there,
partly because he did not wish to waste time, and partly because he had
no desire to hold converse at that time with Mr Smart, who, he rightly
suspected, must have shared in Redding's suspicions as to the intentions
of the McLeods.

Making a straight cut, therefore, across the bay in front of the
fur-trading establishment, on ice that had not yet been floated away, he
gained the land below the fort and continued his journey down the coast.
That night he slept in the snow.

Let not the reader entertain the mistaken idea that such a
sleeping-place was either cold, wet, or uncomfortable.  It was the
reverse of all that, being warm, dry, and cosy.  The making of this bed
we record here, for the benefit of housemaids, and all whom it may
concern.

First of all, the sturdy trapper walked along the coast, sometimes on
snow-shoes when fields of snow-covered ice projected out to sea; at
other times on foot, with the snow-shoes slung over his back, when long
stretches of sand or shingly beach, from which the ice had been swept
away, presented themselves.  This process of progression he continued
till night began to close upon him.  Then he bethought him of encamping,
and retired to the neighbouring woods for the purpose.

The woods referred to consisted chiefly of pines, which fringed the base
of the precipitous hills by which that part of the Gulf of Saint
Lawrence is bordered.  Here he selected the largest tree he could find,
and threw down his bundle of food and blankets under the flat spreading
branches thereof.  Resting one of his snow-shoes against the stem of the
tree, he proceeded to dig a huge hole in the snow, using his other
snow-shoe as a shovel.  The operation cost him much labour, for he had
to dig completely down to the ground, and the snow in the woods was
still between three and four feet deep.  When a hole of ten feet long by
five broad was thus cleared to the bottom, the natural walls were raised
by the snow thrown out, to a total height of about six feet.  This was
Bellew's bedchamber.  The spreading pine-branches overhead were its
admirable roof.  Next, the trapper cut down a young pine, with the
tender branches of which he covered the floor of his chamber to a depth
of ten or twelve inches.  This was his mattress, and a soft, warm,
elastic one it was, as the writer of this narrative can testify from
personal experience.  The head of the mattress rested against the stem
of the pine tree, and a convenient root thereof served Bellew for a
pillow.  At the foot of the bed he had left the floor of his chamber
uncovered; this was his fireplace, and in the course of ten minutes or
so he cut down and chopped into billets enough of dry wood to fill it
with materials for a splendid fire.  These being arranged, with a core
of dry moss and broken twigs in the centre, the patient man struck a
light by means of flint, steel, and tinder, and applied it.  While the
first few tongues of fire were crackling in the core of moss, he spread
a thick blanket on his bed, and then stood up leisurely to fill his pipe
and dreamily to watch the kindling of the fire.

And this was a sight worth watching, for the change in the aspect of
affairs was little short of miraculous.  Before the flames shot forth,
Jonas Bellew, looking over the edge of a black hole that was
disagreeably suggestive of a tomb, could dimly perceive a stretch of
cold, grey, ghostly forest, through the openings of which hummocks of
ice could be seen floating away over the black waters of the sea.  The
little starlight that prevailed only served to render darkness visible,
and thus to increase the desolate aspect of the scene.  But when the
ruddy flames began to shoot forth and tip with a warm glow the nearest
projections, they brought out in startling prominence the point of
Bellew's nose and the bowl of his little pipe.  Continuing to gain
strength they seemed to weaken the force of distant objects in
proportion as they intensified those that were near.  The pale woods and
dark waters outside deepened into invisible black, while the snow-walls
of Bellew's chamber glowed as if on fire, and sparkled as if set with
diamonds.  The tree stem became a ruddy column, with Bellew's shadow
lying black as ink against it, and the branches above became like a
red-hot roof.

It may, perhaps, be supposed that the snow-walls melted under this
ordeal; nothing of the sort.  Their tendency to do so was checked
effectually, not only by a sharp frost, but by the solid backing of snow
behind them; and the little that did give way in close proximity to the
fire ran unobtrusively down to the earth and crept away under the snow
towards the sea, for Bellew had made his camp with the fire at its lower
end, so that not a drop of water could by any means reach the spot
whereon he lay.

Having stuffed his little tin can or kettle with snow, he put this on
the fire to melt, and then spread out his bacon and biscuit, and sugar
and tea, all of which being in course of time prepared, he sat down to
enjoy himself, and felt, as well as looked, supremely happy.

Then Jonas Bellew went on his knees and prayed--for he was one of those
men who do not think it unmanly to remember the Giver of all that they
enjoy--and thereafter he rolled himself in his blanket, pillowed his
head on the tree-root, and sank into profound repose--such repose as is
known only to healthy infants and hard-working men and women.  Little by
little the fire burnt low, the ruddy lights grew dim, the pale lights
reappeared, and the encampment resumed its tomb-like appearance until
the break of another day gave it a new aspect and caused Jonas Bellew to
rise, yawn, shake the hoar-frost from his blanket, pack up his traps,
and resume his journey.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

A SAD DISCOVERY.

A wreck on a rocky shore is at all times a dreary sight, but especially
so when the shore is that of an uninhabited land, and when the rocks as
well as the wreck are fringed with snow-wreaths and cumbered with ice.

Some such thoughts probably filled the mind of the trapper when, on the
afternoon of the day whose dawn we have mentioned, he stood beside the
wreck of what had once been a full-rigged ship and gazed intently on the
scene of desolation.

Life and death were powerfully suggested to him.  Many a time had he
seen such a craft breasting the waves of the broad Saint Lawrence, when
every dip of the bow, every bend of the taper masts, every rattle of the
ropes, and every mellow shout of the seamen, told of vigorous life and
energy; and now, the broken masts and yards tipped and fringed with
snow-wreaths, the shattered stern, out of which the cargo had been
evidently washed long ago, the decks crushed down with snow, the bulged
sides, the bottom pierced by rocks, the bowsprit burst to shivers by the
opposing cliff, the pendant and motionless cordage, even the slight
ripple of the sleeping sea, which deepened rather than broke the
prevailing silence, all told eloquently of death,--death, perchance to
passengers and crew, at all events to sanguine hopes and prospects.
Nevertheless there was much life connected with that death-like scene,
as the sequel of our tale will show.

The trapper, although fond of moralising, was not prone to indulge in
sentiment when circumstances called him to action.  He had come suddenly
in sight of the wreck on turning the point of the frowning cliff where
the gallant ship had met her doom, and stood only for a few seconds to
gaze sadly on the scene.

Hastening forward he proceeded at once to make a thorough survey of the
vessel.

First he went to the stern to ascertain, if possible, her name.  The
greater part of the stern had, as we have said, been torn away; but,
after careful search, he discovered a piece of wood on which he could
plainly trace portions of the letters _B_ and _E_ and _T_.  The
remainder of the word, whatever it was, had been completely erased.

Bellew did not at first climb on board the ship, because from her
general aspect he knew full well that there could be no survivor in her,
besides, through the yawning stern he could see nearly the whole of the
interior.

His next step was to search the neighbourhood for tracks, in order to
see whether or not the wreck had been lately visited by human beings.
This search resulted in discoveries which perplexed him greatly, for not
only did he find numerous footprints which crossed each other in various
directions, but he knew from their appearance that these had been
recently made, and that they were those of white men as well as red;
some of them showing the prints of shoes, while others displayed the
marks of moccasins.

Had Bellew discovered one or two tracks made by men of the forest like
himself, his knowledge of wood-craft would have enabled him at once to
decide which way they had come and whither they had gone; but, with at
least a dozen meandering tracks radiating from the ship in all
directions, as well towards the sea as the land, he felt himself
puzzled.  He knew well enough that they were too fresh to be those of
the wrecked crew, unless indeed the crew had remained by the ship; but
in that case there would have been evidences of an encampment of some
sort, such as fittings-up on board, or huts on shore.  He followed the
tracks that led to the sea and found that they terminated abruptly, as
if those who had made them had plunged into the water and drowned
themselves.  Before following up those that went landward he returned to
the ship and clambered on board, but found nothing to reward him for his
pains.  The sea had swept the hold fore and aft so completely that
nothing whatever was left.

These investigations did not take up much time.  The trapper, after one
or two circuits, found the spot where the footsteps became disentangled
from the maze of individual tracks, and led, not along the shore as he
had supposed they would, but up into a narrow gorge; and now he learned
that the tracks of what appeared a multitude of people had been made by
the running to and fro of not more than a dozen men, six of whom were
natives.  Thinking it probable that the party could not be far distant,
for the gorge up which they had proceeded seemed of very limited extent,
the trapper pushed forward with increasing expectation, not unmingled
with anxiety.

Turning the point of a projecting cliff he came suddenly on a sight that
filled him with sadness.  It was the mouldering remains of a human
being--one who had been a seaman, to judge from the garments which
covered him.  One glance sufficed to show the trapper that his services
there were not required.  He also observed that the fresh tracks which
he had been following circled round the body of the seaman and then led
straight on.

Following these, Bellew soon came to an open circular space at the head
of the gorge, where the appearance of smoke, rising from among the
trees, arrested his attention.  In a few minutes he had reached the spot
whence it issued, and there to his surprise found Mr Bob Smart with
five of his men and several Indians standing in solemn silence round
something on the ground that appeared to rivet their attention.  Some of
the men looked up as Bellew approached and nodded to him, for the
trapper was well-known in the district; they also moved aside and let
him pass.

"What's wrong, Mr Smart?" he asked, on coming up.

The fur-trader pointed to the ground, on which lay a group of men, who,
at a first glance, appeared to be dying.  One in particular, a youth,
seemed to be in the very last stage of exhaustion.  Smart had just risen
from his side after administering a cup of hot tea, when the trapper
appeared.

"I fear he won't last long," said Smart, turning to Bellew, with a shake
of his head.

"What have you been givin' him?" asked Bellew, stooping and feeling his
pulse.

"Just a cup of tea," replied Smart; "I have unfortunately nothing
better.  We only heard of the wreck yesterday, and came down in our boat
in such haste that we forgot spirits.  Besides, I counted on bringing
whoever I should find up to the fort without delay, but although we may
move most of these poor fellows, I doubt much that we daren't move
_him_."

This was said in a whisper, for the poor fellows referred to, although
unable to rise, lay listening eagerly to every word that was spoken.
There were six of them--one a negro--all terribly emaciated, and more or
less badly frost-bitten.  They formed the remnant of a crew of
twenty-five, many of whom, after suffering dreadfully from hunger and
frost-bites, had wandered away into the woods, and in a half delirious
state, had perished.

"You have hot water, I see," said the trapper, hastily unfastening his
pack, "fetch some."

Bob Smart promptly and gladly obeyed, for he saw that Bellew was a man
of action, and appeared to know what to do.

"You're right, Mr Smart," said Bellew, as he poured a little of the
contents of a bottle into the tin pannikin that had served him for a
tea-cup the night before, "this poor lad couldn't stand moving just now.
Fortunately I've brought some spirits with me.  It will start fresh
life in him if he's not too far gone already.  Here, sir," he continued,
