mountains of wool or butter.  Everything in nature seemed to have gone
to sleep at noon, as if Spanish principles had suddenly imbued the
universe.

And what a business they had, to be sure, with the spreading of the
viands and the kindling of the fire!  The latter was the first duty.
Hector said he would undertake it, but after attempting to light it with
damp sticks he gave it up and assisted the ladies to lay the cloth on
the grass.  Then George and Fred got the fire to kindle, and Mr
Sudberry, in attempting to mend it, burnt his fingers and put it out;
whereupon McAllister came to his rescue and got it to blaze in right
earnest.  Jacky thereafter tried to jump over it, fell into it, and was
saved from premature destruction by being plucked out and quenched
before having received any further damage than the singeing of his hair
and eyelashes.  He was thus rendered a little more hideous and
impish-like than Nature had intended him to be.

Jacky happened to be particularly bad that day.  Not only was he more
bent on mischief than usual, but Fortune seemed to enhance the value,
(so to speak), of his evil doings, by connecting them with disasters of
an unexpected nature.  He tried to leap over a small stream, (in
Scotland styled a burn), and fell into it.  This necessitated drying at
the fire--a slow process and disagreeable in all circumstances, but
especially so when connected with impatience and headstrong obstinacy.
Then he put his foot on a plate of sandwiches, and was within an ace of
sitting down on a jam tart, much to his own consternation, poor boy, for
had he destroyed _that_, the chief source of his own prospective
felicity would have been dried up.

It is not to be supposed that everyone regarded Jacky's eccentricities
with the forgiving and loving spirit of his mother.  Mr Sudberry, good
man, did not mind much; he was out for a day's enjoyment, and having
armed himself _cap-a-pie_ with benevolence, was invulnerable.  Not so
the other members of the party, all of whom had to exercise a good deal
of forbearance towards the boy.  McAllister took him on his knee and
gravely began to entertain him with a story, for which kindness Jacky
kicked his shins and struggled to get away; so the worthy man smiled
sadly, and let him go, remarking that Ovid himself would be puzzled to
metamorphose him into a good boy--this in an undertone, of course.

Hector Macdonald was somewhat sanguine and irascible in temper.  He felt
a tingling in his fingers, and an irresistible desire to apply them to
the ears of the little boy.

"Come here, Jacky!" said he.

Flora, who understood his feelings, smiled covertly while she busied
herself with cups, plates, and pannikins.  Lucy, who did not understand
his feelings, thought, "he must be a good-natured fellow to speak so
kindly to a child who had annoyed him very much."  Lucy did not admit
that she herself had been much annoyed by her little brother's
pertinacity in interrupting conversation between her and Hector,
although she might have done so with perfect truth.

Jacky advanced with hesitation.  Hector bent down playfully and seized
him by both arms, turning his back upon the party, and thus bringing his
own bulky figure between them and young Hopeful.

"Jack, I want you to be good."

"I won't!" promptly said, and with much firmness.

"Oh, yes, you will!"  A stern masculine countenance within an inch of
his nose, and a vigorous little shake, somewhat disconcerted Jacky, who
exhibited a tendency to roar; but Hector closed his strong hands on the
little arms so suddenly and so powerfully, that, being unexpectedly
agonised, Jacky was for a moment paralysed.  The awful glare of a pair
of bright blue eyes, and the glistening of a double row of white teeth,
did not tend to re-assure him.

"Oh, yes, you will, my little man!" repeated Hector, tumbling him over
on his back with a smile of ineffable sweetness, but with a little touch
of violence that seemed inconsistent therewith.

Jacky rose, gasped, and ran away, glancing over his shoulder with a look
of alarm.  This little piece of by-play was not observed by any one but
Flora, who exchanged a bright glance and a smile with her brother.

The imp was quelled--he had met his match!  During the remainder of the
picnic he disturbed no one, but kept at the farthest possible distance
from Hector that was consistent with being one of the party.  But it is
not to be supposed that his nature was changed.  No--Jacky's wickedness
only sought a new channel in which to flow.  He consoled himself with
thoughts of the dire mischief he would perpetrate when the dinner was
over.  Meanwhile, he sat down and gloated over the jam tart, devouring
it in imagination.

"Is that water boiling yet?" cried Mr Sudberry.

"Just about it.  Hand me the eggs, Fred."

"Here they are," cried Flora, going towards the fire with a basket.

She looked very sweet at that moment, for the active operations in which
she had been engaged had flushed her cheeks and brightened her eyes.

George and Fred gazed at her in undisguised admiration.  Becoming
suddenly aware of the impoliteness of the act, the former ran to relieve
her of the basket of eggs; the latter blushed, and all but upset the
kettle in an effort to improve the condition of the fire.

"Fred, you goose, leave alone, will you?" roared George, darting forward
to prevent the catastrophe.

"This is really charming, is it not, Mr Macgregor?" said Mrs Sudberry,
with a languid smile.

"Macdonald, madam, if I may be allowed to correct you," said Hector,
with a smile and a little bow.

"Ah, to be sure!"  (with an attempt at a laugh.) "I have such a stupid
habit of misnaming people."

If Mrs Sudberry had told the exact truth she would have said, "I have
such difficulty in remembering people's names that I have made up my
mind to call people by any name that comes first into my head rather
than confess my forgetfulness."  But she did not say this; she only went
on to observe that she had no idea it would have been so charming.

"To what do you refer?" said Hector,--"the scenery, the weather, or the
prospect of dinner?"

"Oh! you shocking man, how _can_ you talk of food in the same breath
with--"

"The salt!" exclaimed Lucy with a little shriek.  Was there ever a
picnic at which the salt was not forgotten, or supposed to have been
forgotten?  Never!

Mr Sudberry's cheerful countenance fell.  He had never eaten an egg
without salt in his life, and did not believe in the possibility of
doing so.  Everyone ransacked everything in anxious haste.

"Here it is!"  (hope revived.)

"No, it's only the pepper."  (Mitigated despair and ransacking
continued.)

"Maybe it'll be in this parcel," suggested McAllister, holding up one
which had not yet been untied.

"Oh! bring it to me, Mr Macannister!" cried Mrs Sudberry with unwonted
energy, for her happiness was dependent on salt that day, coupled, of
course, with weather and scenery.  "Faugh! no, it's your horrid onions,
Mr MacAndrews."

"Why, you have forgotten the potato salad, Mr Macdonald," exclaimed
Lucy.

"No, I have not: it can be made in five minutes, but not without salt.
Where _can_ the salt be?  I am certain it could not have been
forgotten."

The only individual of the party who remained calmly indifferent was
Master Jacky.  That charming creature, having made up his mind to feed
on jam tart, did not feel that there was any need for salt.  An
attentive observer might have noticed, however, that Jacky's look of
supreme indifference suddenly gave place to one of inexpressible glee.
He became actually red in the face with hugging himself and endeavouring
to suppress all visible signs of emotion.  His eye had unexpectedly
fallen on the paper of salt which lay on the centre of the table-cloth,
so completely exposed to view that nobody saw it!

"Why, here it is, actually before our eyes!" shouted George, seizing the
paper and holding it up.

A small cheer greeted its discovery.  A groan instantly followed, as
George spilt the whole of it.  As it fell on the cloth, however, it was
soon gathered up, and then Mr Sudberry ordered everyone to sit down on
the grass in a circle round the cloth.

"What a good boy Jacky has suddenly become!" remarked Lucy in some
surprise.

"Darling!" ejaculated his mother.

"A _very_ good little fellow," said Flora, with a peculiar smile.

Jacky said nothing.  Hector's eye was upon him, as was his upon Hector.
Deep unutterable thoughts filled his swelling heart, but he spoke not.
He merely gazed at the jam tart, a large portion of which was in a few
minutes supplied to him.  The immediate result was crimson hands, arms,
and cheeks.

While Hector was engaged in concocting the potato salad the kettle
upset, extinguished the fire, and sent up a loud triumphant hiss of
steam mingled with ashes.  Fortunately the potatoes were cooked, so the
dinner was at last begun in comfort--that is to say, everyone was very
hot, very much exhausted and excited, and very thirsty.  Jacky gorged
himself with tart in five minutes, and then took an opportunity of
quietly retiring into the bushes, sheltered by which he made a detour
unseen towards the place where the boat had been left.

Alas for the picnic party that day, that they allowed Hector to prevail
on them to begin with his potato salad!  It was partly composed of raw
onions.  After having eaten a few mouthfuls of it, their sense of taste
was utterly destroyed!  The chickens tasted of onions, so did the cheese
and the bread.  Even the whiskey was flavoured with onions.  The
beefsteak-pie might as well have been an onion-pie; indeed, no member of
the party could, with shut eyes, have positively said that it was not.
The potatoes harmonised with the prevailing flavour; not so the
ginger-bread, however, nor the butter.  Everything was oniony; they
finished their repast with a sweet onion-tart!  To make things worse,
the sky soon became overcast, a stiff breeze began to blow, and Mr
McAllister "opined" that there was going to be a squall.

A piercing shriek put an abrupt termination to the meal!

Intent on mischief; the imp had succeeded in pushing off the boat and
clambering into it.  For some time he rowed about in a circle with one
oar, much delighted with his performances.  But when the breeze began to
increase and blow the boat away he became alarmed; and when the oar
missed the water and sent him sprawling on his back, he gave utterance
to the shriek above referred to.  Luckily the wind carried him past the
place where they were picnicking.  There was but one mode of getting at
the boat.  It was at once adopted.  Hector threw off his coat and vest,
and swam out to it!

Ten minutes later, they were rowing at full speed for the foot of the
loch.  The sky was dark and a squall was tearing up the waters of the
lake.  Then the rain came down in torrents.  Then it was discovered that
the cloaks had been left at Hazlewood Creek, as the place where they had
dined was named.  To turn back was impossible.  The gentlemen's coats
were therefore put on the ladies' shoulders.  All were soaked to the
skin in a quarter of an hour.  Jacky was quiet--being slightly overawed,
but not humbled!  His mother was too frightened to speak or scream.  Mr
Sudberry rubbed his hands and said, "Come, I like to have a touch of all
sorts of weather, and _won't_ we have a jolly tea and a rousing fire
when we get home?"  Mrs Sudberry sighed at the word "home."  McAllister
volunteered a song, and struck up the "Callum's Lament," a dismally
cheerful Gaelic ditty.  In the midst of this they reached the
landing-place, from which they walked through drenched heather and
blinding rain to the White House.

Thus, drearily, the picnic ended!



STORY ONE, CHAPTER 8.

CONCERNING FOWLS AND POOLS.

One morning the Sudberry Family sat on the green hill-side, in front of
the White House, engaged in their usual morning amusement--feeding the
cocks and hens.

It is astonishing what an amount of interest may be got up in this way!
If one goes at it with a sort of philanthropico-philosophical spirit, a
full hour of genuine satisfaction may be thus obtained--not to speak of
the joy imparted to the poultry, and the profound glimpses obtained into
fowl character.

There were about twenty hens, more or less, and two cocks.  With
wonderful sagacity did these creatures come to perceive that when the
Sudberrys brought out chairs and stools after breakfast, and sat down
thereon, they, the fowls, were in for a feed!  And it was surprising the
punctuality with which they assembled each fine morning for this
purpose.

Most of the family simply enjoyed the thing; but Mr Sudberry, in
addition to enjoying it, studied it.  He soon came to perceive that the
cocks were cowardly wretches, and this gave him occasion to point out to
his wife the confiding character and general superiority of female
nature, even in hens.  The two large cocks could not be prevailed on to
feed out of the hand by any means.  Under the strong influence of
temptation they would strut with bold aspect, but timid, hesitating
step, towards the proffered crumb, but the slightest motion would scare
them away; and when they did venture to peck, they did so with violent
haste, and instantly fled in abject terror.

It was this tendency in these ignoble birds that exasperated poor Jacky,
whose chief delight was to tempt the unfortunate hens to place unlimited
confidence in him, and then clutch them by the beaks or heads, and hold
them wriggling in his cruel grasp; and it was this tendency that induced
him, in the heat of disappointment, and without any reference whatever
to sex, to call the cocks "big hens!"

The hens, on the other hand, exhibited gentle and trusting natures.  Of
course there was vanity of character among them, as there is among
ladies; but, for the most part, they were wont to rush towards their
human friends in a body, and peck the crumbs--at first timidly, then
boldly--from their palms.  There was one hen--a black and ragged one,
with only half a tail, and a downtrodden aspect--which actually went the
length of jumping up on little Tilly's knee, and feeding out of her lap.
It even allowed her to stroke its back, but it evidently permitted
rather than enjoyed the process.

On the morning in question, the black hen was bolder than usual; perhaps
it had not breakfasted that day, for it was foremost in the rush when
the family appeared with chairs and stools, and leaped on Tilly's knee,
without invitation, as soon as she was seated; whereupon Tilly called it
"a dear darling pretty 'ittle pet," and patted its back.

"Why, the creature seems quite fond of you, my child," said Mrs
Sudberry.

"So it is, mamma.  It loves me, I know, by the way it looks at me with
its beautiful black eye.  What a pity the other is not so nice!  I think
the poor darling must be blind of that eye."

There was no doubt about that.  Blackie's right eye was blinder than any
bat's; it was an opaque white ball--a circumstance which caused it no
little annoyance, for the other eye had to do duty for both, and this
involved constant screwing of the head about, and unwearied
watchfulness.  It was as if a solitary sentinel were placed to guard the
front and back doors of a house at one and the same time.  Despite
Blackie's utmost care, Jacky got on her blind side more than once, and
caught her by the remnant of her poor tail.  This used to spoil Tilly's
morning amusement, and send her sorrowful into the house.  But what did
that matter to Jacky?  He sometimes broke out worse than usual, and set
the whole brood into an agitated flutter, which rather damaged the
happiness of the family.  But what did that matter to Jacky?

Oh! he was a "darling child," _according to his mother_.

For some time the feeding went on quietly enough.  The fowls were
confiding.  Mr Sudberry was becoming immensely philosophical; Mrs
Sudberry was looking on in amiable gratification; George had prevailed
on a small white hen to allow him to scratch her head; Fred was taking a
rapid portrait of the smallest cock; Lucy had drawn the largest
concourse towards herself by scattering her crumbs on the ground; Jacky
had only caught two chickens by their beaks and one hen by its tail, and
was partially strangling another; and the nine McAllister dogs were
ranged in a semicircle round the group, looking on benignantly, and
evidently inclined to put in for a share, but restrained by the memory
of past rebuffs--when little Blackie, standing on Tilly's knee, and
having eaten a large share of what was going, raised itself to its full
height, flapped its wings, and gave utterance to a cackle of triumph!  A
burst of laughter followed--and Tilly gave a shriek of delighted
surprise that at once dissolved the spell, and induced the horrified
fowl to seek refuge in precipitate flight.

"By the way," said Mrs Sudberry, "that reminds me that this would be a
most charming day for your excursion over the mountains to that Lake
What-you-may-call-it."

What connection there was between the little incident just described and
the excursion to Lake "What-you-may-call-it" we cannot pretend to state;
but there must have been some sort of connection in Mrs Sudberry's
brain, and we record her observation because it was the origin of this
day's proceedings.  Mr Sudberry had, for some time past, talked of a
long walking excursion with the whole family to a certain small loch or
tarn among the hills.  Mrs Sudberry had made up her mind,--first, that
she would not go; and second, that she would get everyone else to go, in
order to let Mrs Brown and Hobbs have a thorough cleaning-up of the
house.  This day seemed to suit for the excursion--hence her propounding
of the plan.  Poor delicate Tilly seldom went on long expeditions,--she
was often doomed to remain at home.

Mr Sudberry shouted, "Capital! huzza!" clapped his hands, and rushed
into the house to prepare, scattering the fowls like chaff in a
whirlwind.  Fired by his example, the rest of the family followed.

"But we must have our bathe first, papa," cried Lucy.

"Certainly, my love, there will be time for that."  So away flew Lucy to
the nursery, whence she re-issued with Jacky, Tilly, Mrs Brown, and
towels.

The bathing-pool was what George called a "great institution."  In using
this slang expression George was literally correct, for the bathing-pool
was not a natural feature of the scenery: it was artificial, and had
been instituted a week after the arrival of the family.  The loch was a
little too far from the house to be a convenient place of resort for
ablutionary purposes.  Close beside the house ran a small burn.  Its
birthplace was one of those dark glens or "corries" situated high up
among those mountains that formed a grand towering background in all
Fred's sketches of the White House.  Its bed was rugged and broken--a
deep cutting, which the water had made on the hill-side.  Here was quite
a forest of dwarf-trees and shrubs; but so small were they, and so deep
the torrent's bed, that you could barely see the tree-tops as you
approached the spot over the bare hills.  In dry weather this burn
tinkled over a chaos of rocks, forming myriads of miniature cascades and
hosts of limpid little pools.  During heavy rains it ran roaring
riotously over its rough bed with a force that swept to destruction
whatever chanced to come in its way.

In this burn, screened from observation by an umbrageous coppice, was
the bathing-pool.  No pool in the stream was deep enough, in ordinary
weather, to take Jacky above the knees; but one pool had been found,
about two hundred yards from the house, which was large enough, if it
had only been deeper.  To deepen it, therefore, they went--every member
of the family.

Let us recall the picture:--

Father, in shirt sleeves rolled up to the shoulders, and trousers rolled
up to the knees, in the middle of the pool, trying to upheave from the
bottom a rock larger than himself--if he only knew it!  But he doesn't,
because it is deeply embedded, therefore he toils on in hope.  George
building, with turf and stone, a strong embankment with a narrow outlet,
to allow the surplus water to escape.  Fred, Lucy, Tilly, and Peter
cutting turf and carrying stones.  Mother superintending the whole, and
making remarks.  Jacky making himself universally disagreeable, and
distracting his mother in a miscellaneous sort of way.

"It's as good as Robinson Crusoe any day!" cries father, panting and
wiping his bald forehead.  "What a stone!  I can't budge it."  He stoops
again, to conquer, if possible; but the great difficulty with father is,
that the water comes so near to his tucked-up trousers that he cannot
put forth his full strength without wetting them; and mother insists
that this must not be done.  "Come, George and Fred, bring the pick-axe
and the iron lever, we _must_ have this fellow out, he's right in the
middle of the pool.  Now, then, heave!"

The lads obey, and father straddles so fiercely that one leg slips down.

"Hah! _there_, you've done it now!" from mother.

"Well, my dear, it can't be helped," meekly, from father, who is
secretly glad, and prepares to root out the stone like a Hercules.
Jacky gets excited, and hopes the other leg will slip down and get wet,
too!

"Here, hand me the lever, George; you don't put enough force to it."
George obeys and grins.  "Now then, once more, with will--ho! hi! hup!"
Father strains at the lever, which, not having been properly fixed,
slips, and he finds himself suddenly in a sitting posture, with the
water round his waist.  As the cool element embraces his loins, he
"h-ah-ah!" gasps, as every bather knows how; but the shock to his system
is nothing compared with the aggravation to his feelings when he hears
the joyful yell of triumph that issues from the brazen lungs of his
youngest hope.

"Never mind, I'll work all the better now--come, let us be jolly, and
