
"All right, fellows, I'm with you," remarked Felix. "And I declare, if
here isn't just the stick I'm looking for, sound enough to send in a
home run with. Must have been waiting for me."

With these words Wagner joined the little group that hurried along the
road. As they reached a certain place Sid, who was in the lead, suddenly
turned aside. It was what had once been a serviceable lane, but which
was now overgrown with weeds and underbrush.

"Wait a minute," Fred remarked, in a low voice.

They saw him looking closely at the ground, and almost immediately he
raised a smiling face toward the balance of the group.

"We made a center-shot when we guessed about this old mill, boys," he
observed, nodding; "because here are the plain tracks of a wagon; it
came in lately too, and went out again. The tracks show that it was here
since that last little shower, which was two nights back. Now for the
mill, Sid."

Gripping their cudgels tightly in their hands; and with compressed lips,
as well as determined-looking faces, the little bunch of boys followed
the sunken lane as it left the main road, and ran into a wilderness of
woodland.

Then suddenly they realized that there was a musical sound of dripping
water close by. It seemed to thrill every nerve, and make six boyish
hearts beat at a double pace.

Two minutes later, on emerging from the tangle, they saw the ruined old
mill before them. And it certainly did look just as "spooky" as Sid had
declared, when he suggested that they might find their missing comrade
hidden there.




CHAPTER XII

A BROKEN DOOR


Fred took charge of the combined forces. Somehow the others appeared to
look to him to do this.

"Seems to be all boarded up across the windows," he remarked.

"I told you I'd heard the owner did that a long time ago," said Sid, at
his elbow.

"And the doors look like they might be locked tight, too," Fred
continued.

"Oh! we can bust one in; that's easy," chuckled Bristles, who was always
ready to proceed to extreme methods; where Fred might think to try
strategy, he would attempt force.

"But they must have found some way to get in; and unless we made sure to
guard that point, they'd have a way to escape handy," the leader went
on.

"Say, wouldn't that be hard luck, though?" Corney exclaimed; "for us to
rush in one door, and have the bunch of kidnappers pop out another."

"I'd be half sick if I didn't get a chance to see who they are,"
ventured little Semi-Colon.

"And me, if I lost a splendid opportunity to use this lovely club,"
Bristles remarked, swinging the article in question around his head,
until it fairly whistled through the air.

"Is there any hole they might get out of, Sid?" asked Fred.

"Well," replied the other, speedily; "if I was in there, and heard some
hot-headed fellows banging on the door with all sorts of clubs, I think
I'd make a break for the old wheel, and take my chances climbing down.
If one of the rotten paddles broke, it'd mean a ducking in the pond
below; but I'd risk that."

"All right," Fred said, quickly; "we'll try to stop up that leak,
Corney."

"That's me," replied the other, stepping out of the line.

"You and Semi-Colon guard the wheel; and if anybody tries to escape that
way, I don't need to tell you what to do."

"And we'll do it, all right; won't we, Semi?" Corney boasted,
immediately swinging around, and heading toward the spot where the
moss-covered wheel of the deserted mill could be seen, with little
streams of water trickling over it from the broken sluiceway above.

"The rest of us will tackle one of the doors, and break it in, if it's
fast," Fred went on to say.

"And don't let's be all day about it, either," remarked the impatient
Bristles, who was fretting all the while because he could not be doing
something.

"Come on!" said Fred.

He headed straight for the nearest door as he spoke, with three anxious
followers at his heels. Felix Wagner was looking particularly well
pleased. He had not anticipated such a treat when deciding to walk all
the way back from Tenafly that morning. And he felt that things were all
coming in his direction at a furious rate.

"Fast; eh, Fred?" asked Sid, as he saw the other make a vain attempt to
open the door of the mill; through which doubtless the office had been
reached in times past, when the neighboring farmers all came here daily
to have their grist ground, and to carry home their flour.

"It sure is; I can't seem to budge it," came the reply.

"Wonder if they went in here?" hazarded Bristles, himself giving a
fierce though ineffective push.

"We can settle that easy enough," remarked Fred; "by seeing if there are
any signs of new footprints here before this door."

"Well, you do take the cake thinkin' up things," muttered Bristles, as
he dropped down to examine the soil.

"They're here, all right, Fred!" he announced quickly, in a thrilling
whisper.

"Perhaps you even see that shoe print that shows the patch?" asked Fred.

"Right you are," Bristles immediately announced; "just what you told us
to watch for. Boys, we've tracked the abductors of our chum to their
lair; and now to smash in the door, and jump 'em!"

"But however in the wide world do you think they got in here, if the old
door is locked?" demanded Wagner, curiously, and wondering if Fred could
give an answer to that question as easily as he seemed to solve other
mysteries.

"I think a key has been used here lately," replied the other. "I can see
marks around the keyhole to tell that. Chances are, they had one made to
fit the door. A smart fellow could take an impression of the lock with
wax, or something, and a locksmith would make him a key that would
answer.

"But, perhaps, if two or three of us could get our shoulders against the
old thing we might manage to force it. The chances are it's pretty punk,
being so old; and the lock must be rusty, too."

"Then let's make a try; and me to be one of the pushers," Bristles
said, as he began to get his sturdy frame locked in an attitude where he
could exert the most force.

Fred and Wagner took their places alongside, managing to crowd in; while
even Sid put his stick against the upper part of the door, as though
meaning to add to the united pressure as well as he could.

"Ready?" asked Fred.

"Yep!" came from Bristles; while Felix grunted his assent.

"Then all together, now!" exclaimed the leader.

"She moved then, Fred!" gasped the pleased Bristles.

"Once more, fellows, and all together, give it to her!" Fred continued;
and the three exerted themselves to their utmost to break the door's
fastenings, or hinges, by a combination of their strength, which was
considerable.

"Listen to her squeak, would you?" called out Bristles. "Again, fellows,
for the honor of old Riverport! Together with a will!"

"Yo-heave-o!" cried Wagner, for the time being willing to be classed as
one of the Riverport crowd, since he was working hand in glove with
them.

The door cracked more than ever under this strain.

"She's giving way!" declared Bristles. "We're doing the business all
right, boys!"

"Keep moving!" called out Sid, encouragingly, and wishing one of the
workers might back out, so that he could find a chance to exercise his
muscles on the job.

One, two, three more tremendous pushes and there was a crash as the door
gave way before the united efforts of the three determined lads. Either
the rusty lock had been unable to hold out longer, or else the hinges
were in a state of complete collapse.

Indeed, so suddenly did the result occur that Bristles was unable to
keep on his feet. His support being withdrawn, he went plunging headlong
with the falling door.

"Ouch!" they heard him cry out, as he struggled there on the floor amid
a whirl of dust.

"Are you hurt?" asked Fred, anxiously; for the other had come down
pretty hard.

"N-no, not much, I guess," Bristles replied, as he began to struggle
once more to his feet, aided by Fred's ready hand; but as the breath had
been pretty well knocked out of him by the concussion, Bristles, for
once, lacked words to explain his feelings.

The balance seemed to be waiting for the dust to settle, or their
companion to get possession of his war-club again, before advancing into
the mill.

"Let me head the crowd, Fred, because I know every inch of the place,"
Sid insisted, as he pushed through the now open door.

"Wait, and let's give a call," suggested Felix. "If Colon's in here he
might be up in the loft, or down in the pit, goodness knows where. Tune
up, fellows, and see what's what!"

They all shouted together, and the result was such a medley of sounds
that it was doubtful if even their chum could have recognized familiar
voices among the lot making up the chorus.

"I heard something like a cry!" declared Sid, immediately after the echo
of their shout had died away in the empty mill.

"You're right," added Wagner, "for I caught the same thing. And, Sid, I
reckon it came from off yonder in the machinery room, where we used to
play, long ago, you remember."

"It's mighty dingy in here," complained Bristles, finding his voice
again.

Indeed, the interior of the deserted mill did look as though it might
harbor all sorts of strange things, such as bats and owls, that could
find a way in and out through broken window panes, or holes in the
siding. And Bristles, to tell the truth, although he would never have
admitted the fact to one of his chums, did secretly feel just a _little_
belief in supernatural things. A graveyard was a place nothing could
tempt him to visit after dark, at least alone.

Fred waited no longer. He had managed to get his bearings now, and
believed he could find his way about, though after coming from the
brightness of the sunshine outside, one's eyes had to get accustomed to
the half-gloom of the cob-web-festooned mill interior.

"Come on!" he simply said, as he started quickly for the door leading
out of the office into the main part of the mill.

And even while he was thus moving, he, too, caught a plain, unmistakable
movement beyond, that told of the mill being occupied by others besides
themselves. In this anxious, yet determined, frame of mind, then, Fred
Fenton led his three chums past the portal of the door, and into the
mill proper.




CHAPTER XIII

HOW GABE MADE GOOD


"Good gracious!" Sid Wells called out

The boys had pushed into the main part of the mill, with their nerves
all on edge, and their muscles set in readiness for a struggle. Whether
they would meet the three tramps who were creating no end of excitement
around the vicinity by their bold robbery of hen-roosts, and even
houses; or some desperate boys ready to fight when caught in a trap,
none of them knew.

They expected trouble of some sort, at least; Bristles was even counting
on it, and would be very much disappointed if it failed to come to pass.

But instead of a group of lads at bay, and ready to give as good as they
received, they discovered what seemed to be just two figures on the
floor of the mill. One of these jumped up, and faced them defiantly,
whirling a piece of flooring in a circle above his head.

"Keep back, you!" he cried, hoarsely.

"Why, if it ain't Gabe Larkins!" exclaimed the astounded Bristles, as
he managed to get a look at the face of the other.

Fred was himself astonished, for he had recognized the butcher's boy
about the same time Bristles did. Gabe here, and apparently concerned in
this abduction of Colon! It raised up a host of wild conjectures. Could
he be in the pay of those reckless Mechanicsburg fellows; or possibly
connected with Buck Lemington's crowd? Even a more sensational theory
flashed through Fred's mind, connected with the men who were looked upon
as thieves. Was Gabe in league with these desperate persons?

"Down him!" exclaimed Bristles, making a forward move, as though ready
to throw himself upon the taller boy without regard for what would
follow when Gabe brought that piece of floor board into play.

The rest were starting to follow his example, as it seemed to be the
only proper course, when to their astonishment there was a movement to
the figure lying on the floor, a kicking of a pair of long legs; and
immediately the well known voice of their chum, Colon, sounded:

"Hold up, boys, don't tackle Gabe; I tell you he's done me a good turn!"

Of course, at that, even the impulsive Bristles held his hand. Perhaps
he was not wholly sorry to declare a temporary truce, pending
negotiations for surrender; because that board had an ugly look, and
Gabe was waving it back and forth just as some players do their bat when
waiting to gauge the delivery of a new pitcher.

"Oh! it's you, fellers, eh?" Gabe remarked, as, bending forward, he
peered at the newcomers who had broken in upon him so suddenly; "call it
off, and we'll say quits. I haven't got any fuss with you."

He thereupon threw the piece of board down, as though that finished the
matter, so far as he was concerned.

"Got a knife, somebody?" sang out the struggling Colon, who was trying
to gain a sitting position, but seemed unable to control his limbs.
"They got me spliced up tight as anything here; and Gabe he didn't have
anything to cut me loose with, so he was chawing the knots to beat the
band when you showed up. We thought it was them fellers come back, and
it gave us both a little scare."

Fred was already at the side of the bound boy. He always kept the blades
of his knife as keen as possible; and once he found where to cut it did
not take him long to set Colon free from the pieces of old rope with
which the unfortunate youth was bound.

"Ow! it pinches like hot cakes!" grunted the late prisoner, as he was
helped to his feet, and doubtless found part of his limbs benumbed or
"asleep," as boys say.

"Tell us first of all, Colon, did they hurt you so you can't run
to-morrow?" demanded Bristles, angrily.

"Oh! I reckon it isn't nothin' much," came the reassuring reply. "Give a
feller a little chance to limber up; won't you? I'll feel all right in a
short time. But it was sure a rough deal for me, and some surprise too,
let me tell you, fellers. I never had the least bit of idea they'd jump
out on me like they did; and would you believe me, the whole bunch had
red handkerchiefs over their faces, so I couldn't tell who they might
be."

"But you heard 'em talk; sure you must; and recognized 'em by their
voices?" declared Bristles, eagerly.

But Colon shook his head in the negative.

"They were cunning about that, too," he declared; "and when they talked
any, it was so low I just couldn't get on to who they were."

"But how about Gabe here, looks funny to see him around. Haven't been
delivering meat to anybody away up here; have you?" asked Sid, with a
strong vein of suspicion in his voice.

"Why, he told me the boss had sent him up here to get a calf that a
farmer had for sale," remarked Colon, who was limping around, and
exercising both arms and legs so as to bring about a return of
circulation in his veins.

"A calf!" echoed Bristles; "well, what next, I wonder? But then they say
a poor excuse is better than none."

"Hold on," interrupted Felix Wagner; "you fellows looked at me like
nothing'd convince you I didn't have a hand in this business. But you
found out that the talk I gave you was straight, after all. Say, perhaps
what he tells is all to the good, too. Didn't Colon say the fellow was
trying to set him free by gnawing at the knots, because he didn't have a
knife along? Suppose you ask him some more questions, Fred."

"Just what I meant to do, Felix," returned the other; "because, for my
part, I believe every word Gabe has said," and turning on the butcher's
boy, he continued:

"Where did you leave your cart, Gabe; for you must have had it along if
you expected to take the calf back with you?"

"It's over at the farmer's right now," replied the other, frankly. "They
said he was in Tenafly, and wouldn't be back short of a hour or more.
And as my boss told me not to come home without the veal, I tied up the
hoss. Used to come over here to the old place when I was a kid, along
with the rest, but I ain't never been up here for years now. Thought,
seein' I was so clost, I'd just take a walk over to find out how she
looked, to pass the time away."

"Oh! I see," Fred broke in; "and when you got here you heard somebody
calling inside the mill, did you?"

"I heard a queer sound, more like a groan than anything else," admitted
the boy.

"That was me, all right," chuckled Colon. "Yelled till I got tired, and
I was so husky I just couldn't let out another peep. And as I kept on
tryin' to slip an arm out, I reckon I did some gruntin'. I was mad all
through; because, you see, I'd guessed what it was all about, and that
they didn't want me to run to-morrow."

"Say, when you heard that groan, didn't you feel like skipping out?"
asked Bristles, with a vein of secret admiration in his voice now.

"Me? Well, I guess not," replied the other, pugnaciously. "I just
reckoned there was somebody inside there that was sick; and when I
couldn't open any door, I crawled up the wheel, and slid in through the
hole, just like we used to do long ago, Sid Wells, when we came up here
to swim and fish."

"That's all there is to it," declared Colon. "I heard somebody coming
along, and called out, so he found me lying here, tied up like a turkey
used to be when they cooked him on the old time spit. And while Gabe
chawed away at the knots we did some chinning, believe me. But boys,
I'm right glad to see you. What's the latest news from home?"

"Why, the whole town's in an uproar about the way you went off without
so much as saying good-bye," Bristles said; which of course, caused
Colon to chuckle; for any boy would feel good to know that, for once,
his worth was appreciated.

Possibly some of those same good people who were now so much concerned
about his welfare had many times in the past referred to him as "that
long-legged imp who ought to be taught better manners at home;" for
Colon as a younger boy had been rather inclined to be saucy.

Hearing the sound of voices, Corney and Semi-Colon had by now entered
the mill, and were working the arm of their newly-found chum like a pump
handle.

"But one thing makes me sore," said Bristles; "and that is, we don't
know any more'n we did before who did this business. They were boys, you
said, Colon; but how can we tell whether they hailed from Riverport or
Mechanicsburg?"

"I give you my word----" began Felix Wagner; when Colon interrupted him.

"Say, there might be a way to tell," he remarked, jubilantly.

"As how?" demanded the eager Bristles.

"Why, you see, when they jumped me I gave 'em all I knew how, and
kicked and hit as hard as I could," the tall boy went on.

"Think you marked any of 'em for keeps, Colon?" asked Bristles,
feverishly.

"I'm dead sure," Colon continued; "that once I landed a straight from
the shoulder jab square in the eye of a feller; because I heard him yell
out like it hurt. And say, perhaps if you look around, you might find
somebody with a black and blue eye."

Bristles gave a whoop that echoed through the dusty, cobwebbed mill.

"You got him, all right, sure you did, Colon!" he cried. "And it was a
peach of a hit, too. It was Buck and his crowd that played this mean
trick on you. How do I know? Why right now one of his fellers, Oscar
Jones, is nursing a bruised left eye. Heard him tellin' how he got up
last night, thinkin' he heard the fire bell ring, and run plumb into the
corner of the bureau. Oh! there ain't any more suspicion restin' on your
team-mates, Felix. We all ask you to forget it."

"And let's be getting out of this, boys," Colon spoke up. "I've seen all
I ever want to of the old mill. Never catch me coming up here again, I
tell you."

And so they trooped out into the cheery October sunlight. The broken
door was propped up the best they could manage. No one was caring much,
anyway. They had accomplished their main object in the morning jaunt;
Colon had been found, and he declared that he was as fit as ever to run,
despite his long condition of helplessness, and his hungry state. What
more could they ask?

And as Gabe, the butcher's boy, made a move as if to leave them at the
end of the winding, overgrown lane, Fred insisted on every fellow
shaking his hand heartily.

"You've sure made good, Gabe," declared Bristles, remembering what he
had thought of the other when his aunt's opals were taken by the
thoughtless butcher's boy; "and I'm proud to shake hands with you."




CHAPTER XIV

PRACTICE FOR THE RACE


"About time you started on your five mile run, isn't it, Fred? Because
the afternoon's slipping away," said Dick Hanshaw, as he came over to
the little group of boys who were chatting on the green of the field,
which later on would be the scene of the gathering crowds coming to
witness the athletic meet of the three rival schools.

Dozens of the lads were in their "working togs," as they called them.
Indeed, all around was a scene of great activity. Men were hammering
away at a tremendous rate, putting up the last series of raised seats
intended to accommodate the spectators on the next day, many of whom
would be willing to pay for good seats. And here and there, all over the
field, boys were running, jumping, vaulting with poles, and doing all
sorts of stunts connected with athletics.

Colon had not come out at all. It had been decided that after his
adventure he must take more rest, in order to be fit for the events of
the morrow. He was at home, playing dominoes with one of his chums.
Others came and went as though he might be holding a reception. And the
news concerning his condition was eagerly sought with the appearance of
every new bunch of schoolboys arriving on the field.

Fred was in his usual running costume, for he meant to make a last try
to beat his record, so as to know how he would stand when the final test
came. There was a string of good fellows ranged against him in that five
mile race; and Fred did not pretend to be without doubts concerning his
ability to head the procession.

"I was just thinking that myself, Dick," he replied as he stooped down
to tie his shoes over again, in preparation for a start. "The four
entries from Riverport are getting impatient to start; but Brad is
holding back for some reason or other."

"Here he comes this way now, and perhaps we'll know what it means,"
remarked Dick; who had intended to be one of the long distance squad
himself, but straining a tendon in his foot that very morning had made
him give up the idea.

Brad Morton came bustling along. Fred saw that he looked worried, and
wondered what could have gone wrong now. With Colon safe it did not seem
as if anybody connected with the Riverport school should be anxious.

"Do we start soon, Brad?" he asked, as the captain of the track team
reached convenient talking distance.

"The rest do; but the committee have decided to make a change about your
running, Fred," were the surprising words he heard.

"Oh! that's all right," Fred replied, smiling; "I'm ready to give up to
some better man, if that's what you mean."

"What?" gasped Dick Hendricks.

"Oh! rats!" cried Brad. "There's no better man in this matter at all,
Fred. Fact is, you're the only one in our string who stands a good
chance of beating that speedy Boggs in to-morrow's race. I've heard some
talk among a lot of Mechanicsburg fellows. They're trying to get a line
on your kind of running, Fred; which shows that they know right well
you're the only one they need fear."

"Oh! well, they've seen me run lots of times when we played baseball and
fought it out on the gridiron," remarked Fred, naturally flushing a
little under the kind words of praise.

"Yes, that's so; but it's got out that you've picked up a new kink in
the way of getting over ground. They kept harping on that all the time.
And I got the notion they've some of their crowd posted along the course
to-day to take notes and compare time, so they can spot what you do. If
you've got a weak point, climbing hills for instance, they'll report,
and that's where Boggs will pass you."

"Well, you've got something up your sleeve, Brad, when you tell me this;
so out with it," Fred observed, reading the other's face cleverly.

"It's this," the track captain went on; "when the rest of the string
start you drop out, and disappear like fog. Then they'll have their
trouble for their pains."

"That sounds nice, but tell me where does my needed exercise come in?"
remarked Fred; "and I'd like to get a line myself on what I can do."

"See here, don't you know of some other five mile course you could take
on the sly, without anybody being the wiser for it?" asked Brad.

"Why, yes, I do, only it happens to be a harder run all told, than the
course mapped out by the committee," replied Fred, promptly.

"That oughtn't to make much difference," the other went on, with a sigh
of relief; "you'll know right well that if you can make it in the same
time you've done the regular course, it'll be all the better."

"Is this really necessary, Brad?" asked Dick; "lots of us expected to
get a line on Fred ourselves; and if he sneaks off unbeknown, how're we
going to know what to expect to-morrow?"

"We talked it over, and that's what we settled on," came the reply. "So
just hold your horses, Dick, till to-morrow. Fred's going to show you
something then that he's keeping up his sleeve. You mark me."

"Don't take any stock in what Brad says," declared Fred. "I haven't
anything so wonderful, only a little notion that came to me, and which I
really believe does help me get over the ground a little bit faster,
with less fatigue. But wait and see what to-morrow brings along. Now,
Brad, suppose you arrange things so that I can be close to those bushes
over yonder when the pistol sounds for the start. Once I get in there,
I'll drop down, and let the rest pass me. After that I'll find a way to
leave without being seen; and start off on my own hook over another five
