in the split of the log."

"I done hear my daddy tell dat tale," remarked Drusilla.

"Yes," said Mr. Rabbit, "it soon became common talk in the
neighborhood. Brother Lion had come a long way to hunt Mr. Man, and as
soon as he got his hand out of the split in the log he started to go
home again. I went part of the way with him, and then it was that I
told him he'd find himself in a cage if he wasn't careful. I made a
burdock poultice for his hand the best I could--"

"And it's mighty good for bruises, I tell you now!" exclaimed Mrs.
Meadows.

"And then Brother Lion went on home, feeling better, but still very
mad. Crippled as he was, he was a quick traveler, and it was not long
before he came to his journey's end.

[Illustration: MR. RABBIT BANDAGING BROTHER LION'S PAW]

"Well, when his mother saw him she was very sorry. But when he told
her what the matter was she was vexed. 'Aha!' said she, 'how often
have I told you about meddling with somebody else's business! How
often have I told you about sticking your nose into things that don't
concern you! I'm not sorry for you one bit, because if you had obeyed
me you wouldn't be coming home now with your hand mashed all to
flinders. But, no! daddy-like, you've got to go and get yourself into
trouble with Mr. Man, and now you see what has come of it. I'm not
feeling at all well myself, but now I've got to go to work and make a
whole parcel of poultices and tie your hand up and nurse you--and I
declare somebody ought to be nursing me this very minute.'

"That was what Brother Lion's mother said," continued Mr. Rabbit, "but
Brother Lion didn't say anything. He just lay on the sheepskin pallet
she made him and studied how he would be revenged on Mr. Man. After a
while his hand got well, but still he said very little about the
matter. The more he thought about the way he had been treated, the
madder he got. He gnashed his teeth together and waved his long tail
about until it looked like a snake. Finally he sent word to all his
kin--his uncles and his cousins--to meet him somewhere in the woods
and hold a convention to consider how they should catch the great
monster, Mr. Man, who had caused a log of wood to mash Brother Lion's
hand.

"Well, it wasn't long before the uncles and cousins began to arrive.
They came from far and near, and they seemed to be very ferocious.
They shook their manes and showed their tushes. They went off in the
woods and held their convention, and Brother Lion laid his complaint
before them. He told them what kind of treatment he had received from
Mr. Man, and asked them if they would help to get his revenge. He made
quite a speech, and when he sat down, his uncles and cousins were very
much excited. They roared and howled. They said they were ready to
tear Mr. Man limb from limb. They declared they were ready to go where
he was, and gnaw him and claw him on account of the scandalous way he
had treated their blood-kin.

"But when Brother Lion's mother heard what they proposed to do she
shut her eyes and shook her head from side to side, and told the
uncles and the cousins that they had better go back home, all of them.
She said that before they got through with Mr. Man they'd wish they
had never been born. But go they would and go they did.

"So they started out soon one morning, and traveled night and day for
nearly a week. They were getting very tired and hungry, and some of
the younger blood-cousins wanted to stop and rest, and some wanted to
turn around and go back home. But one morning while they were going
through the woods, feeling a little shaky in head and limb, they
suddenly came in sight of Mr. Man. He was cutting down trees and
splitting them into timber. He had his coat off, and seemed to be very
busy.

"But he was not so busy that he didn't hear Mr. Lion and his uncles
and blood-cousins sneaking through the woods over the dry leaves, and
he wasn't so busy that he couldn't see them moving about among the
trees. He was very much astonished. He wondered where so many of the
Lion family came from, and what they were doing there, but he didn't
stop to ask any questions. He dropped his axe and climbed a tree.

"Brother Lion and his uncles and his blood-cousins were very much
pleased when they saw Mr. Man climb the tree. 'We have him now,' said
Brother Lion, and the rest licked their jaws and smiled. Then they
gathered around the tree and sat on their haunches and watched Mr.
Man. This didn't do any good, for Mr. Man sat on a limb and swung his
legs, just as contentedly as if he was sitting in his rocking-chair at
home.

"Then Brother Lion and his uncles and his blood-cousins showed their
teeth and growled. But this didn't do any good. Mr. Man swung his feet
and whistled a dance-tune. Then Brother Lion and his blood-cousins
opened their mouths wide and roared as loud as they could. But this
didn't do any good. Mr. Man leaned his head against the trunk of the
tree and pretended to be nodding.

"This made Brother Lion and his blood-kin very mad. They ran around
the tree and tore the bark with their claws, and waved their tails
back and forth. But this didn't do any good. Mr. Man just sat up
there and swung his feet and laughed at them.

"Brother Lion and his blood-kin soon found that if they intended to
capture Mr. Man they'd have to do something else besides caper around
the foot of the tree. So they talked it over, and Brother Lion fixed
up a plan. He said that he would stand at the foot of the tree and
rear up against the trunk, and one of his blood-cousins could climb on
his back and rear up, and then another cousin or uncle could climb up,
and so on until there was a ladder of bloodthirsty Lions high enough
to reach Mr. Man.

"Brother Lion, mind you, was to be at the bottom of the Lion ladder,"
remarked Mr. Rabbit, with a chuckle, "and he had a very good reason
for it. He had had dealings with Mr. Man, and he wanted to keep as far
away from him as possible. But before they made the Lion ladder,
Brother Lion looked up at Mr. Man and called out:--

"'What are you doing up there?'

"'You'll find out a great deal too soon for your comfort,' replied Mr.
Man.

"Brother Lion said, 'Come down from there.'

"Mr. Man answered, 'I'll come down much sooner than you want me to.'

"Then Brother Lion, his uncles, and his blood-cousins began to build
their ladder. Brother Lion was the bottom round of this ladder, as you
may say," continued Mr. Rabbit. "He reared up and placed his hands
against the tree, and one of his uncles jumped on his shoulders, and
put his hands against the tree. Then a cousin, and then another uncle,
and so on until the ladder reached a considerable distance up the
tree. It was such a high ladder that it began to wobble, and the last
uncle had hard work to make his way to the top. He climbed up very
carefully and slowly, for he was not used to this sort of business. He
was the oldest and the fiercest of the old company, but his knees
shook under him as he climbed up and felt the ladder shaking and
wobbling.

"Mr. Man saw that by the time this big Lion got to the top of the
ladder his teeth and his claws would be too close for comfort, and so
he called out in an angry tone:--

[Illustration: THE LADDER OF LIONS]

"'Just hold on! Just stand right still! Wait! I'm not after any of you
except that fellow at the bottom there. I'm not trying to catch any
of you but him. He has bothered me before. I let him go once, but I'll
not let him get away this time. Just stand right still and hold him
there till I climb down the other side of the tree.'

"With that Mr. Man shook the limbs and leaves and dropped some pieces
of bark. This was more than Brother Lion could stand. He was so
frightened that he jumped from under the ladder, and his uncles and
his blood-cousins came tumbling to the ground, howling, growling, and
fighting.

"They were as sorry-looking a sight as ever you saw when they came to
their senses. Those that didn't have their bones broken by the fall
were torn and mangled. They had acted so foolishly that out of the
whole number, Mr. Man didn't get but three lion-skins that could be
called perfect.

"Brother Lion went home to his mother as fast as he could go and
remained quiet a long time. And now you tell me he's in a cage."

Mr. Rabbit paused and shook his head until his ears flopped.

The children seemed to enjoy the story very much; so much so, indeed,
that Mrs. Meadows wanted Mr. Rabbit to tell some of his own queer
experiences, but Mr. Rabbit laughed and said that it didn't seem
exactly right to be telling his own stories. He said if he told the
stories just as they happened, he'd have to talk about himself a good
deal, and people would think he was boastful. He declared he didn't
feel like making his young friends think he was bragging.

"Oh, we shan't mind that," said Sweetest Susan, "shall we, brother?"

"Why, of course not," replied Buster John.

"La! we all done hear folks brag, till we got hardened ter braggin'!"
exclaimed Drusilla.

So the children, aided by Mrs. Meadows, coaxed Mr. Rabbit until he
finally consented to tell some of his queer adventures.




VIII.

BROTHER TERRAPIN'S FIDDLE-STRING.


Mr. Rabbit moved his body uneasily about, and scratched his head, and
crossed and uncrossed his legs several times before he began.

"I declare it isn't right!" he exclaimed after a while. "I don't mind
telling about other folks, but when it comes to talking about myself,
it is a different thing."

"Don't you remember the time you tried to get Brother Terrapin to give
you a fiddle-string?" asked Mrs. Meadows, laughing a little.

"Oh, that was just a joke," replied Mr. Rabbit.

"Call it a joke, then," said Mrs. Meadows. "You know what the little
boy said when the man asked him his name. He said, says he, 'You may
call it anything, so you call me to dinner.'"

"He wasn't very polite," remarked Sweetest Susan.

"No, indeed," Mrs. Meadows answered; "but you know that little boys
can't always remember to be polite."

"I think we were at your house," suggested Mr. Rabbit, rubbing his
chin.

"Yes," replied Mrs. Meadows. "In the little house by the creek. The
yard sloped from the front door right to the bank."

"To be sure," exclaimed Mr. Rabbit, brightening up. "I remember the
house just as well as if I had seen it yesterday. There was a little
shelf on the left-hand side of the door as you came out, and there the
water-bucket sat."

"Yes," said Mrs. Meadows; "and there was just room enough up there by
the bucket for Brother Terrapin."

"That's so," Mr. Rabbit replied, laughing, "and when he used to go to
your house to see the girls they'd set the bucket on the table in the
house and lift Brother Terrapin to the shelf so he could see and be
seen. I remember it used to make him very mad when I'd tell him he
would be a mighty man if he wasn't so flat-footed."

"Oh, you used to talk worse than that," cried Mrs. Meadows, laughing
heartily at the remembrance of it. "You used to tell him he was the
only man you ever saw that sat down when he stood up. I declare!
Brother Terrapin's eyes used to get right red."

"Well," said Mr. Rabbit, after a pause; "I remember I went to your
house one day and I carried my fiddle. When I got there, who should I
see but old Brother Terrapin sitting up on the shelf. I expected to
find the girls by themselves, but there was Brother Terrapin. So I
began to joke him.

"'Howdy, Brother Terrapin?' says I. 'If you had a ladder handy you
could come downstairs and shake hands, couldn't you?'

"He began to get sullen and sulky at once. He wouldn't hardly make any
reply. But I didn't care for that. Says I: 'Cross your legs and look
comfortable, Brother Terrapin; don't be glum in company. I've got my
fiddle with me, and I'm going to make your bones ache if you don't
dance.'

"Then I whirled in," said Mr. Rabbit, "and played the liveliest
tunes I could think of,--'Billy in the Low Grounds,' ''Possum up
the Gum-Stump,' 'Chicken in the Bread-Tray,' and all those
hoppery-skippery, jiggery-dancery tunes that make your feet go
whether or no. But there Brother Terrapin sat, looking as
unconcerned as if the fiddle had been ten miles away. He didn't even
keep time to the music with his foot. More than that, he didn't even
wag his head from side to side."

"I always knew Brother Terrapin had no ear for music," remarked Mrs.
Meadows. "If that was a fault, he certainly had more than his share of
it."

"I ought not to talk about people behind their backs," Mr. Rabbit
continued, trying to shake a fly out of his ear, "but I must say that
Brother Terrapin was very dull about some things. Well, I played and
played, and the girls danced and seemed to enjoy it. I believe you
danced a round or two yourself?" Mr. Rabbit turned to Mrs. Meadows
inquiringly.

"I expect I shook my foot a little," said Mrs. Meadows with a sigh. "I
was none too good."

"They danced and danced until they were tired of dancing," Mr. Rabbit
resumed; "but there sat Brother Terrapin as quiet as if he were
asleep. Well, I was vexed--I don't mind saying so now--I was
certainly vexed. But I didn't let on. And between tunes I did my best
to worry Brother Terrapin.

[Illustration: MR. RABBIT FIDDLING FOR BROTHER TERRAPIN]

"'Ladies,' says I, 'don't make so much fuss. Let Brother Terrapin get
his nap out. You'll turn a chair over directly, and Brother Terrapin
will give a jump and fall off the shelf and break some of the
furniture in his house.' This made the girls laugh very much, for they
remembered the old saying that Brother Terrapin carries his house on
his back. 'Don't laugh so loud,' says I, 'Brother Terrapin has earned
his rest. He's been courting on the other side of the creek, and he
has no carriage to ride in when he goes back and forth. Sh-h!' says I,
'don't disturb him. When a person sits down when he stands up, and
lies down when he walks, some allowance must be made.'

"Brother Terrapin's eyes grew redder and redder, and the skin on the
back of his head began to work backward and forward. What might have
happened I don't know, but just as the girls were in the middle of a
dance one of my fiddle-strings broke, and it was the treble, too. I
wouldn't have minded it if it had been any of the other strings, but
when the treble broke I had to stop playing.

"Well, the girls were very much disappointed and so was I, for I had
come for a frolic. I searched in my pockets, but I had no other
string. I tried to play with three strings, but the tune wouldn't
come. The girls were so sorry they didn't know what to do.

"Just then an idea struck me. 'Ladies,' says I, 'it's a thousand
pities I didn't bring an extra treble, and I'm perfectly willing to go
home and fetch one, but if Brother Terrapin was a little more
accommodating the music could go right on. You could be dancing again
in a little or no time.'

"'Oh, is that so?' says the girls. 'Well, we know Brother Terrapin
will oblige us.'

"'I'm not so sure of that,' says I.

"'What do you want me to do?' says he. His voice sounded as if he had
the croup.

"'Ladies,' says I, 'you may believe it or not, but if Brother Terrapin
has a mind to he can lend me a treble string that will just fit my
fiddle.'

"'Brother Rabbit,' says he, 'you know I have no fiddle-string. What
would I be doing with one?'

"'Don't mind him, ladies. He knows just as well as I do that he has a
fiddle-string in his neck. I can take my pocket-knife and get it out
in half a minute,' says I.

"This made Brother Terrapin roll his eyes.

"'Be ashamed of yourself, Brother Terrapin,' says the girls. 'And we
were having so much fun, too.'

"'If my neck was as long and as tough as Brother Terrapin's, I'd take
one of the leaders out and make a fiddle-string of it, just to oblige
the ladies,' says I.

"The girls turned up their noses and tossed their heads. 'Don't pester
Brother Terrapin,' says they. 'We'll not ask him any more.'

"'Ladies,' says I, 'there is a way to get the fiddle-string without
asking for it. Will you please hand me a case-knife out of the
cupboard there?'

"I rose from my chair with a sort of a frown," continued Mr. Rabbit,
laughing heartily, "but before I could lift my hand Brother Terrapin
rolled from the shelf and went tumbling down the slope to the creek,
heels over head."

"Did it hurt him much?" asked Sweetest Susan, with a touch of
sympathy.

"It didn't stop his tongue," replied Mr. Rabbit. "He crawled out on
the other side of the creek and said very bad words. He even went so
far as to call me out of my name. But it is all over with now," said
Mr. Rabbit, with a sigh. "I bear no grudges. Let bygones be bygones."

"I never heard before that Brother Terrapin had a fiddle-string in his
neck," said Buster John, after he had thought the matter over a
little.

"In dem times," said Drusilla, as if to satisfy her own mind, "you
couldn't tell what nobody had skacely."

"Why, as to that," replied Mr. Rabbit, "the fiddle-string in his neck
was news to Brother Terrapin."

There was a pause here and the children seemed to be somewhat
listless.

"I'll tell you what I think," remarked Mrs. Meadows to Mr. Rabbit;
"these children here are lonesome, and they'll be getting homesick
long before the time comes for them to go. Oh, don't tell me!" she
cried, when the children would have protested. "I know how I'd feel if
I was away from home in a strange country and had nobody but queer
people to talk to. We are too old. Even Chickamy Crany Crow and
Tickle-My-Toes are too old, and Mr. Thimblefinger is too little."

[Illustration: BROTHER TERRAPIN TUMBLING INTO THE CREEK]

"Well, what are we going to do about it?" asked Mr. Rabbit, running
his thumb in the bowl of his pipe.

"I was just thinking," responded Mrs. Meadows. "Hadn't we better bring
out the Looking-Glass family?"

"Well," said Mr. Rabbit, "I leave that to you." To hide the smile that
gathered around his mouth Mr. Rabbit leaned his head over and
scratched his left ear lazily with his left foot.

"That's what I'll do," Mrs. Meadows declared decisively. "These
children want company they can appreciate, poor things!"

She went into the house, and presently came out again, bringing a
mirror about three feet wide and five feet high.




IX.

THE LOOKING-GLASS CHILDREN.


The frame of the mirror was of dark wood, curiously carved, and it was
set on pivots between two small but stout upright posts, made of the
same kind of wood. As Mrs. Meadows brought the looking-glass out, it
swung back and forth between these posts, and its polished surface
shone with great brilliancy. The children wondered how they were to
amuse themselves with this queer toy. Mrs. Meadows placed the
looking-glass a little way from them, but not facing them. The frame
was in profile, so that they could see neither the face nor the back
of the mirror.

"You come first," she said to Buster John.

He went forward, and Mrs. Meadows placed him in front of the
looking-glass. As he turned to face it, his reflection (as it seemed)
stepped from the mirror and stared at him. Buster John looked at Mrs.
Meadows for an explanation, but at that moment she beckoned to
Sweetest Susan. When Buster John moved, his image moved. Mrs.
Meadows pushed him gently aside to make room for Sweetest Susan, and
it seemed that some invisible hand pushed his reflection gently aside.

[Illustration: SWEETEST SUSAN MEETING HER REFLECTION]

Sweetest Susan stepped before the looking-glass, and her reflection
walked out to meet her. Drusilla now came forward, and her image
stepped forth, looking somewhat scared and showing the whites of its
eyes. Mrs. Meadows went to the looking-glass, gave it a sudden turn on
its pivots, and carried it into the house.

All this happened so rapidly that the children hardly had time to be
surprised, but now that the looking-glass had been carried away and
they were left with their reflections, their shadows, their images (or
whatever it was), they didn't know what to do, or say, or think. They
could only look at each other in dumb astonishment. Drusilla was the
first to break the silence. In her surprise she had moved quickly back
a few steps, and her image, which had come out of the looking-glass,
had as quickly moved forward and toward her a few steps.

"Don't come follerin' atter me!" she cried excitedly. "Kaze ef you
do, you'll sho' git hurted. I ain't done nothin' 't all ter you. I
ain't gwine ter pester you, an' I ain't gwine ter let you pester me. I
tell you dat now, so you'll know what ter 'pen' on."

"Don't move! Please don't move!" cried Sweetest Susan to Buster John.
"If you do I can't tell you apart. I won't know which is which. That
wouldn't be treating me right nor Mamma, either."

Naturally, the children were in a great predicament when Mrs. Meadows
came back. She saw the trouble at once, and began to laugh. It was
funny to see Buster John and Sweetest Susan and Drusilla standing
there staring first at the Looking-Glass children and then at
themselves, not daring to move for fear they would get mixed up with
their doubles. The Looking-Glass children stared likewise, first at
themselves and then at the others.

"What is the matter?" Mrs. Meadows asked. "Why don't you go and play
with one another and make friends? It isn't many folks that have the
chance you children have got."

"I don't feel like playing," said Sweetest Susan. "I'm afraid we'll
get mixed up so that nobody will know one from the other."

"Why, there's all the difference in the world," exclaimed Mrs.
Meadows, trying hard not to laugh. "The Looking-Glass children are all
left-handed. You have a flower on the left side of your hat, the other
Susan has a flower on the right side of hers. Your brother there has
buttons on the right side of his coat; the other John has buttons on
the left side. There is a flaw in the looking-glass, and Drusilla,
being a little taller than you two, was just tall enough for the end
of her nose to be even with the flaw. That's the reason the other
Drusilla's nose looks like it had been mashed with a hammer."

"Yes 'm, it do!" exclaimed Drusilla. She involuntarily took a step
forward to take a nearer view of the flawed nose, and of course the
other Drusilla took a step forward as if to show the flawed nose.
"Don't you dast ter come 'bout me!" exclaimed Drusilla. "Goodness
knows, I don't look dat away. Go on, now! Go 'ten' ter yo' own
business ef you got any."

"I don't want to play with you," said the other Drusilla. "You've got
smut on your face. I don't like to play with dirty-faced girls."

"My face cleaner'n yone dis blessed minnit," retorted Drusilla.

"And your hair is not combed," said the other Drusilla. "It is wrapped
with strings, and you couldn't comb it if you wanted to. I think it is
a shame."

"Look at yo' own head!" retorted Drusilla angrily. "It's mo' woolly
dan what mine is. 'T ain't never been kyarded much less combed. An'
who got any mo' strings roun' der hair dan you got on yone?"

"How could I help it?" the other Drusilla asked. "You came and looked
at me in the glass and I had to be just like you, smutty face and all.
I don't think it is right. I know I never looked like this before, and
I hope I never shall again."

"Tut, tut!" said Mrs. Meadows; "don't get to mooning around here. You
might look better, but you don't look so bad. It will all come right
on wash-day, as the woman said when she put her dress on wrong side
outwards. Here comes Chickamy Crany Crow and Tickle-My-Toes. They'll
be glad to see you, no matter how you look."

And they were. They ran to the Looking-Glass children and greeted
them warmly. Tickle-My-Toes stared at the other Drusilla in surprise,
but he didn't laugh at her. "You look as if you had fallen down the
chimney," he said, "but that doesn't make any difference. So long as
you are here, we are satisfied."

"Oh, I don't mind it," said the other Drusilla.

"Now, then," remarked Mrs. Meadows, "you couldn't please us better
than to sing us a song. You haven't practiced together for a long
time."

The other children looked at one another in a shamefaced way, and
then, without a word of objection or explanation, they began to sing
as with one voice, the most plaintive song that ever was heard. It may
be called:--


THE LOOKING-GLASS SONG.

    It's oh! and it's ah! It's alack! and alas!
    Just imagine you lived in a big looking-glass!

    Oh, what could you say and what could you do
    If you lived all alone in the toe of a shoe?
    You could hop, you could skip, you could jump, you could dance,
    And you'd hear very little of "shouldn'ts" and "shan'ts."
    You could stump your big toe, and it would never get hurt;
    You could kick up the sand, you could play in the dirt.

    But it's oh! and it's ah! It's alack! and alas!
    Just imagine you lived in a big looking-glass!

    Oh, what could you do, and what would you say
    If you lived in the pantry all night and all day?
    You could say it was jolly, and splendid, and nice;
    You could eat all the jelly, and frighten the mice.
    You could taste the preserves, you could nibble the cheese--
    You could smell the red pepper, and sit down and sneeze.

    But it's oh! and it's ah! It's alack! and alas!
    Just imagine you lived in a big looking-glass!

    Oh, what could you do if you lived under ground?
    You could ride Mr. Mole and go galloping round;
    You could hear the black cricket a-playing his fife,
    For to quiet the baby and please his dear wife.
    You could hear the green grasshopper frying his meat,
    Near the nest of the June-Bug under the wheat.
    You could get all the goobers and artichokes, too--
    You could peep from the window the grub-worm went through.

    But it's oh! and it's ah! It's alack! and alas!
    Just imagine you lived in a big looking-glass!

"Oh, I think that is splendid," cried Sweetest Susan.

"Mr. Rabbit doesn't like it much," replied Mrs. Meadows, "but I tell
him it is pretty good for children that were raised in a
Looking-Glass."

"It will do very well," remarked Mr. Rabbit, "but you'll hear nicer
songs by the time you are as old as I am."

"Dem ar white chillun done mighty well," said Drusilla, "but I don't
like de way dat ar nigger gal hilt her head."

"Do they have to stay in the looking-glass?" asked Buster John. "If
they do I'm sorry for them."

"I ain't sorry fer dat black gal," said Drusilla spitefully. "She too
ugly ter suit me."

"Whose fault is it but yours?" cried Chickamy Crany Crow.

"Yes, whose fault is it?" cried Tickle-My-Toes.

"Come, come!" cries Mrs. Meadows. "We want no trouble here."

"We'll not trouble her," answered Tickle-My-Toes. "Old
Rawhead-and-Bloody-Bones will do the troubling."

"Now you all heah dat!" exclaimed Drusilla, in some alarm. "I ain't
pesterin' nobody, an' I ain't doin' nothin' 't all. Ef I can't talk I
des ez well quit livin'. I'm gwine home, I am, an' ef I can't fin' de
way, den I'll know who'll have ter answer fer it."

