"Thank you, sir."

The old gentleman drew a card from his pocket, containing his name and
address, and on the reverse side wrote the name of the friend at whose
office he felt sure the umbrella had been left, with a brief note
directing that it be handed to the bearer.

"All right, sir."

"Stop a moment, my boy. Have you got money to ride?"

"No, sir."

"Here, take this, and go down at once in the next stage. The sooner you
get there the better."

Frank followed directions. He stopped the next stage, and got on board.
As he passed the City-Hall Park, Dick Rafferty espied him. Frank nodded
to him.

"How did he get money enough to ride in a 'bus?" Dick asked himself in
much wonderment. "A few minutes ago he wanted to borrow some money of
me, and now he's spending ten cents for a ride. Maybe he's found a
pocket-book."

Frank kept on his way, and got out at Wall street. He found Mr.
Peckham's office, and on presenting the card, much to his delight, the
umbrella was handed him.

"Mr. Bowen was afraid to trust me with it over night," said Mr. Peckham,
with a smile.

"He thought some visitor might carry it off," said Frank.

"Not unlikely. Umbrellas are considered common property."

Frank hailed another stage, and started on his way up-town. There was no
elevated railway then, and this was the readiest conveyance, as Mr.
Bowen lived on Madison avenue.




CHAPTER VII.

AN INVITATION TO DINNER.


"Mr. Bowen must be a rich man," thought Frank, as he paused on the steps
of a fine brown-stone mansion, corresponding to the number on his card.

He rang the bell, and asked, "Is Mr. Bowen at home?"

"Yes, but he is in his chamber. I don't think he will see you."

"I think he will," said Frank, who thought the servant was taking too
much upon herself, "as I come by his appointment."

"I suppose you can come into the hall," said the servant, reluctantly.
"Is your business important?"

"You may tell him that the boy he sent for his umbrella has brought it.
He was afraid he had lost it."

"He sets great store by that umbrella," said the girl, in a different
tone. "I'll go and tell him."

Mr. Bowen came downstairs almost immediately. There was a look of
extreme gratification upon his face.

"Bless my soul, how quick you were!" he exclaimed. "Why, I've only been
home a few minutes. Did you find the umbrella at Mr. Peckham's office?"

"Yes, sir; it had been found, and taken care of."

"Did Peckham say anything?"

"He said you were probably afraid to trust it with him over night, but
he smiled when he said it."

"Peckham will have his joke, but he is an excellent man. My boy, I am
much indebted to you."

"I was very glad to do the errand, sir," said Frank.

"I think you said you were poor," said the old man, thoughtfully.

"Yes, sir. When I met you I hadn't a cent in the world."

"Haven't you any way to make a living?"

"Yes, sir. I could sell papers if I had enough money to set me up in
business."

"Does it require a large capital?"

"Oh, no, sir," said Frank, smiling, "unless you consider fifty cents a
large sum."

"Fifty cents!" repeated the old gentleman, in surprise. "You don't mean
to say that this small sum would set you up in business?"

"Yes, sir; I could buy a small stock of papers, and buy more with what I
received for them."

"To be sure. I didn't think of that."

Mr. Bowen was not a man of business. He had an ample income, and his
tastes were literary and artistic. He knew more of books than of men,
and more of his study than of the world.

"Well, my boy," he said after a pause, "how much do I owe you for doing
this errand?"

"I leave that to you, sir. Whatever you think right will satisfy me."

"Let me see, you want fifty cents to buy papers, and you will require
something to pay for your bed."

"Fifty cents in all will be enough, sir."

"I think I had better give you a dollar," said the old gentleman,
opening his pocket-book.

Frank's eyes sparkled. A dollar would do him a great deal of good; with
a dollar he would feel quite independent.

"Thank you, sir," he said. "It is more than I earned, but it will be
very acceptable."

He put on his hat, and was about to leave the house, when Mr. Bowen
suddenly said, "Oh, I think you'd better stay to dinner. It will be on
the table directly. My niece is away, and if you don't stay I shall be
alone."

Frank did not know what to say. He was rather abashed by the invitation,
but, as the old gentleman was to be alone, it did not seem so
formidable.

"I am afraid I don't look fit," he said.

"You can go upstairs and wash your face and hands. You'll find a
clothes-brush there also. I'll ring for Susan to show you the way."

He rang the bell, and the girl who had admitted Frank made her
appearance.

"Susan," said her master, "you may show this young gentlemen into the
back chamber on the third floor, and see that he is supplied with towels
and all he needs. And you may lay an extra plate; he will dine with me."

Susan stared first at Mr. Bowen, and then at Frank, but did not venture
to make any remark.

"This way, young man," she said, and ascended the front stairs, Frank
following her closely.

She led the way into a handsomely furnished chamber, ejaculating, "Well,
I never!"

"I hope you'll find things to your satisfaction, sir," she said, dryly.
"If we'd known you were coming, we'd have made particular preparations
for you."

"Oh, I think this will do," said Frank, smiling for he thought it a good
joke.

"I am glad you think it'll do," continued Susan. "Things mayn't be as
nice as you're accustomed to at home."

"Not quite," said Frank, good-humoredly; "but I shan't complain."

"That's very kind and considerate of you, I'm sure," said Susan, tossing
her head. "Well, I never did!"

"Nor I either, Susan," said Frank, laughing. "I am a poor boy, and I am
not used to this way of living; so if you'll be kind enough to give me
any hints, so I may behave properly at the table, I'll be very much
obliged to you."

This frank acknowledgment quite appeased Susan, and she readily complied
with our hero's request.

"But I must be going downstairs, or dinner will be late," she said,
hurriedly. "You can come down when you hear the bell ring."

Frank had been well brought up, though not in the city, and he was aware
that perfect neatness was one of the first characteristics of a
gentleman. He therefore scrubbed his face and hands till they fairly
shone, and brushed his clothes with great care. Even then they certainly
did look rather shabby, and there was a small hole in the elbow of his
coat; but, on the whole, he looked quite passable when he entered the
dining-room.

"Take that seat, my boy," said his host.

Frank sat down and tried to look as if he was used to it.

"Take this soup to Mr. Kavanagh," said Mr. Bowen, in a dignified tone.

Frank started and smiled slightly, feeling more and more that it was an
excellent joke.

"I wonder what Dick Rafferty would say if he could see me now," passed
through his mind.

He acquitted himself very creditably, however, and certainly displayed
an excellent appetite, much to the satisfaction of his hospitable host.

After dinner was over, Mr. Bowen detained him and began to talk of his
dead son, telling anecdotes of his boyhood, to which Frank listened with
respectful attention, for the father's devotion was touching.

"I think my boy looked a little like you," said the old gentleman. "What
do you think, Susan?"

"Not a mite, sir," answered Susan, promptly.

"When he was a boy, I mean."

"I didn't know him when he was a boy, Mr. Bowen."

"No, to be sure not."

"But Mr. John was dark-complected, and this boy is light, and Mr. John's
hair was black, and his is brown."

"I suppose I am mistaken," sighed the old man; "but there was something
in the boy's face that reminded me of John."

"A little more, and he'll want to adopt him," thought Susan. "That
wouldn't do nohow, though he does really seem like a decent sort of a
boy."

At eight o'clock Frank rose, and wished Mr. Bowen good-night.

"Come and see me again, my boy," said the old gentleman, kindly. "You
have been a good deal of company for me to-night."

"I am glad of it, sir."

"I think you might find something better to do than selling papers."

"I wish I could, sir."

"Come and dine with me again this day week, and I may have something to
tell you."

"Thank you, sir."

Feeling in his pocket to see that his dollar was safe, Frank set out to
walk down-town, repairing to the lodging-house, where he met Dick, and
astonished that young man by the recital of his adventures.

"It takes you to get round, Frank," he said. "I wonder I don't get
invited to dine on Madison avenue."

"I give it up," said Frank.




CHAPTER VIII.

A NEWSBOY'S EXPERIENCES.


Frank slept that night at the lodging-house, and found a much better bed
than he had been provided with by his late employer. He was up bright
and early the next morning, and purchased a stock of morning papers.
These he succeeded in selling during the forenoon, netting a profit of
thirty cents. It was not much, but he was satisfied. At any rate he was
a good deal better off than when in the employ of Mr. Mills. Of course
he had to economize strictly, but the excellent arrangements of the
lodging-house helped him to do this. Twelve cents provided him with
lodging and breakfast. At noon, in company with his friend Dick, he went
to a cheap restaurant, then to be found in Ann street, near Park row,
and for fifteen cents enjoyed a dinner of two courses. The first
consisted of a plate of beef, with a potato and a wedge of bread,
costing ten cents, and the second, a piece of apple-pie.

"That's a good square meal," said Dick, in a tone of satisfaction. "I
oughter get one every day, but sometimes I don't have the money."

"I should think you could raise fifteen cents a day for that purpose,
Dick."

"Well, so I could; but then you see I save my money sometimes to go to
the Old Bowery, or Tony Pastor's, in the evenin'."

"I would like to go, too, but I wouldn't give up my dinner. A boy that's
growing needs enough to eat."

"I guess you're right," said Dick. "We'll go to dinner together every
day, if you say so."

"All right, Dick; I should like your company."

About two o'clock in the afternoon, as Frank was resting on a bench in
the City-Hall Park, a girl of ten approached him. Frank recognized her
as an inmate of the tenement-house where Mills, his late employer,
lived.

"Do you want to see me?" asked Frank, observing that she was looking
towards him.

"You're the boy that went round with the blind man, aint you?" she
asked.

"Yes."

"He wants you to come back."

Frank was rather surprised, but concluded that Mills had difficulty in
obtaining a boy to succeed him. This was not very remarkable,
considering the niggardly pay attached to the office.

"Did he send you to find me?" asked our hero.

"Yes; he says you needn't pass that money if you'll come back."

"Tell him that I don't want to come back," said Frank, promptly. "I can
do better working for myself."

"He wants to know what you are doing," continued the girl.

"Does he? You can tell him that I am a newsboy."

"He says if you don't come back he'll have you arrested for stealing
money from him. You mustn't be mad with me. That's what he told me to
say."

"I don't blame you," said Frank, hotly; "but you can tell him that he is
a liar."

"Oh, I wouldn't dare to tell him that; he would beat me."

"How can he do that, when he can't see where you are?"

"I don't know how it is, but he can go right up to where you are just as
well as if he could see."

"So he can. He's a humbug and a fraud. His eyes may not be very good,
but he can see for all that. He pretends to be blind so as to make
money."

"That's what mother and I think," said the girl. "So you won't come
back?"

"Not much. He can hire some other boy, and starve him. He won't get me."

