window to guide the dear Christ-child, lest he should stumble in the
dark night as he passed up the deserted street. This done, she dropped
into bed, a rather tired, but very happy Christmas fairy.

[Illustration]




V

SOME OTHER BIRDS ARE TAUGHT TO FLY


Before the earliest Ruggles could wake and toot his five-cent tin horn,
Mrs. Ruggles was up and stirring about the house, for it was a gala day
in the family. Gala day! I should think so! Were not her nine "childern"
invited to a dinner-party at the great house, and weren't they going to
sit down free and equal with the mightiest in the land? She had been
preparing for this grand occasion ever since the receipt of Carol Bird's
invitation, which, by the way, had been speedily enshrined in an old
photograph frame and hung under the looking-glass in the most prominent
place in the kitchen, where it stared the occasional visitor directly in
the eye, and made him livid with envy:--


                                        BIRDS' NEST, December 17, 188-.

     DEAR MRS. RUGGLES,--I am going to have a dinner-party on Christmas
     Day, and would like to have all your children come. I want them
     every one, please, from Sarah Maud to Baby Larry. Mamma says
     dinner will be at half past five, and the Christmas tree at seven;
     so you may expect them home at nine o'clock. Wishing you a Merry
     Christmas and a Happy New Year, I am

                              Yours truly,
                              CAROL BIRD.




Breakfast was on the table promptly at seven o'clock, and there was very
little of it, too; for it was an excellent day for short rations, though
Mrs. Ruggles heaved a sigh as she reflected that the boys, with their
India-rubber stomachs, would be just as hungry the day after the
dinner-party as if they had never had any at all.

As soon as the scanty meal was over, she announced the plan of the
campaign: "Now, Susan, you an' Kitty wash up the dishes; an' Peter,
can't yer spread up the beds, so't I can git ter cuttin' out Larry's new
suit? I ain't satisfied with his clo'es, an' I thought in the night of a
way to make him a dress out o' my old red plaid shawl--kind o' Scotch
style, yer know, with the fringe 't the bottom.--Eily, you go find the
comb and take the snarls out the fringe, that's a lady! You little young
ones clear out from under foot! Clem, you and Con hop into bed with
Larry while I wash yer underflannins; 'twon't take long to dry
'em.--Yes, I know it's bothersome, buy yer can't go int' s'ciety 'thout
takin' some trouble, 'n' anyhow I couldn't git round to 'em last
night.--Sarah Maud, I think 'twould be perfeckly han'som' if you ripped
them brass buttons off yer uncle's _po_liceman's coat 'n' sewed 'em in a
row up the front o' yer green skirt. Susan, you must iron out yours 'n'
Kitty's apurns; 'n' there, I come mighty near forgettin' Peory's
stockin's! I counted the whole lot last night when I was washin' of 'em,
'n' there ain't but nineteen anyhow yer fix 'em, 'n' no nine pairs mates
nohow; 'n' I ain't goin' ter have my childern wear odd stockin's to a
dinner-comp'ny, fetched up as I was!--Eily, can't you run out and ask
Mis' Cullen ter lend me a pair o' stockin's for Peory, 'n' tell her if
she will, Peory'll give Jim half her candy when she gets home. Won't
yer, Peory?"

Peoria was young and greedy, and thought the remedy so out of all
proportion to the disease, that she set up a deafening howl at the
projected bargain--a howl so rebellious and so entirely out of season
that her mother started in her direction with flashing eye and uplifted
hand; but she let it fall suddenly, saying, "No, I vow I won't lick ye
Christmas Day, if yer drive me crazy; but speak up smart, now, 'n' say
whether yer'd ruther give Jim Cullen half yer candy or go bare-legged
ter the party?" The matter being put so plainly, Peoria collected her
faculties, dried her tears, and chose the lesser evil, Clem having
hastened the decision by an affectionate wink, that meant he'd go halves
with her on his candy.

"That's a lady!" cried her mother. "Now, you young ones that ain't doin'
nothin', play all yer want ter before noontime, for after ye git through
eatin' at twelve o'clock me 'n' Sarah Maud's goin' ter give yer sech a
washin' 'n' combin' 'n' dressin' as yer never had before 'n' never will
agin likely, 'n' then I'm goin' to set yer down 'n' give yer two solid
hours trainin' in manners; 'n' 'twon't be no foolin' neither."

"All we've got ter do's go eat!" grumbled Peter.

"Well, that's enough," responded his mother; "there's more'n one way of
eatin', let me tell yer, 'n' you've got a heap ter learn about it, Peter
Ruggles. Land sakes, I wish you childern could see the way I was fetched
up to eat. I never took a meal o' vittles in the kitchen before I
married Ruggles; but yer can't keep up that style with nine young ones
'n' yer Pa always off ter sea."

The big Ruggleses worked so well, and the little Ruggleses kept from
"under foot" so successfully, that by one o'clock nine complete toilets
were laid out in solemn grandeur on the beds. I say, "complete;" but I
do not know whether they would be called so in the best society. The law
of compensation had been well applied: he that had necktie had no cuffs;
she that had sash had no handkerchief, and _vice versa_; but they all
had shoes and a certain amount of clothing, such as it was, the outside
layer being in every case quite above criticism.

"Now, Sarah Maud," said Mrs. Ruggles, her face shining with excitement,
"everything's red up an' we can begin. I've got a boiler 'n' a kettle
'n' a pot o' hot water. Peter, you go into the back bedroom, 'n' I'll
take Susan, Kitty, Peory, 'n' Cornelius; 'n' Sarah Maud, you take Clem,
'n' Eily, 'n' Larry, one to a time. Scrub 'em 'n' rinse 'em, or 't any
rate git's fur's yer can with 'em, and then I'll finish 'em off while
you do yerself."

Sarah Maud couldn't have scrubbed with any more decision and force if
she had been doing floors, and the little Ruggleses bore it bravely, not
from natural heroism, but for the joy that was set before them. Not
being satisfied, however, with the "tone" of their complexions, and
feeling that the number of freckles to the square inch was too many to
be tolerated in the highest social circles, she wound up operations by
applying a little Bristol brick from the knife-board, which served as
the proverbial "last straw," from under which the little Ruggleses
issued rather red and raw and out of temper. When the clock struck four
they were all clothed, and most of them in their right minds, ready for
those last touches that always take the most time.

Kitty's red hair was curled in thirty-four ringlets, Sarah Maud's was
braided in one pig-tail, and Susan's and Eily's in two braids apiece,
while Peoria's resisted all advances in the shape of hair oils and stuck
out straight on all sides, like that of the Circassian girl of the
circus--so Clem said; and he was sent into the bedroom for it, too, from
whence he was dragged out forgivingly, by Peoria herself, five minutes
later. Then, exciting moment, came linen collars for some and neckties
and bows for others,--a magnificent green glass breastpin was sewed into
Peter's purple necktie,--and Eureka! the Ruggleses were dressed, and
Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these!

A row of seats was then formed directly through the middle of the
kitchen. Of course, there were not quite chairs enough for ten, since
the family had rarely wanted to sit down all at once, somebody always
being out or in bed, or otherwise engaged, but the wood-box and the
coal-hod finished out the line nicely, and nobody thought of grumbling.
The children took their places according to age, Sarah Maud at the head
and Larry on the coal-hod, and Mrs. Ruggles seated herself in front,
surveying them proudly as she wiped the sweat of honest toil from her
brow.

"Well," she exclaimed, "if I do say so as shouldn't, I never see a
cleaner, more stylish mess o' childern in my life! I do wish Ruggles
could look at ye for a minute!--Larry Ruggles, how many times have I got
ter tell yer not ter keep pullin' at yer sash? Haven't I told yer if it
comes ontied, yer waist 'n' skirt'll part comp'ny in the middle, 'n'
then where'll yer be?--Now look me in the eye, all of yer! I've of'en
told yer what kind of a family the McGrills was. I've got reason to be
proud, goodness knows! Your uncle is on the _po_lice force o' New York
city; you can take up the paper most any day an' see his name printed
right out--James McGrill,--'n' I can't have my children fetched up
common, like some folks'; when they go out they've got to have clo'es,
and learn to act decent! Now I want ter see how yer goin' to behave when
yer git there to-night. 'Tain't so awful easy as you think 'tis. Let's
start in at the beginnin' 'n' act out the whole business.
Pile into the bedroom, there, every last one o' ye, 'n' show me how yer
goin' to go int' the parlor. This'll be the parlor, 'n' I'll be Mis'
Bird."

[Illustration: "I WANT TER SEE HOW YER GOIN' TER BEHAVE"]

The youngsters hustled into the next room in high glee, and Mrs. Ruggles
drew herself up in the chair with an infinitely haughty and purse-proud
expression that much better suited a descendant of the McGrills than
modest Mrs. Bird.

The bedroom was small, and there presently ensued such a clatter that
you would have thought a herd of wild cattle had broken loose. The door
opened, and they straggled in, all the younger ones giggling, with Sarah
Maud at the head, looking as if she had been caught in the act of
stealing sheep; while Larry, being last in line, seemed to think the
door a sort of gate of heaven which would be shut in his face if he
didn't get there in time; accordingly he struggled ahead of his elders
and disgraced himself by tumbling in head foremost.

Mrs. Ruggles looked severe. "There, I knew yer'd do it in some sech fool
way! Now go in there and try it over again, every last one o' ye, 'n' if
Larry can't come in on two legs he can stay ter home,--d' yer hear?"

The matter began to assume a graver aspect; the little Ruggleses stopped
giggling and backed into the bedroom, issuing presently with lock step,
Indian file, a scared and hunted expression on every countenance.

"No, no, no!" cried Mrs. Ruggles, in despair. "That's worse yet;
yer look for all the world like a gang o' pris'ners! There ain't
no style ter that: spread out more, can't yer, 'n' act kind o'
careless-like--nobody's goin' ter kill ye! That ain't what a
dinner-party is!"

The third time brought deserved success, and the pupils took their seats
