are the waters we know to all the waters in the world. And no one has a
right to say that no water-babies exist, till they have seen no
water-babies existing; which is quite a different thing, mind, from not
seeing water-babies; and a thing which nobody ever did, or perhaps ever
will do.

"But surely if there were water-babies, somebody would have caught one
at least?"

Well. How do you know that somebody has not?

"But they would have put it into spirits, or into the _Illustrated
News_, or perhaps cut it into two halves, poor dear little thing, and
sent one to Professor Owen, and one to Professor Huxley, to see what
they would each say about it."

Ah, my dear little man! that does not follow at all, as you will see
before the end of the story.

"But a water-baby is contrary to nature."

Well, but, my dear little man, you must learn to talk about such things,
when you grow older, in a very different way from that. You must not
talk about "ain't" and "can't" when you speak of this great wonderful
world round you, of which the wisest man knows only the very smallest
corner, and is, as the great Sir Isaac Newton said, only a child picking
up pebbles on the shore of a boundless ocean.

You must not say that this cannot be, or that that is contrary to
nature. You do not know what Nature is, or what she can do; and nobody
knows; not even Sir Roderick Murchison, or Professor Owen, or Professor
Sedgwick, or Professor Huxley, or Mr. Darwin, or Professor Faraday, or
Mr. Grove, or any other of the great men whom good boys are taught to
respect. They are very wise men; and you must listen respectfully to all
they say: but even if they should say, which I am sure they never would,
"That cannot exist. That is contrary to nature," you must wait a little,
and see; for perhaps even they may be wrong. It is only children who
read Aunt Agitate's Arguments, or Cousin Cramchild's Conversations; or
lads who go to popular lectures, and see a man pointing at a few big
ugly pictures on the wall, or making nasty smells with bottles and
squirts, for an hour or two, and calling that anatomy or chemistry--who
talk about "cannot exist," and "contrary to nature." Wise men are afraid
to say that there is anything contrary to nature, except what is
contrary to mathematical truth; for two and two cannot make five, and
two straight lines cannot join twice, and a part cannot be as great as
the whole, and so on (at least, so it seems at present): but the wiser
men are, the less they talk about "cannot." That is a very rash,
dangerous word, that "cannot"; and if people use it too often, the Queen
of all the Fairies, who makes the clouds thunder and the fleas bite, and
takes just as much trouble about one as about the other, is apt to
astonish them suddenly by showing them, that though they say she cannot,
yet she can, and what is more, will, whether they approve or not.

And therefore it is, that there are dozens and hundreds of things in the
world which we should certainly have said were contrary to nature, if we
did not see them going on under our eyes all day long. If people had
never seen little seeds grow into great plants and trees, of quite
different shape from themselves, and these trees again produce fresh
seeds, to grow into fresh trees, they would have said, "The thing cannot
be; it is contrary to nature." And they would have been quite as right
in saying so, as in saying that most other things cannot be.

Or suppose again, that you had come, like M. Du Chaillu, a traveller
from unknown parts; and that no human being had ever seen or heard of an
elephant. And suppose that you described him to people, and said, "This
is the shape, and plan, and anatomy of the beast, and of his feet, and
of his trunk, and of his grinders, and of his tusks, though they are
not tusks at all, but two fore teeth run mad; and this is the section of
his skull, more like a mushroom than a reasonable skull of a reasonable
or unreasonable beast; and so forth, and so forth; and though the beast
(which I assure you I have seen and shot) is first cousin to the little
hairy coney of Scripture, second cousin to a pig, and (I suspect)
thirteenth or fourteenth cousin to a rabbit, yet he is the wisest of all
beasts, and can do everything save read, write, and cast accounts."
People would surely have said, "Nonsense; your elephant is contrary to
nature"; and have thought you were telling stories--as the French
thought of Le Vaillant when he came back to Paris and said that he had
shot a giraffe; and as the king of the Cannibal Islands thought of the
English sailor, when he said that in his country water turned to marble,
and rain fell as feathers. They would tell you, the more they knew of
science, "Your elephant is an impossible monster, contrary to the laws
of comparative anatomy, as far as yet known." To which you would answer
the less, the more you thought.

Did not learned men, too, hold, till within the last twenty-five years,
that a flying dragon was an impossible monster? And do we not now know
that there are hundreds of them found fossil up and down the world?
People call them Pterodactyles: but that is only because they are
ashamed to call them flying dragons, after denying so long that flying
dragons could exist.

The truth is, that folks' fancy that such and such things cannot be,
simply because they have not seen them, is worth no more than a savage's
fancy that there cannot be such a thing as a locomotive, because he
never saw one running wild in the forest. Wise men know that their
business is to examine what is, and not to settle what is not. They know
that there are elephants; they know that there have been flying dragons;
and the wiser they are, the less inclined they will be to say positively
that there are no water-babies.

No water-babies, indeed? Why, wise men of old said that everything on
earth had its double in the water; and you may see that that is, if not
quite true, still quite as true as most other theories which you are
likely to hear for many a day. There are land-babies--then why not
water-babies? _Are there not water-rats, water-flies, water-crickets,
water-crabs, water-tortoises, water-scorpions, water-tigers and
water-hogs, water-cats and water-dogs, sea-lions and sea-bears,
sea-horses and sea-elephants, sea-mice and sea-urchins, sea-razors and
sea-pens, sea-combs and sea-fans; and of plants, are there not
water-grass, and water-crowfoot, water-milfoil, and so on, without end?_

"But all these things are only nicknames; the water things are not
really akin to the land things."

That's not always true. They are, in millions of cases, not only of the
same family, but actually the same individual creatures. Do not even you
know that a green drake, and an alder-fly, and a dragon-fly, live under
water till they change their skins, just as Tom changed his? And if a
water animal can continually change into a land animal, why should not
a land animal sometimes change into a water animal? Don't be put down by
any of Cousin Cramchild's arguments, but stand up to him like a man, and
answer him (quite respectfully, of course) thus:--

If Cousin Cramchild says, that if there are water-babies, they must grow
into water-men, ask him how he knows that they do not? and then, how he
knows that they must, any more than the Proteus of the Adelsberg caverns
grows into a perfect newt.

If he says that it is too strange a transformation for a land-baby to
turn into a water-baby, ask him if he ever heard of the transformation
of Syllis, or the Distomas, or the common jelly-fish, of which M.
Quatrefages says excellently well--"Who would not exclaim that a miracle
had come to pass, if he saw a reptile come out of the egg dropped by the
hen in his poultry-yard, and the reptile give birth at once to an
indefinite number of fishes and birds? Yet the history of the jelly-fish
is quite as wonderful as that would be." Ask him if he knows about all
this; and if he does not, tell him to go and look for himself; and
advise him (very respectfully, of course) to settle no more what strange
things cannot happen, till he has seen what strange things do happen
every day.

If he says that things cannot degrade, that is, change downwards into
lower forms, ask him, who told him that water-babies were lower than
land-babies? But even if they were, does he know about the strange
degradation of the common goose-barnacles, which one finds sticking on
ships' bottoms; or the still stranger degradation of some cousins of
theirs, of which one hardly likes to talk, so shocking and ugly it is?

And, lastly, if he says (as he most certainly will) that these
transformations only take place in the lower animals, and not in the
higher, say that that seems to little boys, and to some grown people, a
very strange fancy. For if the changes of the lower animals are so
wonderful, and so difficult to discover, why should not there be changes
in the higher animals far more wonderful, and far more difficult to
discover? And may not man, the crown and flower of all things, undergo
some change as much more wonderful than all the rest, as the Great
Exhibition is more wonderful than a rabbit-burrow? Let him answer that.
And if he says (as he will) that not having seen such a change in his
experience, he is not bound to believe it, ask him respectfully, where
his microscope has been? Does not each of us, in coming into this world,
go through a transformation just as wonderful as that of a sea-egg, or a
butterfly? and do not reason and analogy, as well as Scripture, tell us
that that transformation is not the last? and that, though what we shall
be, we know not, yet we are here but as the crawling caterpillar, and
shall be hereafter as the perfect fly. The old Greeks, heathens as they
were, saw as much as that two thousand years ago; and I care very little
for Cousin Cramchild, if he sees even less than they. And so forth, and
so forth, till he is quite cross. And then tell him that if there are
no water-babies, at least there ought to be; and that, at least, he
cannot answer.

And meanwhile, my dear little man, till you know a great deal more about
nature than Professor Owen and Professor Huxley put together, don't tell
me about what cannot be, or fancy that anything is too wonderful to be
true. "We are fearfully and wonderfully made," said old David; and so we
are; and so is everything around us, down to the very deal table. Yes;
much more fearfully and wonderfully made, already, is the table, as it
stands now, nothing but a piece of dead deal wood, than if, as foxes
say, and geese believe, spirits could make it dance, or talk to you by
rapping on it.

Am I in earnest? Oh dear no! Don't you know that this is a fairy tale,
and all fun and pretence; and that you are not to believe one word of
it, even if it is true?

But at all events, so it happened to Tom. And, therefore, the keeper,
and the groom, and Sir John made a great mistake, and were very unhappy
(Sir John at least) without any reason, when they found a black thing in
the water, and said it was Tom's body, and that he had been drowned.
They were utterly mistaken. Tom was quite alive; and cleaner, and
merrier, than he ever had been. The fairies had washed him, you see, in
the swift river, so thoroughly, that not only his dirt, but his whole
husk and shell had been washed quite off him, and the pretty little real
Tom was washed out of the inside of it, and swam away, as a caddis does
when its case of stones and silk is bored through, and away it goes on
its back, paddling to the shore, there to split its skin, and fly away
as a caperer, on four fawn-coloured wings, with long legs and horns.
They are foolish fellows, the caperers, and fly into the candle at
night, if you leave the door open. We will hope Tom will be wiser, now
he has got safe out of his sooty old shell.

But good Sir John did not understand all this, not being a fellow of the
Linnaean Society; and he took it into his head that Tom was drowned. When
they looked into the empty pockets of his shell, and found no jewels
there, nor money--nothing but three marbles, and a brass button with a
string to it--then Sir John did something as like crying as ever he did
in his life, and blamed himself more bitterly than he need have done. So
he cried, and the groom-boy cried, and the huntsman cried, and the dame
cried, and the little girl cried, and the dairymaid cried, and the old
nurse cried (for it was somewhat her fault), and my lady cried, for
though people have wigs, that is no reason why they should not have
hearts; but the keeper did not cry, though he had been so good-natured
to Tom the morning before; for he was so dried up with running after
poachers, that you could no more get tears out of him than milk out of
leather: and Grimes did not cry, for Sir John gave him ten pounds, and
he drank it all in a week. Sir John sent, far and wide, to find Tom's
father and mother: but he might have looked till Doomsday for them, for
one was dead, and the other was in Botany Bay. And the little girl would
not play with her dolls for a whole week, and never forgot poor little
Tom. And soon my lady put a pretty little tombstone over Tom's shell in
the little churchyard in Vendale, where the old dalesmen all sleep side
by side between the limestone crags. And the dame decked it with
garlands every Sunday, till she grew so old that she could not stir
abroad; then the little children decked it for her. And always she sang
an old old song, as she sat spinning what she called her wedding-dress.
The children could not understand it, but they liked it none the less
for that; for it was very sweet, and very sad; and that was enough for
them. And these are the words of it:--

          _When all the world is young, lad,
            And all the trees are green;
          And every goose a swan, lad,
            And every lass a queen;
          Then hey for boot and horse, lad,
            And round the world away;
          Young blood must have its course, lad,
            And every dog his day._

          _When all the world is old, lad,
            And all the trees are brown;
          And all the sport is stale, lad,
            And all the wheels run down;
          Creep home, and take your place there,
            The spent and maimed among:
          God grant you find one face there,
            You loved when all was young._

Those are the words: but they are only the body of it: the soul of the
song was the dear old woman's sweet face, and sweet voice, and the sweet
old air to which she sang; and that, alas! one cannot put on paper. And
at last she grew so stiff and lame, that the angels were forced to carry
her; and they helped her on with her wedding-dress, and carried her up
over Harthover Fells, and a long way beyond that too; and there was a
new schoolmistress in Vendale, and we will hope that she was not
certificated.

And all the while Tom was swimming about in the river, with a pretty
little lace-collar of gills about his neck, as lively as a grig, and as
clean as a fresh-run salmon.

Now if you don't like my story, then go to the schoolroom and learn your
multiplication-table, and see if you like that better. Some people, no
doubt, would do so. So much the better for us, if not for them. It takes
all sorts, they say, to make a world.

          "He prayeth well who loveth well
           Both men and bird and beast;
           He prayeth best who loveth best
           All things both great and small:
           For the dear God who loveth us,
           He made and loveth all."

                                  COLERIDGE.





CHAPTER III


TOM was now quite amphibious. You do not know what that means?

You had better, then, ask the nearest Government pupil-teacher, who may
possibly answer you smartly enough, thus--

"Amphibious. Adjective, derived from two Greek words, _amphi_, a fish,
and _bios_, a beast. An animal supposed by our ignorant ancestors to be
compounded of a fish and a beast; which therefore, like the
hippopotamus, can't live on the land, and dies in the water."

However that may be, Tom was amphibious: and what is better still, he
was clean. For the first time in his life, he felt how comfortable it
was to have nothing on him but himself. But he only enjoyed it: he did
not know it, or think about it; just as you enjoy life and health, and
yet never think about being alive and healthy; and may it be long before
you have to think about it!

He did not remember having ever been dirty. Indeed, he did not remember
any of his old troubles, being tired, or hungry, or beaten, or sent up
dark chimneys. Since that sweet sleep, he had forgotten all about his
master, and Harthover Place, and the little white girl, and in a word,
all that had happened to him when he lived before; and what was best of
all, he had forgotten all the bad words which he had learned from
Grimes, and the rude boys with whom he used to play.

That is not strange: for you know, when you came into this world, and
became a land-baby, you remembered nothing. So why should he, when he
became a water-baby?

Then have you lived before?

My dear child, who can tell? One can only tell that, by remembering
something which happened where we lived before; and as we remember
nothing, we know nothing about it; and no book, and no man, can ever
tell us certainly.

There was a wise man once, a very wise man, and a very good man, who
wrote a poem about the feelings which some children have about having
lived before; and this is what he said--

          "_Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting;
            The soul that rises with us, our life's star,
                Hath elsewhere had its setting,
                  And cometh from afar:
              Not in entire forgetfulness,
              And not in utter nakedness,
            But trailing clouds of glory, do we come
                From God, who is our home._"

There, you can know no more than that. But if I was you, I would believe
that. For then the great fairy Science, who is likely to be queen of
all the fairies for many a year to come, can only do you good, and never
do you harm; and instead of fancying, with some people, that your body
makes your soul, as if a steam-engine could make its own coke; or, with
some people, that your soul has nothing to do with your body, but is
only stuck into it like a pin into a pin-cushion, to fall out with the
first shake;--you will believe the one true,

          _orthodox_,        _inductive_,
          _rational_,        _deductive_,
          _philosophical_,   _seductive_,
          _logical_,         _productive_,
          _irrefragable_,    _salutary_,
          _nominalistic_,    _comfortable_,
          _realistic_,
          _and on-all-accounts-to-be-received_

doctrine of this wonderful fairy tale; which is, that your soul makes
your body, just as a snail makes his shell. For the rest, it is enough
for us to be sure that whether or not we lived before, we shall live
again; though not, I hope, as poor little heathen Tom did. For he went
downward into the water: but we, I hope, shall go upward to a very
different place.

But Tom was very happy in the water. He had been sadly overworked in the
land-world; and so now, to make up for that, he had nothing but holidays
in the water-world for a long, long time to come. He had nothing to do
now but enjoy himself, and look at all the pretty things which are to
be seen in the cool clear water-world, where the sun is never too hot,
and the frost is never too cold.

And what did he live on? Water-cresses, perhaps; or perhaps water-gruel,
and water-milk; too many land-babies do so likewise. But we do not know
what one-tenth of the water-things eat; so we are not answerable for the
water-babies.

Sometimes he went along the smooth gravel water-ways, looking at the
crickets which ran in and out among the stones, as rabbits do on land;
or he climbed over the ledges of rock, and saw the sand-pipes hanging in
thousands, with every one of them a pretty little head and legs peeping
out; or he went into a still corner, and watched the caddises eating
dead sticks as greedily as you would eat plum-pudding, and building
their houses with silk and glue. Very fanciful ladies they were; none of
them would keep to the same materials for a day. One would begin with
some pebbles; then she would stick on a piece of green wood; then she
found a shell, and stuck it on too; and the poor shell was alive, and
did not like at all being taken to build houses with: but the caddis did
not let him have any voice in the matter, being rude and selfish, as
vain people are apt to be; then she stuck on a piece of rotten wood,
then a very smart pink stone, and so on, till she was patched all over
like an Irishman's coat. Then she found a long straw, five times as long
as herself, and said, "Hurrah! my sister has a tail, and I'll have one
too"; and she stuck it on her back, and marched about with it quite
proud, though it was very inconvenient indeed. And, at that, tails
became all the fashion among the caddis-baits in that pool, as they were
at the end of the Long Pond last May, and they all toddled about with
long straws sticking out behind, getting between each other's legs, and
