any suspicion arose that the fugitive had escaped by water, the hiring
of a boat by one who had already befriended the slave, and its absence
for so long a time, would be almost certain to cause suspicion to be
directed toward him. He therefore decided upon borrowing a boat from a
friend, and next morning rode to the plantation of the father of Harry
Furniss, this being situated on a convenient position on the Pamunkey,
one of the branches of the York River.

"Are you using that sailing-boat of yours at present, Harry? Because, if
not, I wish you would let me have the use of it for a week or so."

"With pleasure, Vincent; and my fishing-lines and nets as well, if you
like. We very seldom use the boat. Do you mean to keep it here or move
it higher up the river, where it would be more handy for you, perhaps?"

"I think I would rather leave it here, Furniss. A mile or two extra to
ride makes no difference. I suppose it's in the water?"

"Yes; at the foot of the boathouse stairs. There is a padlock and chain.
I will give you the key, so you can go off whenever you like without
bothering to come up to the house. If you just call in at the stable as
you ride by, one of the boys will go down with you and take your horse
and put him up till you come back again."

"That will do capitally," Vincent replied. "It is some time since I was
on the water, and I seem to have a fancy for a change at present. One is
sick of riding into Richmond and hearing nothing but politics talked of
all day. Don't be alarmed if you hear at any time that the boat has not
come back at night, for if tide and wind are unfavorable at any time I
might stop at Cumberland for the night."

"I have often had to do that," Furniss said. "Besides, if you took it
away for a week, I don't suppose any one would notice it; for no one
goes down to the boathouse unless to get the boat ready for a trip."

The next day Vincent rode over to his friend's plantation, sending Dan
off an hour beforehand to bail out the boat and get the masts and sails
into her from the boathouse. The greater part of the next two days was
spent on the water, sometimes sailing, sometimes fishing. The evening of
the second of these days was that upon which Vincent had arranged to
meet Tony again, and an hour after dark he went down through the garden
to the stable; for that was the time the fugitive was to meet him, for
he could not leave his place of concealment until night fell. After
looking at the horses, and giving some instructions to the negroes in
charge, he returned to the shrubbery, and, sending Dan up to summon
Dinah, he went to the bushes where he had before met Tony. The negro
came out as he approached.

"How are you, Tony?"

"Much better dan I was, massa. I hab not been disturbed since I saw you,
and, thanks to dat and to de good food and to massa's kind words, I'm
stronger and better now, and ready to do whatever massa think best."

"Well, Tony, I am glad to say that I think I have arranged a plan by
which you will be got safely out of the country. Of course, it may fail;
but there is every hope of success. I have arranged for a boat, and
shall take you down the river, and put you on board a ship bound for
England."

The black clapped his hands in delight at the news.

"When you get there you will take another ship out to Canada, and as
soon as I learn from you that you are there, and what is your address, I
will give Dinah her papers of freedom and send her on to you."

"Oh, massa, it is too much," Tony said, with the tears running down his
cheeks; "too much joy altogeder."

"Well, I hope it will all come right, Tony. Dinah will be here in a
minute or two. Do not keep her long, for I do not wish her absence from
the house to be observed just now. Now, listen to my instructions. Do
you know the plantation of Mr. Furniss, on the Pamunkeyunky, near Coal
harbor?"

"No, sir; but me can find out."

"No, you can't; because you can't see any one or ask questions. Very
well, then, you must be here again to-morrow night at the same hour. Dan
will meet you here, and act as your guide. He will presently bring you
provisions for to-morrow. Be sure you be careful, Tony, and get back to
your hiding-place as soon as you can, and be very quiet to-morrow until
it is time to start. It would be terrible if you were to be caught now,
just as we have arranged for you to get away."

On the following afternoon Vincent told his mother that he was going
over that evening to his friend Furniss, as an early start was to be
made next morning; they intended to go down the river as far as
Yorktown, if not further; that he certainly should not be back for two
days, and probably might be even longer.

"This new boating freak of yours, Vincent, seems to occupy all your
thoughts. I wonder how long it will last."

"I don't suppose it will last much longer, mother," Vincent said with a
laugh. "Anyhow, it will make a jolly change for a week. One had got so
sick of hearing nothing talked about but secession that a week without
hearing the word mentioned will do one lots of good, and I am sure I
felt that if one had much more of it, one would be almost driven to take
up the Northern side just for the sake of a change."

"We should all disown you, Vin," Annie said, laughing; "we should have
nothing to say to you, and you would be cut by all your friends."

"Well, you see, a week's sailing and fishing will save me from all that,
Annie; and I be all be able to begin again with a fresh stock of
patience."

"I believe you are only half in earnest in the cause, Vincent," his
mother said gravely.

"I am not indeed, mother. I quite agree with what you and every one say
as to the rights of the State of Virginia, and if the North should
really try to force us and the other Southern States to remain with
them, I shall be just as ready to do everything I can as any one else;
but I can't see the good of always talking about it, and I think it's
very wrong to ill-treat and abuse those who think the other way. In
England in the Civil War the people of the towns almost all thought one
way, and almost all those of the counties the other, and even now
opinions differ almost as widely as to which was right. I hate to hear
people always laying down the law as if there could not possibly be two
sides of the case, and as if every one who differed from them must be a
rascal and a traitor. Almost all the fellows I know say that if it comes
to fighting they shall go into the State army, and I should be quite
willing, if they would really take fellows of my age for soldiers, to
enlist too; but that is no reason why one should not get sick of hearing
nothing but one subject talked of for weeks."

It was nearly dark when Vincent started for his walk of ten miles; for
he had decided not to take his horse with him, as he had no means of
sending it back, and its stay for three days in his friend's stables
would attract attention to the fact of his long absence.

After about three hours' walking he reached the boat house, having seen
no one as he passed through the plantation. He took the oars and sails
from the boathouse and placed them in the boat, and then sat down in the
stern to await the coming of the negroes. In an hour they arrived; Tony
carrying a bundle of clothes that Dan had by Vincent's orders bought for
him in Richmond, while Dan carried a large basket of provisions. Vincent
gave an exclamation of thankfulness as he saw the two figures appear,
for the day having been Sunday he knew that a good many men would be
likely to join the search parties in hopes of having a share in the
reward offered for Tony's capture, and he had felt very anxious all day.

"You sit in the bottom of the boat, Tony, and do you steer, Dan. You
make such a splashing with your oar that we should be heard a mile away.
Keep us close in shore in the shadow of the trees; the less we are
noticed the better at this time of night."

Taking the sculls, Vincent rowed quietly away. He had often been out on
boating excursions with his friends, and had learned to row fairly.
During the last two days he had diligently instructed Dan, and after two
long days' work the young negro had got over the first difficulties, but
he was still clumsy and awkward. Vincent did not exert himself. He knew
he had a long night's row before him, and he paddled quietly along with
the stream. The boat was a good-sized one, and when not under sail was
generally rowed by two strong negroes accustomed to the work.

Sometimes for half an hour at a time Vincent ceased rowing, and let the
boat drift along quietly. There was no hurry, for he had a day and two
nights to get down to the mouth of the river, a distance of some seventy
miles, and out to sea far enough to intercept the vessel. At four
o'clock they arrived at Cumberland, where the Pamunkey and Mattapony
Rivers unite and form the York River. Here they were in tidal waters;
and as the tide, though not strong, was flowing up, Vincent tied the
boat to the branch of a tree, and lay down in the bottom for an hour's
sleep, telling Dan to wake him when the tide turned, or if he heard any
noise. Day had broken when the boat drifted round, and Dan aroused him.

The boat was rowed off to the middle of the river, as there could be no
longer any attempt at concealment. Dan now took the bow oar, and they
rowed until a light breeze sprang up. Vincent then put up the mast, and,
having hoisted the sail, took his place at the helm, while Dan went
forward into the bow. They passed several fishing-boats, and the smoke
was seen curling up from the huts in the clearings scattered here and
there along the shore. The sun had now risen, and its heat was pleasant
after the damp night air.

Although the breeze was light, the boat made fair way with the tide, and
when the ebb ceased at about ten o'clock the mouth of the river was but
a few miles away. The mast was lowered and the sails stowed. The boat
was then rowed into a little creek and tied up to the bushes. The basket
of provisions was opened, and a hearty meal enjoyed, Tony being now
permitted for the first time to sit up in the boat. After the meal
Vincent and Dan lay down for a long sleep, while Tony, who had slept
some hours during the night, kept watch.

At four in the afternoon tide again slackened, and as soon as it had
fairly turned they pushed out from the creek and again set sail. In
three hours they were at the mouth of the river. A short distance out
they saw several boats fishing, and dropping anchor a short distance
away from these, they lowered their sail, and taking the fishing-lines
from the locker of the boat, set to to fish. As soon as it was quite
dark the anchor was hauled up, and Vincent and Dan took the oars, the
wind having now completely dropped. For some time they rowed steadily,
keeping the land in sight on their right hand.

Tony was most anxious to help, but as he had never had an oar in his
hand in his life, Vincent thought that he would do more harm than good.
It was, he knew, some ten miles from the mouth of the York River to
Fortress Monroe, at the entrance to Hampton Roads, and after rowing for
three hours he thought that he could not be far from that point, and
therefore turned the boat's head out toward the sea. They rowed until
they could no longer make out the land astern, and then laying in their
oars waited till the morning, Vincent sitting in the stern and often
nodding off to sleep, while the two negroes kept up a constant
conversation in the bow.

As soon as it was daylight the oars were again got out. They could
clearly make out the outline of the coast, and saw the break in the
shore that marked the entrance to Hampton Roads. There was a light
breeze now, but Vincent would not hoist the sail lest it might attract
the attention of some one on shore. He did not think the boat itself
could be seen, as they were some eight or nine miles from the land. They
rowed for a quarter of an hour, when Vincent saw the white sails of a
ship coming out from the entrance.

The breeze was so light that she would, he thought, be nearly three
hours before she reached the spot where they were now, and whether she
headed to the right or left of it he would have plenty of time to cut
her off. For another two hours he and Dan rowed steadily. The wind had
freshened a good deal, and the ship was now coming up fast to them. Two
others had come out after her, but were some miles astern. They had
already made out that the ship was flying a flag at her masthead, and
although they had not been able to distinguish its colors, Vincent felt
sure that it was the right ship; for he felt certain that the captain
would get up sail as soon as possible, so as to come up with them before
any other vessels came out. They had somewhat altered their course, to
put themselves in line with the vessel. When she was within a distance
of about a mile and a half Vincent was able to make out the flag, and
knew that it was the right one.

"There's the ship, Tony," he said; "it is all right, and in a few
minutes you will be on your way to England."

Tony had already changed his tattered garments for the suit of sailor's
clothes that Dan had bought for him. Vincent had given him full
instructions as to the course he was to pursue. The ship was bound for
Liverpool; on his arrival there he was at once to go round the docks and
take a passage in the steerage of the next steamer going to Canada.

"The fare will be about twenty-five dollars," he said. "When you get to
Canada you will land at Quebec, and you had better go on by rail to
Montreal, where you will, I think, find it easier to get work than at
Quebec. As soon as you get a place you are likely to stop in, get
somebody to write for you to me, giving me your address. Here are a
hundred dollars, which will be sufficient to pay your expenses to
Montreal and leave you about fifty dollars to keep you till you can get
something to do."


CHAPTER IV. SAFELY BACK.

When the ship came within a few hundred yards, Vincent stood up and
waved his cap, and a minute later the ship was brought up into the wind
and her sails thrown aback. The captain appeared at the side and shouted
to the boat now but fifty yards away:

"What do you want there?"

"I have a passenger for England," Vincent replied. "Will you take him?"

"Come alongside," the captain said. "Why didn't he come on board before
I started?"

The boat was rowed alongside, and Vincent climbed on board. The captain
greeted him as a stranger and led the way to his cabin.

"You have managed that well," he said when they were alone, "and I am
heartily glad that you have succeeded. I made you out two hours ago. We
will stop here another two or three minutes so that the men may think
you are bargaining for a passage for the negro, and then the sooner he
is on board and you are on your way back the better, for the wind is
rising, and I fancy it is going to blow a good deal harder before
night."

"And won't you let me pay for the man's passage, captain? It is only
fair anyhow that I should pay for what he will eat."

"Oh, nonsense!" the captain replied. "He will make himself useful and
pay for his keep. I am only too glad to get the poor fellow off. Now,
we will have a glass of wine together and then say good-by."

Two minutes later they returned to the deck. Vincent went to the side.

"Jump on board, Tony. I have arranged for your passage."

The negro climbed up the side.

"Good-by, captain, and thank you heartily. Good-by, Tony."

The negro could not speak, but he seized the hand Vincent held out to
him and pressed it to his lips. Vincent dropped lightly into his boat;
and pushed off from the side of the vessel. As he did so he heard orders
shouted, the yards swung round, and the vessel almost at once began to
move through the water.

"Now, Dan, up with the mast; and sail again; but let me put two reefs in
first, the wind is getting up."

In five minutes the sail was hoisted, and with Vincent at the helm and
Dan sitting up to windward, was dashing through the water. Although
Vincent understood the management of a sailing-boat on the calm waters
of the rivers, this was his first experience of sea-sailing; and
although the waves were still but small, he felt at first somewhat
nervous as the boat dashed through them, sending up at times a sheet of
spray from her bows. But he soon got over this sensation, and enjoyed
the lively motion and the fresh wind. The higher points of the land were
still visible; but even had they not been so it would have mattered
little, as he had taken the precaution to bring with him a small
pocket-compass. The wind was from the southwest; and he was therefore
able, with the sheet hauled in, to make for a point where he judged the
mouth of the York River lay.

"Golly, massa! how de boat do jump up and down."

"She is lively, Dan, and it would be just as well if we had some ballast
on board; however, she has a good beam and walks along splendidly. If
the wind keeps as it is, we shall be back at the mouth of the York in
three or four hours. You may as well open that basket again and hand me
that cold chicken and a piece of bread; cut the meat off the bones and
put it on the bread, for I have only one hand disengaged; and hand me
that bottle of cold tea. That's right. Now you had better take something
yourself. You must be hungry. We forgot all about the basket in our
interest in the ship."

Dan shook his head.

"A little while ago, massa, me seem berry hungry, now me doesn't feel
hungry at all."

"That's bad, Dan. I am afraid you are going to be seasick."

"Me no feel seasick, massa; only me don't feel hungry." But in a few
minutes Dan was forced to confess that; he did feel ill, and a few
moments afterward was groaning in the agonies of seasickness.

"Never mind, Dan," Vincent said cheerfully. "You will be better after
this."

"Me not seasick, massa; de sea have nuffin to do with it. It's de boat
dat will jump up and down instead of going quiet."

"It's all the same thing, Dan; and I hope she won't jump about more
before we get into the river."

But in another half hour Vincent had to bring the boat's head up to the
wind, lower the lug, and tie down the last reef.

"There, she goes easier now, Dan," he said, as the boat resumed her
course; but Dan, who was leaning helplessly over the side of the boat,
could see no difference.

Vincent, however, felt that; under her close sail the boat was doing
better, and rising more easily on the waves, which were now higher and
farther apart than before. In another hour the whole of the shore-line
was visible; but the wind had risen so much that, even under her reduced
sail, the boat had as much as she could carry, and often heeled over
until her gunwale was nearly under water. Another hour and the shore was
but some four miles away, but Vincent felt he could no longer hold on.

In the hands of an experienced sailor, who would have humored the boat
and eased her up a little to meet the seas, the entrance to the York
River could no doubt have been reached with safety; but Vincent was
ignorant of the art of sailing a boat in the sea, and she was shipping
water heavily. Dan had for some time been bailing, having only
undertaken the work in obedience to Vincent's angry orders, being too
ill to care much what became of them.

"Now, Dan, I am going to bring her head up to the wind, so get ready to
throw off that halyard and gather in the sail as it; comes down. That's
right, man; now down with the mast."

Vincent had read that the best plan when caught in an open boat in a
gale, was to tie the oars and mast, if she had one, together, and to
throw them overboard with the head rope tied to them, as by that means
the boat would ride head to sea. The oars, sculls, mast, and sail were
firmly tied together and launched overboard, the rope being first taken
off the anchor and tied round the middle of the clump of spars.

Vincent carefully played out the rope till some fifteen yards were over,
then he fastened it to the ring of the head rope, and had the
satisfaction of finding that the boat rode easily to the floating
anchor, rising lightly over the waves, and not shipping a drop of water.
He then took the bailer and got rid of the water that had found its way
on board, Dan, after getting down the sail, having collapsed utterly.

"Now, Dan, sit up; there, man, the motion is much easier now, and we are
taking no water on board. I will give you a glass of rum, that will put
new strength into you. It's lucky we put it in the basket in case of
emergency."

The negro, whose teeth were chattering from cold, fright, and
exhaustion, eagerly drank off the spirit. Vincent, who was wet to the
skin with the spray, took a little himself, and then settled himself as
comfortably as he could on the floor-boards in the stern of the boat,
and quietly thought out the position. The wind was still rising, and a
thick haze obscured the land. He had no doubt that by night it would be
blowing a gale; but the boat rode so easily and lightly that he believed
she would get through it.

They might, it was true, be blown many miles off the shore, and not be
able to get back for some time, for the gale might last two or three
days. The basket of provisions was, however, a large one. Dan had
received orders to bring plenty and had obeyed them literally, and
Vincent saw that the supply of food, if carefully husbanded, would last;
without difficulty for a week. The supply of liquor was less
satisfactory. There was the bottle of rum, two bottles of claret, and a
two-gallon jar, nearly half empty, of water. The cold tea was finished.

"That would be a poor supply for a week for two of us," Vincent;
muttered, as he removed the contents of the basket and stored them
carefully in the locker; "however, if it's going to be a gale there is
sure to be some rain with it, so I think we shall manage very well."

By night it was blowing really heavily, but although the waves were high
the boat shipped but little water. Dan had fallen off to sleep, and
Vincent had been glad to wrap himself in the thick coat he had brought
with him as a protection against the heavy dews when sleeping on the
river. At times sharp rain squalls burst upon them, and Vincent had no
difficulty in filling up the water-bottle again with the bailer.

The water was rather brackish, but not sufficiently so to be of
consequence. All night the boat was tossed heavily on the waves. Vincent
dozed off at times, rousing himself occasionally and bailing out the
water, which came in the shape of spray and rain. The prospect in the
morning was not cheering. Gray clouds covered the sky and seemed to come
down almost on to the water, the angry sea was crested with white heads,
