merrily,--

"I am Debby Wilder, or Dora, as aunt prefers to call me; and instead of
laughing, I ought to be four feet under water, looking for something we
have lost; but I can't dive, and my distress is dreadful, as you see."

"What have you lost?  I will look for it, and bring it back in spite of
the kelpies, if it is a human possibility," replied Mr. Evan, pushing
his wet locks out of his eyes, and regarding the ocean with a
determined aspect.

Debby leaned toward him, whispering with solemn countenance,--

"It is a set of teeth, Sir."

Mr. Evan was more a man of deeds than words, therefore he disappeared
at once with a mighty splash, and after repeated divings and much
laughter appeared bearing the chief ornament of Mrs. Penelope Carroll's
comely countenance.  Debby looked very pretty and grateful as she
returned her thanks, and Mr.  Evan was guilty of a secret wish that all
the worthy lady's features were at the bottom of the sea, that he might
have the satisfaction of restoring them to her attractive niece; but
curbing this unnatural desire, he bowed, saying, gravely,--

"Tell your aunt, if you please, that this little accident will remain a
dead secret, so far as I am concerned, and I am very glad to have been
of service at such a critical moment."

Whereupon Mr. Evan marched again into the briny deep, and Debby trotted
away to her aunt, whom she found a clammy heap of blue flannel and
despair. Mrs. Carroll's temper was ruffled, and though she joyfully
rattled in her teeth, she said, somewhat testily, when Debby's story
was done,--

"Now that man will have a sort of claim on us, and we must be civil,
whoever he is. Dear! dear! I wish it had been Joe Leavenworth instead.
Evan,--I don't remember any of our first families with connections of
that name, and I dislike to be under obligations to a person of that
sort, for there's no knowing how far he may presume; so, pray, be
careful, Dora."

"I think you are very ungrateful, Aunt Pen; and if Mr. Evan should
happen to be poor, it does not become me to turn up my nose at him, for
I'm nothing but a make-believe myself just now. I don't wish to go down
upon my knees to him, but I do intend to be as kind to him as I should
to that conceited Leavenworth boy; yes, kinder even; for poor people
value such things more, as I know very well."

Mrs. Carroll instantly recovered her temper, changed the subject, and
privately resolved to confine her prejudices to her own bosom, as they
seemed to have an aggravating effect upon the youthful person whom she
had set her heart on disposing of to the best advantage.

Debby took her swimming-lesson with much success, and would have
achieved her dinner with composure, if white-aproned gentlemen had not
effectually taken away her appetite by whisking bills-of-fare into her
hands, and awaiting her orders with a fatherly interest, which induced
them to congregate mysterious dishes before her, and blandly rectify
her frequent mistakes. She survived the ordeal, however, and at four
p.m. went to drive with "that Leavenworth boy" in the finest turnout
----- could produce.  Aunt Pen then came off guard, and with a sigh of
satisfaction subsided into a peaceful doze, still murmuring, even in
her sleep,--

"Propinquity, my love, propinquity works wonders."



"Aunt Pen, are you a modest woman?" asked the young crusader against
established absurdities, as she came into the presence-chamber that
evening ready for the hop.

"Bless the child, what does she mean?" cried Mrs. Carroll, with a start
that twitched her back-hair out of Victorine's hands.

"Would you like to have a daughter of yours go to a party looking as I
look?" continued her niece, spreading her airy dress, and standing very
erect before her astonished relative.

"Why, of course I should, and be proud to own such a charming
creature," regarding the slender white shape with much
approbation,--adding, with a smile, as she met the girl's eye,--

"Ah, I see the difficulty, now; you are disturbed because there is not
a bit of lace over these pretty shoulders of yours.  Now don't be
absurd, Dora; the dress is perfectly proper, or Madame Tiphany never
would have sent it home. It is the fashion, child; and many a girl with
such a figure would go twice as decolletee, and think nothing of it, I
assure you."

Debby shook her head with an energy that set the pink heather-bells
a-tremble in her hair, and her color deepened beautifully as she said,
with reproachful eyes,--

"Aunt Pen, I think there is a better fashion in every young girl's
heart than any Madame Tiphany can teach.  I am very grateful for all
you have done for me, but I cannot go into public in such an undress as
this; my mother would never allow it, and father never forgive it.
Please don't ask me to, for indeed I cannot do it even for you."

Debby looked so pathetic that both mistress and maid broke into a laugh
which somewhat reassured the young lady, who allowed her determined
features to relax into a smile, as she said,--

"Now, Aunt Pen, you want me to look pretty and be a credit to you; but
how would you like to see my face the color of those geraniums all the
evening?"

"Why, Dora, you are out of your mind to ask such a thing, when you know
it's the desire of my life to keep your color down and make you look
more delicate," said her aunt, alarmed at the fearful prospect of a
peony-faced protegee.

"Well, I should be anything but that, if I wore this gown in its
present waistless condition; so here is a remedy which will prevent
such a calamity and ease my mind."

As she spoke, Debby tied on her little blonde fichu with a gesture
which left nothing more to be said.

Victorine scolded, and clasped her hands; but Mrs. Carroll, fearing to
push her authority too far, made a virtue of necessity, saying,
resignedly,--

"Have your own way, Dora, but in return oblige me by being agreeable to
such persons as I may introduce to you; and some day, when I ask a
favor, remember how much I hope to do for you, and grant it cheerfully."

"Indeed I will, Aunt Pen, if it is anything I can do without disobeying
mother's 'notions' as you call them.  Ask me to wear an orange-colored
gown, or dance with the plainest, poorest man in the room, and I'll do
it; for there never was a kinder aunt than mine in all the world,"
cried Debby, eager to atone for her seeming wilfulness, and really
grateful for her escape from what seemed to her benighted mind a very
imminent peril.

Like a clover-blossom in a vase of camellias little Debby looked that
night among the dashing or languid women who surrounded her; for she
possessed the charm they had lost,--the freshness of her youth.
Innocent gayety sat smiling in her eyes, healthful roses bloomed upon
her cheek, and maiden modesty crowned her like a garland. She was the
creature that she seemed, and, yielding to the influence of the hour,
danced to the music of her own blithe heart. Many felt the spell whose
secret they had lost the power to divine, and watched the girlish
figure as if it were a symbol of their early aspirations dawning
freshly from the dimness of their past. More than one old man thought
again of some little maid whose love made his boyish days a pleasant
memory to him now. More than one smiling fop felt the emptiness of his
smooth speech, when the truthful eyes looked up into his own; and more
than one pale woman sighed regretfully with herself, "I, too, was a
happy-hearted creature once!"

"That Mr. Evan does not seem very anxious to claim our acquaintance,
after all, and I think better of him on that account.  Has he spoken to
you to-night, Dora?" asked Mrs. Carroll, as Debby dropped down beside
her after a "splendid polka."

"No, ma'am, he only bowed.  You see some people are not so presuming as
other people thought they were; for we are not the most attractive
beings on the planet; therefore a gentleman can be polite and then
forget us without breaking any of the Ten Commandments.  Don't be
offended with him yet, for he may prove to be some great creature with
a finer pedigree than any of your first families.' Mr. Leavenworth, as
you know everybody, perhaps you can relieve Aunt Pen's mind, by telling
her something about the tall, brown man standing behind the lady with
salmon-colored hair."

Mr. Joe, who was fanning the top of Debby's head with the best
intentions in life, took a survey, and answered readily,--

"Why, that's Frank Evan.  I know him, and a deused good fellow he
is,--though he don't belong to our set, you know."

"Indeed! pray, tell us something about him, Mr. Leavenworth.  We met in
the cars, and he did us a favor or two.  Who and what is the man?"
asked Mrs. Carroll, relenting at once toward a person who was favorably
spoken of by one who did belong to her "set."

"Well, let me see," began Mr. Joe, whose narrative powers were not
great. "He is a bookkeeper in my Uncle Josh Loring's importing concern,
and a powerful smart man, they say.  There's some kind of clever story
about his father's leaving a load of debts, and Frank's working a
deused number of years till they were paid.  Good of him, wasn't it?
Then, just as he was going to take things easier and enjoy life a bit,
his mother died, and that rather knocked him up, you see.  He fell
sick, and came to grief generally, Uncle Josh said; so he was ordered
off to get righted, and here he is, looking like a tombstone. I've a
regard for Frank, for he took care of me through the smallpox a year
ago, and I don't forget things of that sort; so, if you wish to be
introduced, Mrs. Carroll, I'll trot him out with pleasure, and make a
proud man of him."

Mrs. Carroll glanced at Debby, and as that young lady was regarding Mr.
Joe with a friendly aspect, owing to the warmth of his words, she
graciously assented, and the youth departed on his errand.  Mr. Evan
went through the ceremony with a calmness wonderful to behold,
considering the position of one lady and the charms of the other, and
soon glided into the conversation with the ease of a most accomplished
courtier.

"Now I must tear myself away, for I'm engaged to that stout Miss
Bandoline for this dance. She's a friend of my sister's, and I must do
the civil, you know; powerful slow work it is, too, but I pity the poor
soul,--upon my life, I do;" and Mr. Joe assumed the air of a martyr.

Debby looked up with a wicked smile in her eyes, as she said,--

"Ah, that sounds very amiable here; but in five minutes you'll be
murmuring in Miss Bandoline's earm--'I've been pining to come to you
this half hour, but I was obliged to take out that Miss Wilder, you
see--countrified little thing enough, but not bad-looking, and has a
rich aunt; so I've done my duty to her, but deuse take me if I can
stand it any longer."

Mr. Evan joined in Debby's merriment; but Mr. Joe was so appalled at
the sudden attack that he could only stammer a remonstrance and beat a
hasty retreat, wondering how on earth she came to know that his
favorite style of making himself agreeable to one young lady was by
decrying another.

"Dora, my love, that is very rude, and 'Deuse' is not a proper
expression for a woman's lips. Pray, restrain your lively tongue, for
strangers may not understand that it is nothing but the sprightliness
of your disposition which sometimes runs away with you."

"It was only a quotation, and I thought you would admire anything Mr.
Leavenworth said, Aunt Pen," replied Debby, demurely.

Mrs. Carroll trod on her foot, and abruptly changed the conversation,
by saying, with an appearance of deep interest,--

"Mr. Evan, you are doubtless connected with the Malcoms of Georgia; for
they, I believe, are descended from the ancient Evans of Scotland. They
are a very wealthy and aristocratic family, and I remember seeing their
coat-of-arms once: three bannocks and a thistle."

Mr. Evan had been standing before them with a composure which impressed
Mrs. Carroll with a belief in his gentle blood, for she remembered her
own fussy, plebeian husband, whose fortune had never been able to
purchase him the manners of a gentleman.  Mr. Evan only grew a little
more erect, as he replied, with an untroubled mien,--

"I cannot claim relationship with the Malcoms of Georgia or the Evans
of Scotland, I believe, Madam.  My father was a farmer, my grandfather
a blacksmith, and beyond that my ancestors may have been
street-sweepers, for anything I know; but whatever they were, I fancy
they were honest men, for that has always been our boast, though, like
President Jackson's, our coat-of-arms is nothing but 'a pair of
shirt-sleeves.'"

From Debby's eyes there shot a bright glance of admiration for the
young man who could look two comely women in the face and serenely own
that he was poor.  Mrs. Carroll tried to appear at ease, and, gliding
out of personalities, expatiated on the comfort of "living in a land
where fame and fortune were attainable by all who chose to earn them,"
and the contempt she felt for those "who had no sympathy with the
humbler classes, no interest in the welfare of the race," and many more
moral reflections as new and original as the Multiplication-Table or
the Westminster Catechism. To all of which Mr. Evan listened with
polite deference, though there was something in the keen intelligence
of his eye that made Debby blush for shallow Aunt Pen, and rejoice when
the good lady got out of her depth and seized upon a new subject as a
drowning mariner would a hen-coop.

"Dora, Mr. Ellenborough is coming this way; you have danced with him
but once, and he is a very desirable partner; so, pray, accept, if he
asks you," said Mrs. Carroll, watching a far-off individual who seemed
steering his zigzag course toward them.

"I never intend to dance with Mr. Ellenborough again, so please don't
urge me, Aunt Pen;" and Debby knit her brows with a somewhat irate
expression.

"My love, you astonish me!  He is a most agreeable and accomplished
young man,--spent three years in Paris, moves in the first circles, and
is considered an ornament to fashionable society.

"What can be your objection, Dora?" cried Mrs. Carroll, looking as
alarmed as if her niece had suddenly announced her belief in the Koran.

"One of his accomplishments consists in drinking champagne till he is
not a 'desirable partner' for any young lady with a prejudice in favor
of decency.  His moving in 'circles' is just what I complain of; and if
he is an ornament, I prefer my society undecorated.  Aunt Pen, I cannot
make the nice distinctions you would have me, and a sot in broadcloth
is as odious as one in rags. Forgive me, but I cannot dance with that
silver-labelled decanter again."

Debby was a genuine little piece of womanhood; and though she tried to
speak lightly, her color deepened, as she remembered looks that had
wounded her like insults, and her indignant eyes silenced the excuses
rising to her aunt's lips.  Mrs. Carroll began to rue the hour she ever
undertook the guidance of Sister Deborah's headstrong child, and for an
instant heartily wished she had left her to bloom unseen in the shadow
of the parsonage; but she concealed her annoyance, still hoping to
overcome the girl's absurd resolve, by saying, mildly,--

"As you please, dear; but if you refuse Mr. Ellenborough, you will be
obliged to sit through the dance, which is your favorite, you know."

Debby's countenance fell, for she had forgotten that, and the Lancers
was to her the crowning rapture of the night.  She paused a moment, and
Aunt Pen brightened; but Debby made her little sacrifice to principle
as heroically as many a greater one had been made, and, with a wistful
look down the long room, answered steadily, though her foot kept time
to the first strains as she spoke,--

"Then I will sit, Aunt Pen; for that is preferable to staggering about
the room with a partner who has no idea of the laws of gravitation."

"Shall I have the honor of averting either calamity?" said Mr. Evan,
coming to the rescue with a devotion beautiful to see; for dancing was
nearly a lost art with him, and the Lancers to a novice is equal to a
second Labyrinth of Crete.

"Oh, thank you!" cried Debby, tumbling fan, bouquet, and handkerchief
into Mrs. Carroll's lap, with a look of relief that repaid him fourfold
for the trials he was about to undergo.  They went merrily away
together, leaving Aunt Pen to wish that it was according to the laws of
etiquette to rap officious gentlemen over the knuckles, when they
introduce their fingers into private pies without permission from the
chief cook.  How the dance went Debby hardly knew, for the conversation
fell upon books, and in the interest of her favorite theme she found
even the "grand square" an impertinent interruption, while her own
deficiences became almost as great as her partner's; yet, when the
music ended with a flourish, and her last curtsy was successfully
achieved, she longed to begin all over again, and secretly regretted
that she was engaged four deep.

"How do you like our new acquaintance, Dora?" asked Aunt Pen, following
Joe Leavenworth with her eye, as the "yellow-haired laddie" whirled by
with the ponderous Miss Flora.

"Very much; and I'm glad we met as we did, for it makes things free and
easy, and that is so agreeable in this ceremonious place," replied
Debby, looking in quite an opposite direction.

"Well, I'm delighted to hear you say so, dear, for I was afraid you had
taken a dislike to him, and he is really a very charming young man,
just the sort of person to make a pleasant companion for a few weeks.
These little friendships are part of the summer's amusement, and do no
harm; so smile away. Dora, and enjoy yourself while you may."

"Yes, Aunt, I certainly will, and all the more because I have found a
sensible soul to talk to. Do you know, he is very witty and well
informed, though he says he never had much time for self-cultivation?
But I think trouble makes people wise, and he seems to have had a good
deal, though he leaves it for others to tell of.  I am glad you are
willing I should know him, for I shall enjoy talking about my pet
heroes with him as a relief from the silly chatter I must keep up most
of the time."

Mrs. Carroll was a woman of one idea; and though a slightly puzzled
expression appeared in her face, she listened approvingly, and
answered, with a gracious smile,--

"Of course, I should not object to your knowing such a person, my love;
but I'd no idea Joe Leavenworth was a literary man, or had known much
trouble, except his father's death and his sister Clementina's
runaway-marriage with her drawing-master."

Debby opened her brown eyes very wide, and hastily picked at the down
on her fan, but had no time to correct her aunt's mistake, for the real
subject of her commendations appeared at that moment, and Mrs. Caroll
was immediately absorbed in the consumption of a large pink ice.

"That girl is what I call a surprise-party, now," remarked Mr. Joe
confidentially to his cigar, as he pulled off his coat and stuck his
feet up in the privacy of his own apartment. "She looks as mild as
strawberries and cream till you come to the complimentary, then she
turns on a fellow with that deused satirical look of hers, and makes
him feel like a fool.  I'll try the moral dodge to-morrow and see what
effect that will have; for she is mighty taking, and I must amuse
myself somehow, you know."

"How many years will it take to change that fresh-hearted little girl
into a fashionable belle, I wonder?" thought Frank Evan, as he climbed
the four flights that led to his "sky-parlor."

"What a curious world this is!" mused Debby, with her nightcap in her
hand.  "The right seems odd and rude, the wrong respectable and easy,
and this sort of life a merry-go-round, with no higher aim than
pleasure.  Well, I have made my Declaration of Independence, and Aunt
Pen must be ready for a Revolution if she taxes me too heavily."

As she leaned her hot cheek on her arm, Debby's eye fell on the quaint
little cap made by the motherly hands that never were tired of working
for her.  She touched it tenderly, and love's simple magic swept the
gathering shadows from her face, and left it clear again, as her
thoughts flew home like birds into the shelter of their nest.

"Good night, mother! I'll face temptation steadily. I'll try to take
life cheerily, and do nothing that shall make your dear face a
reproach, when it looks into my own again."

Then Debby said her prayers like any pious child, and lay down to dream
of pulling buttercups with Baby Bess, and singing in the twilight on
her father's knee.



The history of Debby's first day might serve as a sample of most that
followed, as week after week went by with varying pleasures and
increasing interest to more than one young debutante.

Mrs. Carroll did her best, but Debby was too simple for a belle, too
honest for a flirt, too independent for a fine lady; she would be
nothing but her sturdy little self, open as daylight, gay as a lark,
and blunt as any Puritan.  Poor Aunt Pen was in despair, till she
observed that the girl often "took" with the very peculiarities which
she was lamenting; this somewhat consoled her, and she tried to make
the best of the pretty bit of homespun which would not and could not
become velvet or brocade.  Seguin, Ellenborough, & Co. looked with
lordly scorn upon her, as a worm blind to their attractions.  Miss
MacRimsy and her "set" quizzed her unmercifully behind her back, after
being worsted in several passages of arms; and more than one successful
mamma condoled with Aunt Pen upon the terribly defective education of
her charge, till that stout matron could have found it in her heart to
tweak off their caps and walk on them, like the irascible Betsey
Trotwood.

But Debby had a circle of admirers who loved her with a sincerity few
summer queens could boast; for they were real friends, won by gentle
arts, and retained by the gracious sweetness of her nature.  Moon-faced
babies crowed and clapped their chubby hands when she passed by their
wicker-thrones; story-loving children clustered round her knee, and
never were denied; pale invalids found wild-flowers on their pillows;
and forlorn papas forgot the state of the moneymarket when she sang for
them the homely airs their daughters had no time to learn.  Certain
plain young ladies poured their woes into her friendly ear, and were
comforted; several smart Sophomores fell into a state of chronic
stammer, blush, and adoration, when she took a motherly interest in
their affairs; and a melancholy old Frenchman blessed her with the
enthusiasm of his nation, because she put a posy in the button-hole of
his rusty coat, and never failed to smile and bow as he passed by.  Yet
Debby was no Edgworth heroine preternaturally prudent, wise, and
untemptable; she had a fine crop of piques, vanities, and dislikes
growing up under this new style of cultivation. She loved admiration,
enjoyed her purple and fine linen, hid new-born envy, disappointed
hope, and wounded pride behind a smiling face, and often thought with a
sigh of the humdrum duties that awaited her at home.  But under the
airs and graces Aunt Pen cherished with such sedulous care, under the
flounces and furbelows Victorine daily adjusted with groans, under the
polish which she acquired with feminine ease, the girl's heart still
beat steadfast and strong, and conscience kept watch and ward that no
traitor should enter in to surprise the citadel which mother-love had
tried to garrison so well.

In pursuance of his sage resolve,  Mr. Joe tried the "moral dodge," as
he elegantly expressed it, and, failing in that, followed it up with
the tragic, religious, negligent, and devoted ditto; but acting was not
his forte, so Debby routed him in all; and at last, when he was at his
wit's end for an idea, she suggested one, and completed her victory by
saying pleasantly,--

"You took me behind the curtain too soon, and now the paste-diamonds
and cotton-velvet don't impose upon me a bit.  Just be your natural
self, and we shall get on nicely, Mr. Leavenworth."

The novelty of the proposal struck his fancy, and after a few relapses
it was carried into effect and thenceforth, with Debby, he became the
simple, good-humored lad Nature designed him to be, and, as a proof of
it, soon fell very sincerely in love.

Frank Evan, seated in the parquet of society, surveyed the dress-circle
with much the same expression that Debby had seen during Aunt Pen's
oration; but he soon neglected that amusement to watch several actors
