He stood motionless until both Mr. and Mrs. Quack had their heads
under water as they searched for food in the mud in the bottom of
the pond.  Then like a red flash he bounded out of sight behind
the dam of Paddy the Beaver.

Presently the hunter saw Reddy's black nose at the end of the dam
as Reddy peeped around it to watch Mr. and Mrs. Quack.  The latter
were slowly moving along in that direction as they fed.  Reddy was
quick to see this.  If he remained right where he was, and Mr. And
Mrs. Quack kept on feeding in that direction, the chances were
that he would have a dinner of fat Duck.  All he need do was to be
patient and wait.  So, with his eyes fixed fast on Mr. and
Mrs. Quack, Reddy Fox crouched behind Paddy's dam and waited.

Watching Reddy and the Ducks, the hunter almost forgot Lightfoot
the Deer.  Mr. and Mrs. Quack were getting very near to where
Reddy was waiting for them.  The hunter was tempted to get up and
frighten those Ducks.  He didn't want Reddy Fox to have them,
because he hoped some day to get them himself.

"I suppose," thought he, "I was foolish not to shoot them when I
had the chance.  They are too far away now, and it looks very much
as if that red rascal will get one of them.  I believe I'll spoil
that red scamp's plans by frightening them away.  I don't believe
that Deer will be back here to-day anyway, so I may as well save
those Ducks."

But the hunter did nothing of the kind.  You see, just as he was
getting ready to step out from his hiding-place, Sammy Jay
arrived.  He perched in a tree close to the end of Paddy's dam and
at once he spied Reddy Fox.  It didn't take him a second to
discover what Reddy was hiding there for.  "Thief, thief, thief!"
screamed Sammy, and then looked down at Reddy with a mischievous
look in his sharp eyes.  There is nothing Sammy Jay delights in
more than in upsetting the plans of Reddy Fox.  At the sound of
Sammy's voice, Mr. and Mrs. Quack swam hurriedly towards the
middle of the pond.  They knew exactly what that warning
meant.  Reddy Fox looked up at Sammy Jay and snarled angrily.
Then, knowing it was useless to hide longer, he bounded away
through the Green Forest to hunt elsewhere.




CHAPTER XVIII: The Hunter Loses His Temper


The hunter, hidden near the pond of Paddy the Beaver, chuckled
silently.  That is to say, he laughed without making any
sound.  The hunter thought the warning of Mr. and Mrs. Quack by
Sammy Jay was a great joke on Reddy.  To tell the truth, he was
very much pleased.  As you know, he wanted those Ducks himself.
He suspected that they would stay in that little pond for some days,
and he planned to return there and shoot them after he had got
Lightfoot the Deer.  He wanted to get Lightfoot first, and he knew
that to shoot at anything else might spoil his chance of getting
a shot at Lightfoot.

"Sammy Jay did me a good turn," thought the hunter, "although he
doesn't know it.  Reddy Fox certainly would have caught one of
those Ducks had Sammy not come along just when he did.  It would
have been a shame to have had one of them caught by that Fox.
I mean to get one, and I hope both of them, myself."

Now when you come to think of it, it would have been a far
greater shame for the hunter to have killed Mr. and Mrs. Quack
than for Reddy Fox to have done so.  Reddy was hunting them
because he was hungry.  The hunter would have shot them for
sport.  He didn't need them.  He had plenty of other food.
Reddy Fox doesn't kill just for the pleasure of killing.

So the hunter continued to sit in his hiding-place with very
friendly feelings for Sammy Jay.  Sammy watched Reddy Fox
disappear and then flew over to that side of the pond where the
hunter was.  Mr. and Mrs. Quack called their thanks to Sammy, to
which he replied, that he had done no more for them than he would
do for anybody, or than they would have done for him.

For some time Sammy sat quietly in the top of the tree, but all
the time his sharp eyes were very busy.  By and by he spied the
hunter sitting on the log.  At first he couldn't make out just
what it was he was looking at.  It didn't move, but nevertheless
Sammy was suspicious.  Presently he flew over to a tree where he
could see better.  Right away he spied the terrible gun, and he
knew just what that was.  Once more he began to yell, "Thief!
thief! thief!" at the top of his lungs.  It was then that the
hunter lost his temper.  He knew that now he had been discovered
by Sammy Jay, and it was useless to remain there longer.  He was
angry clear through.




CHAPTER XIX: Sammy Jay Is Modest


As soon as the angry hunter with the terrible gun had disappeared
among the trees of the Green Forest, and Lightfoot was sure that
he had gone for good, Lightfoot came out from his hiding-place on
top of the ridge and walked down to the pond of Paddy the Beaver
for a drink.  He knew that it was quite safe to do so, for Sammy
Jay had followed the hunter, all the time screaming, "Thief!
thief! thief!"  Every one within hearing could tell just where
that hunter was by Sammy's voice.  It kept growing fainter and
fainter, and by that Lightfoot knew that the hunter was getting
farther and farther away.

Paddy the Beaver swam out from his hiding-place and climbed out
on the bank near Lightfoot.  There was a twinkle in his
eyes.  "That blue-coated mischief-maker isn't such a bad fellow at
heart, after all, is he?" said he.

Lightfoot lifted his beautiful head and set his ears forward to
catch the sound of Sammy's voice in the distance.

"Sammy Jay may be a mischief-maker, as some people say," said he,
"but you can always count on him to prove a true friend in time
of danger.  He brought me warning of the coming of the hunter the
other morning.  You saw him save Mr. and Mrs. Quack a little while
ago, and then he actually drove that hunter away.  I suppose Sammy
Jay has saved more lives than any one I know of.  I wish he would
come back here and let me thank him."

Some time later Sammy Jay did come back.  "Well," said he, as he
smoothed his feathers, "I chased that fellow clear to the edge of
the Green Forest, so I guess there will be nothing more to fear
from him today.  I'm glad to see he hasn't got you yet,
Lightfoot.  I've been a bit worried about you."

"Sammy," said Lightfoot, "you are one of the best friends I
have.  I don't know how I can ever thank you for what you have
done for me."

"Don't try," replied Sammy shortly.  "I haven't done anything but
what anybody else would have done. Old Mother Nature gave me a
pair of good eyes and a strong voice.  I simply make the best use
of them I can.  Just to see a hunter with a terrible gun makes me
angry clear through.   I'd rather spoil his hunting than eat."

"You want to watch out, Sammy. One of these days a hunter will
lose his temper and shoot you, just to get even with you,"
warned Paddy the Beaver.

"Don't worry about me," replied Sammy.  "I know just how far
those terrible guns can shoot, and I don't take any chances.
By the way, Lightfoot, the Green Forest is full of hunters looking
for you.  I 've seen a lot of them, and I know they are looking
for you because they do not shoot at anybody else even when they
have a chance."




CHAPTER XX: Lightfoot Hears A Dreadful Sound


Day after day, Lightfoot the Deer played hide and seek for his
life with the hunters who were seeking to kill him.  He saw them
many times, though not one of them saw him.  More than once a
hunter passed close to Lightfoot's hiding-place without once
suspecting it.

But poor Lightfoot was feeling the strain.  He was growing thin,
and he was so nervous that the falling of a dead leaf from a tree
would startle him.  There is nothing quite so terrible as being
continually hunted.  It was getting so that Lightfoot half
expected a hunter to step out from behind every tree.  Only when
the Black Shadows wrapped the Green Forest in darkness did he
know a moment of peace.  And those hours of safety were filled
with dread of what the next day might bring.

Early one morning a terrible sound rang through the Green Forest
and brought Lightfoot to his feet with a startled jump.  It was
the baying of hounds following a trail.  At first it did not sound
so terrible.  Lightfoot had often heard it before.  Many times he
had listened to the baying of Bowser the Hound, as he followed
Reddy Fox.  It had not sounded so terrible then because it meant
no danger to Lightfoot.

At first, as he listened early that morning, he took it for
granted that those hounds were after Reddy, and so, though
startled, he was not worried.  But suddenly a dreadful suspicion
came to him and he grew more and more anxious as he listened.
In a few minutes there was no longer any doubt in his mind.
Those hounds were following his trail.  It was then that the sound
of that baying became terrible.  He must run for his life!
Those hounds would give him no rest.  And he knew that in running
from them, he would no longer be able to watch so closely for the
hunters with terrible guns.  He would no longer be able to hide
in thickets.  At any time he might be driven right past one of
those hunters.

Lightfoot bounded away with such leaps as only Lightfoot can make.
In a little while the voices of the hounds grew fainter.
Lightfoot stopped to get his breath and stood trembling
as he listened.  The baying of the hounds again grew louder and
louder.  Those wonderful noses of theirs were following his trail
without the least difficulty.  In a panic of fear, Lightfoot
bounded away again.  As he crossed an old road, the Green Forest
rang with the roar of a terrible gun.  Something tore a strip of
bark from the trunk of a tree just above Lightfoot's back.  It was
a bullet and it had just missed Lightfoot.  It added to his terror
and this in turn added to his speed.

So Lightfoot ran and ran, and behind him the voices of the hounds
continued to ring through the Green Forest.




CHAPTER XXI: How Lightfoot Got Rid Of The Hounds


Poor Lightfoot! It seemed to him that there were no such things
as justice and fair play.  Had it been just one hunter at a time
against whom he had to match his wits it would not have been so
bad.  But there were many hunters with terrible guns looking for
him, and in dodging one he was likely at any time to meet
another.  This in itself seemed terribly unfair and unjust.
But now, added to this was the greater unfairness of being trailed
by hounds.

Do you wonder that Lightfoot thought of men as utterly heartless?
You see, he could not know that those hounds had not been put on
his trail, but had left home to hunt for their own pleasure.
He could not know that it was against the law to hunt him with dogs.
But though none of those hunters looking for him were guilty
of having put the hounds on his trail, each one of them
was willing and eager to take advantage of the fact that the
hounds were on his trail. Already he had been shot at once and he
knew that he would be shot at again if he should be driven where
a hunter was hidden.

The ground was damp and scent always lies best on damp ground.
This made it easy for the hounds to follow him with their
wonderful noses. Lightfoot tried every trick he could think of to
make those hounds lose the scent.

"If only I could make them lose it long enough for me to get a
little rest, it would help," panted Lightfoot, as he paused for
just an instant to listen to the baying of the hounds.

But he couldn't.  They allowed him no rest. He was becoming very,
very tired.  He could no longer bound lightly over fallen logs or
brush, as he had done at first.  His lungs ached as he panted for
breath.  He realized that even though he should escape the hunters
he would meet an even more terrible death unless he could get rid
of those hounds.  There would come a time when he would have to stop.
Then those hounds would catch up with him and tear him to pieces.

It was then that he remembered the Big River.  He turned towards it.
It was his only chance and he knew it.  Straight through the
Green Forest, out across the Green Meadows to the bank of the Big
River, Lightfoot ran.  For just a second he paused to look behind.
The hounds were almost at his heels. Lightfoot hesitated
no longer but plunged into the Big River and began to swim.
On the banks the hounds stopped and bayed their disappointment,
for they did not dare follow Lightfoot out into the Big River.




CHAPTER XXII: Lightfoot's Long Swim


The Big River was very wide.  It would have been a long swim for
Lightfoot had he been fresh and at his best.  Strange as it may
seem, Lightfoot is a splendid swimmer, despite his small,
delicate feet.  He enjoys swimming.

But now Lightfoot was terribly tired from his long run ahead of
the hounds.  For a time he swam rapidly, but those weary muscles
grew still more weary, and by the time he reached the middle of
the Big River it seemed to him that he was not getting ahead at all.
At first he had tried to swim towards a clump of trees he
could see on the opposite bank above the point where he had
entered the water, but to do this he had to swim against the
current and he soon found that he hadn't the strength to do this.
Then he turned and headed for a point down the Big River.
This made the swimming easier, for the current helped him
instead of hindering him.
