Glen Cairn late in the afternoon. The news of the fall of Lanark
had already penetrated even to that quiet village, and there was
great excitement as Archie and his party came in. One of Wallace's
messengers had passed through, and many of the men were preparing
to join him. Dame Forbes was at once proud and grieved when Archie
told her of the share which he had had in the street fray at Lanark,
and in the capture of the town. She was proud that her son should
so distinguish himself, grieved that he should, at so young an
age, have become committed to a movement of whose success she had
but little hope. However, she could not blame him, as it seemed as
if his course had been forced upon him. She agreed to start early
the next morning.

It was well for Archie that he had brought a guard with him,
for before he had been an hour in the hold a boy ran in from the
village saying that a party of the Kerrs was close at hand, and
would be there in a few minutes. Archie set his men at once to pile
up a barricade of stones breast high at the outer gate, and took
his position there with his men. He had scarcely completed his
preparations when the trampling of horses was heard and a party
of ten men, two of whom bore torches, headed by young Allan Kerr,
rode up. They drew rein abruptly as they saw the barricade with
the line of pikes behind it.

"What want you here, Allan Kerr?" Archie said.

"I came in search of you, little traitor," young Kerr replied
angrily.

"Here I am," Archie said; "why don't you come and take me?"

Allan saw that the number of the defenders of the gate exceeded
that of his own party, and there might, for aught he knew, be more
within.

"I will take you tomorrow," he said.

"Tomorrow never comes," Archie replied with a laugh.  "Your father
thought to take me yesterday. How is the good knight? Not suffering,
I trust, greatly either in body or temper?"

"You shall repent this, Archibald Forbes," Allan Kerr exclaimed
furiously. "It will be my turn next time."

And turning his horse he rode off at full speed, attended by his
followers.

"We had best start at once, Master Archie," Sandy Graham said:
"it is eight miles to the Kerrs' hold, and when Allan Kerr returns
there you may be sure they will call out their vassals and will be
here betimes in the morning. Best get another cart from the village,
for your men are weary and footsore, seeing that since yesterday
even they have been marching without ceasing. Elspie will by this
time have got supper ready.  There was a row of ducks and chickens
on the spit when I came away."

"That were best, Sandy. Do you see to their comforts, and aid my
mother pack up such things as she most values, and I will go myself
down to the village for the cart, for I wish to speak with some
there."

Archie had no difficulty in engaging two carts, as he thought that
one would be needed for his mother and what possessions she might
take. Then he went from house to house and saw his old companions,
and told them of his plans, which filled them with delight. Having
done this he returned to the hold, hastily ate the supper which
had been put aside for him, and then saw that his mother's chests,
which contained all her possessions save a few articles of heavy
furniture, were placed in one of the carts. A bed was then laid
on its floor upon which she could sit comfortably. Elspie mounted
with her. Archie, Sandy, and the men took their places in the other
carts, and the party drove off. They had no fear of interruption,
for the Kerrs, ignorant of the number who had arrived with Archie
at Glen Cairn, would not venture to attack until they had gathered
a considerable force, and would not be likely to set out till
morning, and long before that time Dame Forbes would have arrived
at her sister's.

The journey was indeed performed without incident, the escort
leaving them when within two or three miles of Lanark, and making
their way direct to the craigs, whither Archie, the moment he had
seen his mother safely at Sir Robert Gordon's, returned. He did
not mount the craig, but wrapping himself in his cloak lay down at
its foot.

As soon as it was daylight he walked out a mile on the road towards
Glen Cairn. He soon saw a party approaching in military order. They
halted when they reached him. They were twenty in number, and were
the lads of his band at Glen Cairn, ranging between the ages of
sixteen and eighteen.  They had originally been stronger, but some
of the elders had already joined Wallace's followers.

"Now," Archie said, "I can explain matters farther than I did last
night. I have procured arms for you all, and I hope that you will
have opportunities of using them. But though some of you are old
enough to join Wallace's band, there are others whom he might not
deem fit to take part in such desperate enterprises.  Therefore
at first make but little show of your arms. I shall present you to
Sir William, telling him that I have brought you hither to serve
as messengers, and to enter towns held by the English and gather
news, seeing that lads would be less suspected than men. But I
propose farther, what I shall not tell him, that you shall form a
sort of bodyguard to him. He takes not sufficient care of himself,
and is ever getting into perils.  I propose that without his
knowing it, you shall be ever at hand when he goes into danger of
this sort, and may thus prevent his falling into the hands of his
enemies. Now, mind, lads, this is a great and honourable mission.
You must be discreet as well as brave, and ready all of you to give
your lives, if need be, for that of Scotland's champion. Your work
as messengers and scouts will be arduous and wearisome. You must
be quiet and well behaved--remember that boys' tricks and play
are out of place among men engaged in a desperate enterprise. Mingle
not much with the others. Be active and prompt in obeying orders,
and be assured that you will have opportunities of winning great
honour and credit, and of having your full share of hard knocks.
You will, as before, be divided into two companies, William Orr and
Andrew Macpherson being your lieutenants in my absence. You will
obey their orders as implicitly as mine. Cluny, you have, I suppose,
brought, as I bade you last night, some of your sister's garments?"

"Yes, Sir Archie," the boy, who was fair and slight, said, with a
smile on his face.

"That is right. I know you are as hearty and strong as the rest;
but seeing that your face is the smoothest and softest of any,
you will do best should we need one in disguise as a girl. And now
come with me. I will show you where your arms are placed; but at
present you must not take them. If I led you as an armed band to
Wallace he might deem you too young. I must present you merely as
lads whom I know to be faithful and trustworthy, and who are willing
to act as messengers and scouts to his force."

So saying Archie led the band to the thicket where he had placed
their arms, and the lads were pleased when they saw the pikes,
swords, and head pieces. Then he led them up the craig to Wallace.

"Why, whom have you here?" Sir William exclaimed in surprise. "This
will not do, Sir Archie. All lads are not like yourself, and were
I to take such boys into my ranks I should have all the mothers in
Scotland calling out against me."

"I have not brought them to join your ranks, Sir William, although
many of them are stout fellows who might do good service at a
pinch. I have brought them to act as messengers and scouts. They
can carry orders whithersoever you may have occasion to send. They
can act as scouts to warn you of the approach of an enemy; or if
you need news of the state of any of the enemy's garrisons, they
can go thither and enter without being suspected, when a man might
be questioned and stopped. They are all sons of my father's vassals
at Glen Cairn, and I can answer for their fidelity. I will take
them specially under my own charge, and you will ever have a fleet
and active messenger at hand when you desire to send an order."

"The idea is not a bad one," Sir William replied; "and in such a
way a lad may well do the work of a man.  Very well, Sir Archie,
since you seem to have set your mind upon it I will not say nay.
At any rate we can give the matter a trial, understanding that you
take the charge of them and are responsible for them in all ways.
Now, lads," he said turning, "you have heard that your lord, for
he is your rightful lord, and will, if Scotland gains the day, be
your real lord again, has answered for you. It is no boys' play
in which you have taken service, for the English, if they conquer
us, will show no further mercy to you than to others of my band. I
understand then that you are all prepared, if need be, to die for
Scotland. Is this so?"

"We are, sir," the lads exclaimed together.

"Then so be it," Sir William said. "Now, Sir Archie, do you fix
a place for their encampment, and make such other arrangements
as you may think fit. You will, of course, draw rations and other
necessaries for them as regular members of the band."

Archie descended with his troop from the craigs, and chose a spot
where they would be apart from the others. It was a small piece of
ground cut off by the stream which wound at the foot of the craigs,
so that to reach it it was necessary to wade knee deep through the
water. This was no inconvenience to the lads, all of whom, as was
common with their class at the time, were accustomed to go barefoot,
although they sometimes wore a sort of sandal. Bushes were cut
down, and arbours made capable of containing them. The spot was
but a little distance from the foot of the path up the craigs, and
any one descending the path could be seen from it.

Archie gave orders that one was always to be above in readiness to
start instantly with a message; that a sentry was to be placed at
the camp, who was to keep his eyes upon the path, and the moment
the one on duty above was seen to leave, the next upon the list was
to go up and take his place.  None were to wander about the wood,
but all were to remain in readiness for any duty which might be
required. The two lieutenants were charged to drill them constantly
at their exercises so as to accustom them to the weight and handle
of their arms. Two were to be sent off every morning to the depot
where the provisions were issued, to draw food for the whole for
the day, and four were to be posted five miles away on the roads
leading towards the craigs to give warning of the approach of any
enemies. These were to be relieved every six hours. They were to
be entirely unarmed, and none were to issue from the camp with arms
except when specially ordered.

Having made these arrangements, and taking with him one of the band
as the first on duty above, he rejoined Wallace at his post on the
craigs.

Wallace's numbers now increased fast. On hearing of the fall of
Lanark, and on the receipt of the proclamation calling upon all
true Scotchmen to join him in his effort to deliver their country
from its yoke, the people began to flock in in great numbers. Richard
Wallace of Riccarton and Robert Boyd came in with such force as
they could collect from Kyle and Cunningham, among whom were not
less than 1000 horsemen. Sir John Grahame, Sir John of Tinto, and
Auchinleck assembled about 3000 mounted troops and a large number
of foot, many of whom, however, were imperfectly armed. Sir Ronald
Crawford, Wallace's uncle, being so close to Ayr, could not openly
join him, but secretly sent reinforcements and money. Many other
gentlemen joined with their followers.

The news of the fall of Lanark and of the numbers who were flocking
to join Wallace paralysed the commanders of the English garrisons,
and for a time no steps were taken against him; but news of the
rising was instantly sent to King Edward, who, furious at this
fresh trouble in Scotland, which he had deemed finally conquered,
instantly commenced preparations for another invasion. A body of
troops was at once sent forward from England, and, being strengthened
by bodies drawn from all the garrisons, assembled at Biggar.  The
army was commanded by the Earl of Kent. Heralds were sent to Wallace
offering him not only pardon but an honourable post if he would
submit, but warning him that if he refused this offer he should,
when taken, be treated as a rebel and hung.

Wallace briefly refused submission, and said that he should be
ready to give battle on the following morning.

At daybreak the army set forth, divided into three parts.  Wallace,
with Boyd and Auchinleck, commanded one; Sir John Grahame, with
Wallace of Riccarton, the second; Sir Walter of Newbigging, with his
son David and Sir John Clinto, the third. The cavalry were placed
in front. The footmen, being imperfectly armed and disciplined,
and therefore unable to withstand the first charge of the English,
followed the cavalry.

Before marching forward Wallace called the commanders round him
and charged them earnestly to restrain their men from plunder until
the contest was decided, pointing out that many a battle had been
lost owing to the propensity of those who gained the first advantage
to scatter for plunder. Just as the Scotch were moving, a body of
300 horsemen, well armed and equipped, from Annandale and Eskdale,
led by Halliday, Kirkpatrick, and Jardine, joined them; and with
this accession of strength they marched forward confidently against
the enemy.




Chapter V

A Treacherous Plot


So rapid was the advance of Wallace's army that the English had
scarce time to form when they were upon them. The Scotch charged
with extreme impetuosity among the English ranks, directing the
onslaught principally against the centre, commanded by the Earl of
Kent.

The English resisted stoutly; but the Earl of Kent was struck down
by Wallace himself, and was with difficulty borne off the field;
and after severe fighting, the whole English army was thrown into
disorder and took to flight. Some hundreds were killed in action,
and many more in the pursuit which followed; this, however, Wallace
would not allow to be pushed too far lest the fugitives should
rally and turn. Then the victorious Scots returned to the English
camp. In this was found a great abundance of provisions, arms,
and other valuable booty. Many of the cattle were killed, and a
sumptuous feast prepared. Then Wallace had the whole of the spoil
carried off into a place of safety in the heart of a neighbouring
bog, and he himself fell back to that shelter.

In the morning the English, who had rallied when the pursuit had
ceased, again advanced, hoping to find Wallace unprepared. They
were now commanded by the Earl of Lancaster, and had received some
reinforcements in the night.  They passed over the scene of the
previous day's battle, and at last came in sight of the Scotch
army. Wallace at first advanced, and then, as if dismayed at their
superior strength, retired to the point where, in order to reach
them, the English would have to cross a portion of the bog. The
surface was covered with moss and long grass, and the treacherous
nature of the ground was unperceived by the English, who, filled
with desire to wipe out their defeat of the preceding day, charged
impetuously against the Scotch line. The movement was fatal, for
as soon as they reached the treacherous ground their horses sunk
to the saddle girths. The Scotch had dismounted on firmer ground
behind, and now advanced to the attack, some working round the
flanks of the morass, others crossing on tufts of grass, and so
fell upon the struggling mass of English. The Earl of Westmoreland
and many others of note were killed, and the Earl of Lancaster,
with the remains of his force, at once retreated south and recrossed
the Border.

Archie had taken no part in the first battle. Wallace had asked
him whether he would fight by his side or take command of a body
of infantry; and he chose the latter alternative. Almost all the
knights and gentlemen were fighting on horse with their followers,
and Archie thought that if these were repulsed the brunt of the fray
would fall upon the infantry. On this occasion, then, he gathered
with his band of lads a hundred or so pikemen, and formed them in
order, exhorting them, whatever happened, to keep together and to
stand stoutly, even against a charge of horse. As the victory was
won entirely by the cavalry he had no opportunity of distinguishing
himself. Upon the second day, however, he did good service,
as he and his lightly armed footmen were able to cross the bog in
places impracticable to the dismounted men-at-arms in their heavy
accoutrements.

The victory of Biggar still further swelled Wallace's forces. Sir
William Douglas joined him, and other gentlemen. A great meeting
was held at Forest Kirk, when all the leaders of Wallace's force
were present; and these agreed to acknowledge him as general of
the Scottish forces against England, with the title of Warden of
Scotland.

King Edward was at this time busied with his wars in France, and
was unable to despatch an army capable of effecting the reconquest
of that portion of Scotland now held by Wallace; and as the English
forces in the various garrisons were insufficient for such purpose,
the Earl of Percy and the other leaders proposed a truce. This
was agreed to. Although Wallace was at the head of a considerable
force, Sir William Douglas was the only one among the Scottish
nobles of importance who had joined him; and although the successes
which he had gained were considerable, but little had been really
done towards freeing Scotland, all of whose strong places were
still in the hands of the English, and King Edward had not as yet
really put out his strength.

The greater portion of the army of Wallace was now dispersed.

Shortly afterwards the governor of Ayr issued a notice that a great
council would be held at that town, and all the Scotch gentlemen
of importance in the district were desired to attend. Wallace was
one of those invited; and deeming that the governor might have
some proposition of Edward to lay before them, he agreed to do so.
Although a truce had been arranged, he himself with a band of his
most devoted followers still remained under arms in the forest,
strictly keeping the truce, but holding communications with his friends
throughout the country, urging them to make every preparation, by
collecting arms and exercising their vassals, to take the field with
a better appointed force at the conclusion of the truce. Provisions
and money were in abundance, so large had been the captures effected;
but Wallace was so accustomed to the free life of the woods that he
preferred to remain there to taking up his abode in a town. Moreover,
here he was safe from treachery; for he felt sure that although the
English nobles and leaders would be incapable of breaking a truce,
yet that there were many of lower degree who would not hesitate at
any deed of treachery by which they might gain reward and credit
from their king. Archie's band were found of the greatest service
as messengers; and although he sometimes spent a few days at Sir
Robert Gordon's with his mother, he generally remained by the side
of Wallace. The spot where the Scottish leader was now staying lay
about halfway between Lanark and Ayr.

Archie heard with uneasiness the news of the approaching council,
and Wallace's acceptance of the invitation. The fact that the Earl
of Percy, a very noble knight and gentleman, had been but lately
recalled from the governorship of Ayr and had been replaced by
one of somewhat low degree, Arlouf of Southampton, still further
increased his doubts. It seemed strange that the governorship of so
important a town--a post deemed fitting for Earl Percy--should
be bestowed on such a man, were it not that one was desired who
would not hesitate to perform an action from which any honourable
English gentleman would shrink.

Two days before the day fixed for the council he called Cluny
Campbell and another lad named Jock Farrel to him.

"I have a most important mission for you," he said. "You have heard
of the coming council at Ayr. I wish to find out if any evil is
intended by the governor. For this purpose you two will proceed
thither. You Cluny will put on the garments which you brought with
you; while you Jock had best go as his brother. Here is money. On
your way procure baskets and buy chickens and eggs, and take them
in with you to sell.  Go hither and thither among the soldiers
and hear what they say. Gather whether among the townspeople there
is any thought that foul play may be intended by the English. Two
of the band will accompany you to within a mile of Ayr, and will
remain there in order that you may from time to time send news by
them of aught that you have gathered. Remember that the safety of
Wallace, and with it the future of Scotland, may depend upon your
care and vigilance. I would myself have undertaken the task; but
the Kerrs are now, I hear, in Ayr, and a chance meeting might ruin
all; for whatever the truce between English and Scotch, they would
assuredly keep no truce with me did they meet me. Mind, it is a
great honour that I have done you in choosing you, and is a proof
that I regard you as two of the shrewdest of my band, although the
youngest among them."

Greatly impressed with the importance of their mission, the lads
promised to use their utmost vigilance to discover the intentions
of the governor; and a few minutes later, Cluny being attired in
his sister's clothes, and looking, as Archie laughingly said, "a
better looking girl than she was herself," they started for Ayr,
accompanied by two of their companions. They were to remain there
until the conclusion of the council, but their companions would be
relieved every six hours. Upon their way they procured two baskets,
which they filled with eggs and chickens; and then, leaving their
comrades a mile outside Ayr, fearlessly entered the town.

The council was to take place in a large wooden building some short
distance outside the town, which was principally chosen because it
was thought by the governor that the Scotch gentlemen would have
less reluctance to meet him there than if they were asked to enter
a city with a strong garrison of English.

The first day the lads succeeded in finding out nothing which could
give any countenance to suspicion that treachery was intended. They
had agreed to work separately, and each mingled among the groups
