
"We have told Dr. Flynch all about it, ma'am and he says if the rent is
not paid by one o'clock to-day, he shall turn us out of the house."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Mrs. Gordon; and Grace actually jumped out of her
chair with astonishment and indignation.

"Yes, ma'am; that's just what he said," added Katy, satisfied with the
impression she had produced.

"Is your mother ill now?" asked Mrs. Gordon.

"Yes ma'am; she has not been off her bed for twelve weeks."

"What does Dr. Flynch say, my child?"

"He says my mother deceived him; that she told him a falsehood; and
that she had money, when she didn't have a cent."

"It is too bad, mother!" exclaimed Grace.

"Hush, Grace; probably Dr. Flynch knows best, for he certainly would
not turn a poor sick woman out of doors because she did not pay the
rent. There may be, as he says, some deception about it, which he can
penetrate and we cannot."

"There is no deception about it, ma'am," pleaded Katy, much disturbed
by this sudden damper upon her hopes. "She has not got a single cent.
She wouldn't tell a lie, and I wouldn't either."

There was something in the eloquence and earnestness of the child that
deeply impressed the mind of the lady, and she could hardly resist the
conclusion that her agent had, in this instance, made a mistake. But
she had great confidence in Dr. Flynch, and she was very unwilling to
believe that he could be so harsh and cruel as the little girl
represented. She had heard of the tricks of the vicious poor, and while
she was disposed to be very tender of a needy tenant, she must be just
to her agent.

"It is now half-past ten," continued Mrs. Gordon.

"You shall remain here, my child, and I will send Michael down to
Colvin Court to inquire into the situation of your mother. He must be
impartial for he knows nothing about the case."

"Thank you, ma'am," said Katy, with a promptness which assured Grace,
if not her mother, that the little girl was honest.

Mrs. Gordon rang the bell, and when Michael answered the summons, she
attended him to the street door, where she instructed him to call upon
Mrs. Redburn, and also to inquire of the grocer at the corner, and of
her neighbors, what sort of a person she was. The lady returned to the
sitting-room when he had gone, and asked Katy a great many questions
about herself and her mother, and thus nearly an hour was consumed, at
the end of which time Michael returned. Katy had answered all the
lady's questions fairly, though without betraying her family history,
which her mother had cautioned her to keep to herself, that she was
prepared to receive a favorable report from her man.

"Well, Michael, did you find the woman at home?" asked Mrs. Gordon, as
the man presented himself.

"Indeed, I deed, marm."

"What was she doing?"

"She was fast in bed, and told me she hadn't been out of it for twelve
weeks come Saturday."

"What does the grocer say?"

"He says she is a very good woman, but poor and proud. She always paid
him every cent she owed him, and he'd trust her for half he has in his
shop."

"That will do, Michael; you may go;" and the man retired with a
respectful bow.

Katy's face wore a smile of triumph, as Michael was dismissed. Her
mother's truthfulness had been vindicated, and it was the proudest
moment she had known for many a day.

"How long has your mother lived in my house?" asked Mrs. Gordon.

"About three years, ma'am; and she always paid her rent till this
month," replied Katy.

"If she had not, Dr. Flynch would have turned her into the street,"
added Grace; and it was evident the beautiful young lady had no special
regard for that worthy gentleman.

"We have tried hard enough to pay the rent this month," continued Katy;
and she proceeded to tell the story of the silver watch, that had
belonged to her father.

"This is dreadful, mother; let us do something about it," said Grace.
"What a wretch the broker must have been!"

"We will endeavor to get the watch back for her," replied Mrs. Gordon,
as she seated herself at a table and wrote a few lines on a piece of
paper. "Here, my child, is a receipt for your month's rent. When Dr.
Flynch comes for the money, you show him this, and he will be
satisfied;" and she handed her the receipt.

Katy took it, and thanked the good lady, assuring her that her mother
would certainly pay the money as soon as she got well.

"My mother is poor and proud, just as the grocer said, and she don't
ask any one to give her anything. I am going to earn some money myself,
and I hope I shall be able to pay the next month's rent," added Katy,
as she moved towards the door.

"But the watch, mother?" interposed Grace.

"If the little girl will come here this afternoon or to-morrow morning,
we will take her to the mayor who will have the case attended to."

"I will come any time, ma'am."

"The mayor is my friend, and I will call at his house with you this
afternoon at three o'clock."

Katy could not but think the mayor had a great many friends, for there
was Master Simon Sneed, and Mrs. Gordon, and she knew not how many
more. She thanked the lady very warmly for her kindness, and promising
to come at the time stated, she took her leave.

She was followed to the door by Grace, who detained her there.

"Katy, I am sure you are a very good little girl, and here is a dollar
for you. It will buy something good for your mother."

"I thank you very much, Miss Gordon. I am poor, but proud, like my
mother," replied she, as a flush of shame mantled her cheek.

"What a foolish little girl!" laughed Grace. "Take it; you will oblige
me very much by taking it."

"No, ma'am, I can't; my mother wouldn't own me if I should take money
as a gift."

"But you must take it, Katy; I shall be angry if you don't."

The little girl looked up into her pretty eyes beaming with pity and
love; and she could hardly resist the temptation to oblige her by
accepting the gift; but since she had heard the story of her mother's
life, she understood why she was so much prouder than other poor
people; and as she thought of her grandfather in his fine house in the
great city of Liverpool, she felt a little of the same spirit--she too
was poor and proud. Besides, as Grace jingled the two half dollars
together, there was a harmony in the sound that suggested a great heap
of good things for her mother. And there was another powerful
consideration that weighed with great force upon her mind. One of those
half dollars would be a sufficient capital upon which to commence her
candy speculation. It would buy ever so much molasses of the very best
quality. As she thought of this, she was disposed, at least, to
compromise with Miss Grace.

"I cannot accept the money as a gift, but you may lend it to me, if you
please," said Katy, after she had reflected a moment.

"Just as you like," laughed Grace; "but I shall not feel bad if you
never pay me."

"I shall certainly pay it again," persisted the embryo candy merchant.
"I would not take it if I thought I could not."

"Very well; but you must know I think you are a very singular little
girl."

"I am poor and proud; that's all."

Katy took the loan, and with her fancy fired with brilliant
expectations in regard to the candy operation, ran home to her mother
as fast as her feet would carry her. Mrs. Redburn was much displeased
with her at first for what she had done. Her pride revolted at the
thought of begging a favor; but Katy explained the matter so well that
she was satisfied, though nothing was said about the loan she had
obtained.

Punctually at the appointed hour came Dr. Flynch for the rent.

"Have you got the money?" he demanded in his usual bland tones, though
Katy thought she could see a wicked purpose in his little gray eye.

"No, sir; but----"

"That's all I desire to know, Mrs. Redburn," interrupted the agent.
"You must leave the house."

"But, sir, I have something that will do as well as the money," added
the sick woman.

"Have you, indeed?" sneered Dr. Flynch "I think not."

"Will you read that, sir?" said Katy, handing him Mrs. Gordon's receipt.

The agent took the paper, and as he read, the wonted serenity of his
brow was displaced by a dark scowl. His threats had been disregarded,
and he had been reported to his employer.

"So you have been fawning and cringing upon Mrs. Gordon," growled he.
"Probably you have told her more lies than you dared tell me."

"I told her nothing but the truth, and she sent her man down here to
find out all about us, said Katy, smartly.

"Very well; this paper will only delay the matter for a few days; when
I have exposed you to her, she will acquiesce in my views;" and Dr.
Flynch threw down the receipt and left the house.

"We are well rid of him, at any rate," said Katy.

"Now I will get you some dinner, for I must be at Mrs. Gordon's at
three o'clock; and I want to tell you about my plan too, mother."

The active little girl made a cup of tea for her mother, and the dinner
was soon dispatched.



CHAPTER VI.

KATY PREPARES A STOCK OF MERCHANDISE.

Katy had not time then to tell her mother about the candy speculation
she had in view, and she was obliged to wait till her return from
Temple Street. Promptly at the hour, she presented herself at Mrs.
Gordon's, and they went to the house of the mayor; but that
distinguished gentleman was not at home, and the lady promised to go
again with her the next day.

As she walked home, she thought of what she should say to her mother in
favor of the candy project, for she felt sure her mother's pride would
throw many obstacles in her path. The best argument she could think of
was, that the business would be an honest calling and though she was
too proud to beg, she was not too proud to work, or to take a very
humble position among the people around her. She did not look upon the
act of selling candy to the passers-by in the streets as degrading in
itself, and therein she differed very widely from her mother, who had
been brought up in ease and affluence. Before she got home she had made
up her mind what she should say, and how she should defend her plan
from the assaults of pride.

"Now, mother, you shall hear my plan," she continued, after she had
announced the ill success of her visit to the mayor's house. "I am
going into business, and I expect to make a great deal of money."

"Are you, indeed?" replied Mrs. Redburn, smiling at the enthusiasm of
her daughter.

"I am; and you must not be angry with me, or object very much to my
plan."

"Well, what is your plan?"

"I am going to sell candy," said Katy, pausing to notice the effect of
this startling declaration. "You know what nice molasses candy you used
to make for me. Mrs. Sneed and Mrs. Colvin said a great many times that
it was a good deal better than they could buy at the shops."

"But, child, I am not able to make candy now. I cannot get off my bed."

"I will make it; you shall lay there and tell me how. I am sure I can
make it."

"It is very hard work to pull it."

"I won't mind that."

"Suppose you can make it, how will you sell it?" asked Mrs. Redburn,
casting an anxious glance at the enthusiastic little girl.

"O, I shall take a box, and offer it to the folks that pass along the
streets."

"Are you crazy, Katy?" exclaimed the mother, raising her head on the
bed. "Do you think I could permit you to do such a thing?"

"Why not, mother?"

"What a life for a child to lead! Do you think I could let you wander
about the streets exposed to the insults and rude jests of the vicious
and thoughtless? You do not understand what you propose."

"I think I do, mother. I don't see any harm in selling candy to those
who are willing to buy."

"Perhaps there is no harm in the mere act of selling candy; but what a
life for you to lead! It makes me shudder to think of it."

"It is your pride, mother."

"I am thankful I have: some pride left, Katy."

"But mother, we can't be poor and proud. We haven't got any money to
proud with."

"I am proud, I know; I wish I could banish it," replied Mrs. Redburn,
with a deep sigh.

"Let me try the plan, mother, and if I can't get along with it, I will
give it up."

"It will subject you to a great many trials and temptations."

"I can manage them, mother."

"Can you submit to the insults of evil-minded persons?"

"Yes, mother; no decent person would insult me and I don't care for
others. I can pity them, and run away from them. I am not afraid of
anything. Do let me try."

Mrs. Redburn saw that Katy was too earnest to be thwarted; that,
impelled by a noble purpose, she had set her heart upon making the
attempt, and she did not like to disappoint her. It is true, she keenly
felt the degradation of such a life, and even feared that Katy might be
led astray while pursuing such an occupation; but she gave a reluctant
consent, trusting that one or two experiments would disgust her with
the business.
