patch and let down with, an' be more economical."

"I know. But Mr. Watson says he'll take back part of it, and let us
have pink and blue for the same price."

"Did you ask him?"

"Yes'm."

"It was none o' your business."

"I was helping Emma Jane choose aprons, and didn't think you'd mind
which color I had. Pink keeps clean just as nice as brown, and Mr.
Watson says it'll boil without fading."

"Mr. Watson 's a splendid judge of washing, I guess. I don't approve of
children being rigged out in fancy colors, but I'll see what your aunt
Jane thinks."

"I think it would be all right to let Rebecca have one pink and one
blue gingham," said Jane. "A child gets tired of sewing on one color.
It's only natural she should long for a change; besides she'd look like
a charity child always wearing the same brown with a white apron. And
it's dreadful unbecoming to her!"

"'Handsome is as handsome does,' say I. Rebecca never'll come to grief
along of her beauty, that's certain, and there's no use in humoring her
to think about her looks. I believe she's vain as a peacock now,
without anything to be vain of."

"She's young and attracted to bright things--that's all. I remember
well enough how I felt at her age."

"You was considerable of a fool at her age, Jane."

"Yes, I was, thank the Lord! I only wish I'd known how to take a little
of my foolishness along with me, as some folks do, to brighten my
declining years."

There finally was a pink gingham, and when it was nicely finished, aunt
Jane gave Rebecca a delightful surprise. She showed her how to make a
pretty trimming of narrow white linen tape, by folding it in pointed
shapes and sewing it down very flat with neat little stitches.

"It'll be good fancy work for you, Rebecca; for your aunt Miranda won't
like to see you always reading in the long winter evenings. Now if you
think you can baste two rows of white tape round the bottom of your
pink skirt and keep it straight by the checks, I'll stitch them on for
you and trim the waist and sleeves with pointed tape-trimming, so the
dress'll be real pretty for second best."

Rebecca's joy knew no bounds. "I'll baste like a house afire!" she
exclaimed. "It's a thousand yards round that skirt, as well I know,
having hemmed it; but I could sew pretty trimming on if it was from
here to Milltown. Oh! do you think aunt Mirandy'll ever let me go to
Milltown with Mr. Cobb? He's asked me again, you know; but one Saturday
I had to pick strawberries, and another it rained, and I don't think
she really approves of my going. It's TWENTY-NINE minutes past four,
aunt Jane, and Alice Robinson has been sitting under the currant bushes
for a long time waiting for me. Can I go and play?"

"Yes, you may go, and you'd better run as far as you can out behind the
barn, so 't your noise won't distract your aunt Mirandy. I see Susan
Simpson and the twins and Emma Jane Perkins hiding behind the fence."

Rebecca leaped off the porch, snatched Alice Robinson from under the
currant bushes, and, what was much more difficult, succeeded, by means
of a complicated system of signals, in getting Emma Jane away from the
Simpson party and giving them the slip altogether. They were much too
small for certain pleasurable activities planned for that afternoon;
but they were not to be despised, for they had the most fascinating
dooryard in the village. In it, in bewildering confusion, were old
sleighs, pungs, horse rakes, hogsheads, settees without backs,
bed-steads without heads, in all stages of disability, and never the
same on two consecutive days. Mrs. Simpson was seldom at home, and even
when she was, had little concern as to what happened on the premises. A
favorite diversion was to make the house into a fort, gallantly held by
a handful of American soldiers against a besieging force of the British
army. Great care was used in apportioning the parts, for there was no
disposition to let anybody win but the Americans. Seesaw Simpson was
usually made commander-in-chief of the British army, and a limp and
uncertain one he was, capable, with his contradictory orders and his
fondness for the extreme rear, of leading any regiment to an inglorious
death. Sometimes the long-suffering house was a log hut, and the brave
settlers defeated a band of hostile Indians, or occasionally were
massacred by them; but in either case the Simpson house looked, to
quote a Riverboro expression, "as if the devil had been having an
auction in it."

Next to this uncommonly interesting playground, as a field of action,
came, in the children's opinion, the "secret spot." There was a velvety
stretch of ground in the Sawyer pasture which was full of fascinating
hollows and hillocks, as well as verdant levels, on which to build
houses. A group of trees concealed it somewhat from view and flung a
grateful shade over the dwellings erected there. It had been hard
though sweet labor to take armfuls of "stickins" and "cutrounds" from
the mill to this secluded spot, and that it had been done mostly after
supper in the dusk of the evenings gave it a still greater flavor. Here
in soap boxes hidden among the trees were stored all their treasures:
wee baskets and plates and cups made of burdock balls, bits of broken
china for parties, dolls, soon to be outgrown, but serving well as
characters in all sorts of romances enacted there,--deaths, funerals,
weddings, christenings. A tall, square house of stickins was to be
built round Rebecca this afternoon, and she was to be Charlotte Corday
leaning against the bars of her prison.

It was a wonderful experience standing inside the building with Emma
Jane's apron wound about her hair; wonderful to feel that when she
leaned her head against the bars they seemed to turn to cold iron; that
her eyes were no longer Rebecca Randall's but mirrored something of
Charlotte Corday's hapless woe.

"Ain't it lovely?" sighed the humble twain, who had done most of the
labor, but who generously admired the result.

"I hate to have to take it down," said Alice, "it's been such a sight
of work."

"If you think you could move up some stones and just take off the top
rows, I could step out over," suggested Charlotte Corday. "Then leave
the stones, and you two can step down into the prison to-morrow and be
the two little princes in the Tower, and I can murder you."

"What princes? What tower?" asked Alice and Emma Jane in one breath.
"Tell us about them."

"Not now, it's my supper time." (Rebecca was a somewhat firm
disciplinarian.)

"It would be elergant being murdered by you," said Emma Jane loyally,
"though you are awful real when you murder; or we could have Elijah and
Elisha for the princes."

"They'd yell when they was murdered," objected Alice; "you know how
silly they are at plays, all except Clara Belle. Besides if we once
show them this secret place, they'll play in it all the time, and
perhaps they'd steal things, like their father."

"They needn't steal just because their father does," argued Rebecca;
"and don't you ever talk about it before them if you want to be my
secret, partic'lar friends. My mother tells me never to say hard things
about people's own folks to their face. She says nobody can bear it,
and it's wicked to shame them for what isn't their fault. Remember
Minnie Smellie!"

Well, they had no difficulty in recalling that dramatic episode, for it
had occurred only a few days before; and a version of it that would
have melted the stoniest heart had been presented to every girl in the
village by Minnie Smellie herself, who, though it was Rebecca and not
she who came off victorious in the bloody battle of words, nursed her
resentment and intended to have revenge.



VII

RIVERBORO SECRETS

Mr. Simpson spent little time with his family, owing to certain awkward
methods of horse-trading, or the "swapping" of farm implements and
vehicles of various kinds,--operations in which his customers were
never long suited. After every successful trade he generally passed a
longer or shorter term in jail; for when a poor man without goods or
chattels has the inveterate habit of swapping, it follows naturally
that he must have something to swap; and having nothing of his own, it
follows still more naturally that he must swap something belonging to
his neighbors.

Mr. Simpson was absent from the home circle for the moment because he
had exchanged the Widow Rideout's sleigh for Joseph Goodwin's plough.
Goodwin had lately moved to North Edgewood and had never before met the
urbane and persuasive Mr. Simpson. The Goodwin plough Mr. Simpson
speedily bartered with a man "over Wareham way," and got in exchange
for it an old horse which his owner did not need, as he was leaving
town to visit his daughter for a year, Simpson fattened the aged
animal, keeping him for several weeks (at early morning or after
nightfall) in one neighbor's pasture after another, and then exchanged
him with a Milltown man for a top buggy. It was at this juncture that
the Widow Rideout missed her sleigh from the old carriage house. She
had not used it for fifteen years and might not sit in it for another
fifteen, but it was property, and she did not intend to part with it
without a struggle. Such is the suspicious nature of the village mind
that the moment she discovered her loss her thought at once reverted to
Abner Simpson. So complicated, however, was the nature of this
particular business transaction, and so tortuous the paths of its
progress (partly owing to the complete disappearance of the owner of
the horse, who had gone to the West and left no address), that it took
the sheriff many weeks to prove Mr. Simpson's guilt to the town's and
to the Widow Rideout's satisfaction. Abner himself avowed his complete
innocence, and told the neighbors how a red-haired man with a hare lip
and a pepper-and-salt suit of clothes had called him up one morning
about daylight and offered to swap him a good sleigh for an old cider
press he had layin' out in the dooryard. The bargain was struck, and
he, Abner, had paid the hare-lipped stranger four dollars and
seventy-five cents to boot; whereupon the mysterious one set down the
sleigh, took the press on his cart, and vanished up the road, never to
be seen or heard from afterwards.

"If I could once ketch that consarned old thief," exclaimed Abner
righteously, "I'd make him dance,--workin' off a stolen sleigh on me
an' takin' away my good money an' cider press, to say nothin' o' my
character!"

"You'll never ketch him, Ab," responded the sheriff. "He's cut off the
same piece o' goods as that there cider press and that there character
and that there four-seventy-five o' yourn; nobody ever see any of 'em
but you, and you'll never see 'em again!"

Mrs. Simpson, who was decidedly Abner's better half, took in washing
and went out to do days' cleaning, and the town helped in the feeding
and clothing of the children. George, a lanky boy of fourteen, did
chores on neighboring farms, and the others, Samuel, Clara Belle,
Susan, Elijah, and Elisha, went to school, when sufficiently clothed
and not otherwise more pleasantly engaged.

There were no secrets in the villages that lay along the banks of
Pleasant River. There were many hard-working people among the
inhabitants, but life wore away so quietly and slowly that there was a
good deal of spare time for conversation,--under the trees at noon in
the hayfield; hanging over the bridge at nightfall; seated about the
stove in the village store of an evening. These meeting-places
furnished ample ground for the discussion of current events as viewed
by the masculine eye, while choir rehearsals, sewing societies, reading
circles, church picnics, and the like, gave opportunity for the
expression of feminine opinion. All this was taken very much for
granted, as a rule, but now and then some supersensitive person made
violent objections to it, as a theory of life.

Delia Weeks, for example, was a maiden lady who did dressmaking in a
small way; she fell ill, and although attended by all the physicians in
the neighborhood, was sinking slowly into a decline when her cousin
Cyrus asked her to come and keep house for him in Lewiston. She went,
and in a year grew into a robust, hearty, cheerful woman. Returning to
Riverboro on a brief visit, she was asked if she meant to end her days
away from home.

"I do most certainly, if I can get any other place to stay," she
responded candidly. "I was bein' worn to a shadder here, tryin' to keep
my little secrets to myself, an' never succeedin'. First they had it I
wanted to marry the minister, and when he took a wife in Standish I was
known to be disappointed. Then for five or six years they suspicioned I
was tryin' for a place to teach school, and when I gave up hope, an'
took to dressmakin', they pitied me and sympathized with me for that.
When father died I was bound I'd never let anybody know how I was left,
for that spites 'em worse than anything else; but there's ways o'
findin' out, an' they found out, hard as I fought 'em! Then there was
my brother James that went to Arizona when he was sixteen. I gave good
news of him for thirty years runnin', but aunt Achsy Tarbox had a
ferretin' cousin that went out to Tombstone for her health, and she
wrote to a postmaster, or to some kind of a town authority, and found
Jim and wrote back aunt Achsy all about him and just how unfortunate
he'd been. They knew when I had my teeth out and a new set made; they
knew when I put on a false front-piece; they knew when the fruit
peddler asked me to be his third wife--I never told 'em, an' you can be
sure HE never did, but they don't NEED to be told in this village; they
have nothin' to do but guess, an' they'll guess right every time. I was
all tuckered out tryin' to mislead 'em and deceive 'em and sidetrack
'em; but the minute I got where I wa'n't put under a microscope by day
an' a telescope by night and had myself TO myself without sayin' 'By
your leave,' I begun to pick up. Cousin Cyrus is an old man an'
consid'able trouble, but he thinks my teeth are handsome an' says I've
got a splendid suit of hair. There ain't a person in Lewiston that
knows about the minister, or father's will, or Jim's doin's, or the
fruit peddler; an' if they should find out, they wouldn't care, an'
they couldn't remember; for Lewiston 's a busy place, thanks be!"

Miss Delia Weeks may have exaggerated matters somewhat, but it is easy
to imagine that Rebecca as well as all the other Riverboro children had
heard the particulars of the Widow Rideout's missing sleigh and Abner
Simpson's supposed connection with it.

There is not an excess of delicacy or chivalry in the ordinary country
school, and several choice conundrums and bits of verse dealing with
the Simpson affair were bandied about among the scholars, uttered
always, be it said to their credit, in undertones, and when the Simpson
children were not in the group.

Rebecca Randall was of precisely the same stock, and had had much the
same associations as her schoolmates, so one can hardly say why she so
hated mean gossip and so instinctively held herself aloof from it.

Among the Riverboro girls of her own age was a certain excellently
named Minnie Smellie, who was anything but a general favorite. She was
a ferret-eyed, blond-haired, spindle-legged little creature whose mind
was a cross between that of a parrot and a sheep. She was suspected of
copying answers from other girls' slates, although she had never been
caught in the act. Rebecca and Emma Jane always knew when she had
brought a tart or a triangle of layer cake with her school luncheon,
because on those days she forsook the cheerful society of her mates and
sought a safe solitude in the woods, returning after a time with a
jocund smile on her smug face.

After one of these private luncheons Rebecca had been tempted beyond
her strength, and when Minnie took her seat among them asked, "Is your
headache better, Minnie? Let me wipe off that strawberry jam over your
mouth."

There was no jam there as a matter of fact, but the guilty Minnie's
handkerchief went to her crimson face in a flash.

Rebecca confessed to Emma Jane that same afternoon that she felt
ashamed of her prank. "I do hate her ways," she exclaimed, "but I'm
sorry I let her know we 'spected her; and so to make up, I gave her
that little piece of broken coral I keep in my bead purse; you know the
one?"

"It don't hardly seem as if she deserved that, and her so greedy,"
remarked Emma Jane.

"I know it, but it makes me feel better," said Rebecca largely; "and
then I've had it two years, and it's broken so it wouldn't ever be any
real good, beautiful as it is to look at."

The coral had partly served its purpose as a reconciling bond, when one
afternoon Rebecca, who had stayed after school for her grammar lesson
as usual, was returning home by way of the short cut. Far ahead, beyond
the bars, she espied the Simpson children just entering the woodsy bit.
Seesaw was not with them, so she hastened her steps in order to secure
company on her homeward walk. They were speedily lost to view, but when
she had almost overtaken them she heard, in the trees beyond, Minnie
Smellie's voice lifted high in song, and the sound of a child's
sobbing. Clara Belle, Susan, and the twins were running along the path,
and Minnie was dancing up and down, shrieking:--

  "'What made the sleigh love Simpson so?'
     The eager children cried;
  'Why Simpson loved the sleigh, you know,'
      The teacher quick replied."

The last glimpse of the routed Simpson tribe, and the last futter of
their tattered garments, disappeared in the dim distance. The fall of
one small stone cast by the valiant Elijah, known as "the fighting
twin," did break the stillness of the woods for a moment, but it did
not come within a hundred yards of Minnie, who shouted "Jail Birds" at
the top of her lungs and then turned, with an agreeable feeling of
excitement, to meet Rebecca, standing perfectly still in the path, with
a day of reckoning plainly set forth in her blazing eyes.

Minnie's face was not pleasant to see, for a coward detected at the
moment of wrongdoing is not an object of delight.

"Minnie Smellie, if ever--I--catch--you--singing--that--to the Simpsons
again--do you know what I'll do?" asked Rebecca in a tone of
concentrated rage.

"I don't know and I don't care," said Minnie jauntily, though her looks
belied her.

"I'll take that piece of coral away from you, and I THINK I shall slap
you besides!"

"You wouldn't darst," retorted Minnie. "If you do, I'll tell my mother
and the teacher, so there!"

"I don't care if you tell your mother, my mother, and all your
relations, and the president," said Rebecca, gaining courage as the
noble words fell from her lips. "I don't care if you tell the town, the
whole of York county, the state of Maine and--and the nation!" she
finished grandiloquently. "Now you run home and remember what I say. If
you do it again, and especially if you say 'Jail Birds,' if I think
it's right and my duty, I shall punish you somehow."

The next morning at recess Rebecca observed Minnie telling the tale
with variations to Huldah Meserve. "She THREATENED me," whispered
Minnie, "but I never believe a word she says."

The latter remark was spoken with the direct intention of being
overheard, for Minnie had spasms of bravery, when well surrounded by
the machinery of law and order.

As Rebecca went back to her seat she asked Miss Dearborn if she might
pass a note to Minnie Smellie and received permission. This was the
note:--

    Of all the girls that are so mean There's none like Minnie
    Smellie. I'll take away the gift I gave And pound her into
    jelly.

    _P. S. Now do you believe me?_

    R. Randall.

The effect of this piece of doggerel was entirely convincing, and for
days afterwards whenever Minnie met the Simpsons even a mile from the
brick house she shuddered and held her peace.



VIII

COLOR OF ROSE

On the very next Friday after this "dreadfullest fight that ever was
seen," as Bunyan says in Pilgrim's Progress, there were great doings in
the little schoolhouse on the hill. Friday afternoon was always the
time chosen for dialogues, songs, and recitations, but it cannot be
stated that it was a gala day in any true sense of the word. Most of
the children hated "speaking pieces;" hated the burden of learning
them, dreaded the danger of breaking down in them. Miss Dearborn
commonly went home with a headache, and never left her bed during the
rest of the afternoon or evening; and the casual female parent who
attended the exercises sat on a front bench with beads of cold sweat on
her forehead, listening to the all-too-familiar halts and stammers.
Sometimes a bellowing infant who had clean forgotten his verse would
cast himself bodily on the maternal bosom and be borne out into the
open air, where he was sometimes kissed and occasionally spanked; but
in any case the failure added an extra dash of gloom and dread to the
occasion. The advent of Rebecca had somehow infused a new spirit into
these hitherto terrible afternoons. She had taught Elijah and Elisha
Simpson so that they recited three verses of something with such
comical effect that they delighted themselves, the teacher, and the
school; while Susan, who lisped, had been provided with a humorous poem
in which she impersonated a lisping child. Emma Jane and Rebecca had a
dialogue, and the sense of companionship buoyed up Emma Jane and gave
her self-reliance. In fact, Miss Dearborn announced on this particular
Friday morning that the exercises promised to be so interesting that
she had invited the doctor's wife, the minister's wife, two members of
the school committee, and a few mothers. Living Perkins was asked to
decorate one of the black-boards and Rebecca the other. Living, who was
the star artist of the school, chose the map of North America. Rebecca
liked better to draw things less realistic, and speedily, before the
