closed, and the determination of the council was announced to the
members, each of whom was ordered to hurry off to set the train in
motion for a popular outbreak for eleven o'clock. It was not until an
hour later that the news that the Barcine party intended to forestall
them reached Hanno's headquarters. Then the most vigourous efforts
were made to get together their forces, but it was too late. At eleven
o'clock crowds of men from all the working portions of the town
were seen making their way towards the forum, shouting as they went,
"Hannibal for general!" "Down with Hanno and the tax gatherers!"

Conspicuous among them were the sailors and fishermen from the port,
armed with oars, and the gang of stevedores with heavy clubs. Hanno and
a large number of his party hurried down to the spot and tried to pacify
the crowd, but the yells of execration were so loud and continuous that
they were forced to leave the forum. The leaders of the Barcine party
now appeared on the scene, and their most popular orator ascended the
rostrum. When the news spread among the crowd that he was a friend of
Hannibal and an opponent of Hanno, the tumult was stayed in order that
all might hear his words.

"My friends," he said, "I am glad to see that Carthage is still true to
herself, and that you resent the attempt made by a faction to remove the
general of the army's choice, the son of the great Hamilcar Barca. To
him and to Hasdrubal, his son-in-law, you owe the conquest of Spain, you
owe the wealth which has of late years poured into Carthage, you owe the
trade which is already doing so much to mitigate your condition. What
have Hanno and his friends done that you should listen to him? It is
their incapacity which has lost Carthage so many of its possessions. It
is their greed and corruption which place such burdens on your backs.
They claim that they are generous. It is easy to be generous with the
money of which they have plundered you; but let them know your will, and
they must bend before it. Tell them that you will have Hannibal and none
other as the general of your armies, and Spain is secure, and year by
year your commerce with that country will increase and flourish."

A roar of assent arose from the crowd. At the same instant a tumult was
heard at the lower entrance to the forum, and the head of a dense body
of men was seen issuing from the street, with shouts of "Hanno forever!"
They were headed by the butchers and tanners, an important and powerful
body, for Carthage did a vast trade in leather.

For a time they bore all before them, but the resistance increased every
foot they advanced. The shouts on both sides became louder and more
angry. Blows were soon exchanged, and ere long a pitched battle was
raging. The fishermen and sailors threw themselves into the thick of
it, and for ten minutes a desperate fight raged in the forum. Soon
the battle extended, as bodies of men belonging to either faction
encountered each other as they hurried towards the forum.

Street frays were by no means unusual in Carthage, but this was a
veritable battle. Hanno had at its commencement, accompanied by a strong
body of his friends, ridden to Byrsa, and had called upon the soldiers
to come out and quell the tumult. They, however, listened in sullen
silence, their sympathies were entirely with the supporters of Hannibal,
and they had already received orders from their officers on no account
to move, whosoever might command them to do so, until Hamilcar placed
himself at their head.

The general delayed doing this until the last moment. Hannibal's friends
had hoped to carry their object without the intervention of the troops,
as it was desirable in every way that the election should appear to be a
popular one, and that Hannibal should seem to have the suffrages of the
people as well as of the army. That the large majority of the people
were with them they knew, but the money which Hanno's friends had
lavishly spent among the butchers, skinners, tanners, and smiths had
raised up a more formidable opposition than they had counted upon.

Seeing that their side was gaining but little advantage, that already
much blood had been shed, and that the tumult threatened to involve all
Carthage, Hamilcar and a number of officers rode to the barracks. The
troops at once got under arms, and, headed by the elephants, moved out
from Byrsa. Being desirous to avoid bloodshed, Hamilcar bade his men
leave their weapons behind them, and armed them with headless spear
shafts, of which, with all other things needed for war, there was a
large store in the citadel. As the column sallied out it broke up into
sections. The principal body marched toward the forum, while others,
each led by officers, took their way down the principal streets.

The appearance of the elephants and troops, and the loud shouts of the
latter for Hannibal, quickly put an end to the tumult. Hanno's hired
mob, seeing that they could do nothing against such adversaries, at once
broke up and fled to their own quarters of the city, and Hanno and his
adherents sought their own houses. The quiet citizens, seeing that the
fight was over, issued from their houses, and the forum was soon again
crowded.

The proceedings were now unanimous, and the shouts raised that the
senate should assemble and confirm the vote of the army were loud and
strenuous. Parties of men went out in all directions to the houses of
the senators to tell them the people demanded their presence at the
forum. Seeing the uselessness of further opposition, and fearing the
consequences if they resisted, Hanno and his friends no longer offered
any opposition.

The senate assembled, and, by a unanimous vote the election of Hannibal
as one of the suffetes in place of Hasdrubal, and as commander-in-chief
of the army in Spain, was carried, and was ratified by that of the
popular assembly, the traders and manufacturers of Hanno's party not
venturing to oppose the will of the mass of mechanics and seafaring
population.

"It has been a victory," Hamilcar said, when, accompanied by a number of
his friends, he returned to his home that evening, "but Hanno will not
forget or forgive the events of this day. As long as all goes well in
Spain we may hope for the support of the people, but should any disaster
befall our arms it will go hard with all who have taken a prominent part
in this day's proceedings. Hanno's friends have so much at stake that
they will not give up the struggle. They have at their back all the
moneys which they wring from the people and the tributaries of Carthage,
and they will work night and day to strengthen their party and to buy
over the lower classes. We are the stronger at present; but to carry
the popular vote on a question which would put a stop to the frightful
corruption of our administration, to suppress the tyranny of the
council, to sweep away the abuses which prevail in every class in the
state--for that we must wait till Hannibal returns victorious. Let him
but humble the pride of Rome, and Carthage will be at his feet."

The party were in high spirits at the result of the day's proceedings.
Not only had they succeeded in their principal object of electing
Hannibal, but they had escaped from a great personal danger; for,
assuredly, had Hanno and his party triumphed, a stern vengeance would
have been taken upon all the leading members of the Barcine faction.

After the banquet, while Hamilcar and his companions reclined on their
couches at tables, a Greek slave, a captive in war, sang songs of his
native land to the accompaniment of the lyre. A party of dancing girls
from Ethiopia performed their rhythmical movements to the sound of the
tinkling of a little guitar with three strings, the beating of a small
drum, the clashing of cymbals, and the jingling of the ornaments and
little metal bells on their arms and ankles. Perfumes were burned in
censers, and from time to time soft strains of music, played by a party
of slaves among the trees without, floated in through the casements.

Malchus was in wild spirits, for his father had told him that it was
settled that he was to have the command of a body of troops which were
very shortly to proceed to Spain to reinforce the army under Hannibal,
and that he should allow Malchus to enter the band of Carthaginian horse
which was to form part of the body under his command.

The regular Carthaginian horse and foot formed but a very small portion
of the armies of the republic. They were a corps d'elite, composed
entirely of young men of the aristocratic families of Carthage, on whom
it was considered as almost a matter of obligation to enter this
force. They had the post of honour in battle, and it was upon them the
Carthaginian generals relied principally to break the ranks of the enemy
in close battle. All who aspired to distinguish themselves in the eyes
of their fellow citizens, to rise to power and position in the state, to
officer the vast bodies of men raised from the tributary nations, and to
command the armies of the country, entered one or other of these bodies.
The cavalry was the arm chosen by the richer classes. It was seldom that
it numbered more than a thousand strong. The splendour of their armour
and appointments, the beauty of their horses, the richness of the
garments of the cavaliers, and the trappings of their steeds, caused
this body to be the admiration and envy of Carthage. Every man in it was
a member of one of the upper ranks of the aristocracy; all were nearly
related to members of the senate, and it was considered the highest
honour that a young Carthaginian could receive to be admitted into it.

Each man wore on his wrist a gold band for each campaign which he had
undertaken. There was no attempt at uniformity as to their appointments.
Their helmets and shields were of gold or silver, surmounted with plumes
or feathers, or with tufts of white horsehair. Their breastplates were
adorned with arabesques or repousse work of the highest art. Their belts
were covered with gold and studded with gems. Their short kilted skirts
were of rich Tyrian purple embroidered with gold.

The infantry were composed of men of good but less exalted families.
They wore a red tunic without a belt. They carried a great circular
buckler of more than a yard in diameter, formed of the tough hide of the
river horse, brought down from the upper Nile, with a central boss of
metal with a point projecting nearly a foot in front of the shield,
enabling it to be used as an offensive weapon in a close fight. They
carried short heavy swords similar to those of the Romans, and went
barefooted. Their total strength seldom exceeded two thousand.

These two bodies constituted the Carthaginian legion, and formed but
a small proportion indeed of her armies, the rest of her forces being
entirely drawn from the tributary states. The fact that Carthage, with
her seven hundred thousand inhabitants, furnished so small a contingent
of the fighting force of the republic, was in itself a proof of the
weakness of the state. A country which relies entirely for its defence
upon mercenaries is rapidly approaching decay.

She may for a time repress one tributary with the soldiers of the
others; but when disaster befalls her she is without cohesion and falls
to pieces at once. As the Roman orator well said of Carthage: "She was
a figure of brass with feet of clay"--a noble and imposing object to
the eye, but whom a vigourous push would level in the dust. Rome, on the
contrary, young and vigourous, was a people of warriors. Every one of
her citizens who was capable of bearing arms was a soldier. The manly
virtues were held in the highest esteem, and the sordid love of wealth
had not as yet enfeebled her strength or sapped her powers. Her citizens
were men, indeed, ready to make any sacrifice for their country; and
such being the case, her final victory over Carthage was a matter of
certainty.

The news which afforded Malchus such delight was not viewed with the
same unmixed satisfaction by the members of his family. Thyra had for
the last year been betrothed to Adherbal, and he, too, was to accompany
Hamilcar to Spain, and none could say how long it might be before they
would return.

While the others were sitting round the festive board, Adherbal and
Thyra strolled away among the groves in the garden.

"I do not think you care for me, Adherbal," she said reproachfully as he
was speaking of the probabilities of the campaign. "You know well
that this war may continue in Spain for years, and you seem perfectly
indifferent to the fact that we must be separated for that time."

"I should not be indifferent to it, Thyra, if I thought for a moment
that this was to be the case. I may remain, it is true, for years in
Spain; but I have not the most remote idea of remaining there alone. At
the end of the first campaign, when our army goes into winter quarters,
I shall return here and fetch you."

"That's all very well," the girl said, pouting; "but how do you know
that I shall be willing to give up all the delights of Carthage to go
among the savage Iberians, where they say the ground is all white in
winter and even the rivers stop in their courses?"

Adherbal laughed lightly. "Then it is not for you to talk about
indifference, Thyra; but it won't be so bad as you fear. At Carthagena
you will have all the luxuries of Carthage. I do not say that your villa
shall be equal to this; but as you will have me it should be a thousand
times dearer to you."

"Your conceit is superb, Adherbal," Thyra laughed. "You get worse
and worse. Had I ever dreamed of it I should never have consented
so submissively when my father ordered me to regard you as my future
husband."

"You ought to think yourself a fortunate girl, Thyra," Adherbal said,
smiling; "for your father might have taken it into his head to have
done as Hamilcar Barca did, and married his daughters to Massilian and
Numidian princes, to become queens of bands of nomad savages."

"Well, they were queens, that was something, even if only of nomads."

"I don't think that it would have suited you, Thyra--a seat on horseback
for a throne, and a rough tent for a palace, would not be in your way at
all. I think a snug villa on the slopes of the bay of Carthagena, will
suit you better, not to mention the fact that I shall make an infinitely
more pleasant and agreeable master than a Numidian chief would do."

"You are intolerable, Adherbal, with your conceit and your mastership.
However, I suppose when the time comes I shall have to obey my father.
What a pity it is we girls cannot choose our husbands for ourselves!
Perhaps the time may come when we shall do so."

"Well, in your case, Thyra," Adherbal said, "it would make no
difference, because you know you would have chosen me anyhow; but most
girls would make a nice business of it. How are they to know what men
really are? They might be gamesters, drunkards, brutal and cruel
by nature, idle and spendthrift. What can maidens know of a man's
disposition? Of course they only see him at his best. Wise parents
can make careful inquiries, and have means of knowing what a man's
disposition and habits really are."

"You don't think, Adherbal," Thyra said earnestly, "that girls are such
fools that they cannot read faces; that we cannot tell the difference
between a good man and a bad one."

"Yes, a girl may know something about every man save the one she loves,
Thyra. She may see other's faults clearly enough; but she is blind to
those of the man she loves. Do you not know that the Greeks depict Cupid
with a bandage over his eyes?"

"I am not blind to your faults," Thyra said indignantly. "I know that
you are a great deal more lazy than becomes you; that you are not
sufficiently earnest in the affairs of life; that you will never rise to
be a great general like my cousin Hannibal."

"That is all quite true," Adherbal laughed; "and yet you see you love
me. You perceive my faults only in theory and not in fact, and you do
not in your heart wish to see me different from what I am. Is it not
so?"

"Yes," the girl said shyly, "I suppose it is. Anyhow, I don't like the
thought of your going away from me to that horrid Iberia."

Although defeated for the moment by the popular vote, the party of Hanno
were not discouraged. They had suffered a similar check when they had
attempted to prevent Hannibal joining Hasdrubal in Spain.

Not a moment was lost in setting to work to recover their lost ground.
Their agents among the lower classes spread calumnies against the
Barcine leaders. Money was lavishly distributed, and the judges, who
were devoted to Hanno's party, set their machinery to work to strike
terror among their opponents. Their modes of procedure were similar to
those which afterwards made Venice execrable in the height of her power.
Arrests were made secretly in the dead of night. Men were missing from
their families, and none knew what had become of them.

Dead bodies bearing signs of strangulation were found floating in the
shallow lakes around Carthage; and yet, so great was the dread inspired
by the terrible power of the judges, that the friends and relations of
those who were missing dared make neither complaint nor inquiry. It was
not against the leaders of the Barcine party that such measures were
taken. Had one of these been missing the whole would have flown to arms.
The dungeons would have been broken open, and not only the captives
liberated, but their arrest might have been made the pretext for an
attack upon the whole system under which such a state of things could
exist.

It was chiefly among the lower classes that the agents of Hanno's
vengeance operated. Among these the disappearance of so many men who
were regarded as leaders among the rest spread a deep and mysterious
fear. Although none dared to complain openly, the news of these
mysterious disappearances was not long in reaching the leaders of the
Barcine party.

These, however, were for the time powerless to act. Certain as they
might be of the source whence these unseen blows descended, they had no
evidence on which to assail so formidable a body as the judges. It
would be a rash act indeed to accuse such important functionaries of the
state, belonging, with scarcely an exception, to powerful families, of
arbitrary and cruel measures against insignificant persons.

The halo of tradition still surrounded the judges, and added to the fear
inspired by their terrible and unlimited power. In such an attack the
Barcine party could not rely upon the population to side with them; for,
while comparatively few were personally affected by the arrests which
had taken place, the fear of future consequences would operate upon all.

Among the younger members of the party, however, the indignation aroused
by these secret blows was deep. Giscon, who was continually brooding
over the tyranny and corruption which were ruining his country, was one
of the leaders of this section of the party; with him were other spirits
as ardent as himself. They met in a house in a quiet street in the lower
town, and there discussed all sorts of desperate projects for freeing
the city of its tyrants.

One day as Giscon was making his way to this rendezvous he met Malchus
riding at full speed from the port.

"What is it, Malchus, whither away in such haste?"

"It is shameful, Giscon, it is outrageous. I have just been down to the
port to tell the old fisherman with whom I often go out that I would
sail with him tomorrow, and find that four days ago he was missing, and
his body was yesterday found by his sons floating in the lagoon. He
had been strangled. His sons are as much overpowered with terror as by
grief, they believe that he has suffered for the part he took in rousing
the fishermen to declare for Hannibal a fortnight since, and they fear
lest the terrible vengeance of Hanno should next fall upon them.

"How it happened they know not. A man arrived late in the evening and
said that one of their father's best customers wanted a supply of fish
for a banquet he was to give next day, and that he wanted to speak
to him at once to arrange about the quantity and quality of fish he
required. Suspecting nothing the old man left at once, and was never
heard of afterwards. Next morning, seeing that he had not returned, one
of his sons went to the house to which he had been fetched, but found
that its owner knew nothing of the affair, and denied that he had sent
any message whatever to him. Fearing that something was wrong they
searched everywhere, but it was not until last night that his body was,
as I have told you, found.

"They are convinced that their father died in no private feud. He had
not, as far as they know, an enemy in the world. You may imagine how l
feel this; not only did I regard him as a friend, but I feel that it was
owing to his acting as I led him that he has come to his death."

"The tyrants!" Giscon exclaimed in a low voice. "But what can you do,
Malchus?"

"I am going to my father," Malchus replied, "to ask him to take the
matter up."

"What can he do?" Giscon said with a bitter laugh. "What can he prove?
Can he accuse our most noble body of judges, without a shadow of proof,
of making away with this unknown old fisherman. No, Malchus, if you are
in earnest to revenge your friend come with me, I will introduce you to
my friends, who are banded together against this tyranny, and who are
sworn to save Carthage. You are young, but you are brave and full of
ardour; you are a son of General Hamilcar, and my friends will gladly
receive you as one of us."

Malchus did not hesitate. That there would be danger in joining such
a body as Giscon spoke of he knew, but the young officer's talk during
their expedition had aroused in him a deep sense of the tyranny and
corruption which were sapping the power or his country, and this blow
which had struck him personally rendered him in a mood to adopt any
dangerous move.

"I will join you, Giscon," he said, "if you will accept me. I am young,
but I am ready to go all lengths, and to give my life if needs be to
free Carthage."



CHAPTER V: THE CONSPIRACY


Giscon led his companion along the narrow lanes until he reached the
back entrance of the house where the meetings were held. Knocking in
a particular way it was opened at once and closed behind them. As they
entered a slave took Malchus' horse without a word and fastened it to a
ring in the wall, where four or five other horses were standing.
