and confided her distress about the wash-stands.

"Don't you think it is horrid, papa?  Aunt Izzie always said that it
isn't lady-like not to take a sponge-bath every morning; but how can
we, with forty-eight girls in the room?  I don't see what we are going
to do."

"I fancy we can arrange it; don't be distressed, my dear," replied Dr.
Carr.  And Katy was satisfied; for when papa undertook to arrange
things, they were very apt to be done.

It was almost evening when they reached their final stopping place.

"Now, two miles in the stage, and then we're at the horrid old
Nunnery," said Lilly.  "Ugh! look at that snow.  It never melts here
till long after it's all gone at home.  How I do hate this station!
I'm going to be awfully homesick: I know I am."

But just then she caught sight of the stagecoach, which stood waiting;
and her mood changed, for the stage was full of girls who had come by
the other train.

"Hurrah! there's Mary Edwards and Mary Silver," she exclaimed; "and I
declare, Rose Red!  O you precious darling! how do you do?"  Scrambling
up the steps, who plunged at a girl with waving hair, and a rosy,
mischievous face; and began kissing her with effusion.

Rose Red did not seem equally enchanted.

"Well, Lilly, how are you?" she said, and then went on talking to a
girl who sat by her side, and whose hand she held; while Lilly rushed
up and down the line, embracing and being embraced.  She did not
introduce Katy and Clover; and, as papa was outside, on the driver's
box, they felt a little lonely, and strange.  All the rest were
chattering merrily, and were evidently well acquainted: they were
the only ones left out.

Clover watched Rose Red, to whose face she had taken a fancy.  It made
her think of a pink carnation, or of a twinkling wild rose, with saucy
whiskers of brown calyx.  Whatever she said or did seemed full of a
flavor especially her own.  Here eyes, which were blue, and not very
large, sparkled with fun and mischief.  Her cheeks were round and
soft, like a baby's; when she laughed, two dimples broke their pink,
and, and made you want to laugh too.  A cunning white throat supported
this pretty head, as a stem supports a flower; and, altogether, she
was like a flower, except that flowers don't talk, and she talked all
the time.  What she said seemed droll, for the girls about here were
in fits of laughter; but Clover only caught a word now and then, the
stage made such a noise.

Suddenly Rose Red leaned forward, and touched Clover's hand.

"What's your name?" she said.  "You've got eyes like my sister's.  Are
you coming to the Nunnery?"

"Yes," replied Clover, smiling back.  "My name is Clover,--Clover Carr."

"What a dear little name!  It sounds just as you look!"

"So does your name,--Rose Red," said Clover, shyly.

"It's a ridiculous name," protested Rose Red, trying to pout.  Just
then the stage stopped.

"Why?  Who's going to the hotel?" cried the school-girls, in a chorus.

"I am," said Dr. Carr, putting his head in at the door, with a smile
which captivated every girl there.  "Come, Katy; come, Clover.  I've
decided that you sha'n't begin school till to-morrow."

"Oh, my!  Don't I wish he was my pa!" cried Rose Red.  Then the stage
moved on.

"Who are they?  What's their name?" asked the girls.  "They look nice."

"They're sort of cousins of mine, and they come from the West," replied
Lilly, not unwilling to own the relationship, now that she perceived
that Dr. Carr had made a favorable impression.

"Why on earth didn't you introduce them, then?  I declare that was
just like you, Lilly Page," put in Rose Red, indignantly.  "They
looked so lonesome that I wanted to pat and stroke both of 'em.  That
little one has the sweetest eyes!"

Meantime Katy and Clover entered the hotel, very glad of the reprieve,
and of one more quiet evening alone with papa.  They needed to get
their ideas straightened out and put to rights, after the confusions
of the day and Lilly's extraordinary talk.  It was very evident that
the Nunnery was to be quite different from their expectations; but
another thing was equally evident,--it would not be dull!  Rose Red
by herself, and without any one to help her, would be enough to
prevent that!




CHAPTER IV.  THE NUNNERY.


The night seemed short; for the girls, tired by their journey, slept
like dormice.  About seven o'clock, Katy was roused by the click of a
blind, and, opening her eyes, saw Clover standing in the window, and
peeping out through the half-opened shutters.  When she heard Katy
move, she cried out,--

"Oh, do come!  It's so interesting!  I can see the colleges and the
church, and, I guess, the Nunnery; only I am not quite sure, because
the houses are all so much alike."

Katy jumped up and hurried to the window.  The hotel stood on one side
of a green common, planted with trees.  The common had a lead-colored
fence, and gravel paths, which ran across it from corner to corner.
Opposite the hotel was a long row of red buildings, broken by one or
two brown ones, with cupolas.  These were evidently the colleges, and
a large gray building with a spire was as evidently the church; but
which one of the many white, green-blinded house which filled the
other sides of the common, was the Nunnery, the girls could not tell.
Clover thought it was one with a garden at the side; but Katy thought
not, because Lilly had said nothing of a garden.  They discussed the
point so long that the breakfast bell took them by surprise, and they
were forced to rush through their dressing as fast as possible, so as
not to keep papa waiting.

When breakfast was over, Dr. Carr told them to put on their hats, and
get ready to walk with him to the school.  Clover took one arm, and
Katy the other, and the three passed between some lead-colored posts,
and took one of the diagonal paths which led across the common.

"That's the house," said Dr. Carr, pointing.

"It isn't the one you picked out, Clover," said Katy.

"No," replied Clover, a little disappointed.  The house papa indicated
was by no means so pleasant as the one she had chosen.

It was a tall, narrow building, with dormer windows in the roof, and a
square porch supported by whitewashed pillars.  A pile of trunks stood
in the porch.  From above came sounds of voices.  Girls' heads were
popped out of upper widows at the swinging of the gate, and, as the
door opened, more heads appeared looking over the balusters from the
hall above.

The parlor into which they were taken was full of heavy, old-fashioned
furniture, stiffly arranged.  The sofa and chairs were covered with
black haircloth, and stood closely against the wall.  Some books lay
upon the table, arranged two by two; each upper book being exactly at
a right angle with each lower book.  A bunch of dried grasses stood
in the fire-place.  There were no pictures, except one portrait in
oils, of a forbidding old gentleman in a wig and glasses, sitting with
his finger majestically inserted in a half-open Bible.  Altogether, it
was not a cheerful room, nor one calculated to raise the spirits of
new-comers; and Katy, whose long seclusion had made her sensitive on
the subject of rooms, shrank instinctively nearer papa as they went in.

Two ladies rose to receive them.  One, a tall dignified person, was
Mrs. Florence.  The other she introduced as "my assistant principal,
Mrs. Nipson."  Mrs. Nipson was not tall.  She had a round face,
pinched lips, and half-shut gray eyes.

"This lady is fully associated with me in the management of the school,"
explained Mrs. Florence.  "When I go, she will assume entire control."

"Is that likely to be soon?" inquired Dr. Carr, surprised, and not
well pleased that the teacher of whom he had heard, and with whom he
had proposed to leave his children, was planning to yield her place
to a stranger.

"The time is not yet determined," replied Mrs. Florence.  Then she
changed the subject, gracefully, but so decidedly that Dr. Carr had
no chance for further question.  She spoke of classes, and discussed
what Katy and Clover were to study.  Finally, she proposed to take
them upstairs to see their room.  Papa might come too, she said.

"I dare say that Lilly Page, who tells me that she is a cousin of
yours, has described the arrangements of the house," she remarked
to Katy.  "The room I have assigned to you is in the back building.
'Quaker Row,' the girls call it."  She smiled as she spoke; and Katy,
meeting her eyes for the fist time, felt that there was something in
what Lilly had said.  Mrs. Florence _was_ a sort of queen.

They went upstairs.  Some girls who were peeping over the baluster
hurried away at their approach.  Mrs. Florence shook her head at them.

"The first day is always one of license," she said, leading the way
along an uncarpeted entry to a door at the end, from which, by a
couple of steps, they went down into a square room; round three sides
of which, ran a shelf, on which stood rows of wash-bowls and pitchers.
Above were hooks for towels.  Katy perceived that this was the much-
dreaded wash-room.

"Our lavatory," remarked Mrs. Florence blandly.

Opening from the wash-room was a very long hall, lighted at each end
by a window.  The doors on either side were numbered "one, two, three,"
and so on.  Some of them were half open; as they went by, Katy and
Clover caught glimpses of girls and trunks, and beds strewed with
things.  At No. 6 Mrs. Florence paused.

"Here is the room which I propose to give you," she said.

Katy and Clover looked eagerly about.  It was a small room, but the
sun shone in cheerfully at the window.  There was a maple bedstead
and table, a couple of chairs, and a row of hooks; that was all,
except that in the wall was set a case of black-handled drawers,
with cupboard-doors above them.

"These take the place of a bureau, and hold your clothes," explained
Mrs. Florence, pulling out one of the drawers.  "I hope, when once
you are settled, you will find yourselves comfortable.  The rooms
are small; but young people do not require so much space as older
ones.  Though, indeed, your elder daughter, Dr. Carr, looks more
advanced and grown-up that I was prepared to find her.  What did
you say was her age?"

"She is past sixteen; but she has been so long confined to her room by
the illness of which I wrote, that you may probably find her behind
in some respects, which reminds me" (this was very adroit of papa!)
"I am anxious that she should keep up the system to which she has
been accustomed at home,--among other things, sponge-baths of cold
water every morning; and, as I see that the bedrooms are not furnished
with wash-stands, I will ask your permission to provide one for the
use of my little girls.  Perhaps you will kindly tell me where I would
look for it?"

Mrs. Florence was not pleased, but she could not object; so she
mentioned a shop.  Katy's heart gave a bound of relief.  She thought
No. 6, with a wash-stand, might be very comfortable.  Its bareness
and simplicity had the charm of novelty.  Then there was something
very interesting to her in the idea of a whole house full of girls.

They did not stay long, after seeing the room, but went off on a
shopping excursion.  Shops were few and far between at Hillsover; but
they found a neat little maple wash-stand and rocking-chair, and papa
also bought a comfortable low chair, with a slatted back and a cushion.
This was for Katy.

"Never study till your back aches," he told her: "when you are tired,
lie flat on the bed for half an hour, and tell Mrs. Florence that it
was by my direction."

"Or Mrs. Nipson," said Katy, laughing rather ruefully.  She had taken
no fancy to Mrs. Nipson, and did not enjoy the idea of a divided
authority.

A hurried lunch at the hotel followed, and then it was time for Dr.
Carr to go away.  They all walked to the school together, and said
good-by upon the steps.  The girls would not cry, but they clung very
tightly to papa, and put as much feeling into their last kisses as
would have furnished forth half a dozen fits of tears.  Lilly might
have thought them cold-hearted, but papa did not; he knew better.

"That's my brave girls!" he said.  Then he kissed them once more, and
hurried away.  Perhaps he did not wish them to see that his eyes too
were a little misty.

As the door closed behind them, Katy and Clover realized that they
were alone among strangers.  The sensation was not pleasant; and they
felt forlorn, as they went upstairs, and down Quaker Row, toward No. 6.

"Aha! so you're going to be next door," said a gay voice, as they
passed No. 5, and Rose Red popped her head into the hall.  "Well,
I'm glad," she went on, shaking hands cordially; "I sort of thought
you would, and yet I didn't know; and there are some awful stiffies
among the new girls.  How do you both do?"

"Oh! are we next door to you?" cried Clover, brightening.

"Yes.  It's rather good of me not to hate you; for I wanted the end
room myself, and Mrs. Florence wouldn't give it to me.  Come in, and
let me introduce you to my room-mate.  It's against the rules, but
that's no matter: nobody pretends to keep rules the first day."

They went in.  No.5 was precisely like No. 6, in shape, size and
furniture; but Rose had unpacked her trunk, and decorated the room
with odds and ends of all sorts.  The table was covered with books
and boxes; colored lithographs were pinned on the walls; a huge blue
rosette ornamented the head-board of the bed; the blinds were tied
together with pink ribbon; over the top of the window was a festoon
of hemlock boughs, fresh and spicy.  The effect was fantastic, but
cheery; and Katy and Clover exclaimed, with one voice, "How pretty!"

The room-mate was a pale, shy girl, with a half-scared look in her
eyes, and small hands which twisted uneasily together when she moved
and spoke.  Her name was Mary Silver.  She and Rose were so utterly
unlike, that Katy thought it odd they should have chosen to be
together.  Afterward she understood it better.  Rose liked to protect,
and Mary to be protected; Rose to talk, and Mary to listen.  Mary
evidently considered Rose the most entertaining creature in the
world; she giggled violently at all her jokes, and then stopped
short and covered her mouth with her fingers, in a frightened way,
as if giggling were wrong.

"Only think, Mary," began Rose, after introducing Katy and Clover,
"these young ladies have got the end room.  What do you suppose was
the reason that Mrs. Florence did not give it to us?  It's very
peculiar."

Mary laughed her uneasy laugh.  She looked as if she could tell the
reason, but did not dare.

"Never mind," continued Rose.  "Trials are good for one, they say.
It's something to have nice people in the room, if we can't be there
ourselves.  You are nice, aren't you?" turning to Clover.

"Very," replied Clover, laughing.

"I thought so.  I can almost always tell without asking; still, it is
something to have it on the best authority.  We'll be good neighbors,
won't we?  Look here!" and she pulled one of the black-handled drawers
completely out and laid it on the bed.  "Do you see? your drawers are
exactly behind ours.  At any time in silent study hour, if I have
something I want to say, I'll rap and pop a note into your drawer,
and you can do the same to me.  Isn't it fun?"

Clover said, "Yes;" but Katy, though she laughed, shook her head.

"Don't entice us into mischief," she said.

"Oh, gracious!" exclaimed Rose.  "Now, are you going to be good,--
you two?  If you are, just break the news at once, and have it over.
