prisoner, and his tongue was sharper than that of any of the others.

"The children are waking up, Santa!" he cried.  "They are waking up to
find their stockings empty!  Ho, ho!  How they will quarrel, and wail,
and stamp their feet in anger!  Our caves will be full today, old
Santa!  Our caves are sure to be full!"

But to this, as to other like taunts, Santa Claus answered nothing.
He was much grieved by his capture, it is true; but his courage did
not forsake him.  And, finding that the prisoner would not reply to
his jeers, the Daemon of Malice presently went away, and sent the
Daemon of Repentance to take his place.

This last personage was not so disagreeable as the others.  He had
gentle and refined features, and his voice was soft and pleasant in tone.

"My brother Daemons do not trust me overmuch," said he, as he entered
the cavern; "but it is morning, now, and the mischief is done.  You
cannot visit the children again for another year."

"That is true," answered Santa Claus, almost cheerfully;
"Christmas Eve is past, and for the first time in centuries
I have not visited my children."

"The little ones will be greatly disappointed," murmured the Daemon of
Repentance, almost regretfully; "but that cannot be helped now.  Their
grief is likely to make the children selfish and envious and hateful,
and if they come to the Caves of the Daemons today I shall get a
chance to lead some of them to my Cave of Repentance."

"Do you never repent, yourself?" asked Santa Claus, curiously.

"Oh, yes, indeed," answered the Daemon.  "I am even now repenting that
I assisted in your capture.  Of course it is too late to remedy the
evil that has been done; but repentance, you know, can come only after
an evil thought or deed, for in the beginning there is nothing to
repent of."

"So I understand," said Santa Claus.  "Those who avoid evil need never
visit your cave."

"As a rule, that is true," replied the Daemon; "yet you, who have done
no evil, are about to visit my cave at once; for to prove that I sincerely
regret my share in your capture I am going to permit you to escape."

This speech greatly surprised the prisoner, until he reflected that it
was just what might be expected of the Daemon of Repentance.  The
fellow at once busied himself untying the knots that bound Santa Claus
and unlocking the chains that fastened him to the wall.  Then he
led the way through a long tunnel until they both emerged in the
Cave of Repentance.

"I hope you will forgive me," said the Daemon pleadingly.  "I am not
really a bad person, you know; and I believe I accomplish a great deal
of good in the world."

With this he opened a back door that let in a flood of sunshine, and
Santa Claus sniffed the fresh air gratefully.

"I bear no malice," said he to the Daemon, in a gentle voice; "and I
am sure the world would be a dreary place without you.  So, good
morning, and a Merry Christmas to you!"

With these words he stepped out to greet the bright morning, and a
moment later he was trudging along, whistling softly to himself, on
his way to his home in the Laughing Valley.

Marching over the snow toward the mountain was a vast army, made up of
the most curious creatures imaginable.  There were numberless knooks
from the forest, as rough and crooked in appearance as the gnarled
branches of the trees they ministered to.  And there were dainty ryls
from the fields, each one bearing the emblem of the flower or plant it
guarded.  Behind these were many ranks of pixies, gnomes and nymphs, and
in the rear a thousand beautiful fairies floated along in gorgeous array.

This wonderful army was led by Wisk, Peter, Nuter, and Kilter, who had
assembled it to rescue Santa Claus from captivity and to punish the
Daemons who had dared to take him away from his beloved children.

And, although they looked so bright and peaceful, the little immortals
were armed with powers that would be very terrible to those who had
incurred their anger.  Woe to the Daemons of the Caves if this mighty
