
Carl breathed a sigh of relief, when, freed from his bonds, he stood
upright.

"I'll tell you all I know," he said, "but it won't throw any light upon
the death."

Dr. Park listened attentively, and asked one or two questions.

"Did you hear any noise when you were sitting at the table?" he
inquired.

"No, sir."

"Was the door closed?"

"Yes, sir."

"That of itself would probably prevent your hearing anything. Mrs.
Brown, at what hour did you leave the house?"

"At ten minutes of twelve."

"It is now five minutes of one. The deed must have been committed just
after you left the house. Had you noticed anything out of the way in
your--husband's manner?"

"No, sir, not much. He was always a silent man."

"Had anything happened to disturb him?"

"He got a letter this morning. I don't know what was in it."

"We had better search for it."

The body was taken down and laid on the bed. Dr. Park searched the
pockets, and found a half sheet of note paper, on which these lines were
written:


"Maria:--I have made up my mind I can ive no longer. I have made a
terrible discovery. When I married you, I thought my first wife, who
deserted me four years ago, dead. I learn by a letter received this
morning that she is still living in a town of Illinois. The only thing I
can do is to free you both from my presence. When you come back from the
store you will find me cold and dead. The little that I leave behind I
give to you. If my first wife should come here, as she threatens, you
can tell her so. Good-by.

"William."


The reading of this letter made a sensation. Mrs. Brown went into
hysterics, and there was a scene of confusion.

"Do you think I can go?" Carl asked Dr. Park.

"Yes. There is nothing to connect you with the sad event."

Carl gladly left the cottage, and it was only when he was a mile on his
way that he remembered that he had not paid for his dinner, after all.



CHAPTER IX.

A PLAUSIBLE STRANGER.


Three days later found Carl still on his travels. It was his custom
to obtain his meals at a cheap hotel, or, if none were met with, at a
farmhouse, and to secure lodgings where he could, and on as favorable
terms as possible. He realized the need of economy, and felt that he was
practicing it. He had changed his ten-dollar bill the first day, for a
five and several ones. These last were now spent, and the five-dollar
bill alone remained to him. He had earned nothing, though everywhere he
had been on the lookout for a job.

Toward the close of the last day he overtook a young man of twenty-five,
who was traveling in the same direction.

"Good-afternoon," said the young man, sociably.

"Good-afternoon, sir."

"Where are you bound, may I ask?"

"To the next town."

"Fillmore?"

"Yes, if that is the name."

"So am I. Why shouldn't we travel together?"

"I have no objection," said Carl, who was glad of company.

"Are you in any business?"

"No, but I hope to find a place."

"Oh, a smart boy like you will soon find employment."

"I hope so, I am sure. I haven't much money left, and it is necessary I
should do something."

"Just so. I am a New York salesman, but just now I am on my
vacation--taking a pedestrian tour with knapsack and staff, as you see.
The beauty of it is that my salary runs on just as if I were at my post,
and will nearly pay all my traveling expenses."

"You are in luck. Besides you have a good place to go back to. There
isn't any vacancy, is there? You couldn't take on a boy?" asked Carl,
eagerly.

"Well, there might be a chance," said the young man, slowly. "You
haven't any recommendations with you, have you?"

"No; I have never been employed."

"It doesn't matter. I will recommend you myself."

"You might be deceived in me," said Carl, smiling.

"I'll take the risk of that. I know a reliable boy when I see him."

"Thank you. What is the name of your firm?"

"F. Brandes & Co., commission merchants, Pearl Street. My own name is
Chauncy Hubbard, at your service."

"I am Carl Crawford."

"That's a good name. I predict that we shall be great chums, if I manage
to get you a place in our establishment."

"Is Mr. Brandes a good man to work for?"

"Yes, he is easy and good-natured. He is liberal to his clerks. What
salary do you think I get?"

"I couldn't guess."

"Forty dollars a week, and I am only twenty-five. Went into the house at
sixteen, and worked my way up."

"You have certainly done well," said Carl, respectfully.

"Well, I'm no slouch, if I do say it myself."

"I don't wonder your income pays the expenses of your vacation trip."

"It ought to, that's a fact, though I'm rather free handed and like to
spend money. My prospects are pretty good in another direction. Old Fred
Brandes has a handsome daughter, who thinks considerable of your humble
servant."

"Do you think there is any chance of marrying her?" asked Carl, with
interest.

"I think my chance is pretty good, as the girl won't look at anybody
else."

"Is Mr. Brandes wealthy?"

"Yes, the old man's pretty well fixed, worth nearly half a million, I
guess."

"Perhaps he will take you into the firm," suggested Carl.

"Very likely. That's what I'm working for."

"At any rate, you ought to save something out of your salary."

"I ought, but I haven't. The fact is, Carl," said Chauncy Hubbard, in a
burst of confidence, "I have a great mind to make a confession to you."

"I shall feel flattered, I am sure," said Carl, politely.

"I have one great fault--I gamble."

"Do you?" said Carl, rather startled, for he had been brought up very
properly to have a horror of gambling.

"Yes, I suppose it's in my blood. My father was a very rich man at one
time, but he lost nearly all his fortune at the gaming table."

"That ought to have been a warning to you, I should think."

"It ought, and may be yet, for I am still a young man."

"Mr. Hubbard," said Carl, earnestly, "I feel rather diffident about
advising you, for I am only a boy, but I should think you would give up
such a dangerous habit."

"Say no more, Carl! You are a true friend. I will try to follow your
advice. Give me your hand."

Carl did so, and felt a warm glow of pleasure at the thought that
perhaps he had redeemed his companion from a fascinating vice.

"I really wish I had a sensible boy like you to be my constant
companion. I should feel safer."

"Do you really have such a passion for gambling, then?"

"Yes; if at the hotel to-night I should see a party playing poker, I
could not resist joining them. Odd, isn't it?"

"I am glad I have no such temptation."

"Yes, you are lucky. By the way, how much money have you about you?"

"Five dollars."

"Then you can do me a favor. I have a ten-dollar bill, which I need to
get me home. Now, I would like to have you keep a part of it for me till
I go away in the morning. Give me your five, and I will hand you ten.
Out of that you can pay my hotel bill and hand me the balance due me in
the morning."

"If you really wish me to do so."

"Enough said. Here is the ten."

Carl took the bill, and gave Mr. Hubbard his five-dollar note.

"You are placing considerable confidence in me," he said.

"I am, it is true, but I have no fear of being deceived. You are a boy
who naturally inspires confidence."

Carl thought Mr. Chauncy Hubbard a very agreeable and sensible fellow,
and he felt flattered to think that the young man had chosen him as a
guardian, so to speak.

"By the way, Carl, you haven't told me," said Hubbard, as they pursued
their journey, "how a boy like yourself is forced to work his own way."

"I can tell you the reason very briefly--I have a stepmother."

"I understand. Is your father living?"

"Yes."

"But he thinks more of the stepmother than of you?"

"I am afraid he does."

"You have my sympathy, Carl. I will do all I can to help you. If you can
only get a place in our establishment, you will be all right. Step by
step you will rise, till you come to stand where I do."

"That would satisfy me. Has Mr. Brandes got another daughter?"

"No, there is only one."

"Then I shall have to be content with the forty dollars a week. If I
ever get it, I will save half."

"I wish I could."

"You can if you try. Why, you might have two thousand dollars saved up
now, if you had only begun to save in time."

"I have lost more than that at the gaming table. You will think me very
foolish."

"Yes, I do," said Carl, frankly.

"You are right. But here we are almost at the village."

"Is there a good hotel?"

"Yes--the Fillmore. We will take adjoining rooms if you say so."

"Very well."

"And in the morning you will pay the bill?"

"Certainly."

The two travelers had a good supper, and retired early, both being
fatigued with the journey. It was not till eight o'clock the next
morning that Carl opened his eyes. He dressed hastily, and went down to
breakfast. He was rather surprised not to see his companion of the day
before.

"Has Mr. Hubbard come down yet?" he asked at the desk.

"Yes; he took an early breakfast, and went off by the first train."

"That is strange. I was to pay his bill."

"He paid it himself."

Carl did not know what to make of this. Had Hubbard forgotten that
he had five dollars belonging to him? Fortunately, Carl had his city
address, and could refund the money in New York.

"Very well! I will pay my own bill. How much is it?"

"A dollar and a quarter."

Carl took the ten-dollar bill from his wallet and tendered it to the
clerk.

Instead of changing it at once, the clerk held it up to the light and
examined it critically.

"I can't take that bill," he said, abruptly.

"Why not?"

"Because it is counterfeit."

Carl turned pale, and the room seemed to whirl round. It was all the
money he had.



CHAPTER X.

THE COUNTERFEIT BILL.


"Are you sure it is counterfeit?" asked Carl, very much disturbed.

"I am certain of it. I haven't been handling bank bills for ten years
without being able to tell good money from bad. I'll trouble you for
another bill."

"That's all the money I have," faltered Carl.

"Look here, young man," said the clerk, sternly, "you are trying a bold
game, but it won't succeed."

"I am trying no game at all," said Carl, plucking up spirit. "I thought
the bill was good."

"Where did you get it?"

"From the man who came with me last evening--Mr. Hubbard."

"The money he gave me was good."

"What did he give you?"

"A five-dollar bill."

"It was my five-dollar bill," said Carl, bitterly.

"Your story doesn't seem very probable," said the clerk, suspiciously.
"How did he happen to get your money, and you his?"

"He told me that he would get to gambling, and wished me to take money
enough to pay his bill here. He handed me the ten-dollar bill which you
say is bad, and I gave him five in return. I think now he only wanted to
get good money for bad."

"Your story may be true, or it may not," said the clerk, whose manner
indicated incredulity. "That is nothing to me. All you have to do is to
pay your hotel bill, and you can settle with Mr. Hubbard when you see
him."

"But I have no other money," said Carl, desperately.

"Then I shall feel justified in ordering your arrest on a charge of
passing, or trying to pass, counterfeit money."

"Don't do that, sir! I will see that you are paid out of the first money
I earn."

"You must think I am soft," said the clerk, contemptuously. "I have seen
persons of your stripe before. I dare say, if you were searched, more
counterfeit money would be found in your pockets."

"Search me, then!" cried Carl, indignantly. "I am perfectly willing that
you should."

"Haven't you any relations who will pay your bill?"

"I have no one to call upon," answered Carl, soberly. "Couldn't you let
me work it out? I am ready to do any kind of work."

"Our list of workers is full," said the clerk, coldly.

Poor Carl! he felt that he was decidedly in a tight place. He had never
before found himself unable to meet his bills, nor would he have been so
placed now but for Hubbard's rascality. A dollar and a quarter seems
a small sum, but if you are absolutely penniless it might as well be
a thousand. Suppose he should be arrested and the story get into the
papers? How his stepmother would exult in the record of his disgrace!
He could anticipate what she would say. Peter, too, would rejoice, and
between them both his father would be persuaded that he was thoroughly
unprincipled.

"What have you got in your valise?" asked the clerk.

"Only some underclothing. If there were anything of any value I would
cheerfully leave it as security. Wait a minute, though," he said, with a
sudden thought. "Here is a gold pencil! It is worth five dollars; at any
rate, it cost more than that. I can place that in your hands."

"Let me see it."

Carl handed the clerk a neat gold pencil, on which his name was
inscribed. It was evidently of good quality, and found favor with the
clerk.

"I'll give you a dollar and a quarter for the pencil," he said, "and
call it square."

"I wouldn't like to sell it," said Carl.

"You won't get any more for it."

"I wasn't thinking of that; but it was given me by my mother, who is now
dead. I would not like to part with anything that she gave me."

"You would prefer to get off scot-free, I suppose?" retorted the clerk,
with a sneer.

"No; I am willing to leave it in your hands, but I should like the
privilege of redeeming it when I have the money."

"Very well," said the clerk, who reflected that in all probability Carl
would never come back for it. "I'll take it on those conditions."

Carl passed over the pencil with a sigh. He didn't like to part with it,
even for a short time, but there seemed no help for it.

"All right. I will mark you paid."

Carl left the hotel, satchel in hand, and as he passed out into the
street, reflected with a sinking heart that he was now quite penniless.
Where was he to get his dinner, and how was he to provide himself with a
lodging that night? At present he was not hungry, having eaten a hearty
breakfast at the hotel, but by one o'clock he would feel the need of
food. He began to ask himself if, after all, he had not been unwise in
leaving home, no matter how badly he had been treated by his stepmother.
There, at least, he was certain of living comfortably. Now he was in
danger of starvation, and on two occasions already he had incurred
suspicion, once of being concerned in a murder, and just now of passing
