a volume of poetry unknown to her. He had hesitated a little over the
former; but the book was so fine and full of beauty that he thought it
could not bruise the bloom of her innocence ever so slightly. He had
no doubts about the poetry. It was the utterance of one of those great
inspired souls whose passing tread has made the kingdom of their birth
and labour a veritable Holy Land.

He read her some of the poems. Then he talked to her of his college days
and friends. The minutes passed very swiftly. There was just then no
world for him outside of that old orchard with its falling blossoms and
its shadows and its crooning winds.

Once, when he told her the story of some college pranks wherein the
endless feuds of freshmen and sophomores figured, she clapped her hands
together according to her habit, and laughed aloud--a clear, musical,
silvery peal. It fell on Eric's ear with a shock of surprise. He thought
it strange that she could laugh like that when she could not speak.
Wherein lay the defect that closed for her the gates of speech? Was it
possible that it could be removed?

"Kilmeny," he said gravely after a moment's reflection, during which
he had looked up as she sat with the ruddy sunlight falling through the
lilac branches on her bare, silky head like a shower of red jewels, "do
you mind if I ask you something about your inability to speak? Will it
hurt you to talk of the matter with me?"

She shook her head.

"Oh, no," she wrote, "I do not mind at all. Of course I am sorry I
cannot speak, but I am quite used to the thought and it never hurts me
at all."

"Then, Kilmeny, tell me this. Do you know why it is that you are unable
to speak, when all your other faculties are so perfect?"

"No, I do not know at all why I cannot speak. I asked mother once and
she told me it was a judgment on her for a great sin she had committed,
and she looked so strangely that I was frightened, and I never spoke of
it to her or anyone else again."

"Were you ever taken to a doctor to have your tongue and organs of
speech examined?"

"No. I remember when I was a very little girl that Uncle Thomas wanted
to take me to a doctor in Charlottetown and see if anything could be
done for me, but mother would not let him. She said it would be no use.
And I do not think Uncle Thomas thought it would be, either."

"You can laugh very naturally. Can you make any other sound?"

"Yes, sometimes. When I am pleased or frightened I have made little
cries. But it is only when I am not thinking of it at all that I can do
that. If I TRY to make a sound I cannot do it at all."

This seemed to Eric more mysterious than ever.

"Do you ever try to speak--to utter words?" he persisted.

"Oh yes, very often. All the time I am saying the words in my head, just
as I hear other people saying them, but I never can make my tongue say
them. Do not look so sorry, my friend. I am very happy and I do not mind
so very much not being able to speak--only sometimes when I have so many
thoughts and it seems so slow to write them out, some of them get away
from me. I must play to you again. You look too sober."

She laughed again, picked up her violin, and played a tinkling, roguish
little melody as if she were trying to tease him, looking at Eric over
her violin with luminous eyes that dared him to be merry.

Eric smiled; but the puzzled look returned to his face many times that
evening. He walked home in a brown study. Kilmeny's case certainly
seemed a strange one, and the more he thought of it the stranger it
seemed.

"It strikes me as something very peculiar that she should be able to
make sounds only when she is not thinking about it," he reflected. "I
wish David Baker could examine her. But I suppose that is out of the
question. That grim pair who have charge of her would never consent."



CHAPTER IX. THE STRAIGHT SIMPLICITY OF EVE

For the next three weeks Eric Marshall seemed to himself to be living
two lives, as distinct from each other as if he possessed a double
personality. In one, he taught the Lindsay district school diligently
and painstakingly; solved problems; argued on theology with Robert
Williamson; called at the homes of his pupils and took tea in state
with their parents; went to a rustic dance or two and played havoc, all
unwittingly, with the hearts of the Lindsay maidens.

But this life was a dream of workaday. He only LIVED in the other, which
was spent in an old orchard, grassy and overgrown, where the minutes
seemed to lag for sheer love of the spot and the June winds made wild
harping in the old spruces.

Here every evening he met Kilmeny; in that old orchard they garnered
hours of quiet happiness together; together they went wandering in the
fair fields of old romance; together they read many books and talked of
many things; and, when they were tired of all else, Kilmeny played to
him and the old orchard echoed with her lovely, fantastic melodies.

At every meeting her beauty came home afresh to him with the old thrill
of glad surprise. In the intervals of absence it seemed to him that she
could not possibly be as beautiful as he remembered her; and then
when they met she seemed even more so. He learned to watch for the
undisguised light of welcome that always leaped into her eyes at the
sound of his footsteps. She was nearly always there before him and she
always showed that she was glad to see him with the frank delight of a
child watching for a dear comrade.

She was never in the same mood twice. Now she was grave, now gay, now
stately, now pensive. But she was always charming. Thrawn and twisted
the old Gordon stock might be, but it had at least this one offshoot of
perfect grace and symmetry. Her mind and heart, utterly unspoiled of the
world, were as beautiful as her face. All the ugliness of existence
had passed her by, shrined in her double solitude of upbringing and
muteness.

She was naturally quick and clever. Delightful little flashes of wit
and humour sparkled out occasionally. She could be whimsical--even
charmingly capricious. Sometimes innocent mischief glimmered out in the
unfathomable deeps of her blue eyes. Sarcasm, even, was not unknown to
her. Now and then she punctured some harmless bubble of a young man's
conceit or masculine superiority with a biting little line of daintily
written script.

She assimilated the ideas in the books they read, speedily, eagerly,
and thoroughly, always seizing on the best and truest, and rejecting the
false and spurious and weak with an unfailing intuition at which Eric
marvelled. Hers was the spear of Ithuriel, trying out the dross of
everything and leaving only the pure gold.

In manner and outlook she was still a child. Yet now and again she was
as old as Eve. An expression would leap into her laughing face, a subtle
meaning reveal itself in her smile, that held all the lore of womanhood
and all the wisdom of the ages.

Her way of smiling enchanted him. The smile always began far down in her
eyes and flowed outward to her face like a sparkling brook stealing out
of shadow into sunshine.

He knew everything about her life. She told him her simple history
freely. She often mentioned her uncle and aunt and seemed to regard them
with deep affection. She rarely spoke of her mother. Eric came somehow
to understand, less from what she said than from what she did not say,
that Kilmeny, though she had loved her mother, had always been rather
afraid of her. There had not been between them the natural beautiful
confidence of mother and child.

Of Neil, she wrote frequently at first, and seemed very fond of him.
Later she ceased to mention him. Perhaps--for she was marvellously quick
to catch and interpret every fleeting change of expression in his voice
and face--she discerned what Eric did not know himself--that his eyes
clouded and grew moody at the mention of Neil's name.

Once she asked him naively,

"Are there many people like you out in the world?"

"Thousands of them," said Eric, laughing.

She looked gravely at him. Then she gave her head a quick decided little
shake.

"I do not think so," she wrote. "I do not know much of the world, but I
do not think there are many people like you in it."

One evening, when the far-away hills and fields were scarfed in gauzy
purples, and the intervales were brimming with golden mists, Eric
carried to the old orchard a little limp, worn volume that held a love
story. It was the first thing of the kind he had ever read to her,
for in the first novel he had lent her the love interest had been
very slight and subordinate. This was a beautiful, passionate idyl
exquisitely told.

He read it to her, lying in the grass at her feet; she listened with her
hands clasped over her knee and her eyes cast down. It was not a long
story; and when he had finished it he shut the book and looked up at her
questioningly.

"Do you like it, Kilmeny?" he asked.

Very slowly she took her slate and wrote,

"Yes, I like it. But it hurt me, too. I did not know that a person could
like anything that hurt her. I do not know why it hurt me. I felt as if
I had lost something that I never had. That was a very silly feeling,
was it not? But I did not understand the book very well, you see. It is
about love and I do not know anything about love. Mother told me once
that love is a curse, and that I must pray that it would never enter
into my life. She said it very earnestly, and so I believed her. But
your book teaches that it is a blessing. It says that it is the most
splendid and wonderful thing in life. Which am I to believe?"

"Love--real love--is never a curse, Kilmeny," said Eric gravely. "There
is a false love which IS a curse. Perhaps your mother believed it was
that which had entered her life and ruined it; and so she made the
mistake. There is nothing in the world--or in heaven either, as I
believe--so truly beautiful and wonderful and blessed as love."

"Have you ever loved?" asked Kilmeny, with the directness of phrasing
necessitated by her mode of communication which was sometimes a little
terrible. She asked the question simply and without embarrassment. She
knew of no reason why love might not be discussed with Eric as other
matters--music and books and travel--might be.

"No," said Eric--honestly, as he thought, "but every one has an ideal of
love whom he hopes to meet some day--'the ideal woman of a young man's
dream.' I suppose I have mine, in some sealed, secret chamber of my
heart."

"I suppose your ideal woman would be beautiful, like the woman in your
book?"

"Oh, yes, I am sure I could never care for an ugly woman," said Eric,
laughing a little as he sat up. "Our ideals are always beautiful,
whether they so translate themselves into realities or not. But the
sun is going down. Time does certainly fly in this enchanted orchard. I
believe you bewitch the moments away, Kilmeny. Your namesake of the
poem was a somewhat uncanny maid, if I recollect aright, and thought as
little of seven years in elfland as ordinary folk do of half an hour
on upper earth. Some day I shall waken from a supposed hour's lingering
here and find myself an old man with white hair and ragged coat, as in
that fairy tale we read the other night. Will you let me give you this
book? I should never commit the sacrilege of reading it in any other
place than this. It is an old book, Kilmeny. A new book, savouring of
the shop and market-place, however beautiful it might be, would not do
for you. This was one of my mother's books. She read it and loved it.
See--the faded rose leaves she placed in it one day are there still.
I'll write your name in it--that quaint, pretty name of yours which
always sounds as if it had been specially invented for you--'Kilmeny of
the Orchard'--and the date of this perfect June day on which we read it
together. Then when you look at it you will always remember me, and the
white buds opening on that rosebush beside you, and the rush and murmur
of the wind in the tops of those old spruces."

He held out the book to her, but, to his surprise, she shook her head,
with a deeper flush on her face.

"Won't you take the book, Kilmeny? Why not?"

She took her pencil and wrote slowly, unlike her usual quick movement.

"Do not be offended with me. I shall not need anything to make me
remember you because I can never forget you. But I would rather not take
the book. I do not want to read it again. It is about love, and there is
no use in my learning about love, even if it is all you say. Nobody will
ever love me. I am too ugly."

"You! Ugly!" exclaimed Eric. He was on the point of going off into a
peal of laughter at the idea when a glimpse of her half averted face
sobered him. On it was a hurt, bitter look, such as he remembered seeing
once before, when he had asked her if she would not like to see the
world for herself.

"Kilmeny," he said in astonishment, "you don't really think yourself
ugly, do you?"

She nodded, without looking at him, and then wrote,

"Oh, yes, I know that I am. I have known it for a long time. Mother told
me that I was very ugly and that nobody would ever like to look at me. I
am sorry. It hurts me much worse to know I am ugly than it does to know
I cannot speak. I suppose you will think that is very foolish of me, but
it is true. That was why I did not come back to the orchard for such a
long time, even after I had got over my fright. I hated to think that
YOU would think me ugly. And that is why I do not want to go out into
the world and meet people. They would look at me as the egg peddler did
one day when I went out with Aunt Janet to his wagon the spring after
mother died. He stared at me so. I knew it was because he thought me so
ugly, and I have always hidden when he came ever since."

Eric's lips twitched. In spite of his pity for the real suffering
displayed in her eyes, he could not help feeling amused over the absurd
idea of this beautiful girl believing herself in all seriousness to be
ugly.

"But, Kilmeny, do you think yourself ugly when you look in a mirror?" he
asked smiling.

"I have never looked in a mirror," she wrote. "I never knew there was
such a thing until after mother died, and I read about it in a book.
Then I asked Aunt Janet and she said mother had broken all the looking
glasses in the house when I was a baby. But I have seen my face
reflected in the spoons, and in a little silver sugar bowl Aunt Janet
has. And it IS ugly--very ugly."

Eric's face went down into the grass. For his life he could not help
laughing; and for his life he would not let Kilmeny see him laughing.
A certain little whimsical wish took possession of him and he did not
hasten to tell her the truth, as had been his first impulse. Instead,
when he dared to look up he said slowly,

"I don't think you are ugly, Kilmeny."

"Oh, but I am sure you must," she wrote protestingly. "Even Neil does.
He tells me I am kind and nice, but one day I asked him if he thought
me very ugly, and he looked away and would not speak, so I knew what he
thought about it, too. Do not let us speak of this again. It makes me
feel sorry and spoils everything. I forget it at other times. Let me
play you some good-bye music, and do not feel vexed because I would not
take your book. It would only make me unhappy to read it."

"I am not vexed," said Eric, "and I think you will take it some day
yet--after I have shown you something I want you to see. Never mind
about your looks, Kilmeny. Beauty isn't everything."

"Oh, it is a great deal," she wrote naively. "But you do like me, even
though I am so ugly, don't you? You like me because of my beautiful
music, don't you?"

"I like you very much, Kilmeny," answered Eric, laughing a little;
but there was in his voice a tender note of which he was unconscious.
Kilmeny was aware of it, however, and she picked up her violin with a
pleased smile.

He left her playing there, and all the way through the dim resinous
spruce wood her music followed him like an invisible guardian spirit.

"Kilmeny the Beautiful!" he murmured, "and yet, good heavens, the child
thinks she is ugly--she with a face more lovely than ever an artist
dreamed of! A girl of eighteen who has never looked in a mirror! I
wonder if there is another such in any civilized country in the world.
What could have possessed her mother to tell her such a falsehood? I
wonder if Margaret Gordon could have been quite sane. It is strange that
Neil has never told her the truth. Perhaps he doesn't want her to find
out."

Eric had met Neil Gordon a few evenings before this, at a country
dance where Neil had played the violin for the dancers. Influenced by
curiosity he had sought the lad's acquaintance. Neil was friendly and
talkative at first; but at the first hint concerning the Gordons
which Eric threw out skilfully his face and manner changed. He looked
secretive and suspicious, almost sinister. A sullen look crept into
his big black eyes and he drew his bow across the violin strings with a
discordant screech, as if to terminate the conversation. Plainly nothing
was to be found out from him about Kilmeny and her grim guardians.



CHAPTER X. A TROUBLING OF THE WATERS

One evening in late June Mrs. Williamson was sitting by her kitchen
window. Her knitting lay unheeded in her lap, and Timothy, though he
nestled ingratiatingly against her foot as he lay on the rug and purred
his loudest, was unregarded. She rested her face on her hand and looked
out of the window, across the distant harbour, with troubled eyes.

"I guess I must speak," she thought wistfully. "I hate to do it. I
always did hate meddling. My mother always used to say that ninety-nine
times out of a hundred the last state of a meddler and them she
meddled with was worse than the first. But I guess it's my duty. I was
Margaret's friend, and it is my duty to protect her child any way I can.
If the Master does go back across there to meet her I must tell him what
I think about it."

Overhead in his room, Eric was walking about whistling. Presently he
came downstairs, thinking of the orchard, and the girl who would be
waiting for him there.

As he crossed the little front entry he heard Mrs. Williamson's voice
calling to him.

"Mr. Marshall, will you please come here a moment?"

He went out to the kitchen. Mrs. Williamson looked at him deprecatingly.
There was a flush on her faded cheek and her voice trembled.

"Mr. Marshall, I want to ask you a question. Perhaps you will think it
isn't any of my business. But it isn't because I want to meddle. No, no.
It is only because I think I ought to speak. I have thought it over for
a long time, and it seems to me that I ought to speak. I hope you won't
be angry, but even if you are I must say what I have to say. Are you
going back to the old Connors orchard to meet Kilmeny Gordon?"

For a moment an angry flush burned in Eric's face. It was more Mrs.
Williamson's tone than her words which startled and annoyed him.

"Yes, I am, Mrs. Williamson," he said coldly. "What of it?"

"Then, sir," said Mrs. Williamson with more firmness, "I have got to
tell you that I don't think you are doing right. I have been suspecting
all along that that was where you went every evening, but I haven't said
a word to any one about it. Even my husband doesn't know. But tell me
this, Master. Do Kilmeny's uncle and aunt know that you are meeting her
there?"

"Why," said Eric, in some confusion, "I--I do not know whether they do
or not. But Mrs. Williamson, surely you do not suspect me of meaning any
harm or wrong to Kilmeny Gordon?"

"No, I don't, Master. I might think it of some men, but never of you. I
don't for a minute think that you would do her or any woman any wilful
wrong. But you may do her great harm for all that. I want you to stop
and think about it. I guess you haven't thought. Kilmeny can't know
anything about the world or about men, and she may get to thinking too
much of you. That might break her heart, because you couldn't ever marry
a dumb girl like her. So I don't think you ought to be meeting her so
often in this fashion. It isn't right, Master. Don't go to the orchard
again."

Without a word Eric turned away, and went upstairs to his room. Mrs.
Williamson picked up her knitting with a sigh.

"That's done, Timothy, and I'm real thankful," she said. "I guess
there'll be no need of saying anything more. Mr. Marshall is a fine
young man, only a little thoughtless. Now that he's got his eyes opened
I'm sure he'll do what is right. I don't want Margaret's child made
unhappy."

Her husband came to the kitchen door and sat down on the steps to enjoy
his evening smoke, talking between whiffs to his wife of Elder Tracy's
church row, and Mary Alice Martin's beau, the price Jake Crosby was
giving for eggs, the quantity of hay yielded by the hill meadow, the
trouble he was having with old Molly's calf, and the respective merits
of Plymouth Rock and Brahma roosters. Mrs. Williamson answered at
random, and heard not one word in ten.

"What's got the Master, Mother?" inquired old Robert, presently. "I hear
him striding up and down in his room 'sif he was caged. Sure you didn't
lock him in by mistake?"

"Maybe he's worried over the way Seth Tracy's acting in school,"
suggested Mrs. Williamson, who did not choose that her gossipy husband
should suspect the truth about Eric and Kilmeny Gordon.

"Shucks, he needn't worry a morsel over that. Seth'll quiet down as soon
as he finds he can't run the Master. He's a rare good teacher--better'n
Mr. West was even, and that's saying something. The trustees are hoping
he'll stay for another term. They're going to ask him at the school
meeting to-morrow, and offer him a raise of supplement."

Upstairs, in his little room under the eaves, Eric Marshall was in
the grip of the most intense and overwhelming emotion he had ever
experienced.

Up and down, to and fro, he walked, with set lips and clenched hands.
When he was wearied out he flung himself on a chair by the window and
wrestled with the flood of feeling.

Mrs. Williamson's words had torn away the delusive veil with which he
had bound his eyes. He was face to face with the knowledge that he loved
Kilmeny Gordon with the love that comes but once, and is for all time.
He wondered how he could have been so long blind to it. He knew that he
must have loved her ever since their first meeting that May evening in
the old orchard.

And he knew that he must choose between two alternatives--either he must
never go to the orchard again, or he must go as an avowed lover to woo
him a wife.

Worldly prudence, his inheritance from a long line of thrifty,
cool-headed ancestors, was strong in Eric, and he did not yield easily
or speedily to the dictates of his passion. All night he struggled
against the new emotions that threatened to sweep away the "common
sense" which David Baker had bade him take with him when he went
a-wooing. Would not a marriage with Kilmeny Gordon be an unwise thing
from any standpoint?

Then something stronger and greater and more vital than wisdom or
unwisdom rose up in him and mastered him. Kilmeny, beautiful, dumb
Kilmeny was, as he had once involuntarily thought, "the one maid" for
him. Nothing should part them. The mere idea of never seeing her again
was so unbearable that he laughed at himself for having counted it a
possible alternative.

"If I can win Kilmeny's love I shall ask her to be my wife," he said,
looking out of the window to the dark, southwestern hill beyond which
