moment.  "I'll show you something prettier still."

Rachel felt vaguely that he meant to say something else when he
began; but she forgot to wonder what it was when she saw what he
brought out of a little corner cupboard.  It was a teapot of some
fine, glistening purple ware, coiled over by golden dragons with
gilded claws and scales.  The lid looked like a beautiful golden
flower and the handle was a coil of a dragon's tail.  Rachel sat
and looked at it rapt-eyed.

"That's the only thing of any value I have in the world--now," he
said.

Rachel knew there was something very sad in his eyes and voice.
She longed to kiss him again and comfort him.  But suddenly he
began to laugh, and then he rummaged out some goodies for her to
eat, sweetmeats more delicious than she had ever imagined.  While
she nibbled them he took down an old violin and played music that
made her want to dance and sing.  Rachel was perfectly happy.
She wished she might stay forever in that low, dim room with all
its treasures.

"I see your little friends coming around the point," he said,
finally.  "I suppose you must go.  Put the rest of the goodies in
your pocket."

He took her up in his arms and held her tightly against his
breast for a single moment.  She felt him kissing her hair.

"There, run along, little girl.  Good-by," he said gently.

"Why don't you ask me to come and see you again?" cried Rachel,
half in tears.  "I'm coming ANYHOW."

"If you can come, COME," he said.  "If you don't come, I shall
know it is because you can't--and that is much to know.  I'm
very, very, VERY glad, little woman, that you have come once."

Rachel was sitting demurely on the skids when her companions came
back.  They had not seen her leaving the house, and she said not
a word to them of her experiences.  She only smiled mysteriously
when they asked her if she had been lonesome.

That night, for the first time, she mentioned her father's name
in her prayers.  She never forgot to do so afterwards.  She
always said, "bless mother--and father," with an instinctive
pause between the two names--a pause which indicated new
realization of the tragedy which had sundered them.  And the tone
in which she said "father" was softer and more tender than the
one which voiced "mother."

Rachel never visited the Cove again.  Isabella Spencer discovered
that the children had been there, and, although she knew nothing
of Rachel's interview with her father, she told the child that
she must never again go to that part of the shore.

Rachel shed many a bitter tear in secret over this command; but
she obeyed it.  Thenceforth there had been no communication
between her and her father, save the unworded messages of soul to
soul across whatever may divide them.

David Spencer's invitation to his daughter's wedding was sent
with the others, and the remaining days of Rachel's maidenhood
slipped away in a whirl of preparation and excitement in which
her mother reveled, but which was distasteful to the girl.

The wedding day came at last, breaking softly and fairly over the
great sea in a sheen of silver and pearl and rose, a September
day, as mild and beautiful as June.

The ceremony was to be performed at eight o'clock in the evening.
At seven Rachel stood in her room, fully dressed and alone.  She
had no bridesmaid, and she had asked her cousins to leave her to
herself in this last solemn hour of girlhood.  She looked very
fair and sweet in the sunset-light that showered through the
birches.  Her wedding gown was a fine, sheer organdie, simply and
daintily made.  In the loose waves of her bright hair she wore
her bridegroom's flowers, roses as white as a virgin's dream.
She was very happy; but her happiness was faintly threaded with
the sorrow inseparable from all change.

Presently her mother came in, carrying a small basket.

"Here is something for you, Rachel.  One of the boys from the
harbor brought it up.  He was bound to give it into your own
hands--said that was his orders.  I just took it and sent him to
the right-about--told him I'd give it to you at once, and that
that was all that was necessary."

She spoke coldly.  She knew quite well who had sent the basket,
and she resented it; but her resentment was not quite strong
enough to overcome her curiosity.  She stood silently by while
Rachel unpacked the basket.

Rachel's hands trembled as she took off the cover.  Two huge
pink-spotted shells came first.  How well she remembered them!
Beneath them, carefully wrapped up in a square of foreign-looking,
strangely scented silk, was the dragon teapot. She held it in her
hands and gazed at it with tears gathering thickly in her eyes.

"Your father sent that," said Isabella Spencer with an odd sound
in her voice.  "I remember it well.  It was among the things I
packed up and sent after him.  His father had brought it home
from China fifty years ago, and he prized it beyond anything.
They used to say it was worth a lot of money."

"Mother, please leave me alone for a little while," said Rachel,
imploringly.  She had caught sight of a little note at the bottom
of the basket, and she felt that she could not read it under her
mother's eyes.

Mrs. Spencer went out with unaccustomed acquiescence, and Rachel
went quickly to the window, where she read her letter by the
fading gleams of twilight.  It was very brief, and the writing
was that of a man who holds a pen but seldom.

    "My dear little girl," it ran, "I'm sorry I can't go to your
    wedding.  It was like you to ask me--for I know it was your
    doing.  I wish I could see you married, but I can't go to the
    house I was turned out of.  I hope you will be very happy.  I
    am sending you the shells and teapot you liked so much.  Do
    you remember that day we had such a good time?  I would liked
    to have seen you again before you were married, but it can't
    be.

                                           "Your loving father,
                                           "DAVID SPENCER."

Rachel resolutely blinked away the tears that filled her eyes.  A
fierce desire for her father sprang up in her heart--an insistent
hunger that would not be denied.  She MUST see her father; she
MUST have his blessing on her new life.  A sudden determination
took possession of her whole being--a determination to sweep
aside all conventionalities and objections as if they had not
been.

It was now almost dark.  The guests would not be coming for half
an hour yet.  It was only fifteen minutes' walk over the hill to
the Cove.  Hastily Rachel shrouded herself in her new raincoat,
and drew a dark, protecting hood over her gay head.  She opened
the door and slipped noiselessly downstairs.  Mrs. Spencer and
her assistants were all busy in the back part of the house.  In a
moment Rachel was out in the dewy garden.  She would go straight
over the fields.  Nobody would see her.

It was quite dark when she reached the Cove.  In the crystal cup
of the sky over her the stars were blinking.  Flying flakes of
foam were scurrying over the sand like elfin things.  A soft
little wind was crooning about the eaves of the little gray house
where David Spencer was sitting, alone in the twilight, his
violin on his knee.  He had been trying to play, but could not.
His heart yearned after his daughter--yes, and after a
long-estranged bride of his youth.  His love of the sea was sated
forever; his love for wife and child still cried for its own
under all his old anger and stubbornness.

The door opened suddenly and the very Rachel of whom he was
dreaming came suddenly in, flinging off her wraps and standing
forth in her young beauty and bridal adornments, a splendid
creature, almost lighting up the gloom with her radiance.

"Father," she cried, brokenly, and her father's eager arms closed
around her.

Back in the house she had left, the guests were coming to the
wedding.  There were jests and laughter and friendly greeting.
The bridegroom came, too, a slim, dark-eyed lad who tiptoed
bashfully upstairs to the spare room, from which he presently
emerged to confront Mrs. Spencer on the landing.

"I want to see Rachel before we go down," he said, blushing.

Mrs. Spencer deposited a wedding present of linen on the table
which was already laden with gifts, opening the door of Rachel's
room, and called her.  There was no reply; the room was dark and
still.  In sudden alarm, Isabella Spencer snatched the lamp from
the hall table and held it up.  The little white room was empty.
No blushing, white-clad bride tenanted it.  But David Spencer's
letter was lying on the stand.  She caught it up and read it.

"Rachel is gone," she gasped.  A flash of intuition had revealed
to her where and why the girl had gone.

"Gone!" echoed Frank, his face blanching.  His pallid dismay
recalled Mrs. Spencer to herself.  She gave a bitter, ugly
little laugh.

"Oh, you needn't look so scared, Frank.  She hasn't run away from
you.  Hush; come in here--shut the door.  Nobody must know of
this.  Nice gossip it would make!  That little fool has gone to
the Cove to see her--her father.  I know she has.  It's just like
what she would do.  He sent her those presents--look--and this
letter.  Read it.  She has gone to coax him to come and see her
married.  She was crazy about it.  And the minister is here and
it is half-past seven.  She'll ruin her dress and shoes in the
dust and dew.  And what if some one has seen her!  Was there ever
such a little fool?"

Frank's presence of mind had returned to him.  He knew all about
Rachel and her father.  She had told him everything.

"I'll go after her," he said gently.  "Get me my hat and coat.
I'll slip down the back stairs and over to the Cove."

"You must get out of the pantry window, then," said Mrs. Spencer
firmly, mingling comedy and tragedy after her characteristic
fashion.  "The kitchen is full of women.  I won't have this known
and talked about if it can possibly be helped."

The bridegroom, wise beyond his years in the knowledge that it
was well to yield to women in little things, crawled obediently
out of the pantry window and darted through the birch wood.  Mrs.
Spencer had stood quakingly on guard until he had disappeared.

So Rachel had gone to her father!  Like had broken the fetters of
years and fled to like.

"It isn't much use fighting against nature, I guess," she thought
grimly.  "I'm beat.  He must have thought something of her, after
all, when he sent her that teapot and letter.  And what does he
mean about the 'day they had such a good time'?  Well, it just
means that she's been to see him before, sometime, I suppose, and
kept me in ignorance of it all."

Mrs. Spencer shut down the pantry window with a vicious thud.

"If only she'll come quietly back with Frank in time to prevent
gossip I'll forgive her," she said, as she turned to the kitchen.

Rachel was sitting on her father's knee, with both her white arms
around his neck, when Frank came in.  She sprang up, her face
flushed and appealing, her eyes bright and dewy with tears.
Frank thought he had never seen her look so lovely.

"Oh, Frank, is it very late?  Oh, are you angry?" she exclaimed
timidly.

"No, no, dear.  Of course I'm not angry.  But don't you think
you'd better come back now?  It's nearly eight and everybody is
waiting."

"I've been trying to coax father to come up and see me married,"
said Rachel.  "Help me, Frank."

"You'd better come, sir," said Frank, heartily, "I'd like it as
much as Rachel would."

David Spencer shook his head stubbornly.

"No, I can't go to that house.  I was locked out of it.  Never
mind me.  I've had my happiness in this half hour with my little
girl.  I'd like to see her married, but it isn't to be."

"Yes, it is to be--it shall be," said Rachel resolutely.  "You
SHALL see me married.  Frank, I'm going to be married here in my
father's house!  That is the right place for a girl to be
married.  Go back and tell the guests so, and bring them all
down."

Frank looked rather dismayed.  David Spencer said deprecatingly:
"Little girl, don't you think it would be--"

"I'm going to have my own way in this," said Rachel, with a sort
of tender finality.  "Go, Frank.  I'll obey you all my life
after, but you must do this for me.  Try to understand," she
added beseechingly.

"Oh, I understand," Frank reassured her.  "Besides, I think you
are right.  But I was thinking of your mother.  She won't come."

"Then you tell her that if she doesn't come I shan't be married
at all," said Rachel.  She was betraying unsuspected ability to
manage people.  She knew that ultimatum would urge Frank to his
best endeavors.

Frank, much to Mrs. Spencer's dismay, marched boldly in at the
front door upon his return.  She pounced on him and whisked him
out of sight into the supper room.

"Where's Rachel?  What made you come that way?  Everybody saw
you!"

"It makes no difference.  They will all have to know, anyway.
Rachel says she is going to be married from her father's house,
or not at all.  I've come back to tell you so."

Isabella's face turned crimson.

"Rachel has gone crazy.  I wash my hands of this affair.  Do as
you please.  Take the guests--the supper, too, if you can carry
it."

"We'll all come back here for supper," said Frank, ignoring the
sarcasm.  "Come, Mrs. Spencer, let's make the best of it."

"Do you suppose that _I_ am going to David Spencer's house?" said
Isabella Spencer violently.

"Oh you MUST come, Mrs. Spencer," cried poor Frank desperately.
He began to fear that he would lose his bride past all finding in
this maze of triple stubbornness.  "Rachel says she won't be
married at all if you don't go, too.  Think what a talk it will
make.  You know she will keep her word."

Isabella Spencer knew it.  Amid all the conflict of anger and
revolt in her soul was a strong desire not to make a worse
scandal than must of necessity be made.  The desire subdued and
tamed her, as nothing else could have done.

"I will go, since I have to," she said icily.  "What can't be
cured must be endured.  Go and tell them."

Five minutes later the sixty wedding guests were all walking over
the fields to the Cove, with the minister and the bridegroom in
the front of the procession.  They were too amazed even to talk
about the strange happening.  Isabella Spencer walked behind,
fiercely alone.

They all crowded into the little room of the house at the Cove,
and a solemn hush fell over it, broken only by the purr of the
sea-wind around it and the croon of the waves on the shore.
David Spencer gave his daughter away; but, when the ceremony was
concluded, Isabella was the first to take the girl in her arms.
She clasped her and kissed her, with tears streaming down her
pale face, all her nature melted in a mother's tenderness.

"Rachel!  Rachel!  My child, I hope and pray that you may be
happy," she said brokenly.

In the surge of the suddenly merry crowd of well-wishers around
the bride and groom, Isabella was pushed back into a shadowy
corner behind a heap of sails and ropes.  Looking up, she found
herself crushed against David Spencer.  For the first time in
twenty years the eyes of husband and wife met.  A strange thrill
shot to Isabella's heart; she felt herself trembling.

"Isabella."  It was David's voice in her ear--a voice full of
tenderness and pleading--the voice of the young wooer of her
girlhood--"Is it too late to ask you to forgive me?  I've been a
stubborn fool--but there hasn't been an hour in all these years
that I haven't thought about you and our baby and longed for
you."

Isabella Spencer had hated this man; yet her hate had been but a
parasite growth on a nobler stem, with no abiding roots of its
own.  It withered under his words, and lo, there was the old
love, fair and strong and beautiful as ever.

"Oh--David--I--was--all--to--blame," she murmured
brokenly.

Further words were lost on her husband's lips.

When the hubbub of handshaking and congratulating had subsided,
Isabella Spencer stepped out before the company.  She looked
almost girlish and bridal herself, with her flushed cheeks and
bright eyes.

"Let's go back now and have supper, and be sensible," she said
crisply.  "Rachel, your father is coming, too.  He is coming to
STAY,"--with a defiant glance around the circle.  "Come,
everybody."

They went back with laughter and raillery over the quiet autumn
fields, faintly silvered now by the moon that was rising over the
hills.  The young bride and groom lagged behind; they were very
happy, but they were not so happy, after all, as the old bride
and groom who walked swiftly in front.  Isabella's hand was in
her husband's and sometimes she could not see the moonlit hills
for a mist of glorified tears.

"David," she whispered, as he helped her over the fence, "how can
you ever forgive me?"

"There's nothing to forgive," he said.  "We're only just married.
Who ever heard of a bridegroom talking of forgiveness?
Everything is beginning over new for us, my girl."



IV. JANE'S BABY

Miss Rosetta Ellis, with her front hair in curl-papers, and her
back hair bound with a checked apron, was out in her breezy side
yard under the firs, shaking her parlor rugs, when Mr. Nathan
Patterson drove in.  Miss Rosetta had seen him coming down the
long red hill, but she had not supposed he would be calling at
that time of the morning.  So she had not run.  Miss Rosetta
always ran if anybody called and her front hair was in
curl-papers; and, though the errand of the said caller might be
life or death, he or she had to wait until Miss Rosetta had taken
her hair out.  Everybody in Avonlea knew this, because everybody
in Avonlea knew everything about everybody else.

But Mr. Patterson had wheeled into the lane so quickly and
unexpectedly that Miss Rosetta had had no time to run; so,
twitching off the checked apron, she stood her ground as calmly
as might be under the disagreeable consciousness of curl-papers.

"Good morning, Miss Ellis," said Mr. Patterson, so somberly that
Miss Rosetta instantly felt that he was the bearer of bad news.
Usually Mr. Patterson's face was as broad and beaming as a
harvest moon.  Now his expression was very melancholy and his
voice positively sepulchral.

"Good morning," returned Miss Rosetta, crisply and cheerfully.
She, at any rate, would not go into eclipse until she knew the
reason therefor.  "It is a fine day."

"A very fine day," assented Mr. Patterson, solemnly.  "I have
just come from the Wheeler place, Miss Ellis, and I regret to
say--"

"Charlotte is sick!" cried Miss Rosetta, rapidly.  "Charlotte has
got another spell with her heart!  I knew it!  I've been
expecting to hear it!  Any woman that drives about the country as
much as she does is liable to heart disease at any moment.  _I_
never go outside of my gate but I meet her gadding off somewhere.
Goodness knows who looks after her place.  I shouldn't like to
trust as much to a hired man as she does.  Well, it is very kind
of you, Mr. Patterson, to put yourself out to the extent of
calling to tell me that Charlotte is sick, but I don't really see
why you should take so much trouble--I really don't.  It doesn't
matter to me whether Charlotte is sick or whether she isn't.  YOU
know that perfectly well, Mr. Patterson, if anybody does.  When
Charlotte went and got married, on the sly, to that good-for-nothing
Jacob Wheeler--"

"Mrs. Wheeler is quite well," interrupted Mr. Patterson
desperately.  "Quite well.  Nothing at all the matter with her,
in fact.  I only--"

"Then what do you mean by coming here and telling me she wasn't,
and frightening me half to death?" demanded Miss Rosetta,
