"What is there inside?" asked Frank.

"There's a hall for public meetin's and lectures in the basement,
and a readin' room and a picture gallery up above," said Dick.

Directly opposite Cooper Institute, Frank saw a very large building
of brick, covering about an acre of ground.

"Is that a hotel?" he asked.

"No," said Dick; "that's the Bible House. It's the place where they
make Bibles. I was in there once,--saw a big pile of 'em."

"Did you ever read the Bible?" asked Frank, who had some idea of the
neglected state of Dick's education.

"No," said Dick; "I've heard it's a good book, but I never read one.
I aint much on readin'. It makes my head ache."

"I suppose you can't read very fast."

"I can read the little words pretty well, but the big ones is what
stick me."

"If I lived in the city, you might come every evening to me, and I
would teach you."

"Would you take so much trouble about me?" asked Dick, earnestly.

"Certainly; I should like to see you getting on. There isn't much
chance of that if you don't know how to read and write."

"You're a good feller," said Dick, gratefully. "I wish you did live
in New York. I'd like to know somethin'. Whereabouts do you live?"

"About fifty miles off, in a town on the left bank of the Hudson.
I wish you'd come up and see me sometime. I would like to have you
come and stop two or three days."

"Honor bright?"

"I don't understand."

"Do you mean it?" asked Dick, incredulously.

"Of course I do. Why shouldn't I?"

"What would your folks say if they knowed you asked a boot-black to
visit you?"

"You are none the worse for being a boot-black, Dick."

"I aint used to genteel society," said Dick. "I shouldn't know how
to behave."

"Then I could show you. You won't be a boot-black all your life, you
know."

"No," said Dick; "I'm goin' to knock off when I get to be ninety."

"Before that, I hope," said Frank, smiling.

"I really wish I could get somethin' else to do," said Dick,
soberly. "I'd like to be a office boy, and learn business, and grow
up 'spectable."

"Why don't you try, and see if you can't get a place, Dick?"

"Who'd take Ragged Dick?"

"But you aint ragged now, Dick."

"No," said Dick; "I look a little better than I did in my Washington
coat and Louis Napoleon pants. But if I got in a office, they
wouldn't give me more'n three dollars a week, and I couldn't live
'spectable on that."

"No, I suppose not," said Frank, thoughtfully. "But you would get
more at the end of the first year."

"Yes," said Dick; "but by that time I'd be nothin' but skin and
bones."

Frank laughed. "That reminds me," he said, "of the story of an
Irishman, who, out of economy, thought he would teach his horse to
feed on shavings. So he provided the horse with a pair of green
spectacles which made the shavings look eatable. But unfortunately,
just as the horse got learned, he up and died."

"The hoss must have been a fine specimen of architectur' by the time
he got through," remarked Dick.

"Whereabouts are we now?" asked Frank, as they emerged from Fourth
Avenue into Union Square.

"That is Union Park," said Dick, pointing to a beautiful enclosure,
in the centre of which was a pond, with a fountain playing.

"Is that the statue of General Washington?" asked Frank, pointing to
a bronze equestrian statue, on a granite pedestal.

"Yes," said Dick; "he's growed some since he was President. If
he'd been as tall as that when he fit in the Revolution, he'd have
walloped the Britishers some, I reckon."

Frank looked up at the statue, which is fourteen and a half feet
high, and acknowledged the justice of Dick's remark.

"How about the coat, Dick?" he asked. "Would it fit you?"

"Well, it might be rather loose," said Dick, "I aint much more'n
ten feet high with my boots off."

"No, I should think not," said Frank, smiling. "You're a queer boy,
Dick."

"Well, I've been brought up queer. Some boys is born with a silver
spoon in their mouth. Victoria's boys is born with a gold spoon, set
with di'monds; but gold and silver was scarce when I was born, and
mine was pewter."

"Perhaps the gold and silver will come by and by, Dick. Did you ever
hear of Dick Whittington?"

"Never did. Was he a Ragged Dick?"

"I shouldn't wonder if he was. At any rate he was very poor when he
was a boy, but he didn't stay so. Before he died, he became Lord
Mayor of London."

"Did he?" asked Dick, looking interested. "How did he do it?"

"Why, you see, a rich merchant took pity on him, and gave him a
home in his own house, where he used to stay with the servants,
being employed in little errands. One day the merchant noticed Dick
picking up pins and needles that had been dropped, and asked him
why he did it. Dick told him he was going to sell them when he got
enough. The merchant was pleased with his saving disposition, and
when soon after, he was going to send a vessel to foreign parts, he
told Dick he might send anything he pleased in it, and it should
be sold to his advantage. Now Dick had nothing in the world but a
kitten which had been given him a short time before."

"How much taxes did he have to pay on it?" asked Dick.

"Not very high, probably. But having only the kitten, he concluded
to send it along. After sailing a good many months, during which the
kitten grew up to be a strong cat, the ship touched at an island
never before known, which happened to be infested with rats and
mice to such an extent that they worried everybody's life out, and
even ransacked the king's palace. To make a long story short, the
captain, seeing how matters stood, brought Dick's cat ashore,
and she soon made the rats and mice scatter. The king was highly
delighted when he saw what havoc she made among the rats and mice,
and resolved to have her at any price. So he offered a great
quantity of gold for her, which, of course, the captain was glad
to accept. It was faithfully carried back to Dick, and laid the
foundation of his fortune. He prospered as he grew up, and in time
became a very rich merchant, respected by all, and before he died
was elected Lord Mayor of London."

"That's a pretty good story," said Dick; "but I don't believe all the
cats in New York will ever make me mayor."

"No, probably not, but you may rise in some other way. A good many
distinguished men have once been poor boys. There's hope for you,
Dick, if you'll try."

"Nobody ever talked to me so before," said Dick. "They just called
me Ragged Dick, and told me I'd grow up to be a vagabone (boys who
are better educated need not be surprised at Dick's blunders) and
come to the gallows."

"Telling you so won't make it turn out so, Dick. If you'll try to
be somebody, and grow up into a respectable member of society, you
will. You may not become rich,--it isn't everybody that becomes
rich, you know--but you can obtain a good position, and be
respected."

"I'll try," said Dick, earnestly. "I needn't have been Ragged Dick
so long if I hadn't spent my money in goin' to the theatre, and
treatin' boys to oyster-stews, and bettin' money on cards, and
such like."

"Have you lost money that way?"

"Lots of it. One time I saved up five dollars to buy me a new
rig-out, cos my best suit was all in rags, when Limpy Jim wanted
me to play a game with him."

"Limpy Jim?" said Frank, interrogatively.

"Yes, he's lame; that's what makes us call him Limpy Jim."

"I suppose you lost?"

"Yes, I lost every penny, and had to sleep out, cos I hadn't a cent
to pay for lodgin'. 'Twas a awful cold night, and I got most froze."

"Wouldn't Jim let you have any of the money he had won to pay for a
lodging?"

"No; I axed him for five cents, but he wouldn't let me have it."

"Can you get lodging for five cents?" asked Frank, in surprise.

"Yes," said Dick, "but not at the Fifth Avenue Hotel. That's it
right out there."



CHAPTER VII

THE POCKET-BOOK


They had reached the junction of Broadway and of Fifth Avenue.
Before them was a beautiful park of ten acres. On the left-hand side
was a large marble building, presenting a fine appearance with its
extensive white front. This was the building at which Dick pointed.

"Is that the Fifth Avenue Hotel?" asked Frank. "I've heard of it
often. My Uncle William always stops there when he comes to New
York."

"I once slept on the outside of it," said Dick. "They was very
reasonable in their charges, and told me I might come again."

"Perhaps sometime you'll be able to sleep inside," said Frank.

"I guess that'll be when Queen Victoria goes to the Five Points
to live."

"It looks like a palace," said Frank. "The queen needn't be ashamed
to live in such a beautiful building as that."

Though Frank did not know it, one of the queen's palaces is far
from being as fine a looking building as the Fifth Avenue Hotel.
St. James' Palace is a very ugly-looking brick structure, and
appears much more like a factory than like the home of royalty.
There are few hotels in the world as fine-looking as this
democratic institution.

At that moment a gentleman passed them on the sidewalk, who looked
back at Dick, as if his face seemed familiar.

"I know that man," said Dick, after he had passed. "He's one of my
customers."

"What is his name?"

"I don't know."

"He looked back as if he thought he knew you."

"He would have knowed me at once if it hadn't been for my new
clothes," said Dick. "I don't look much like Ragged Dick now."

"I suppose your face looked familiar."

"All but the dirt," said Dick, laughing. "I don't always have the
chance of washing my face and hands in the Astor House."

"You told me," said Frank, "that there was a place where you could
get lodging for five cents. Where's that?"

"It's the News-boys' Lodgin' House, on Fulton Street," said Dick,
"up over the 'Sun' office. It's a good place. I don't know what us
boys would do without it. They give you supper for six cents, and
a bed for five cents more."

"I suppose some boys don't even have the five cents to pay,--do
they?"

"They'll trust the boys," said Dick. "But I don't like to get
trusted. I'd be ashamed to get trusted for five cents, or ten
either. One night I was comin' down Chatham Street, with fifty
cents in my pocket. I was goin' to get a good oyster-stew, and then
go to the lodgin' house; but somehow it slipped through a hole in
my trowses-pocket, and I hadn't a cent left. If it had been summer
I shouldn't have cared, but it's rather tough stayin' out winter
nights."

Frank, who had always possessed a good home of his own, found
it hard to realize that the boy who was walking at his side had
actually walked the streets in the cold without a home, or money
to procure the common comfort of a bed.

"What did you do?" he asked, his voice full of sympathy.

"I went to the 'Times' office. I knowed one of the pressmen, and he
let me set down in a corner, where I was warm, and I soon got fast
asleep."

"Why don't you get a room somewhere, and so always have a home to
go to?"

"I dunno," said Dick. "I never thought of it. P'rhaps I may hire a
furnished house on Madison Square."

"That's where Flora McFlimsey lived."

"I don't know her," said Dick, who had never read the popular poem
of which she is the heroine.

While this conversation was going on, they had turned into
Twenty-fifth Street, and had by this time reached Third Avenue.

Just before entering it, their attention was drawn to the rather
singular conduct of an individual in front of them. Stopping
suddenly, he appeared to pick up something from the sidewalk,
and then looked about him in rather a confused way.

"I know his game," whispered Dick. "Come along and you'll see what
it is."

He hurried Frank forward until they overtook the man, who had come
to a stand-still.

"Have you found anything?" asked Dick.

"Yes," said the man, "I've found this."

He exhibited a wallet which seemed stuffed with bills, to judge from
its plethoric appearance.

"Whew!" exclaimed Dick; "you're in luck."

"I suppose somebody has lost it," said the man, "and will offer a
handsome reward."

"Which you'll get."

"Unfortunately I am obliged to take the next train to Boston. That's
where I live. I haven't time to hunt up the owner."

"Then I suppose you'll take the pocket-book with you," said Dick,
with assumed simplicity.

"I should like to leave it with some honest fellow who would see it
returned to the owner," said the man, glancing at the boys.

"I'm honest," said Dick.

"I've no doubt of it," said the other. "Well, young man, I'll make
you an offer. You take the pocket-book--"

"All right. Hand it over, then."

"Wait a minute. There must be a large sum inside. I shouldn't wonder
if there might be a thousand dollars. The owner will probably give
you a hundred dollars reward."

"Why don't you stay and get it?" asked Frank.

"I would, only there is sickness in my family, and I must get home
as soon as possible. Just give me twenty dollars, and I'll hand you
the pocket-book, and let you make whatever you can out of it. Come,
that's a good offer. What do you say?"

Dick was well dressed, so that the other did not regard it as at all
improbable that he might possess that sum. He was prepared, however,
to let him have it for less, if necessary.

"Twenty dollars is a good deal of money," said Dick, appearing to
hesitate.

"You'll get it back, and a good deal more," said the stranger,
persuasively.
