"I'm so sorry! Have you brothers and sisters?" asked Belle, hoping to
find something pleasant to talk about; for she was a kind little soul.

"No, miss; I've got no folks at all."

"Oh, dear; how sad! Why, who takes care of you?" cried Belle, looking
quite distressed.

"No one; I take care of myself. I work for Madame, and she pays me a
dollar a week. I stay with Mrs. Brown, and chore round to pay for my
keep. My dollar don't get many clothes, so I can't be as neat as I'd
like." And the forlorn look came back to poor Lizzie's face.

Belle said nothing, but sat among the sofa cushions, where she had
thrown herself, looking soberly at this other girl, no older than she
was, who took care of herself and was all alone in the world. It was a
new idea to Belle, who was loved and petted as an only child is apt to
be. She often saw beggars and pitied them, but knew very little about
their wants and lives; so it was like turning a new page in her happy
life to be brought so near to poverty as this chance meeting with the
milliner's girl.

"Aren't you afraid and lonely and unhappy?" she said, slowly, trying to
understand and put herself in Lizzie's place.

"Yes; but it's no use. I can't help it, and may be things will get
better by and by, and I'll have my wish," answered Lizzie, more
hopefully, because Belle's pity warmed her heart and made her troubles
seem lighter.

"What is your wish?" asked Belle, hoping mamma wouldn't come just yet,
for she was getting interested in the stranger.

"To have a nice little room, and make flowers, like a French girl I
know. It's such pretty work, and she gets lots of money, for every one
likes her flowers. She shows me how, sometimes, and I can do leaves
first-rate; but--"

There Lizzie stopped suddenly, and the color rushed up to her forehead;
for she remembered the little rose in her pocket and it weighed upon her
conscience like a stone.

Before Belle could ask what was the matter, Marie came in with a tray of
cake and fruit, saying:

"Here's your lunch, Miss Belle."

"Put it down, please; I'm not ready for it yet."

And Belle shook her head as she glanced at Lizzie, who was staring hard
at the fire with such a troubled face that Belle could not bear to see
it.

Jumping out of her nest of cushions, she heaped a plate with good
things, and going to Lizzie, offered it, saying, with a gentle courtesy
that made the act doubly sweet:

"Please have some; you must be tired of waiting."

But Lizzie could not take it; she could only cover her face and cry;
for this kindness rent her heart and made the stolen flower a burden too
heavy to be borne.

"Oh, don't cry so! Are you sick? Have I been rude? Tell me all about
it; and if I can't do anything, mamma can," said Belle, surprised and
troubled.

"No; I'm not sick; I'm bad, and I can't bear it when you are so good to
me," sobbed Lizzie, quite overcome with penitence; and taking out the
crumpled rose, she confessed her fault with many tears.

"Don't feel so much about such a little thing as that," began Belle,
warmly; then checked herself, and added, more soberly, "It WAS wrong to
take it without leave; but it's all right now, and I'll give you as many
roses as you want, for I know you are a good girl."

"Thank you. I didn't want it only because it was pretty, but I wanted to
copy it. I can't get any for myself, and so I can't do my make-believe
ones well. Madame won't even lend me the old ones in the store, and
Estelle has none to spare for me, because I can't pay her for teaching
me. She gives me bits of muslin and wire and things, and shows me now
and then. But I know if I had a real flower I could copy it; so she'd
see I did know something, for I try real hard. I'm SO tired of slopping
round the streets, I'd do anything to earn my living some other way."

Lizzie had poured out her trouble rapidly; and the little story was
quite affecting when one saw the tears on her cheeks, the poor clothes,
and the thin hands that held the stolen rose. Belle was much touched,
and, in her impetuous way, set about mending matters as fast as
possible.

"Put on those boots and that pair of dry stockings right away. Then tuck
as much cake and fruit into your pocket as it will hold. I'm going to
get you some flowers, and see if mamma is too busy to attend to me."

With a nod and a smile, Belle flew about the room a minute; then
vanished, leaving Lizzie to her comfortable task, feeling as if fairies
still haunted the world as in the good old times.

When Belle came back with a handful of roses, she found Lizzie absorbed
in admiring contemplation of her new boots, as she ate sponge-cake in a
blissful sort of waking-dream.

"Mamma can't come; but I don't care about the hat. It will do very well,
and isn't worth fussing about. There, will those be of any use to you?"
And she offered the nosegay with a much happier face than the one Lizzie
first saw.

"Oh, miss, they're just lovely! I'll copy that pink rose as soon as ever
I can, and when I've learned how to do 'em tip-top, I'd like to bring
you some, if you don't mind," answered Lizzie, smiling all over her face
as she buried her nose luxuriously in the fragrant mass.

"I'd like it very much, for I should think you'd have to be very clever
to make such pretty things. I really quite fancy those rosebuds in my
hat, now I know that you're going to learn how to make them. Put an
orange in your pocket, and the flowers in water as soon as you can, so
they'll be fresh when you want them. Good-by. Bring home our hats every
time and tell me how you get on."

With kind words like these, Belle dismissed Lizzie, who ran downstairs,
feeling as rich as if she had found a fortune. Away to the next place
she hurried, anxious to get her errands done and the precious posy
safely into fresh water. But Mrs. Turretviile was not at home, and the
bonnet could not be left till paid for. So Lizzie turned to go down the
high steps, glad that she need not wait. She stopped one instant to take
a delicious sniff at her flowers, and that was the last happy moment
that poor Lizzie knew for many weary months.

The new boots were large for her, the steps slippery with sleet, and
down went the little errand girl, from top to bottom, till she landed in
