
'Why stumblest thou, sorry jade? Scentest thou some ill?'

'Prince Ivan has come and carried off Marya Morevna.'

'Is it possible to catch them?'

'It is possible to sow barley, to wait till it grows up, to reap it and
thresh it, to brew beer, to drink ourselves drunk on it, to sleep our
fill, and then to set off in pursuit--and yet to be in time.'

Koshchei galloped off, caught up Prince Ivan:

'Didn't I tell you that you should not see Marya Morevna any more than
your own ears?'

And he took her away and carried her off home with him.

Prince Ivan was left there alone. He wept and wept; then he went back
again after Marya Morevna. Koshchei happened to be away from home at
that moment.

'Let us fly, Marya Morevna!'

'Ah, Prince Ivan! he is sure to catch us and hew you in pieces.'

'Let him hew away! I cannot live without you.

So they got ready and fled.

Koshchei the Deathless was returning home when his good steed stumbled
beneath him.

'Why stumblest thou? Scentest thou any ill?'

'Prince Ivan has come and has carried off Marya Morevna.'

Koshchei galloped off, caught Prince Ivan, chopped him into little
pieces, put them into a barrel, smeared it with pitch and bound it with
iron hoops, and flung it into the blue sea. But Marya Morevna he carried
off home.

At that very time the silver articles turned black which Prince Ivan had
left with his brothers-in-law.

'Ah!' said they, 'the evil is accomplished sure enough!'

Then the Eagle hurried to the blue sea, caught hold of the barrel, and
dragged it ashore; the Falcon flew away for the Water of Life, and the
Raven for the Water of Death.

Afterwards they all three met, broke open the barrel, took out the
remains of Prince Ivan, washed them, and put them together in fitting
order. The Raven sprinkled them with the Water of Death--the pieces
joined together, the body became whole. The Falcon sprinkled it with the
Water of Life--Prince Ivan shuddered, stood up, and said:

'Ah! what a time I've been sleeping!'

'You'd have gone on sleeping a good deal longer if it hadn't been for
us,' replied his brothers-in-law. 'Now come and pay us a visit.'

'Not so, brothers; I shall go and look for Marya Morevna.'

And when he had found her, he said to her:

'Find out from Koshchei the Deathless whence he got so good a steed.'

So Marya Morevna chose a favourable moment, and began asking Koshchei
about it. Koshchei replied:

'Beyond thrice nine lands, in the thirtieth kingdom, on the other side
of the fiery river, there lives a Baba Yaga. She has so good a mare that
she flies right round the world on it every day. And she has many other
splendid mares. I watched her herds for three days without losing a
single mare, and in return for that the Baba Yaga gave me a foal.'

'But how did you get across the fiery river?'

'Why, I've a handkerchief of this kind--when I wave it thrice on the
right hand, there springs up a very lofty bridge, and the fire cannot
reach it.'

Marya Morevna listened to all this, and repeated it to Prince Ivan, and
she carried off the handkerchief and gave it to him. So he managed to
get across the fiery river, and then went on to the Baba Yaga's. Long
went he on without getting anything either to eat or to drink. At last
he came across an outlandish bird and its young ones. Says Prince Ivan:

'I'll eat one of these chickens.'

'Don't eat it, Prince Ivan!' begs the outlandish bird; 'some time or
other I'll do you a good turn.'

He went on farther and saw a hive of bees in the forest.

'I'll get a bit of honeycomb,' says he.

'Don't disturb my honey, Prince Ivan!' exclaims the queen-bee; 'some
time or other I'll do you a good turn.'

So he didn't disturb it, but went on. Presently there met him a lioness
with her cub.

'Anyhow, I'll eat this lion cub,' says he; 'I'm so hungry I feel quite
unwell!'

'Please let us alone, Prince Ivan!' begs the lioness; 'some time or
other I'll do you a good turn.'

'Very well; have it your own way,' says he.

Hungry and faint he wandered on, walked farther and farther, and at last
came to where stood the house of the Baba Yaga. Round the house were set
twelve poles in a circle, and on each of eleven of these poles was stuck
a human head; the twelfth alone remained unoccupied.

'Hail, granny!'

'Hail, Prince Ivan! wherefore have you come? Is it of your own accord,
or on compulsion?'

'I have come to earn from you an heroic steed.'

'So be it, Prince! You won't have to serve a year with me, but just
three days. If you take good care of my mares, I'll give you an heroic
steed. But if you don't--why, then you mustn't be annoyed at finding
your head stuck on top of the last pole up there.'

Prince Ivan agreed to these terms. The Baba Yaga gave him food and
drink, and bade him set about his business. But the moment he had driven
the mares afield, they cocked up their tails, and away they tore across
the meadows in all directions. Before the Prince had time to look round
they were all out of sight. Thereupon he began to weep and to disquiet
himself, and then he sat down upon a stone and went to sleep. But when
the sun was near its setting the outlandish bird came flying up to him,
and awakened him, saying:

'Arise, Prince Ivan! The mares are at home now.'

The Prince arose and returned home. There the Baba Yaga was storming and
raging at her mares, and shrieking:

'Whatever did ye come home for?'

'How could we help coming home?' said they. 'There came flying birds
from every part of the world, and all but pecked our eyes out.'

'Well, well! to-morrow don't go galloping over the meadows, but disperse
amid the thick forests.'

Prince Ivan slept all night. In the morning the Baba Yaga says to him:

'Mind, Prince! if you don't take good care of the mares, if you lose
merely one of them--your bold head will be stuck on that pole!'

He drove the mares afield. Immediately they cocked up their tails and
dispersed among the thick forests. Again did the Prince sit down on the
stone, weep and weep, and then go to sleep. The sun went down behind the
forest. Up came running the lioness.

'Arise, Prince Ivan! The mares are all collected.'

Prince Ivan arose and went home. More than ever did the Baba Yaga storm
at her mares and shriek:

'Whatever did ye come back home for?'

'How could we help coming back? Beasts of prey came running at us from
all parts of the world, and all but tore us utterly to pieces.'

'Well, to-morrow run off into the blue sea.'

Again did Prince Ivan sleep through the night. Next morning the Baba
Yaga sent him forth to watch the mares.

'If you don't take good care of them,' says she, 'your bold head will be
stuck on that pole!'

He drove the mares afield. Immediately they cocked up their tails,
disappeared from sight, and fled into the blue sea. There they stood,
up to their necks in water. Prince Ivan sat down on the stone, wept, and
fell asleep. But when the sun had set behind the forest, up came flying
a bee, and said:

'Arise, Prince! The mares are all collected. But when you get home,
don't let the Baba Yaga set eyes on you, but go into the stable and
hide behind the mangers. There you will find a sorry colt rolling in
the muck. Do you steal it, and at the dead of night ride away from the
house.'

Prince Ivan arose, slipped into the stable, and lay down behind
the mangers, while the Baba Yaga was storming away at her mares and
shrieking:

'Why did ye come back?'

'How could we help coming back? There came flying bees in countless
numbers from all parts of the world, and began stinging us on all sides
till the blood came!'

The Baba Yaga went to sleep. In the dead of the night Prince Ivan stole
the sorry colt, saddled it, jumped on its back, and galloped away to the
fiery river. When he came to that river he waved the handkerchief three
times on the right hand, and suddenly, springing goodness knows whence,
there hung across the river, high in the air, a splendid bridge. The
Prince rode across the bridge and waved the handkerchief twice only on
the left hand; there remained across the river a thin, ever so thin a
bridge!

When the Baba Yaga got up in the morning the sorry colt was not to be
seen! Off she set in pursuit. At full speed did she fly in her iron
mortar, urging it on with the pestle, sweeping away her traces with the
broom. She dashed up to the fiery river, gave a glance, and said, 'A
capital bridge!' She drove on to the bridge, but had only got half-way
when the bridge broke in two, and the Baba Yaga went flop into the
river. There truly did she meet with a cruel death!

Prince Ivan fattened up the colt in the green meadows, and it turned
into a wondrous steed. Then he rode to where Marya Morevna was. She came
running out, and flung herself on his neck, crying:

'By what means has God brought you back to life?'

'Thus and thus,' says he. 'Now come along with me.'

'I am afraid, Prince Ivan! If Koshchei catches us you will be cut in
pieces again.'

'No, he won't catch us! I have a splendid heroic steed now; it flies
just like a bird.' So they got on its back and rode away.

Koshchei the Deathless was returning home when his horse stumbled
beneath him.

'What art thou stumbling for, sorry jade? Dost thou scent any ill?'

'Prince Ivan has come and carried off Marya Morevna.'

'Can we catch them?'

'God knows! Prince Ivan has a horse now which is better than I.'

'Well, I can't stand it,' says Koshchei the Deathless. 'I will pursue.'

After a time he came up with Prince Ivan, lighted on the ground, and
was going to chop him up with his sharp sword. But at that moment Prince
Ivan's horse smote Koshchei the Deathless full swing with its hoof,
and cracked his skull, and the Prince made an end of him with a club.
Afterwards the Prince heaped up a pile of wood, set fire to it, burnt
Koshchei the Deathless on the pyre, and scattered his ashes to the wind.
Then Marya Morevna mounted Koshchei's horse and Prince Ivan got on his
own, and they rode away to visit first the Raven, and then the Eagle,
and then the Falcon. Wherever they went they met with a joyful greeting.

'Ah, Prince Ivan! why, we never expected to see you again. Well, it
wasn't for nothing that you gave yourself so much trouble. Such a beauty
as Marya Morevna one might search for all the world over--and never find
one like her!'

And so they visited, and they feasted; and afterwards they went off to
their own realm.(3)


(3) Ralston.




THE BLACK THIEF AND KNIGHT OF THE GLEN.

IN times of yore there was a King and a Queen in the south of Ireland
who had three sons, all beautiful children; but the Queen, their mother,
sickened unto death when they were yet very young, which caused great
grief throughout the Court, particularly to the King, her husband, who
could in no wise be comforted. Seeing that death was drawing near her,
she called the King to her and spoke as follows:

'I am now going to leave you, and as you are young and in your prime, of
course after my death you will marry again. Now all the request I ask of
you is that you will build a tower in an island in the sea, wherein you
will keep your three sons until they are come of age and fit to do for
themselves; so that they may not be under the power or jurisdiction of
any other woman. Neglect not to give them education suitable to
their birth, and let them be trained up to every exercise and pastime
requisite for king's sons to learn. This is all I have to say, so
farewell.'

The King had scarce time, with tears in his eyes, to assure her she
should be obeyed in everything, when she, turning herself in her bed,
with a smile gave up the ghost. Never was greater mourning seen than was
throughout the Court and the whole kingdom; for a better woman than
the Queen, to rich and poor, was not to be found in the world. She was
interred with great pomp and magnificence, and the King, her husband,
became in a manner inconsolable for the loss of her. However, he caused
the tower to be built and his sons placed in it, under proper guardians,
according to his promise.

In process of time the lords and knights of the kingdom counselled the
King (as he was young) to live no longer as he had done, but to take
a wife; which counsel prevailing, they chose him a rich and beautiful
princess to be his consort--a neighbouring King's daughter, of whom he
was very fond. Not long after, the Queen had a fine son, which caused
great feasting and rejoicing at the Court, insomuch that the late Queen,
in a manner, was entirely forgotten. That fared well, and King and Queen
lived happy together for several years.

At length the Queen, having some business with the hen-wife, went
herself to her, and, after a long conference passed, was taking leave of
her, when the hen-wife prayed that if ever she should come back to her
again she might break her neck. The Queen, greatly incensed at such a
daring insult from one of her meanest subjects, demanded immediately the
reason, or she would have her put to death.

'It was worth your while, madam,' says the hen-wife, 'to pay me well for
it, for the reason I prayed so on you concerns you much.'

'What must I pay you?' asked the Queen.

'You must give me,' says she, 'the full of a pack of wool, and I have an
ancient crock which you must fill with butter, likewise a barrel which
you must fill for me full of wheat.'

'How much wool will it take to the pack?' says the Queen.

'It will take seven herds of sheep,' said she, 'and their increase for
seven years.'

'How much butter will it take to fill your crock?'

'Seven dairies,' said she, 'and their increase for seven years.'

'And how much will it take to fill the barrel you have?' says the Queen.

'It will take the increase of seven barrels of wheat for seven years.'

'That is a great quantity,' says the Queen; 'but the reason must be
extraordinary, and before I want it, I will give you all you demand.'

'Well,' says the hen-wife, 'it is because you are so stupid that you
don't observe or find out those affairs that are so dangerous and
hurtful to yourself and your child.'

'What is that?' says the Queen.

'Why,' says she, 'the King your husband has three fine sons he had by
the late Queen, whom he keeps shut up in a tower until they come of age,
intending to divide the kingdom between them, and let your son push
his fortune; now, if you don't find some means of destroying them; your
child and perhaps yourself will be left desolate in the end.'

'And what would you advise me to do?' said she; 'I am wholly at a loss
in what manner to act in this affair.'

'You must make known to the King,' says the hen-wife, 'that you heard of
his sons, and wonder greatly that he concealed them all this time from
you; tell him you wish to see them, and that it is full time for them to
be liberated, and that you would be desirous he would bring them to
the Court. The King will then do so, and there will be a great feast
prepared on that account, and also diversions of every sort to amuse the
people; and in these sports,' said she, 'ask the King's sons to play
a game at cards with you, which they will not refuse. Now,' says
the hen-wife, 'you must make a bargain, that if you win they must do
whatever you command them, and if they win, that you must do whatever
they command you to do; this bargain must be made before the assembly,
and here is a pack of cards,' says she, 'that I am thinking you will not
lose by.'

The Queen immediately took the cards, and, after returning the hen-wife
thanks for her kind instruction, went back to the palace, where she
was quite uneasy until she got speaking to the King in regard of his
children; at last she broke it off to him in a very polite and engaging
manner, so that he could see no muster or design in it. He readily
consented to her desire, and his sons were sent for to the tower,
who gladly came to Court, rejoicing that they were freed from such
confinement. They were all very handsome, and very expert in all arts
and exercises, so that they gained the love and esteem of all that had
seen them.

The Queen, more jealous with them than ever, thought it an age until
all the feasting and rejoicing was over, that she might get making her
proposal, depending greatly on the power of the hen-wife's cards. At
length this royal assembly began to sport and play at all kinds of
diversions, and the Queen very cunningly challenged the three Princes
to play at cards with her, making bargain with them as she had been
instructed.

They accepted the challenge, and the eldest son and she played the first
game, which she won; then the second son played, and she won that game
likewise; the third son and she then played the last game, and he won
it, which sorely grieved her that she had not him in her power as well
as the rest, being by far the handsomest and most beloved of the three.

However, everyone was anxious to hear the Queen's commands in regard to
the two Princes, not thinking that she had any ill design in her head
against them. Whether it was the hen-wife instructed her, or whether it
was from her own knowledge, I cannot tell; but she gave out they must
go and bring her the Knight of the Glen's wild Steed of Bells, or they
should lose their heads.

The young Princes were not in the least concerned, not knowing what they
had to do; but the whole Court was amazed at her demand, knowing very
well that it was impossible for them ever to get the steed, as all that
ever sought him perished in the attempt. However, they could not retract
the bargain, and the youngest Prince was desired to tell what demand he
had on the Queen, as he had won his game.

'My brothers,' says he, 'are now going to travel, and, as I understand,
a perilous journey wherein they know not what road to take or what may
happen them. I am resolved, therefore, not to stay here, but to go with
them, let what will betide; and I request and command, according to my
bargain, that the Queen shall stand on the highest tower of the palace
until we come back (or find out that we are certainly dead), with
nothing but sheaf corn for her food and cold water for her drink, if it
should be for seven years and longer.'

All things being now fixed, the three princes departed the Court in
search of the Knight of the Glen's palace, and travelling along the road
they came up with a man who was a little lame, and seemed to be somewhat
advanced in years; they soon fell into discourse, and the youngest of
the princes asked the stranger his name, or what was the reason he wore
so remarkable a black cap as he saw on him.

'I am called,' said he, 'the Thief of Sloan, and sometimes the
Black Thief from my cap; 'and so telling the prince the most of his
adventures, he asked him again where they were bound for, or what they
were about.

The prince, willing to gratify his request, told him their affairs from
the beginning to the end. 'And now,' said he, 'we are travelling, and do
not know whether we are on the right road or not.'

'Ah! my brave fellows,' says the Black Thief, 'you little know the
danger you run. I am after that steed myself these seven years, and
can never steal him on account of a silk covering he has on him in the
stable, with sixty bells fixed to it, and whenever you approach the
place he quickly observes it and shakes himself; which, by the sound
of the bells, not only alarms the prince and his guards, but the whole
country round, so that it is impossible ever to get him, and those that
are so unfortunate as to be taken by the Knight of the Glen are boiled
in a red-hot fiery furnace.'

'Bless me,' says the young prince, 'what will we do? If we return
without the steed we will lose our heads, so I see we are ill fixed on
both sides.'

'Well,' says the Thief of Sloan, 'if it were my case I would rather
die by the Knight than by the wicked Queen; besides, I will go with you
myself and show you the road, and whatever fortune you will have, I will
take chance of the same.'

They returned him sincere thanks for his kindness, and he, being well
acquainted with the road, in a short time brought them within view of
the knight's castle.

'Now,' says he, 'we must stay here till night comes; for I know all the
ways of the place, and if there be any chance for it, it is when they
are all at rest; for the steed is all the watch the knight keeps there.'

Accordingly, in the dead hour of the night, the King's three sons and
the Thief of Sloan attempted the Steed of Bells in order to carry him
away, but before they could reach the stables the steed neighed most
terribly and shook himself so, and the bells rung with such noise, that
the knight and all his men were up in a moment.

The Black Thief and the King's sons thought to make their escape,
but they were suddenly surrounded by the knight's guards and taken
prisoners; where they were brought into that dismal part of the palace
where the knight kept a furnace always boiling, in which he threw
all offenders that ever came in his way, which in a few moments would
entirely consume them.

'Audacious villains!' says the Knight of the Glen, 'how dare you attempt
so bold an action as to steal my steed? See, now, the reward of your
folly; for your greater punishment I will not boil you all together,
but one after the other, so that he that survives may witness the dire
afflictions of his unfortunate companions.'

So saying he ordered his servants to stir up the fire: 'We will boil
the eldest-looking of these young men first,' said he, 'and so on to the
last, which will be this old champion with the black cap. He seems to be
the captain, and looks as if he had come through many toils.'

'I was as near death once as the prince is yet,' says the Black Thief,
'and escaped; and so will he too.'

'No, you never were,' said the knight; 'for he is within two or three
minutes of his latter end.'
