"Phil teased him so that Father was tired of hearing him. He said Phil
was a regular abolitionist," Flora explained with her pretty smile.

"What's an abbylitionzist?" asked Grace.

"Ask Sylvia. I heard my father say that Sylvia's father was one,"
answered Flora.

"I don't know. But my father is a Congregationalist," replied Sylvia.
"Perhaps that's what your father meant."

"No, it's something about not believing in having slaves, I know that
much," said Flora.

"Who would do our work then?" questioned Grace.

Flora could not answer this question. Sylvia resolved to ask Miss
Rosalie at question time the meaning of this new word. If her father
and Philip Hayes were "abolitionists," she was quite sure the word
meant something very brave and fine.

"What about Miss Flora and her ghost now?" Grace found a chance to
whisper, as they entered the schoolroom. "She doesn't mean to own up."

"Wait, she will," was Sylvia's response as she took her seat.

When question time came Sylvia was ready. She stood up smiling and
eager, and Miss Rosalie smiled back. She had grown fond of her little
pupil from Boston, and thought to herself that Sylvia was really
becoming almost like a little southern girl in her graceful ways and
pleasant smile.

"What is your question, Sylvia?" she asked.

"If you please, Miss Rosalie, what does 'abolitionist' mean?"

Some of the older girls exchanged startled looks, and May Bailey barely
restrained a laugh. Probably Grace and Sylvia were the only girls in
school who had not heard the word used as a term of reproach against
the people of the northern states who wished to do away with slavery.

Miss Rosalie's smile faded, but she responded without a moment's
hesitation:

"Why, an 'abolitionist' is a person who wishes to destroy some law or
custom."

There was a little murmur among the other pupils, but Grace and Sylvia
looked at each other with puzzled eyes. Philip did not wish to
"destroy" anything, thought Sylvia; he only wanted to protect Dinkie.
And she was sure that her father would not destroy anything, unless it
was something which would harm people. So it was a puzzled Sylvia who
came home from school that day. She decided that her father could
answer a question much better than Miss Rosalie, and resolved to ask
him the meaning of the word.

"Come up-stairs, Estralla," she said, finding the little negro girl at
the gate as usual waiting for her. "I have some things my mother said I
could give you."

Estralla followed happily. She didn't care very much what it might be
that Missy Sylvia would give her, it was delight enough for Estralla to
follow after her. But when the little girl saw the things spread out on
Sylvia's bed she exclaimed aloud:

"Does you mean, Missy, dat I'se to pick out somethin'? Well, then I
chooses the shoes. I never had no shoes."

"They are all for you," said Sylvia, lifting up a pretty blue cape and
holding it toward Estralla.

"My lan'!" whispered Estralla.

There was a dress of blue delaine with tiny white dots, two pretty
white aprons, the blue cape, and shoes and stockings, beside some of
Sylvia's part-worn underwear. She had begged her mother to let her give
the little darky these things, and Mrs. Fulton had been glad that her
little daughter wished to do so.

"Estralla has never had ANYTHING," Sylvia had urged, "and she is always
afraid of something. Of being whipped or sold. And I would like to see
her have clothes like other girls."

Estralla wanted to try on the shoes at once, and when she found that
they fitted very comfortably, she chuckled and laughed with delight.
Neither of the girls heard a rap at the door, and both were surprised
when Aunt Connie, who had opened the door and stood waiting, exclaimed:

"Fo' lan's sake! Wat you lettin' that darky dress up in you' clo'es
fer, Missy Sylvia?"

"They are her own clothes now, Aunt Connie," Sylvia explained. "My
mother said I might give them to her."

For a moment the negro woman stood silent. Then she put her hands up to
her face and began to cry, very quietly. Estralla's laughter vanished.
She wondered if her mammy was going to tell her that she could not keep
the things.

"'Scusie, Missy," muttered Aunt Connie; "you'se an angel to my po'
little gal. An' I'se 'bliged to you. But I'se feared the chile won't
wear 'em long. Massa Robert Waite's man sez he's gwine sell her off
right soon."

"He cyan't do no sech thing. Missy Sylvia won't let him," declared
Estralla, who was perfectly sure that "Missy Sylvia" could do whatever
she wished. With a pair of shoes on her feet and the blue cape over her
shoulders Estralla had more courage. Sylvia's kindness had given the
little colored girl a hope of happier days.

"Aunt Connie, I'll do all I can for Estralla," said Sylvia.

"Will you, Missy? Then ask yo' pa not to let Estralla be sold," pleaded
Aunt Connie.

Sylvia promised, and Aunt Connie went off smilingly. But Sylvia
wondered if her father could prevent Mr. Robert Waite from selling the
negro girl. "Estralla," she said very soberly, "I have promised that
you shall not be sold, and I will ask my father. But if he cannot do
anything, we will have to do something ourselves. Will you do whatever
I tell you?"

"Oh, yas indeed, Missy," Estralla answered eagerly.

"Well, I'll ask Father to-night. And to-morrow morning you bring up my
hot water, and I'll tell you what he says. But don't be frightened,
anyway," said Sylvia.

"I ain't skeered like I used to be," responded Estralla. "Yo' see,
Missy, I feels jes' as if you was my true fr'en'."

"I'll try to be," Sylvia promised.

Estralla went off happy with her new possessions, and Sylvia turned to
the window, and looked off across the beautiful harbor toward the
forts. She had heard her father say, that very noon, that South
Carolina would fight to keep its slaves, and she wondered if the
soldiers in Fort Moultrie would not fight to set the black people free.
She remembered that her father had said that Fort Sumter was the
property of the United States; and, for some reason which she could not
explain even to herself, she was sure that Estralla would be safe
there. If Mr. Robert Waite really meant to sell her, Sylvia again
resolved to find some way to get the little slave girl to Fort Sumter.

When Estralla brought the hot water the next morning she found a very
sober little mistress. For Sylvia's father had not only explained the
meaning of the word "abolitionist" as being the name the southerners
had given to the men who were determined that slavery of other men,
whatever their color, should end, but he had told his little daughter
that he could do nothing to prevent the sale of the little colored
girl, and that not even at Fort Sumter would she be safe. Sylvia had
not gone to sleep very early. She lay awake thinking of Estralla.
"Suppose somebody could sell me away from my mother," she thought,
ready to cry even at such a possibility. Sylvia knew that Aunt Connie
had been whipped because she had rebelled against parting with her
older children, and there was no Philip to take Aunt Connie's part.

"Mornin', Missy," said Estralla, coming into the room, and setting down
the pitcher of hot water very carefully. She had on the pink gingham
with one of the white aprons, and as she stood smiling and neat at the
foot of Sylvia's bed, she looked very different from the clumsy little
darky who had tumbled into the room a few weeks ago. Sylvia smiled
back. "Estralla, I want you to be sure to come up-stairs to-night after
the house is all quiet. Don't tell your mother, or anybody," she said
very soberly.

"All right, Missy," agreed Estralla, sure that whatever Missy Sylvia
asked was right.

Sylvia said nothing more, but dressed and went down to breakfast. She
heard her father say that he feared that South Carolina would secede
from the United States, and she repeated the word aloud: "'Secede'?
What does that mean?" She began to think the world was full of
difficult words.

"In this case it means that the State of South Carolina wishes to give
up her rights as one of the States of the Union," Mr. Fulton explained,
"but we hope she will give up slavery instead," he concluded.

Grace was at the gate as Sylvia came out ready for school, and called
out a gay greeting.

"What are you so sober about, Sylvia?" she asked as they walked on
together.




CHAPTER X

THE PALMETTO FLAG


When Sylvia had told Estralla to come to her room that night, she had
determined to find a way to get the little negro to a place of safety.
Sylvia did not know that a negro was, in those far-off days, the
property of his master as much as a horse or a dog, and that wherever
the negro might go his master could claim him and punish him for trying
to escape. Any person aiding a slave to escape could also be punished
by law.

All Sylvia thought of was to have Estralla protected, and she was quite
sure that a United States fort could protect one little negro girl.
Nevertheless she was troubled and worried as to how she could carry out
her plan; but she resolved not to tell Grace.

As usual Flora was waiting at Miss Patten's gate for her friends. She
was wearing a pretty turban hat, and pinned in front was a fine blue
cockade, to which Flora pointed and said: "Look, girls. This is the
Secession Cockade. Ralph gave it to me," she explained; "all loyal
Carolinians ought to wear it, Ralph says."

"What does it mean to wear one?" asked Sylvia.

"Oh, it means that you believe South Carolina has a right to keep its
slaves, and sell them, of course; and if the United States interferes,
why, Carolinians will teach them a lesson," Flora explained grandly,
repeating the explanation her father had given her that very morning.

Many of the other girls wore blue cockades, and a palmetto flag was
hung behind Miss Rosalie's desk.

"Young ladies," said Miss Rosalie, "I have hung South Carolina's flag
where you can all see it. You all know that a flag is an emblem. Our
flag means the glory of our past and the hope of the future. I will ask
you all to rise and salute this flag!"

The little girls all stood, and each raised her right hand. All but
Sylvia. Flushed and unhappy, with downcast eyes, she kept her seat.
This was not the "Stars and Stripes," the flag she had been taught to
love and honor. She knew that the palmetto flag stood for slavery.

Sylvia did not know what Miss Rosalie would say to her, and, even worse
than her teacher's disapproval, she was sure that her schoolmates,
perhaps even Grace and Flora, would dislike and blame her for not
saluting their flag.

But she was soon to realize just how serious was her failure to salute
the palmetto flag. Miss Rosalie came down the aisle and laid a note on
Sylvia's desk.

It was very brief: "You may go home at recess. Take your books and go
quietly without a word to any of the other pupils. You may tell your
parents that I do not care to have you as a pupil for another day."

As Sylvia read these words the tears sprang to her eyes. It was all she
could do not to sob aloud. She dared not look at the other girls. She
held a book before her face, and only hoped that she could keep back
the tears until recess-time.

But not for a moment did Sylvia wish that she had saluted a flag which
stood for the protection of slavery. Miss Rosalie had said that a flag
was an "emblem," and even in her unhappiness Sylvia knew that the
emblem of the United States stood for justice and liberty.

When the hour of recess came Sylvia had her books neatly strapped, and,
as Miss Rosalie had directed, she left the room quietly without one
word to any of the other girls. She had nearly reached the gate when
she heard steps close behind her and Grace's voice calling: "Sylvia,
Sylvia, dear," and Grace's arm was about her. "It's a mean shame,"
declared the warm-hearted little southern girl, "and flag or no flag,
I'm your true friend."

"Grace! Grace!" called Miss Rosalie, and before Sylvia could respond
her loyal playmate had turned obediently back to the house.

Sylvia stepped out on the street, her eyes a little blurred by tears,
but greatly comforted by Grace's assuring words of friendship.

She did not want to go home and tell her mother what had happened, and
show her Miss Patten's note, for she knew that her mother would be
troubled and unhappy.

Suddenly she decided to go to her father's warehouse and tell him, and
go home with him at noon. She was sure her father would think she had
done right.

She turned and walked quickly down King Street, and in a short time she
was near the wharves and could see the long building where her father
stored the cotton he purchased from the planters. The wharves were
piled high with boxes and bales, and there were small boats coming in
to the wharves, and others making ready to depart.

Sylvia could see her father's boat close to the wharf near the
warehouse. "I wish I could take that boat and carry Estralla off to
Fort Sumter," she thought.

A good-natured negro led her to Mr. Fulton's office, and before her
father could say a word Sylvia was in the midst of her story. She told
of the blue cockades that the other girls wore, of the palmetto flag,
and of her failure to salute it, and handed him Miss Patten's note.

Mr. Fulton looked serious and troubled as he listened to his little
girl's story. Then he lifted her to his knee, took off her pretty hat,
and said:

"Too bad, dear child! But you did right. A little Yankee girl must be
loyal to the Stars and Stripes. I am glad you came and told me."

For a moment it seemed to Sylvia that her father had forgotten all
about her. He was looking straight out of the window.

While he had not forgotten his little girl he was thinking that
Charleston people must be quite ready to take the serious step of
urging their State to declare her secession from the United States, and
her right to buy and sell human beings as slaves.

He wished that the United States officers at Fort Moultrie could
realize that at any time Charleston men might seize Fort Sumter, where
there were but few soldiers, and he said aloud: "I ought to warn them."

Sylvia wondered for a moment what her father could mean, but he said
quickly: "Jump down and put on your hat. I'm going to sail down to Fort
Moultrie and have a talk with my good friends there, and you can come
with me."

At this good news Sylvia forgot all her troubles. A sail across the
harbor with her father was the most delightful thing that she could
imagine. And she held fast to his hand, smiling happily, as they walked
down the wharf where the boat was fastened.

Mr. Fulton was beginning to find his position as a northern man in
Charleston rather uncomfortable. Many of his southern friends firmly
believed that the northern men had no right to tell them that slavery
was wrong and must cease. He wished to protect his business interests,
or he would have returned to Boston; for it was difficult for him not
to declare his own patriotic feeling that Abraham Lincoln, who had just
been elected President of the United States, would never permit slavery
to continue.

Mr. Fulton sent a darky with a message to Sylvia's mother that he was
taking the little girl for a sail to the forts, and in a short time
they were on board the Butterfly, as Sylvia had named the white sloop,
and were going swiftly down the harbor.

"May I steer?" asked Sylvia, and Mr. Fulton smilingly agreed. He was
very proud of his little daughter's ability to sail a boat, and
although he watched her shape the boat's course, and was ready to give
her any needed assistance, he was sure that he could trust her.

As they sailed past Fort Sumter Sylvia could see men at work repairing
the fortifications. Over both forts waved the Stars and Stripes.

She made a skilful landing at Fort Moultrie, greatly to the admiration
of the sentry on guard. Mr. Fulton and Sylvia went directly to the
officer's quarters, which were in the rear of the fort, and where Mrs.
Carleton gave Sylvia a warm welcome. She asked the little girl about
her school and Sylvia told her what had happened that morning.

"I am not surprised," said Captain Carleton. "I expect any day that
Charleston men will take Fort Sumter, and fly the palmetto flag,
instead of the Stars and Stripes. If Major Anderson had his way we
would have a stronger force in Fort Sumter, and that is greatly needed."

Major Anderson was the officer in command at Fort Moultrie. He was a
southern man, but a true and loyal officer of the United States.

When Captain Carleton and Mr. Fulton went out Mrs. Carleton asked
Sylvia if she was sorry to leave the school, and if she liked her
schoolmates. Sylvia was eager to tell her of all the good times she had
enjoyed with Grace and Flora, and declared that they were her true
friends. Then she told Mrs. Carleton about Estralla, and of her resolve
that the little darky girl should not be separated from Aunt Connie.

"Your best plan, then, will be to go and see Mr. Robert Waite and ask
him. He is a kind-hearted man, and perhaps he will promise you to let
the child stay with her mother. I hope it will not be long now before
all the slaves will be set free," said Mrs. Carleton.

Before Sylvia could respond Captain Carleton came hurrying into the
room. He had a letter in his hand, and asked Sylvia to excuse Mrs.
Carleton for a moment, and they left the room together. In a few
moments Mrs. Carleton returned alone, and Sylvia heard Captain Carleton
say: "It is worth trying."

"My dear Sylvia, I want you to do something for me; it is not really
for me," she added quickly, "it is for the United States. Something to
help keep the flag flying over these forts."

"Oh, can I do something like that?" Sylvia asked eagerly.

"Yes, my dear. Now, listen carefully. Here is a letter which Major
Anderson wants delivered to a gentleman who will start for Washington
to-morrow. If anyone from this fort should be seen visiting that
gentleman he would not be allowed to leave Charleston as he plans. If
your father, even, should call upon him it would create suspicion. So I
am going to ask you to carry this letter to the address written on the
envelope, and you must give it into his own hands to-night. Not even
your own father will know that you have this letter; so if he should be
questioned or watched he will be able to deny knowing of its existence.
Are you willing to undertake it?"

"Yes! Yes!" promised Sylvia. "I will carry it safely. The gentleman
shall have the letter to-night," and she reached out her hand to take
it.

But Mrs. Carleton shook her head. "No, my dear, I will pin it safely
inside your dress. It would not do for you to be seen leaving the fort
with a letter in your hand."




CHAPTER XI

SYLVIA CARRIES A MESSAGE


Mrs. Fulton did not seem surprised to hear of Sylvia's dismissal from
Miss Patten's school because of her failure to salute the palmetto
flag. She did not say very much of the occurrence that afternoon, when
Sylvia returned from the fort, for she wanted Sylvia to think as
pleasantly as possible of her pretty teacher. But she was surprised
that Sylvia herself did not have more to say about the affair.

But Sylvia's own thoughts were so filled by the mysterious letter which
was pinned inside her dress, with wondering how she could safely
deliver it without the knowledge of anyone, that she hardly thought of
school. For the time she had even forgotten Estralla.

"What do you say to becoming a teacher yourself, Sylvia dear?" her
mother asked, as they sat together in the big sunny room which
overlooked the harbor.

"When I grow up?" asked Sylvia.

Mrs. Fulton smiled. Sylvia "grown up" seemed a long way in the future.

"No--that is too far away," she answered. "I was thinking that perhaps
you would like to teach Estralla to read and write. You could begin
to-morrow, if you wished."

"Yes, indeed! Mother, you think of everything," declared Sylvia. "Why,
that will be better than going to school!"

"But we must not let your own studies be neglected," her mother
reminded her, "so after you have given Estralla a morning lesson each
day you and I will study together and keep up with Grace and Flora. By
the way, Flora was here just before you and your father reached home;
she was very sorry not to see you, and I have asked Flora and Grace to
come to supper to-morrow night."

Sylvia began to think that a world without school was going to be a
very pleasant world after all. She was sure that it would be great fun
to teach Estralla, and to have lessons with her mother was even better
than reciting to pretty Miss Rosalie; and, beside this, her best
friends were coming to supper the next night, so she had many pleasant
things to think of, which was exactly what her mother had planned. Her
father had said that she might ask Grace to go sailing with them in the
Butterfly in a day or two; and now Sylvia resolved to ask if she might
not ask Flora as well, and perhaps Estralla could go, too. So it was no
wonder that she ran up-stairs singing:

"There's a good time coming, It's almost here,"--

greatly to the satisfaction of her father and mother, who had feared
that she would be very unhappy over the school affair. They were sorry
it had happened, but they could not blame Sylvia.

"Oh, Missy Sylvia, here I is," and as Sylvia set her candle on the
table, Estralla stood smiling before her.

"Oh!" exclaimed Sylvia with such surprise that the little darky looked
at her wonderingly.

"Yo' tells me to come, an' here I is," she repeated. "You tells me,"
and Estralla sniffed as if ready to give her usual wails, "that you'se
gwine to stop my bein' sold off from my mammy. How you gwine to stop
it, Missy?"

For a moment Sylvia was tempted to tell Estralla that it couldn't be
helped, as long as South Carolina believed in slavery. But Estralla's
sad eyes and pleading look made her resolve again to protect this
little slave girl against injustice. So she replied quickly:

"That is my secret. But don't you worry. Some day, very soon, I shall
tell you all about it. You know, Estralla, that you need not be afraid.
And what do you think! I am not going to school any more."

Estralla's face had brightened. She was always quite ready to smile,
but she could not understand why Sylvia had wanted her to come so
mysteriously to her room.

"And I am going to teach you to read and write," Sylvia added.

"Is you, Missy?" Estralla responded in a half-frightened whisper. Now,
she thought, she knew all about Missy Sylvia's reasons for the secret
visit. For very few slave-owners allowed anyone to teach the slaves to
read and write. Estralla knew this, and it seemed a wonderful thing
that Missy Sylvia proposed.

"I'll tell you all about it to-morrow morning," said Sylvia; "now run
away," and with a chuckle of delight Estralla closed the door softly
behind her. She had been quite ready to run away with Missy Sylvia when
she had crept up the stairs earlier in the evening. But to stay safely
with her mammy and learn to read seemed a much happier plan to the
little darky. If she could read and write! Why, it would be almost as
wonderful as it would to be a little white girl, she thought.

Now Sylvia realized, as she stood alone in her safe, pleasant chamber,
that as soon as possible she must deliver the letter entrusted to her.
If it was to go to Washington it must be some message that was of
importance to the officers at Fort Moultrie and Fort Sumter, she
thought. Perhaps it might even be something that would help Carolinians
to give up slavery; and then Estralla and Aunt Connie, and all the
black people she knew and liked, could be safe and have homes of their
own.

Sylvia went to the window and peered out. The street and garden lay
dark and shadowy. Now and then a dark figure went along the street. The
house seemed very quiet. She tiptoed to the closet and took out a brown
cape. It was one which she wore on stormy days, and nearly covered her.
Then from one of the bureau drawers she drew out a long blue silk
scarf, and twisted it about her head.

"I can pull the end over my face, and they'll think I'm a darky," she
thought, resolved if anyone spoke to her not to answer.

She whispered over the name and address on the letter. She knew that
the street led from King Street, and she was sure that she could find
it. But it was some distance from home; it would be late before she
could get back.

She blew out her candle, opened her chamber door and stood listening.
She could not hear a sound, and tiptoed cautiously along the hall to
the stairs. What if the door of her mother's room should open, she
thought, terrified at such a possibility. What could she say? She had
promised not to tell of the letter, and what reason could she give for
