
"You see," continued Eben, "I'm a good deal nearer your age than
Herbert, and I've had the advantage of residing in the city, which
Herbert hasn't, and naturally should be more company to you. Then,
again, Herbert could do the work in the post office and store, which I
am doing, nearly as well as I can. I'll undertake to get father to give
him back his place, and then I shall be happy to make an arrangement
with you to go hunting and fishing, or anything else that you choose.
I am sure I should enjoy your company, Mr. Melville," concluded Eben,
rubbing his hands complacently and surveying George Melville with an
insinuating smile.

"You have certainly taken considerable trouble to arrange this matter
for me," said Melville, with a sarcasm which Eben did not detect.

"Oh, no trouble at all!" said Eben, cheerfully. "You see, the idea came
into my head when Herbert told me of his arrangements with you, and I
thought I'd come and see you about it."

"Did you mention it to Herbert?" asked George Melville, with some
curiosity.

"Well, no, I didn't. I didn't know how Herbert would look at it. I got
Herbert to take my place in the store while I ran over to see you about
the matter. By the way, though I am some years older than Herbert, I
shan't ask more than you pay him. In fact, I am willing to leave the pay
to your liberality."

"You are very considerate!" said Melville, hardly knowing whether to be
amused or provoked by the cool assurance of his visitor.

"Oh, not at all!" returned Eben, complacently. "I guess I've fetched
him!" he reflected, looking at Mr. Melville through his small,
half-closed eyes.

"You have certainly surprised me very much, Mr. Graham," said Melville,
"by the nature of your suggestion. I won't take into consideration the
question whether you have thought more of your own pleasure or mine.
So far as the latter is concerned, you have made a mistake in supposing
that Herbert's youth is any drawback to his qualification as a
companion. Indeed, his youth and cheerful temperament make him more
attractive in my eyes. I hope, Mr. Graham, you will excuse me for saying
that he suits me better than you possibly could."

Eben's countenance fell, and he looked quite discomfited and mortified.

"I didn't suppose a raw, country boy would be likely to suit a gentleman
of taste, who has resided in the city," he said, with asperity.

"Then you will have a chance to correct your impression," said Melville,
with a slight smile.

"Then you don't care to accept my offer?" said Eben, regretfully.

"Thank you, no. If you will excuse me for suggesting it, Mr. Graham,
it would have been more considerate for you to have apprised Herbert of
your object in asking him to take your place this evening. Probably he
had no idea that you meant to supersede him with me."

Eben tossed his head.

"You mustn't think, Mr. Melville," he said, "that I was after the extra
pay. Six dollars doesn't seem much to me. I was earning ten dollars a
week in Boston, and if I had stayed, should probably have been raised to
twelve."

"So that you were really consenting to a sacrifice in offering to enter
my employment at six dollars a week?"

"Just so!"

"Then I am all the more convinced that I have decided for the best in
retaining Herbert. I do not wish to interfere with your prospects in the
city."

"Oh, as for that," said Eben, judging that he had gone too far, "I
don't care to go back to the city just yet. I've been confined pretty
steadily, and a few weeks in the country, hunting and fishing, will do
me good."

George Melville bowed, but said nothing.

Eben felt that he had no excuse for staying longer, and reluctantly
rose.

"If you should think better of what I've proposed," he said, "you can
let me know."

"I will do so," said Melville.

"He's rather a queer young man," muttered Eben, as he descended the
stairs. "It's funny that he should prefer a country boy like Herbert to
a young man like me who's seen life, and got some city polish--at the
same price, too! He don't seem to see his own interest. I'm sorry, for
it would have been a good deal more interesting to me, going round with
him a few hours a day, than tending store for father. There's one thing
sure, I won't do it long. I'm fitted for a higher position than that, I
hope."

"For downright impudence and cool assurance, I think that young man will
bear off the palm," thought George Melville, as his unwelcome visitor
left the room. "Herbert is in no danger from him. It would probably
surprise him if he knew that I should consider his company as an
intolerable bore. I will tell Herbert to-morrow the good turn his friend
has tried to do him."




CHAPTER IX. THE SOLITARY FARMHOUSE.



If Eben had been sensitive, the cool reception which he met with at the
hands of Mr. Melville would have disturbed him. As it was, he felt
angry and disappointed, and desirous of "coming up with" Herbert, as he
expressed it, though it was hard to see in what way the boy had injured
him. It did not seem quite clear at present how he was to punish
Herbert, but he only waited for an occasion.

When Herbert learned, the next morning, from Mr. Melville, in what
manner Eben had tried to undermine him, and deprive him of his
situation, he was naturally indignant.

"I didn't think Eben Graham could be so mean," he exclaimed.

"It was certainly a mean thing to do, Herbert," said George Melville;
"but you can afford to treat young Graham with contempt, as he has been
unable to do you any injury."

"What shall we do this morning, Mr. Melville?" asked Herbert.

"I should like a row on the river," said Melville. "Do you know of any
boat we can have?"

"Walter Ingalls has a boat; I think we can hire that."

"Do you know him?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then you may go and ascertain whether we can have it, or I will go with
you to avoid loss of time."

The boat was readily loaned, and the two were soon on the river. Mr.
Melville first took the oars, but he was quickly fatigued, and resigned
them to Herbert, who was strong and muscular for his age. As his
companion observed his strong and steady strokes, he said:

"Herbert, I am disposed to envy you your strength and endurance. I get
tired very easily."

"Were you not strong when a boy?" asked Herbert.

"I never had much endurance. My mother had a feeble constitution and was
consumptive, and I inherit something of her weakness."

"It is fortunate that you have money, Mr. Melville, so that you are not
obliged to work."

"True; but I would give half my fortune to be strong and well."

Herbert noticed the hectic flush upon Mr. Melville's cheeks, and his
white, transparent hands, and his sympathy was aroused.

"I see," he said, thoughtfully, "that I am more fortunate than I thought
in my health and strength."

"They are blessings not to be overestimated, Herbert. However, my lot
is, on the whole, a happy one, even though my life will probably be
brief, and I have still many sources of satisfaction and enjoyment."

The river led away from the village, flowing between wooded banks, with
here and there a cottage set in the midst of the fields. Lying back in
the stern, Melville enjoyed their tranquil passage, when their attention
was suddenly attracted by a boy who stood on the bank, frantically
waving his hat. Melville was the first to see him.

"What can that boy want?" he asked.

Herbert immediately looked around, and exclaimed in surprise:

"It's Tom Tripp!"

"Row to shore, and see what he wants," said Melville, quickly.

They were already near, and in a brief space of time they touched the
bank.

"What's the matter, Tom?"

"There's a tramp in the house, stealing all he can lay hands on,"
answered Tom, in excitement.

"What house?"

"Farmer Cole's."

Mr. Cole was the farmer for whom Tom Tripp was working.

Tom explained that the farmer was gone to the village, leaving his wife
alone. A tramp had come to the door and asked for a meal. While Mrs.
Cole was getting something for him, the visitor looked about him and,
finding that there was no man about, boldly demanded money, after
unceremoniously possessing himself of the silver spoons.

"Is he armed?" asked Melville.

"I don't know; I don't think so."

"Does he know that you have gone for help?"

"No; he did not see me. I came from the fields, and saw him through the
window. Mrs. Cole thinks I am in the field and there is no help near."

Physical courage and physical strength do not always go together, and
a weak man often excels a strong man in bravery. George Melville was
thoroughly roused. For injustice or brutality he had a hearty contempt,
and he was not one to stand by and see a ruffian triumph.

"Come, Herbert," he said; "let us go to the help of this poor woman."

"With all my heart," answered Herbert, his eyes flashing.

Before describing the appearance of Herbert and George Melville upon
the scene, I will go back a few minutes and relate what happened at the
farmhouse.

Mrs. Cole was engaged in ironing when she heard a knock at the door.

Answering the summons, she found herself confronted by an ill-looking
fellow whose dusty and travel-soiled garments revealed the character of
the wearer.

"What is it you wish?" asked the farmer's wife.

"I'm hungry!" said the tramp. "Can you give me something to eat?"

"Yes," answered Mrs. Cole, cheerfully, for the good woman could not find
it in her heart to turn away a fellow creature suffering from hunger.
"We have enough and to spare. Come in, and sit down at the table."

The visitor followed her into the kitchen and took a seat at the table,
while the farmer's wife went to the pantry and brought out half a loaf
of bread and a plate of cold meat.

The tramp was not long in attacking it, but after a few mouthfuls laid
down his knife and fork.

"Where's the coffee?" he asked.

"I have no warm coffee," she answered.

"Don't you drink coffee in the morning?"

"Yes, but breakfast was over two or three hours since. Shall I get you a
glass of water?"

"Haven't you any cider?"

"It seems to me you are particular," said Mrs. Cole, growing indignant.

"All the same I want some cider," said the tramp, impudently.

"I have no cider," answered Mrs. Cole, shortly.

"A pretty farmhouse this is, without cider," growled the tramp. "You can
make me some coffee, then!"

"Who are you to order me round in my own house?" demanded Mrs. Cole,
angrily. "One would think you took this for a hotel."

"I take it for what I please," said the tramp.

"If my husband were here you wouldn't dare to talk to me like this!"

It was an unguarded admission, made on the impulse of the moment, and
Mrs. Cole felt its imprudence as soon as she had uttered the words, but
it was too late to recall them.

"Where is your husband?" asked the tramp, his face lighting up with a
gleam of exultation.

"Near by," answered Mrs. Cole, evasively; but her visitor saw that this
was not correct.

"How much money have you in the house?" he demanded, abruptly.

"Money?" gasped the farmer's wife, turning pale.

"Yes, money! Didn't I speak plain enough?" asked the tramp, angrily.

"Are you a thief, then?"

"Don't you dare to call me a thief!" said the tramp, menacingly.

"Then, if you are an honest man, why do you ask that question?"

"Because I am going to borrow what money you have."

"Borrow!"

"Yes," said the man, with a grin. "I'll hand it back when I come around
again."

Under ordinary circumstances there would not have been money enough in
the farmhouse to be anxious about, but it so happened that Farmer Cole
had sold a yoke of oxen, and the money received, a hundred dollars,
was upstairs in a bureau drawer. The thought of this, though she didn't
suppose the tramp to be aware of it, was enough to terrify Mrs. Cole,
and she sank back in the chair in a panic. Of course the tramp inferred
that there was a considerable sum in the house.

"Come, hurry up!" he said, roughly, "I can't wait here all day. Where do
you keep the money?"

"It is my husband's," said Mrs. Cole, terrified out of all prudence.

"All right! I'll pay it back to him. While you're about it, you may
collect all the spoons, too. I'm going to open a boarding house," he
continued, with a chuckle, "and I shall need them."

"Oh, heavens! What shall I do?" ejaculated the frightened woman.




CHAPTER X. AN EXCITING SCENE.



"You'd better go upstairs and get that money, or I will go up myself,"
said the tramp, boldly.

"I will go," said Mrs. Cole, terrified.

It was at this time that Tom Tripp, looking in at the window, got an
idea of the situation, but he was unobserved. The river bank was near,
and he ran down to it, hoping, but not expecting, to see some one who
could interfere with the impudent robber. We have already seen that he
was luckier than he anticipated.

Meanwhile Mrs. Cole went upstairs, not knowing how to save the money
from being carried away. She wished heartily that her husband had taken
it with him. One hundred dollars, as she well knew, would be a serious
loss to her husband, who was only moderately well to do. She thought
it possible that the tramp might know how large a sum there was in the
house, but could not be sure. She resolved, however, to make an effort
to save the larger part of the money. From the wallet she took two
five-dollar bills, and then, removing it from the drawer, put it between
the beds. She lingered as long as she dared, and then went downstairs
with the two bills in her hand.

"Well, have you got the money?" growled the tramp.

"Don't take it," she said; "be satisfied with the breakfast I have given
you."

"You're a fool!" said the tramp, rudely. "How much have you got there?"

"Ten dollars."

"Ten dollars!" said the tramp, disdainfully. "What do you take me for?"

"It is a large sum of money to me and my husband, sir," said the poor
woman, nervously.

"It isn't enough for me! You have got more money in the house. Don't lie
to me! You know you have."

"I am not used to be talked to in that way," said Mrs. Cole, forgetting
her timidity for the moment.

"I can't help what you are used to; you'd better not trifle with me. Go
upstairs and bring down the rest of the money--do you hear?"

"Oh, sir!"

"'Oh, sir!'" repeated the tramp, impatiently. "I can't stay here all
day. Are you going to do as I tell you?"

"I suppose I must," said the poor woman.

"That's sensible. You'll find out after a while that nothing is to be
gained by trying to fool me. I'll give you just three minutes to find
that money and bring it down."

"You'll leave the spoons, then?"

"No; I want them, as I've already told you. Come, two minutes are
passed. I don't want to kill you, but--"

Mrs. Cole uttered a shriek of dismay, and turned to obey the command
of her unwelcome visitor, when a loud, clear voice was heard from just
outside the window.

"Stay where you are, Mrs. Cole! There is help at hand. This ruffian
