After dinner a soldier played the fiddle.
Captain Lewis wrote: "Such as were able to shake a foot amused
themselves in dancing on the green."




burst   fif teen   ra vine
cloud   clothes   wave


THE CLOUD-BURST.

One day Captain Clark took Sacajawea and her husband with him to look
over the top of the Falls.
Sacajawea's baby was in his basket on her back.
Captain Clark saw a black cloud.
He said, "It will rain soon.
Let us go into that ravine."
They sat under some big rocks.
Sacajawea took off the baby's basket and put it at her feet.
All the baby's clothes were in the basket.
Sacajawea took the baby in her lap.
It began to rain a little.
The rain did not get to them.
It rained harder.
Then the cloud burst just over the ravine.
The rain and hail made a big wave in the little ravine.
Captain Clark saw the wave coming.
He jumped up and caught his gun in his left hand.
With his right hand he pushed Sacajawea up the bank.
The wave was up to their waists.
They ran faster and got to the top of the bank.
Then the wave was fifteen feet high.
It made a big noise as it ran down the ravine.
Soon it would have caught them and carried them over the Falls.
It did carry away the baby's basket and his clothes, and Captain Clark's
compass.
The next day a soldier found the compass in the mud.




a live   be stride   min er als   be gin ning
ra pid   nar row   source   Co lum bia


AT THE SOURCE OF THE MISSOURI.

When the canoes were ready, the party started up the river above the
Falls.
As they reached the mountains, the river grew narrow.
It was not deep, but it was rapid.
The soldiers had to pull the canoes with ropes.
The river did not run straight.
One day the men dragged the canoes twelve miles.
Then they were only four miles from where they had started.
They had to walk in the river all day.
Their feet were cut by the rocks.
They were ill from being wet so much.
It was hot in the day and cold at night.
They had no wood but willow.
They could not make a good fire.
But they had enough to eat.
Then the river grew very narrow.
The canoes could not go up it.
The soldiers put the canoes under water with rocks in them.
They made another cache.
In it they put skins, plants, seeds, minerals, maps, and some medicines.
Captain Lewis and some men went ahead.
They were looking for Indians.
They wanted to buy some horses.
After a time the river grew so narrow that a soldier put one foot on one
bank and his other foot on the other bank.
Then he said, "Thank God, I am alive to bestride the mighty Missouri."
Before this, people did not know where the Missouri began.
A little way off was the beginning of the mighty Columbia River.
The soldiers reached this place in August.
Captain Lewis was very happy as he drank some cold water from the
beginnings of these two rivers.
Captain Clark and the other men were coming behind.
Sacajawea was with them.
They had all the goods and walked slowly.




a nise      grease        pound
bread       mixed         pow der
hun gry     mush          roast ed
tastes      um brel la    yamp


SACAJAWEA FINDS ROOTS AND SEEDS.

Far up on the Missouri, Sacajawea knew the plants that were good to
eat.
The captains and soldiers were glad that she did.
They had only a little corn left, and there were not many animals
near.
Sacajawea told Captain Clark all about the yamp plant, as her tribe knew
it.
It grew in wet ground.
It had one stem and deeply cut leaves.
Its stem and leaves were dark green.
It had an umbrella of white flowers at the top of the stem.
The Indian women watched the yamp until the stem dried up.
Then they dug for the roots.
The yamp root is white and hard.
The Indians eat it fresh or dried.
When it is dry, they pound it into a fine white powder.
The Indian women make the yamp powder into a mush.
Indian children like yamp mush as much as white children like candy.
It tastes like our anise seed.
The soldiers liked the yamp mush that Sacajawea made.
Sacajawea also made a sunflower mush.
She roasted sunflower seeds.
Then she pounded them into a powder and made a mush with hot water.
She made a good drink of the sunflower powder and cold water.
She mixed the sunflower powder with bear grease and roasted it on hot
rocks.
This made a bread the soldiers liked very much.
Without Sacajawea the soldiers would have been hungry.
They did not know the plants.
Some plants would kill them.
But Sacajawea knew those good to eat.




meet    sang    sucked
own     short   taken

SACAJAWEA'S PEOPLE.

One day near the head of the Missouri, Sacajawea stopped short as she
walked.
She looked hard to the West.
She saw far away some Indians on horseback.
She began to dance and jump.
She waved her arms.
She laughed and called out.
She turned to Captain Clark and sucked her fingers.
This showed that these Indians were her own people.
She ran ahead to meet them.
After a time a woman from the Indians ran out to meet Sacajawea.
When they came together, they put their arms around each other.
They danced together.
They cried together.
This woman had been Sacajawea's friend from the time when they were
babies.
She had been taken East by the same Indians that took Sacajawea.
On the way East she got away from these Indians.
She found her way home.
She had been afraid she would never see Sacajawea again.
Now they were happy to meet.
They danced and sang and cried and laughed with their arms around each
other.




broth er      sent       tied
         sell       shells


SACAJAWEA'S BROTHER.

The party went with Sacajawea's people to their camp.
Captain Clark was taken to the chief's house.
The house was made of a ring of willows.
The chief put his arms about Captain Clark.
He made him sit on a white skin.
He tied in his hair six shells.
Each one then took off his moccasins.
Then they smoked without talking.
When they wanted to talk, they sent for Sacajawea.
She came into the house and sat down.
She looked at the chief.
She saw that he was her brother.
She jumped up and ran to him.
She threw her blanket over his head.
She cried aloud in joy.
He was glad to see her.
He did not cry nor jump.
He did not like to show that he was glad.
Sacajawea told him about the white men.
She said they wanted to go across the Rocky Mountains to the Big Water
in the West.
She did not know the way across the mountains.
The Indians could help them.
They could sell them horses and show them the way across the steep
mountain tops.


Ca me ah wa it     kind


Sacajawea said the white men had many things the Indians would like.
If they found a good way over the mountains, the white men would send
these things to the Indians each summer.
Sacajawea said the white men were kind to her and her baby.
