Fred was compelled to do a good deal of thinking, and the conclusion he
came to was the next best possible to reach. Clearly, the wiser course
was for him to remain where he was for the time being. So long as
darkness remained, it was comparatively easy for him to keep concealed,
and, while the situation could not have grown any worse, with the
passage of the night, the chances were that it would improve, as the way
for a safe run across the exposed area would have shown itself in due
time. But it was natural that the boy should become impatient, and he
easily persuaded himself that his position became more critical each
moment.

He decided to make a run straight for the larger building, depending
not upon concealment but upon speed. He expected to be fired at, and
probably chased by some of the Apaches, but there was a reasonable
chance of his escaping both. The distance was short, and he was sure to
gain a good start at the beginning; but his main reliance was upon his
being recognized by his friends, who would cover his flight. Having
decided upon this course, he did not delay its execution a moment, since
delay foreboded so much.

Breathing a prayer to heaven to guide him safely, he drew in a deep
breath, and, leaping full into the moonlit space, started through his
fiery gauntlet.

For a second or two the tomb-like silence continued, and then he heard
several hoarse, crow-like calls, which he knew were made by the Apaches.
Then came several rifle reports, but he was not injured. It showed,
however, that his flight had been discovered. Fred had nothing to do,
however, but to run, and he put on the utmost speed to which he
could force himself, straining every nerve in the hope of making the
log-house, which seemed to recede as he advanced.

Silence succeeded the shots and shouts, and the heart of the young
fugitive was throbbing with a wild hope, when a noise caused him to look
over his shoulder. To his horror, he perceived an Indian runner on foot,
and within a dozen feet, bearing down upon him with the speed of the
wind. The poor lad felt as if weighed down by a horrible nightmare, but
he bent to his work with the desperation of despair.

It was useless.

His speed was not one half as great as that of the trained Apache, who
bounded forward like a panther, and the next instant griped his horny
fingers in the arm of Fred, who uttered a wail, and sank like one dying.

At that moment, the sharp, penetrating crack of a rifle came from the
direction of the large building, and the warrior, with an ear-splitting
screech, threw up his hands, and fell backward.

"Run, you young beaver! Thar's a chance for you yet!"

The ringing voice of Sut Simpson, aroused the boy, who, finding himself
loose from the grasp of the Indian, bounded forward again. But he had
scarcely done so, when the tramp of horses' hoofs were heard, and a
warrior, more daring than the others, sent his mustang forward with
arrowy swiftness, not behind the lad, but directly in front of him, so
that he was compelled to turn to one side, in the attempt to dodge him.

Detecting his purpose, a fusilade of rifles was kept up from the houses,
but the Apache seemed to escape them all; and, throwing himself on the
opposite side of the horse, so as to interpose the body of the latter
between himself and his enemies, and, without checking his speed, he
reached down, and catching the bewildered lad, dashed up the slope,
bearing him away in triumph.



CHAPTER IX. IN LONE WOLF'S CLUTCHES

Poor Fred Munson struggled with the vigor of desperation to escape
the clutches of the Indian, who swooped down upon him in the fashion
described, but it was in vain; and he scarcely heard the thunder of the
horses' hoofs and saw the figure of the rushing mustang, when he was
snatched up by the muscular and far-reaching Apache, and borne away amid
the shower of bullets, which hurtled as harmlessly about the red rider
and his steed as if the two bore charmed lives.

The daring warrior who performed this remarkable feat had no sooner
secured the boy than he righted himself on the back of his horse,
sitting bolt upright, while, almost at the same instant, the dead run
was toned down to a moderate walk. Turning his head, the Apache emitted
several tantalizing whoops, intended to irritate the whites into firing.

Although he was within easy rifle-shot, no one essayed to fire, and he
knew none would do so. Not even that skillful marksman, Sut Simpson,
dared make the trial, for the painted body of the sinewy red-skin was
covered by that of the boy, whom he held in front of him, and he who
fired at the wretch was much more likely to kill the lad so cunningly
held in his arms. Thus it was that the captor made off with his prize,
and no one was able to check him, although the hearts of the whites
were burning with rage and with the desire to shoot the Apache who had
baffled them so utterly.

Fred was still struggling, in the frantic hope of twisting himself
loose from the grasp of the redskin, when the latter spoke in his harsh,
guttural voice:

"Stop, or I'll kill."

This was said in the best of English, and the boy was astonished, as
may well be supposed, at the linguistic accomplishment of the Indian. At
first he imagined that it was a white man painted and disguised, but
one searching glance not only removed that impression, but revealed the
identity of his captor. It was Lone Wolf, whom he had baffled the night
before in the wood.

"It's all up with me now," was the thought of Fred, when this
intelligence flashed upon him. "He will never forgive me for the way I
stopped him last night. How sorry I am that I didn't shoot him when I
had such a good chance!"

For one minute he thought of appealing to his mercy, but a brief
reflection convinced him that that was worse than useless, and he
abandoned the idea as absurd. He was old enough to know that Indians are
merciless.

It will be remembered that night was closing in when Fred was captured
and a few minutes later, when he turned his head back toward New Boston,
he was unable to distinguish a single house.

The mustang bearing captor and prisoner dropped into an easy gallop,
passing entirely out of the valley and a short distance over the
prairie, where, when he halted, he found himself amid some thirty or
forty mounted Apaches. Here a halt was made and the red-skins engaged in
a consultation, which, as a matter of course, was conducted in their own
language, and, consequently, was unintelligible to the lad, who was as
deeply interested as any of them in the proceedings.

The scene was a strange one, and was so firmly impressed upon his memory
that he was sure he could not forget it if he lived a hundred years.
The Indians he saw now for the first time with their animals perfectly
motionless. They were grouped around their chief in an irregular circle,
and in the gathering darkness, with their long, coarse, black hair
dangling over their shoulders; their low, scarcely perceptible
foreheads; broad, misshapen, painted faces and their hideous figures,
they formed as unearthly a scene as can be conjured up. Several
persisted in talking at the same moment, and they indulged liberally in
gesture, so that it was very apparent that something exciting was before
the convention.

What it was, Fred could not conjecture satisfactorily to himself. He
could not believe that he himself was regarded of sufficient importance
to cause any such discussion, and from what he had heard of the
war-chief, it did not seem probable that he would allow any such wrangle
over a prisoner which he had in his own possession. It surely was
over some other matter, probably concerning the action of the Apaches,
regarding which he had invited discussion; but whatever it was, Fred
could only content himself with looking and listening.

The lad felt that he was as helpless as an infant, and, now that he had
been given time to collect his senses, he stopped making any further
effort to escape from his captor. Knowing the uncontrollable temper of
the Indians, he resolved not to provoke an outburst by any action of his
own. The wonder with him was, that the chief did not kill him the minute
he found that he was in his power. They had not shown any desire to
make prisoners, when it was so much more easy to rid themselves of their
captives by a blow from the tomahawk or the thrust of the knife.

"I suppose they mean to do something dreadful with me," was the thought
of Fred, as he shudderingly looked around upon the repulsive group.

There could be but little doubt of that, and he could do nothing but ask
heaven to protect him in the terrible danger in which he was placed. At
such a time a person's mind is unusually active and a hundred schemes
agitated the mind of the young captive--schemes which, when analyzed by
the clear light of reason, were about as unsubstantial as the fabric of
a dream. Fred felt that if he was not killed immediately there was some
chance for him. A few hours, or at least a day or two, would give time
for his friends to do something. Mickey O'Rooney, upon returning to the
settlement (as he would have to do sooner or later), would not consent
to remain there as long as the fate of his young friend was in doubt.
And there was Sut Simpson, the hunter, who had taken so much pains to
come and warn the settlers of the impending attack. He had witnessed the
capture of the lad and was certain to do all he could to rescue him.
His long experience in the west, and his numerous encounters with these
Indians, had given him a knowledge which would be of great value in such
an emergency. Fred recalled too, that he had heard it stated more than
once that the Indians frequently took prisoners for the purpose
of ransom, and that he might be restored in this manner so soon as
communication could be opened between the Apaches and his friends.

It so happened, therefore, as the minutes passed, that something like
the renewal of hope came to the heart of the lad, who had reached the
conclusion that the subject under discussion did not relate to himself.

This Apache convention did not prolong its session. Lone Wolf seemed to
permit his warriors to talk until he became weary, when he said a few
words, and the talk ended. During the discussion, numbers had continued
to come in, until there were over a hundred gathered together. The moon
was shining from a clear sky overhead, and the group gathered on the
open prairie, where the members thereof were in readiness to dash in any
direction, in case of an attack. With the words of Lone Wolf came the
adjournment of the convention. The talk ceased instantly, as if by
magic, and the heads of the horses were turned toward the north.

The Indians were about to leave the neighborhood where they had been so
roughly used by the whites. A number had already gone, bearing with them
the dead and wounded, and the remainder were about to depart--that is,
for a time, until their forces could be marshaled into a body that would
sweep New Boston from the face of the earth. Such was the decree of Lone
Wolf. Was he to permit a party of white men to plant a settlement in
the very heart of his country? Was he to allow his hunting grounds to
be appropriated in this fashion? Was he to submit quietly to the
encroachments of those who had never so much as asked his consent? Not
so long as he could summon an army of the best warriors of the Southwest
to his command. If his present company had been too small, then he would
double and treble it. At all events, the power would be provided to
accomplish his purpose.

The horsemen speedily arranged themselves; the head of all turned in
a northerly direction. It took some minutes for them to arrange
themselves, but they were about ready to receive the command of their
chief, when the report of a rifle broke upon the stillness. An Indian,
with a spasmodic shriek, threw up his arms and rolled backward, and then
from his steed, which snorted and reared, as if it, too, had suffered
some injury.

This warrior was directly in the rear of Lone Wolf, and had been so
fairly in line with him that there could be no doubt that the bullet had
really been intended for the chief. The point from whence it came could
not be mistaken.

Over half of the war-party saw the flash of the gun, off to their right,
in the direction of the settlement, and those who chanced not to see it
were quickly informed of the spot by the appearance of a horse, looking
as if he had sprung from the ground itself. No rider was visible; but,
of course, he was there, as he had just demonstrated by means of his
shot. That there might be no doubt of his identity, he uttered a loud
yell, like that with which one Indian defies another, and called out in
the Apache tongue:

"Sut Simpson sends the shot for the heart of Lone Wolf, who is a dog and
a coward."

This was the favorite taunt of the hunter when he sought to draw out his
old enemy. Some of the numerous scars which he received were the direct
result of his daring defiance, and he was hopeful that the challenge
would accomplish something in the present case. Nor was he disappointed.



CHAPTER X. TWO OLD ENEMIES

Lone Wolf recognized the taunt of his old enemy, and his black eye lit
up with a gleam of fire and passion. He would not turn his back upon his
white foe, who had just sent a bullet in quest of his heart. He would
accept the gage of battle, and end his personal warfare of years. But,
like all Indians, the chieftain was the personification of treachery,
without a particle of chivalry or manhood, and when he resolved upon his
attempt to destroy the frontiersman, it was without any regard for the
fairness of the means which he should employ.

He handed the boy to one of the warriors sitting near him, as, of
course, he could do nothing when impeded by his presence, although he
had proved very convenient some time before, in the way of a shield.
Then he said something to a dozen or so of the warriors immediately
around him. The main body remained comparatively motionless, while the
chief rode out in advance and headed toward his antagonist, his horse
upon a slow walk, and moving with great caution.

Sut Simpson was not to be caught napping. No one understood the sneaking
character of Lone Wolf better than did he. He had had it back and forth
with him too many times not to be able to read the fellow through and
through.

While the leader was coming forward in this cautious manner, he saw
several other horsemen in motion. Their direction was not the same as
their leader. They appeared to be riding further back upon the prairie,
as though they had been sent upon some errand to a distant point. But
Sut knew what it meant. They meant to steal away until they were out
of sight, when they would come around behind him. There were enough to
surround him completely and to cut off his escape in any direction.

Sut saw all this and was not surprised thereat. He believed that he
was too old a bird to be caught with such chaff. The manner in which he
could defeat the purpose of Lone Wolf was by direct fight, or by forcing
him into a combat which would anticipate the intention of the Apache. He
preferred the latter course, and he made the effort in the common Indian
way, by uttering a taunt, still using the Apache tongue.

"Lone Wolf is a coward and a dog! He is afraid of the white hunter! He
stays by his warriors, that they may hold his head when his heart grows
faint at sight of his pale-face foe."

Anyone who understands the temper of an Indian will see that such a
taunt as this was of the most exasperating nature. It rankled deeply
in the heart of Lone Wolf, who would have given a dozen of his best
warriors for the chance of burying his tomahawk in the skull of his foe;
but he was too cunning to be misled by his desire for revenge. He,
too, indulged in a little of the taunting business himself; and, as the
hunter had honored him by speaking in the Apache language, he "threw
himself," so to speak, in English.

"The white hunter is afraid of Lone Wolf. He dreads his scalping-knife.
His heart trembles, and he knows not where to hide himself."

"He does not hide from Lone Wolf, for he has hunted days and nights to
find him, and when Lone Wolf saw him coming, he ran among his warriors
and hid."

"He is not among them now," retorted Lone Wolf; "while he seeks Sut
Simpson, the brave hunter moves away."

Such was really the case. Judged from a superficial standpoint, the
greatest show of courage was made by the Apache, whose horse was moving
forward at a slow, cautious pace, while the mustang of Sut Simpson kept
up a continued and equally guarded retreat, so that the distance between
the two taunting enemies remained about the same. The hunter had a
manifest purpose in this, which was simply to draw his foe far enough
away from his support to gain a chance for a sudden dash at him before
he could elude him. At the same time he did not forget the dozen
horsemen that had stolen out so cautiously from the rear, and he knew
that "if it were done, then 'twere well it were done quickly," as
Macbeth so aptly puts it.

Sut carefully measured the intervening space with his eye, but Lone Wolf
was still too near his reserve. The two men were eying each other like
cats, and, although he taunted so loudly, yet no one would have been
readier than the Apache to flee if he believed that he was in greater
peril than his antagonist.

"Why does not Lone Wolf move faster?" asked Sut, hoping to spur him into
