wanted a position, to call upon you, and you would see if you could
help me."

"Very true, I did. Have you made up your mind to seek a place?"

"Yes, sir."

"Are your parents willing you should come to New York?"

"Yes, sir. That is, my mother is willing, and my father will agree
to whatever she decides to be best."

"So far so good. I wouldn't engage any boy who came against his
parents' wishes. Now let me tell you that you have come at a very
favorable time. I have had in my employ for two years the son of an
old friend, who has suited me in every respect; but now he is to go
abroad with his father for a year, and I must supply his place. You
shall have the place if you want it."

"Nothing would suit me better," said Grant, joyfully. "Do you think
I would be competent to fulfill the duties?"

"Harry Becker does not leave me for two weeks. He will initiate you
into your duties, and if you are as quick as I think you are at
learning, that will be sufficient."

"When shall I come, sir?"

"Next Monday morning. It is now Thursday, and that will give you
time to remove to the city."

"Perhaps I had better come Saturday, so as to get settled in a
boarding-house before going to work. Could you recommend some
moderate priced boarding-house, Mr. Reynolds?"

"For the first week you may come to my house as my guest. That will
give you a chance to look about you. I live at 58 West 3-th Street.
You had better take it down on paper. You can come any time on
Monday. That will give you a chance to spend Sunday at home, and you
need not go to work till Tuesday."

Grant expressed his gratitude in suitable terms, and left the office
elated at his good fortune. A surprise awaited him. At the junction
of Wall and New Streets he came suddenly upon a large-sized
bootblack, whose face looked familiar.

"Tom Calder!" he exclaimed. "Is that you?"



CHAPTER IX -- 'UNCLE GODFREY PARTS FROM GRANT



When Tom Calder turned round and saw who had addressed him, he
turned red with mortification, and he tried to hide his blacking
box. He was terribly mortified to have it known that he had been
forced into such a business. If Tom had nothing worse to be ashamed
of he need not have blushed, but he was suffering from false shame.

"When did you come to the city?" he stammered.

"Only this morning."

"I suppose you are surprised to see me in this business," said Tom,
awkwardly.

"There is nothing to be ashamed of," said Grant. "It is an honest
business."

"It's an awful come down for me," said Tom, uncomfortably. "The fact
is, I've had hard luck."

"I am sorry to hear that," said Grant.

"I expected a place in Wall Street, but I came just too late, and
things are awful dull anyway. Then I was robbed of my money."

"How much?" asked Grant, curiously, for he didn't believe a word of
it.

"Eight dollars and thirty-three cents," replied Tom, glibly.

"I thought you were too smart to be robbed," said Grant, slyly. "If
it had been a green boy from the country like me, now, it wouldn't
have been surprising."

"I was asleep when I was robbed," explained Tom, hurriedly. "A
fellow got into my room in the night, and picked my pocket. I
couldn't help that, now, could I?"

"I suppose not."

"So I had to get something to do, or go back to Colebrook. I say,
Grant---"

"Well?"

"Don't you tell any of the fellers at home what business I'm in,
that's a good fellow."

"I won't if you don't want me to," said Grant.

"You see, it's only a few days till I can get something else to do."

"It's a great deal better blacking boots than being idle, in my
opinion," said Grant.

"That's the way I look at it. But you didn't tell me what you came
to the city for?"

"I'm coming here for good," announced Grant.

"You haven't got a place, have you?" ejaculated Tom, in surprise.

"Yes, I am to enter the office of Mr. Reynolds, a stock broker.
There is his sign."

"You don't say so I. Why, that's just the sort of place I wanted.
How did you get the chance?"

"I got acquainted with Mr. Reynolds on board the cars that day we
came to New York together."

"And you asked him for the place?"

"I asked him this morning."

"You might have given me the chance," grumbled Tom, enviously. "You
knew it was the sort of place I was after."

"I don't think I was called upon to do that," said Grant, smiling.
"Besides, he wouldn't have accepted you."

"Why not? Ain't I as smart as you, I'd like to know?" retorted Tom
Calder, angrily.

"He heard us talking in the cars, and didn't like what you said."

"What did I say?"

"He doesn't approve of boys smoking cigarettes and going to bucket
shops. You spoke of both."

"How did he hear?"

"He was sitting just behind us."

"Was it that old chap that was sittin' with you when I came back
from the smoking car?"

"Yes."

"Just my luck," said Tom, ruefully.

"When are you goin' to work?" asked Tom, after a pause.

"Next Monday."

"Where are you going to board? We might take a room together, you
know. It would be kind of social, as we both come from the same
place."

It did not occur to Grant that the arrangement would suit him at
all, but he did not think it necessary to say so. He only said: "I
am going to Mr. Reynolds' house, just at first."

"You don't say so! Why, he's taken a regular fancy to you."

"If he has, I hope he won't get over it."

"I suppose he lives in a handsome brownstone house uptown."

"Very likely; I've never seen the house."

"Well, some folks has luck, but I ain't one of 'em," grumbled Tom.

"Your luck is coming, I hope, Tom."

"I wish it would come pretty soon, then; I say, suppose your folks
won't let you take the place?" he asked, suddenly, brightening up.

"They won't oppose it." "I thought they wanted you to go to
college."

"I can't afford it. It would take too long before I could earn
anything, and I ought to be helping the family."

"I'm goin' to look out for number one," said Tom, shrugging his
shoulders. "That's all I can do."

Tom's mother was a hard-working woman, and had taken in washing for
years. But for her the family would often have lacked for food. His
father was a lazy, intemperate man, who had no pride of manhood, and
cared only for himself. In this respect Tom was like him, though the
son had not as yet become intemperate.

"I don't think there is any chance of my giving up the place,"
answered Grant. "If I do, I will mention your name."

"That's a good fellow."

Grant did not volunteer to recommend Tom, for he could not have done
so with a clear conscience. This omission, however, Tom did not
notice.

"Well, Tom, I must be going. Good-by, and good luck."

Grant went home with a cheerful face, and announced his good luck to
his mother.

"I am glad you are going to your employer's house," she said. "I
wish you could remain there permanently."

"So do I, mother; but I hope at any rate to get a comfortable
boarding place. Tom Calder wants to room with me."

"I hope you won't think of it," said Mrs. Thornton, alarmed.

"Not for a moment. I wish Tom well, but I shouldn't like to be too
intimate with him. And now, mother, I think I ought to write to
Uncle Godfrey, and tell him what I have decided upon."

"That will be proper, Grant." Grant wrote the following letter, and
mailed it at once:

"DEAR UNCLE GODFREY:

I am afraid you won't like what I have to tell you, but I think it
is my duty to the family to give up the college course you so kindly
offered me, in view of father's small salary and narrow means. I
have been offered a place in the office of a stock broker in New
York, and have accepted it. I enter upon my duties next Monday
morning. I hope to come near paying my own way, and before very long
to help father. I know you will be disappointed, Uncle Godfrey, and
I hope you won't think I don't appreciate your kind offer, but I
think it would be selfish in me to accept it. Please do forgive me,
and believe me to be

Your affectionate nephew, GRANT THORNTON."

In twenty-four hours an answer came to this letter. It ran thus:

"NEPHEW GRANT:

I would not have believed you would act so foolishly and
ungratefully. It is not often that such an offer as mine is made to
a boy. I did think you were sensible enough to understand the
advantages of a professional education. I hoped you would do credit
to the name of Thornton, and keep up the family reputation as a man
of learning and a gentleman. But you have a foolish fancy for going
into a broker's office, and I suppose you must be gratified. But you
needn't think I will renew my offer. I wash my hands of you from
this time forth, and leave you to your own foolish course. The time
will come when you will see your folly.

GODFREY THORNTON."

Grant sighed as he finished reading this missive. He felt that his
uncle had done him injustice. It was no foolish fancy, but a
conscientious sense of duty, which had led him to sacrifice his
educational prospects.

On Monday morning he took the earliest train for New York.



CHAPTER X -- A DAY IN WALL STREET



Grant went at once on his arrival in the city to Mr. Reynolds'
office. He had in his hand a well-worn valise containing his small
stock of clothing. The broker was just leaving the office for the
Stock Exchange as Grant entered.

"So you are punctual," he said, smiling.

"Yes, sir, I always on time."

"That is an excellent habit. Here, Harry."

In answer to this summons, Harry Becker, a boy two years older and
correspondingly larger than Grant, came forward. He was a
pleasant-looking boy, and surveyed Grant with a friendly glance.

"Harry," said Mr. Reynolds, "this is your successor. Do me the favor
of initiating him into his duties, so that when you leave me he will
be qualified to take your place."

"All right, sir."

The broker hurried over to the Exchange, and the two boys were left
together.

"What is your name?" asked the city boy.

"Grant Thornton."

"Mine is Harry Becker. Are you accustomed to the city?"

"No, I am afraid you will find me very green," answered Grant.

"You are not the boy to remain so long," said Harry, scrutinizing
him attentively.

"I hope not. You are going to Europe, Mr. Reynolds tells me."

"Yes, the governor is going to take me."

"The governor?"

"My father, I mean," said Harry, smiling.

"I suppose you are not sorry to go?"

"Oh, no; I expect to have a tip-top time. How would you like it?"

"Very much, if I could afford it, but at present I would rather fill
your place in the office. I am the son of a poor country minister,
and must earn my own living."

"How did you get in with Mr. Reynolds?" asked Harry.

Grant told him. "Is he easy to get along with?" he inquired, a
little anxiously.

"He is very kind and considerate. Still he is stanch, and expects a
boy to serve him faithfully."

"He has a right to expect that."

"As I am to break you in, you had better go about with me
everywhere. First, we will go to the post-office."

The two boys walked to Nassau Street, where the New York post-office
was then located. Harry pointed out the box belonging to the firm,
and producing a key opened it, and took out half a dozen letters.

"There may be some stock orders in these letters," he said; "we will
go back to the office, give them to Mr. Clark to open, and then you
can go with me to the Stock Exchange."

Ten minutes later they entered the large room used by the brokers as
an Exchange. Grant looked about him in undisguised astonishment. It
seemed like a pandemonium. The room was full of men, shouting,
gesticulating and acting like crazy men. The floor was littered with
fragments of paper, and on a raised dais were the officers of the
Exchange, the chief among them, the chairman, calling rapidly the
names of a long list of stocks. Each name was followed by a confused
shouting, which Grant learned afterward to be bids for the stock
named. There were several groups of brokers, each apparently
interested in some leading security. In each of the galleries, one
at each end, overlooking the stock room, curious spectators were
watching what was going on.

Harry Decker was amused at Grant's look of surprise and
bewilderment.

"You'll get used to it in time," he said. "Say--there is Mr.
Reynolds. I must speak to him."

Mr. Reynolds stood near a placard on which, in prominent letters,
was inscribed "Erie." Harry handed him a paper, which he took,
glanced at quickly, and then resumed his bidding.

"He has just bought one thousand Erie," said Harry, aside, to Grant.

"One thousand?"

"Yes, a thousand shares, at fifty-five."

"Fifty-five dollars?"

"Yes."

"Why, that will make fifty-five thousand dollars," ejaculated Grant,
in wonder.

"Yes, that is one of the orders I brought over just now."

"A man must have a great deal of capital to carry on this business,
if that is only an item of a single day's business."

"Yes, but not so much as you may imagine. I can't explain now, but
you'll understand better as you go on. Now we'll go back and see if
there's anything to do in the office."

Not long afterward Harry had to come back to the Exchange again, and
Grant came with him. He found something new to surprise him.

A tall man of dignified presence was walking across the floor, when
a fellow member with a sly stroke sent his tall hat spinning across
the floor. When the victim turned the mischief-maker was intent upon
his memorandum book, and the tall man's suspicions fell upon a
short, stout young man beside him. With a vigorous sweep he knocked
the young man's hat off, saying, "It's a poor rule that don't work
both ways."

This led to a little scrimmage, in which a dozen were involved. The
brokers, staid, middle-aged men, most of them, seemed like a pack of
school boys at recess. Grant surveyed the scene with undisguised
astonishment.

"What does it mean, Harry?" he asked.

"Oh, that's a very common occurrence," said Harry, smiling.

"I never saw grown men acting so. Won't there be a fight?"

"Oh, it's all fun. The brokers are unlike any other class of men in
