spending the winter with us. The place where we were was far from
the homes of men, and it was only once in a long while that we had
to watch out for terrible guns. Of course, we had to have our wits
with us all the time, because there are Hawks and Owls and Minks
down there just as there are up here, but any Duck who can't keep
out of their way deserves to furnish one of them a dinner.

"Then there was another fellow we had to watch out for, a queer
fellow whom we never see anywhere but down there. It was never safe
to swim too near an old log floating in the water or lying on the
bank, because it might suddenly open a great mouth and swallow one
of us whole."

"What's that?" Peter Rabbit leaned forward and stared at Mrs. Quack
with his eyes popping right out. "What's that?" he repeated. "How
can an old log have a mouth?"

Mrs. Quack just had to smile, Peter was so in earnest and looked
so astonished.

"Of course," said she, "no really truly log has a mouth or is alive,
but this queer fellow I was speaking of looks so much like an old
log floating in the water unless you look at him very sharply,
that many a heedless young Duck has discovered the difference when
it was too late. Then, too, he will swim under water and come up
underneath and seize you without any warning. He has the biggest
mouth I've ever seen, with terrible-looking teeth, and could swallow
me whole."

[Illustration with caption: "Some folks call him Alligator and some
just 'Gator."]

By this time Peter's eyes looked as if they would fall out of his
head. "What is his name?" whispered Peter.

"It's Old Ally the 'Gator," replied Mrs. Quack. "Some folks call
him Alligator and some just 'Gator, but we call him Old Ally. He's a
very interesting old fellow. Some time perhaps I'll tell you more
about him. Mr. Quack and I kept out of his reach, you may be sure.
We lived quietly and tried to get in as good condition as possible
for the long journey back to our home in the North. When it was
time to start, a lot of us got together, just as we did when we came
down from the North, only this time the young Ducks felt themselves
quite grown up.  In fact, before we started there was a great deal
of love-making, and each one chose a mate. That was a very happy
time, a very happy time indeed, but it was a sad time too for us
older Ducks, because we knew what dreadful things were likely to
happen on the long journey. It is hard enough to lose father or
mother or brother or sister, but it is worse to lose a dear mate."

Mrs. Quack's eyes suddenly filled with tears again. "Oh, dear,"
she sobbed, "I wish I knew what became of Mr. Quack."

Peter said nothing, but looked the sympathy he felt. Presently Mrs.
Quack went on with her story. "We had a splendid big flock when we
started, made up wholly of pairs, each pair dreaming of the home
they would build when they reached the far North. Mr. Quack was
the leader as usual, and I flew right behind him. We hadn't gone
far before we began to hear the terrible guns, and the farther we
went, the worse they got. Mr. Quack led us to the safest feeding
and resting grounds he knew of, and for a time our flock escaped
the terrible guns. But the farther we went, the more guns there
were." Mrs. Quack paused and Peter waited.




XI

THE TERRIBLE, TERRIBLE GUNS


"Bang! Bang! Bang! Not a feather spare!       Kill! Kill! Kill!
Wound and rip and tear!"

That is what the terrible guns roar from morning to night at Mrs.
Quack and her friends as they fly on their long journey to their
home in the far North. I don't wonder that she was terribly uneasy
and nervous as she sat in the Smiling Pool talking to Peter Rabbit;
do you?

"Yes," said she, continuing her story of her long journey from the
sunny Southland where she had spent the winter, "the farther we
got, the more there were of those terrible guns. It grew so bad
that as well as Mr. Quack knew the places where we could find food,
and no Duck that ever flew knew them better, he couldn't find one
where we could feel perfectly sure that we were safe. The very
safest-looking places sometimes were the most dangerous. If you saw
a lot of Rabbits playing together on the Green Meadows, you would
feel perfectly safe in joining them, wouldn't you?"

Peter nodded. "I certainly would," said he. "If it was safe for
them it certainly would be safe for me."

"Well, that is just the way we felt when we saw a lot of Ducks
swimming about on the edge of one of those feeding-places. We were
tired, for we had flown a long distance, and we were hungry. It
was still and peaceful there and not a thing to be seen that looked
the least bit like danger. So we went straight in to join those
Ducks, and then, just as we set our wings to drop down on the water
among them, there was a terrible bang, bang, bang, bang! My heart
almost stopped beating. Then how we did fly! When we were far
out over the water where we could see that nothing was near us we
stopped to rest, and there we found only half as many in our flock
as there had been."

"Where were the others?" asked Peter, although he guessed.

"Killed or hurt by those terrible guns," replied Mrs. Quack sadly.
"And that wasn't the worst of it. I told you that when we started
each of us had a mate.  Now we found that of those who had escaped,
four had lost their mates. They were heartbroken. When it came
time for us to move on, they wouldn't go. They said that if they
did reach the nesting-place in the far North, they couldn't have
nests or eggs or young because they had no mates, so what was the
use? Besides, they hoped that if they waited around they might find
their mates. They thought they might not have been killed, but just
hurt, and might be able to get away from those hunters. So they
left us and swam back towards that terrible place, calling for their
lost mates, and it was the saddest sound. I know now just how they
felt, for I have lost Mr. Quack, and that's why I'm here." Mrs.
Quack drew a wing across her eyes to wipe away the tears.

"But what happened to those Ducks that were swimming about there
and made you think it was safe?" asked Peter, with a puzzled look
on his face.

"Nothing," replied Mrs. Quack. "They had been fastened out there
in the water by the hunters so as to make us think it safe, and the
terrible guns were fired at us and not at them. The hunters were
hidden under grass, and that is why we didn't see them."

Peter blinked his eyes rapidly as if he were having hard work to
believe what he had been told. "Why," said he at last, "I never
heard of anything so dreadfully unfair in all my life! Do you mean
to tell me that those hunters actually made other Ducks lead you
into danger?"

"That's just what I mean," returned Mrs. Quack. "Those two-legged
creatures don't know what fairness is. Why, some of them have
learned our language and actually call us in where they can shoot
us. Just think of that! They tell us in our own language that there
is plenty to eat and all is safe, so that we will think that other
Ducks are hidden and feeding there, and then when we go to join
them, we are shot at! You ought to be mighty thankful, Peter Rabbit,
that you are not a Duck."

"I am," replied Peter. He knew that not one of the meadow and forest
people who were always trying to catch him would do a thing like
that.

"It's all true," said Mrs. Quack, "and those hunters do other things
just as unfair. Sometimes awful storms will come up, and we just
have to find places where we can rest. Those hunters will hide
near those places and shoot at us when we are so tired that we can
hardly move a wing. It wouldn't be so bad if a hunter would be
satisfied to kill just one Duck, just as Reddy Fox is, but he seems
to want to kill EVERY Duck. Foxes and Hawks and Owls catch a good
many young Ducks, just as they do young Rabbits, but you know how
we feel about that.  They only hunt when they are hungry, and they
hunt fairly. When, they have got enough to make a dinner, they stop.
They keep our wits sharp. If we do not keep out of their way, it
is our own fault. It is a kind of game--the game of life. I guess
it is Old Mother Nature's way of keeping us wide-awake and sharpening
our wits, and so making us better fitted to live.

"With these two-legged creatures with terrible guns, it is all
different. We don't have any chance at all. If they hunted us as
Reddy Fox does, tried to catch us themselves, it would be different.
But their terrible guns kill when we are a long way off, and there
isn't any way for us to know of the danger. And then, when one of
them does kill a Duck, he isn't satisfied, but keeps on killing
and killing and killing. I'm sure one would make him a dinner, if
that is what he wants.

"And they often simply break the wings or otherwise terribly hurt
the ones they shoot at, and then leave them to suffer, unable
to take care of themselves. Oh, dear, I'm afraid that is what has
happened to Mr. Quack."

Once more poor Mrs. Quack was quite overcome with her troubles and
sorrows.  Peter wished with all his heart that he could do something
to comfort her, but of course he couldn't, so he just sat still and
waited until she could tell him just what did happen to Mr. Quack.




XII

WHAT DID HAPPEN TO MR. QUACK


"When did you last see Mr. Quack?" asked Jerry Muskrat, who had
been listening while Mrs. Quack told Peter Rabbit about her terrible
journey.

"Early yesterday morning," replied Mrs. Quack, the tears once more
filling her eyes. "We had reached the Big River over there, just
six of us out of the big flock that had started from the sunny
Southland. How we got as far as that I don't know. But we did, and
neither Mr. Quack nor I had lost a feather from those terrible guns
that had banged at us all the way up and that had killed so many
of our friends.

"We were flying up the Big River, and everything seemed perfectly
safe. We were in a hurry, and when we came to a bend in the Big
River, we flew quite close to shore, so as not to have to go way
out and around. That was where Mr. Quack made a mistake. Even the
smartest people will make mistakes sometimes, you know."

Peter Rabbit nodded, "I know," said he. "I've made them myself."
And then he wondered why Jerry Muskrat laughed right out.

"Yes," continued Mrs. Quack, "that is where Mr. Quack made a mistake,
a great mistake. I suppose that because not a single gun had been
fired at us that morning he thought perhaps there were no hunters
on the Big River. So to save time he led us close to shore. And
then it happened. There was a bang, bang of a terrible gun, and
down fell Mr. Quack just as we had seen so many fall before.  It was
awful. There was Mr. Quack flying in front of me on swift, strong
wings, and there never was a swifter, stronger flier or a handsomer
