"Gentlemen of Dormitory 4, report at the office in the morning with an
explanation," droned the severe tones of the monitor out in the corridor.




CHAPTER XII

A STRANGE HAPPENING


"Bob, this is worse than the Banbury crowd could devise," remarked Frank.

"Yes. The only thing is that in this case it's friends who are responsible
for it. Ugh! I'm sunk to the knees in water."

"I'm in to the waist," said Frank. "They've gone--the vandals! Off with the
blindfolds. Well, this is a pretty fix!"

Two minutes previous a sepulchral voice had spoken the awful words:

"Slide them into the endless pit!"

Then, with a gay college song, the mob that had led Frank and Bob on a
hazing trip, that had been positively hair-raising in its incidents, had
seemed to retire from the spot. Their laughter and songs now faded far away
in the distance.

"Well," uttered Bob, getting his eyes clear and his arms free, "we've had
an experience."

"I should say so," echoed Frank. "That old ice chute they dropped us into
must have been a hundred feet long."

"The hogshead they rolled us downhill in went double that distance,"
declared Bob.

"Well, let's get out of this," advised Frank.

That was more easily said than done. Comparative strangers as yet to the
country surrounding Bellwood, even when they had got on solid ground out
of the muck and mire of the boggy waste, they knew not which way to turn.

It was dark as Erebus and the wind was blowing a gale. Nowhere on the
landscape could they discover a guiding light. They were in a scrubby
little patch of woods, and they were confused even as to the points of
the compass.

"I think this is the direction of the academy," said Frank, striking out on
a venture.

"Yes; and we want to get there soon, too," replied Bob, "for we're going to
have a great storm in a few minutes."

As Bob spoke the big drops began to splash down. As the lads emerged upon a
flat field, the drops seemed to form into streams, and they breasted the
tempest breathless, blown about, and drenched to the skin.

"We've got to get shelter somewhere," declared Bob. "Let's put back for the
timber."

"I think I see some kind of a building ahead," observed Frank. "Yes, it's a
hut or a barn. Hustle, now, and we'll find cover till the worst of this is
over."

In a few minutes they came to an old cabin standing near some dead trees.
It was small and square and had one door and one window. Bob banged at the
door with a billet of wood he found, but could not budge it. The windows
had stout bars crisscrossing it.

"Give it up," he said at last. "No one living here, and padlocked as if it
was a bank. Hey, Frank, here's a chance."

In veering to the partial shelter of the lee side of the old structure, Bob
had noticed a sashless aperture answering for a window in the low attic of
the cabin. He got a hold with fingers and toes in the chinks between the
logs, and steadily climbed up.

"Come on," he called. "It's high and dry under the roof," and his companion
joined him, both half reclining across a loose board floor.

"Hear that," said Bob, as the rain seemed to strike the roof in bucket-like
volume. "I hope the crowd who got us in this fix are ten miles from any
shelter."

The rain kept on without the slightest cessation. In fact, it seemed to
increase every minute in volume. Fully half an hour passed by. Neither lad
thought of leaving shelter, and Bob had stretched himself out. The
conversation languished. Then Frank, catching himself nodding, sat up and
looked out of the window, noticing that his rugged, healthy comrade was
breathing heavily in profound slumber.

"There's a light coming this way," spoke Frank to himself, as he peered
from the window. "If it's a wagon, I'll hustle down and see if there's any
chance of a lift in the direction of the school. Hello, it's two men!
Hello again--they're coming right here to this hut. There, I can hear them
at the front door."

Frank was convinced a minute later that the newcomers lived in the cabin,
or at least had secured the right to occupy the place. He could hear them
at the padlock, and then their lantern illumined the room below. Gazing
through a crack in the floor, Frank could make out all they did and was
able to overhear their conversation.

They were two rough-looking, trampish fellows. Each threw a bundle on the
floor. The room had some old boxes in it and a pile of hay in one corner.
The men seated themselves on boxes and let the water drip from their soaked
clothing.

"That was a pretty husky tramp," spoke one of them.

"I see the governor isn't here yet."

"No; so it's up to us to get as comfortable as we can."

They threw off their coats, and one of them undid a bundle. He took from it
some bread, cheese, and a big black bottle, and the twain were soon
enjoying themselves. When they had finished eating they lay down in the
straw, smoking short, stubby pipes and chatting with one another.

"Now, then, look a-here, Jem," one of them remarked, "you wouldn't see me
tramping around in this kind of weather if it wasn't that there was a
chance to get something out of it."

"Don't I tell you what's at the end of it, Dan?" retorted the other. "Don't
I say as how the governor pays the expenses right royal while we're here?
And then don't you know as how he's agreed to turn over the other half of
that card, when we helps him get his plans through about this young kid up
at the academy?"

"Say, that was a funny thing about that card," observed the man called Dan.

"No, 'twasn't," dissented Jem. "We got our hands on a fine piece of goods.
We had to hide it till there was no danger of its being looked for. The gov
and me therefore goes to a friend and we puts it in his strong safe. He is
told that we has a card torn up with writing on it, atween us. The
arrangement is made that he doesn't let go the property till we both
presents them there pieces of card together. So you see, the gov can't get
the property and run off with it. No more can I. Now, then, the gov says I
can have the property entire if we help him on his present business here."

"Say," spoke up the interested Dan, "is the property pretty fine?"

"I'd call it good for a thousand dollars."

"Where did you fellows get it, Jem?"

"At a town called Tipton."

"Ah!" aspirated the listening Frank in a great gasp.

"And what was it, Jem?"

"A bracelet--a diamond bracelet," replied the man Jem.

Frank held his breath. He was greatly excited and startled. It seemed a
strange thing to him that here, in a lonely loft hundreds of miles from
home, by pure accident he should run across a clue to the person who had
stolen Samuel Mace's diamond bracelet, the mysterious theft of which had so
darkened our hero's young life.




CHAPTER XIII

SOME MYSTERY


Frank gulped down his astonishment. Then he sat still without a rustle. He
was afraid that Bob might snore, wake up talking, and had an idea to creep
closer to his chum, wake him up softly, and warn him to remain perfectly
quiet.

Before Frank could act, however, there came a sudden interruption to the
conversation between the men below, Jem and Dan. There was a thundering
knock at the door.

"It's the gov at last!" shouted Jem, jumping to his feet.

"No one else!" echoed Dan.

Jem opened the door and a man staggered in. His slouch hat, dripping wet,
was pulled down over his face. He was completely enveloped in a great rain
blanket. The hole in its center fitted about his neck and covered him
nearly to the feet, even to his arms. These held something under the cloak,
for its bulging surface showed that he was carrying something.

"Help me out of this," growled the newcomer. "Good I borrowed this blanket
in a convenient barn, or everything would have been soaked."

"Borrowed!" guffawed Jem.

"Haw! haw!" roared Dan, as if it was a great joke. "There you are, mate."

If Frank had been surprised and startled at the secret concerning Samuel
Mace's missing diamond bracelet, he was dumfounded at the face of the
newcomer.

"Why," he breathed in wonderment, "it's the man I drove off from bothering
that traveling scissors grinding boy at Tipton, Ned Foreman. Yes, this is
the man the boy called Tim Brady, and--whew!"

Frank's thoughts seemed to come as swift as lightning. He had marveled at
the strange series of events that had given him a clue as to the persons
who had stolen the diamond bracelet that had got him into so much trouble.
Now that the tramp, Brady, had appeared on the scene, Frank saw how it all
could have happened, for Brady was in Tipton the day the diamond bracelet
was stolen.

The only thing that mystified Frank was why these people should be at
Bellwood, so far away from Tipton. There was scarcely a chance in a
thousand that they could have come accidentally.

When the two men had pulled the blanket from Brady, he disclosed two
packages in his hand, one resembling a hat box. He placed them on the
floor.

"Got the togs there?" inquired Jem.

"Yes," nodded Brady. "I'm famished; give me something to eat."

Frank did not stir. He felt that it was important that he should remain
where he was. These men knew about Samuel Mace's missing bracelet. That was
one point of interest. They were up to something now; that was another.

Frank listened to every word they said, but they did not just then again
refer to the bracelet nor discuss their plans. They talked generally of how
easy the farmers they had met gave away meals. They discussed various
stores and houses that might be robbed readily. Frank realized that they
were very bad men.

Finally, having finished his meal, Brady got up from the box he had been
seated on. He went over to the bundles he had brought, undoing one of them.
He took out a long black dress coat. This he tried on. It buttoned up to
his neck closely, like some clerical garb.

He opened the other box and took out a silk hat. As he put this on his head
he straightened up and drew his face down in mock seriousness.

"My friends," he sniffled, "you see in me a penitent and reformed man."

"Hold me!" yelled Jem, rolling around on the straw in a paroxysm of
laughter.

"Will it do?" smirked Brady. "Ter-rewly, my friends, I seek only now to
make amends for my wicked, misspent life--a--ah!"

"Wow! Oh, you actor! It's enough to make a cow laugh!"

"Will it work?"

"Work!" chuckled the man Jem. "Why, you'd win over the president of the
college himself."

Bang!

"What was that?" demanded Brady sharply.

Frank was in dismay. In his sleep Bob Upton had groaned, then moved.
Probably, in some nightmare, dreaming he was back among his old tyrant
masters on the farm, he had kicked out his foot, landing heavily on the
floor of the loft.

"Oh, I guess it was the wind rattling some loose timber about the old ruin
of a place," observed Jem.

Frank crept cautiously to the side of his sleeping comrade.

Bob was muttering restlessly in his sleep, and Frank feared another
outbreak. He placed his hand over Bob's mouth.

"Wake up--quietly, now--there is somebody below," he whispered.

"What's the row?" droned Bob.

"S--st! Follow me. Get out of this. It's stopped raining."

Frank managed to get himself and his friend out of the place without
disturbing the three men in the hut or apprising them of their presence.
The rain had nearly stopped. Bob rubbed his eyes sleepily.

"Some tramps came into the cabin yonder after you went to sleep," explained
Frank. "They are hard characters, and it is best to steer clear of them."

It took the two boys an hour to find their way to Bellwood School. Bob was
tired out and sleepy, and Frank was by no means in a mood for chatting. He
was absorbed in thinking out his strange discoveries of the night.

"I've got a clue to that diamond bracelet of Mace's," he reflected. "Mace
don't deserve any favors from me after the outrageous way he's acted, but
if I can do anything toward getting it back for him, all right. I wonder,
though, what it means--that man, Brady, being here, and what trick he is up
to with the high hat and the dress coat? His friend spoke of the president
of the college and some 'kid.' Are they up to some thieving trick? If so, I
want to be alert to balk them."

When the two boys reached the academy, they had some difficulty in locating
a loose window, and they had to use caution in getting to their room. The
bed felt so good after the rough experiences of the night that Frank soon
joined his snoring companion in the land of dreams, leaving action as to
the crowd at the cabin for the morrow.

They met their friendly persecutors of the evening before good-naturedly at
breakfast. It was easy for Frank to see that Ritchie and his associates
were ready to accept them as gritty comrades who could take a joke as a
matter of course.

"You've paid your initiation fee in pluck and endurance, Jordan," said Mark
Prescott, the able lieutenant of Dean Ritchie in his rounds of mischief.
"You and Upton can consider yourselves full-fledged members of the Twilight
Club."

"Good!" laughed Frank as he started for the campus. Before he was out of
the building, however, Frank got thinking of his adventures of the evening
before. And instead of immediately joining his fellows he strolled around
to the side of the academy.

There was a walk, not much used by the students, leading past the kitchen
and laundry quarters of the school. As Frank got nearly to the end of this
a baseball whizzed by him and he saw Banbury and a crony named Durkin
making for it.

Just at that moment, too, Frank noticed a boy wearing a long apron sitting
on a stone step just outside the kitchen door.

He was peeling potatoes, and he was peeling them right, fully engrossed in
his labors, as though it were some artistic and agreeable occupation.

"Well! well! well!" irresistibly ejaculated Frank. "If it isn't Ned
Foreman!"




CHAPTER XIV

THE ROW ON THE CAMPUS


"Shake!" cried Frank, rushing forward and extending a warm hand.

The boy peeling potatoes looked up in some surprise. For a minute he was
puzzled. Then his face broke into a genial smile.

"It's the fellow I met at Tipton----" he began.

"That's who--Frank Jordan."

"Who saved me from getting robbed."

"Put it that way, if you like," answered Frank. "How did you ever come
here?"

"Walked, coaxed freight hands, and got some passenger lifts," explained
Ned. "You know I told you I was going out of the scissors grinding and into
school?"

"I know you did."

"Well, I've landed. I've saved up twenty dollars. That don't go far in
tuition, so I'm working my way through school."

"Good for you," cheered Frank. "You're the kind that makes a mark in the
world. Say, come up to my room. I want to have a real chummy chat with
you."

"I couldn't do that just now," demurred Ned. "You see, I help in the
kitchen here from six to eight in the morning, eleven to one at noon and
five to seven in the evening."

"I haven't seen you in any of the classes."

"No; one of the professors is coaching me. You see, I need training to get
into even the lowest class. As I said, I can't leave my work here now, but
I may meet you occasionally after dark."

"Come at four this afternoon."

"Think I'd better?" inquired Ned dubiously.

"Why not?"

"Well, to be candid," answered Ned manfully, "my clothes aren't very good,
as you see, and some of the fellows here have pretty well snubbed me, and
maybe it would be wiser for me to keep my place."

"Your place?" fired up Frank. "Except among the stuck-up cads, your place
is to be welcome to all the privileges of any well-behaved student, and
I'll see to it that you get them, too."

"Hi, Jordan; on the domestic list?" broke in Banbury just then. He had
regained the baseball and with his companion stood staring at Frank and
Ned.

"Hum! I should say so," sniggered Durkin with a chuckle. "Pah! How it
smells of onions and dishwater!"

"Take your friend and introduce him to Ritchie," sneered Banbury. "He needs
a new catcher for his measly team that we're going to wallop to-morrow."

"Say," spoke Frank steadily, though with a flashing eye, "I'll bet you that
my friend here--understand, my friend, Ned Foreman--would prove as good a
catcher as he has to my knowledge run a business where he was trusted and
did his duty well. I'll make another bet--you'll be the second-rate scholar
you are now two years further on, when my friend is the boss of some
surveying camp, where the smartest fellow is the one who has learned the
cooking and science both--not a smattering--but from the ground up."

"Yah!" yawped Banbury, but he saw something in Frank's eye that warned him
to sheer off promptly.

"You'll run up against a few cads like that fellow," explained Frank to
Ned. "Use 'em up in one chapter, and stick to the real friends I'll
introduce you to."

"Jordan, you're a true-blue brick," declared Ned heartily, "but I know from
experience how these things go----"

"There's the rally whistle for our crowd, so I've got to go," interrupted
Frank; "but four o'clock at my room. You come, or I'll come and fetch you."

Frank bolted off for the campus. As he neared his group of friends he
observed the Banbury crowd, just rejoined by their leader and Durkin.
Banbury was pointing at Frank and saying something, derisively hailed by
his companions. Then Frank saw his stanch champion, Bob Upton, spring
forward with clenched fists. Frank hurried his steps, guessing out the
situation, and anxious to rescue his impetuous friend from an outbreak.

"Hi, chef!" howled out Durkin, as Frank approached, and Frank knew that the
mean-spirited cads had been spreading the story of his meeting with Ned
Foreman.

"What have you got to say about it, huh? Who are you?" Frank heard Bob cry
out angrily, as he came nearer to the crowd.

Frank could not repress a start as he observed the boy whom Bob was facing.
He was a newcomer--he was Gill Mace. It appeared that the nephew of the
Tipton jeweler had been sent to the same school as Frank.

Gill Mace looked as mean as ever. There was a sneer on his face. He was
loudly dressed, or rather overdressed. His uncle had probably provided him
with plenty of spending money, for he was jingling some coins in his
pocket. His money and his natural cheek had evidently made him "solid" with
Banbury and the others, for they seemed to be upholding his braggart
insolence.

"Don't get hot, sonny," advised Gill. "I said that Jordan needed to make
friends, for he never had any where he came from," and then, staring meanly
at Frank, he whispered something to Banbury.

"Hello!" broke out the latter. "That so? Jordan, how's the diamond market
this morning?"

Frank started as if he had been struck by a whiplash. A bright red spot
showed on either cheek. His eyes flashed, his finger nails dug into the
palms of his hands.

He advanced straight up to where Gill Mace stood, brushing aside heedlessly
all who were in his way. The jeweler's nephew tried to hide behind his
cohorts in a craven way, but Frank fixed him with his eye.

"Gill Mace," he spoke in a firm, stern tone, "you have been telling that
bully friend of yours some more of the falsehoods you peddled out at
Tipton."

"I told him how you stood in that old burg," admitted Gill.

"What do you mean?"

"I said that you robbed my uncle's jewelry shop."

"Then you uttered a low, malicious falsehood," retorted Frank. "Fellows,"
he cried, turning to his adherents, "I ducked this sneak in a mud puddle
for lying about me once. I want to now make the announcement in public that
if within twenty-four hours he does not retract his words I shall whip him
till he can't stand, leave the academy, and never come back till I have the
proofs to vindicate myself, which I can do."

Mace turned white about the corners of his mouth.

"Everybody in Tipton knows that Frank Jordan stole a diamond bracelet from
my uncle," he stammered.

"It's false!" shouted out Bob Upton, squarely springing before Gill, who
retreated in dismay, "and you are more than a thief, for you're trying to
rob an honest boy of his good name. Take that!"

And Bob Upton knocked Gill Mace down--flat.




CHAPTER XV

DARK HOURS


Gill Mace went down with a shock of surprise and a yell of fright. He
blubbered as his teeth went together like a pair of castanets.

Banbury stepped forward in his usual braggart way. Bob did not wait for him
to advance. He flew right up to him.

"You want some?" he shouted. "Come on, the whole bunch of you, one at a
time."

Just then, however, Dean Ritchie uttered a familiar warning, and there was
a general movement of commotion and dispersement among the group.

"Scatter, fellows," was what Ritchie said.

The Banbury contingent proceeded to sneak away. Some of Ritchie's crowd
surrounded Bob Upton and cleverly tried to manipulate him out of view.

Frank, turning, learned the motive for the maneuvers. Professor Elliott
stood not thirty feet away, his eyes fixed upon them. The seriousness of
his countenance told that he had witnessed the fight.

Bob brushed aside his friendly helpers. He walked straight up to Professor
Elliott, took off his cap respectfully and stood with his head bowed. Then
some words seemed to pass between them, and Mr. Elliott turned toward the
academy, Bob following him.

Frank was a good deal stirred up by the exciting events of the hour. He did
not feel much desire for companionship, and less for sport. He left his
friends and went up to his room.

He sat down on the bed somewhat gloomy and worried. Frank knew that the
malicious story told by Gill Mace would spread through the school like
wildfire.

Frank valued his fair name and the good opinion of the new friends he had
made. To be dubbed a thief meant harm, and there were some who would
believe the story. He recalled the impression such an accusation had made
on several people at his home town, and he grew quite downcast thinking it
all over.

"I won't mope," he cried resolutely, stirring about the room. "I am
innocent, so who can hurt me? I won't think of it."

Frank tried to whistle a careless air, but his efforts were somewhat
feeble. Then he went over to his trunk and looked over its contents. He got
to thinking of Ned Foreman, and took out a suit of clothes, some neckties
and a couple of shirts from the trunk, and had just placed them on a chair
when Bob entered the apartment.

"Well, what's the latest?" inquired Frank with a sharp quiz of his
impulsive friend's face.

"I'm all broken up, that's the latest," declared Bob, throwing himself into
a chair, his face a puzzling mixture of soberness and satisfaction. "Say,
Frank, I want to say one thing with all my heart--President Elliott is a
bang-up good old man. I've been ashamed, near crying, sorry, glad, mad, and
just about all knocked out in the last five minutes. Oh, that measly
Banbury mob! And oh, that miserable Gill Mace!"

"What's happened, Bob?"

"Why, I went to the library with the president, and told him manfully that
the Mace fellow had insulted the best friend I had, you, and that I
couldn't stand for it and just had to land him one."

"And the president?"

"He looked grave. Then he turned his head away. Then he sort of looked at
me as if he'd been a--a corker himself in the old boy days. He gave me a
mild lecture on controlling my temper. I told him he'd better have me tied
up or put Mace somewhere so I couldn't find him, or I was afraid I'd break
loose again."

"That was pretty strong, wasn't it, Bob?"

"I spoke my mind, and he knew it. Then he carried me right off my feet, and
