
The first beginning of this happiness was to come to Cecile through an
unexpected source--even through the ministrations of an old, partly
blind, and half-simple woman.

Mrs. Bell from the first took a fancy to Cecile, and liked to have her
about her. She called her Mercy, and Cecile grew accustomed to the name
and answered to it. This delusion on the part of poor old Mrs. Bell was
great torture to Lydia Purcell, and when the child and the old woman
were together she always left them alone.

One afternoon Mrs. Bell said abruptly:

"Mercy, I thought--or was it a dream?--I thought you were safe away
with Jesus for the last few years."

"No, Mistress Bell," answered Cecile in her slow and grave tones, "I've
only been in London these last few years."

"Now you're puzzling me," said Mrs. Bell in a querulous voice, "and you
know I hate being puzzled. Lydia Purcell, too, often puzzles me lately,
but you, Mercy, never used to. Sit down, child, and stitch at your
sampler, and I'll get accustomed to the sight of you, and not believe
that you've been away with my blessed Master, as I used to dream."

"Is your blessed Master the same as Jesus that you thought I had gone
to live with?" asked Cecile, as she pulled out the faded sampler and
tried to work the stitches.

"Yes, my darling, He's my light and my stay, the sure guide of a poor
old woman to a better country, blessed be His holy Name!"

"A guide!" said Cecile. This name attracted her--a guide would be so
useful by and by when she went into a foreign land to look for Lovedy.
"Do you think as He'd guide me too, Mistress Bell?"

"For sure, deary, for sure. Don't He call a little thing like you one
of His lambs? 'Tis said of Him that He carries the lambs in His arms.
That's a very safe way of being guided, ain't it, Mercy?"

"Yes, ma'am. Only I hope as He'll take you in His arms too, Mistress
Bell, for you don't look as though you could walk far. And will He come
soon, Mistress?"

"I don't say as 'twill be long, Mercy. I'm very old and very feeble,
and He don't ever leave the very old and feeble long down here."

"And is the better country that the blessed Master has to guide you to,
away in France, away in the south of France, in the Pyrenees?" asked
Cecile with great excitement and eagerness.

But Mrs. Bell had never even heard of the Pyrenees. She shook her old
head and frowned.

"Tis called the Celestial City by some," she said, "and by some again
the New Jerusalem, but I never yet heard anyone speak of it by that
other outlandish name. Now you're beginning your old game of puzzling,
Mercy Bell."

Cecile bent over her work, and old Mrs. Bell dozed off to sleep.

But the words the old woman had spoken were with Cecile when later in
the day she went out to play with Maurice and Toby; were with her when
she lay down to sleep that night. What a pity Jesus only guided people
to the Celestial City and to the New Jerusalem! What a pity that, as He
was so very good, He did not do more! What a pity that He could not be
induced to take a little girl who was very young, and very ignorant,
but who had a great care and anxiety on her mind, into France, even as
far as, if necessary, to the south of France! Cecile wondered if He
could be induced to do it. Perhaps old Mrs. Bell, who knew Him so well,
would ask Him. Cecile guessed that Jesus must have a very kind heart.
For what did that girl say who once sat upon a doorstep, and sang about
him?

  "I am so glad Jesus loves even me."

That girl was as poor as Cecile herself. Nay, indeed, she was much
poorer. How white was her thin face, how ragged her shabby gown! But
then, again, how triumphant was her voice as she sang! What a happy
light filled her sunken eyes!

There was no doubt at all that Jesus loved this poor girl; and if He
loved her, why might He not love Cecile too? Yes, He surely had a great
and loving heart, capable of taking in everybody; for Cecile's
stepmother, though she was not _very_ nice, had smiled when that little
story of the poor girl on the doorstep had been told to her; had smiled
and seemed comforted, and had repeated the words, "Jesus loves even
me," softly over to herself when she was dying.

Cecile, too, now looking back over many things, remembered her own
father. Cecile's father, Maurice D'Albert, was a Roman Catholic by
birth. He was a man, however, out of whose life religion had slipped.

During his wife's lifetime, and while he lived on his little farm in
the Pyrenees, he had done as his neighbors did, gone to confession, and
professed himself a good Catholic; but when trouble came to him, and he
found his home in the bleaker land of England, there was found to be no
heart in his worship. He was an amiable, kind-hearted man, but he
forgot the religious part of life. He went neither to church nor
chapel, and he brought up his children like himself, practically little
heathens. Cecile, therefore, at ten years old was more ignorant than it
would be possible to find a respectable English child. God, and heaven,
and the blessed hope of a future life were things practically unknown
to her.

What fragmentary ideas she had gleaned in her wanderings about the
great city with her little brother were vague and unformed. But even
Cecile, thinking now of her father's deathbed, remembered words which
she had little thought of at the time.

Just before he breathed his last, he had raised two feeble hands, and
placed one on her head, and one on Maurice's, and said in a faltering,
failing voice:

"If the blessed and adorable Jesus be God, may He guide you, my
children."

These were his last words, and Cecile, lying on her little bed
to-night, remembered them vividly.

Who was this Jesus who was so loving, and who was so willing to guide
people? She must learn more about Him, for if _He_ only promised to go
with her into France, then her heart might be light, her fears as to
the success of her great mission might be laid to rest.

Cecile resolved to find out all she could about Jesus from old Mrs.
Bell.

The next morning, immediately after breakfast, Aunt Lydia called the
little girl aside, and gave her as usual a basket of broken provisions.

"There is a good piece of apple-tart in the basket this morning,
Cecile, and a bottle of fresh milk. Don't any of you three come
worriting me again before nightfall; there, run away quickly, child,
for I'm dreadful busy and put out to-day."

For a brief moment Cecile looked eagerly and pityingly into the hard
face. There was love in her gentle eyes, and, as they filled with love,
they grew so like Mercy's eyes that Lydia Purcell almost loathed her.
She gave her a little push away, and said sharply:

"Get away, get away, do," and turned her back, pretending to busy
herself over some cold meat.

Cecile went slowly and sought Maurice. She knew there would be no
dinner in store for her that day. But what was dinner compared to the
knowledge she hoped to gain!

"Maurice, dear," she said, as she put the basket into his hand, "this
is a real lovely day, and you and Toby are to spend it in the woods,
and I'll come presently if I can. And you might leave a little bit of
dinner if you're not very hungry, Maurice. There's lovely apple-pie in
the basket, and there's milk, but a bit of bread will do for me. Try
and leave a little bit of bread for me when I come." Maurice nodded,
his face beaming at the thought of the apple-pie and the milk. But
Toby's brown eyes said intelligently:

"We'll keep a little bit of _every_thing for you, Cecile, and I'll take
care of Maurice." And Cecile, comforted that Toby would take excellent
care of Maurice, ran away into old Mrs. Bell's room.

"May I sit with you, and may I do a little bit more of Mercy's sampler,
please, Mistress Bell?" she asked.

The old lady, who was propped up in the armchair in the sunshine,
received her in her usual half-puzzled half-pleased way.

"There, Mercy, child, you've grown so queer in your talk that I
sometimes fancy you're half a changeling. May you sit with your
grandam? What next? There, there, bring yer bit of a stool, and get the
sampler out, and do a portion of the feather-stitch. Mind ye're
careful, Mercy, and see as you count as you work."

Cecile sat down willingly, drew out the faded sampler, and made valiant
efforts to follow in the dead Mercy's finger marks. After a moment or
two of careful industry, she laid down her work and spoke:

"Mistress Bell, when 'ull you be likely to see Jesus next, do you
think?"

"Lawk a mercy, child! ain't you near enough to take one's breath away.
Do you want to kill your old grandam, Mercy? Why, in course I can't see
my blessed Saviour, the Lord Jesus, till I'm dead."

"Oh!" said Cecile, with a heavy sigh, "I did think as He lived down
yere, and that He came in and out to see you sometimes, seeing as you
love Him so. You said as He was a guide. How can He be a guide when
He's dead?"

"A guide to the New Jerusalem and the Celestial City," murmured old
Mrs. Bell, beginning to wander a little. "Yes, yes, my blessed Lord and
faithful and sure guide."

"But how can He be a guide when He's dead?" questioned Cecile.

"Mercy, child, put in another feather in yer sampler, and don't worry
an old woman. The Lord Jesus ain't dead--no, no; He died once, but He
rose--He's alive for evermore. Don't you ask no strange questions,
Mercy, child."

"Oh! but I must--I must," answered Cecile, now grown desperate. She
threw her sampler on the floor, rose to her feet, and confronted the
old woman with her eyes full of tears. "Whether I'm Mercy or not don't
matter, but I'm a very, very careworn little girl--I'm a little girl
with a deal, a great deal of care on my mind--and I want Jesus most
terrible bad to help me. Mistress Bell, dear Mistress Bell, when you
die and see Jesus, won't you ask Him, won't you be certain sure to ask
Him to guide me too?"

"Why, my darling, He's sure to guide you. There ain't no fear, my dear
life. He's sure, sure to take my Mercy, too, to the Celestial City when
the right time comes."

"But I don't want Him to take me to the Celestial City. I haven't got
to look for nobody in the Celestial City. 'Tis away to France, down
into the south of France I've got to go. Will you ask Jesus to come and
guide me down into the Pyrenees in the south of France, please,
Mistress Bell?"

"I don't know nothing of no such outlandish place," said old Mrs. Bell,
once more irritated and thrown off her bearings, and just at this
moment, to Cecile's serious detriment, Lydia Purcell entered.

Lydia was in one of her worst tempers, and old Mrs. Bell, rendered
cross for the moment, spoke unadvisedly:

"Lydia, I do think you're bringing up the child Mercy like a regular
heathen. She asks me questions as 'ud break her poor father, my son
Robert's heart ef he was to hear. She's a good child, but she's _that_
puzzling. You bid her mind her sampler, and not worry an old woman,
Lydia Purcell."

Lydia's eyes gazed stormily at Cecile.

"I'll bid her see and do what she's told," she said, going up to the
little girl and giving her a shake. "You go out of the house this
minute, miss, and don't let me never see you slinking into this yere
room again without my leave." She took the child to the door and shut
it on her.

Mrs. Bell began to remonstrate feebly. "Lydia, don't be harsh on my
little Mercy," she began. "I like to have her along o' me. I'm mostly
alone, and the child makes company."

"Yes, but you have no time for her this morning, for, as I've told you
a score of times already to-day, Mr. Preston is coming," replied Lydia.

Now Mr. Preston was Mrs. Bell's attorney, and next to her religion,
which was most truly real and abiding in her poor old heart, she loved
her attorney.




CHAPTER VIII.

"THE UNION."


Lydia had just then plenty of cause for anxiety; for that kind of
anxiety which such a woman would feel. She was anxious about the gold
she had been so carefully saving, putting by here a pound and there a
pound, until the bank held a goodly sum sufficient to support her in
comfort in the not very distant day when her residence in Warren's
Grove would come to an end.

Whenever Mrs. Bell died, Lydia knew she must look out for a fresh home,
and that day could surely now not be very distant.

The old woman had seen her eighty-fifth birthday. Death must be near
one so feeble, who was also eighty-five years of age. Lydia would be
comfortably off when Mrs. Bell died, and she often reflected with
satisfaction that this money, as she enjoyed it, need trouble her with
no qualms of conscience--it was all the result of hard work, of patient
industry. In her position she could have been dishonest, and it would
be untrue to deny that the temptation to be dishonest when no one would
be the wiser, when not a soul could possibly ever know, had come to her
more than once. But she had never yet yielded to the temptation. "No,
no," she had said to her own heart, "I will enjoy my money by and by
with clean hands. It shall be good money. I'm a hard woman, but nothing
mean nor unclean shall touch me." Lydia made these resolves most often
sitting by Mercy's grave. For week after week did she visit this little
grave, and kept it bright with flowers and green with all the love her
heart could ever know.

But all the same it was about this money which surely she had a right
to enjoy, and feel secure and happy in possessing, that Lydia was so
anxious now.

She had ground for her fears. As I said before Lydia Purcell had once
done a foolish thing. Now her folly was coming home to her. She had
been tempted to invest two hundred pounds in an unlimited company.
Twenty per cent. she was to receive for this money. This twenty per
cent. tempted her. She did the deed, thinking that for a year or two
she was safe enough.

But this very morning she had been made uneasy by a letter from Mr.
Preston, her own and Mrs. Bell's man of business.

He knew she had invested this money. She had done so against his will.

He told her that ugly rumors were afloat about this very company. And
if it went, all Lydia's money, all the savings of her life would be
swept away in its downfall.

When he called, which he did that same morning, he could but confirm
her fears.

Yes, he would try and sell out for her. He would go to London for the
purpose that very day.

Lydia, anxious about her golden calf, the one idol of her life, was not
a pleasant mistress of the farm. She was never particularly kind to the
children; but now, for the next few days, she was rough and hard to
everyone who came within her reach.

The dairymaid and the cook received sharp words, which, fortunately for
themselves, they were powerful enough to return with interest. Poor old
Mrs. Bell cowered lonely and sad by her fireside. Now and then she
asked querulously for Mercy, but no Mercy, real or imaginary, ever came
near her; and then her old mind would wander off from the land of
Beulah, where she really lived, right across to the Celestial City at
the other side of the river. Mrs. Bell was too old and too serene to be
rendered really unhappy by Lydia's harsh ways! Her feet were already on
