"Yes; still, it is one of the things that we foresaw might happen."

"I vote we go at once, Harry, and see if he is here."

"I don't think we shall find him here; for Barnett said that he lived
in the village of Miraflores, five miles away on the north, and that if
he is not there, Senor Pasquez, to whom I have a letter, will be likely
to tell me where he is to be found, for he is often employed by him.
However, I am as anxious as you to see him. As it is only eleven
o'clock yet, there is no reason why we should not go to Miraflores.
They will get mules for us at the hotel, and tell us which road to
take."

It was not necessary, however, to go into the hotel, for when they
returned, two or three men with mules were waiting to be hired. They
engaged two animals, and as the man of whom they hired them had a
third, and he was ready to accompany them for a small fee, they agreed
to take him with them.

Before they were a mile out of the town the mist cleared off and the
sun shone brightly. The heat, however, was by no means too great to be
pleasant. Miraflores was a charming village, or rather small town,
nestling among gardens and orchards.

"I want to find a muleteer named Dias Otero," Harry said to their guide
as they rode into the place.

"I know him well," he said. "Everyone about here knows Dias. His wife
was a cousin of my mother's."

"Do you know whether he is at home now?"

"Yes, senor; I saw him in Lima three days ago. He had just come down
from the mountains. He had been away two months, and certainly will not
have started again so soon. Shall I lead you to his house at once?"

"Do so; it is to see him that I have come to this town. He worked for a
long time with a friend of mine some years ago, and I have brought a
message from him. I may be some time talking with him, so when I go in
you can tie up your mules for a while."

"That is his house," the man said presently.

It lay in the outskirts of the town, and was neater than the generality
of houses, and the garden was a mass of flowers. They dismounted,
handed over the mules to their owner, and walked to the door. An Indian
of some five-and-forty years came out as they did so.

"Are you Dias Otero?" Harry asked.

"The same, senor."

"I have just arrived from England, and bring a letter to you from Senor
Barnett, with whom you travelled for two or three years some time ago."

The man's face lit up with pleasure. "Will you enter, senor. Friends of
Senor Barnett may command my services in any way. It is a delight to
hear from him. He writes to me sometimes, but in these troubles letters
do not always come. I love the senor; there never was a kinder master.
He once saved my life at the risk of his own. Is there any hope of his
coming out again?"

"I do not think so, Dias. He is strong and well, but I do not think he
is likely to start again on a journey of exploration. He is my greatest
friend. My brother and I were left under his charge when we were young,
and he has been almost a father to us. It is he who has sent us out to
you. Here is his letter."

"Will you read it to me, senor. I cannot read; I am always obliged to
get somebody to read my letters, and write answers for me."

The letter was of course in Spanish, and Harry read:

"Dear friend Dias,

"I am sending out to you a gentleman, Mr. Prendergast, an officer of
the British Navy, in whom I am deeply interested. His brother
accompanies him. I beg that you will treat them as you would me, and
every service you can render him consider as rendered to myself. From a
reason which he will no doubt explain to you in time, it is of the
deepest importance to him that he should grow rich in the course of the
next two years. He asked my advice, and I said to him, 'There is no one
I know of who could possibly put you in the way of so doing better than
my friend Dias Otero. I believe it is in his power to do so if he is
willing.' I also believe that for my sake you will aid him. He will
place himself wholly in your hands. He does not care what danger he
runs, or what hardships he has to go through in order to attain his
purpose. I know that I need not say more to you. He has two years
before him; long before that I am sure you will be as interested in him
as you were in me. He has sufficient means to pay all expenses of
travel for the time he will be out there. I know that you are descended
from nobles of high rank at the court of the Incas when the Spaniards
arrived, and that secrets known to but few were passed down from father
to son in your family. If you can use any of those secrets to the
advantage of my friend, I pray you most earnestly to do so. I trust
that this letter will find you and your good wife in health. Had I been
ten years younger I would have come out with my friends to aid them in
their adventure, but I know that in putting them into your hands I
shall be doing them a vastly greater service than I could do were I
able to come in person."

When Harry ceased, the Indian sat for some time without speaking, then
he said:

"It is a matter that I must think over, senor. It is a very grave one,
and had any other man than Senor Barnett asked this service of me no
money could have tempted me to assent to it. It is not only that my
life would be in danger, but that my name would be held up to
execration by all my people were I to divulge the secret that even the
tortures of the Spaniards could not wring from us. I must think it over
before I answer. I suppose you are staying at the Hotel Morin; I will
call and see you when I have thought the matter over. It is a grave
question, and it may be three or four days before I can decide."

"I thank you, Dias; but there is no occasion for you to give a final
decision now. Whether or no, we shall travel for a while, and I trust
that you will go with us with your mules and be our guide, as you did
to Mr. Barnett. It will be time enough when you know us better to give
us a final answer; it is not to be expected that even for Senor
Barnett's sake you would do this immense service for strangers,
therefore I pray you to leave the matter open. Make arrangements for
your mules and yourself for a three months' journey in the mountains,
show us what there is to see of the gold and silver placers, and the
quicksilver mines at Huanuco. At the end of that time you will know us
and can say whether you are ready to aid us in our search."

The native bowed his head gravely.

"I will think it over," he said; "and now, senors, let us put that
aside. My wife has been busy since you entered in preparing a simple
meal, and I ask you to honour me by partaking of it."

"With pleasure, Dias."

It consisted of _puchero_, a stew consisting of a piece of beef,
cabbage, sweet-potatoes, salt pork, sausage-meat, pigs' feet, yuccas,
bananas, quinces, peas, rice, salt, and an abundance of Chili peppers.
This had been cooked for six hours and was now warmed up. Two bottles
of excellent native wine, a flask of spirits, and some water were also
put on the table. The Indian declined to sit down with them, saying
that he had taken a meal an hour before.

While they ate he chatted with them, asking questions of their voyage
and telling them of the state of things in the country.

"It is always the same, senors, there is a revolution and two or three
battles; then either the president or the one who wants to be president
escapes from the country or is taken and shot, and in a day or two
there is a fresh pronunciamiento. We thought that when the Spaniards
had been driven out we should have had peace, but it is not so; we have
had San Martin, and Bolivar, and Aguero, and Santa Cruz, and Sucre.
Bolivar again finally defeated the Spaniards at Ayacucho. Rodil held
possession of Callao castle, and defended it until January of this
year. We in the villages have not suffered--those who liked fighting
went out with one or other of the generals; some have returned, others
have been killed--but Lima has suffered greatly. Sometimes the people
have taken one side, sometimes the other, and though the general they
supported was sometimes victorious for a short time, in the end they
suffered. Most of the old Spanish families perished; numbers died in
the castle of Callao, where many thousands of the best blood of Lima
took refuge, and of these well-nigh half died of hunger and misery
before Rodil surrendered."

"But does not this make travelling very unsafe?"

The Indian shrugged his shoulders.

"Peru is a large country, senor, and those who want to keep out of the
way of the armies and lighting can do so; I myself have continued my
occupation and have never fallen in with the armies. That is because
the fighting is principally in the plains, or round Cuzco; for the men
do not go into the mountains except as fugitives, as they could not
find food there for an army. It is these fugitives who render the road
somewhat unsafe; starving men must take what they can get. They do not
interfere with the great silver convoys from Potosi or other mines--a
loaf of bread is worth more than a bar of silver in the mountains--but
they will plunder persons coming down with goods to the town or going
up with their purchases. Once or twice I have had to give up the food I
carried with me, but I have had little to grumble at, and I do not
think you need trouble yourself about them; we will take care to avoid
them as far as possible."

After chatting for an hour they left the cottage, and, mounting their
mules, returned to Lima.

"I think he will help us, Harry," Bertie said as soon as they set out.

"I think so too, but we must not press him to begin with. Of course
there is a question too as to how far he can help us. He may know
vaguely where the rich mines once existed; but you must remember that
they have been lost for three hundred years, and it may be impossible
for even a man who has received the traditions as to their positions to
hit upon the precise spot. The mountains, you see, are tremendous;
there must be innumerable ravines and gorges among them. It is certain
that nothing approaching an accurate map can ever have been made of the
mountains, and I should say that in most cases the indications that may
have been given are very vague. They would no doubt have been
sufficient for those who lived soon after the money was hidden, and
were natives of that part of the country and thoroughly acquainted with
all the surroundings, but when the information came to be handed down
from mouth to mouth during many generations, the local knowledge would
be lost, and what were at first detailed instructions would become
little better than vague legends. You know how three hundred years will
alter the face of a country--rocks roll down the hills, torrents wash
away the soil, forests grow or are cleared away. I believe with you
that the Indian will do his best, but I have grave doubts whether he
will be able to locate any big thing."

"Well, you don't take a very cheerful view of things, Harry; you
certainly seemed more hopeful when we first started."

"Yes. I don't say I am not hopeful still, but it is one thing to plan
out an enterprise at a distance and quite another when you are face to
face with its execution. As we have come down the coast, and seen that
great range of mountains stretching along for hundreds of miles, and we
know that there is another quite as big lying behind it, I have begun
to realize the difficulties of the adventures that we are undertaking.
However, we shall hear, when Dias comes over to see us, what he thinks
of the matter. I fancy he will say that he is willing to go with us and
help us as far as he can, but that although he will do his best he
cannot promise that he will be able to point out, with anything like
certainty, the position of any of the old mines."

Next day they called on Senor Pasquez, who received them very cordially.

"So you are going to follow the example of Senor Barnett and spend some
time in exploring the country and doing some shooting. Have you found
Dias?"

"Yes, senor, and I think he will go with us, though he has not given a
positive answer."

"You will be fortunate if you get him; he is one of the best-known
muleteers in the country, and if anyone comes here and wants a guide
Dias is sure to be the first to be recommended. If he goes with you he
can give you much useful advice; he knows exactly what you will have to
take with you, the best districts to visit for your purpose, and the
best way of getting there. For the rest, I shall be very happy to take
charge of any money you may wish to leave behind, and to act as your
banker and cash any orders you may draw upon me. I will also receive
and place to your account any sums that may be sent you from England."

"That, sir, is a matter which Mr. Barnett advised me to place in your
hands. After making what few purchases we require, and taking fifty
pounds in silver, I shall have two hundred and fifty pounds to place in
your hands. Mr. Barnett will manage my affairs in my absence, and will
send to you fifty pounds quarterly."

"You will find difficulty in spending it all in two years," the
merchant said with a smile. "If you are content to live on what can be
bought in the country, it costs very little; and as for the mules, they
can generally pick up enough at their halting-places to serve them,
with a small allowance of grain. You can hire them cheaply, or you can
buy them. The latter is cheaper in the end, but you cannot be sure of
getting mules accustomed to mountains, and you would therefore run the
risk of their losing their foothold, and not only being dashed to
pieces but destroying their saddles and loads. However, if you secure
the services of Dias Otero, you will get mules that know every path in
the mountains. He is famous for his animals, and he himself is
considered the most trusty muleteer here; men think themselves lucky in
obtaining his services. I would send him with loads of uncounted gold
and should be sure that there would not be a piece missing."

Next day Dias came to the hotel.

"I have thought it over, senor," he said. "I need not say that were it
only ordinary service, instead of exploring the mountains, I should be
glad indeed to do my best for a friend of Senor Barnett; but as to the
real purpose of your journey I wish, before making any arrangement,
that the matter should be thoroughly understood. I have no certain
knowledge whatever as to any of the lost mines, still less of any
hidden treasures; but I know all the traditions that have passed down
concerning them. I doubt whether any Indians now possess a certain
knowledge of these things. For generations, no doubt, the secrets were
handed down from father to son, and it is possible that some few may
still know of these places; but I doubt it. Think of the hundreds and
thousands of our people who have been killed in battle, or died as
slaves in the mines, and you will see that numbers of those to whom the
secrets were entrusted must have taken their knowledge to the grave
with them.

"In each generation the number of those who knew the particulars of
these hiding-places must have diminished. Few now can know more than I
do, yet I am sure of nothing. I know generally where the mines were
situated and where some treasures were concealed, and what knowledge I
have I will place at your service; but so great a care was used in the
concealment of the entrances to the mines, so carefully were the
hiding-places of the treasures chosen, and so cunningly concealed,
that, without the surest indications and the most minute instructions,
we might search for years, as men indeed have done ever since the
Spanish came here, without finding them. I am glad that I can lay my
hand upon my heart and say, that whatever may have been possessed by
ancestors of mine, no actual details have ever come down to me; for,
had it been so, I could not have revealed them to you. We know that all
who were instructed in these were bound by the most terrible oaths not
to reveal them. Numbers have died under the torture rather than break
those oaths; and even now, were one of us to betray the secrets that
had come down to him, he would be regarded as accursed. No one would
break bread with him, every door would be closed against him, and if he
died his body would rot where it fell. But my knowledge is merely
general, gathered not only from the traditions known to all our people,
but from confidences made by one member of our family to another. Full
knowledge was undoubtedly given to some of them; but all these must
have died without initiating others into the full particulars. Such
knowledge as I have is at your disposal. I can take you to the
localities, I can say to you, 'Near this place was a great mine,' but
unless chance favours you you may search in vain."

"That is quite as much as I had hoped for, Dias, and I am grateful for
your willingness to do what you can for us, just as you did for Senor
Barnett."




CHAPTER IV

A STREET FRAY


"Now, senor," Dias said, "as we have settled the main point, let us
talk over the arrangements. What is the weight of your baggage?"

"Not more than a mule could carry. Of course we shall sling our rifles
over our shoulders. We have a good stock of ammunition for them and for
our pistols. We shall each take two suits of clothes besides those we
wear, and a case of spirits in the event of accident or illness. We
shall each have three flannel shirts, stockings, and so on, but
certainly everything belonging to us personally would not mount up to
more than a hundred and fifty pounds. We should, of course, require a
few cooking utensils, tin plates, mugs, and cups. What should we need
besides these?"

"A tent and bedding, senor. We should only have, at the start, to carry
such provisions as we could not buy. When we are beyond the range of
villages in the forests we might often be weeks without being able to
buy anything; still, we should probably be able to shoot game for food.
We should find fruits, but flour we shall have to take with us from the
last town we pass through before we strike into the mountains, and
dried meat for an emergency; and it would be well to have a bag of
grain, so that we could give a handful or so to each of the mules. I am
glad you have brought some good spirits--we shall need it in the swamps
by the rivers. Your tea and coffee will save your having to buy them
here, but you will want some sugar. We must take two picks and a
shovel, a hammer for breaking up ore, a small furnace, twenty crucibles
and bellows, and a few other things for aiding to melt the ore. You
would want for the journey five baggage mules, and, of course, three
riding mules. I could hardly manage them, even with aid from you, in
very bad places, and I would rather not take any strange man with me on
such business as we have in hand. But some assistance I must have, and
I will take with me my nephew Jose. He has lost his father, and I have
taken him as my assistant, and shall train him to be a guide such as I
am. He is but fifteen, but he already knows something of his business,
and such an expedition will teach him more than he would learn in ten
years on the roads."

"That would certainly be far better than having a muleteer whom you
could not trust, Dias. My brother and myself will be ready to lend you
a hand whenever you want help of any kind. We have not had any
experience with mules, but sailors can generally turn their hands to
anything. Now, how about the eight mules?"

"I have five of my own, as good mules as are to be found in the
province; we shall have to buy the three others for riding. Of course I
have saddles and ropes."

"But you will want four for riding."

"No, senor; yours and the one I ride will be enough. Jose at times will
take my place, and can when he likes perch on one of the most lightly
laden animals."

"How much will the riding mules cost?"

"I can get fair ones for about fifty dollars apiece; trade is slack at
present owing to the troubles, and there are many who would be glad to
get rid of one or two of their train."

"And now, Dias, we come to the very important question, what are we to
pay you for yourself, your nephew, and the five mules--say by the
month?"

"I have been thinking the matter over, senor--I have talked it over
with my wife"--he paused for a moment, and then said: "She wishes to go
with me, senor."

Harry opened his eyes in surprise. "But surely, Dias, you could not
think of taking her on such an expedition, where, as you say yourself,
you may meet with many grave dangers and difficulties?"

"A woman can support them as well as a man," Dias said quietly. "My
wife has more than once accompanied me on journeys when I have been
working on contract. We have been married for fifteen years, and she
has no children to keep her at home. She is accustomed to my being away
for weeks. This would be for months, perhaps for two years. I made no
secret to her that we might meet with many dangers. She says they will
be no greater for her than for me. At first she tried to dissuade me
from going for so long a time; but when I told her that you were sent
me by the gentleman who saved my life a year after I married her, and
that he had recommended you to me as standing to him almost in the
relation of a son, and I therefore felt bound to carry his wishes into
effect, and so to pay the debt of gratitude that I owed him, she agreed
at once that it was my duty to go and do all in my power for you, and
she prayed me to take her with me. I said that I would put it before
you, senor, and that I must abide by your decision."

"By all means bring her with you, Dias. If you and she are both willing
to share the dangers we should meet with, surely we cannot object in
any way."

"Thank you, senor; you will find her useful. You have already seen that
she can cook well; and if we have Jose to look after the animals when
we are searching among the hills, you will find it not unpleasant, when
we return of an evening, to find a hot supper ready for us."

"That is quite true, and I am sure we shall find your wife a great
acquisition to our party. The only difference will be, that instead of
one large tent we must have two small ones--it does not matter how
small, so long as we can crawl into them and they are long enough for
us to lie down. And now about payment?"

"I shall not overcharge you," Dias said with a smile. "If my wife had
remained behind I must have asked for money to maintain her while we
were away. It would not have been much, for she has her garden and her
house, and there is a bag hid away with my savings, so that if she had
been widowed she could still live in the house until she chose someone
else to share it with her; she is but thirty-two, and is as comely as
when I first married her. However, as she is going with us, there will
be no need to trouble about her. If misfortune comes upon us and I am
killed, it is likely she will be killed also. We shall have no expenses
on the journey, as you will pay for food for ourselves and the animals.
You will remember, senor, that I make this journey not as a business
matter--no money would buy from me any information that I may have as
to hidden mines or treasures,--I do it to repay a debt of gratitude to
my preserver, Don Henry Barnett, and partly because I am sure that I
shall like you and your brother as I did him. I shall aid you as far as
lies in my power in the object for which you are undertaking this
journey. Therefore until it is finished there shall be no talk about
payment. You may have many expenses beyond what you calculate upon. If
we meet with no success, and return to Lima empty-handed, I shall have
