'Mutabor!' they both cried, and in an instant they were once more
transformed. In the rapture of their newly-given lives master and
servant fell laughing and weeping into each other's arms. Who shall
describe their surprise when they at last turned round and beheld
standing before them a beautiful lady exquisitely dressed!

With a smile she held out her hand to the Caliph, and asked: 'Do you not
recognise your screech owl?'

It was she! The Caliph was so enchanted by her grace and beauty, that he
declared being turned into a stork had been the best piece of luck
which had ever befallen him. The three set out at once for Bagdad.
Fortunately, the Caliph found not only the box with the magic powder,
but also his purse in his girdle; he was, therefore, able to buy in the
nearest village all they required for their journey, and so at last they
reached the gates of Bagdad.

Here the Caliph's arrival created the greatest sensation. He had been
quite given up for dead, and the people were greatly rejoiced to see
their beloved ruler again.

Their rage with the usurper Mirza, however, was great in proportion.
They marched in force to the palace and took the old magician and
his son prisoners. The Caliph sent the magician to the room where the
Princess had lived as an owl, and there had him hanged. As the son,
however, knew nothing of his father's acts, the Caliph gave him his
choice between death and a pinch of the magic snuff. When he chose the
latter, the Grand Vizier handed him the box. One good pinch, and the
magic word transformed him to a stork. The Caliph ordered him to be
confined in an iron cage, and placed in the palace gardens.

Caliph Chasid lived long and happily with his wife the Princess. His
merriest time was when the Grand Vizier visited him in the afternoon;
and when the Caliph was in particularly high spirits he would condescend
to mimic the Vizier's appearance when he was a stork. He would strut
gravely, and with well-stiffened legs, up and down the room, chattering,
and showing how he had vainly bowed to the east and cried 'Mu...Mu...'
The Caliphess and her children were always much entertained by this
performance; but when the Caliph went on nodding and bowing, and calling
'Mu...mu...' too long, the Vizier would threaten laughingly to tell the
Chaliphess the subject of the discussion carried on one night outside
the door of Princess Screech Owl.





THE ENCHANTED WATCH



Once upon a time there lived a rich man who had three sons. When they
grew up, he sent the eldest to travel and see the world, and three years
passed before his family saw him again. Then he returned, magnificently
dressed, and his father was so delighted with his behaviour, that he
gave a great feast in his honour, to which all the relations and friends
were invited.

When the rejoicings were ended, the second son begged leave of his
father to go in his turn to travel and mix with the world. The father
was enchanted at the request, and gave him plenty of money for his
expenses, saying, 'If you behave as well as your brother, I will do
honour to you as I did to him.' The young man promised to do his best,
and his conduct during three years was all that it should be. Then he
went home, and his father was so pleased with him that his feast of
welcome was even more splendid than the one before.

The third brother, whose name was Jenik, or Johnnie, was considered the
most foolish of the three. He never did anything at home except sit
over the stove and dirty himself with the ashes; but he also begged his
father's leave to travel for three years. 'Go if you like, you idiot;
but what good will it do you?'

The youth paid no heed to his father's observations as long as he
obtained permission to go. The father saw him depart with joy, glad to
get rid of him, and gave him a handsome sum of money for his needs.

Once, as he was making one of his journeys, Jenik chanced to cross a
meadow where some shepherds were just about to kill a dog. He entreated
them to spare it, and to give it to him instead which they willingly
did, and he went on his way, followed by the dog. A little further on
he came upon a cat, which someone was going to put to death. He implored
its life, and the cat followed him. Finally, in another place, he saved
a serpent, which was also handed over to him and now they made a party
of four--the dog behind Jenik, the cat behind the dog, and the serpent
behind the cat.

Then the serpent said to Jenik, 'Go wherever you see me go,' for in
the autumn, when all the serpents hide themselves in their holes, this
serpent was going in search of his king, who was king of all the snakes.

Then he added: 'My king will scold me for my long absence, everyone else
is housed for the winter, and I am very late. I shall have to tell
him what danger I have been in, and how, without your help, I should
certainly have lost my life. The king will ask what you would like in
return, and be sure you beg for the watch which hangs on the wall. It
has all sorts of wonderful properties, you only need to rub it to get
whatever you like.'

No sooner said than done. Jenik became the master of the watch, and
the moment he got out he wished to put its virtues to the proof. He was
hungry, and thought it would be delightful to eat in the meadow a loaf
of new bread and a steak of good beef washed down by a flask of wine, so
he scratched the watch, and in an instant it was all before him. Imagine
his joy!

Evening soon came, and Jenik rubbed his watch, and thought it would be
very pleasant to have a room with a comfortable bed and a good supper.
In an instant they were all before him. After supper he went to bed and
slept till morning, as every honest man ought to do. Then he set forth
for his father's house, his mind dwelling on the feast that would be
awaiting him. But as he returned in the same old clothes in which he
went away, his father flew into a great rage, and refused to do anything
for him. Jenik went to his old place near the stove, and dirtied himself
in the ashes without anybody minding.

The third day, feeling rather dull, he thought it would be nice to see
a three-story house filled with beautiful furniture, and with vessels
of silver and gold. So he rubbed the watch, and there it all was. Jenik
went to look for his father, and said to him: 'You offered me no feast
of welcome, but permit me to give one to you, and come and let me show
you my plate.'

The father was much astonished, and longed to know where his son had got
all this wealth. Jenik did not reply, but begged him to invite all their
relations and friends to a grand banquet.

So the father invited all the world, and everyone was amazed to see such
splendid things, so much plate, and so many fine dishes on the table.
After the first course Jenik prayed his father to invite the King, and
his daughter the Princess. He rubbed his watch and wished for a carriage
ornamented with gold and silver, and drawn by six horses, with harness
glittering with precious stones. The father did not dare to sit in
this gorgeous coach, but went to the palace on foot. The King and his
daughter were immensely surprised with the beauty of the carriage, and
mounted the steps at once to go to Jenik's banquet. Then Jenik rubbed
his watch afresh, and wished that for six miles the way to the house
should be paved with marble. Who ever felt so astonished as the King?
Never had he travelled over such a gorgeous road.

When Jenik heard the wheels of the carriage, he rubbed his watch and
wished for a still more beautiful house, four stories high, and hung
with gold, silver, and damask; filled with wonderful tables, covered
with dishes such as no king had ever eaten before. The King, the Queen,
and the Princess were speechless with surprise. Never had they seen
such a splendid palace, nor such a high feast! At dessert the King asked
Jenik's father to give him the young man for a son-in-law. No sooner
said than done! The marriage took place at once, and the King returned
to his own palace, and left Jenik with his wife in the enchanted house.

Now Jenik was not a very clever man, and at the end of a very short time
he began to bore his wife. She inquired how he managed to build palaces
and to get so many precious things. He told her all about the watch, and
she never rested till she had stolen the precious talisman. One night
she took the watch, rubbed it, and wished for a carriage drawn by
four horses; and in this carriage she at once set out for her father's
palace. There she called to her own attendants, bade them follow her
into the carriage, and drove straight to the sea-side. Then she rubbed
her watch, and wished that the sea might be crossed by a bridge, and
that a magnificent palace might arise in the middle of the sea. No
sooner said than done. The Princess entered the house, rubbed her watch,
and in an instant the bridge was gone.

Left alone, Jenik felt very miserable. His father, mother, and brothers,
and, indeed, everybody else, all laughed at him. Nothing remained to him
but the cat and dog whose lives he had once saved. He took them with
him and went far away, for he could no longer live with his family.
He reached at last a great desert, and saw some crows flying towards
a mountain. One of them was a long way behind, and when he arrived his
brothers inquired what had made him so late. 'Winter is here,' they
said, 'and it is time to fly to other countries.' He told them that he
had seen in the middle of the sea the most wonderful house that ever was
built.

On hearing this, Jenik at once concluded that this must be the
hiding-place of his wife. So he proceeded directly to the shore with his
dog and his cat. When he arrived on the beach, he said to the dog: 'You
are an excellent swimmer, and you, little one, are very light; jump on
the dog's back and he will take you to the palace. Once there, he will
hide himself near the door, and you must steal secretly in and try to
get hold of my watch.'

No sooner said than done. The two animals crossed the sea; the dog
hid near the house, and the cat stole into the chamber. The Princess
recognised him, and guessed why he had come; and she took the watch down
to the cellar and locked it in a box. But the cat wriggled its way into
the cellar, and the moment the Princess turned her back, he scratched
and scratched till he had made a hole in the box. Then he took the
watch between his teeth, and waited quietly till the Princess came back.
Scarcely had she opened the door when the cat was outside, and the watch
into the bargain.

The cat was no sooner beyond the gates than she said to the dog:

'We are going to cross the sea; be very careful not to speak to me.'

The dog laid this to heart and said nothing; but when they approached
the shore he could not help asking, 'Have you got the watch?'

The cat did not answer--he was afraid that he might let the talisman
fall. When they touched the shore the dog repeated his question.

'Yes,' said the cat.

And the watch fell into the sea. Then our two friends began each to
accuse the other, and both looked sorrowfully at the place where their
treasure had fallen in. Suddenly a fish appeared near the edge of the
sea. The cat seized it, and thought it would make them a good supper.

'I have nine little children,' cried the fish. 'Spare the father of a
family!'

'Granted,' replied the cat; 'but on condition that you find our watch.'

The fish executed his commission, and they brought the treasure back to
their master. Jenik rubbed the watch and wished that the palace, with
the Princess and all its inhabitants, should be swallowed up in the sea.
No sooner said than done. Jenik returned to his parents, and he and his
watch, his cat and his dog, lived together happily to the end of their
days.

Deulin.





ROSANELLA



Everybody knows that though the fairies live hundreds of years they do
sometimes die, and especially as they are obliged to pass one day in
every week under the form of some animal, when of course they are liable
to accident. It was in this way that death once overtook the Queen of
the Fairies, and it became necessary to call a general assembly to elect
a new sovereign. After much discussion, it appeared that the choice lay
between two fairies, one called Surcantine and the other Paridamie; and
their claims were so equal that it was impossible without injustice to
prefer one to the other. Under these circumstances it was unanimously
decided that whichever of the two could show to the world the greatest
wonder should be Queen; but it was to be a special kind of wonder,
no moving of mountains or any such common fairy tricks would do.
Surcantine, therefore, resolved that she would bring up a Prince whom
nothing could make constant. While Paridamie decided to display to
admiring mortals a Princess so charming that no one could see her
without falling in love with her. They were allowed to take their
own time, and meanwhile the four oldest fairies were to attend to the
affairs of the kingdom.

Now Paridamie had for a long time been very friendly with King
Bardondon, who was a most accomplished Prince, and whose court was the
model of what a court should be. His Queen, Balanice, was also charming;
indeed it is rare to find a husband and wife so perfectly of one mind
about everything. They had one little daughter, whom they had named
'Rosanella,' because she had a little pink rose printed upon her white
throat. From her earliest infancy she had shown the most astonishing
intelligence, and the courtiers knew her smart sayings by heart, and
repeated them on all occasions. In the middle of the night following the
assembly of fairies, Queen Balanice woke up with a shriek, and when her
maids of honour ran to see what was the matter, they found she had had a
frightful dream.

'I thought,' said she, 'that my little daughter had changed into a
bouquet of roses, and that as I held it in my hand a bird swooped down
suddenly and snatched it from me and carried it away.'

'Let some one run and see that all is well with the Princess,' she
added.

So they ran; but what was their dismay when they found that the cradle
was empty; and though they sought high and low, not a trace of Rosanella
could they discover. The Queen was inconsolable, and so, indeed, was the
King, only being a man he did not say quite so much about his feelings.
He presently proposed to Balanice that they should spend a few days at
one of their palaces in the country; and to this she willingly agreed,
since her grief made the gaiety of the capital distasteful to her. One
lovely summer evening, as they sat together on a shady lawn shaped like
a star, from which radiated twelve splendid avenues of trees, the Queen
looked round and saw a charming peasant-girl approaching by each path,
and what was still more singular was that everyone carried something in
a basket which appeared to occupy her whole attention. As each drew near
she laid her basket at Balanice's feet, saying:

'Charming Queen, may this be some slight consolation to you in your
unhappiness!'

The Queen hastily opened the baskets, and found in each a lovely
baby-girl, about the same age as the little Princess for whom she
sorrowed so deeply. At first the sight of them renewed her grief; but
presently their charms so gained upon her that she forgot her
melancholy in providing them with nursery-maids, cradle-rockers, and
ladies-in-waiting, and in sending hither and thither for swings and
dolls and tops, and bushels of the finest sweetmeats.

Oddly enough, every baby had upon its throat a tiny pink rose. The Queen
found it so difficult to decide on suitable names for all of them,
that until she could settle the matter she chose a special colour for
everyone, by which it was known, so that when they were all together
they looked like nothing so much as a nosegay of gay flowers. As they
grew older it became evident that though they were all remarkably
intelligent, and profited equally by the education they received, yet
they differed one from another in disposition, so much so that they
gradually ceased to be known as 'Pearl,' or 'Primrose,' or whatever
might have been their colour, and the Queen instead would say:

'Where is my Sweet?' or 'my Beautiful,' or 'my Gay.'

Of course, with all these charms they had lovers by the dozen. Not only
in their own court, but princes from afar, who were constantly arriving,
attracted by the reports which were spread abroad; but these lovely
girls, the first Maids of Honour, were as discreet as they were
beautiful, and favoured no one.

But let us return to Surcantine. She had fixed upon the son of a king
who was cousin to Bardondon, to bring up as her fickle Prince. She had
before, at his christening, given him all the graces of mind and body
that a prince could possibly require; but now she redoubled her efforts,
and spared no pains in adding every imaginable charm and fascination.
So that whether he happened to be cross or amiable, splendidly or simply
attired, serious or frivolous, he was always perfectly irresistible! In
truth, he was a charming young fellow, since the Fairy had given him the
best heart in the world as well as the best head, and had left nothing
to be desired but--constancy. For it cannot be denied that Prince
Mirliflor was a desperate flirt, and as fickle as the wind; so much so,
that by the time he arrived at his eighteenth birthday there was not a
heart left for him to conquer in his father's kingdom--they were all his
own, and he was tired of everyone! Things were in this state when he was
invited to visit the court of his father's cousin, King Bardondon.

Imagine his feelings when he arrived and was presented at once to twelve
of the loveliest creatures in the world, and his embarrassment was
heightened by the fact that they all liked him as much as he liked each
one of them, so that things came to such a pass that he was never happy
a single instant without them. For could he not whisper soft speeches
to Sweet, and laugh with Joy, while he looked at Beauty? And in his more
serious moments what could be pleasanter than to talk to Grave upon some
shady lawn, while he held the hand of Loving in his own, and all the
others lingered near in sympathetic silence? For the first time in his
life he really loved, though the object of his devotion was not one
person, but twelve, to whom he was equally attached, and even
Surcantine was deceived into thinking that this was indeed the height of
inconstancy. But Paridamie said not a word.

In vain did Prince Mirliflor's father write commanding him to return,
and proposing for him one good match after another. Nothing in the world
could tear him from his twelve enchantresses.

One day the Queen gave a large garden-party, and just as the guests were
all assembled, and Prince Mirliflor was as usual dividing his
attentions between the twelve beauties, a humming of bees was heard. The
Rose-maidens, fearing their stings, uttered little shrieks, and fled all
together to a distance from the rest of the company. Immediately, to the
horror of all who were looking on, the bees pursued them, and, growing
suddenly to an enormous size, pounced each upon a maiden and carried
her off into the air, and in an instant they were all lost to view. This
amazing occurrence plunged the whole court into the deepest affliction,
and Prince Mirliflor, after giving way to the most violent grief at
first, fell gradually into a state of such deep dejection that it was
feared if nothing could rouse him he would certainly die. Surcantine
came in all haste to see what she could do for her darling, but he
rejected with scorn all the portraits of lovely princesses which she
offered him for his collection. In short, it was evident that he was in
a bad way, and the Fairy was at her wits' end. One day, as he wandered
about absorbed in melancholy reflections, he heard sudden shouts and
exclamations of amazement, and if he had taken the trouble to look up he
could not have helped being as astonished as everyone else, for through
the air a chariot of crystal was slowly approaching which glittered
in the sunshine. Six lovely maidens with shining wings drew it
by rose-coloured ribbons, while a whole flight of others, equally
beautiful, were holding long garlands of roses crossed above it, so as
to form a complete canopy. In it sat the Fairy Paridamie, and by her
side a Princess whose beauty positively dazzled all who saw her. At the
foot of the great staircase they descended, and proceeded to the Queen's
apartments, though everyone had run together to see this marvel, till it
was quite difficult to make a way through the crowd; and exclamations
of wonder rose on all sides at the loveliness of the strange Princess.
'Great Queen,' said Paridamie, 'permit me to restore to you your
daughter Rosanella, whom I stole out of her cradle.'

After the first transports of joy were over the Queen said to Paridamie:

'But my twelve lovely ones, are they lost to me for ever? Shall I never
see them again?'

But Paridamie only said:

'Very soon you will cease to miss them!' in a tone that evidently meant
'Don't ask me any more questions.' And then mounting again into her
chariot she swiftly disappeared.

The news of his beautiful cousin's arrival was soon carried to the
Prince, but he had hardly the heart to go and see her. However, it
became absolutely necessary that he should pay his respects, and he had
scarcely been five minutes in her presence before it seemed to him that
she combined in her own charming person all the gifts and graces which
had so attracted him in the twelve Rose-maidens whose loss he had so
truly mourned; and after all it is really more satisfactory to make love
to one person at a time. So it came to pass that before he knew where he
was he was entreating his lovely cousin to marry him, and the moment the
words had left his lips, Paridamie appeared, smiling and triumphant, in
the chariot of the Queen of the Fairies, for by that time they had all
heard of her success, and declared her to have earned the kingdom. She
had to give a full account of how she had stolen Rosanella from her
cradle, and divided her character into twelve parts, that each might
charm Prince Mirliflor, and when once more united might cure him of his
inconstancy once and for ever.

And as one more proof of the fascination of the whole Rosanella, I may
tell you that even the defeated Surcantine sent her a wedding gift, and
was present at the ceremony which took place as soon as the guests could
arrive. Prince Mirliflor was constant for the rest of his life. And
indeed who would not have been in his place? As for Rosanella, she loved
him as much as all the twelve beauties put together, so they reigned in
peace and happiness to the end of their long lives.

By the Comte de Caylus.
