"You forbid!" Dame Anthony cried. "What do I care for your forbidding?
If you say a word I will go down the town and join those who pelted you
with mud last night. A nice spectacle it would be for the worthy Mayor
of Southampton to be pelted in the street by a lot of women led by his
own wife. You know me, Richard. You know when I say I will do a thing I
will do it."

"I will lock you up in your own room, woman."

"You won't," Dame Anthony said scornfully. "I would scream out of the
window till I brought the whole town round. No, Mr. Mayor. You have had
your own way, and I am going to have mine. Go and tell the town if you
like that your wife has left you because you kidnapped her cousin, the
boy she loved. You tell your story and I will tell mine. Why, the women
in the town would hoot you, and you wouldn't dare show your face in the
streets. You insist, indeed! Why, you miserable little man, my fingers
are tingling now. Say another word to me and I will box your ears till
you won't know whether you are standing on your head or your heels."

The mayor was a small man, while Dame Anthony, although not above the
usual height, was plump and strong; and her crestfallen spouse felt
that she was capable of carrying her threat into execution. He therefore
thought it prudent to make no reply, and his angry wife swept from the
room.

It was some time before the mayor descended to his shop. In the interval
he had thought the matter over, and had concluded that it would be best
for him to let his wife have her way. Indeed, he did not see how he
could do otherwise.

He had expected a storm, but not such a storm as this. Never before
in his fifteen years of married life had he seen his wife in such a
passion, and there was no saying whether she would not carry all her
threats into execution if he interfered with her now. No. It would be
better to let her go. The storm would blow over in time. It was natural
enough for her to go over and stay a few weeks with her people, and in
time, of course, she would come back again. After all, he had got rid of
Jack, and this being so, he could afford for awhile to put up with the
absence of his wife. It was unpleasant, of course, very unpleasant, to
be called such names, but as no one had heard them but himself it did
not so much matter. Perhaps, after all, it was the best thing that could
happen that she should take it into her head to go away for a time. In
her present mood she would not make things comfortable at home, and, of
course, his daughter would side with her mother.

Accordingly, when the carrier's wagon stopped at the door the mayor
went out with a pleasant countenance, and saw that the boxes were safely
placed in it, and that his wife was comfortably seated on some shawls
spread over a heap of straw. His attention, however, received neither
thanks nor recognition from Dame Anthony, while Alice, whose face was
swollen with crying, did not speak a word. However, they were seated
well under the cover of the wagon, and could not be seen by the few
people standing near; and as the mayor continued till the wagon started
speaking cheerfully, and giving them all sorts of injunctions as to
taking care of themselves on the way, he flattered himself that no one
would have an idea that the departure was anything but an amicable one.

A week later a letter arrived for Dame Anthony and the mayor at once
recognized the handwriting of Jack Stilwell. He took it up to his room,
and had a considerable debate with himself as to whether he would open
it or not. The question was, What did the boy say? If he wrote full of
bitter complaints as to his treatment, the receipt of the letter by his
wife would only make matters worse, and in that case it would be better
to destroy the letter as well as any others which might follow it, and
so put an end to all communication, for it was unlikely that the boy
would ever return to England.

Accordingly he opened the letter, and after reading it through, laid
it down with a feeling of something like relief. It was written in a
cheerful spirit. Jack began by saying that he feared Dame Anthony and
Alice would have been anxious when they heard that he was missing from
his lodgings.

"I have no doubt, my dear cousin, you will have guessed what has
befallen me, seeing that so many have been taken away in the same way. I
don't think that my late master acted handsomely in thus getting rid of
me; for, as the list was made up by him, it was of course his doing. But
you will please tell him from me that I feel no grudge against him. In
the first place, he did not know I was going away to sea, and it must
naturally have angered him to see one known to be connected with him
hanging about Southampton doing nothing. Besides, I know that he always
meant kindly by me. He took me in when I had nowhere to go, he gave
me my apprenticeship without fee, and, had it not been that my roving
spirit rendered me disinclined for so quiet a life, he would doubtless
have done much for me hereafter. Thus thinking it over, it seems to me
but reasonable that he should have been angered at my rejection of the
benefits he intended for me.

"In the next place, it may be that his action in shipping me off as a
soldier may in the end prove to be for my welfare. Had I carried out my
intention and gone as a sailor, a sailor I might have remained all my
life. It seems to me that as a soldier my chances are larger. Not only
shall I see plenty of fighting and adventure, which accords well with
my spirit, but it seems to me--and a sergeant who has shown me much
kindness says that it is so--that there are fair chances of advancement.
The soldiers are for the great part disorderly and ignorant men; and,
as I mean to be steady and obedient so as to gain the goodwill of the
officers, and as I have received a good education from my dear father,
I hope in time to come to be regarded as one somewhat different from the
common herd; and if I get an opportunity of distinguishing myself, and
do not get killed by a Spanish bullet or pike thrust, or by the fevers
which they say are not uncommon, then it is possible I may come back at
the end of the war with some honor and credit, and, the sergeant said,
may even obtain advancement to the rank of an officer. Therefore my late
master, having done me many good turns, may perhaps find that this last
one--even though he intended it not--is the best of all. Will you make
my respects to him, dear cousin, and tell him that I feel no grudge or
ill will against him? Will you give my love to my Cousin Alice? Tell her
that I will bring her home some rare keepsakes from Spain should they
fall in my way; and you know I will do the same for yourself, who have
always been so good and kind to me."

"The boy is not a bad boy," the mayor said, well pleased as he laid down
the letter. "It may be that I have judged him too harshly, seeing that
he set himself against what was best for his welfare. Still, one cannot
expect men's heads on boys' shoulders, and he writes dutifully and
properly. I believe it is the fault of Andrew Carson, who was forever
edging me on by reports of the boy's laziness and carelessness. He
certainly has a grudge against him, and he assuredly exceeded his place
and authority when he lifted his hand against my wife's cousin. It seems
to me truly that I have acted somewhat hastily and wrong headedly in the
matter. I shall give Master Carson notice that at the end of a month
I shall require his services no longer--the fellow puts himself too
forward. That will please Mary; she never liked him, and women in these
matters of likes and dislikes are shrewder than we are. Perhaps when she
hears that he is going, and reads this letter, which I will forward
to her by the carrier, she may come back to me. I certainly miss her
sorely, and the household matters go all wrong now that she is away. She
ought not to have said things to me; but no wise man thinks anything of
what a woman says when she's angry; and now that I think things over, it
certainly seems to me that she had some sort of warrant for her words.
Yes, I certainly don't know what can have come over me, unless it was
that fellow, Andrew Carson. Richard Anthony has not been considered a
bad fellow else he would never have become the Mayor of Southampton; and
for fifteen years Mary and I have got on very well together, save
for the little disputes which have arisen from her over masterful
disposition. But she is a good wife--none could wish for better--though
she is given to flame out at what she considers unrighteous dealings;
but every woman has her faults, and every man too as far as that goes,
and upon the whole few of them have less than Mary. I will write to her
at once."

The mayor was not a man to delay when his mind was once made up, and
sitting down at a writing desk he wrote as follows:

"DEAR WIFE: I inclose a letter which has come for you from your Cousin
Jack. I opened it, and you will think poorly of me when I tell you that
had it been filled with complaints of me, as I expected, it would not
have come to your hands; for your anger against me is fierce enough
without the adding of fresh fuel thereto. But the lad, as you will see,
writes in quite another strain, and remembers former kindnesses rather
than late injuries. His letter has put it into my head to think matters
over, and in a different spirit from that in which I had previously
regarded it, and I have come to the conclusion that I have acted
wrongly; first, that I did not make allowances enough for the boy;
second, that I insisted on keeping him to a trade he disliked; third,
that I have given too willing an ear to what Andrew Carson has said
against the boy; lastly, that I took such means of freeing myself from
him. I today give Andrew Carson notice to quit my service--a matter in
which I have hitherto withstood you. I am willing to forget the words
which you spoke to me in anger, seeing that there was some foundation
for them, and that when a woman is in a passion her tongue goes further
than she means.

"Now, as I am ready to put this on one side, I trust that you also will
put aside your anger at my having obtained the pressing for a soldier
of your cousin. You can see for yourself by his writing that he does not
desire that any enmity shall arise out of the manner of his going. For
fifteen years we have lived in amity, and I see not why, after this
cloud passes away, we should not do so again.

"I miss you sorely. Things go badly with us since you have gone. The
food is badly cooked, and the serving indifferent. If you will write
to tell me that you are willing to come back, and to be a loving
and dutiful wife again, I will make me a holiday and come over to
Basingstoke to fetch you and Alice home again. I am writing to Jack
and sending him five guineas, for which he will no doubt find a use in
getting things suitable for the adventure upon which he is embarked,
for the payment of her majesty to her soldiers does not permit of the
purchase of many luxuries. On second thoughts I have resolved to pay
Andrew Carson his month's wages, and to let him go at once. So that if
you return you will not find one here against whom you have always been
set, and who is indeed in no small way the author of the matters which
have come between us, save only as touching the impressment, of which
I own that I must take the blame solely upon myself. Give my love to
Alice, and say that she must keep up her spirits, and look forward to
the time when her Cousin Jack shall come back to her after the killing
of many Spaniards."

Having signed and carefully sealed this letter, with that from Jack
inclosed within it, the mayor then proceeded to write the following to
the young soldier:

"MY DEAR COUSIN JACK: I have read the letter which you sent to my wife,
and it is written in a very proper and dutiful strain. Your departure
has caused trouble between my wife and me; but this I hope will pass
away after she has read and considered your letter. She carried matters
so far that she is at present with your Cousin Alice at the house of
her parents at Basingstoke. Having read your letter, I write to tell
you that I feel that I am not without blame toward you. I did not see
it myself until the manner of your letter opened my eyes to the fact.
I have misunderstood you, and, being bent on carrying out my own
inclinations, made not enough allowance for yours. Were you here now I
doubt not that in future we should get on better together; but as that
cannot be, I can only say that I recognize the kind spirit in which
you wrote, and that I trust that in future we shall be good friends. I
inclose you an order for five guineas on a tradesman in Dover with whom
I have dealings. There are many little things that you may want to buy
for your voyage to supplement the pay which you receive. Andrew Carson
is leaving my service. I think that it is he greatly who came between
us, and has brought things to the pass which I cannot but regret."

A week later the cloth merchant's shop in the High Street was shut up,
and the mayor, having appointed a deputy for the week he purposed to
be absent, took his place in the stage for Basingstoke, when a complete
reconciliation was effected between him and his wife.

The starting of the expedition was delayed beyond the intended time, for
the government either could not or would not furnish the required funds,
and the Earl of Peterborough was obliged to borrow considerable sums
of money, and to involve himself in serious pecuniary embarrassments to
remedy the defects, and to supply as far as possible the munition and
stores necessary for the efficiency of the little force he had been
appointed to command. It consisted of some three thousand English
troops, who were nearly all raw and undisciplined, and a brigade, two
thousand strong, of Dutch soldiers.

Early in May the regiment to which Jack Stilwell belonged marched
for Portsmouth, where the rest of the expedition were assembled, and
embarked on board the transports lying at Spithead, and on the 22d
of the month set sail for St. Helens, where they were joined on the
following day by their general, who embarked with his suit on board the
admiral's ship. On the 24th the fleet sailed for Lisbon.

Fond as Jack was of the sea, he did not find the change an agreeable
one. On shore the constant drill and steady work had fully occupied
the men, and had left them but little time for grumbling. On board ship
things were different. In those days there was but little of the strict
discipline which is now maintained on board a troop ship. It was true
that the vessels in which the expedition was being carried belonged to
the royal navy; but even here the discipline was but lax. There were
many good sailors on board; but the bulk of the crew had been pressed
into the service as harshly and tyrannically as were the soldiers
themselves, and the grumblers of one class found ready sympathizers
among the others.

The captain was a young man of good family who had obtained his
appointment solely by interest, and who, although he would have fought
his ship bravely in an action with the enemy, took but little interest
in the regular work, leaving such matters entirely in the hands of his
first lieutenant. The military officers were all new to their work.
On shore they had had the support which the presence of a considerable
number of veteran troops in garrison in the castle gave them; but they
now ceased to struggle against the difficulty of keeping up discipline
among a large number of raw and insubordinate recruits, relying upon
bringing them into order and discipline when they got them ashore in a
foreign country. Beyond, therefore, a daily parade, and half an hour's
drill in the handling of their firelocks, they interfered but little
with the men.

Sergeant Edwards with twenty of his men had at the last minute,
to Jack's great satisfaction, been drafted into the regiment, and
accompanied them on their voyage.

"Ay, they are a rough lot," the sergeant said in answer to an
observation of Jack as to the grumbling of the men after they had been
at sea a few days; "but what can you expect when you take men from their
homes against their will, pick out the worst characters in each town,
make up their number with jail birds, and then pack them off to sea
before they have got into shape? There's nothing tries men more than a
sea voyage. Here they are packed up as close as herrings, with scarcely
room to move about, with nothing to do, and with food which a dog
would turn up his nose to eat. Naturally they get talking together, and
grumbling over their wrongs till they work themselves up.

"I wish the voyage was over. It wouldn't matter if we had a good steady
old crew, but more than half of them have been pressed; many of them are
landsmen who have been carried off just as you were. No doubt they would
all fight toughly enough if a Frenchman hove in view, but the captain
couldn't rely on them in a row on board. As long as the fleet keeps
together it's all right enough. Here are nine vessels, and no one on
board one knows what's going on in the others, but if the captain of
any one of them were to hoist a signal that a mutiny had broken out on
board, the others would be round her with their portholes opened ready
to give her a dose of round shot in no time."

"But you don't think that it is really likely that we shall have any
trouble, sergeant?"

"There won't be any trouble if, as I am telling you, the weather holds
fine and the fleet keeps together; but if there's a gale and the ships
get scattered, no one can't say what might come of it."

"I can't think how they could be so mad as to get up a mutiny," Jack
said; "why, even supposing they did take the ship, what would they do
with it?"

"Them's questions as has been asked before, my lad, and there's sense
and reason in them, but you knows as well as I that there's many a craft
sailing the seas under the black flag. There isn't a ship as puts to sea
but what has half a dozen hands on board who have been in slavers, and
who are full of tales of islands where everything grows without the
trouble of putting a spade in the ground, where all sorts of strange
fruit can be had for the picking, and where the natives are glad enough
to be servants or wives, as the case may be, to whites. It's just such
tales as these as leads men away, and I will warrant there's a score at
least among the crew of the Caesar who are telling such tales to any who
will listen to them. Well, you see, it's a tempting story enough to one
as knows no better. On the one side there is a hard life, with bad food
