
'Then we may as well stay here.'

The fires were drawn again, everything made right, and the two
disposed themselves again for spending the night in slumber.

No disturbance occurred, and both slept Roundly until broad daylight.
The trapper's first proceeding upon awakening was to scan the prairie
in every direction in quest of danger.

He was not a little amused to see a dozen or so mounted Indians about
a third of a mile to the west. They had reined up on the plain, and
were evidently scanning the strange object, with a great deal of
wonder, mixed with some fear.

'Do you think they will attack us?' inquired the boy, who could not
suppress his trepidation at the sight of the warlike savages, on their
gayly-caparisoned horses, drawn up in such startling array.

'Ef thar war any danger of that, we could stop 'em by 'tacking 'em.

'Jest fire up and start toward 'em, and see how quick they will
scatter.' The advice was acted upon on the instant, although it was
with no little misgiving on the part of the engineer.

All the time that the 'firingup' process was under way the savages sat
as motionless as statues upon their horses. Had they understood the
real nature of the 'animal,' it cannot be supposed that they would
rave hesitated for a moment to charge down upon it and demolish it
entirely.

But it was a terra incognita, clothed with a terror such as no array
of: enemies could wear, and they preferred to keep at a goodly
distance from it.

'Now, suppose they do not run?' remarked Johnny, rather doubtingly, as
he hesitated whether to start ahead or not.

'What if they don't? Can't we run another way? But yer needn't fear.
Jist try it on.'

Steam was let on as rapidly as possible, and the momentum gathering
quickly, it was soon speeding over the prairie at a tremendous rate,
straight toward the savages.

The latter remained motionless a few moments, before they realized
that it was coining after them, and then, wheeling about, they ran as
though all the legions of darkness were after them.

'Shall I keep it up?' shouted Johnny in the ear of the hunter.

'Yas; give 'em such a skear that they won't be able to git over it
ag'in in all thar lives.'

There is some fun in chasing a foe, when you know that he is really
afraid of you, and will keep running without any thought of turning at
bay, and the dwarf put the steam man to the very highest notch of
speed that was safe, even at the slight risk of throwing both the
occupants out.

The prairie was harder and nearer level than any over which they had
passed since starting, so that nothing was in the way of preventing
the richest kind of sport.

'Are we gaining?' inquired Johnny, his eyes glowing with excitement.

'Gaining? Thar never was a red-skin that had such a chase in all the
world. Ef they don't git out the way mighty soon, we'll run over 'em
all.'

They were, in truth, rapidly overhauling the red-skins, who were about
as much terrified as it was possible for a mortal to be, and still
live.

To increase their fears, the boy kept up a constant shrieking of his
whistle. If there had been any other contrivance or means at his
command, it is possible the red-skins would have tumbled off their
horses and died; for they were bearing almost all the fright, terror
and horror that can possibly be concentrated into a single person.

Finding there was no escape by means of the speed of their horses, the
Indians sensibly did what the trapper had prophesied they would do at
first.

They 'scattered,' all diverging over the prairie. As it was impossible
for the steam man to overtake all of these, of course, this expedient
secured the safety of the majority.

Neither Baldy nor the boy were disposed to give up the sport in this
manner; so, they singled out a single 'noble red-man,' who was
pursuing nearly the same direction as they were, and they headed
straight for him.

The poor wretch, when he saw that he was the object of the monster's
pursuit, seemed to become frantic with terror. Rising on his horse's
back, he leaned forward until it looked as though there was danger of
going over his head altogether. Then, whooping and shrieking to his
terrified horse, that was already straining every nerve, he pounded
his heels in its sides, vainly urging it to still greater speed.

In the mean time, the steam man was gaining steadily upon him, while
to add variety to the scene, Johnny kept up the unearthly shrieking of
the nose-whistle of the giant. It was difficult to tell which sounded
the most hideously in this strange chase.

The remaining Indians had improved their advantage to the utmost.
Fearful that their dreadful enemy might change its mind and single
them out, they kept up their tearing light, all regardless of the
great extremity to which their companion was reduced, until finally
they disappeared in the distance.

A short distance only separated pursuer and pursued, when the latter,
realizing that there was no escape in flight, headed toward the river,
which was a short distance on the right.

This saved him. When with a bowl, horse and rider thundered over the
bank and disappeared, the steam man could not follow him. He was
compelled to give up the chase and draw off. A few days later, and
without further noteworthy incident, the steam man reached Wolf
Ravine, being received in the manner narrated at the beginning of this
story.



                       CHAPTER X. WOLF RAVINE.

DURING THE absence of Baldy Bicknell in search of the steam man,
neither Mickey nor Ethan had been disturbed by Indians.

They had worked unceasingly in digging the gold mine to which they had
gained access through the instrumentality of the trapper. When they
had gathered together quite a quantity of the gravel and dirt, with
the yellow sand glittering through it, it was carried a short distance
to the margin of the river, where it underwent the 'washing' process.

While thus engaged, one of them was constantly running up the bank, to
make sure that their old enemies did not steal upon them unawares.
Once or twice they caught sight of several moving in the distance, but
they did not come near enough to molest them, doing nothing more than
to keep them on the qui vive.

There was one Indian, however, who bestrode a black horse, who haunted
them like a phantom. When they glanced over the river, at almost any
time, they could see this individual cautiously circling about on his
horse, and apparently waiting for a chance to get a shot at his
enemies.

'Begorrah, but he loves us, that he does, as the lamb observed when
speaking of the wolf,' said Mickey, just after he had sent a bullet
whistling about their ears.

'Jehosiphat! he loves us too much!' added the Yankee, who had no
relish for these stolen shots. 'If we ain't keerful, there'll be
nuthin' of us left when Baldy comes back, that is, if he comes back at
all.'

This red-skin on his black horse was so dangerous that he required
constant watching, and the men could perform only half their usual
work. It was while Mickey was on the lookout for him that he caught
sight of the steam man coming toward him, as we have related in
another place.

So long as that personage was kept puffing and tearing round the
vicinity, they knew there was no fear of disturbance from the
treacherous red-skins, who were so constantly on the alert to avenge
themselves for the loss they had suffered in the attack; but it would
hardly pay to keep an iron man as sentinel, as the wear and tear in
all probability would be too much for him.

After consulting together upon the return of Baldy, and after they had
ridden behind the steam man to their heart's content, they decided
upon their future course. As the boy, Johnny, had no intention of
devoting himself to manual labor, even had he been able, it was agreed
that he should take upon himself the part of sentinel, while the
others were at work.

In this way it was believed that they could finish within a couple of
weeks, bidding good-by to the Indians, and quickly reach the States
and give up their dangerous pursuits altogether, whereas, if compelled
to do duty themselves as sentinels, their stay would be doubly
prolonged.

This arrangement suited the boy very well, who was thereby given
opportunity to exercise his steam man by occasional airings over the
prairies. To the east and south the plains stretched away till the
horizon shut down upon them, as the sky does on the sea. To the west,
some twenty odd miles distant, a range of mountains was visible, the
peaks being tinged with a faint blue in the distance, while some of
the more elevated looked like white conical clouds resting against the
clear sky beyond.

From the first, young Brainerd expressed a desire to visit these
mountains. There was something in their rugged grandeur which invited
a close inspection, and he proposed to the trapper that they should
make a hunting excursion in that direction.

'No need of goin' so fur for game,' he replied, 'takes too much time,
and thar's sure to be red-skins.'

'But if we go with the steam man we shall frighten them all away,' was
the reply.

'Yas,' laughed Baldy, 'and we'll skear the game away too.'

'But we can overtake that as we did the poor Indian the other day.'

'Not if he takes to the mountains. Leastways yer isn't him that would
like to undertake to ride up the mountain behind that old gintle-man.'

'Nor I either, but we can leave the wagon when we get to the base of
the mountain.'

'And give the reds time to come down and run off with yer whole team.'

'Do you think there is danger of that?'

'Dunno as thar be, but ef they catched sight of yourself, they'd raise
yer ha'r quicker'n lightning.'

Seeing that the little fellow was considerably discouraged, Baldy
hastened to add:

'Ef you're keerful, younker, and I b'lieve yer generally be, take a
ride thar yerself, behind yer jumping-jack, but remember my advice and
stick to yer wagon.'

Having thus obtained permission of the hunter, Johnny Brainerd, as may
well be supposed, did not wait long before availing himself of his
privilege.

The weather, which had been threatening toward the latter part of the
day, entirely cleared away, and the next morning dawned remarkably
clear and beautiful. So the boy announced his intention of making the
expected visit, after which, he promised to devote himself entirely to
performing the duty of sentinel.

'Abeout what time may we look for you, neow!' asked Ethan, as he was
on the point of starting.

'Sometime this afternoon.'

'Come in before dark, as me mither used to observe to meself, when I
wint out shparkin',' added Mickey.

The boy promised to heed their warnings, and began firing up again.
The tank was completely filled with water, and the wagon filled nearly
full of wood, so that the two were capable of running the contrivance
for the entire day, provided there was no cessation, and that he was
on the 'go' continually.

Before starting, it was thoroughly oiled through and through, and put
in the best possible condition, and then waving them all a pleasant
farewell, he steamed gayly toward the mountains.

The ground was admirable, and the steam man traveled better than ever.
Like a locomotive, he seemed to have acquired a certain smoothness and
steadiness of motion, from the exercise he had already had, and the
sharp eye of the boy detected it at once. He saw that he had been very
fortunate indeed in constructing his wonderful invention, as it was
impossible for any human skill to give it any better movement than it
now possessed.

The first three or four miles were passed at a rattling gait, and the
boy was sitting on the front of his wagon, dreamily watching the play
of the huge engine, when it suddenly paused, and with such abruptness
that he was thrown forward from his seat, with violence, falling
directly between the legs of the monster, which seemed to stand
perfectly motionless, like the intelligent elephant that is fearful of
stirring a limb, lest he might crush his master lying beneath him.

The boy knew at once that some accident had happened, and unmindful of
the severe scratch he had received, he instantly clambered to his
feet, and began examining the machinery, first taking the precaution
to give vent to the surplus steam, which was rapidly gathering.

It was some time before he could discover the cause of difficulty, but
he finally ascertained that a small bolt had slipped loose, and had
caught in such a manner as to check the motion of the engine on the
instant.

Fortunately no permanent injury was done, and while he was making
matters right, he recollected that in chatting with the trapper as he
was on the point of starting, he had begun to screw on the bolt, when
his attention had been momentarily diverted, when it escaped his mind
altogether, so that he alone was to blame for the accident, which had
so narrowly escaped proving a serious one.

Making sure that everything was right, he remounted the wagon, and
cautiously resumed his journey, going very slowly at first, so as to
watch the play of the engine.

Everything moved with its usual smoothness, and lifting his gaze he
descried three buffaloes, standing with erect heads, staring
wonderingly at him.

'If you want a chase you may have it!' exclaimed the boy as he headed
toward them.



             CHAPTER XI. THE STEAM MAN ON A BUFFALO HUNT.

WITH A WILD snort of alarm, the three buffaloes turned tail and dashed
over the prairie, with the shrieking steam man in pursuit.

The boy had taken the precaution to bring a rifle with him. When he
saw them flee in this terrified manner, the thought came to him at
once that he would shoot one of them, and take a portion back to his
friends for their supper.

It would to a grand exploit for him, and he would be prouder of its
performance than he was of the construction of the wonderful steam
man.

The lumbering, rolling gait of the buffaloes was not a very rapid one,
and the boy found himself speedily overhauling them without
difficulty. They did not know enough to separate, but kept close
together, sometimes crowding and striking against each other in their
furious efforts to escape.

But, after the chase had continued some time, one of the animals began
to fall in the rear, and Johnny directed his attention toward him, as
he would be the most easy to secure.

This fellow was a huge bull that was slightly lame, which accounted
for his tardiness of gait. Frightened as he was, it was not that blind
terror which had seized the Indians when they discovered the steam man
so close at their heels. The bull was one of those creatures that if
closely pressed would turn and charge the monster. He was not one to
continue a fruitless flight, no matter who or what was his pursuer.

The boy was not aware of this sturdy trait in the animal, nor did he
dream of anything like resistance.

So he steadily drew toward him, until within twenty yards, when he let
go of his controlling rod, and picked up the rifle beside him. A
bullet from this, he supposed, would kill any animal, however large,
no matter at what portion of his body he aimed.

So raising partly to his feet, and steadying himself as well as he
could, he aimed for the lumping haunch of the animal. The ball buried
itself in his flank, and so retarded his speed, that the next moment
the boy found himself beside him.

The instant this took place, the bull lowered his head, and without
further warning, charged full at the steam man.

The boy saw the danger, but too late to stave it off. His immense head
struck the rear of the monster with such momentum that he was lifted
fully a foot from the ground, the concussion sounding like the crack of
a pistol.

Fortunately the shock did not materially injure the machine, although
the frightened boy expected to be capsized and killed by the
infuriated buffalo.

The latter, when he had made his plunge, instantly drew back for
another, which was sure to be fatal if made as fairly as the first.
The boy retained his presence of mind enough to let on full steam, and
the concern shot away at an extraordinary rate, bounding over the
ground so furiously that the billets of wood were thrown and scattered
in every direction, so that now, from being the pursuer, he had
speedily become the pursued. The tables were turned with a vengeance!

It was only by providential good fortune that young Brainerd escaped
instant destruction. The wonder was that the steam man was not so
injured as to be unable to travel, in which case the maddened bull
would have left little of him.

As it was, the experience of the boy was such as he could never
forget. When he turned his affrighted glance behind he saw the enraged
animal plunging furiously after him, his head lowered, his tongue out,
his eyes glaring, and his whole appearance that of the most brutal
ferocity.

Had the bull come in collision with the horse or man while in that
mood he would have made short work of him.

But great as was his speed, it could not equal that of the wonderful
steam man, who took such tremendous strides that a few minutes
sufficed to carry him beyond all danger.

Johnny quietly slacked off steam, but he kept up a good swinging gait,
not caring to renew his close acquaintance with his wounded enemy. The
latter speedily discovered he was losing ground, and finally gave up
the pursuit and trotted off at a leisurely rate to join his
companions, apparently none the worse for the slight wound he had
received.

As soon as the boy found himself beyond the reach of the animal's fury
he halted the man and made a minute examination of the machinery.

The head and horns of the buffalo had dented the iron skin of the
steam man, but the blow being distributed over a large area, inflicted
no other damage, if indeed this could be called damage of itself.

The boy was greatly pleased, not only at his escape but at the
admirable manner in which his invention had borne the shock of
collision. It gave him a confidence in it which hitherto he had not
felt.

Turning his face more toward the mountains, he again let on a good
head of steam and rattled over the prairie at a stirring rate. An hour
was sufficient to bring him to the base, where he halted.

He had not forgotten the warning of the trapper, but, like almost any
inexperienced person, he could not see any cause for alarm. He scanned
every part of the prairie and mountain that was in his field of
vision, but could detect nothing alarming.

He supposed the parting admonition of Baldy was merely a general
warning, such as a cautious person gives to one whom he has reason to
fear is somewhat careless in his conduct.

It therefore required little self-argument upon his part after putting
his man in proper 'condition,' to start off on a ramble up the
mountain side. It was not his intention to remain more than an hour or
so, unless he came across some game. He had a goodly quantity of
ammunition, and was careful that his rifle was loaded, so as not to be
taken unawares by any emergency.

Although Johnny Brainerd was afflicted with misshapen form, yet he was
very quick and active upon his feet, and bounded along over the rocks,
and across the chasms like a deer, with such a buoyancy of spirits
that he forgot danger.

However, he had gone but a short distance, when he was startled by a
low fierce growl, and turning his head, saw to his horror, that he had
nearly run against a colossal animal, which he at once recognized as
