hotter and hotter, and the gold in their pockets got heavier and
heavier.

It was Jane who said, 'I don't see how we're to spend it all.
There must be thousands of pounds among the lot of us.  I'm going
to leave some of mine behind this stump in the hedge.  And directly
we get to the village we'll buy some biscuits; I know it's long
past dinner-time.'  She took out a handful or two of gold and hid
it in the hollows of an old hornbeam.  'How round and yellow they
are,' she said.  'Don't you wish they were gingerbread nuts and we
were going to eat them?'

'Well, they're not, and we're not,' said Cyril.  'Come on!'

But they came on heavily and wearily.  Before they reached the
village, more than one stump in the hedge concealed its little
hoard of hidden treasure.  Yet they reached the village with about
twelve hundred guineas in their pockets.  But in spite of this
inside wealth they looked quite ordinary outside, and no one would
have thought they could have more than a half-crown each at the
outside.  The haze of heat, the blue of the wood smoke, made a sort
of dim misty cloud over the red roofs of the village.  The four sat
down heavily on the first bench they came to- It happened to be
outside the Blue Boar Inn.

It was decided that Cyril should go into the Blue Boar and ask for
ginger-beer, because, as Anthea said, 'It is not wrong for men to
go into public houses, only for children.  And Cyril is nearer to
being a man than us, because he is the eldest.'  So he went.  The
others sat in the sun and waited.

'Oh, hats, how hot it is!' said Robert.  'Dogs put their tongues
out when they're hot; I wonder if it would cool us at all to put
out ours?'

'We might try,'Jane said; and they all put their tongues out as far
as ever they could go, so that it quite stretched their throats,
but it only seemed to make them thirstier than ever, besides
annoying everyone who went by.  So they took their tongues in
again, just as Cyril came back with the ginger-beer.

'I had to pay for it out of my own two-and-sevenpence, though, that
I was going to buy rabbits with,' he said.  'They wouldn't change
the gold.  And when I pulled out a handful the man just laughed and
said it was card-counters.  And I got some sponge-cakes too, out of
a glass jar on the bar-counter.  And some biscuits with caraways
in.'

The sponge-cakes were both soft and dry and the biscuits were dry
too, and yet soft, which biscuits ought not to be.  But the
ginger-beer made up for everything.

'It's my turn now to try to buy something with the money,' Anthea
said, 'I'm next eldest.  Where is the pony-cart kept?'

It was at The Chequers, and Anthea went in the back way to the
yard, because they all knew that little girls ought not to go into
the bars of public-houses.  She came out, as she herself said,
'pleased but not proud'.

'He'll be ready in a brace of shakes, he says,' she remarked, 'and
he's to have one sovereign - or whatever it is - to drive us in to
Rochester and back, besides waiting there till we've got everything
we want.  I think I managed very well.'

'You think yourself jolly clever, I daresay,' said Cyril moodily.
'How did you do it?'

'I wasn't jolly clever enough to go taking handfuls of money out of
my pocket, to make it seem cheap, anyway,' she retorted.  'I just
found a young man doing something to a horse's leg with a sponge
and a pail.  And I held out one sovereign, and I said, "Do you know
what this is?" He said, "No," and he'd call his father.  And the
old man came, and he said it was a spade guinea; and he said was it
my own to do as I liked with, and I said "Yes"; and I asked about
the pony-cart, and I said he could have the guinea if he'd drive us
in to Rochester.  And his name is S.  Crispin.  And he said, "Right
oh".'

It was a new sensation to be driven in a smart pony-trap along
pretty country roads, it was very pleasant too (which is not always
the case with new sensations), quite apart from the beautiful plans
of spending the money which each child made as they went along,
silently of course and quite to itself, for they felt it would
never have done to let the old innkeeper hear them talk in the
affluent sort of way they were thinking.  The old man put them down
by the bridge at their request.

'If you were going to buy a carriage and horses, where would you
go?' asked Cyril, as if he were only asking for the sake of
something to say.

'Billy Peasemarsh, at the Saracen's Head,' said the old man
promptly.  'Though all forbid I should recommend any man where it's
a question of horses, no more than I'd take anybody else's
recommending if I was a-buying one.  But if your pa's thinking of
a turnout of any sort, there ain't a straighter man in Rochester,
nor a civiller spoken, than Billy, though I says it.'

'Thank you,' said Cyril.  'The Saracen's Head.'

And now the children began to see one of the laws of nature turn
upside down and stand on its head like an acrobat.  Any grown-up
persons would tell you that money is hard to get and easy to spend.
But the fairy money had been easy to get, and spending it was not
only hard, it was almost impossible.  The tradespeople of Rochester
seemed to shrink, to a trades-person, from the glittering fairy
gold ('furrin money' they called it, for the most part).  To begin
with, Anthea, who had had the misfortune to sit on her hat earlier
in the day, wished to buy another.  She chose a very beautiful one,
trimmed with pink roses and the blue breasts of peacocks.  It was
marked in the window, 'Paris Model, three guineas'.

'I'm glad,' she said, 'because, if it says guineas, it means
guineas, and not sovereigns, which we haven't got.'

But when she took three of the spade guineas in her hand, which was
by this time rather dirty owing to her not having put on gloves
before going to the gravel-pit, the black-silk young lady in the
shop looked very hard at her, and went and whispered something to
an older and uglier lady, also in black silk, and then they gave
her back the money and said it was not current coin.

'It's good money,' said Anthea, 'and it's my own.'

'I daresay,' said the lady, 'but it's not the kind of money that's
fashionable now, and we don't care about taking it.'

'I believe they think we've stolen it,' said Anthea, rejoining the
others in the street; 'if we had gloves they wouldn't think we were
so dishonest.  It's my hands being so dirty fills their minds with
doubts.'

So they chose a humble shop, and the girls bought cotton gloves,
the kind at sixpence three-farthings, but when they offered a
guinea the woman looked at it through her spectacles and said she
had no change; so the gloves had to be paid for out of Cyril's
two-and-sevenpence that he meant to buy rabbits with, and so had
the green imitation crocodile-skin purse at ninepence-halfpenny
which had been bought at the same time.  They tried several more
shops, the kinds where you buy toys and scent, and silk
handkerchiefs and books, and fancy boxes of stationery, and
photographs of objects of interest in the vicinity.  But nobody
cared to change a guinea that day in Rochester, and as they went
from shop to shop they got dirtier and dirtier, and their hair got
more and more untidy, and Jane slipped and fell down on a part of
the road where a water-cart had just gone by.  Also they got very
hungry, but they found no one would give them anything to eat for
their guineas.  After trying two pastrycooks in vain, they became
so hungry, perhaps from the smell of the cake in the shops, as
Cyril suggested, that they formed a plan of campaign in whispers
and carried it out in desperation.  They marched into a third
pastrycook's - Beale his name was - and before the people behind
the counter could interfere each child had seized three new penny
buns, clapped the three together between its dirty hands, and taken
a big bite out of the triple sandwich.  Then they stood at bay,
with the twelve buns in their hands and their mouths very full
indeed.  The shocked pastrycook bounded round the corner.

'Here,' said Cyril, speaking as distinctly as he could, and holding
out the guinea he got ready before entering the shop, 'pay yourself
out of that.'

Mr Beale snatched the coin, bit it, and put it in his pocket.

'Off you go,' he said, brief and stern like the man in the song.

'But the change?' said Anthea, who had a saving mind.

'Change!' said the man.  'I'll change you!  Hout you goes; and you
may think yourselves lucky I don't send for the police to find out
where you got it!'

In the Castle Gardens the millionaires finished the buns, and
though the curranty softness of these were delicious, and acted
like a charm in raising the spirits of the party, yet even the
stoutest heart quailed at the thought of venturing to sound Mr
Billy Peasemarsh at the Saracen's Head on the subject of a horse
and carriage.  The boys would have given up the idea, but Jane was
always a hopeful child, and Anthea generally an obstinate one, and
their earnestness prevailed.

The whole party, by this time indescribably dirty, therefore betook
itself to the Saracen's Head.  The yard-method of attack having
been successful at The Chequers was tried again here.  Mr
Peasemarsh was in the yard, and Robert opened the business in these
terms -

'They tell me you have a lot of horses and carriages to sell.'  It
had been agreed that Robert should be spokesman, because in books
it is always the gentlemen who buy horses, and not ladies, and
Cyril had had his go at the Blue Boar.

'They tell you true, young man,' said Mr Peasemarsh.  He was a long
lean man, with very blue eyes and a tight mouth and narrow lips.

'We should like to buy some, please,' said Robert politely.

'I daresay you would.'

'Will you show us a few, please?  To choose from.'
'Who are you a-kiddin of?' inquired Mr Billy Peasemarsh.  'Was you
sent here of a message?'

'I tell you,' said Robert, 'we want to buy some horses and
carriages, and a man told us you were straight and civil spoken,
but I shouldn't wonder if he was mistaken.'

'Upon my sacred!' said Mr Peasemarsh.  'Shall I trot the whole
stable out for your Honour's worship to see?  Or shall I send round
to the Bishop's to see if he's a nag or two to dispose of?'

'Please do,' said Robert, 'if it's not too much trouble.  It would
be very kind of you.'

Mr Peasemarsh put his hands in his pockets and laughed, and they
did not like the way he did it.  Then he shouted 'Willum!'

A stooping ostler appeared in a stable door.

'Here, Willum, come and look at this 'ere young dook!  Wants to buy
the whole stud, lock, stock, and bar'l.  And ain't got tuppence in
his pocket to bless hisself with, I'll go bail!'

Willum's eyes followed his master's pointing thumb with
contemptuous interest.

'Do 'e, for sure?' he said.

But Robert spoke, though both the girls were now pulling at his
jacket and begging him to 'come along'.  He spoke, and he was very
angry; he said:

'I'm not a young duke, and I never pretended to be.  And as for
tuppence - what do you call this?'  And before the others could
stop him he had pulled out two fat handfuls of shining guineas, and
held them out for Mr Peasemarsh to look at.  He did look.  He
snatched one up in his finger and thumb.  He bit it, and Jane
expected him to say, 'The best horse in my stables is at your
service.'  But the others knew better.  Still it was a blow, even
to the most desponding, when he said shortly:

'Willum, shut the yard doors,' and Willum grinned and went to shut
them.

'Good-afternoon,' said Robert hastily; 'we shan't buy any of your
horses now, whatever you say, and I hope it'll be a lesson to you.'
He had seen a little side gate open, and was moving towards it as
he spoke.  But Billy Peasemarsh put himself in the way.

'Not so fast, you young off-scouring!' he said.  'Willum, fetch the
pleece.'

Willum went.  The children stood huddled together like frightened
sheep, and Mr Peasemarsh spoke to them till the pleece arrived.  He
said many things.  Among other things he said:

'Nice lot you are, aren't you, coming tempting honest men with your
guineas!'

'They ARE our guineas,' said Cyril boldly.

'Oh, of course we don't know all about that, no more we don't - oh
no - course not!  And dragging little gells into it, too.  'Ere -
I'll let the gells go if you'll come along to the pleece quiet.'

'We won't be let go,' said Jane heroically; 'not without the boys.
It's our money just as much as theirs, you wicked old man.'

'Where'd you get it, then?' said the man, softening slightly, which
was not at all what the boys expected when Jane began to call
names.

Jane cast a silent glance of agony at the others.

'Lost your tongue, eh?  Got it fast enough when it's for calling
names with.  Come, speak up!  Where'd you get it?'

'Out of the gravel-pit,' said truthful Jane.

'Next article,' said the man.

'I tell you we did,' Jane said.  'There's a fairy there - all over
brown fur - with ears like a bat's and eyes like a snail's, and he
gives you a wish a day, and they all come true.'

'Touched in the head, eh?' said the man in a low voice, 'all the
more shame to you boys dragging the poor afflicted child into your
sinful burglaries.'

'She's not mad; it's true,' said Anthea; 'there is a fairy.  If I
ever see him again I'll wish for something for you; at least I
would if vengeance wasn't wicked - so there!'

'Lor' lumme,' said Billy Peasemarsh, 'if there ain't another on
'em!'

And now Willum came -back with a spiteful grin on his face, and at
his back a policeman, with whom Mr Peasemarsh spoke long in a
hoarse earnest whisper.

'I daresay you're right,' said the policeman at last.  'Anyway,
I'll take 'em up on a charge of unlawful possession, pending
inquiries.  And the magistrate will deal with the case.  Send the
afflicted ones to a home, as likely as not, and the boys to a
reformatory.  Now then, come along, youngsters!  No use making a
fuss.  You bring the gells along, Mr Peasemarsh, sir, and I'll
shepherd the boys.'

Speechless with rage and horror, the four children were driven
along the streets of Rochester.  Tears of anger and shame blinded
them, so that when Robert ran right into a passer-by he did not
recognize her till a well--known voice said, 'Well, if ever I did!
Oh, Master Robert, whatever have you been a doing of now?'  And
another voice, quite as well known, said, 'Panty; want go own
Panty!'

They had run into Martha and the baby!

Martha behaved admirably.  She refused to believe a word of the
policeman's story, or of Mr Peasemarsh's either, even when they
made Robert turn out his pockets in an archway and show the
guineas.

'I don't see nothing,' she said.  'You've gone out of your senses,
you two!  There ain't any gold there - only the poor child's hands,
all over crock and dirt, and like the very chimbley.  Oh, that I
should ever see the day!'

And the children thought this very noble of Martha, even if rather
wicked, till they remembered how the Fairy had promised that the
servants should never notice any of the fairy gifts.  So of course
Martha couldn't see the gold, and so was only speaking the truth,
and that was quite right, of course, but not extra noble.

It was getting dusk when they reached the police-station.  The
policeman told his tale to an inspector, who sat in a large bare
room with a thing like a clumsy nursery-fender at one end to put
prisoners in.  Robert wondered whether it was a cell or a dock.

