the junior block.

"That kid," said Spencer to his immortal soul, "wants his head
smacked, badly."

At lunch Phipps had questions to ask.

"Saw you talking to Shearne in the interval," he said. "What were you
talking about?"

"Oh, nothing in particular."

"What did you think of him?"

"Little idiot."

"Ask him to tea this afternoon?"

"No."

"You must. Dash it all, you must do something for him. You've had ten
bob out of his people."

Spencer made no reply.

Going to the school shop that afternoon, he found Thomas seated there
with Phipps, behind a pot of tea. As a rule, he and Phipps tea'd
together, and he resented this desertion.

"Come on," said Phipps. "We were waiting for you."

"Pining away," added Thomas unnecessarily.

Spencer frowned austerely.

"Come and look after me," urged Thomas.

Spencer sat down in silence. For a minute no sound could be heard but
the champing of Thomas's jaws as he dealt with a slab of gingerbread.

"Buck up," said Phipps uneasily.

"Give me," said Thomas, "just one loving look."

Spencer ignored the request. The silence became tense once more.

"Coming to the house net, Phipps?" asked Spencer.

"We were going to the baths. Why don't you come?"

"All right," said Spencer.

Doctors tell us that we should allow one hour to elapse between taking
food and bathing, but the rule was not rigidly adhered to at Eckleton.
The three proceeded straight from the tea-table to the baths.

The place was rather empty when they arrived. It was a little earlier
than the majority of Eckletonians bathed. The bath filled up as lock-up
drew near. With the exception of a couple of infants splashing about in
the shallow end, and a stout youth who dived in from the spring-board,
scrambled out, and dived in again, each time flatter than the last, they
had the place to themselves.

"What's it like, Gorrick," inquired Phipps of the stout youth, who had
just appeared above the surface again, blowing like a whale. The
question was rendered necessary by the fact that many years before the
boiler at the Eckleton baths had burst, and had never been repaired,
with the consequence that the temperature of the water was apt to
vary. That is to say, most days it was colder than others.

"Simply boiling," said the man of weight, climbing out. "I say, did I
go in all right then?"

"Not bad," said Phipps.

"Bit flat," added Thomas critically.

Gorrick blinked severely at the speaker. A head-waiter at a
fashionable restaurant is cordial in his manner compared with a boy
who has been at a public school a year, when addressed familiarly by a
new boy. After reflecting on the outrage for a moment, he dived in
again.

"Worse than ever," said Truthful Thomas.

"Look here!" said Gorrick.

"Oh, come _on_!" exclaimed Phipps, and led Thomas away.

"That kid," said Gorrick to Spencer, "wants his head smacked, badly."

"That's just what I say," agreed Spencer, with the eagerness of a
great mind which has found another that thinks alike with itself.

Spencer was the first of the trio ready to enter the water. His
movements were wary and deliberate. There was nothing of the
professional diver about Spencer. First he stood on the edge and
rubbed his arms, regarding the green water beneath with suspicion and
dislike. Then, crouching down, he inserted three toes of his left
foot, drew them back sharply, and said "Oo!" Then he stood up again.
His next move was to slap his chest and dance a few steps, after which
he put his right foot into the water, again remarked "Oo!" and resumed
Position I.

"Thought you said it was warm," he shouted to Gorrick.

"So it is; hot as anything. Come on in."

And Spencer came on in. Not because he wanted to--for, by rights,
there were some twelve more movements to be gone through before he
should finally creep in at the shallow end--but because a cold hand,
placed suddenly on the small of his back, urged him forward. Down he
went, with the water fizzing and bubbling all over and all round him.
He swallowed a good deal of it, but there was still plenty left; and
what there was was colder than one would have believed possible.

He came to the surface after what seemed to him a quarter of an hour,
and struck out for the side. When he got out, Phipps and Thomas had
just got in. Gorrick was standing at the end of the cocoanut matting
which formed a pathway to the spring-board. Gorrick was blue, but
determined.

"I say! Did I go in all right then?" inquired Gorrick.

"How the dickens do I know?" said Spencer, stung to fresh wrath by the
inanity of the question.

"Spencer did," said Thomas, appearing in the water below them and
holding on to the rail.

"Look here!" cried Spencer; "did you shove me in then?"

"Me! Shove!" Thomas's voice expressed horror and pain. "Why, you dived
in. Jolly good one, too. Reminded me of the diving elephants at the
Hippodrome."

And he swam off.

"That kid," said Gorrick, gazing after him, "wants his head smacked."

"Badly," agreed Spencer. "Look here! did he shove me in? Did you see
him?"

"I was doing my dive. But it must have been him. Phipps never rags in
the bath."

Spencer grunted--an expressive grunt--and, creeping down the steps,
entered the water again.

It was Spencer's ambition to swim ten lengths of the bath. He was not
a young Channel swimmer, and ten lengths represented a very respectable
distance to him. He proceeded now to attempt to lower his record. It
was not often that he got the bath so much to himself. Usually, there
was barely standing-room in the water, and long-distance swimming was
impossible. But now, with a clear field, he should, he thought, be able
to complete the desired distance.

He was beginning the fifth length before interruption came. Just as he
reached halfway, a reproachful voice at his side said: "Oh, Percy,
you'll tire yourself!" and a hand on the top of his head propelled him
firmly towards the bottom.

Every schoolboy, as Honble. Macaulay would have put it, knows the
sensation of being ducked. It is always unpleasant--sometimes more,
sometimes less. The present case belonged to the former class. There
was just room inside Spencer for another half-pint of water. He
swallowed it. When he came to the surface, he swam to the side without
a word and climbed out. It was the last straw. Honour could now be
satisfied only with gore.

He hung about outside the baths till Phipps and Thomas appeared, then,
with a steadfast expression on his face, he walked up to the latter
and kicked him.

Thomas seemed surprised, but not alarmed. His eyes grew a little
rounder, and the pink on his cheeks deepened. He looked like a
choir-boy in a bad temper.

"Hullo! What's up, you ass, Spencer?" inquired Phipps.

Spencer said nothing.

"Where shall we go?" asked Thomas.

"Oh, chuck it!" said Phipps the peacemaker.

Spencer and Thomas were eyeing each other warily.

"You chaps aren't going to fight?" said Phipps.

The notion seemed to distress him.

"Unless he cares to take a kicking," said Spencer suavely.

"Not to-day, I think, thanks," replied Thomas without heat.

"Then, look here!" said Phipps briskly, "I know a ripping little place
just off the Lelby Road. It isn't five minutes' walk, and there's no
chance of being booked there. Rot if someone was to come and stop it
half-way through. It's in a field; thick hedges. No one can see. And I
tell you what--I'll keep time. I've got a watch. Two minute rounds,
and half-a-minute in between, and I'm the referee; so, if anybody
fouls the other chap, I'll stop the fight. See? Come on!"

Of the details of that conflict we have no very clear record. Phipps
is enthusiastic, but vague. He speaks in eulogistic terms of a
"corker" which Spencer brought off in the second round, and, again, of
a "tremendous biff" which Thomas appears to have consummated in the
fourth. But of the more subtle points of the fighting he is content
merely to state comprehensively that they were "top-hole." As to the
result, it would seem that, in the capacity of referee, he declared
the affair a draw at the end of the seventh round; and, later, in his
capacity of second to both parties, helped his principals home by back
and secret ways, one on each arm.

The next items to which the chronicler would call the attention of the
reader are two letters.

The first was from Mrs. Shearne to Spencer, and ran as follows--

    My Dear Spencer,--I am writing to you direct, instead of through
    your aunt, because I want to thank you so much for looking after
    my boy so well. I know what a hard time a new boy has at a public
    school if he has got nobody to take care of him at first. I heard
    from Tom this morning. He seems so happy, and so fond of you. He
    says you are "an awfully decent chap" and "the only chap who has
    stood up to him at all." I suppose he means "for him." I hope you
    will come and spend part of your holidays with us. ("Catch _me!_"
    said Spencer.)

                            _Yours sincerely,_
                                      _Isabel Shearne_

    P.S.--I hope you will manage to buy something nice with
    the enclosed.

The enclosed was yet another postal order for five shillings. As
somebody wisely observed, a woman's P.S. is always the most important
part of her letter.

"That kid," murmured Spencer between swollen lips, "has got cheek
enough for eighteen! 'Awfully decent chap!'"

He proceeded to compose a letter in reply, and for dignity combined
with lucidity it may stand as a model to young writers.

                                 _5 College Grounds,_
                                          _Eckleton._

    Mr. C. F. Spencer begs to present his compliments to Mrs. Shearne,
    and returns the postal order, because he doesn't see why he should
    have it. He notes your remarks _re_ my being a decent chap in
    your favour of the 13th _prox_., but cannot see where it quite
    comes in, as the only thing I've done to Mrs. Shearne's son is to
    fight seven rounds with him in a field, W. G. Phipps refereeing. It
    was a draw. I got a black eye and rather a whack in the mouth, but
    gave him beans also, particularly in the wind, which I learned to do
    from reading "Rodney Stone"--the bit where Bob Whittaker beats the
    Eyetalian Gondoleery Cove. Hoping that this will be taken in the
    spirit which is meant,

                           _I remain_
                                   _Yours sincerely,_
                                               _C. F. Spencer_
    _One enclosure._

He sent this off after prep., and retired to bed full of spiritual
pride.

On the following morning, going to the shop during the interval, he
came upon Thomas negotiating a hot bun.

"Hullo!" said Thomas.

As was generally the case after he had had a fair and spirited turn-out
with a fellow human being, Thomas had begun to feel that he loved his
late adversary as a brother. A wholesome respect, which had hitherto
been wanting, formed part of his opinion of him.

"Hullo!" said Spencer, pausing.

"I say," said Thomas.

"What's up?"

"I say, I don't believe we shook hands, did we?"

"I don't remember doing it."

They shook hands. Spencer began to feel that there were points about
Thomas, after all.

"I say," said Thomas.

"Hullo?"

"I'm sorry about in the bath, you know. I didn't know you minded being
ducked."

"Oh, all right!" said Spencer awkwardly.

Eight bars rest.

"I say," said Thomas.

"Hullo!"

"Doing anything this afternoon?"

"Nothing special, Why?"

"Come and have tea?"

"All right. Thanks."

"I'll wait for you outside the house."

"All right."

It was just here that Spencer regretted that he had sent back that
five-shilling postal order. Five good shillings.

Simply chucked away.

Oh, Life, Life!

But they were not, after all. On his plate at breakfast next day Spencer
found a letter. This was the letter--

    Messrs. J. K. Shearne (father of T. B. A. Shearne) and P. W. Shearne
    (brother of same) beg to acknowledge receipt of Mr. C. F. Spencer's
    esteemed communication of yesterday's date, and in reply desire to
    inform Mr. Spencer of their hearty approval of his attentions to
    Mr. T. B. A. Shearne's wind. It is their opinion that the above,
    a nice boy but inclined to cheek, badly needs treatment on these
    lines occasionally. They therefore beg to return the postal order,
    together with another for a like sum, and trust that this will meet
    with Mr. Spencer's approval.

                               (Signed) _J. K. Shearne,_
                                        _P. W. Shearne._
     Two enclosures.

"Of course, what's up really," said Spencer to himself, after reading
this, "is that the whole family's jolly well cracked."

His eye fell on the postal orders.

"Still----!" he said.

That evening he entertained Phipps and Thomas B. A. Shearne lavishly
at tea.




A CORNER IN LINES


Of all the useless and irritating things in this world, lines are
probably the most useless and the most irritating. In fact, I only
know of two people who ever got any good out of them. Dunstable, of
Day's, was one, Linton, of Seymour's, the other. For a portion of one
winter term they flourished on lines. The more there were set, the
better they liked it. They would have been disappointed if masters had
given up the habit of doling them out.

Dunstable was a youth of ideas. He saw far more possibilities in the
routine of life at Locksley than did the majority of his
contemporaries, and every now and then he made use of these
possibilities in a way that caused a considerable sensation in the
school.

In the ordinary way of school work, however, he was not particularly
brilliant, and suffered in consequence. His chief foe was his
form-master, Mr. Langridge. The feud between them had begun on
Dunstable's arrival in the form two terms before, and had continued
ever since. The balance of points lay with the master. The staff has
ways of scoring which the school has not. This story really begins
with the last day but one of the summer term. It happened that
Dunstable's people were going to make their annual migration to
