
'Keep it carefully, then,' said the gentleman impressively; 'and if ever
you should wish to part with it, may I ask you to give me the refusal of
it?'

'The refusal?'

'I mean, do not sell it to anyone else until you have given me the
opportunity of buying it.'

'All right,' said Cyril, 'we won't. But we don't want to sell it. We
want to make it do things.'

'I suppose you can play at that as well as at anything else,' said the
gentleman; 'but I'm afraid the days of magic are over.'

'They aren't REALLY,' said Anthea earnestly. 'You'd see they aren't if I
could tell you about our last summer holidays. Only I mustn't. Thank you
very much. And can you read the name?'

'Yes, I can read it.'

'Will you tell it us?' 'The name,' said the gentleman, 'is Ur Hekau
Setcheh.'

'Ur Hekau Setcheh,' repeated Cyril. 'Thanks awfully. I do hope we
haven't taken up too much of your time.'

'Not at all,' said the gentleman. 'And do let me entreat you to be very,
very careful of that most valuable specimen.'

They said 'Thank you' in all the different polite ways they could think
of, and filed out of the door and down the stairs. Anthea was last.
Half-way down to the first landing she turned and ran up again.

The door was still open, and the learned gentleman and the mummy-case
were standing opposite to each other, and both looked as though they had
stood like that for years.

The gentleman started when Anthea put her hand on his arm.

'I hope you won't be cross and say it's not my business,' she said,
'but do look at your chop! Don't you think you ought to eat it? Father
forgets his dinner sometimes when he's writing, and Mother always says I
ought to remind him if she's not at home to do it herself, because it's
so bad to miss your regular meals.

So I thought perhaps you wouldn't mind my reminding you, because you
don't seem to have anyone else to do it.'

She glanced at the mummy-case; IT certainly did not look as though it
would ever think of reminding people of their meals.

The learned gentleman looked at her for a moment before he said--

'Thank you, my dear. It was a kindly thought. No, I haven't anyone to
remind me about things like that.'

He sighed, and looked at the chop.

'It looks very nasty,' said Anthea.

'Yes,' he said, 'it does. I'll eat it immediately, before I forget.'

As he ate it he sighed more than once. Perhaps because the chop was
nasty, perhaps because he longed for the charm which the children did
not want to sell, perhaps because it was so long since anyone cared
whether he ate his chops or forgot them.

Anthea caught the others at the stair-foot. They woke the Psammead, and
it taught them exactly how to use the word of power, and to make the
charm speak. I am not going to tell you how this is done, because you
might try to do it. And for you any such trying would be almost sure
to end in disappointment. Because in the first place it is a thousand
million to one against your ever getting hold of the right sort of
charm, and if you did, there would be hardly any chance at all of your
finding a learned gentleman clever enough and kind enough to read the
word for you.

The children and the Psammead crouched in a circle on the floor--in the
girls' bedroom, because in the parlour they might have been interrupted
by old Nurse's coming in to lay the cloth for tea--and the charm was put
in the middle of the circle.

The sun shone splendidly outside, and the room was very light. Through
the open window came the hum and rattle of London, and in the street
below they could hear the voice of the milkman.

When all was ready, the Psammead signed to Anthea to say the word. And
she said it. Instantly the whole light of all the world seemed to go
out. The room was dark. The world outside was dark--darker than the
darkest night that ever was. And all the sounds went out too, so that
there was a silence deeper than any silence you have ever even dreamed
of imagining. It was like being suddenly deaf and blind, only darker and
quieter even than that.

But before the children had got over the sudden shock of it enough to be
frightened, a faint, beautiful light began to show in the middle of the
circle, and at the same moment a faint, beautiful voice began to speak.
The light was too small for one to see anything by, and the voice was
too small for you to hear what it said. You could just see the light and
just hear the voice.

But the light grew stronger. It was greeny, like glow-worms' lamps,
and it grew and grew till it was as though thousands and thousands of
glow-worms were signalling to their winged sweethearts from the middle
of the circle. And the voice grew, not so much in loudness as in
sweetness (though it grew louder, too), till it was so sweet that
you wanted to cry with pleasure just at the sound of it. It was like
nightingales, and the sea, and the fiddle, and the voice of your mother
when you have been a long time away, and she meets you at the door when
you get home.

And the voice said--

'Speak. What is it that you would hear?'

I cannot tell you what language the voice used. I only know that
everyone present understood it perfectly. If you come to think of it,
there must be some language that everyone could understand, if we only
knew what it was. Nor can I tell you how the charm spoke, nor whether
it was the charm that spoke, or some presence in the charm. The children
could not have told you either. Indeed, they could not look at the charm
while it was speaking, because the light was too bright. They looked
instead at the green radiance on the faded Kidderminster carpet at the
edge of the circle. They all felt very quiet, and not inclined to ask
questions or fidget with their feet. For this was not like the things
that had happened in the country when the Psammead had given them their
wishes. That had been funny somehow, and this was not. It was something
like Arabian Nights magic, and something like being in church. No one
cared to speak.

It was Cyril who said at last--

'Please we want to know where the other half of the charm is.'

'The part of the Amulet which is lost,' said the beautiful voice, 'was
broken and ground into the dust of the shrine that held it. It and the
pin that joined the two halves are themselves dust, and the dust is
scattered over many lands and sunk in many seas.'

'Oh, I say!' murmured Robert, and a blank silence fell. 'Then it's all
up?' said Cyril at last; 'it's no use our looking for a thing that's
smashed into dust, and the dust scattered all over the place.'

'If you would find it,' said the voice, 'You must seek it where it still
is, perfect as ever.'

'I don't understand,' said Cyril.

'In the Past you may find it,' said the voice.

'I wish we MAY find it,' said Cyril.

The Psammead whispered crossly, 'Don't you understand? The thing existed
in the Past. If you were in the Past, too, you could find it. It's very
difficult to make you understand things. Time and space are only forms
of thought.'

'I see,' said Cyril.

'No, you don't,' said the Psammead, 'and it doesn't matter if you don't,
either. What I mean is that if you were only made the right way, you
could see everything happening in the same place at the same time. Now
do you see?'

'I'm afraid _I_ don't,' said Anthea; 'I'm sorry I'm so stupid.'

'Well, at any rate, you see this. That lost half of the Amulet is in the
Past. Therefore it's in the Past we must look for it. I mustn't speak to
the charm myself. Ask it things! Find out!'

'Where can we find the other part of you?' asked Cyril obediently.

'In the Past,' said the voice.

'What part of the Past?'

'I may not tell you. If you will choose a time, I will take you to the
place that then held it. You yourselves must find it.'

'When did you see it last?' asked Anthea--'I mean, when was it taken
away from you?'

The beautiful voice answered--

'That was thousands of years ago. The Amulet was perfect then, and lay
in a shrine, the last of many shrines, and I worked wonders. Then came
strange men with strange weapons and destroyed my shrine, and the Amulet
they bore away with many captives. But of these, one, my priest, knew
the word of power, and spoke it for me, so that the Amulet became
invisible, and thus returned to my shrine, but the shrine was broken
down, and ere any magic could rebuild it one spoke a word before which
my power bowed down and was still. And the Amulet lay there, still
perfect, but enslaved. Then one coming with stones to rebuild the
shrine, dropped a hewn stone on the Amulet as it lay, and one half was
sundered from the other. I had no power to seek for that which was lost.
And there being none to speak the word of power, I could not rejoin it.
So the Amulet lay in the dust of the desert many thousand years, and at
last came a small man, a conqueror with an army, and after him a crowd
of men who sought to seem wise, and one of these found half the Amulet
and brought it to this land. But none could read the name. So I lay
still. And this man dying and his son after him, the Amulet was sold by
those who came after to a merchant, and from him you bought it, and it
is here, and now, the name of power having been spoken, I also am here.'

This is what the voice said. I think it must have meant Napoleon by the
small man, the conqueror. Because I know I have been told that he took
an army to Egypt, and that afterwards a lot of wise people went grubbing
in the sand, and fished up all sorts of wonderful things, older than
you would think possible. And of these I believe this charm to have been
one, and the most wonderful one of all.

Everyone listened: and everyone tried to think. It is not easy to do
this clearly when you have been listening to the kind of talk I have
told you about.

At last Robert said--

'Can you take us into the Past--to the shrine where you and the other
thing were together. If you could take us there, we might find the other
part still there after all these thousands of years.'

'Still there? silly!' said Cyril. 'Don't you see, if we go back into the
Past it won't be thousands of years ago. It will be NOW for us--won't
it?' He appealed to the Psammead, who said--

'You're not so far off the idea as you usually are!'

'Well,' said Anthea, 'will you take us back to when there was a shrine
and you were safe in it--all of you?'

'Yes,' said the voice. 'You must hold me up, and speak the word of
power, and one by one, beginning with the first-born, you shall pass
through me into the Past. But let the last that passes be the one that
holds me, and let him not lose his hold, lest you lose me, and so remain
in the Past for ever.'

'That's a nasty idea,' said Robert.

'When you desire to return,' the beautiful voice went on, 'hold me up
towards the East, and speak the word. Then, passing through me, you
shall return to this time and it shall be the present to you.'

'But how--' A bell rang loudly.

'Oh crikey!' exclaimed Robert, 'that's tea! Will you please make it
proper daylight again so that we can go down. And thank you so much for
all your kindness.'

'We've enjoyed ourselves very much indeed, thank you!' added Anthea
politely.

The beautiful light faded slowly. The great darkness and silence came
and these suddenly changed to the dazzlement of day and the great soft,
rustling sound of London, that is like some vast beast turning over in
its sleep.

The children rubbed their eyes, the Psammead ran quickly to its sandy
bath, and the others went down to tea. And until the cups were actually
filled tea seemed less real than the beautiful voice and the greeny
light.

After tea Anthea persuaded the others to allow her to hang the charm
round her neck with a piece of string.

'It would be so awful if it got lost,' she said: 'it might get lost
anywhere, you know, and it would be rather beastly for us to have to
stay in the Past for ever and ever, wouldn't it?'



CHAPTER 4. EIGHT THOUSAND YEARS AGO

Next morning Anthea got old Nurse to allow her to take up the 'poor
learned gentleman's' breakfast. He did not recognize her at first, but
when he did he was vaguely pleased to see her.

'You see I'm wearing the charm round my neck,' she said; 'I'm taking
care of it--like you told us to.'

'That's right,' said he; 'did you have a good game last night?'

'You will eat your breakfast before it's cold, won't you?' said Anthea.
'Yes, we had a splendid time. The charm made it all dark, and then
greeny light, and then it spoke. Oh! I wish you could have heard it--it
was such a darling voice--and it told us the other half of it was lost
in the Past, so of course we shall have to look for it there!'

The learned gentleman rubbed his hair with both hands and looked
anxiously at Anthea.

'I suppose it's natural--youthful imagination and so forth,' he said.
'Yet someone must have... Who told you that some part of the charm was
missing?'

'I can't tell you,' she said. 'I know it seems most awfully rude,
especially after being so kind about telling us the name of power, and
all that, but really, I'm not allowed to tell anybody anything about
the--the--the person who told me. You won't forget your breakfast, will
you?'

The learned gentleman smiled feebly and then frowned--not a cross-frown,
but a puzzle-frown.

'Thank you,' he said, 'I shall always be pleased if you'll look in--any
time you're passing you know--at least...'

'I will,' she said; 'goodbye. I'll always tell you anything I MAY tell.'
