turned round and winked at Ridiklis in such a delightful saucy way
that she suddenly felt as if he _was_ very good-looking, though she
had not thought of it before.

"Hello," he said all at once. "I've just thought of something to
attract her attention. Where's the ball of string?"

Cynthia's kitten had made them a present of a ball of string which
had been most useful. Ridiklis ran and got it, and all the others
came running upstairs to see what Peter Piper was going to do. They
all were delighted to hear he had fallen in love with the lovely,
funny Lady Patsy. They found him standing in the middle of the
attic unrolling the ball of string.

"What are you going to do, Duke?" they all shouted.

"Just you watch," he said, and he began to make the string into a
rope ladder--as fast as lightning. When he had finished it, he
fastened one end of it to a beam and swung the other end out of
the window.

"From her window," he said, "she can see Racketty-Packetty House
and I'll tell you something. She's always looking at it. She
watches us as much as we watch her, and I have seen her giggling
and giggling when we were having fun. Yesterday when I chased Lady
Meg and Lady Peg and Lady Kilmanskeg round and round the front of
the house and turned summersaults every five steps, she laughed
until she had to stuff her handkerchief into her mouth. When we
joined hands and danced and laughed until we fell in heaps I
thought she was going to have a kind of rosy-dimpled, lovely little
fit, she giggled so. If I run down the side of the house on this
rope ladder it will attract her attention and then I shall begin to
do things."

He ran down the ladder and that very minute they saw Lady Patsy at
her window give a start and lean forward to look. They all crowded
round their window and chuckled and chuckled as they watched him.

[Transcriber's Note: See picture chuckled.jpg]

He turned three stately summersaults and stood on his feet and made
a cheerful bow. The Racketty-Packettys saw Lady Patsy begin to
giggle that minute. Then he took an antimacassar out of his pocket
and fastened it round the edge of his torn trousers leg, as if it
were lace trimming and began to walk about like a Duke--with his
arms folded on his chest and his ragged old hat cocked on one side
over his ear. Then the Racketty-Packettys saw Lady Patsy begin to
laugh. Then Peter Piper stood on his head and kissed his hand and
Lady Patsy covered her face and rocked backwards and forwards in
her chair laughing and laughing.

Then he struck an attitude with his tattered leg put forward
gracefully and he pretended he had a guitar and he sang right up at
her window.

    "From Racketty-Packetty House I come,
     It stands, dear Lady, in a slum,
     A low, low slum behind the door
     The stout arm-chair is placed before,
     (Just take a look at it, my Lady).

    "The house itself is a perfect sight,
     And everybody's dressed like a perfect fright,
     But no one cares a single jot
     And each one giggles over his lot,
     (And as for me, I'm in love with you).

    "I can't make up another verse,
     And if I did it would be worse,
     But I could stand and sing all day,
     If I could think of things to say,
     (But the fact is I just wanted to make you look at me)."

And then he danced such a lively jig that his rags and tags flew
about him, and then he made another bow and kissed his hand again
and ran up the ladder like a flash and jumped into the attic.

After that Lady Patsy sat at her window all the time and would not
let the trained nurse put her to bed at all; and Lady Gwendolen and
Lady Muriel and Lady Doris could not understand it. Once Lady
Gwendolen said haughtily and disdainfully and scornfully and
scathingly:

"If you sit there so much, those low Racketty-Packetty House people
will think you are looking at them."

"I am," said Lady Patsy, showing all her dimples at once. "They are
such fun."

And Lady Gwendolen swooned haughtily away, and the trained nurse
could scarcely restore her.

When the castle dolls drove out or walked in their garden, the
instant they caught sight of one of the Racketty-Packettys they
turned up their noses and sniffed aloud, and several times the
Duchess said she would remove because the neighborhood was
absolutely low. They all scorned the Racketty-Packettys--they just
_scorned_ them.

One moonlight night Lady Patsy was sitting at her window and she
heard a whistle in the garden. When she peeped out carefully, there
stood Peter Piper waving his ragged cap at her, and he had his rope
ladder under his arm.

"Hello," he whispered as loud as he could. "Could you catch a bit
of rope if I threw it up to you?"

"Yes," she whispered back.

"Then catch this," he whispered again and he threw up the end of
a string and she caught it the first throw. It was fastened to the
rope ladder.

"Now pull," he said.

She pulled and pulled until the rope ladder reached her window and
then she fastened that to a hook under the sill and the first thing
that happened--just like lightning--was that Peter Piper ran up the
ladder and leaned over her window ledge.

"Will you marry me," he said. "I haven't anything to give you to
eat and I am as ragged as a scarecrow, but will you?"

[Transcriber's Note: See picture marry.jpg]

She clapped her little hands.

"I eat very little," she said. "And I would do without anything at
all, if I could live in your funny old shabby house."

"It is a ridiculous, tumbled-down old barn, isn't it?" he said.
"But every one of us is as nice as we can be. We are perfect
Turkish Delights. It's laughing that does it. Would you like to
come down the ladder and see what a jolly, shabby old hole the
place is?"

"Oh! do take me," said Lady Patsy.

So he helped her down the ladder and took her under the armchair
and into Racketty-Packetty House and Meg and Peg and Kilmanskeg
and Ridiklis and Gustibus all crowded round her and gave little
screams of joy at the sight of her.

They were afraid to kiss her at first, even though she was engaged
to Peter Piper. She was so pretty and her frock had so much lace on
