a single shade, and be myself her lover. Yes, dreamer,--but your
lonely heart will be the colder for such fancies.  Sometimes, too, the
Past comes back, and finds me here, and in her train come faces which
were gladsome, when I knew them, yet seem not gladsome now.  Would
that my hiding-place were lonelier, so that the past might not find
me!  Get ye all gone, old friends, and let me listen to the murmur of
the sea,--a melancholy voice, but less sad than yours.  Of what
mysteries is it telling?  Of sunken ships, and whereabouts they lie?
Of islands afar and undiscovered, whose tawny children are unconscious
of other islands and of continents, and deem the stars of heaven their
nearest neighbors?  Nothing of all this. What then?  Has it talked for
so many ages, and meant nothing all the while--No; for those ages find
utterance in the sea's unchanging voice, and warn the listener to
withdraw his interest from mortal vicissitudes, and let the infinite
idea of eternity pervade his soul.  This is wisdom; and, therefore,
will I spend the next half-hour in shaping little boats of drift-wood,
and launching them on voyages across the cove, with the feather of a
sea-gull for a sail.  If the voice of ages tell me true, this is as
wise an occupation as to build ships of five hundred tons, and launch
them forth upon the main, bound to "far Cathay."  Yet, how would the
merchant sneer at me!

And, after all, can such philosophy be true?  Methinks I could find a
thousand arguments against it.  Well, then, let yonder shaggy rock,
mid-deep in the surf,--see! he is somewhat wrathful,--he rages and
roars and foams,--let that tall rock be my antagonist, and let me
exercise my oratory like him of Athens, who bandied words with an
angry sea and got the victory.  My maiden speech is a triumphant one;
for the gentleman in sea-weed has nothing to offer in reply, save an
immitigable roaring.  His voice, indeed, will be heard a long while
after mine is hushed. Once more I shout, and the cliffs reverberate
the sound.  O, what joy for a shy man to feel himself so solitary,
that he may lift his voice to its highest pitch without hazard of a
listener! But, hush!--be silent, my good friend!--whence comes that
stifled laughter?  It was musical,--but how should there be such music
in my solitude?  Looking upwards, I catch a glimpse of three faces,
peeping from the summit of the cliff, like angels between me and their
native sky.  Ah, fair girls, you may make yourselves merry at my
eloquence,--but it was my turn to smile when I saw your white feet in
the pool!  Let us keep each other's secrets.

The sunshine has now passed from my hermitage, except a gleam upon the
sand just where it meets the sea.  A crowd of gloomy fantasies will
come and haunt me, if I tarry longer here, in the darkening twilight
of these gray rocks.  This is a dismal place in some moods of the
mind.  Climb we, therefore, the precipice, and pause a moment on the
brink, gazing down into that hollow chamber by the deep where we have
been, what few can be, sufficient to our own pastime,-yes, say the
word outright!--self-sufficient to our own happiness.  How lonesome
looks the recess now, and dreary, too,--like all other spots where
happiness has been!  There lies my shadow in the departing sunshine
with its head upon the sea.  I will pelt it with pebbles.  A hit! a
hit! I clap my hands in triumph, and see!  my shadow clapping its
unreal hands, and claiming the triumph for itself.  What a simpleton
must I have been all day,--since my own shadow makes a mock of my
fooleries!

Homeward! homeward!  It is time to hasten home.  It is time; it is
time; for as the sun sinks over the western wave, the sea grows
melancholy, and the surf has a saddened tone.  The distant sails
appear astray, and not of earth, in their remoteness amid the desolate
waste.  My spirit wanders forth afar, but finds no resting-place, and
comes shivering back.  It is time that I were hence.  But grudge me
not the day that has been spent in seclusion, which yet was not
solitude, since the great sea has been my companion, and the little
sea-birds my friends, and the wind has told me his secrets, and airy
shapes have flitted around me in my hermitage.  Such companionship
works an effect upon a man's character, as if he had been admitted to
the society of creatures that are not mortal.  And when, at noontide,
I tread the crowded streets, the influence of this day will still be
felt; so that I shall walk among men kindly and as a brother, with
affection and sympathy, but yet shall not melt into the
indistinguishable mass of humankind.  I shall think my own thoughts,
and feel my own emotions, and possess my individuality unviolated.

But it is good, at the eve of such a day, to feel and know that there
