the several modes in which the four others attained felicity, I next
set my mind at work to discover what enjoyments were peculiar to the
old   "Straggler," as the people of the country would have termed the
wandering mendicant and prophet. As he pretended to familiarity with
the Devil, so I fancied that he was fitted to pursue and take delight
in his way of life, by possessing some of the mental and moral
characteristics, the lighter and more comic ones, of the Devil in
popular stories. Among them might be reckoned a love of deception for
its own sake, a shrewd eye and keen relish for human weakness and
ridiculous infirmity, and the talent of petty fraud.  Thus to this old
man there would be pleasure even in the consciousness, so
insupportable to some minds, that his whole life was a cheat upon the
world, and that, so far as he was concerned with the public, his
little cunning had the upper hand of its united wisdom.  Every day
would furnish him with a succession of minute and pungent triumphs: as
when, for instance, his importunity wrung a pittance out of the heart
of a miser, or when my silly good-nature transferred a part of my
slender purse to his plump leather bag; or when some ostentatious
gentleman should throw a coin to the ragged beggar who was richer than
himself; or when, though he would not always be so decidedly
diabolical, his pretended wants should make him a sharer in the scanty
living of real indigence.  And then what an inexhaustible field of
enjoyment, both as enabling him to discern so much folly and achieve
such quantities of minor mischief, was opened to his sneering spirit
by his pretensions to prophetic knowledge.

All this was a sort of happiness which I could conceive of, though I
had little sympathy with it.  Perhaps, had I been then inclined to
admit it, I might have found that the roving life was more proper to
him than to either of his companions; for Satan, to whom I had
compared the poor man, has delighted, ever since the time of Job, in
"wandering up and down upon the earth"; and indeed a crafty
disposition, which operates not in deep-laid plans, but in
disconnected tricks, could not have an adequate scope, unless
naturally impelled to a continual change of scene and society.  My
reflections were here interrupted.

"Another visitor!" exclaimed the old showman.

The door of the wagon had been closed against the tempest, which was
roaring and blustering with prodigious fury and commotion, and beating
violently against our shelter, as if it claimed all those homeless
people for its lawful prey, while we, caring little for the
displeasure of the elements, sat comfortably talking.  There was now
an attempt to open the door, succeeded by a voice, uttering some
strange, unintelligible gibberish, which my companions mistook for
Greek, and I suspected to be thieves' Latin.  However, the showman
stepped forward, and gave admittance to a figure which made me
imagine; either that our wagon had rolled back two hundred years into
past ages, or that the forest and its old inhabitants had sprung up
around us by enchantment.

It was a red Indian, armed with his bow and arrow.  His dress was a
sort of cap, adorned with a single feather of some wild bird, and a
frock of blue cotton, girded tight about him; on his breast, like
orders of knighthood, hung a crescent and a circle, and other
ornaments of silver; while a small crucifix betokened that our Father
the Pope had interposed between the Indian and the Great Spirit, whom
he had worshipped in his simplicity.  This son of the wilderness, and
pilgrim of the storm, took his place silently in the midst of us.
When the first surprise was over, I rightly conjectured him to be one
of the Penobscot tribe, parties of which I had often seen, in their
summer excursions down our Eastern rivers.  There they paddle their
birch canoes among the coasting schooners, and build their wigwam
beside some roaring milldam, and drive a little trade in basket-work
where their fathers hunted deer.  Our new visitor was probably
wandering through the country towards Boston, subsisting on the
careless charity of the people, while he turned his archery to
profitable account by shooting at cents, which were to be the prize of
his successful aim.

The Indian had not long been seated, ere our merry damsel sought to
draw him into conversation.  She, indeed, seemed all made up of
sunshine in the mouth of May; for there was nothing so dark and dismal
that her pleasant mind could not cast a glow over it; and the wild
Indian, like a fir-tree in his native forest, soon began to brighten
into a sort of sombre cheerfulness.  At length, she inquired whether
his journey had any particular end or purpose.

"I go shoot at the camp-meeting at Stamford," replied the Indian.

"And here are five more," said the girl, "all aiming at the camp-meeting
too.  You shall be one of us, for we travel with light hearts;
and as for me, I sing merry songs, and tell merry tales, and am full
of merry thoughts, and I dance merrily along the road, so that there
is never any sadness among them that keep me company.  But, O, you
would find it very dull indeed, to go all the way to Stamford alone!"

My ideas of the aboriginal character led me to fear that the Indian
would prefer his own solitary musings to the gay society thus offered
him; on the contrary, the girl's proposal met with immediate
acceptance, and seemed to animate him with a misty expectation of
enjoyment.  I now gave myself up to a course of thought which, whether
it flowed naturally from this combination of events, or was drawn
forth by a wayward fancy, caused my mind to thrill as if I were
listening to deep music.  I saw mankind, in this weary old age of the
world, either enduring a sluggish existence amid the smoke and dust of
cities, or, if they breathed a purer air, still lying down at night
with no hope but to wear out to-morrow, and all the to-morrows which
make up life, among the same dull scenes and in the same wretched toil
that had darkened the sunshine of to-day.  But there were some, full
of the primeval instinct, who preserved the freshness of youth to
their latest years by the continual excitement of new objects, new
pursuits, and new associates; and cared little, though their
birthplace might have been here in New England, if the grave should
