
"Popular? How do you mean? Is it with the teachers or with the girls?"

"Well, with both I fancy."

"Then, I tell you what," exclaimed Kitty, "I'd like to bet with you that
you are wrong--that I'll be the most popular girl in the whole of the
school with the teachers--yes, with the teachers--and the scholars as
well."

"You must be very conceited," exclaimed Elma, who had sat silent during
the greater part of the evening, taking Kitty in, however, all the same.

"Conceited? No more than you are," cried Kitty, "but I know my powers,
and I have not kissed the Blarney Stone for nothing."

"Oh, you need not tell us that ridiculous story over again," said Alice.

"But I should like to hear it," cried Gwin.

"You really would not Gwin; it is too absurd. We must show Kitty, now
she has come to live among us, what is real wit and what is not. Her
way of talking is only silly."

Gwin knit her brows, and looked pained.

"I would rather not correct her now," she said in a gentle voice. Then
she added, her eyes sparkling with sudden eagerness, "Would it not be a
good opportunity for talking over the rules of our society, girls?"

"Oh yes," cried Elma, "yes; but is it well to----"

Here she bent forward, and began to whisper vigorously in Gwin's ear.

"Yes, I think so," answered Gwin.

"I wouldn't, I really wouldn't," said Elma. "I am certain Alice agrees
with me."

"I can guess what you are saying," cried Alice, "and I do agree most
heartily."

"And I can guess what you are saying," exclaimed Kitty, starting to her
feet with flashing eyes. "You don't want to talk about your society or
whatever it is because I am present. Well, discuss it without me. I'll
find my way to the library. Poor dear Bessie is the only decent one
among you, and I shall go and sit with her. How do you know I won't take
up with literature just to spite you all? I can do anything I have a
mind to, and that you will soon find to your cost."

She ran out of the room as she spoke, slamming the door behind her.

"There, that's a comfort," cried Alice, breathing freely for the first
time. "Did you ever, girls, in all your lives, see a more terrible
creature? What is to be done? Why, she will disgrace us all at school.
You know what a very nice set we are in at present."

"Oh, an excellent set," said Elma, in a sarcastic voice.

"You know, Elma, that we do belong to the nicest set in the school, and
I am sure, Gwin, your father--"

"You need not drag father in," cried Gwin. Father likes all the people I
like."

"But, surely--" began Alice.

Gwin looked at her gravely, then she nodded.

"I am not quite certain yet," she said; "but I think it highly probable
that I shall take up that poor, wild, little Kitty. At least she is
fresh; she speaks out her mind plainly, and there is a great deal to
admire about her."

"Then, listen, Gwin," cried Alice; "if she is taken into our special
society I will resign."

"Will you really, Alice? What, if I ask you to stay?"

"It is hard to refuse you, dear; but you scarcely know what all this
means to me. I am rubbed the wrong way; I don't understand myself. But
frankly, Gwin, you are not going to ask Kitty Malone to join our
society?"

"What if it does her good?"

"But ought we not to think of the others? She is a perfect stranger to
us all at present."

"But she won't be long. Bless the child, she has no reserve in her, and
I do want to help her, poor little girl! Well, we need not decide that
point at present."

"Do let us vote to leave her out," cried Alice.

"No, Alice, we will leave the point undecided. Now let us set to work,
and begin to form our rules, for really we have no time to lose."

"But what are we to do without Bessie?" exclaimed Alice. "Whatever
happens, we cannot do without Bessie Challoner; she will be the life and
soul of the whole society. Shall we send for her, Gwin?"

"No, Kitty is with her, and they had better not be disturbed."

"What a difference Kitty makes," cried Alice. "I did think we should
have had a delightful and heavenly evening, and it has been all ruction
from first to last."

"Because you dislike her so much, Alice," said Gwin.

"Well, I do," said Alice; "I can't abide her. But do I show my dislike
so plainly?" she added.

"Rather! Any one can see it in the curl of your lip and the expression
in your eyes; and then you say such terribly withering things to the
poor girl. You try to crush her."

"Well, if I may say what I think," cried Elma, "Kitty Malone seems to me
to be a very unpleasant, vulgar girl, and I cannot imagine why she has
been sent here."

"Oh, as to her vulgarity," said Alice, who suddenly felt forced to
defend herself against Elma's spiteful speeches, "Kitty comes of a very
old family, and her father is as rich as ever he can be. They live in a
wonderful castle in County Donegal, just overhanging the sea; and from
what I learn are considered county people. Father was very pleased to
have her, and whatever she is, she is a lady by birth."

"So she is rich?" remarked Elma in a low voice. "Well, at any rate,"
she continued after a pause, "she is very pretty."

"Pretty!" cried Gwin; "I should just think she is. She has the most
lovely face I ever saw. Girls, it is quite true what she says; she will
fascinate any number of people. That dashing, daring way of hers will go
down with numbers. Yes, she will make a revolution in Middleton School,
I am certain."




CHAPTER V

INCORRIGIBLE KITTY


Mr. Harley's library was a beautiful room. It was lined with books from
floor to ceiling, and these books had been selected with the greatest
care. Standard works of all sorts and in three languages were to be
found on certain bookshelves, also modern works, both poetry and prose,
with some of the best novels of the day.

Bessie Challoner never envied rich people. She cared nothing whatever
for fine dresses, nor for carriages and horses, nor for the luxurious
life of the wealthy, but she did envy Gwin Harley the use of her
father's library; and when she entered the room now, with that delicious
faint smell of leather which all libraries possess, she sniffed first
with ecstasy, and then climbing on the ladder secured the volume of the
"Encyclopaedia" which she required, and seating herself at one of the
center tables, was soon lost in the fascinations of her subject. After a
time a little cough, very gentle, however, caused her to raise her head,
and there standing before her was Kitty Malone.

Kitty's long arms had dropped to her sides, and she had pushed back her
masses of dark hair. There was a pathetic expression about her rosy
lips, and tears trembled on her long eyelashes.

"Why, what is it, Kitty; what do you want?" asked Bessie.

"Ah, then it's good to hear you say that word, aroon," said Kitty. "I
want to sit near you. I won't speak, no, not a syllable. Hush will be
the only word with me, hush! hush! hush! You can go on with your beloved
reading and I'll stay near you; that's all I require. Why, then, it's
just a shelter I need, and nothing more. Read away, Bessie, my honey,
and I'll do nothing to interrupt you."

"But why have you left the others?" asked Bessie.

"Never mind, dear, now. I'll just sit quietly here, and contemplate you
while you are studying."

Bessie sighed impatiently. She then bent again over her book, and began
to devour the pages. Kitty watched her with marked interest.

"I wonder if it will be my fate to have to take up with literature in
sober earnest," she said to herself, "I, who can never abide a book. Oh,
to be back again in the dear old place! I should not be a bit surprised
if Laurie is out fishing now, and Pat with him. And oh, suppose they are
bringing in the trout, and the creatures are leaping and struggling as
they come to shore, and father is going round to feed the dogs--why, the
thought is enough to madden me. Oh, then, why did I ever leave home? I
don't care _that_ for books, nor for being clever nor for--How she works
to be sure! How earnest she looks. She has got a very fine forehead,
although it is miles too high. She ought to wear a fringe; it would
improve her wonderfully. I will cut her hair some day if she will let
me. I will cut it and curl it. I have got the dearest little jewel of a
pair of curling tongs that ever was seen! Aunt Honora sent it to me in a
box with a spirit lamp all complete when I got the rest of my things.
I'll just exercise those little tongs on dear, nice Bessie. I do wish
she would not be so devoted to that book, she might talk. Oh, I am
lonely. I think I'll fidget a bit."

Kitty moved her chair, creaking it ominously; but Bessie had got to a
most thrilling part of her subject, and Kitty might have creaked the
library down before she would have roused her companion's attention.

"Now, if I sigh, perhaps that will do it," thought Kitty. She opened her
mouth and let some profound sighs come up from the depths of her heart;
but they only depressed her still more, and had no effect whatever on
Bessie.

"I think I hate intellectual people," muttered the Irish girl. She
jumped to her feet.

"I must do something to rouse her or I shall go mad. She is the nicest
of them all, much. I wish she would speak to me. Why should I break my
heart, and why should she simply go on devouring that stupid book? Here,
I know what I'll do. I'll just toss down one of the big volumes; it will
make a clatter and she will have to look up. Perhaps I'll let it drop
just the tiniest bit in the world on the corner of her toe; that will
finish her." Here Kitty laughed excitedly, pushed out her arm and
knocked over a huge volume which certainly fell a good deal more than a
tiny bit on poor Bessie's foot.

"Oh, Kitty, what have you done?" cried Bessie. "You have quite hurt me.
I wish you would not drop the books about."

"There, darling, I had to do it. Pray forgive me," said Kitty.

"You had to do it!" answered Bessie. "Do you mean that you did it on
purpose?"

"Why, then, yes, love--that's what I do mean exactly. I did it because
I wanted you to talk to me, and you _would_ think of nothing but that
book."

"It is such a chance," answered Bessie, "and I wanted to find out for
myself all about that wonderful magnetic iron ore. You know it never
loses its power, it is potent for hundreds and hundreds of years, and--"

"Oh, don't tell me any more, or I'll lose my senses. Dear Bessie, what
does magnetic iron ore matter. Bessie, I'm awfully unhappy. Every one is
so unkind to me. Promise you'll be my friend, won't you?"

Bessie looked up, and then she saw something so touching in Kitty's face
that she closed her book with a reluctant sigh, to devote herself the
next moment with all the sympathy she possessed to her companion.

"I am sure you are suffering, Kitty, and I am sorry for you," she said.
"I'll fetch my hat and we'll go out for a little."

"Oh, what a darling you are!" answered Kitty.

A moment or two later the girls were walking across the beautifully-kept
garden; they soon reached a shady path at the further end.

"And now, Kitty," said Bessie, "I mean to lecture you a little."

"Anything in the world you like, darling. I'm quite agreeable. Aunt
Honora and Aunt Bridget lecture me, and so does the dear old dad
sometimes; but I always say when they have finished that it is like
water on a duck's back--it rolls off without making the least bit of
impression, and then they laugh and say that I am the queerest mixture
they ever came across, and that they had best leave me to nature. But
perhaps I'll listen to you, Bessie."

"I wish you would," said Bessie. "I am sure," she added, speaking with
great earnestness, "that you are a very nice girl, Kitty; but at the
same time you are wild."

"Oh, I pride myself on that," said Kitty in her frankest of voices.

"But I wish you would not, Kitty, for it really isn't nice."

"Not nice! Now what may you be meaning by that, aroon?"

"Well, there is a sort of dignity which I think a really well brought-up
girl ought to possess."

"Oh, my! dignity is it?" said Kitty. She stepped away from her
companion, drew down her face to a ridiculous length, nearly closed her
eyes, and folded her hands demurely across her breast.

"Is that pleasing you, mavourneen?" she said. "Is it dignified and sober
enough poor Kitty Malone looks now?"

"Oh, Kitty, you will joke about everything."

Kitty immediately changed her mood.

"No, I won't," she said. "I am really awfully obliged to you. You don't
know what all this has been to me. Father said I was growing too
wild--yes, the darling dad did; he agrees with you down to the core of
his heart, and he said I must go to England and be taught manners. But,
bless you, they'll have a job. I told him so when I was going. I said,
'Dad, it's the hearts of the teachers I'll be breaking;' and dad said,
'Oh, no, you won't, Kitty, aroon. You'll be a good girl, and you'll try
to please your old dad and you'll come back a beautiful, perfect lady!'
He said it with tears in his eyes, he did, the darling; and I promised,
and down on my knees I went and asked God to help me. But, dear, it's
like the froth of the sea-foam inside me, the fun and the mischief and
the nonsense and the ways that you think queer; but, all the same, those
ways delight the good folk at home. Must I really give them up,
Bessie--must I?"

"To a certain extent," said Bessie, "or you will have a lot of enemies
here, Kitty, and you won't be at all happy."

"How I wish I lived with you, Bessie Challoner. You're a broth of a
girl, that you are. You have not taken a dislike to me just because of
the fun bubbling up in my heart?"

"No, dear; on the contrary, I like you extremely."

"Ah, you precious duck of a darling! It is a good squeeze you would
like, if I gave it to you?"

"Well, I am not very fond of being kissed; but if you must, Kitty."

"I must, dear, I must, for the heart in me is full to the brim. Now
then, stand still, and I'll catch you up close to my heart. There! isn't
that better?"

Poor Bessie gave some long-drawn breaths, for the firmness, in fact the
ferocity, of Kitty's embrace quite hurt her for a moment.

"There," said Kitty, "that's the way we hug in Old Ireland. Now I'm a
sight better, and I'll let go. So you do like me, Bessie?"

"Yes, very much indeed, Kitty, only--please don't do it again."

"I won't to-night, I won't really, but it's wonderful that you don't
like it. I wish you could see Aunt Honora and Aunt Bridget hug one
another. Why, it's the noise they make when they get together, and the
way they kiss! Oh, dear, I hope some day you'll come to Ireland."

"You don't tempt me by these descriptions," replied Bessie. "But now,
Kitty, will you promise just to be a little quieter, to keep in all
those irrepressible and--really I must say it, dear, at the risk of
hurting you--those silly words."

"But then I'm silly myself," said Kitty. "Can you expect wisdom out of
nonsense? I am pure and simple nonsense from first to last."

"But you do want to be something better? You do want to lead a good
life?"

"A good life! I never thought there was anything bad in me."

"You want to learn for instance?"

"No; that I don't, darling."

"You don't want to learn, Kitty? Then what is the good of coming to
Middleton School?"

