Ford came near "catching" one more as he tried to turn around for the
look proposed, exclaiming,--

"Dab, let's get to work as quick as we can. They might go away."

"Might fly?"

"No; but don't they go and come?"

"Well, you go and drop the grapnel over the bows, and we'll see 'em come
in pretty quick."

The grapnel, or little anchor, was thrown over quickly enough; and the
two boys were in such an eager haste that they had hardly a word to say
to Dick, though he was now but a few rods away.

Now, it happened that when Ford and Dab came down to the water that
morning, each of them had brought a load. The former had only a neat
little japanned tin box, about as big as his head; and the latter,
besides his oars, carried a seemingly pretty heavy basket.

"Lots of lunch, I should say," had been Ford's mental comment; but he
had not thought it wise to ask questions.

"Plenty of lunch in that box," thought Dab at the same moment, but only
as a matter of course.

And they were both wrong. Lunch was the one thing they had both
forgotten.

But the box and the basket.

Ford Foster came out, of his own accord, with the secret of the box; for
he now took a little key out of his pocket, and unlocked it with an air
of--

"Look at this, will you?"

Dab Kinzer looked, and was very sure he had never before seen quite such
an assortment of brand-new fish-hooks, of many sorts and sizes, and of
fish-lines which looked as if they had thus far spent their lives on dry
land.

"Tip-top," he remarked. "I see a lot of things we can use one of these
days, but there isn't time to go over 'em now. Let's go for the crabs.
What made you bring your box along?"

"Oh!" replied Ford, "I left my rods at home, both of 'em. You don't
s'pose I'd go for crabs with a rod, do you? But you can take your pick
of hooks and lines."

"Crabs? Hooks and lines?"

"Why, yes. You don't mean to scoop 'em up in that landing-net, do you?"

Dab looked at his friend for a moment in blank amazement, and then the
truth broke upon him for the first time.

"Oh, I see! You never caught any crabs. Well, just you lock up your
jewellery-box, and I'll show you."

It was not easy for Dab to keep from laughing in Ford Foster's face; but
his mother had not given him so many lessons in good-breeding for
nothing, and Ford was permitted to close his ambitious "casket" without
any worse annoyance than his own wounded pride gave him.

But now came out the secret of the basket.

The cover was jerked off; and nothing was revealed but a varied
assortment of clams, large and small, but mostly of good size,--tough
old customers, that no amount of roasting or boiling would ever have
prepared for human eating.

"What are they for,--bait?"

"Yes, bait, weight, and all."

"How's that?"

Dabney's reply was to draw from his pocket a couple of long, strong
cords, bits of old fishing-lines. He cracked a couple of clams one
against the other; tied the fleshy part of one to each of the cords;
tied bits of shell on, a foot or so from the ends, for sinkers; handed
one cord to Ford, took the other himself, and laid the long-handled
scoop-net he had brought with him down between them, saying,--

"Now we're ready. Drop your clam down to the bottom, and it won't be
half a minute before you feel something pull on it. Then you draw it up
gently,--steady as you know how. You mustn't jerk the crab loose. You'll
get the knack of it in five minutes. It's all knack. There isn't any
thing else so stupid as a crab."

Ford watched carefully, and obeyed in silence the directions he had
received.

In a minute or so more the operation of the scoop-net was called for,
and the fun began.

"You got him!" exclaimed Ford in a loud whisper, as he saw Dab quickly
plunge the net into the water, and then shake out of it into the bottom
of the boat a great sprawling "blue-legged" crab. "He's a whopper!"

"He'll do for one."

"There's one on mine! I declare, he's let go!"

"You jerked the clam away from him. Sink it again. He's mad about it.
He'll take right hold again."

"He's pulling now, or it's another one."

"Let him pull. Lift him easy. Long as he thinks he's stealing something,
he'll hold on. There he comes,--see him?"

Ford saw the white flesh of the clam coming slowly up through the water,
and he held his breath; for just behind and below it was a sprawling
shadowy something that was tugging with all its might at that tough
shell-fish.

"It's an awful big one!"

"Shall I scoop him?"

"No, indeed: I want to scoop him myself. I saw how you did it."

Splash went the net, as the prize came nearer the surface; and Ford
began, somewhat excitedly, to shake it all over the bottom of the boat.

"Why, where's that crab? You don't mean to say he was quick enough to
dodge away?"

"Quick? well, no, that isn't just the trouble. I forgot to tell you to
scoop way under him. You hit him, square, and knocked him ever so far.
The water deceives your eyes. Drive the net under him quick, and then
lift. I've got one--now just you see how I scoop."

Ford felt dreadfully disappointed over the loss of his first crab, but
the rapidity with which he caught the "knack of it" after that was a
great credit to him. He did not miss the next one he pulled up.

It was great fun; but it had its slack moments, and in one of these Dab
suddenly exclaimed,--

"The young black rascal! If he hasn't gone and got a sheep's-head!"

"A sheep's-head?"

They were both staring at the old punt, where Dick Lee was apparently
enjoying the most extraordinary good fortune.

"Yes, that's it. That's why he beats us so badly. They're a sight
better'n clams, only you can't always get one. I wonder where he picked
up that one."

"But how he does pull 'em in!"

"We're doing well enough," began Dabney, when suddenly there came a
shrill cry of pain from the black boy's punt.

"He's barefooted," shouted Dab, with, it must be confessed, something
like a grin; "and one of the little pirates has pinned him with his
nippers."

That was the difficulty exactly, and there need not have been any very
serious result of such an expression of a crab's bad temper. But Dick
Lee was more than ordinarily averse to any thing like physical pain, and
the crab which now had him by the toe was a very muscular and vicious
specimen of his quarrelsome race.

The first consequence of that vigorous nip was a momentary dance up and
down in the punt, accompanied by exclamatory howls from Dick, but not by
a word of any sort from the crab.

The next consequence was, that the crab let go; but so at the same
instant, did the rotten board in the boat-bottom, upon which Dick Lee
had so rashly danced.

It let go of the rest of the boat so suddenly that poor Dick had only
time for one tremendous yell, as it let him right down through to his
armpits.

The water was perfectly smooth; but the boat was full in an instant, and
nearly a bushel of freshly-caught and ill-tempered crabs were
manoeuvring in all directions around the woolly head, which was all
their late captor could now keep in sight.

"Up with the grapnel, Ford," shouted Dab. "Take an oar: we'll both row.
He can swim like a duck, but he might split his throat."

"Or get scared to death."

"Or those crabs might go for him, and eat him up."

"How he does yell!"





CHAPTER VII.

A VERY ACCIDENTAL CALL.


At the very moment when the angry crab closed his nippers on the bare
big toe of Dick Lee, and his shrill note of discomfort rang across the
inlet, the shriller whistle of the engine announced the arrival of the
morning train from the city, at the little station in the village.

A moment or so later, a very pretty young lady was standing beside a
trunk on the platform, trying to get some information from the flagman.

"Can you tell me where Mr. Foster lives?"

"That's the gimlet-eyed lawyer from New Yark?"

"Yes, he's from New York," said the young lady, smiling in his face.
"Where does he live?"

"He's got the sassiest boy, thin. Is it him as took the Kinzer house?"

"I think likely it is. Can you tell me how to get there?"

"Thim Kinzers is foine people. The widdy married one of the gurrels to
Misther Morris."

"But how can I get to the house?"

"Is it there ye're afther goin'?--Hey, Michael, me boy, bring up yer
owld rattlethrap, and take the leddy's thrunk. She'll be goin' to the
Kinzer place. Sharp, now."

"I should say it was," muttered the young lady, as the remains of what
had been a carryall were pulled up beside the platform by the skinny
skeleton of what might once have been a horse. "It's a rattletrap."

There was no choice, however; for that was the only public conveyance at
the station, and the trunk was already whisked in behind the dashboard,
and the driver was waiting for her.

He could afford to wait, as it would be some hours before another train
would be in.

There was no door to open in that "carriage." It was all door except the
top and bottom, and the pretty passenger was neither helped nor hindered
in finding her place on the back seat.

If the flagman was more disposed to ask questions than to answer them,
Michael said few words of any kind except to his horse. To him, indeed,
he kept up a constant stream of encouraging remarks, the greatest part
of which would have been difficult for an ordinary hearer to understand.

Very likely the horse knew what they meant; for he came very near
breaking from a limp into a trot several times, under the stimulus of
all that clucking and "G'lang, now!"

The distance was by no means great, and Michael seemed to know the way
perfectly. At least he answered, "Yes'm, indade," to several inquiries
from his passenger, and she was compelled to be satisfied with that.

"What a big house it is! And painters at work on it too," she exclaimed,
just as Michael added a vigorous jerk of the reins to the "Whoa!" with
which he stopped his nag in front of an open gate.

"Are you sure this is the place?"

"Yes'm; fifty cints, mum."

By the time the trunk was out of the carriage and swung inside of the
gate, the young lady had followed; but for some reason Michael at once
sprang back to his place, and whipped up his limping steed. It may have
been from the fear of being asked to take that trunk into the house, for
it was not a small one. The young lady stood for a moment irresolute,
and then left it where it was, and walked on up to the house.

No bell; no knocker. The workmen had not reached that part of their
improvements yet. But the door was open; and a very neatly furnished
parlor at the left of the hall seemed to say, "Come right in, please;"
and in she went.

Such an arrival could not possibly have escaped the notice of the
inmates of the house; and, as the young lady from the railway came in at
the front, another and a very different-looking lady marched through to
the parlor from the rear.

Each one would have been a puzzle to the other, if the elder of the two
had not been Mrs. Kinzer, and the widow had never been very much puzzled
in all her life. At all events, she put out her hand, with a cordial
smile, saying,--

"Miss Foster, is it not? I am Mrs. Kinzer. How could he have made such a
mistake?"

"Yes, Miss Annie Foster. But do please explain Where am I? and how do
you know me?"

The widow laughed cheerily.

"How do I know you, my dear? Why, you resemble your mother almost as
much as your brother Ford resembles his father. You are only one door
from home here, and I'll have your trunk taken right over to the house.
Please sit down a moment. Ah! my daughter Samantha, Miss Foster. Excuse
me a moment, while I call one of the men."

By the time their mother was fairly out of the room, however, Keziah and
Pamela were also in it; and Annie thought she had rarely seen three
girls whose appearance testified so strongly to the healthiness of the
place they lived in.

The flagman's questions and Annie's answers were related quickly enough,
and the cause of Michael's blunder was plain at once.

The parlor rang again with peals of laughter; for Dab Kinzer's sisters
were ready at any time to look at the funny side of things, and their
accidental guest saw no reason for not joining them.
