A man of heart! Yes, truly! None knew it better than Robert, but again
he kept his own counsel. He too was glad that his had not been one of
the two French bodies found, but there was still danger from the
pursuing Mohawks, who would hang on tenaciously, and he felt a sudden
thrill of alarm. But it passed, as he remembered that the chevalier
was a woodsman of experience and surpassing skill.

Tayoga came back to them somewhat blown. He had followed the fleeing
French and Indian force two or three miles. But there was a limit even
to his nerves and sinews of wrought steel. He had already run thirty
miles before joining in the combat, and now it was time to rest.

"Come, Tayoga," said the hunter, "we'll go back to the ground our lads
have defended so well, and eat, drink and sleep. The Mohawks will
attend to all the work that's left, which isn't much. We've earned our
repose."

Captain Colden, slightly wounded in the arm, appeared and Willet gave
him the high compliments that he and his soldiers deserved. He told
him it was seldom that men unused to the woods bore themselves so well
in an Indian fight, but the young captain modestly disclaimed the
chief merit, replying that he and his detachment would surely have
been lost, had it not been for Willet and his comrades.

Then they went back to the ground near the cliff, where they had made
their great fight, and Willet although the night was warm, wisely had
a large fire built. He knew the psychological and stimulating effect
of heat and light upon the lads of the city, who had passed through
such a fearful ordeal in the dark and Indian-haunted forest. He
encouraged them to throw on more dead boughs, until the blaze leaped
higher and higher and sparkled and roared, sending up myriads of
joyous sparks that glowed for their brief lives among the trees and
then died. No fear of St. Luc and the Indians now! That fierce fringe
of Mohawks was a barrier that they could never pass, even should they
choose to return, and no such choice could possibly be theirs! The
fire crackled and blazed in increasing volume, and the Philadelphia
lads, recovering from the collapse that had followed tremendous
exertions and excitement, began to appreciate the extent of their
victory and to talk eagerly with one another.

But the period of full rest had not yet come. Captain Colden made them
dig with their bayonets shallow graves for their dead, six in number.
Fluent of speech, his sensitive mind again fitting into the deep
gravity of the situation, Robert said a few words above them, words
that he felt, words that moved those who heard. Then the earth was
thrown in and stones and heavy boughs were placed over all to keep
away the digging wolves or other wild animals.

The wounded were made as comfortable as possible before the fire, and
in the light of the brilliant flames the awe created by the dead
quickly passed. Food was served and fresh water was drunk, the
canteens being refilled from a spring that Tayoga found a quarter of a
mile away. Then the soldiers, save six who had been posted as guard,
stretched themselves on grass or leaves, and fell asleep, one by
one. Tayoga who had made the greatest physical effort followed them to
the land of slumber, but Captain Colden sat and talked with Robert and
Willet, although it was now far past midnight.

The bushes parted and a dark figure, making no sound as it came,
stepped into the circle of light. It was Black Rifle and his eyes
still glittered, but he said nothing. Robert thought he saw upon his
face a look of intense satisfaction and once more he shuddered a
little. The man lay down with his rifle beside him, and fell asleep,
his hands still clutching his weapon.

Before dawn Daganoweda and the Mohawks came back also, and Robert in
behalf of them all thanked the young chief in the purest Mohawk, and
with the fine phrasing and apt allegory so dear to the Indian heart.
Daganoweda made a fitting reply, saying that the merit did not belong
to him but to Manitou, and then, leaving a half dozen of his warriors
to join in the watch, he and the others slept before the fire.

"It was well that you played so strongly upon the feelings of the
Mohawks at that test in the vale of Onondaga, Robert," said Willet. "If
you had not said over and over again that the Quebec of the French was
once the Stadacona of the Mohawks they would not have been here
tonight to save us. They say that deeds speak louder than words, but
when the same man speaks with both words and deeds people have got to
hear."

"You give me too much credit, Dave. The time was ripe for a Mohawk
attack upon the French."

"Aye, lad, but one had to see a chance and use it. Now, join all
those fellows in sleep. We won't move before noon."

But Robert's brain was too active for sleep just yet. While his
imaginative power made him see things before other people saw them, he
also continued to see them after they were gone. The wilderness battle
passed once more before him, and when he brushed his eyes to thrust it
away, he looked at the sleeping Mohawks and thought what splendid
savages they were. The other tribes of the Hodenosaunee were still
holding to their neutrality--all that was asked of them--but the
Mohawks, with the memories of their ancient wrongs burning in their
hearts, had openly taken the side of the English, and tonight their
valor and skill had undoubtedly saved the American force. Daganoweda
was a hero! And so was Tayoga, the Onondaga, always the first of red
men to Robert.

His heated brain began to grow cool at last. The vivid pictures that
had been passing so fast before his eyes faded. He saw only reality,
the blazing fire, the dusky figures lying motionless before it, and
the circling wall of dark woods. Then he slept.

Willet was the only white man who remained awake. He saw the great
fire die, and the dawn come in its place. He felt then for the first
time in all that long encounter the strangeness of his own position.
The wilderness, savages and forest battle had become natural to him,
and yet his life had once been far different. There was a taste of a
distant past in that fierce duel at Quebec when he slew the bravo,
Boucher, a deed for which he had never felt a moment's regret, and yet
when he balanced the old times against the present, he could not say
which had the advantage. He had found true friends in the woods, men
who would and did risk their own lives to save his.

The dawn came swiftly, flooding the earth with light. Daganoweda and
many of the Mohawk warriors awoke, but the young Philadelphia captain
and his men slept on, plunged in the utter stupor of exhaustion.
Tayoga, who had made a supreme effort, both physical and mental, also
continued to sleep, and Robert, lying with his feet to the coals,
never stirred.

Daganoweda shook himself, and, so shaking, shook the last shred of
sleep from his eyes. Then he looked with pride at his warriors, those
who yet lay upon the ground and those who had arisen. He was a young
chief, not yet thirty years of age, and he was the bloom and flower of
Mohawk courage and daring. His name, Daganoweda, the Inexhaustible,
was fully deserved, as his bravery and resource were unlimited. But
unlike Tayoga, he had in him none of the priestly quality. He had not
drunk or even sipped at the white man's civilization. The spirituality
so often to be found in the Onondagas was unknown to him. He was a
warrior first, last and all the time. He was Daganoweda of the Clan of
the Turtle, of the Nation Ganeagaono, the Keepers of the Eastern Gate,
of the great League of the Hodenosaunee, and he craved no glory save
that to be won in battle, which he craved all the time.

Daganoweda, as he looked at his men, felt intense satisfaction,
because the achievement of his Mohawks the night before had been
brilliant and successful, but he concealed it from all save himself. It
was not for a chief who wished to win not one victory, but a hundred
to show undue elation. But he turned and for a few moments gazed
directly into the sun with unwinking eyes, and when he shifted his
gaze away, a great tide of life leaped in his veins.

Then he gave silent thanks. Like all the other Indians in North
America the Mohawks personified and worshipped the sun, which to them
was the mighty Dweller in Heaven, almost the same as Manitou, a great
spirit to whom sacrifices and thanksgivings were to be made. The sun,
an immortal being, had risen that morning and from his seat in the
highest of the high heavens he had looked down with his invincible eye
which no man could face more than a few seconds, upon his favorite
children, the Mohawks, to whom he had given the victory. Daganoweda
bowed a head naturally haughty and under his breath murmured thanks
for the triumph given and prayers for others to come.

The warriors built the fire anew and cooked their breakfasts. They had
venison and hominy of three kinds according to the corn of which it
was made, _Onaogaant_ or the white corn, _Ticne_ or the red corn, and
_Hagowa_ or the white flint corn. They also had bear meat and dried
beans. So their breakfast was abundant, and they ate with the appetite
of warriors who had done mighty deeds.

Daganoweda and Willet, as became great men, sat together on a log and
were served by a warrior who took honor from the task. Black Rifle sat
alone a little distance away. He would have been welcome in the
company of the Mohawk chief and the hunter, but, brooding and solitary
in mind, he wished to be alone and they knew and respected his wish.
Daganoweda glanced at him more than once as he remained in silence,
and always there was pity in his looks. And there was admiration too,
because Black Rifle was a great warrior. The woods held none greater.

When Robert awoke it was well on toward noon and he sprang up,
refreshed and strong.

"You've had quite a nap, Robert," said Willet, who had not slept at
all, "but some of the soldiers are still sleeping, and Tayoga has just
gone down to the spring to bathe his face."

"Which I also will do," said Robert.

"And when you come back food will be ready for you."

Robert found Tayoga at the spring, flexing his muscles, and taking
short steps back and forth. "It was a great run you made," said the
white youth, "and it saved us. There's no stiffness, I hope?"

"There was a little, Dagaeoga, but I have worked it out of my
body. Now all my muscles are as they were. I am ready to make another
and equal run."

"It's not needed, and for that I'm thankful. St. Luc will not come
back, nor will Tandakora, I think, linger in the woods, hoping for a
shot. He knows that the Mohawk skirmishers will be too vigilant."

As they went back to the fire for their food they heard a droning song
and the regular beat of feet. Some of the Mohawks were dancing the
Buffalo Dance, a dance named after an animal never found in their
country, but which they knew well. It was a tribute to the vast energy
and daring of the nations of the Hodenosaunee that they should range
in such remote regions as Kentucky and Tennessee and hunt the buffalo
with the Cherokees, who came up from the south.

They called the dance Dageyagooanno, and it was always danced by men
only. One warrior beat upon the drum, _ganojoo_, and another used
_gusdawasa_ or the rattle made of the shell of a squash. A dozen
warriors danced, and players and dancers alike sang. It was a most
singular dance and Robert, as he ate and drank, watched it with
curious interest.

The warriors capered back and forth, and often they bent themselves
far over, until their hands touched the ground. Then they would arch
their backs, until they formed a kind of hump, and they leaped to and
fro, bellowing all the time. The imitation was that of a buffalo,
recognizable at once, and, while it was rude and monotonous, both
dancing and singing preserved a rhythm, and as one listened
continuously it soon crept into the blood. Robert, with that singular
temperament of his, so receptive to all impressions, began to feel
it. Their chant was of war and victory and he stirred to both. He was
on the warpath with them, and he passed with them through the thick of
battle.

They danced for a long time, quitting only when exhaustion
compelled. By that time all the soldiers were awake and Captain Colden
talked with the other leaders, red and white. His instructions took
him farther west, where he was to build a fort for the defense of the
border, and, staunch and true, he did not mean to turn back because he
had been in desperate battle with the French and their Indian allies.

"I was sent to protect a section of the frontier," he said to Willet,
"and while I've found it hard to protect my men and myself, yet I must
go on. I could never return to Philadelphia and face our people
there."

"It's a just view you take, Captain Colden," said Willet.

"I feel, though, that my men and I are but children in the
woods. Yesterday and last night proved it. If you and your friends
continue with us our march may not be in vain."

Willet glanced at Robert, and then at Tayoga.

"Ours for the present, at least, is a roving commission," said young
Lennox. "It seems to me that the best we can do is to go with Captain
Colden."

"I am not called back to the vale of Onondaga," said Tayoga, "I would
see the building of this fort that Captain Colden has planned."

"Then we three are agreed," said the hunter. "It's best not to speak
to Black Rifle, because he'll follow his own notions anyway, and as
for Daganoweda and his Mohawks I think they're likely to resume their
march northward against the French border."

"I'm grateful to you three," said Captain Colden, "and, now that it's
settled, we'll start as soon as we can."

"Better give them all a good rest, and wait until the morning," said
the hunter.

Again Captain Colden agreed with him.




CHAPTER IV

THE PERILOUS PATH


After a long night of sleep and rest, the little troop resumed its
march the next morning. The wounded fortunately were not hurt so
badly that they could not limp along with the others, and, while the
surgery of the soldiers was rude, it was effective nevertheless.
Daganoweda, as they had expected, prepared to leave them for a raid
toward the St. Lawrence. But he said rather grimly that he might
return, in a month perhaps. He knew where they were going to build
their fort, and unless Corlear and all the other British governors
awoke much earlier in the morning it was more than likely that the
young captain from Philadelphia would need the help of the Mohawks
again.

Then Daganoweda said farewell to Robert, Tayoga, Willet and Black
Rifle, addressing each according to his quality. Them he trusted. He
knew them to be great warriors and daring rovers of the wilderness.
He had no advice for them, because he knew they did not need it, but
he expected them to be his comrades often in the great war, and he
wished them well. To Tayoga he said:

"You and I, oh, young chief of the Onondagas, have hearts that beat
alike. The Onondagas do well to keep aloof from the white man's
quarrels for the present, and to sit at peace, though watchful, in the
vale of Onondaga, but your hopes are with our friends the English and
you in person fight for them. We Mohawks know whom to hate. We know
that the French have robbed us more than any others. We know, that
their Quebec is our Stadacona. So we have dug up the tomahawk and last
night we showed to Sharp Sword and his men and Tandakora the Ojibway
how we could use it."

Sharp Sword was the Iroquois name for St. Luc, who had already proved
his great ability and daring as a forest leader.

"The Ganeagaono are now the chief barrier against the French and their
tribes," said Tayoga.

The brilliant eyes of Daganoweda glittered in his dark face. He knew
that Tayoga would not pay the Mohawks so high a compliment unless he
meant it.

"Tayoga," he said, "we belong to the leading nations of the great
League of the Hodenosaunee, you to the Onundahgaono and I to the
Ganeagaono. You are first in the council and we are first on the
warpath. It was Tododaho, the Onondaga, who first formed the great
League and it was Hayowentha, the Mohawk, who combed the snakes out of
his hair and who strengthened it and who helped him to build it so
firmly that it shall last forever. Brothers are we, and always shall
be."

He touched his forehead in salute, and the Onondaga touched his in
reply.

"Aye, brothers are we," he said, "Mohawk and Onondaga, Onondaga and
Mohawk. The great war of the white kings which draws us in it has
come, but I know that Hayowentha watches over his people, and Tododaho
over his. In the spring when I went forth in the night to fight the
Hurons I gazed off there in the west where shines the great star on
which Tododaho makes his home, and I saw him looking down upon me, and
casting about me the veil of his protection."

Daganoweda looked up at the gleaming blue of the heavens, and his eyes
glittered again. He believed every word that Tayoga said.

"As Tododaho watches over you, so Hayowentha watches over me," he
said, "and he will bring me back in safety and victory from the
St. Lawrence. Farewell again, my brother."

"Farewell once more, Daganoweda!"

The Mohawk chief plunged into the forest, and his fifty warriors
followed him. Like a shadow they were gone, and the waving bushes gave
back no sign that they had ever been. Captain Colden rubbed his eyes
and then laughed.

"I never knew men to vanish so swiftly before," he said, "but last
night was good proof that they were here, and that they came in
time. I suppose it's about the only victory of which we can make
boast."

He spoke the full truth. From the St. Lawrence to the Ohio the border
was already ravaged with fire and sword. Appeals for help were pouring
in from the distant settlements, and the governors of New York,
Pennsylvania and Massachusetts scarcely knew what to do. France had
struck the first blow, and she had struck hard. Young Washington,
defeated by overwhelming numbers, was going back to Virginia, and
Duquesne, the fort of the French at the junction of the Monongahela
and Allegheny, was a powerful rallying place for their own forces and
the swarming Indian bands, pouring out of the wilderness, drawn by the
tales of unlimited scalps and plunder.

The task before Captain Colden's slender force was full of danger. His
numbers might have been five times as great and then they would not
have been too many to build and hold the fort he was sent to build and
hold. But he had no thought of turning back, and, as soon as
Daganoweda and the Mohawks were gone, they started, bending their
course somewhat farther toward the south. At the ford of a river
twenty men with horses carrying food, ammunition and other supplies
were to meet them, and they reckoned that they could reach it by
midnight.

The men with the horses had been sent from another point, and it was
not thought then that there was any danger of French and Indian attack
before the junction was made, but the colonial authorities had
reckoned without the vigor and daring of St. Luc. Now the most cruel
fears assailed young Captain Colden, and Robert and the hunter could
not find much argument to remove them. It was possible that the second
force had been ambushed also, and, if so, it had certainly been
destroyed, being capable of no such resistance as that made by
