"Do you think," I said, "that our masters know how bad it is for us?"

"I can't say," he replied, "but the dealers and the horse-doctors know
it very well. I was at a dealer's once, who was training me and another
horse to go as a pair; he was getting our heads up, and he said, a
little higher and a little higher every day. A gentleman who was there
asked him why he did so. 'Because,' said he, 'people won't buy them
unless we do. The fashionable people want their horses to carry their
heads high and to step high. Of course, it is very bad for the horses,
but then it is good for trade. The horses soon wear up, and they come
for another pair.' That," said Max, "is what he said in my hearing, and
you can judge for yourself."

What I suffered with that rein for four months in my lady's carriage
would be hard to describe; but I am quite sure that, had it lasted much
longer, either my health or my temper would have given way. Before
that, I never knew what it was to foam at the mouth, but now the action
of the sharp bit on my tongue and jaw, and the constrained position of
my head and throat, always caused me to froth at the mouth more or less.
Some people think it very fine to see this, and say, "What fine,
spirited creatures!" But it is just as unnatural for horses as for men
to foam at the mouth; it is a sure sign of some discomfort, and should
be attended to. Besides this, there was a pressure on my windpipe, which
often made my breathing very uncomfortable; when I returned from my
work, my neck and chest were strained and painful, my mouth and tongue
tender, and I felt worn and depressed.

[Illustration]

In my old home I always knew that John and my master were my friends;
but here, although in many ways I was well treated, I had no friend.
York might have known, and very likely did know, how that rein harassed
me; but I suppose he took it as a matter of course that could not be
helped; at any rate, nothing was done to relieve me.




CHAPTER XI


A HORSE FAIR

No doubt a horse fair is a very amusing place to those who have nothing
to lose; at any rate, there is plenty to see.

Long strings of young horses out of the country, fresh from the marshes,
and droves of shaggy little Welsh ponies, no higher than Merrylegs; and
hundreds of cart horses of all sorts, some of them with their long tails
braided up and tied with scarlet cord; and a good many like myself,
handsome and high-bred, but fallen into the middle class, through some
accident or blemish, unsoundness of wind, or some other complaint. There
were some splendid animals quite in their prime, and fit for anything,
they were throwing out their legs and showing off their paces in high
style, as they were trotted out with a leading rein, the groom running
by the side. But round in the background there were a number of poor
things, sadly broken down with hard work, with their knees knuckling
over and their hind legs swinging out at every step; and there were some
very dejected-looking old horses, with the under-lip hanging down and
the ears lying back heavily, as if there was no more pleasure in life,
and no more hope; there were some so thin you might see all their ribs,
and some with old sores on their backs and hips. These were sad sights
for a horse to look upon, who knows not but he may come to the same
state.  I was put with some useful-looking horses, and a good many
people came to look at us. The gentlemen always turned from me when they
saw my broken knees; though the man who had me swore it was only a slip
in the stall.

The first thing was to pull my mouth open, then to look at my eyes, then
feel all the way down my legs and give me a hard feel of the skin and
flesh, and then try my paces. It was wonderful what a difference there
was in the way these things were done. Some did it in a rough, off-hand
way, as if one was only a piece of wood; while others would take their
hands gently over one's body, with a pat now and then, as much as to
say, "By your leave." Of course, I judged a good deal of the buyers by
their manners to myself.

There was one man, I thought, if he would buy me, I should be happy. He
was not a gentleman. He was rather a small man, but well made, and quick
in all his motions. I knew in a moment, by the way he handled me, that
he was used to horses; he spoke gently, and his gray eye had a kindly,
cheery look in it. It may seem strange to say--but it is true all the
same--that the clean, fresh smell there was about him made me take to
him; no smell of old beer and tobacco, which I hated, but a fresh smell
as if he had come out of a hayloft. He offered twenty-three pounds for
me; but that was refused, and he walked away. I looked after him, but he
was gone, and a very hard-looking, loud-voiced man came. I was
dreadfully afraid he would have me; but he walked off. One or two more
came who did not mean business. Then the hard-faced man came back again
and offered twenty-three pounds. A very close bargain was being driven,
for my salesman began to think he should not get all he asked, and must
come down; but just then the gray-eyed man came back again. I could not
help reaching out my head toward him. He stroked my face kindly. "Well,
old chap," he said, "I think we should suit each other. I'll give
twenty-four for him."

"Say twenty-five, and you shall have him."  "Twenty-four then," said my
friend, in a very decided tone, "and not another sixpence--yes, or no?"

"Done," said the salesman; "and you may depend upon it there's a
monstrous deal of quality in that horse, and if you want him for cab
work he's a bargain."

[Illustration]

The money was paid on the spot, and my new master took my halter, and
led me out of the fair to an inn, where he had a saddle and bridle
ready. He gave me a good feed of oats, and stood by while I ate it,
talking to himself and talking to me. Half an hour after, we were on our
way to London, through pleasant lanes and country roads, until we came
into the great thoroughfare, on which we traveled steadily, till in the
twilight we reached the great city. The gas lamps were already lighted;
there were streets and streets crossing each other, for mile upon mile.
I thought we should never come to the end of them. At last, in passing
through one, we came to a long cab stand, when my rider called out in a
cheery voice, "Good-night, Governor!"

"Hallo!" cried a voice. "Have you got a good one?"

"I think so," replied my owner.

"I wish you luck with him."

"Thank ye, Governor," and he rode on. We soon turned up one of the
side-streets, and about half-way up that we turned into a very narrow
street, with rather poor-looking houses on one side, and what seemed to
be coach-houses and stables on the other.

My owner pulled up at one of the houses and whistled. The door flew
open, and a young woman, followed by a little girl and boy, ran out.
There was a very lively greeting as my rider dismounted. "Now, then,
Harry, my boy, open the gates, and mother will bring us the lantern."

The next minute they were all round me in the stable yard. "Is he
gentle, father?" "Yes, Dolly, as gentle as your own kitten; come and pat
him." At once the little hand was patting about all over my shoulder
without fear. How good it felt!

"Let me get him a bran mash while you rub him down," said the mother.
"Do, Polly, it's just what he wants; and I know you've got a beautiful
mash ready for me."

I was led into a comfortable, clean-smelling stall with plenty of dry
straw, and after a capital supper, I lay down, thinking I was going to
be happy.




CHAPTER XII


A LONDON CAB HORSE

My new master's name was Jeremiah Barker, but as every one called him
Jerry, I shall do the same. Polly, his wife, was just as good a match as
a man could have. She was a plump, trim, tidy little woman, with smooth,
dark hair, dark eyes, and a merry little mouth. The boy was nearly
twelve years old, a tall, frank, good-tempered lad; and little Dorothy
(Dolly they called her) was her mother over again, at eight years old.
They were all wonderfully fond of each other; I never knew such a happy,
merry family before or since. Jerry had a cab of his own, and two
horses, which he drove and attended to himself. His other horse was a
tall, white, rather large-boned animal, called Captain. He was old now,
but when he was young he must have been splendid; he had still a proud
way of holding his head and arching his neck; in fact, he was a
high-bred, fine-mannered, noble old horse, every inch of him. He told me
that in his early youth he went to the Crimean War; he belonged to an
officer in the cavalry, and used to lead the regiment.

The next morning, when I was well-groomed, Polly and Dolly came into the
yard to see me and make friends. Harry had been helping his father since
the early morning, and had stated his opinion that I should turn out "a
regular brick." Polly brought me a slice of apple, and Dolly a piece of
bread, and made as much of me as if I had been the Black Beauty of olden
time. It was a great treat to be petted again and talked to in a gentle
voice, and I let them see as well as I could that I wished to be
friendly. Polly thought I was very handsome, and a great deal too good
for a cab, if it was not for the broken knees.

"Of course there's no one to tell us whose fault that was," said Jerry,
"and as long as I don't know I shall give him the benefit of the doubt;
for a firmer, neater stepper I never rode. We'll call him Jack, after
the old one--shall we, Polly?"

"Do," she said, "for I like to keep a good name going."

[Illustration]

Captain went out in the cab all the morning. Harry came in after school
to feed me and give me water. In the afternoon I was put into the cab.
Jerry took as much pains to see if the collar and bridle fitted
comfortably as if he had been John Manly over again. There was no
check-rein, no curb, nothing but a plain ring snaffle. What a blessing
that was!

After driving through the side-street we came to the large cabstand
where Jerry had said "Good-night." On one side of this wide street were
high houses with wonderful shop fronts, and on the other was an old
church and churchyard, surrounded by iron palisades. Alongside these
iron rails a number of cabs were drawn up, waiting for passengers; bits
of hay were lying about on the ground; some of the men were standing
together talking; some were sitting on their boxes reading the
