melt away before you and we'd merely waste our energies.  Let them look
as much as they please, and now that the boys have eaten their bread
and bacon and drunk their coffee, and are giants again, we'll ride on
toward the Potomac."

"Do we reach it to-day, sir?" asked Colonel Talbot.

"Not before to-morrow afternoon, even if we should not be interrupted.
This is the enemy's country and we may run at any time into a force as
large as our own if not larger."

"Thank you for the information, Colonel Sherburne.  My ignorance of
geography may appear astonishing to you, although we had to study it
very hard at West Point.  But I admit my weakness and I add, as perhaps
some excuse, that I have lately devoted very little attention to the
Northern states.  It did not seem worth my time to spend much study on
the rivers, and creeks and mountains of what is to be a foreign
country--although I may never be able to think of John Carrington and
many other of my old friends in the army as the foreigners they're sure
to become.  Has the thought ever occurred to you, Colonel, that by our
victories we're making a tremendous lot of foreigners in America?"

"It has, Colonel Talbot, but I can't say that the thought has ever been
a particularly happy one."

"It's the Yankees who are being made into foreigners," said
Lieutenant-Colonel St. Hilaire.  "The gallant Southern people, of
course, remain what they are."

"They're going," said Harry.  "They've seen enough of us."

The distant troop disappeared over the crest of the hill.  Harry had
noticed that Shepard led the way as if he were the ruling spirit, but
he did not consider it necessary to say anything to the others about
him. The trumpet blew and Sherburne's force, mounting, rode away from
the cove.  Harry cast one regretful glance back at the splendid fire
which still glowed there, and then resigned himself to the cold and
rain.

They did not stop again until far in the night.  The rain ceased, but
the whole earth was sodden and the trees on the low ridge, on which
Sherburne camped, dripped with water.  Spies might be all around them,
but for the sake of physical comfort and the courage that he knew would
come with it, he ordered another big fire built.  Vigilant riflemen
took turns in beating up the forests and fields for possible enemies,
but the young officers once more enjoyed the luxury of the fire.  Their
clothing was dried thoroughly, and their tough and sinewy frames
recovered all their strength and elasticity.

"To enjoy being dry it is well to have been wet," said Dalton
sententiously.

"That's just like you, you old Presbyterian," said Happy Tom.  "I
suppose you'll argue next that you can't enjoy Heaven unless you've
first burned in the other place for a thousand years."

"There may be something in that," said Dalton gravely, "although the
test, of course, would be an extremely severe one."

"I know which way you're headed, George."

"Then tell me, because I don't know myself."

"As soon as this war is over you'll enter the ministry, and no sin will
get by you, not even those nice little ones that all of us like to
forgive."

"Maybe you're right, Happy, and if I do go into the ministry I shall at
once begin long and earnest preparation for the task which would
necessarily be the most difficult of my life."

"And may I make so bold as to inquire what it is, George?"

"Your conversion, Happy."

Langdon grinned.

"But why do you want to convert me, George?  I'm perfectly happy as I
am."

"For your own well being, Tom.  Your happiness is nothing to me, but I
want to make you good."

Both laughed the easy laugh of youth, but Harry looked long at Dalton.
He thought that he detected in him much of the spirit of Stonewall
Jackson, and that here was one who had in him the makings of a great
minister.  The thought lingered with him.

St. Clair was carefully smoothing out his uniform and brushing from it
the least particle of mud.  His first preoccupation always asserted
itself at the earliest opportunity, and in a very short time he was the
neatest looking man in the entire force.  Harry, although he often
jested with him about it, secretly admired this characteristic of St.
Clair's.

"You boys sleep while you can," said Sherburne, "because we can't
afford to linger in this region.  Our safety lies in rapid marching,
giving the enemy no chance to gather a large force and trap us.  Make
the best of your time because we're up and away an hour after midnight."

The young officers were asleep within ten minutes, but the vigilant
riflemen patrolled the country in a wide circuit about them.  Sherburne
himself, although worn by hard riding, slept but little.  Anxiety kept
his eyes open.  He knew that his task to find a passage for the army
across the swollen Potomac was of the utmost importance and he meant to
achieve it.  He understood to the full the dangerous position in which
the chief army of the Confederacy stood.  His own force might be
attacked at any moment by overwhelming numbers and be cut off and
destroyed or captured, but he also knew the quality of the men he led,
and he believed they were equal to any task.

As he sat by the fire thinking somberly, a figure in the brush no great
distance away was watching him.  Shepard, the spy, in the darkness had
passed with ease between the sentinels, using the skill of an Indian in
stalking or approaching, and now, lying well hidden, almost flat upon
his stomach, he surveyed the camp.  He looked at Sherburne, sitting on
a log and brooding, and he made out Harry's figure wrapped in a blanket
and lying with his feet to the fire.

Shepard's mind was powerfully affected.  An intense patriot, something
remote and solitary in his nature had caused him to undertake this most
dangerous of all trades, to which he brought an intellectual power and
comprehension that few spies possess.  As Harry had discovered long
since, he was a most uncommon man.

Now Shepard as he gazed at this little group felt no hatred for them or
their men.  He had devoted his life to the task of keeping the Union
intact.  His work must be carried out in obscure ways.  He could never
hope for material reward, and if he perished it would be in some
out-of-the-way corner, perhaps at the end of a rope, a man known to so
few that there would be none to forget him.  And yet his patriotism was
so great and of such a fine quality that he viewed his enemies around
the fire as his brethren.  He felt confident that the armies of the
North would bring them back into the Union, and when that occurred they
must come as Americans on an equal footing with other Americans.  They
could not be in the Union and not of it.

But Shepard's feeling for his official enemies would not keep him from
acting against them with all the skill, courage and daring that he
possessed in such supreme measure.  He knew that it was Sherburne's
task to open a way for the Army of Northern Virginia to the Potomac and
to find a ford, or, in cooperation with some other force, to build a
bridge. It was for him to defeat the plan if he could.

While the rain all the day before had brought gloom to the hearts of
Sherburne and his men it had filled his with joy, as he thought of the
innumerable brooks and creeks that were pouring their swollen waters
into the Potomac, already swollen too.  He meant now to follow
Sherburne's force, see what plan it would attempt, what point, perhaps,
it would select for the bridge, and then bring the Union brigades in
haste to defeat it.

It is said that men often feel when they are watched, although the
watcher is invisible, but it was not so in Sherburne's case.  He did
not in the least suspect the presence of Shepard or of any foe, and the
spy, after he had seen all he wished, withdrew, with the same stealth
that had marked his coming.

An hour after midnight all were awakened and they rode away.  The next
day they reached the Potomac near Williamsport, where their pontoon
bridge had been destroyed, and looked upon the wide stream of the
Potomac, far too deep for fording.

"If General Lee is attacked on the banks of this river by greatly
superior forces," said Sherburne, "he'll have no time to build bridges.
If we didn't happen to be victorious our forces would have to scatter
into the mountains, where they could be hunted down, man by man."

"But such a thing as that is unthinkable, sir," said Harry.  "We may
not win always, but here in the East we never lose.  Remember Antietam
and the river at our back."

"Right you are, Harry," said Sherburne more cheerfully.  "The general
will get us out of this, and here is where we must cross.  The river
may run down enough in two or three days to permit of fording.  God
grant that it will!"

"And so say I!" repeated Harry with emphasis.

"I mean to hold this place for our army," continued Sherburne.

"A reserved seat, so to speak."

"Yes, that's it.  We must keep the country cleared until our main force
comes up.  It shouldn't be difficult.  I haven't heard of any
considerable body of Union troops between us and the river."

They made camp rapidly in a strong position, built their fires for
cooking, set their horses to grazing and awaited what would come. It
was a dry, clear night, and Harry, who had no duties, save to ride with
a message at the vital moment, looked at once for his friends, the
Invincibles.

St. Clair met him and held up a warning hand, while Happy touched his
lip with his finger.  Before the double injunction of silence and
caution, Harry whispered:

"What's happened?"

"A tragedy," replied St. Clair.

"And a victory, too," said Happy Tom.

"I don't understand," said Harry.

"Then look and you will," said St. Clair.

He pointed to a small clear space in which Colonel Leonidas Talbot and
Lieutenant-Colonel Hector St. Hilaire sat on their blankets facing each
other with an empty cracker box between them, upon which their chess
men were spread.  The firelight plainly revealed a look of dismay upon
the face of Colonel Talbot, and with equal plainness a triumphant
expression upon that of Lieutenant-Colonel St. Hilaire.

"Colonel Talbot has lost his remaining knight," whispered St. Clair. "I
don't know how it came about, but when the event occurred we heard them
both utter a cry.  Listen!"

"I fail even yet, Hector, to see just how it occurred." said Colonel
Talbot.

"But it has occurred, Leonidas, and that's the main thing.  A general
in battle does not always know how he is whipped, but the whipping
hurts just as much."

"You should not show too much elation over your triumph, Hector.
Remember that he laughs best who laughs last."

"I take my laugh whenever I can, Leonidas, because no one knows who is
going to laugh last.  It may be that he who laughs in the present will
also laugh at the end.  What do you mean by that move, Leonidas?"

"That to you is a mystery, Hector.  It's like one of Stonewall
Jackson's flanking marches, and in due time the secret will be revealed
with terrible results."

"Pshaw, Leonidas, you can't frighten a veteran like me.  That for your
move, and here's mine in reply."

The two gray heads bent lower over the board as the colonels made move
after move.  The youths standing in the shadow of the trees watched
until the second time that night the two uttered a simultaneous cry.
But they were very different in quality.  Now Colonel Talbot's
expressed victory and Lieutenant-Colonel St. Hilaire's consternation.

"Your bishop, Hector!" exclaimed Colonel Talbot.  "Pious and able
gentleman as he is, an honor to his cloth, he is nevertheless my
captive."

"I admit that it was most unexpected, Leonidas.  You have matched my
victory with one of yours.  It was indeed most skillful and I don't yet
see what led to it."

"Did I not warn you a little while ago that you couldn't frighten me? I
prepared a trap for you, and thus I rise from defeat to victory."

"At any rate we are about even on the evening's work, Leonidas, and we
have made more progress than for the whole six months preceding.  It
seems likely now that we can finish our game soon."

A sudden crash of rifle fire toward the east and from a point not
distant told them no.  They rose to their feet, but they put the
chessmen away very deliberately, while the young officers hastened to
their posts. The fire continued and spread about them in a half circle,
accompanied now and then by the deeper note of a light field gun.
Sherburne made his dispositions rapidly.  All the men remained on foot,
but a certain number were told off to hold the horses in the center of
the camp.

"We're attacked by a large force," said Sherburne, "Our scouts gave us
warning in time.  Evidently they wish to drive us away from here
because this will be the ford in case the river falls in time."

"Then you look for a sharp fight?"

"Without question.  And remember that you're to avoid all risk if you
can.  It's not your business to get shot here, but it is your business,
and your highly important business, to ride back to General Lee with
the news of what's happening.  In order to do that it's necessary for
you to remain alive."

"I obey orders," said Harry reluctantly.

"Of course you do.  Keep back with the men who are holding the horses.
That fire is growing fast!  I'm glad we were able to find a camp so
defensible as this hill."

He hurried away to watch his lines and Harry remained at his station
near the horses, where Dalton was compelled by the same responsibility
to stay with him.  It was the first time that Harry had been forced to
remain a mere spectator of a battle raging around him, and while not
one who sought danger for danger's sake, it was hard work to control
himself and remain quiet and unmoved.

"I suspect they're trying to cut us off completely from our own army,"
he said to Dalton.

"Seems likely to me, too," said Dalton.  "Wipe us out here, and hold
the river for themselves.  Our scouts assured us that there was no
large force of the enemy in this region.  It must have been gathered in
great haste."

"In whatever way it was gathered, it's here, that's sure."

There was a good moon now, and, using his glasses, Harry saw many
details of the battle.  The attack was being pressed with great vigor
and courage.  He saw in a valley numerous bodies of cavalry, firing
their carbines, and he saw two batteries, of eight light guns each,
move forward for a better range.  Soon their shells were exploding near
the hill on which Harry stood, and the fire of the rifles, unbroken
now, grew rapidly in volume.

But the men under Sherburne, youthful though most of them might be,
were veterans.  They knew every trick of war, and columns of infantry
swept forward to meet the attack, preceded by the skirmishers, who took
heavy toll of the foe.

"If they'd been able to make it a surprise they might have rushed us,"
said Harry.

"Nobody catches Sherburne sleeping," said Dalton.

"That's true, and because they can't they won't be able to overcome him
here.  Now there go our rifles!  Listen to that crash.  I fancy that
about a thousand were fired together, and they weren't fired for
nothing."

"No," said Dalton, "but the Yankees don't give way.  You can see by
their line of fire that they're still coming.  Look there!  A powerful
body of horse is charging!"

It was unusual to see cavalry attack at night, and the spectacle was
remarkable, as the moonlight fell on the raised sabers.  But the
defiant rebel yell, long and fierce, rose from the thicket, and, as the
rifles crashed, the entire front of the charging column was burned
away, as if by a stroke of lightning.  But after a moment of hesitation
they came on, only to ride deeper into a rifle fire which emptied
saddles so fast that they were at last compelled to turn and gallop
away.

"Brave men," said Harry.  "A gallant charge, but it had to meet too
many Southern rifles, aimed by men who know how to shoot."

"But their infantry are advancing through that wood," said Dalton.
"Hear them cheering above the rifle fire!"

The Northern shout rang through the forest, and the rebel yell, again
full of defiance, replied.  The cavalry had been driven off, but the
infantry and artillery were far from beaten.  The sixteen guns of the
two batteries were massed on a hill and they began to sweep the
Southern lines with a storm of shells and shrapnel.  The forest and the
dark were no protection, because the guns searched every point of the
Southern line with their fire.  Sherburne's men were forced to give
ground, before cannon served with such deadly effect.

"What will the colonel do?" asked Dalton.  "The big guns give the
Yankees the advantage."

"He'll go straight to the heart of the trouble," said Harry.  "He'll
attack the guns themselves."

He did not know actually in what manner Sherburne would proceed, but he
