electric-bell circuit as indicated, for the purpose of giving an
alarm should anybody try to experiment with the secret contacts.
By means of a pocket knife or other metal article the operator can
let himself in at any time by connecting the tacks numbered 1 and
7, while a person not knowing the combination would be liable to
sound the alarm. Of course, the builder of this device may choose
a combination of his own and may thus prevent anybody else from
entering the door, even those who read this description.
--Contributed by Perry A. Borden, Gachville, N. B.

[Illustration: Wiring Diagram]



** How to Tighten a Curtain-Roller Spring [79]

A common table fork can be used to hold the little projection on
the end of a curtain roller for tightening the spring. Hold the
fork firmly with one hand while turning the roller with the other.
Do not let go of the fork until the little catches are set in
position to prevent the spring from turning, or else the fork may
be thrown off with dangerous force.



** Alarm Clock Chicken Feeder [79]

An automatic poultry feeder, which will discharge the necessary
amount of corn or other feed at any desired time, may be made by
using an alarm clock as shown in the sketch. A small wire trigger
rests on the winding key and supports the swinging bottom of the
food hopper by means of a piece of string which connects the two.
When the alarm goes off the trigger drops and allows the door to
open, thus discharging the contents of the hopper.

After the device has been in operation for some time the hens will
run to the feeder whenever the. bell rings.
--Contributed by Dr. H. A. Dobson, Washington, D. C.

[Illustration: Will Open or Close Circuit as Desired]



** Homemade Disk-Record Cabinet [79]

Select some boards that have a nice grain and about 1 in. thick
and 12-in. wide. Cut the end pieces each 36-in. long and trim down
the edges so as to make them 11-3/8 in. wide. The top board is
made 28-in. long and full 12-in. wide. The three shelves are cut
25-in. long and the edges trimmed so they will be 11-3/8 in. wide.
The distance between the bottom of the top board and the top of
the first shelf should be 3 in. Two drawers are fitted in this
space, as shown in Fig. 1. A series of grooves are cut 1/4 in.
wide,

[Illustration: Cabinet Holding 32 Records]

1/4 in. deep and 3/4 in. apart on one side of the top and bottom
shelves, as shown in Fig. 2, and on both sides of the middle
shelf. The shelves should be spaced 9-5/8 in. for 10-in. records
and 5-5/8 in. for 6-in. records. A neat scroll design is cut from
a board 25 in. long to fill up and finish the space below the
bottom shelf.
--Contributed by H. E. Mangold, Compton, Cal.



** A Battery Rheostat [80]

In a board 7 in. long and 5 in. wide bore holes about 1/4 in.
apart, in a semicircle 2 in. from the bottom, and cut notches in
top end to correspond with the holes. From a piece of brass a
switch, C, is cut with a knob soldered on at the end. Nails for
stops are placed at DD. Two binding-posts are placed in board at A
and B. With about 9 ft. of fine iron wire attach one end to the
bottom of post A and run through first hole and over in first
notch to back of board and then through second hole and over
second notch and so on until E is reached, where the other end of
wire is fastened. Connect switch to post B.
--Contributed by Edmund Kuhn, Jr., East Orange, N. J.

[Illustration: Battery Rheostat]



** Automatic Time Switch [80]

This device may be used to either open or close the circuit at any
desired time. An alarm clock is firmly fastened to a wooden
bracket and provided with a small wood or metal drum, A, to which
is fastened a cord, B. The other end of the cord is tied to the
switch handle so that when the alarm goes off the switch is either
opened or closed, depending on whether the cord is passed over
pulley C or pulley D.

When the cord is passed over pulley C, as shown in Fig. 1, the
circuit will be closed when the alarm goes off, but if it is
passed over D the circuit will be opened. Pulley D is fastened to
a piece of spring steel, E, which in operation is bent, as shown
by the dotted lines, thus causing the switch to snap open quickly
and prevent forming an arc.
--Contributed by Douglas Royer, Roanoke, Va.

[Illustration: Will Open or Close Circuit as Desired]



** How to Make a Rotary Pump [81]

[Illustration: Details of Rotary Pump]

A simple rotary pump is constructed on the principle of creating a
vacuum in a rubber tube and so causing water to rise to fill the
vacuum. Figs. 3, 4 and 5 show all the parts needed, excepting the
crank and tubing. The dimensions and description given are for a
minimum pump, but a larger one could be built in proportion.

Through the center of a block of wood 4 in. square and 7/8 in.
thick (A, Figs. 1, 2 and 3) saw a circular opening 2-7/8 in. in
diameter. On each side of this block cut a larger circle 3-1/4 in.
in diameter, having the same center as the first circle (Fig. 3).
Cut the last circles only 1/4 in. deep, leaving the first circle
in the form of a ridge or track 3/8 in. wide, against which the
rubber tubing, E, is compressed by wheels. Bore two 1/4 in. holes
(HH, Fig. 1) from the outside of the block to the edge of the
inner circle. Put the rubber tube, E, through one of these holes,
pass it around the track and out through the other hole. Notice
the break (S) in the track; this is necessary in order to place in
position the piece holding the wheels.

Fig. 4 shows the wheel-holder, B. Make it of hard wood 3-1/8 in.
long, 1 in. wide and a little less than 7/8 in. thick, so that it
will run freely between the sides (Fig. 5) when they are placed.
Cut two grooves, one in each end, 1 in. deep and 1/2 in. wide. In
these grooves place wheels, CC, to turn on pins of stout wire.
These wheels should be 3/4 in. in diameter. When placed in the
holder their centers must be exactly 2 in. apart, or so arranged
that the distance between the edge of the wheels and the track (K,
Fig. 1) is equal to the thickness of the tubing when pressed flat.
If the wheels fit too tightly, they will bind; it too loose, they
will let the air through. Bore a hole through the middle of the
wheel-holder and insert the crankpin, D, which should be about 1/2
in. in diameter. The crankpin should fit tightly; if necessary
drive a brad through to keep it from slipping.

In the sides (Fig. 5) bore a hole in the center of the crankpin to
run in loosely. Now put all these parts together, as shown in the
illustration. Do not fasten the sides too securely until you have
tried the device and are sure it will run smoothly. For the crank
a bent piece of stout wire or a nail will serve, though a small
iron wheel is better, as it gives steadiness to the motion. In
this case a handle must be attached to the rim of the wheel to
serve as a crank. The drive wheel from a broken-down eggbeater
will do nicely. For ease in handling the pump, a platform should
be added.

To use the pump, fill the tube with water and place the lower end
of the tube in a reservoir of water. Make a nozzle of the end of a
clay pipe stem for the other end of the tube. Then turn the crank
from left to right. The first wheel presses the air out of the
tube, creating a vacuum which is immediately filled with water.
Before the first wheel releases the tube at the top, the other
wheel has reached the bottom, this time pressing along the water
that was brought up by the first wheel. If the motion of the
wheels is regular, the pump will give a steady stream. Two feet of
1/4-in. tubing, costing 10 cents, is all the expense necessary.
--Contributed by Dan H. Hubbard, Idana, Kan.



** How to Make a Fire Screen [82]

[Illustration: FIG.2  Made of Strap Iron]

A screen which will not interfere with the radiation of the heat
from the fire, and will keep skirts and children safe can be made
at little expense out of some strap iron. The screen which is
shown in Fig. 1, stands 20 in. high from the base to the top
crosspiece and is made of 3/4 by 1/4-in. and 1/2 by 1/4-in. iron.
The top and bottom pieces marked AA, Fig. 1, are 3/4 by 1/4 in.
and are 30 in. long, bent at an angle to fit the fireplace 7 in.
from each end, as shown in Fig. 2. The three legs marked BBB, Fig.
1, are of the same size iron and each leg will take 34 in. of
material. In shaping the feet of these three pieces give them a
slight tendency to lean toward the fire or inside of screen, says
a correspondent in the Blacksmith and Wheelwright. In the two
cross bars 1 in. from each end, A in Fig. 2, mark for hole and 3
in. from that mark the next hole. Take the center of the bar, B,
15 in. from each end, and mark for a hole, and 3-1/2 in. on each
side mark again and 3-1/2 in. beyond each of these two, mark
again.

Mark the legs 2-3/4 in. from the bottom and 2 in. from the top and
after making rivet-holes rivet them to the cross bars, AA, Fig. 1.

Cut six pieces, 17-1/2 in. long and punch holes to fit and rivet
onto the remaining holes in cross bars, AA, Fig. 1. Clean it up
and give it a coat of black Japan or dead black.



** Trap for Small Animals [82]

This is a box trap with glass sides and back, the panes of glass
being held in place by brads placed on both sides. The animal does
not fear to enter the box, because he can see through it: when he
enters, however, and touches the bait the lid is released and,
dropping, shuts him in. This is one of the easiest traps to build
and is usually successful.

[Illustration: Trap]



** Homemade Grenet Battery [83]

Procure an ordinary carbon-zinc, sal-ammoniac battery and remove
the zinc rod. If the battery has been used before, it is better to
soak the carbon cylinder for a few hours to remove any remaining
crystals of sal-ammoniac from its pores.

The truncated, conical zinc required is known as a fuller's zinc
and can be bought at any electrical supply dealer's, or, it may be
cast in a sand mold from scrap zinc or the worn-out zinc rods from
sal-ammoniac batteries. It should be cast on the end of a piece of
No. 14 copper wire. Amalgamation is not necessary for the zinc one
buys, but if one casts his own zinc, it is necessary to amalgamate
it or coat it with mercury. This may be done as follows:

Dip a piece of rag in a diluted solution of sulphuric acid (water
16 parts, acid 1 part); rub the zinc well, at the same time
allowing a few drops of mercury to fall on a spot attacked by the
acid. The mercury will adhere, and if the rubbing is continued so
as to spread the mercury, it will cover the entire surface of the
zinc, giving it a bright, silvery appearance.

Next procure what is known as a wire connector. This is a piece of
copper tube about 1-1/2 in. long having two thumb screws, one on
each end on opposite sides (Fig. 2). The upper screw is to connect
the battery wire, the lower one to raise and lower the zinc. The
battery is now complete, and the solution (Fig. 1) must be
prepared. Proceed as follows:

In 32 oz. of water dissolve 4 oz. potassium bichromate. When the
bichromate has all dissolved, add slowly, stirring constantly, 4
oz. sulphuric acid. Do not add the acid too quickly or the heat
generated may break the vessel containing the solution. Then pour
the solution into the battery jar, until it is within 3 in. of the
top. Thread the wire holding the zinc through the porcelain
insulator of the carbon cylinder and also through the wire
connector. Pull the zinc up as far as it will go and tighten the
lower thumb screw so that it holds the wire secure. Place the
carbon in the jar. If the solution touches the zinc, some of it
should be poured out. To determine whether or not the zinc is
touched by the solution, take out the carbon and lower the zinc.
If it is wet, there is too much liquid in the jar. The battery is
now ready for use.

To cause a flow of electricity, lower the zinc until it almost
touches the bottom of the jar and connect an electric bell or
other electrical apparatus by means of wires to the two binding
posts.

This battery when first set up gives a current of about two volts.
It is useful for running induction coils, or small electric
motors. When through using the battery, raise the zinc and tighten
the lower thumb screw. This prevents the zinc wasting away when no
current is being used.
--Contributed by H. C. Meyer, Philadelphia.

[Illustration: Fig.1 Details of Homemade Battery]



** Door-Opener for Furnace [83]

The accompanying diagram shows an arrangement to open the coal
door of a furnace. When approaching the furnace with a shovelful
of coal it is usually necessary to rest the shovel on the top of
the ash door, while the coal door is being opened. With my device
it is only necessary to press the foot pedal, which opens the
door. After putting in the coal, pressing the pedal closes the
door. The pulley in the ceiling must be placed a little in front
of the door, in order to throw the door open after lifting it from
the catch. A large gate hinge is used to hold the pedal to the
floor.
--Contributed by Edward Whitney, Madison, Wis.

[Illustration: Furnace Door Opener]



** How to Make an Efficient Wireless Telegraph [84]
By GEORGE W. RICHARDSON

A simple but very efficient wireless telegraph may be constructed
at slight cost from the following description:

The sending apparatus consists of nothing but an induction coil
with a telegraph key inserted in the primary circuit, i. e., the
battery circuit. This apparatus may be purchased from any
electrical-supply house. The price of the coil depends upon its
size, and upon the size depends the distance signals can be
transmitted. If, however, one wishes to construct his own coil he
can make and use, with slight changes, the jump-spark coil
described elsewhere in this book. This coil, being a 1-in. coil,
will transmit nicely up to a distance of one mile; while a 12-in.
coil made on the same plan will transmit 20 miles or even more
under favorable conditions.

Change the coil described, as follows: Insert an ordinary
telegraph key in the battery circuit, and attach two small pieces
of wire with a brass ball on each, by inserting them in the
binding-posts of the coil as shown at B B". Of these two terminal
wires one is grounded to earth, while the other wire is sent aloft
and is called the aerial line. This constitutes all there is to
the sending apparatus.

Now for the receiving apparatus. In the earlier receiving
instruments a coherer was used, consisting of a glass tube about
1/8-in. diameter, in which were two silver pistons separated by
nickel and silver filings, in a partial vacuum. This receiver was
difficult of adjustment and slow in transmission. An instrument
much less complicated and inexpensive and which will work well can
be made thus:

Take a 5-cp. incandescent lamp and break off the tip at the dotted
line, as shown in Fig. 5. This can be done by giving the glass tip
or point a quick blow with a file or other thin edged piece of
metal. Then with a blow-torch heat the broken edges until red hot
and turn the edges in as seen in Fig. 6. Remove the carbon
filament in the lamp and bend the two small platinum wires so they
will point at each other as in Fig. 6, W W. Screw the lamp into an
ordinary wall socket which will serve as a base as in Fig. 7. Make
a solution of 1 part sulphuric acid to 4 parts of water, and fill
the lamp about two-thirds full (Fig. 7). This will make an
excellent receiver. It will be necessary to adjust the platinum
points, W W, to suit the distance the message is to be worked. For
a mile or less the points should be about 1/16 in. apart, and
closer for longer distances.

The tuning coil is simply a variable choking coil, made of No. 14
insulated copper wire wound on an iron core, as shown in Fig. 7.
After winding, carefully scrape the insulation from one side of
the coil, in a straight line from top to bottom, the full length
of the coil, uncovering just enough to allow a

[Illustration: Aerial]

good contact for the sliding piece. The tuning is done by sliding
the contact piece, which is made of light copper wire, along the
convolutions of the tuning coil until you can hear the signals.
The signals are heard in a telephone receiver, which is shown
connected in shunt across the binding posts of the lamp holder
with one or two cells of dry battery in circuit, Fig. 7.

[Illustration: Details]

The aerial line, No.6 stranded, is run from binding-post B through
the choking or tuning coil, and for best results should extend up
50 ft. in the air. To work a 20-mile distance the line should be
100 or 150 ft. above the ground. A good way is to erect a wooden
pole on a house or barn and carry the aerial wire to the top and
out to the end of a gaff or arm.

To the end of the aerial wire fasten a bunch of endless loops made
of about No. 14 magnet wire (bare or insulated), attaching both
ends to the leading or aerial wire. The aerial wire should not
come nearer than 1 ft. at any point to any metal which is
grounded.

Run a wire from the other binding post, A, to the ground and be
sure to make a good ground connection.

For simple experimental work on distances of 100 ft. only, an
ordinary automobile spark coil can be used in place of the more
elaborate coil, Figs. 1 to 4.

The above-mentioned instruments have no patents on them, and
anyone is at liberty to build and use them. The writer does not
claim to be the originator, but simply illustrates the above to
show that, after all, wireless is very simple when it is once
understood. The fundamental principles are that induction travels
at right angles, 90 degrees, to the direction of the current. For
an illustration, if a person standing on a bridge should drop a
pebble into the water below, after contact he would note circles
radiating out over the surface of the water. These circles, being
at right angles, 90 degrees, to the direction of the force that
caused the circles, are analogous to the flow of induction, and
hence the aerial line, being vertical, transmits signals
horizontally over the earth's surface.



** Beeswax for Wood Filler [85]

When filling nail holes in yellow pine use beeswax instead of
putty, as it matches the color well.



** How to Make a Lathe [86]

A small speed-lathe, suitable for turning wood or small metal
articles, may be easily made at very little expense. A lathe of
this kind is shown in the cut (Fig. 1), where A is the headstock,
B the bed and C the tailstock. I run my lathe by power, using an
electric motor and countershaft, but it could be run by foot power
if desired. A large cone pulley would then be required, but this
may be made in the same manner as the small one, which will be
described later.

[Illustration: Assembled Lathe Bed and Bearing Details]

The bed of the machine is made of wood as shown in Figs. 2 and 3,
hardwood being preferable for this purpose. Fig. 2 shows an end
view of the assembled bed, and Fig. 3 shows how the ends are cut
out to receive the side pieces.

The headstock, Fig. 6, is fastened to the bed by means of carriage
bolts, A, which pass through a piece of wood, B, on the under side
of the bed. The shaft is made of 3/4-in. steel tubing about 1/8
in. thick, and runs in babbitt bearings, one of which is shown in
Fig. 5.

To make these bearings, cut a square hole in the wood as shown,
making half of the square in each half of the bearing. Separate
the two halves of the bearing slightly by placing a piece of
cardboard on each side, just touching the shaft. The edges which
touch the shaft should be notched like the teeth of a saw, so as
to allow the babbitt to run into the lower half of the bearing.
The notches for this purpose may be about 1/8 in. pitch and 1/8
in. deep. Place pieces of wood against the ends of the bearing as
shown at A and B, Fig. 4, and drill a hole in the top of the
bearing as shown in Fig. 4.

The bearing is then ready to be poured. Heat the babbitt well, but
not hot enough to burn it, and it is well to have the shaft hot,
too, so that the babbitt will not be chilled when it strikes the
shaft. If the shaft is thoroughly chalked or smoked the babbitt
will not stick to it. After pouring, remove the shaft and split
the bearing with a round, tapered wooden pin. If the bearing has
been properly made, it will split along the line of the notched
cardboard where the section of the metal is smallest. Then drill a
hole in the top as shown at A, Fig. 5, drilling just deep enough
to have the point of the drill appear at the lower side. This
cavity acts as an oil cup and prevents the bearing from running
dry.

The bolts B (Fig. 5) are passed through holes in the wood and
screwed into nuts C, which are let into holes

[Illustration: FIG. 6 Headstock Details]

D, the holes afterward being filled with melted lead.

This type of bearing will be found very satisfactory and may be
used to advantage on other machines. After the bearings are
completed the cone pulley can be placed on the shaft. To make this
pulley cut three circular pieces of wood to the dimensions given
in Fig. 6 and fasten these together with nails and glue. If not
perfectly true, they may be turned up after assembling, by rigging
up a temporary toolrest in front of the headstock.

The tail stock (Fig. 7) is fastened to the bed in the same manner
as the headstock, except that thumb nuts are used on the carriage
bolts, thus allowing the tail stock to be shifted when necessary.
The mechanism of the center holder is obtained by using a 1/2-in.

[Illustration: FIG.7 Details of Tailstock]

pipe, A, and a 1/2-in. lock nut, B, embedded in the wood. I found
that a wooden tool-rest was not satisfactory, so I had to buy one,
but they are inexpensive and much handier than homemade tool rest.
--Contributed by Donald Reeves, Oak Park, Ill.



** To Use Old Battery Zincs [87]

When the lower half of a battery zinc becomes eaten away the
remaining part can be used again by suspending it from a wire as
shown in the cut. Be sure and have a good connection at the zinc
binding post and cover that with melted paraffin. This prevents
corrosion, which would otherwise occur from the action of the sal
ammoniac or other chemical. The wire may be held at the top by
twisting it around a piece

[Illustration: Showing Zinc Suspended]

of wood or by driving a peg through the hole in the porcelain
insulator.
--Contributed by Louis Lauderbach, Newark, N.J.



** Callers' Approach Alarm [87]

This alarm rings so that callers approaching the door may be seen
before they ring the bell and one can exercise his pleasure about
admitting them.

If one has a wooden walk, the alarm is easy to fix up. Take up
about 5 ft. of the walk and nail it together so as to make a
trapdoor that will work easily. Place a small spring under one end
to hold it up about 1/4 in. (A, Fig. 2). Nail a strip of tin along
the under side of the trap near the spring and fasten another
strip on the baseboard, so that they will not touch, save when a
weight is on the trap. Connect up an electric bell, putting the
batteries and bell anywhere desired, and using rubber-covered

[Illustration: Alarm Rings When Caller Approaches]

wire outside the house, and the alarm is complete.

When a person approaching the house steps on the trap, the bell
will ring and those in the house can see who it is before the door
bell rings.
--Contributed by R. S. Jackson, Minneapolis, Minn.



** Easy Method of Electroplating [88]

Before proceeding to electroplate with copper, silver or other
metal, clean the articles thoroughly, as the least spot of grease
or dirt will prevent

[Illustration: Electroplating Apparatus]

the deposit from adhering. Then polish the articles and rub them
over with a cloth and fine pumice powder, to roughen the surface
slightly. Finally, to remove all traces of grease, dip the
articles to be plated in a boiling potash solution made by
dissolving 4 oz. American ash in 1-1/2 pt. of water. Do not touch
the work with the hands again. To avoid touching it, hang the
articles on the wires, by which they are to be suspended in the
plating bath, before dipping them in the potash solution; then
hold them by the wires under running water for ten minutes to
completely remove every trace of the potash.

For plating with copper prepare the following solution: 4 oz.
copper sulphate dissolved in 12 oz. water; add strong ammonia
solution until no more green crystals are precipitated. Then add
more ammonia and stir until the green crystals are re-dissolved
giving an intense blue solution. Add slowly a strong solution of
potassium cyanide until the blue color disappears, leaving a clear
solution; add potassium cyanide again, about one-fourth as much in
bulk as used in the decolorizing process. Then make the solution
up to 2 qt. with water. With an electric pressure of 3.5 to 4
volts, this will give an even deposit of copper on the article
being plated.

A solution for silver plating may be prepared as follows: Dissolve
3/4 oz. of commercial silver nitrate in 8 oz. of water, and slowly
add a strong solution of potassium cyanide until no more white
precipitate is thrown down. Then pour the liquid off and wash the
precipitate carefully. This is best done by filling the bottle
with water, shaking, allowing precipitate to settle and then
pouring off the water. Repeat six times. Having finished washing
the precipitate, slowly add to it a solution of potassium cyanide
until all the precipitate is dissolved. Then add an excess of
potassium cyanide--about as much as was used in dissolving the
precipitate--and make the solution up to 1 qt. with water. This
solution, with an electric pressure of 2 to 4 volts, will give a
good white coat of silver in twenty minutes to half-an-hour; use 2
volts for large articles, and 4 volts for very small ones. If more
solution is required, it is only necessary to double all given
quantities.

Before silver plating, such metals as iron, lead, pewter, zinc,
must be coated with copper in the alkaline copper bath described,
and then treated as copper. On brass, copper, German silver,
nickel and such metals, silver can be plated direct. The deposit
of silver will be dull and must be polished. The best method is to
use a revolving scratch brush; if one does not possess a buffing
machine, a hand scratch brush is good. Take quick, light strokes.
Polish the articles finally with ordinary plate powder.

The sketch shows how to suspend the articles in the plating-bath.
If accumulators are used, which is advised, be sure to connect the
positive (or red) terminal to the piece of silver hanging in the
bath, and the negative (or black) terminal to the article to be
plated. Where Bunsen cells are used, the carbon terminal takes the
place of the positive terminal of the accumulator. --Model
Engineer.



** An Ingenious Electric Lock for a Sliding Door [89]

The apparatus shown in Fig. 1 not only unlocks, but opens the
door, also, by simply pressing the key in the keyhole.

In rigging it to a sliding door, the materials required are: Three
flat pulleys, an old electric bell or buzzer, about 25 ft. of
clothesline rope and some No. 18 wire. The wooden catch, A (Fig.
1), must be about 1 in. thick

[Illustration: Electric Lock for Sliding Door]

and 8 in. long; B should be of the same wood, 10 in. long, with
the pivot 2 in. from the lower end. The wooden block C, which is
held by catch B, Can be made of a 2-in. piece of broomstick. Drill
a hole through the center of this block for the rope to pass
through, and fasten it to the rope with a little tire tape.

When all this is set up, as shown in Fig. 1, make a key and
keyhole. A 1/4 in. bolt or a large nail sharpened to a point, as
at F, Fig. 3, will serve for the key. To provide the keyhole, saw
a piece of wood, I, 1 in. thick by 3 in. square, and bore a hole
to fit the key in the center. Make a somewhat larger block (E,
Fig. 3) of thin wood with a 1/8-in. hole in its center. On one
side of this block tack a piece of tin (K, Fig. 3) directly over
the hole. Screw the two blocks together, being careful to bring
the holes opposite each other. Then, when the point of the key
touches the tin, and the larger part (F, Fig. 3) strikes the bent
wire L, a circuit is completed; the buzzer knocks catch A (Fig.
1), which rises at the opposite end and allows catch B to fly
forward and release the piece of broom-stick C. The weight D then
falls and jerks up the hook-lock M, which unlocks the door, and
the heavier weight N immediately opens it.

Thus, with a switch as in Fig. 3, the door can only be opened by
the person who has the key, for the circuit cannot be closed with
an ordinary nail or wire. B, Fig. 2, shows catch B, Fig. 1,
enlarged; 0, Fig. 2, is the cut through which the rope runs; H,
Fig. 1, is an elastic that snaps the catch back into place, and at
G the wires run outside to the keyhole.

This arrangement is very convenient when one is carrying something
in one hand and can only use the other. Closing the door winds up
the apparatus again.
--Contributed by E. H. Klipstein, 116 Prospect St., East Orange,
New Jersey.



** Parlor Magic for Winter Evenings [90]
By C. H. CLAUDY

You are seated in a parlor at night, with the lights turned low.
In front of you, between the parlor and the room back of it, is an
upright square of brightly burning lights, surrounding a perfectly
black space. The magician stands in front of this, in his shirt
sleeves, and after a few words of introduction proceeds to show
the wonders of his magic cave.

Showing you plainly that both hands are empty, he points with one
finger to the box, where immediately appears a small white china
bowl. Holding his empty hand over this bowl, some oranges and
apples drop from his empty hand into the bowl. He removes the bowl
from the black box, or cave, and hands its contents round to the
audience. Receiving the bowl again, he tosses it into the cave,
but it never reaches the floor--it disappears in midair.

The illusions he shows you are too many to retail at length.
Objects appear and disappear. Heavy metal objects, such as forks,
spoons and jackknives, which have been shown to the audience and
which can have no strings attached to them, fly about in the box
at the will of the operator. One thing changes to another and back
again, and black art reigns supreme.

Now all this "magic" is very simple and requires no more skill to
prepare or execute than any clever boy or girl of fourteen may
possess. It is based on the performance of the famous Hermann, and
relies on a principle of optics for its success. To prepare such a
magic cave, the requisites are a large soap box, a few simple
tools, some black paint, some black cloth, and plenty of candles.

The box must be altered first. One end is removed, and a slit,
one-third of the length from the remaining end, cut in one side.
This slit should be as long as the width of the box and about five
inches wide. On either side of the box, half way from open end to
closed end, should be cut a hole, just large enough to comfortably
admit a hand and arm.

Next, the box should be painted black both inside and out, and
finally lined inside with black cloth. This lining must be done
neatly-no folds must show and no heads of tacks. The interior must
be a dead black. The box is painted black first so that the cloth
used need not be very heavy; but if the cloth be sufficiently
thick, no painting inside is required. The whole inside is to be
cloth-lined, floor, top, sides and end.

[Illustration: Candle stand]

Next, the illumination in front must be arranged. If you can have
a plumber make you a square frame of gas-piping, with tiny holes
all along it for the gas to escape and be lit, and connect this by
means of a rubber tube to the gas in the house, so much the
better; but a plentiful supply of short candles will do just as
well, although a little more trouble. The candles must be close
together and arranged on little brackets around the whole front of
the "cave" (see small cut), and should have little pieces of
bright tin behind them, to throw the light toward the audience.
The whole function of these candles is to dazzle the eyes of the
spectators, heighten the illusion, and prevent them seeing very
far into the black box.

Finally, you must have an assistant, who must be provided with
either black gloves or black bags to go over his hands and arms,
and several black drop curtains, attached to sticks greater in
length than the width of the box, which are let down through the
slit in the top.

The audience room should have only low lights; the room where the
cave is should be dark, and if you can drape portieres between two
rooms around the box (which, of course, is on a table) so much the
better.

The whole secret of the trick lies in the fact that if light be
turned away from anything black, into the eyes of him who looks,
the much fainter light reflected from the black surface will not
affect the observer's eye. Consequently, if, when the exhibitor
puts his hand in the cave, his confederate behind inserts his
hand, covered with a black glove and holding a small bag of black
cloth, in which are oranges and apples, and pours them from the
bag into a dish, the audience sees the oranges and apples appear,
but does not see the black arm and bag against the black
background.

The dish appears by having been placed in position behind a black
curtain, which is snatched swiftly away at the proper moment by
the assistant. Any article thrown into the cave and caught by the
black hand and concealed by a black cloth seems to disappear. Any
object not too large can be made to "levitate" by the same means.
A picture of anyone present may be made to change into a grinning
skeleton by suddenly screening it with a dropped curtain, while
another curtain is swiftly removed from over a pasteboard
skeleton, which can be made to dance either by strings, or by the
black veiled hand holding on to it from behind, and the skeleton
can change to a white cat.

But illusions suggest themselves. There is no end to the effects
which can be had from this simple apparatus, and if the operators
are sufficiently well drilled the result is truly remarkable to
the uninitiated. The illusion, as presented by Hermann, was
identical with this, only he, of course, had a big stage, and
people clothed in black to creep about and do his bidding, while
here the power behind the throne is but a black-veiled hand and
arm. It can be made even more complicated by having two
assistants, one on each side of the box, and this is the reason
why it was advised that two holes be cut. This enables an
absolutely instantaneous change as one uncovers the object at the
moment the second assistant covers and removes the other.

[Illustration: The Magic Cave]

It is important that the assistants remain invisible throughout,
and if portieres are impossible, a screen must be used. But any
boy ingenious enough to follow these simple instructions will not
need to be told that the whole success of the exhibition depends
upon the absolute failure of the audience to understand that there
is more than one concerned in bringing about the curious effects
which are seen. The exhibitor should be a boy who can talk; a good
"patter"--as the magicians call it--is often of more value than a
whole host of mechanical effects and helpers. It is essential that
the exhibitor and his confederate be well drilled, so that the
latter can produce the proper effects at the proper cue from the
former. Finally, never give an exhibition with the "cave" until
you have watched the illusions from the front yourself; so that
you can determine whether everything connected with the draping is
right, or whether some stray bit of light reveals what you wish to
conceal.



** Reversing-Switch for Electrical Experiments [92]

A homemade reversing-switch, suitable for use by students of
electrical and engineering courses in performing experiments, is
shown in the diagram.

[Illustration: FIG.2  Suitable for Students' Use]

Referring to Fig. 1, A represents a pine board 4 in. by 4 in. and
a is a circular piece of wood about 1/4 in. square, with three
brass strips, b1, b2, b3, held down on it by two terminals, or
binding posts, c1, c2, and a common screw, d. Post c1 is connected
to d by means of an insulated wire, making them carry the same
kind of current (+ in the sketch).

About the center piece H moves a disk, held down by another disk F
(Fig. 2), which is fastened through the center piece to the wooden
base, A, by means of two wood screws. On the disk G are two brass
strips, e1 and e2, so arranged that, when handle K is turned to
one side, their one end just slips under the strips b1, b2, or b2,
b3, respectively, making contact with them, as shown in Fig. 2, at
L, while their other ends slide in two half-circular brass plates
f1, f2, held down on disk F by two other terminals, c3, c4, making
contact with them as shown at y, Fig. 2.

The action of the switch is shown in Fig. 1. Connect terminal c1
to the carbon of a battery, and c2 to the zinc. Then, if you turn
handle K to the right, so that the strips e1 and e2 touch b1 and
b2, respectively, terminal c3 will show +, and c1 -- electricity;
vice versa, if you turn the handle to the left so that e1 and e2
touch b2 and b3, respectively, terminal c3 will show - , and c4 +
electricity.

The switch is easy to make and of very neat appearance.



** How to Receive Wireless Telegraph Messages with a Telephone
[92]

Any telephone having carbon in the transmitter (all ordinary
telephones have carbon transmitters) can be used to receive
wireless messages by simply making a few changes in the
connections and providing a suitable antenna. Connect the
transmitter and receiver in series with three dry cells and run
one wire from the transmitter to the antenna. Connect the other
transmitter wire to a water or gas pipe in order to ground it, and
then hold the receiver to your ear. Any wireless telegraph message
within a radius of one mile will cause the transmitter to act as a
coherer, thus making the message audible in the receiver.

By using an ordinary telephone transmitter and receiver and a
1/2-in. jump spark coil, a complete wireless telegraph station may
be made, which will send or receive messages for a radius of one
mile. The accompanying wiring diagram shows how to make the
connections. By putting in an extra switch three of the sending
batteries may be switched in when receiving,

[Illustration: Wiring Diagram for Wireless Telegraph]

thus obviating the necessity of an extra set of batteries.
--Contributed by A. E. Joerin.



** Connecting Up Batteries to Give Any Voltage [93]

Referring to the illustration: A is a five-point switch (may be
homemade) ; B is a one-point switch, and C and C1 are binding
posts. When switch B is closed and A is on No. 1,

[Illustration: Battery Switch]

you have the current of one battery; when A is on No. 2 you
receive the current from two batteries; when on No. 3, from three
batteries; when on No. 4, from four batteries, and when on No. 5,
from five batteries. More batteries may be connected to each point
of switch B.

I have been using the same method for my water rheostat
(homemade). I have the jars of water where the batteries are and
the current coming in at a and b.
--Contributed by Eugene F. Tuttle, Jr., Newark, Ohio.



** A Simple Accelerometer [93]

[Illustration: Accelerometer]

A simple accelerometer for indicating the increase in speed of a
train was described by Mr. A. P. Trotter in a paper read before
the Junior Institution of Engineers of Great Britain. The device
consists of an ordinary 2-ft. rule, A, with a piece of thread tied
to the 22-in. mark, as shown in the sketch, and supporting the
small weight, B, which may be a button or other small object.

The device thus arranged, and placed on the windowsill of the car,
will indicate the acceleration and retardation as follows: Every
1/2 in. traveled by the thread, over the bent portion of the rule,
indicates an increase of or decrease of velocity to the extent of
1 ft. per second for each second. Thus, it the thread moved 2-1/4
in. in a direction opposite to the movement of the train, then the
train would be increasing its speed at the rate of 4-1/2 ft. per
second.

If the thread is tied at the 17-in. mark, then each half inch will
represent the mile per hour increase for each second. Thus if the
thread moves 1 in., it shows that the train is gaining 2 miles an
hour each second.



** An Egg-Shell Funnel [93]

Bottles having small necks are hard to fill without spilling the
liquid. A funnel cannot be used in a small opening, and pouring
with a graduate glass requires a steady hand. When you do not have
a graduate at hand, a half egg-shell with a small hole pricked in
the end will serve better than a funnel. Place the shell in an
oven to brown the surface slightly and it will be less brittle and
last much longer.
--Contributed by Maurice Baudier, New Orleans, La.



** Handy Electric Alarm [94]

An electric alarm which one may turn off from the bed without
arising combined with a light which may be turned on and off from
a lying position, so one can see the time, is the device of H. E.
Redmond, of Burlington, Wis. The alarm clock rests on a shelf, A,

[Illustration: Handy Electric Alarm]

which has a piece of metal, B, fastened in such a position that
the metal rod C, soldered to the alarm winder, will complete the
circuit and ring the bell. The two-point switch D is closed
normally at E, but may be closed at F any time desired, thus
turning on the small incandescent light G, which illuminates the
face of the clock. When the alarm goes off, the bell will continue
to ring until the switch is opened.



** To Keep Dogs and Cats Away from the Garbage-Can [94]

Last summer I was annoyed a great deal by dogs upsetting our
garbage can on the lawn, but finally executed a plan that rid the
yard of them in one afternoon.

I first secured a magneto out of an old telephone, then drove a
spike in a damp place under the porch, attached a wire to the
spike and ran the wire to one of the poles of the magneto. Then I
set the garbage-can on some blocks of wood, being careful not to
have it touch the ground at any point. I next ran a wire from the
other pole of the

[Illustration: Wiring]

magneto to the can, wrapping the wire around the can several
times. Then I sat down on the porch to wait.

It was not long before a big greyhound came along, putting his
forepaws on the top of the can to upset it. At the same instant I
gave the magneto a quick turn, which sent the dog away a very
surprised animal. This was repeated several times during the
afternoon with other dogs, and with the same result. --Contributed
by Gordon T. Lane, Crafton, Pa.



** How to Cross a Stream on a Log [94]

When crossing a water course on a fence rail or small log, do not
face up or down the stream and walk sideways, for a wetting is the
inevitable result. Instead, fix the eye on the opposite shore and
walk steadily forward. Then if a mishap comes, you will fall with
one leg and arm encircling the bridge. --C. C. S.



** Relay Made from Electric Bell [94]

It is not necessary to remove the adjusting-screw when changing an
electric bell into a relay. Simply twist it around as at A and
bend the circuit-breaking contact back as shown. It may be
necessary to remove the head of the screw, A, to prevent
short-circuiting with the armature.
--Contributed by A. L. Macey, New York City.

[Illustration: Relay]



** Foundry Work at Home [95]



** I The Equipment [95]

Many amateur mechanics who require small metal castings in their
work would like to make their own castings. This can easily be
done at home without going to any great expense, and the variety
and usefulness of the articles produced will make the equipment a
good investment.

With the easily made devices about to be described, the young
mechanic can make his own telegraph keys and sounders, battery
zincs, binding posts, engines, cannons, bearings, small machinery
parts, models and miniature objects, ornaments of various kinds,
and duplicates of all these, and many other interesting and useful
articles.

The first thing to make is a molding bench, as shown in Fig. 1. It
is possible to make molds without a bench, but it is a mistake to
try to do this, as the sand is sure to get on the floor, whence it
is soon tracked into the house. The bench will also make the
operation of molding much easier and will prove to be a great
convenience.

The bench should be made of lumber about 1 in. thick and should be
constructed in the form of a trough, as shown. Two cleats, AA,
should be nailed to the front and back to support the
cross-boards, BE, which in turn support the mold while it is being
made. The object of using the cleats and removable cross-boards
instead of a stationary shelf is to give access to the sand, C,
when it is being prepared.

About one or two cubic feet of fine molding-sand will be required,
which may, be purchased at the nearest foundry for a small sum.
Yellow sand will be found a little better for the amateur's work
than the black sand generally used in most foundries, but if no
yellow sand can be obtained the black kind will do. If there is no
foundry

[Illustration: Fig. 1 - Convenient Arrangement of Bench and Tools]

near at hand, try using sand from other sources, giving preference
to the finest sand and that which clings together in a cake when
