they are of no special interest.  But after the meeting was over,
groups of members discussed matters which had come up during the
evening.  Fletcher approached Oscar Vincent, and said, "I can't see,
Oscar, why you are trying to get that printer's devil into our
Society."

"Because he's a good fellow, and smart enough to do us credit."

"If there were any bootblacks in Centreville I suppose you'd be
proposing them?" said Fletcher with a sneer.

"I might, if they were as smart as my friend Walton."

"You are not very particular about your friends," said Fletcher in
the same tone.

"I don't ask them to open their pocket-books, and show me how much
money they have."

"I prefer to associate with gentlemen."

"So do I."

"Yet you associate with that printer's devil."

"I consider him a gentleman."

Fletcher laughed scornfully.

"You have strange ideas of a gentleman," he said.

"I hold the same," said James Hooper, who had come up in time to hear
the last portion of the conversation.  "I don't think a full purse is
the only or the chief qualification of a gentleman.  If labor is to
be a disqualification, then I must resign all claims to be considered
a gentleman, as I worked on a farm for two years before coming to
school, and in that way earned the money to pay my expenses here."

Fletcher turned up his nose, but did not reply.

Hooper was a good scholar and influential in the Society, but in
Fletcher's eyes he was unworthy of consideration.

"Look here, Fletcher,--what makes you so confoundedly exclusive is
your ideas?" asked Henry Fairbanks.

"Because I respect myself," said Fletcher in rather a surly tone.

"Then you have one admirer," said Fairbanks.

"What do you mean by that?" asked Fletcher, suspiciously.

"Nothing out of the way.  I believe in self-respect, but I don't see
how it is going to be endangered by the admission of Oscar's friend
to the Society."

"Am I expected to associate on equal terms with a printer's devil?"

"I can't answer for you.  As for me, if he is a good fellow, I shall
welcome him to our ranks.  Some of our most eminent men have been
apprenticed to the trade of printer.  I believe, after all, it is the
name that has prejudiced you."

"No it isn't.  I have seen him."

"Henry Walton?"

"Yes."

"Where?"

"In Oscar's room."

"Well?"

"I don't like his appearance."

"What's the matter with his appearance?" asked Oscar.

"He looks low."

"That's where I must decidedly contradict you, Fitz, and I shall
appeal confidently to the members of the Society when they come to
know him, as they soon will, for I am sure no one else shares your
ridiculous prejudices.  Harry Walton, in my opinion, is a true
gentleman, without reference to his purse, and he is bound to rise
hereafter, take my word for it."

"There's plenty of room for him to rise," said Fletcher with a sneer.

"That is true not only of him, but of all of us, I take it."

"Do you refer to me?"

"Oh no," said Oscar with sarcasm.  "I am quite aware that you are at
the pinnacle of eminence, even if you do flunk in Greek occasionally."

Fitzgerald had failed in the Greek recitation during the day, and
that in school parlance is sometimes termed a "flunk."  He bit his
lip in mortification at this reference, and walked away, leaving
Oscar master of the situation.

"You had the best of him there, Vincent," said George Sanborn.  "He
has gone off in disgust."

"I like to see Fletcher taken down," said Henry Fairbanks.  "I never
saw a fellow put on so many airs.  He is altogether too aristocratic
to associate with ordinary people."

"Yes," said Oscar, "he has a foolish pride, which I hope he will some
time get rid of."

"He ought to have been born in England, and not in a republic."

"If he had been born in England, he would have been unhappy unless he
had belonged to the nobility," said Alfred DeWitt.

"Look here, boys," said Tom Carver, "what do you say to mortifying
Fitz's pride?"

"Have you got a plan in view, Tom?  If so, out with it."

"Yes: you know the pedler that comes into town about once a month to
buy up rags, and sell his tinwares."

"I have seen him.  Well, what of him?"

"He is coming early next week.  Some of us will see him privately,
and post him up as to Fitz's relations and position, and hire him to
come up to school, and inquire for Fitz, representing himself as his
cousin.  Of course Fitz will deny it indignantly, but he will persist
and show that he knows all about the family."

"Good!  Splendid!" exclaimed the boys laughing.  "Won't Fitz be
raving?"

"There's no doubt about that.   Well, boys, I'll arrange it all, if
you'll authorize me."

"Go ahead, Tom.  You can draw upon us for the necessary funds."

Fletcher had retired to his room, angry at the opposition his
proposal had received, and without any warning of the humiliation
which awaited him.




CHAPTER X.

THE TIN-PEDLER.

Those of my readers who live in large cities are probably not
familiar with the travelling tin-pedler, who makes his appearance at
frequent intervals in the country towns and villages of New England.
His stock of tinware embraces a large variety of articles for
culinary purposes, ranging from milk-pans to nutmeg-graters.  These
are contained in a wagon of large capacity, in shape like a box, on
which he sits enthroned a merchant prince.  Unlike most traders, he
receives little money, most of his transactions being in the form of
a barter, whereby be exchanges his merchandise for rags, white and
colored, which have accumulated in the household, and are gladly
traded off for bright tinware.  Behind the cart usually depend two
immense bags, one for white, the other for colored rags, which, in
time, are sold to paper manufacturers.  It may be that the very paper
on which this description is printed, was manufactured from rags so
collected.

Abner Bickford was the proprietor of such an establishment as I have
described.  No one, at first sight, would have hesitated to class him
as a Yankee.  He was long in the limbs, and long in the face, with a
shrewd twinkle in the eye, a long nose, and the expression of a man
who respected himself and feared nobody.  He was unpolished, in his
manners, and knew little of books, but he belonged to the same
resolute and hardy type of men who in years past sprang to arms, and
fought bravely for an idea.  He was strong in his manhood, and would
have stood unabashed before a king.  Such was the man who was to
mortify the pride of Fitzgerald Fletcher.

Tom Carver watched for his arrival in Centreville, and walking up to
his cart, accosted him.

"Good-morning, Mr. Bickford."

"Good-mornin', young man.  You've got the advantage of me.  I never
saw you before as I know of."

"I am Tom Carver, at your service."

"Glad to know you.  Where do you live?  Maybe your wife would like
some tinware this mornin'?" said Abner, relaxing his gaunt features
into a smile.

"She didn't say anything about it when I came out," said Tom,
entering into the joke.

"Maybe you'd like a tin-dipper for your youngest boy?"

"Maybe I would, if you've got any to give away."

"I see you've cut your eye-teeth.  Is there anything else I can do
for you?  I'm in for a trade."

"I don't know, unless I sell myself for rags."

"Anything for a trade.  I'll give you two cents a pound."

"That's too cheap.  I came to ask your help in a trick we boys want
to play on one of our number."

"Sho! you don't say so.  That aint exactly in my line."

"I'll tell you all about it.  There's a chap at our school--the
Academy, you know--who's awfully stuck up.  He's all the time
bragging about belonging to a first family in Boston, and turning up
his nose at poorer boys.  We want to mortify him."

"Just so!" said Abner, nodding.  "Drive ahead!"

"Well, we thought if you'd call at the school and ask after him, and
pretend he was a cousin of yours, and all that, it would make him
mad."

"Oh, I see," said Abner, nodding, "he wouldn't like to own a
tin-pedler for his cousin."

"No," said Tom; "he wants us to think all his relations are rich.  I
wouldn't mind at all myself," he added, it suddenly occurring to him
that Abner's feelings might be hurt.

"Good!" said Abner, "I see you aint one of the stuck-up kind.  I've
got some relations in Boston myself, that are rich and stuck up.  I
never go near 'em.  What's the name of this chap you're talkin'
about?"

"Fletcher--Fitzgerald Fletcher."

"Fletcher!" repeated Abner.  "Whew! well, that's a joke!"

"What's a joke?" asked Tom, rather surprised.

"Why, he _is_ my relation--a sort of second cousin.  Why, my mother
and his father are own cousins.  So, don't you see we're second
cousins?"

"That's splendid!" exclaimed Tom.  "I can hardly believe it."

"It's so.  My mother's name was Fletcher--Roxanna Fletcher--afore she
married.  Jim Fletcher--this boy's father--used to work in my
grandfather's store, up to Hampton, but he got kinder discontented,
and went off to Boston, where he's been lucky, and they do say he's
mighty rich now.  I never go nigh him, 'cause I know he looks down on
his country cousins, and I don't believe in pokin' my nose in where I
aint wanted."

"Then you are really and truly Fitz's cousin?"

"If that's the boy's name.  Seems to me it's a kinder queer one.  I
s'pose it's a fust-claas name.  Sounds rather stuck up."

"Won't the boys roar when they hear about it!  Are you willing to
enter into our plan?"

"Well," said Abner, "I'll do it.  I can't abide folks that's stuck
up.  I'd rather own a cousin like you."

"Thank you, Mr. Bickford."

"When do you want me to come round?"

"How long do you stay in town?"

"Well, I expect to stop overnight at the tavern; I can't get through
in one day."

"Then come round to the Academy to-morrow morning, about half-past
eight.  School don't begin till nine, but the boys will be playing
ball alongside.  Then we'll give you an introduction to your cousin."

"That'll suit me well enough.  I'll come."

Tom Carver returned in triumph, and communicated to the other boys
the arrangement be had made with Mr. Bickford, and his unexpected
discovery of the genuine relationship that existed between Fitz and
the tin-pedler.  His communication was listened to with great
delight, and no little hilarity, and the boys discussed the probable
effect of the projected meeting.

"Fitz will be perfectly raving," said Henry Fairbanks.  "There's
nothing that will take down his pride so much."

"He'll deny the relationship, probably," said Oscar.

"How can he?"

"He'll do it.  See if he don't.  It would be death to all his
aristocratic claims to admit it."

"Suppose it were yourself, Oscar?"

"I'd say, 'How are you, cousin?  How's the the business?'" answered
Oscar, promptly.

"I believe you would, Oscar.  There's nothing of the snob about you."

"I hope not."

"Yet your family stands as high as Fletcher's."

"That's a point I leave to others to discuss," said Oscar.  "My
father is universally respected, I am sure, but he rose from the
ranks.  He was once a printer's devil, like my friend Harry Walton.
Wouldn't it be ridiculous in me to turn up my nose at Walton, just
because be stands now where my father did thirty years ago?  It would
be the same thing as sneering at father."

"Give us your hand, Oscar," said Henry Fairbanks.  "You've got no
nonsense about you--I like you."

"I'm not sure whether your compliment is deserved, Henry," said
Oscar, "but if I have any nonsense it isn't of that kind."

"Do you believe Fitz has any suspicion that he has a cousin in the
tin business?"

"No; I don't believe he has.  He must know he has poor relations,
living in the country, but he probably thinks as little as possible
about them.  As long as they don't intrude themselves upon his
greatness, I suppose he is satisfied."

"And as long as no one suspects that he has any connection with such
plebeians."

"Of course."

"What sort of a man is this tin-pedler, Tom?" asked Oscar.

"He's a pretty sharp fellow--not educated, or polished, you know, but
he seems to have some sensible ideas.  He said he had never seen the
Fletchers; because he didn't want to poke his nose in where he wasn't
wanted.  He showed his good sense also by saying that he had rather
have me for a cousin than Fitz."

"That isn't a very high compliment--I'd say the same myself."

"Thank you, Oscar.  Your compliment exalts me.  You won't mind my
strutting a little."

And Tom humorously threw back his head, and strutted about with mock
pride.

"To be sure," said Oscar, "you don't belong to one of the first
families of Boston, like our friend, Fitz."

"No, I belong to one of the second families.  You can't blame me, for
I can't help it."

"No, I won't blame you, but of course I consider you low."

"I am afraid, Tom, I haven't got any cousins in the tin trade, like
Fitz."

"Poor Fitz! he little dreams of his impending trial.  If he did, I am
afraid he wouldn't sleep a wink to-night."

"I wish I thought as much of myself as Fitz does," said Henry
Fairbanks.  "You can see by his dignified pace, and the way he tosses
his head, how well satisfied he is with being Fitzgerald Fletcher,
Esq."

"I'll bet five cents he won't strut round so much to-morrow
afternoon," said Tom, "after his interview with his new cousin.  But
hush, boys!  Not a word more of this.  There's Fitz coming up the
hill.  I wouldn't have him suspect what's going on, or he might
defeat our plans by staying away."




CHAPTER XI.

FITZ AND HIS COUSIN.

The next morning at eight the boys began to gather in the field
beside the Seminary.  They began to play ball, but took little
interest in the game, compared with the "tragedy in real life," as
Tom jocosely called it, which was expected soon to come off.

Fitz appeared upon the scene early.  In fact one of the boys called
for him, and induced him to come round to school earlier than usual.
Significant glances were exchanged when he made his appearance, but
Fitz suspected nothing, and was quite unaware that he was attracting
more attention than usual.

Punctually at half-past eight, Abner Bickford with his tin-cart
appeared in the street, and with a twitch of the rein began to ascend
the Academy Hill.

"Look there," said Tom Carver, "the tin-pedler's coming up the hill.
Wonder if he expects to sell any of his wares to us boys.  Do you
know him, Fitz?"

"I!" answered Fitzgerald with a scornful look, "what should I know of
a tin-pedler?"

Tom's mouth twitched, and his eyes danced with the anticipation of
fun.

By this time Mr. Bickford had brought his horse to a halt, and
jumping from his box, approached the group of boys, who suspended
their game.

"We don't want any tinware," said one of the boys, who was not in the
secret.

"Want to know!  Perhaps you haven't got tin enough to pay for it.
Never mind, I'll buy you for old rags, at two cents a pound."

"He has you there, Harvey," said Tom Carver.  "Can I do anything for
you, sir?"

"Is your name Fletcher?" asked Abner, not appearing to recognize Tom.

"Why, he wants you, Fitz!" said Harvey, in surprise.

"This gentleman's name is Fletcher," said Tom, placing his hand on
the shoulder of the astonished Fitzgerald.

"Not Fitz Fletcher?" said Abner, interrogatively.

"My name is Fitzgerald Fletcher," said the young Bostonian,
haughtily, "but I am at a loss to understand why you should desire to
see me."

Abner advanced with hand extended, his face lighted up with an
expansive grin.

"Why, Cousin Fitz," he said heartily, "do you mean to say you don't
know me?"

"Sir," said Fitzgerald, drawing back, "you are entirely mistaken in
the person.  I don't know you."

