months, the survivors obtained a passage to the Cape, all except a young
sailor named White, who had formed an attachment to one of the servant
girls on board, and who, in all the miseries which had been endured, had
been her constant protector and companion; whilst gratitude on her part
prevented her wishing to leave him. Both chose to remain, and were
forthwith adopted as free citizens of the little community.




SHIPWRECK OF THE MEDUSA.


On the 17th of June, 1816, the Medusa, French frigate, commanded by
Captain Chaumareys, and accompanied by three smaller vessels, sailed
from the island of Aix, for the coast of Africa, in order to take
possession of some colonies. The first accident she encountered was off
Cape Finisterre, when one of the crew fell into the sea; and from the
apathy of his companions, their want of promptitude in manoeuvring, with
the want of every precaution, he was left to perish. On the tenth day of
sailing, there appeared an error of thirty leagues in the reckoning. On
the 1st of July, they entered the tropics; and there, with a childish
disregard to danger, and knowing that she was surrounded by all the
unseen perils of the ocean, her crew performed the ceremony usual to the
occasion, while the vessel was running headlong on destruction. The
captain, presided over the disgraceful scene of merriment, leaving the
ship to the command of a Mons. Richefort, who had passed the ten
preceding years of his life in an English prison--a few persons on board
remonstrated in vain; though it was ascertained that they were on the
banks of Arguise, she continued her course, and heaved the lead, without
slackening the sail. Every thing denoted shallow water, but M. Richefort
persisted in saying that they were in one hundred fathoms. At that very
moment only six fathoms were found; and the vessel struck three times,
being in about sixteen feet water, and the tide full flood. At ebb-tide,
there remained but twelve feet water; and after some bungling
manoeuvres, all hope of getting the ship off was abandoned.

When the frigate struck, she had on board six boats, of various
capacities, all of which could not contain the crew and passengers; and
a raft was constructed. A dreadful scene ensued. All scrambled out of
the wreck without order or precaution. The first who reached the boats
refused to admit any of their fellow-sufferers into them, though there
was ample room for more. Some, apprehending that a plot had been formed
to abandon them in the vessel, flew to arms. No one assisted his
companions; and Captain Chaumareys stole out of a port-hole into his own
boat, leaving a great part of the crew to shift for themselves. At
length they put off to sea, intending to steer for the sandy coast of
the desert, there to land, and thence to proceed with a caravan to the
island of St. Louis.

The raft had been constructed without foresight or intelligence. It was
about sixty-five feet long and twenty-five broad, but the only part
which could be depended upon was the middle; and that was so small, that
fifteen persons could not lie down upon it. Those who stood on the floor
were in constant danger of slipping through between the planks; the sea
flowed in on all its sides. When one hundred and fifty passengers who
were destined to be its burden, were on board, they stood like a solid
parallelogram, without a possibility of moving; and they were up to
their waists in water. The original plan was, that as much provision as
possible should be put upon this raft; that it should be taken in tow by
the six boats; and that, at stated intervals, the crews should come on
board to receive their rations. As they left the ship, M. Correard asked
whether the charts, instruments, and sea-stores were on board; and was
told by an officer, that nothing was wanting. "And who is to command
us?" "I am to command you," answered he, "and will be with you in a
moment." The officer with these words, the last in his mouth, went on
board one of the boats, and returned no more.

The desperate squadron had only proceeded three leagues, when a faulty,
if not treacherous manoeuvre, broke the tow-line which fastened the
captain's boat to the raft; and this became the signal to all to let
loose their cables. The weather was calm. The coast was known to be but
twelve or fifteen leagues distant; and the land was in fact discovered
by the boats on the very evening on which they abandoned the raft. They
were not therefore driven to this measure by any new perils; and the cry
of "_Nous les abandonons!_" which resounded throughout the line, was the
yell of a spontaneous and instinctive impulse of cowardice, perfidy, and
cruelty; and the impulse was as unanimous as it was diabolical. The raft
was left to the mercy of the waves; one after another, the boats
disappeared, and despair became general. Not one of the promised
articles, no provisions, except a very few casks of wine, and some
spoiled biscuit, sufficient for one single meal was found. A small
pocket compass, which chance had discovered, their last guide in a
trackless ocean, fell between the beams into the sea. As the crew had
taken no nourishment since morning, some wine and biscuit were
distributed; and this day, the first of thirteen on the raft, was the
last on which they tasted any solid food--except such as human nature
shudders at. The only thing which kept them alive was the hope of
revenge on those who had treacherously betrayed them.

The first night was stormy; and the waves, which had free access,
committed dreadful ravages, and threatened worse. When day appeared,
twelve miserable wretches were found crushed to death between the
openings of the raft, and several more were missing; but the number
could not be ascertained, as several soldiers had taken the billets of
the dead, in order to obtain two, or even three rations. The second
night was still more dreadful, and many were washed off; although the
crew had so crowded together, that some were smothered by the mere
pressure. To soothe their last moments, the soldiers drank immoderately;
and one, who affected to rest himself upon the side, but was
treacherously cutting the ropes, was thrown into the sea. Another whom
M. Correard had snatched from the waves, turned traitor a second time,
as soon as he had recovered his senses; but he too was killed. At length
the revolted, who were chiefly soldiers, threw themselves upon their
knees, and abjectly implored mercy. At midnight, however, they rebelled
again. Those who had no arms, fought with their teeth, and thus many
severe wounds were inflicted. One was most wantonly and dreadfully
bitten above the heel, while his companions were beating him upon the
head with their carbines, before throwing him into the sea. The raft was
strewed with dead bodies, after innumerable instances of treachery and
cruelty; and from sixty to sixty-five perished that night. The force and
courage of the strongest began to yield to their misfortunes; and even
the most resolute labored under mental derangement. In the conflict, the
revolted had thrown two casks of wine, and all the remaining water, into
the sea; and it became necessary to diminish each man's share.

A day of comparative tranquility succeeded. The survivors erected their
mast again, which had been wantonly cut down in the battle of the night;
and endeavored to catch some fish, but in vain. They were reduced to
feed on the dead bodies of their companions. A third night followed,
broken by the plaintive cries of wretches, exposed to every kind of
suffering, ten or twelve of whom died of want, and awfully foretold the
fate of the remainder. The following day was fine. Some flying fish were
caught in the raft; which, mixed up with human flesh, afforded one
scanty meal.

A new insurrection to destroy the raft, broke out on the fourth night;
this too, was marked by perfidy, and ended in blood. Most of the rebels
were thrown into the sea. The fifth morning mustered but thirty men
alive; and these sick and wounded, with the skin of their lower
extremities corroded by the salt water. Two soldiers were detected
drinking the wine of the only remaining cask; they were instantly thrown
into the sea. One boy died, and there remained only twenty-seven; of
whom fifteen only seemed likely to live. A council of war, preceded by
the most horrid despair, was held; as the weak consumed a part of the
common store, they determined to throw them into the sea. This sentence
was put into immediate execution! and all the arms on board, which now
filled their minds with horror, were, with the exception of a single
sabre, committed to the deep.

Distress and misery increased with an accelerated ratio; and even after
the desperate measure of destroying their companions, and eating the
most nauseous aliments, the surviving fifteen could not hope for more
than a few days' existence. A butterfly lighted on their sail the ninth
day, and though it was held to be a messenger of good, yet many a
greedy eye was cast upon it. Some sea-fowl also appeared; but it was
impossible to catch them. The misery of the survivors increased with a
rapidity which cannot be described; they even stole from each other
little goblets of urine which had been set to cool in the sea water, and
were now considered a luxury. The most trifling article of food, a
lemon, a small bottle of spirituous dentrifice, a little garlic, became
causes of contention; and every daily distribution of wine awakened a
spirit of selfishness and ferocity, which common sufferings and common
interest could not subdue into more social feelings.

Three days more passed over in expressible anguish, when they
constructed a smaller and more manageable raft, in the hope of directing
it to the shore; but on trial it was found insufficient. On the
seventeenth day, a brig was seen; which, after exciting the vicissitudes
of hope and fear, proved to be the Argus, sent out in quest of the
Medusa. The inhabitants of the raft were all received on board, and were
again very nearly perishing, by a fire which broke out in the night.
The six boats which had so cruelly cast them adrift, reached the coast
of Africa in safety; and after many dangers among the Moors, the
survivors arrived at St. Louis.

After this, a vessel was despatched to the wreck of the Medusa, to carry
away the money and provisions; after beating about for eight days, she
was forced to return. She again put to sea, but after being away five
days, again came back. Ten days more were lost in repairing her; and she
did not reach the spot till fifty-two days after the vessel had been
lost; and dreadful to relate, three miserable sufferers were found on
board. Sixty men had been abandoned there by their magnanimous
countrymen. All these had been carried off except seventeen, some of
whom were drunk, and others refused to leave the vessel. They remained
at peace as long as their provisions lasted. Twelve embarked on board a
raft, for Sahara, and were never more heard of. Another put to sea on a
hen-coop, and sunk immediately. Four remained behind, one of whom,
exhausted with hunger and fatigue, perished. The other three lived in
separate corners of the wreck, and never met but to run at each other
with drawn _knives_. They were put on board the vessel, with all that
could be saved from the wreck of the Medusa.

The vessel was no sooner seen returning to St. Louis, than every heart
beat high with joy, in the hope of recovering some property. The men and
officers of the Medusa jumped on board, and asked if any thing had been
saved. "Yes," was the reply, "but it is all ours now;" and the naked
Frenchmen, whose calamities had found pity from the Moors of the desert,
were now deliberately plundered by their own countrymen.

A fair was held in the town, which lasted eight days. The clothes,
furniture, and necessary articles of life, belonging to the men and
officers of the Medusa, were publicly sold before their faces. Such of
the French as were able, proceeded to the camp at Daceard, and the sick
remained at St. Louis. The French governor had promised them clothes
and provisions, but sent none; and during five months, they owed their
existence to strangers--to the British.




SINGULAR LOSS OF THE SHIP ESSEX, SUNK BY A WHALE.


The ship Essex, Captain George Pollard, sailed from Nantucket, on the
12th of August, 1819, on a whaling voyage to the Pacific Ocean. Her crew
consisted of twenty-one men, fourteen of whom were whites, mostly
belonging to Nantucket, the remainder were blacks. On the 20th of
November, 1820, in latitude 0 deg. 40' S. longitude 119 deg. W. a school of
whales was discovered, and in pursuing them the mate's boat was stove,
which obliged him to return to the ship, when they commenced repairing
the damage. The captain and second mate were left with their boats
pursuing the whales. During this interval the mate discovered a large
spermaceti whale, near the ship, but, not suspecting the approach of any
danger, it gave them no alarm, until they saw the whale coming with full
speed towards them. In a moment they were astonished by a tremendous
crash. The whale had struck the ship a little forward of the fore
chains. It was some minutes before the crew recovered from their
astonishment, so far as to examine whether any damage had been
sustained. They then tried their pumps, and found that the ship was
sinking. A signal was immediately set for the boats. The whale now
appeared again making for the ship, and coming with great velocity, with
the water foaming around him, he struck the ship a second blow, which
nearly stove in her bows. There was now no hope of saving the ship, and
the only course to be pursued was, to prepare to leave her with all
possible haste. They collected a few things, hove them into the boat and
shoved off. The ship immediately fell upon one side and sunk to the
water's edge. When the captain's and second mate's boat arrived, such
was the consternation, that for some time not a word was spoken. The
danger of their situation at length aroused them, as from a terrific
dream, to a no less terrific reality. They remained by the wreck two or
three days, in which time they cut away the masts, which caused her to
right a little. Holes were then cut in the deck, by which means they
obtained about six hundred pounds of bread, and as much water as they
could take, besides other articles likely to be of use to them. On the
22d of November, they left the ship, with as gloomy a prospect before
them as can well be imagined. The nearest land was about one thousand
miles to the windward of them; they were in open boats, weak and leaky,
with a very small pittance of bread and water for support of so many
men, during the time they must necessarily be at sea. Sails had been
prepared for the boats, before leaving the ship, which proved of
material benefit. Steering southerly by the wind, they hoped to fall in
with some ship, but in this they were disappointed. After being in the
boat twenty-eight days, experiencing many sufferings by gales of wind,
want of water, and scanty provisions, they arrived at Duncie's Island,
latitude 24 deg. 40' S., longitude 124 deg. 40' W., where they were disappointed
in not finding a sufficiency of any kind of food for so large a company
to subsist on. Their boats being very weak and leaky, they were hauled
on shore and repaired. They found a gentle spring of fresh water,
flowing out of a rock, at about half ebb of the tide, from which they
filled their kegs. Three of the men chose to stay on the island, and
take their chance for some vessel to take them off.

On the 27th of December, they left this island, and steered for Easter
Island; but passed it far to the leeward. They then directed their
course for Juan Fernandez, which was about twenty-five hundred miles
east by south-east from them. On the 10th of January, 1821, Matthew P.
Joy, the second mate, died, and his body was launched into the deep. His
constitution was slender, and it was supposed that his sufferings,
though great, were not the immediate cause of his death. On the 12th,
the mate's boat separated from the other two, and did not fall in with
them afterwards. The situation of the mate and his crew, became daily
more and more distressing. The weather was mostly calm, the sun hot and
scorching. They were growing weaker and weaker by want of food, and yet,
such was their distance from land, that they were obliged to lessen
their allowance nearly one half. On the 20th, a black man died.

On the 28th, they found, on calculation, that their allowance, only one
and a half ounce of bread per day to a man, would be exhausted in
fourteen days; and that this allowance was not sufficient to sustain
life. They therefore determined to extend the indulgence, and take the
consequence, whether to live or die. On the 8th of February, another of
the crew died. From this time to the 17th, their sufferings were
extreme. At seven o'clock, A.M. of that day, they were aroused from a
lethargy by the cheering cry of the steersman, "there's a sail!" The
boat was soon descried by the vessel, the brig Indian, Captain Grozier,
of London, which took them on board, latitude 33 deg. 45' S., longitude 81 deg.
3' W. They were treated by Captain Grozier with all the care and
tenderness which their weak condition required. On the same day they
made Massafuero, and on the 25th, arrived at Valparaiso.

Captain Pollard and Charles Ramsdell, the only survivors in the
captain's boat, were taken up on the 23d of February, 1821, by the ship
Dauphin, of Nantucket, Captain Zimri Coffin, in latitude 37 deg. S. off St.
Mary's. The captain relates, that, after the mate's boat was separated
from the others, they made what progress their weak condition would
permit, towards the island of Juan Fernandez, but contrary winds and
calm weather, together with the extreme debility of the crew, prevented
their making much progress.

On the 29th of January, the second mate's boat separated from the
captain's, in the night, at which time their provisions were totally
exhausted, since which they have not been heard from.

We shall not attempt a sketch of the sufferings of the crews of these
boats. Imagination may picture the horrors of their situation, and the
extremes to which they were driven to sustain life, but no power of the
imagination can heighten the dreadful reality.

The following is an account of the whole crew.

In the captain's boat but two survived, Captain Pollard and Charles
Ramsdell. In the mate's boat three survived, Owen Chase, the mate,
Benjamin Lawrence, and Thomas Nickerson. Left on Duncie's Island, and
afterwards taken off, Seth Weeks, William Wright, and Thomas Chapple.
One left the ship before the accident. In the second mate's boat, when
separated from the captain's, three. Dead, nine, which added to the
second mate's crew, doubtless lost, makes total deaths twelve.




LOSS OF THE WELLINGTON.


We sailed from the Cove of Cork for St. Andrews, on the 6th of October,
1833. During a passage of sixty days, all of which time we struggled
against adverse winds, nothing material occurred, save the shifting of
our ballast, (limestone,) which caused some alarm; but the promptitude
and alacrity of the crew soon set it all right. On reaching the
ballast-ground, we discharged our ballast; and after we had repaired the
rigging, we took in a cargo of deals. Here four of the men left us, and
we had to wait for others to supply their place.

On the 23d of December we sailed on our return to Cork; mustering in all
seventeen persons, including one male and one female passenger. With a
fine stiff breeze down the bay, we soon lost sight of land, and nothing
of note occurred till the 30th, when the wind got up from the
north-west, and soon blew so heavy a gale, that we were obliged to take
in every thing but a close-reefed main-topsail, under which we scudded
till the 5th of January. All this time it blew a hurricane, principally
from the north-west, but occasionally, after a short lull, flying round
to the south-west, with a fury that nothing could resist. The sea
threatened to overwhelm our little craft. It was several times proposed
to lay her to; but the fatal opinion prevailed that she did better in
scudding. On the night of the 6th, a tremendous sea struck her on the
stern, stove in all the dead-lights, and washed them into the cabin,
lifted the taffrail a foot or more out of its place, carried away the
afterpart of the larboard bulwark, shattered the whole of the
stern-frame, and washed one of the steersmen away from the wheel. The
carpenter and crew with much labor secured the stern as well as they
could for the night, and next morning the wind moderated a little, new
dead-lights were put in, and the damages further repaired.

Every stitch of canvas, but the main-topsail, jib, and trysail, were
split into ribbons, so that we became anxious to know how we should
reach port when the gale subsided. But we were soon spared further care
on that head. As the day closed in, the tempest resumed its fury, and by
the following morning, (the 8th,) raged with such appalling violence,
that we laid her too. From her straining, the brig had now began to make
so much water, as to require all hands in succession at the pumps till
the following morning at two, when the larboard watch went below, the
watch on deck, by constant exertion, sufficing to keep her free.

At seven on the morning of the 9th, a tremendous sea broke over the
starboard bow, overwhelming all, and sweeping caboose, boats, planks,
casks, every thing before it, to the afterpart of the deck; even the
starboard anchor was lifted on to the forecastle; and and the cook, who
was in the galley, washed with all his culinary apparatus into the
lee-scuppers, where he remained some time in a very perilous situation,
jammed in amongst the loose spars and other portions of the wreck, until
extricated by the watch on deck, who, being aft at the moment of the
occurrence, escaped unhurt. Before we could recover from this shock, the
watch below rushed on deck, with the appalling intelligence, that the
water had found its way below, and was pouring in like a torrent We
found that the coppers, forced along the deck with irresistible
violence, had, by striking a stanchen fixed firmly in the deck, split
the covering fore and aft, and let in the water. The captain thought it
time to prepare for the worst. As the ship, from her buoyant cargo,
could not sink, he ordered the crew to store the top with provisions.
And as all exerted themselves with the energy of despair, two barrels of
beef, some hams, pork, butter, cheese, and a large jar of brandy, were
handed in a trice up from below, but not before the water had nearly
filled the cabin, and forced those employed there to cease their
operations, and with the two unfortunate passengers to fly to the deck.
Fortunately for the latter, they knew not the full horror of our
situation. The poor lady, whose name I have forgotten, young and
delicate, already suffering from confinement below and sea sickness,
pale and shivering, but patient and resigned, had but a short time taken
her seat beside her fellow passenger on some planks near the taffrail,
on which lay extended the unfortunate cook, unable to move from his
bruises, when the vessel, a heavy lurch having shifted her cargo, was
laid on her beam-ends, and the water rushing in, carried every thing
off the deck--provisions, stores, planks, all went adrift--and with the
latter, the poor lady, who, with the cook, floated away on them, without
the possibility of our saving either of them. But such was the
indescribable horror of those who were left, that had we been able to
reason or reflect we might have envied our departed shipmates.

A few minutes before we went over, two of the crew, invalids, having
gone to the maintop, one of them was forced into the belly of the main
top-sail, and there found a watery grave. The rest of the crew, and the
male passenger, got upon her side. In this hopeless situation, secured,
and clinging to the channels and rigging, the sea every instant dashing
over us, and threatening destruction, we remained some hours. Then the
vessel once more righted, and we crawled on board. The deck having blown
up, and the stern gone the same way, we had now the prospect of
perishing with cold and hunger. For our ultimate preservation I conceive
we were mainly indebted to the carpenter's having providentially
retained his axe. With it, the foremast was cut away. While doing this,
we found a piece of pork about four pounds weight; and even the
possession of this morsel raised our drooping spirits. It would at least
prolong existence a few hours, and in that interval, the gale might
abate, some friendly sail heave in sight, and the elements relent. Such
were our reflections. Oh, how our eye-balls strained, as, emerging from
the trough of the sea on the crest of a liquid mountain, we gazed on the
misty horizon, until, from time to time, we fancied, nay, felt assured,
we saw the object of our search, but the evening closed in, and with it
hope almost expired. That day, not a morsel passed our lips. The pork,
our only supply, given in charge to the captain, it was thought prudent
to husband as long as possible.

Meanwhile, with a top-gallant studding-sail remaining in the top, which
was stretched over the mast-head, we contrived to procure a partial
shelter from the inclemency of the weather. Under this, drenched as we
were and shivering with cold, some of us crouched for the night; but
others of the crew remained all that night in the rigging. In the
morning we all--fourteen in number--mustered on deck, and received from
the mate a small piece of pork, about two ounces, the remainder being
put away, and reserved for the next day. This, and some water, the only
article of which--a cask had been discovered forward, well stowed away
among the planks--we had abundance, constituted our only meal that day.
