resting-place. As she gazed an unmirthful smile spread over her
features, like sunshine that grows melancholy in some desolate spot.
Her lips moved inaudibly, but at length she spake:

"I hear it, I hear it! The voice speaketh within me and saith, 'Leave
thy child, Catharine, for his place is here, and go hence, for I have
other work for thee. Break the bonds of natural affection, martyr thy
love, and know that in all these things eternal wisdom hath its ends.'
I go, friends, I go. Take ye my boy, my precious jewel. I go hence
trusting that all shall be well, and that even for his infant hands
there is a labor in the vineyard."

She knelt down and whispered to Ilbrahim, who at first struggled and
clung to his mother with sobs and tears, but remained passive when she
had kissed his cheek and arisen from the ground. Having held her hands
over his head in mental prayer, she was ready to depart.

"Farewell, friends in mine extremity," she said to Pearson and his
wife; "the good deed ye have done me is a treasure laid up in heaven,
to be returned a thousandfold hereafter.--And farewell, ye mine
enemies, to whom it is not permitted to harm so much as a hair of my
head, nor to stay my footsteps even for a moment. The day is coming
when ye shall call upon me to witness for ye to this one sin
uncommitted, and I will rise up and answer."

She turned her steps toward the door, and the men who had stationed
themselves to guard it withdrew and suffered her to pass. A general
sentiment of pity overcame the virulence of religious hatred.
Sanctified by her love and her affliction, she went forth, and all the
people gazed after her till she had journeyed up the hill and was lost
behind its brow. She went, the apostle of her own unquiet heart, to
renew the wanderings of past years. For her voice had been already
heard in many lands of Christendom, and she had pined in the cells of
a Catholic Inquisition before she felt the lash and lay in the
dungeons of the Puritans. Her mission had extended also to the
followers of the Prophet, and from them she had received the courtesy
and kindness which all the contending sects of our purer religion
united to deny her. Her husband and herself had resided many months in
Turkey, where even the sultan's countenance was gracious to them; in
that pagan land, too, was Ilbrahim's birthplace, and his Oriental name
was a mark of gratitude for the good deeds of an unbeliever.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Pearson and his wife had thus acquired all the rights over
Ilbrahim that could be delegated, their affection for him became, like
the memory of their native land or their mild sorrow for the dead, a
piece of the immovable furniture of their hearts. The boy, also, after
a week or two of mental disquiet, began to gratify his protectors by
many inadvertent proofs that he considered them as parents and their
house as home. Before the winter snows were melted the persecuted
infant, the little wanderer from a remote and heathen country, seemed
native in the New England cottage and inseparable from the warmth and
security of its hearth. Under the influence of kind treatment, and in
the consciousness that he was loved, Ilbrahim's demeanor lost a
premature manliness which had resulted from his earlier situation; he
became more childlike and his natural character displayed itself with
freedom. It was in many respects a beautiful one, yet the disordered
imaginations of both his father and mother had perhaps propagated a
certain unhealthiness in the mind of the boy. In his general state
Ilbrahim would derive enjoyment from the most trifling events and from
every object about him; he seemed to discover rich treasures of
happiness by a faculty analogous to that of the witch-hazel, which
points to hidden gold where all is barren to the eye. His airy gayety,
coming to him from a thousand sources, communicated itself to the
family, and Ilbrahim was like a domesticated sunbeam, brightening
moody countenances and chasing away the gloom from the dark corners of
the cottage.

On the other hand, as the susceptibility of pleasure is also that of
pain, the exuberant cheerfulness of the boy's prevailing temper
sometimes yielded to moments of deep depression. His sorrows could not
always be followed up to their original source, but most frequently
they appeared to flow--though Ilbrahim was young to be sad for such a
cause--from wounded love. The flightiness of his mirth rendered him
often guilty of offences against the decorum of a Puritan household,
and on these occasions he did not invariably escape rebuke. But the
slightest word of real bitterness, which he was infallible in
distinguishing from pretended anger, seemed to sink into his heart and
poison all his enjoyments till he became sensible that he was entirely
forgiven. Of the malice which generally accompanies a superfluity of
sensitiveness Ilbrahim was altogether destitute. When trodden upon, he
would not turn; when wounded, he could but die. His mind was wanting
in the stamina of self-support. It was a plant that would twine
beautifully round something stronger than itself; but if repulsed or
torn away, it had no choice but to wither on the ground. Dorothy's
acuteness taught her that severity would crush the spirit of the
child, and she nurtured him with the gentle care of one who handles a
butterfly. Her husband manifested an equal affection, although it grew
daily less productive of familiar caresses.

The feelings of the neighboring people in regard to the Quaker infant
and his protectors had not undergone a favorable change, in spite of
the momentary triumph which the desolate mother had obtained over
their sympathies. The scorn and bitterness of which he was the object
were very grievous to Ilbrahim, especially when any circumstance made
him sensible that the children his equals in age partook of the enmity
of their parents. His tender and social nature had already overflowed
in attachments to everything about him, and still there was a residue
of unappropriated love which he yearned to bestow upon the little ones
who were taught to hate him. As the warm days of spring came on
Ilbrahim was accustomed to remain for hours silent and inactive within
hearing of the children's voices at their play, yet with his usual
delicacy of feeling he avoided their notice, and would flee and hide
himself from the smallest individual among them. Chance, however, at
length seemed to open a medium of communication between his heart and
theirs; it was by means of a boy about two years older than Ilbrahim,
who was injured by a fall from a tree in the vicinity of Pearson's
habitation. As the sufferer's own home was at some distance, Dorothy
willingly received him under her roof and became his tender and
careful nurse.

Ilbrahim was the unconscious possessor of much skill in physiognomy,
and it would have deterred him in other circumstances from attempting
to make a friend of this boy. The countenance of the latter
immediately impressed a beholder disagreeably, but it required some
examination to discover that the cause was a very slight distortion of
the mouth and the irregular, broken line and near approach of the
eyebrows. Analogous, perhaps, to these trifling deformities was an
almost imperceptible twist of every joint and the uneven prominence of
the breast, forming a body regular in its general outline, but faulty
in almost all its details. The disposition of the boy was sullen and
reserved, and the village schoolmaster stigmatized him as obtuse in
intellect, although at a later period of life he evinced ambition and
very peculiar talents. But, whatever might be his personal or moral
irregularities, Ilbrahim's heart seized upon and clung to him from the
moment that he was brought wounded into the cottage; the child of
persecution seemed to compare his own fate with that of the sufferer,
and to feel that even different modes of misfortune had created a sort
of relationship between them. Food, rest and the fresh air for which
he languished were neglected; he nestled continually by the bedside of
the little stranger and with a fond jealousy endeavored to be the
medium of all the cares that were bestowed upon him. As the boy became
convalescent Ilbrahim contrived games suitable to his situation or
amused him by a faculty which he had perhaps breathed in with the air
of his barbaric birthplace. It was that of reciting imaginary
adventures on the spur of the moment, and apparently in inexhaustible
succession. His tales were, of course, monstrous, disjointed and
without aim, but they were curious on account of a vein of human
tenderness which ran through them all and was like a sweet familiar
face encountered in the midst of wild and unearthly scenery. The
auditor paid much attention to these romances and sometimes
interrupted them by brief remarks upon the incidents, displaying
shrewdness above his years, mingled with a moral obliquity which
grated very harshly against Ilbrahim's instinctive rectitude. Nothing,
however, could arrest the progress of the latter's affection, and
there were many proofs that it met with a response from the dark and
stubborn nature on which it was lavished. The boy's parents at length
removed him to complete his cure under their own roof.

Ilbrahim did not visit his new friend after his departure, but he made
anxious and continual inquiries respecting him and informed himself of
the day when he was to reappear among his playmates. On a pleasant
summer afternoon the children of the neighborhood had assembled in the
little forest-crowned amphitheatre behind the meeting-house, and the
recovering invalid was there, leaning on a staff. The glee of a score
of untainted bosoms was heard in light and airy voices, which danced
among the trees like sunshine become audible; the grown men of this
weary world as they journeyed by the spot marvelled why life,
beginning in such brightness, should proceed in gloom, and their
hearts or their imaginations answered them and said that the bliss of
childhood gushes from its innocence. But it happened that an
unexpected addition was made to the heavenly little band. It was
Ilbrahim, who came toward the children with a look of sweet confidence
on his fair and spiritual face, as if, having manifested his love to
one of them, he had no longer to fear a repulse from their society. A
hush came over their mirth the moment they beheld him, and they stood
whispering to each other while he drew nigh; but all at once the devil
of their fathers entered into the unbreeched fanatics, and, sending up
a fierce, shrill cry, they rushed upon the poor Quaker child. In an
instant he was the centre of a brood of baby-fiends, who lifted sticks
against him, pelted him with stones and displayed an instinct of
destruction far more loathsome than the bloodthirstiness of manhood.

The invalid, in the mean while, stood apart from the tumult, crying
out with a loud voice, "Fear not, Ilbrahim; come hither and take my
hand," and his unhappy friend endeavored to obey him. After watching
the victim's struggling approach with a calm smile and unabashed eye,
the foul-hearted little villain lifted his staff and struck Ilbrahim
on the mouth so forcibly that the blood issued in a stream. The poor
child's arms had been raised to guard his head from the storm of
blows, but now he dropped them at once. His persecutors beat him down,
trampled upon him, dragged him by his long fair locks, and Ilbrahim
was on the point of becoming as veritable a martyr as ever entered
bleeding into heaven. The uproar, however, attracted the notice of a
few neighbors, who put themselves to the trouble of rescuing the
little heretic, and of conveying him to Pearson's door.

Ilbrahim's bodily harm was severe, but long and careful nursing
accomplished his recovery; the injury done to his sensitive spirit was
more serious, though not so visible. Its signs were principally of a
negative character, and to be discovered only by those who had
previously known him. His gait was thenceforth slow, even and unvaried
by the sudden bursts of sprightlier motion which had once corresponded
to his overflowing gladness; his countenance was heavier, and its
former play of expression--the dance of sunshine reflected from moving
water--was destroyed by the cloud over his existence; his notice was
attracted in a far less degree by passing events, and he appeared to
find greater difficulty in comprehending what was new to him than at a
happier period. A stranger founding his judgment upon these
circumstances would have said that the dulness of the child's
intellect widely contradicted the promise of his features, but the
secret was in the direction of Ilbrahim's thoughts, which were
brooding within him when they should naturally have been wandering
abroad. An attempt of Dorothy to revive his former sportiveness was
the single occasion on which his quiet demeanor yielded to a violent
display of grief; he burst into passionate weeping and ran and hid
himself, for his heart had become so miserably sore that even the hand
of kindness tortured it like fire. Sometimes at night, and probably in
his dreams, he was heard to cry, "Mother! Mother!" as if her place,
which a stranger had supplied while Ilbrahim was happy, admitted of no
substitute in his extreme affliction. Perhaps among the many
life-weary wretches then upon the earth there was not one who combined
innocence and misery like this poor broken-hearted infant so soon the
victim of his own heavenly nature.

While this melancholy change had taken place in Ilbrahim, one of an
earlier origin and of different character had come to its perfection
in his adopted father. The incident with which this tale commences
found Pearson in a state of religious dulness, yet mentally disquieted
and longing for a more fervid faith than he possessed. The first
effect of his kindness to Ilbrahim was to produce a softened feeling,
an incipient love for the child's whole sect, but joined to this, and
resulting, perhaps, from self-suspicion, was a proud and ostentatious
contempt of their tenets and practical extravagances. In the course of
much thought, however--for the subject struggled irresistibly into his
mind--the foolishness of the doctrine began to be less evident, and
the points which had particularly offended his reason assumed another
aspect or vanished entirely away. The work within him appeared to go
on even while he slept, and that which had been a doubt when he laid
down to rest would often hold the place of a truth confirmed by some
forgotten demonstration when he recalled his thoughts in the morning.
But, while he was thus becoming assimilated to the enthusiasts, his
contempt, in nowise decreasing toward them, grew very fierce against
himself; he imagined, also, that every face of his acquaintance wore a
sneer, and that every word addressed to him was a gibe. Such was his
state of mind at the period of Ilbrahim's misfortune, and the emotions
consequent upon that event completed the change of which the child had
been the original instrument.

In the mean time, neither the fierceness of the persecutors nor the
infatuation of their victims had decreased. The dungeons were never
empty; the streets of almost every village echoed daily with the lash;
the life of a woman whose mild and Christian spirit no cruelty could
embitter had been sacrificed, and more innocent blood was yet to
pollute the hands that were so often raised in prayer. Early after the
Restoration the English Quakers represented to Charles II. that a
"vein of blood was open in his dominions," but, though the displeasure
of the voluptuous king was roused, his interference was not prompt.
And now the tale must stride forward over many months, leaving Pearson
to encounter ignominy and misfortune; his wife, to a firm endurance of
a thousand sorrows; poor Ilbrahim, to pine and droop like a cankered
rose-bud; his mother, to wander on a mistaken errand, neglectful of
the holiest trust which can be committed to a woman.

       *       *       *       *       *

A winter evening, a night of storm, had darkened over Pearson's
habitation, and there were no cheerful faces to drive the gloom from
his broad hearth. The fire, it is true, sent forth a glowing heat and
a ruddy light, and large logs dripping with half-melted snow lay ready
to cast upon the embers. But the apartment was saddened in its aspect
by the absence of much of the homely wealth which had once adorned it,
for the exaction of repeated fines and his own neglect of temporal
affairs had greatly impoverished the owner. And with the furniture of
peace the implements of war had likewise disappeared; the sword was
broken, the helm and cuirass were cast away for ever: the soldier had
done with battles, and might not lift so much as his naked hand to
guard his head. But the Holy Book remained, and the table on which it
rested was drawn before the fire, while two of the persecuted sect
sought comfort from its pages.

He who listened while the other read was the master of the house, now
emaciated in form and altered as to the expression and healthiness of
his countenance, for his mind had dwelt too long among visionary
thoughts and his body had been worn by imprisonment and stripes. The
hale and weatherbeaten old man who sat beside him had sustained less
injury from a far longer course of the same mode of life. In person he
was tall and dignified, and, which alone would have made him hateful
to the Puritans, his gray locks fell from beneath the broad-brimmed
hat and rested on his shoulders. As the old man read the sacred page
the snow drifted against the windows or eddied in at the crevices of
the door, while a blast kept laughing in the chimney and the blaze
leaped fiercely up to seek it. And sometimes, when the wind struck the
hill at a certain angle and swept down by the cottage across the
wintry plain, its voice was the most doleful that can be conceived; it
came as if the past were speaking, as if the dead had contributed each
a whisper, as if the desolation of ages were breathed in that one
lamenting sound.

The Quaker at length closed the book, retaining, however, his hand
between the pages which he had been reading, while he looked
steadfastly at Pearson. The attitude and features of the latter might
have indicated the endurance of bodily pain; he leaned his forehead on
his hands, his teeth were firmly closed and his frame was tremulous at
intervals with a nervous agitation.

"Friend Tobias," inquired the old man, compassionately, "hast thou
found no comfort in these many blessed passages of Scripture?"

"Thy voice has fallen on my ear like a sound afar off and indistinct,"
replied Pearson, without lifting his eyes. "Yea; and when I have
hearkened carefully, the words seemed cold and lifeless and intended
for another and a lesser grief than mine. Remove the book," he added,
in a tone of sullen bitterness; "I have no part in its consolations,
and they do but fret my sorrow the more."

"Nay, feeble brother; be not as one who hath never known the light,"
said the elder Quaker, earnestly, but with mildness. "Art thou he that
wouldst be content to give all and endure all for conscience' sake,
desiring even peculiar trials that thy faith might be purified and thy
heart weaned from worldly desires? And wilt thou sink beneath an
affliction which happens alike to them that have their portion here
below and to them that lay up treasure in heaven? Faint not, for thy
burden is yet light."

"It is heavy! It is heavier than I can bear!" exclaimed Pearson, with
the impatience of a variable spirit. "From my youth upward I have been
a man marked out for wrath, and year by year--yea, day after day--I
have endured sorrows such as others know not in their lifetime. And
now I speak not of the love that has been turned to hatred, the honor
to ignominy, the ease and plentifulness of all things to danger, want
and nakedness. All this I could have borne and counted myself blessed.
But when my heart was desolate with many losses, I fixed it upon the
child of a stranger, and he became dearer to me than all my buried
ones; and now he too must die as if my love were poison. Verily, I am
an accursed man, and I will lay me down in the dust and lift up my
head no more."

"Thou sinnest, brother, but it is not for me to rebuke thee, for I
also have had my hours of darkness wherein I have murmured against the
cross," said the old Quaker. He continued, perhaps in the hope of
distracting his companion's thoughts from his own sorrows: "Even of
late was the light obscured within me, when the men of blood had
banished me on pain of death and the constables led me onward from
village to village toward the wilderness. A strong and cruel hand was
wielding the knotted cords; they sunk deep into the flesh, and thou
mightst have tracked every reel and totter of my footsteps by the
blood that followed. As we went on--"

"Have I not borne all this, and have I murmured?" interrupted Pearson,
impatiently.

"Nay, friend, but hear me," continued the other. "As we journeyed on
night darkened on our path, so that no man could see the rage of the
persecutors or the constancy of my endurance, though Heaven forbid
that I should glory therein. The lights began to glimmer in the
cottage windows, and I could discern the inmates as they gathered in
comfort and security, every man with his wife and children by their
own evening hearth. At length we came to a tract of fertile land. In
the dim light the forest was not visible around it, and, behold, there
was a straw-thatched dwelling which bore the very aspect of my home
far over the wild ocean--far in our own England. Then came bitter
thoughts upon me--yea, remembrances that were like death to my soul.
The happiness of my early days was painted to me, the disquiet of my
manhood, the altered faith of my declining years. I remembered how I
had been moved to go forth a wanderer when my daughter, the youngest,
the dearest of my flock, lay on her dying-bed, and--"

"Couldst thou obey the command at such a moment?" exclaimed Pearson,
shuddering.

"Yea! yea!" replied the old man, hurriedly. "I was kneeling by her
bedside when the voice spoke loud within me, but immediately I rose
and took my staff and gat me gone. Oh that it were permitted me to
forget her woeful look when I thus withdrew my arm and left her
journeying through the dark valley alone! for her soul was faint and
she had leaned upon my prayers. Now in that night of horror I was
assailed by the thought that I had been an erring Christian and a
cruel parent; yea, even my daughter with her pale dying features
seemed to stand by me and whisper, 'Father, you are deceived; go home
and shelter your gray head.'--O Thou to whom I have looked in my
furthest wanderings," continued the Quaker, raising his agitated eyes
to heaven, "inflict not upon the bloodiest of our persecutors the
unmitigated agony of my soul when I believed that all I had done and
suffered for thee was at the instigation of a mocking fiend!--But I
yielded not; I knelt down and wrestled with the tempter, while the
scourge bit more fiercely into the flesh. My prayer was heard, and I
went on in peace and joy toward the wilderness."

The old man, though his fanaticism had generally all the calmness of
reason, was deeply moved while reciting this tale, and his unwonted
emotion seemed to rebuke and keep down that of his companion. They sat
in silence, with their faces to the fire, imagining, perhaps, in its
red embers new scenes of persecution yet to be encountered. The snow
still drifted hard against the windows, and sometimes, as the blaze of
the logs had gradually sunk, came down the spacious chimney and hissed
upon the hearth. A cautious footstep might now and then be heard in a
neighboring apartment, and the sound invariably drew the eyes of both
Quakers to the door which led thither. When a fierce and riotous gust
of wind had led his thoughts by a natural association to homeless
travellers on such a night, Pearson resumed the conversation.

"I have wellnigh sunk under my own share of this trial," observed he,
sighing heavily; "yet I would that it might be doubled to me, if so
the child's mother could be spared. Her wounds have been deep and
many, but this will be the sorest of all."

"Fear not for Catharine," replied the old Quaker, "for I know that
valiant woman and have seen how she can bear the cross. A mother's
heart, indeed, is strong in her, and may seem to contend mightily with
her faith; but soon she will stand up and give thanks that her son has
been thus early an accepted sacrifice. The boy hath done his work, and
she will feel that he is taken hence in kindness both to him and her.
Blessed, blessed are they that with so little suffering can enter into
peace!"

The fitful rush of the wind was now disturbed by a portentous sound:
it was a quick and heavy knocking at the outer door. Pearson's wan
countenance grew paler, for many a visit of persecution had taught him
what to dread; the old man, on the other hand, stood up erect, and his
glance was firm as that of the tried soldier who awaits his enemy.

"The men of blood have come to seek me," he observed, with calmness.
"They have heard how I was moved to return from banishment, and now am
I to be led to prison, and thence to death. It is an end I have long
looked for. I will open unto them lest they say, 'Lo, he feareth!'"

"Nay; I will present myself before them," said Pearson, with recovered
fortitude. "It may be that they seek me alone and know not that thou
abidest with me."

"Let us go boldly, both one and the other," rejoined his companion.
"It is not fitting that thou or I should shrink."

They therefore proceeded through the entry to the door, which they
opened, bidding the applicant "Come in, in God's name!" A furious
blast of wind drove the storm into their faces and extinguished the
lamp; they had barely time to discern a figure so white from head to
foot with the drifted snow that it seemed like Winter's self come in
human shape to seek refuge from its own desolation.

"Enter, friend, and do thy errand, be it what it may," said Pearson.
"It must needs be pressing, since thou comest on such a bitter night."

"Peace be with this household!" said the stranger, when they stood on
the floor of the inner apartment.

Pearson started; the elder Quaker stirred the slumbering embers of the
fire till they sent up a clear and lofty blaze. It was a female voice
that had spoken; it was a female form that shone out, cold and wintry,
in that comfortable light.

"Catharine, blessed woman," exclaimed the old man, "art thou come to
this darkened land again? Art thou come to bear a valiant testimony as
in former years? The scourge hath not prevailed against thee, and
from the dungeon hast thou come forth triumphant, but strengthen,
strengthen now thy heart, Catharine, for Heaven will prove thee yet
this once ere thou go to thy reward."

"Rejoice, friends!" she replied. "Thou who hast long been of our
people, and thou whom a little child hath led to us, rejoice! Lo, I
come, the messenger of glad tidings, for the day of persecution is
over-past. The heart of the king, even Charles, hath been moved in
gentleness toward us, and he hath sent forth his letters to stay the
hands of the men of blood. A ship's company of our friends hath
arrived at yonder town, and I also sailed joyfully among them."

As Catharine spoke her eyes were roaming about the room in search of
him for whose sake security was dear to her. Pearson made a silent
appeal to the old man, nor did the latter shrink from the painful task
assigned him.

"Sister," he began, in a softened yet perfectly calm tone, "thou
tellest us of his love manifested in temporal good, and now must we
speak to thee of that selfsame love displayed in chastenings.
Hitherto, Catharine, thou hast been as one journeying in a darksome
and difficult path and leading an infant by the hand; fain wouldst
thou have looked heavenward continually, but still the cares of that
little child have drawn thine eyes and thy affections to the earth.
Sister, go on rejoicing, for his tottering footsteps shall impede
thine own no more."

But the unhappy mother was not thus to be consoled. She shook like a
leaf; she turned white as the very snow that hung drifted into her
hair. The firm old man extended his hand and held her up, keeping his
eye upon hers as if to repress any outbreak of passion.

"I am a woman--I am but a woman; will He try me above my strength?"
said Catharine, very quickly and almost in a whisper. "I have been
wounded sore; I have suffered much--many things in the body, many in
the mind; crucified in myself and in them that were dearest to me.
Surely," added she, with a long shudder, "he hath spared me in this
one thing." She broke forth with sudden and irrepressible violence:
"Tell me, man of cold heart, what has God done to me? Hath he cast
me down never to rise again? Hath he crushed my very heart in his
hand?--And thou to whom I committed my child, how hast thou fulfilled
thy trust? Give me back the boy well, sound, alive--alive--or earth
and heaven shall avenge me!"

The agonized shriek of Catharine was answered by the faint--the very
faint--voice of a child.

On this day it had become evident to Pearson, to his aged guest and to
Dorothy that Ilbrahim's brief and troubled pilgrimage drew near its
close. The two former would willingly have remained by him to make use
of the prayers and pious discourses which they deemed appropriate to
the time, and which, if they be impotent as to the departing
traveller's reception in the world whither he goes, may at least
sustain him in bidding adieu to earth. But, though Ilbrahim uttered no
