ask her for six shillings and sixpence, five and three, one pound two,
or two pound ten, she cannot manage the operation. She is docile, well
mannered, grateful, and really likable, but her present philosophy of
life is a thing of shreds and patches. She calls it 'the science,' as if
there were but one; and she became a convert to its teachings this
past winter, while living in the house of a woman lecturer in Salem,
a lecturer, not a 'curist,' she explains. She attended to the door,
ushered in the members of classes, kept the lecture-room in order, and
so forth, imbibing by the way various doctrines, or parts of doctrines,
which she is not the sort of person to assimilate, but with which she is
experimenting: holding, meantime, a grim intuition of their foolishness,
or so it seems to me. 'The science' made it easier for her to seek her
ancestors in a foreign country with only a hundred dollars in her purse;
for the Salem priestess proclaims the glad tidings that all the wealth
of the world is ours, if we will but assert our heirship. Benella
believed this more or less until a week's sea-sickness undermined all
her new convictions of every sort. When she woke in the little bedroom
at O'Carolan's, she says, her heart was quite at rest, for she knew that
we were the kind of people one could rely on! I mustered courage to
say, "I hope so, and I hope also that we shall be able to rely upon you,
Benella!"

This idea evidently had not occurred to her, but she accepted it, and I
could see that she turned it over in her mind. You can imagine that this
vague philosophy of a Salem woman scientist superimposed on a foundation
of orthodoxy makes a curious combination, and one which will only be
temporary.

We shall expect you to-morrow evening, and we shall be quite ready to go
on to the Lakes of Killarney or wherever you wish. By the way, I met
an old acquaintance the morning I arrived here. I went to see Queen's
College; and as I was walking under the archway which has carved upon
it, 'Where Finbarr taught let Munster learn,' I saw two gentlemen. They
looked like professors, and I asked if I might see the college. They
said certainly, and offered to take my card into some one who would
do the honours properly. I passed it to one of them: we looked at each
other, and recognition was mutual. He (Dr. La Touche) is giving a course
of lectures here on Irish Antiquities. It has been a great privilege to
see this city and its environs with so learned a man; I wish you could
have shared it. Yesterday he made up a party and we went to Passage,
which you may remember in Father Prout's verses:--

     'The town of Passage is both large and spacious,
        And situated upon the say;
      'Tis nate and dacent, and quite adjacent
        To come from Cork on a summer's day.
      There you may slip in and take a dippin'
        Fornent the shippin' that at anchor ride;
      Or in a wherry cross o'er the ferry
        To Carrigaloe, on the other side.'

Dr. La Touche calls Father Prout an Irish potato seasoned with Attic
salt. Is not that a good characterisation?

Good-bye for the moment, as I must see about Benella's luncheon.

Yours affectionately S.P.



Chapter X. The belles of Shandon.

     'The spreading Lee that, like an Island fayre,
      Encloseth Corke with his divided floode.'
                               Edmund Spenser.

We had seen all that Youghal could offer to the tourist; we were
yearning for Salemina; we wanted to hear Benella talk about 'the
science'; we were eager to inspect the archaeologist, to see if he
'would do' for Salemina instead of the canon, or even the minor canon,
of the English Church, for whom we had always privately destined her.
Accordingly we decided to go by an earlier train, and give our family
a pleasant surprise. It was five o'clock in the afternoon when our car
trundled across St. Patrick's Bridge, past Father Mathew's statue, and
within view of the church and bells of Shandon, that sound so grand on
the pleasant waters of the river Lee. Away to the west is the two-armed
river. Along its banks rise hills, green and well wooded, with beautiful
gardens and verdant pastures reaching to the very brink of the shining
stream.

It was Saturday afternoon, and I never drove through a livelier,
quainter, more easy-going town. The streets were full of people selling
various things and plying various trades, and among them we saw many
a girl pretty enough to recall Thackeray's admiration of the Corkagian
beauties of his day. There was one in particular, driving a donkey in a
straw-coloured governess cart, to whose graceful charm we succumbed on
the instant. There was an exquisite deluderin' wildness about her,
a vivacity, a length of eyelash with a gleam of Irish grey eye, 'the
greyest of all things blue, the bluest of all things grey,' that might
well have inspired the English poet to write of her as he did of his own
Irish wife; for Spenser, when he was not writing the Faerie Queene,
or smoking Raleigh's fragrant weed, wooed and wedded a fair colleen of
County Cork.

     'Tell me, ye merchant daughters, did ye see
      So fayre a creature in your town before?
      Her goodlie eyes, like sapphyres shining bright;
      Her forehead, ivory white;
      Her lips like cherries, charming men to byte.'

Now we turned into the old Mardyke Walk, a rus in urbe, an avenue a mile
long lined with noble elm-trees; forsaken now as a fashionable promenade
for the Marina, but still beautiful and still beloved, though frequented
chiefly by nurse-maids and children. Such babies and such children, of
all classes and conditions--so jolly, smiling, dimpled, curly-headed;
such joyous disregard of rags and dirt; such kindness one to the other
in the little groups, where a child of ten would be giving an anxious
eye to four or five brothers and sisters, and mothering a contented baby
in arms as well.

Our driver, though very loquacious, was not quite intelligible. He
pronounced the simple phrase 'St. Patrick's Street' in a way to astonish
the traveller; it would seem impossible to crowd as many h's into three
words, and to wrap each in flannel, as he succeeded in doing. He seemed
pleased with our admiration of the babies, and said that Irish children
did be very fat and strong and hearty; that they were the very best
soldiers the Queen had, God kape her! They could stand anny hardship and
anny climate, for they were not brought up soft, like the English.
He also said that, fine as all Irish children undoubtedly were, Cork
produced the flower of them all, and the finest women and the finest
men; backing his opinion with an Homeric vaunt which Francesca took down
on the spot:--

     'I'd back one man from Corkshire
      To bate ten more from Yorkshire:
        Kerrymen
        Agin Derrymen,
      And Munster agin creation,
      Wirrasthrue! 'tis a pity we aren't a nation!'

Here he slackened his pace as we passed a small bosthoon driving a
donkey, to call out facetiously, "Be good to your little brother,
achree!"

"We must be very near Coolkilla House by this time," said Francesca.
"That isn't Salemina sitting on the bench under the trees, is it? There
is a gentleman with her, and she never wears a wide hat, but it looks
like her red umbrella. No, of course it isn't, for whoever it is belongs
to that maid with the two children. Penelope, it is borne in upon me
that we shouldn't have come here unannounced, three hours ahead of the
time arranged. Perhaps, whenever we had chosen to come, it would have
been too soon. Wouldn't it be exciting to have to keep out of Salemina's
way, as she has always done for us? I couldn't endure it; it would make
me homesick for Ronald. Go slowly, driver, please."

Nevertheless, as we drew nearer we saw that it was Salemina; or at least
it was seven-eighths of her, and one-eighth of a new person with whom
we were not acquainted. She rose to meet us with an exclamation of
astonishment, and after a hasty and affectionate greeting, presented
Dr. La Touche. He said a few courteous words, and to our relief made no
allusions to round towers, duns, raths, or other antiquities, and bade
us adieu, saying that he should have the honour of waiting upon us that
evening with our permission.

A person in a neat black dress and little black bonnet with white lawn
strings now brought up the two children to say good-bye to Salemina.
It was the Derelict, Benella Dusenberry, clothed in maid's apparel, and
looking, notwithstanding that disguise, like a New England schoolma'am.
She was delighted to see us, scanned every detail of Francesca's
travelling costume with the frankest admiration, and would have allowed
us to carry our wraps and umbrellas upstairs if she had not been
reminded by Salemina. We had a cosy cup of tea together, and told our
various adventures, but Salemina was not especially communicative about
hers. Oddly enough, she had met the La Touche children at the hotel in
Mallow. They were travelling with a very raw Irish nurse, who had no
control of them whatever. They shrieked and kicked when taken to their
rooms at night, until Salemina was obliged to speak to them, in order
that Benella's rest should not be disturbed.

"I felt so sorry for them," she said--"the dear little girl put to
bed with tangled hair and unwashed face, the boy in a rumpled, untidy
nightgown, the bedclothes in confusion. I didn't know who they were nor
where they came from, but while the nurse was getting her supper I made
them comfortable, and Broona went to sleep with my strange hand in hers.
Perhaps it was only the warm Irish heart, the easy friendliness of
the Irish temperament, but I felt as if the poor little things must be
neglected indeed, or they would not have clung to a woman whom they had
never seen before." (This is a mistake; anybody who has the opportunity
always clings to Salemina.) "The next morning they were up at daylight,
romping in the hall, stamping, thumping, clattering, with a tin cart
on wheels rattling behind them. I know it was not my affair, and I was
guilty of unpardonable rudeness, but I called the nurse into my room and
spoke to her severely. No, you needn't smile; I was severe. 'Will you
kindly do your duty, and keep the children quiet as they pass through
the halls?' I said. 'It is never too soon to teach them to obey the
rules of a public place, and to be considerate of older people.' She
seemed awestruck. But when she found her tongue she stammered, 'Sure,
ma'am, I've tould thim three times this day already that when their
father comes he'll bate thim with a blackthorn stick!'

"Naturally I was horrified. This, I thought, would explain everything:
no mother, and an irritable, cruel father.

"'Will he really do such a thing?' I asked, feeling as if I must know
the truth.

"'Sure he will not, ma'am!' she answered cheerfully. 'He wouldn't lift a
feather to thim, not if they murdthered the whole counthryside, ma'am.'

"Well, they travelled third class to Cork, and we came first, so we did
not meet, and I did not ask their surnames; but it seems that they were
being brought to their father, whom I met many years ago in America."

As she did not volunteer any further information, we did not like to ask
her where, how many years ago, or under what circumstances. 'Teasing' of
this sort does not appeal to the sophisticated at any time, but it seems
unspeakably vulgar to touch on matters of sentiment with a woman of
middle age. If she has memories, they are sure to be sad and sacred
ones; if she has not, that perhaps is still sadder. We agreed, however,
when the evening was over, that Dr. La Touche was probably the love of
her youth--unless, indeed, he was simply an old friend, and the degree
of Salemina's attachment had been exaggerated; something that is very
likely to happen in the gossip of a New England town, where they always
incline to underestimate the feeling of the man, and overrate that of
the woman, in any love affair. 'I guess she'd take him if she could
get him' is the spoken or unspoken attitude of the public in rural or
provincial New England.

The professor is grave, but very genial when he fully recalls the fact
that he is in company, and has not, like the Trappist monks, taken vows
of silence. Francesca behaved beautifully, on the whole, and made no
embarrassing speeches, although she was in her gayest humour. Salemina
blushed a little when the young sinner dragged into the conversation the
remark that, undoubtedly, from the beginning of the sixth century to the
end of the eighth, Ireland was the University of Europe, just as Greece
was in the late days of the Roman Republic, and asked our guest when
Ireland ceased to be known as 'Insula sanctorum et doctorum,' the island
of saints and scholars.

We had seen her go into Salemina's bedroom, and knew perfectly well that
she had consulted the Peabody notebook, lying open on the desk; but the
professor looked as surprised as if he had heard a pretty paroquet quote
Gibbon. I don't like to see grave and reverend scholars stare at pretty
paroquets, but I won't belittle Salemina's exquisite and peculiar charm
by worrying over the matter.

     'Wirra, wirra!  Ologone!
      Can't ye lave a lad alone,
  Till he's proved there's no tradition left of any other girl--
      Not even Trojan Helen,
      In beauty all excellin'--
  Who's been up to half the divilment of Fan Fitzgerl?'

Of course Francesca's heart is fixed upon Ronald Macdonald, but that
fact has not altered the glance of her eyes. They no longer say,
'Wouldn't you like to fall in love with me, if you dared?' but they
still have a gleam that means, 'Don't fall in love with me; it is no
use!' And of the two, one is about as dangerous as the other, and each
has something of 'Fan Fitzgerl's divilment.

     'Wid her brows of silky black
      Arched above for the attack,
  Her eyes they dart such azure death on poor admiring man;
      Masther Cupid, point your arrows,
      From this out, agin the sparrows,
  For you're bested at Love's archery by young Miss Fan.'

Of course Himself never fell a prey to Francesca's fascinations, but
then he is not susceptible; you could send him off for a ten-mile drive
in the moonlight with Venus herself, and not be in the least anxious.

Dr. La Touche is grey for his years, tall and spare in frame, and there
are many lines of anxiety or thought in his forehead; but a wonderful
smile occasionally smooths them all out, and gives his face a rare
though transient radiance. He looks to me as if he had loved too many
books and too few people; as if he had tried vainly to fill his heart
and life with antiquities, which of all things, perhaps, are the most
bloodless, the least warming and nourishing when taken in excess or as
a steady diet. Himself (God bless him!) shall never have that patient
look, if I can help it; but how it will appeal to Salemina! There are
women who are born to be petted and served, and there are those who seem
born to serve others. Salemina's first idea is always to make tangled
things smooth (like little Broona's curly hair); to bring sweet and
discreet order out of chaos; to prune and graft and water and weed and
tend things, until they blossom for very shame under her healing touch.
Her mind is catholic, well ordered, and broad,--for ever full of other
people's interests, never of her own: and her heart always seems to
me like some dim, sweet-scented guest-chamber in an old New England
mansion, cool and clean and quiet, and fragrant of lavender. It has been
a lovely, generous life, lived for the most part in the shadow of other
people's wishes and plans and desires. I am an impatient person,
I confess, and heaven seems so far away when certain things are in
question: the righting of a child's wrong, or the demolition of a
barrier between two hearts; above all, for certain surgical operations,
more or less spiritual, such as removing scales from eyes that refuse
to see, and stops from ears too dull to hear. Nobody shall have our
Salemina unless he is worthy, but how I should like to see her life
enriched and crowned! How I should enjoy having her dear little overworn
second fiddle taken from her by main force, and a beautiful first
violin, or even the baton for leading an orchestra, put into her
unselfish hands!

And so good-bye and 'good luck to ye, Cork, and your pepper-box
steeple,' for we leave you to-morrow!



Chapter XI. 'The rale thing.'

     'Her ancestors were kings before Moses was born,
      Her mother descended from great Grana Uaile.'
                                Charles Lever.

                                     Knockarney House, Lough Lein.

We are in the province of Munster, the kingdom of Kerry, the town of
Ballyfuchsia, and the house of Mrs. Mullarkey. Knockarney House is
not her name for it; I made it myself. Killarney is church of the
sloe-trees; and as kill is church, the 'onderhanded manin'' of 'arney'
must be something about sloes; then, since knock means hill, Knockarney
should be hill of the sloe-trees.

I have not lost the memory of Jenny Geddes and Tam o' the Cowgate, but
Penelope O'Connor, daughter of the king of Connaught, is more frequently
present in my dreams. I have by no means forgotten that there was a
time when I was not Irish, but for the moment I am of the turf, turfy.
Francesca is really as much in love with Ireland as I, only, since she
has in her heart a certain tender string pulling her all the while to
the land of the heather, she naturally avoids comparisons. Salemina,
too, endeavours to appear neutral, lest she should betray an
inexplicable interest in Dr. La Touche's country. Benella and I alone
are really free to speak the brogue, and carry our wild harps slung
behind us, like Moore's minstrel boy. Nothing but the ignorance of her
national dishes keeps Benella from entire allegiance to this island; but
she thinks a people who have grown up without a knowledge of doughnuts,
baked beans, and blueberry-pie must be lacking in moral foundations.
There is nothing extraordinary in all this; for the Irish, like the
Celtic tribes everywhere, have always had a sort of fascinating power
over people of other races settling among them, so that they become
completely fused with the native population, and grow to be more Irish
than the Irish themselves.

We stayed for a few days in the best hotel; it really was quite good,
and not a bit Irish. There was a Swiss manager, an English housekeeper,
a French head waiter, and a German office clerk. Even Salemina, who
loves comforts, saw that we should not be getting what is known as the
real thing, under these circumstances, and we came here to this--what
shall I call Knockarney House? It was built originally for a fishing
lodge by a sporting gentleman, who brought parties of friends to stop
for a week. On his death is passed somehow into Mrs. Mullarkey's fair
hands, and in a fatal moment she determined to open it occasionally to
'paying guests,' who might wish a quiet home far from the madding crowd
of the summer tourist. This was exactly what we did want, and here we
encamped, on the half-hearted advice of some Irish friends in the town,
who knew nothing else more comfortable to recommend.

"With us, small, quiet, or out-of-the-way places are never clean; or
if they are, then they are not Irish," they said. "You had better see
Ireland from the tourist's point of view for a few years yet, until we
have learned the art of living; but if you are determined to know the
humours of the people, cast all thought of comfort behind you."

So we did, and we afterward thought that this would be a good motto for
Mrs. Mullarkey to carve over the door of Knockarney House. (My name for
it is adopted more or less by the family, though Francesca persists in
dating her letters to Ronald from 'The Rale Thing,' which it undoubtedly
is.) We take almost all the rooms in the house, but there are a
few other guests. Mrs. Waterford, an old lady of ninety-three, from
Mullinavat, is here primarily for her health, and secondarily to dispose
of threepenny shares in an antique necklace, which is to be raffled for
the benefit of a Roman Catholic chapel. Then we have a fishing gentleman
and his bride from Glasgow, and occasional bicyclers who come in for
a dinner, a tea, or a lodging. These three comforts of a home are
sometimes quite indistinguishable with us: the tea is frequently made up
of fragments of dinner, and the beds are always sprinkled with crumbs.
Their source is a mystery, unless they fall from the clothing of the
chambermaids, who frequently drop hairpins and brooches and buttons
between the sheets, and strew whisk brooms and scissors under the
blankets.

We have two general servants, who are supposed to do all the work of the
house, and who are as amiable and obliging and incapable as they well
can be. Oonah generally waits upon the table, and Molly cooks; at
least she cooks now and then when she is not engaged with Peter in the
vegetable garden or the stable. But whatever happens, Mrs. Mullarkey, as
a descendant of one of the Irish kings, is to be looked upon only as an
inspiring ideal, inciting one to high and ever higher flights of happy
incapacity. Benella ostensibly oversees the care of our rooms, but she
is comparatively helpless in such a kingdom of misrule. Why demand clean
linen when there is none; why seek for a towel at midday when it is
never ironed until evening; how sweep when a broom is all inadequate
to the task? Salemina's usual remark, on entering a humble hostelry
anywhere, is: "If the hall is as dirty as this, what must the kitchen
be! Order me two hard-boiled eggs, please!"

"Use your 'science,' Benella," I say to that discouraged New England
maiden, who has never looked at her philosophy from its practical or
humorous side. "If the universe is pure mind and there is no matter,
then this dirt is not a real thing, after all. It seems, of course,
as if it were thicker under the beds and bureaus than elsewhere, but
I suppose our evil thoughts focus themselves there rather than in the
centre of the room. Similarly, if the broom handle is broken, deny
