hitched up a little cart. The
cart had some corn in it.
]



LESSON XLII.

look'ing    thought   pick'ing    heard    chirp    were    told    birds

search     dear'ly    young       girl     loved    chil'dren    be sides'


[Illustration: Girl picking flowers.]


A little girl went in search of flowers for her mother. It was early in
the day, and the grass was wet. Sweet little birds were singing all around
her.

And what do you think she found besides flowers? A nest with young birds
in it.

While she was looking at them, she heard the mother bird chirp, as if she
said, "Do not touch my children, little girl, for I love them dearly."

The little girl now thought how dearly her own mother loved her.

So she left the birds. Then picking some flowers, she went home, and told
her mother what she had seen and heard.



LESSON XLIII.

eight    ask    aft'er    town    past    ah    tick'et

right    half   two       train   ding    light'ning


[Illustration: Boy and girl sitting in wicker clothes basket.
Woman sitting in chair.]


"Mamma, will you go to town?"

"What do you ask for a ticket on your train?"

"Oh! we will give you a ticket, mamma."

"About what time will you get back? "

"At half past eight."

"Ah! that is after bedtime. Is this the fast train?"

"Yes, this is the lightning train."

"Oh! that is too fast for me."

"What shall we get for you in town, mamma?"

"A big basket, with two good little children in it."

"All right! Time is up! Ding, ding!"



LESSON XLIV.

school    e'ven (e'vn)    three    room    small

book      teach'er        noon     rude    read'ing    poor


[Illustration: Several children in woods. Three are holding books,
others are playing with a ball.]


It is noon, and the school is out. Do you see the children at play? Some
run and jump, some play ball, and three little girls play school under a
tree.

What a big room for such a small school!

Mary is the teacher. They all have books in their hands, and Fanny is
reading.

They are all good girls, and would not be rude even in playing school.

Kate and Mary listen to Fanny as she reads from her book.

What do you think she is reading about? I will tell you. It is about a
poor little boy who was lost in the woods.

When Fanny has finished, the three girls will go home.

In a little while, too, the boys will give up their playing.



LESSON XLV.

ap'ple    mew    tease    crack'er    down    new    sil'ly    a sleep'

wants     calls  knew     friends     up on'  flew   Poll      Pol'ly


[Illustration: Girl sitting at dinner table. Parrot is on a perch
in the foreground.]


Lucy has a new pet. Do you know what kind of bird it is? Lucy calls her
Polly.

Polly can say, "Poor Poll! Poor Poll! Polly wants a cracker;" and she can
mew like a cat.

But Polly and the cat are not good friends. One day Polly flew down, and
lit upon the cat's back when she was asleep.

I think she knew the cat would not like that, and she did it to tease her.

When Lucy pets the cat, Polly flies up into the old apple tree, and will
not come when she calls her. Then Lucy says, "What a silly bird!"



LESSON XLVI. REVIEW.


"Well, children, did you have a nice time in the woods?"

"Oh yes, mother, such a good time! See what sweet flowers we found, and
what soft moss. The best flowers are for grandma. Won't they please her?"

"Yes; and it will please grandma to know that you thought of her."


[Illustration: Dog sitting by picnic basket in woods. Two dolls are
lying next to the basket.]


"Rab was such a good dog, mother.

We left him under the big tree by the brook, to take care of the dolls and
the basket.

"When we came back, they were all safe. No one could get them while Rab
was there. We gave him some of the crackers from the basket.

"O mother, how the birds did sing in the woods!

"Fanny said she would like to be a bird, and have a nest in a tree. But I
think she would want to come home to sleep."

"If she were a bird, her nest would be her home. But what would mother do,
I wonder, without her little Fanny?"



LESSON XLVII.

beach    shells    these    seat        waves     go'ing

ev'er    sea       watch    e'ven ing   la'zy     side


[Illustration: Horses pulling family in wagon.]


These boys and girls live near the sea. They have been to the beach. It is
now evening, and they are going home.

John, who sits on the front seat, found some pretty shells. They are in
the basket by his side.

Ben White is driving. He holds the lines in one hand, and his whip in the
other.

Robert has his hat in his hand, and is looking at the horses. He thinks
they are very lazy; they do not trot fast.

The children are not far from home. In a little while the sun will set,
and it will be bedtime.

Have you ever been at the seaside? Is it not good sport to watch the big
waves, and to play on the wet sand?



LESSON XLVIII.

log    qui'et    proud    pulled    fish    stump    riv'er    fa'ther


[Illustration: Father and son fishing from under a tree.]


One evening Frank's father said to him, "Frank, would you like to go with
me to catch some fish?"

"Yes; may I go? and with you, father?"

"Yes, Frank, with me."

"Oh, how glad I am!"

Here they are, on the bank of a river. Frank has just pulled a fine fish
out of the water. How proud he feels!

See what a nice, quiet spot they have found. Frank has the stump of a big
tree for his seat, and his father sits on a log near by. They like the
sport.



LESSON XLIX.

rain     out'side    of'ten    pit'ter       say      win'dow

sound    pat'ter     drops     some'times    on'ly    mu'sic


SLATE WORK
