
"Come along now," she said, and taking Lili's hand, she ran with her to
the wash-house, lifted the long wooden spout from its hiding-place, put
one end into the log, and the other into a small tub. Then she explained
to Lili that when they had enough water, they could push the spout away
from the log, and when they wanted it again, they could lift it up and put
it into the log themselves. But now she must go back to her work.

Away went Trine, and now the preparations for the voyage could begin. The
children took the lower end of the spout out of the tub, and put it down
upon the floor. Lili got into the new ark, and then Wili, and then they
lifted in the cat and the dog. Noah and his wife sat side by side, and
rejoiced over their safety and over the delightful voyage they should make
on the rising waters of the flood, as the stream from the spout flowed
merrily in upon the wash-house floor. The water rose very fast. Now, yes,
now the ark fairly floated, and Noah and his wife shouted for joy! The
flood had begun, and they were floating backward and forth upon the
surface of the water!

The wash-house floor was lower by several steps than the level of the
ground outside. The water rose and rose, and the children began to be
frightened.

"Look, Wili, we can't get out again, and it is getting very deep."

Wili gazed thoughtfully over the edge of the tub, and said, "If it gets
much deeper we shall be drowned."

And it went on getting deeper and deeper.

Pretty soon Schnurri grew restless, and sprang up, making the tub roll so
frightfully as almost to upset it. The water was now so deep that the
children could not get out without danger, and they became dreadfully
frightened, and began to cry out as loud as they could,

"We are drowning! Mamma! Battiste! Trine! We are drowning!" Then they no
longer used any words, but simply screamed, quite beside themselves with
terror. Schnurri barked and howled in sympathy, but Philomele scratched
and bit at everything within reach. Now the true character of the two
animals showed itself. The cat would not go out of the tub into the
water, and would not stay quietly in it, either, but fought like a mad
creature. But when the faithful dog found that, in spite of all the
screams and howls, no one came to their aid, he jumped into the water,
swam to the door, shook himself vigorously, and ran away. The children
screamed louder than ever, for the dog's movements had made the tub tip
back and forth, and they were well scared.

Dora had run down from her room, and was peeping through her opening in
the hedge, to try to find out the cause of these terrible cries. The
wash-house stood quite near the hedge, but she could not see anything
except the logs that carried the water to it from the spring. She heard
the cry "We are drowning!" and she ran back up-stairs, calling out,
breathless with fright,

"Aunt, aunt! two children are drowning over there! don't you hear them
call?"

Her aunt had closed all the windows, but the screams penetrated even to
her ears.

"Oh dear, what can that be?" she exclaimed, in the greatest alarm. "I hear
a terrible cry; but who says they are drowning? Mrs. Kurd! Mrs. Kurd! Mrs.
Kurd!"

Meantime, Schnurri, all dripping-wet, ran to the shed where Battiste was
shaping bean-poles for the kitchen garden. The dog rushed at Battiste,
barking furiously, seized him by the trousers, and tried to pull him
along.

"Something is amiss," said the man to himself; and taking a long
bean-pole on his shoulder, in case it should be needed, he followed
Schnurri to the wash-house. By this time the whole family had assembled
there--the mother, the governess, Julius, Paula, Rolf, Hunne, and last of
all Trine; for the cries had reached every corner of house and garden.
Battiste stretched his long pole across the water to the floating tub.

"Now, catch hold of that, and hold on tight, very tight," he said, and
pulled the ark and its occupants towards dry land. Wili and Lili were as
white as chalk from their long fright.

It was no time to question the children about this new mishap, for they
were in no condition to talk about it; so the mother wisely took each by
the hand, and led them to the seat under the apple-tree, to recover
themselves. Julius followed with little Hunne, saying, "Oh Wili and Lili,
you terrible twins, you will come to some dreadful end before long."

Old Battiste rolled up his trousers and stepped into the water in the
wash-house, to pull out the stopper from the waste pipe so that the flood
could subside from the land of Noah. Trine stood looking on. Battiste
growled at her.

"You have no more sense than the seven-year-old babies! But that is the
way things go!" for he had seen at once, who must have given them the
water-spout. Trine did not think it best to reply at that moment, as she
had been fairly caught in the wrong, but she secretly got her claws ready
to scratch when her chance came--just like Philomele. When the little
party under the apple-tree were somewhat tranquillized again, the cat came
purring and rubbing herself fawningly about Lili's feet. The child only
gave her an angry push, and turned to caress old Schnurri, who lay, still
wet, on the ground near by; while Wili patted him affectionately, saying
softly,

"You shall have all my supper to-night, old fellow."

"Mine too," said Lili, and they both understood now the real characters of
the two pets.

Hunne sat looking thoughtfully at the rescued party, and at last accosted
Jule, who was walking back and forth on the gravel path:

"Look here, Jule, what will the 'dreadful end' be like?"

"Oh it may be anything, Hunne. You see they have tried fire and water, and
next they will pull the house down about our ears, I dare say. Then we
shall lie under the ruins, and it will be all over with us."

"Shan't we be able to jump up quick, and get out of the way?" asked Hunne,
anxiously.

"We may; unless the twins should be seized with their great idea in the
middle of the night."

"You'll wake me up then Jule, won't you?" asked the little fellow
pleadingly.

Mrs. Kurd had come running at the repeated summons of Aunt Ninette, just
as Battiste had gone to save the patriarchs of the flood with his
bean-pole; and when she reached her, the tumult was stilled.

"Did you hear that, Mrs. Kurd? It was frightful! Everything is quiet now,
and I hope they are saved!"

"Oh yes, of course," said Mrs. Kurd, quite unconcernedly, "it is only the
little ones. They are always crying out about something. There isn't
really anything the matter."

"No; but children's cries are so shrill; I am shivering all over. How will
my husband stand it? No; this settles it, Mrs. Kurd. We shall go away.
This is the last drop."

With these words Mrs. Ehrenreich hurried into her husband's room to see
how he had borne the shock. He was sitting at his table, with his ears
stopped with cotton wool, and he did not hear his wife come in. He had
stuffed his ears when the first cry came, and had therefore escaped the
rest of the hubbub.

"Oh, that is very unhealthy, it is so heating for the head;" cried Aunt
Ninette, much distressed. She pulled the wool from his ears, and announced
that she should go directly after the church-service on the morrow, and
ask the pastor where they could move to, since this place was unendurable.

This plan suited Uncle Titus as well as any other; all he wanted was
quiet. Aunt Ninette, thinking over her plans, went back to her own room.

Dora stood waiting for her aunt in the passage-way. "Are we really going
away, Aunt?" she asked anxiously.

"Yes, decidedly;" replied Mrs. Ehrenreich, "we shall move on Monday."

Poor little Dora! it was a sad trial to her, to have to go away without
once having a chance to make the acquaintance of the other family; to go
into the beautiful garden, to smell those delicious flowers, and to join
the merry child-life that she had watched so closely, and yet from which
she was so entirely separated. Her future seemed swallowed up in those
stifling cotton shirts that were her fate in dull Karlsruhe. As she sat on
the side of her little bed, that night, sadly cast down by these
melancholy thoughts, she forgot the five friendly stars in the sky above.
Yet there they were, sparkling as ever, as if they were trying to speak to
their child and say, "Dora, Dora! have you quite forgotten your father's
verses?"




CHAPTER VI.

A FRIGHTFUL DEED.


It was a beautiful, bright Sunday morning. In the garden all was peaceful
and lovely. No sound broke the perfect stillness, save when now and then a
rosy-cheeked apple fell to the ground, for the apples were ripening fast
in the autumn sun.

Mr. and Mrs. Birkenfeld had gone to church, and with them Paula and Miss
Hanenwinkel. In the sitting-room, Jule and Hunne were harmoniously
discussing over a big dish of hazel-nuts, in how many different ways they
could make the nutcracker crack a nut. The twins, since the lesson they
had had in the wash-house, had returned contented to the mimic ark, with
its wooden men and women, and they were now playing with it on the
school-room table, which they had all to themselves to-day. Rolf had early
betaken himself to the garden, and had settled down in a sequestered
summer-house, where he could think over all sorts of things, without fear
of being disturbed.

After the flood had subsided (a flood this time without water), and when
the dove had returned with the olive-branch, and quiet was restored in the
land, new schemes began to work in Lili's busy little head.

"What do you say, Wili, to coming down-stairs to look at Rolf's new bow;
he left it in the passage-way last evening."

Wili was all agog at the idea, and they both scampered down-stairs. Lili
knew the corner where Rolf had placed the bow, and there too was the
quiver, with its two feathered arrows.

"Just see how jolly this is;" said Lili, "you pull this string back, and
put the arrow here, and then let the string fly, and off goes the arrow
like anything. I saw just how Rolf did it; and suppose we try to see how
it works!"

"But we must not shoot with it; don't you remember that papa said so,
Lili?"

"I don't mean to shoot, but only to try it. I just want to see how it is
done; don't you understand?"

This explanation satisfied Wili.

"Where shall we try it? There is not room in this passage."

"No, no; I know where, in the garden. Come along;" and Lili ran off with
the quiver, while Wili followed with the bow. They chose a nice open space
near the hedge.

"Here now, we will both try together, and see if we can do it," said Lili.

Wili brought up his bow, and they pressed it against the ground, and then
both took the cord in their hands, and tugged away till they had snapped
it into place. Lili shouted with delight.

"Now, we must lift it up," she said, "so; and put the arrow in here, Wili,
do you see? and now you pull back that thing underneath, and you will see
how it will go off. There, just try."

Wili tried; pulled back the "thing," and the arrow whistled through the
hedge. Instantly a cry of anguish sounded from the other side, and then
all was silent. They looked at each other in great fright.

"Do you think that was a rabbit?" asked Wili.

"I thought it sounded like a hen;" said Lili. Their consciences were
troubled, and their hearts were filled with fear, for they knew they had
done wrong to take the bow, and they each had the impression that the cry
of pain came from a child, though each hoped that the other thought it was
really only an animal. They carried the bow back to its place in silence.
Suddenly a new fear seized them. One arrow was gone from the quiver; what
if Rolf should miss it! The sound of the family coming back from church,
added to their embarrassment. It was not possible now to go to look for
the arrow, for that would lead to immediate discovery. Rolf did not yet
know that they had been shooting, but if he should begin to question them!
They had got themselves into a fine box, through their disobedience; and
they had no idea how they should ever get out of it, for they felt sure
that they should never dare to tell the truth, if the arrow were asked
for.

Silent, and covered with confusion from their consciousness of
wrong-doing, the twins crept back to the school-room, and there they sat
without stirring or speaking, until they were called to dinner. They did
not dare lift their eyes to the table, to see what dainty Sunday-dish had
been prepared, but slipped into their seats and felt almost choked even by
the soup; for something seemed to lie like a lump in their throats, and
prevent them from swallowing. They did not look up once during the whole
of dinner-time, and although their father spoke to them several times,
they could not find voice to answer.

"What have you two been about this time?" he said at last; for he knew
very well that this depression was not the result of yesterday's
performance; their contrition never lasted over night; that was not the
way with the twins. There was no answer. They sat as if nailed to their
seats, and stared into their plates. Their mother shook her head
thoughtfully. Little Hunne kept a watchful eye on them, for he had
observed from the first, that something was amiss. Presently a delicious
pudding with wine sauce was brought in, and their mother helped each one
to a good big slice. At that moment their father exclaimed,

"What is that? Is there any one very ill in the next house? There goes the
doctor, hurrying along as if some one were in great danger."

"I do not know of any one's being ill there," said the mother. "Mrs. Kurd
has let her rooms to some strangers. It may be one of them."

The twins were by turns as red as fire and as white as chalk. A secret
voice cried out in each little palpitating heart, "Now it is coming! it is
coming!" They were almost paralyzed with fright; the delicious pudding lay
untouched on their plates, though it was full of raisins and looked
unusually tempting. But even Hunne, the pudding-eater of the family,
neglected his plate today, and suddenly jumping down from his chair, he
began to shout like a crazy creature,

"Mama! Papa! come away! the house is going to fall down! everything is
going to pieces!" In his excitement he almost pulled Jule off his seat, to
make him come with him, as he ran out of the door. Presently they heard
him outside repeating, "The house will tumble down; Jule said it would!"

"Some evil spirit has certainly taken possession of the children," said
the astonished father, "The twins look as if they were sitting on pins,
and little Hunne is acting like a mad-man."

At these words Julius broke out into inextinguishable laughter; for it
suddenly dawned upon him what the little boy had in his mind. The unusual
timidity and silence of the twins was caused, no doubt, by their having
already begun in secret the work of destruction; and at any moment now the
house might fall in ruins upon the assembled family. Jule explained with
repeated outbursts of laughter, the meaning of Hunne's fright. In vain the
mother called the little boy to come in; he was jumping up and down before
the house door, stamping, and calling to his father and mother and Jule
and everyone to come out. At last his father lost patience, and said
decidedly that the door must be closed, and that the dinner should be
ended in peace. After dinner they all went into the garden, where Hunne
joined them. When he saw them all seated in safety under the apple-tree,
he said with a sigh,

"I wish some one would bring me my pudding, before the house falls down."

His mother drew him to her, and explained to him that big Jule and little
Hunne, were two very foolish fellows; the first to invent such silly
stuff, and the second to believe it. She begged him to think a bit how
impossible it would be for two children like Wili and Lili to pull down a
great strong stone house like theirs. But it was a long time before the
impression was effaced from the child's imagination.

Dora had been standing by the hedge, as usual, hoping that the children
would come into the garden, when Wili and Lili appeared with the bow. She
had watched the progress of their undertaking with the greatest interest.
At last, off flew the arrow; and in a second, the sharp point pierced the
little girl's bare arm. Dora groaned aloud with pain. The arrow fell to
the ground; it had not penetrated deep enough to hold at all; but the
blood followed, and trickled along her arm and hand, and down upon her
dress. At this sight Dora forgot her pain in her fear. Her first thought
was, "How Aunt Ninette will scold!" She tried to hide what had happened.
She twisted her handkerchief about the wounded arm, and she ran to the
spring before the house, to wash out all signs of blood. It was useless;
the blood flowed out under the bandage in a stream, and soon her dress was
spotted all over with the red drops.

"Dora! Dora!" called some one from above. It was her aunt; there was no
help for it; she must show herself. In fear and trembling, she mounted the
stairs and stood before her aunt, hiding the bandaged arm behind her. Her
pretty Sunday dress was stained with blood, and her face too; for in her
eagerness to wash it off she had spread it everywhere.

"Merciful Heaven!" cried her aunt, "what is the matter? Speak, child, did
you fall down? How you look! You are as pale as death, and all smeared
with blood! Dora, for heaven's sake, do speak!"

Dora had been trying to speak, but she could not get in a word edgewise.
At last she said timidly,

"It was an arrow!"

A flood of lamentations followed. Aunt Ninette flew up and down the room
wringing her hands and crying, "An arrow! an arrow! You have been shot!
Shot in the arm! You will have a stiff arm all your life! You will be a
cripple! You can never sew any more, nor do anything else! You will come
to want! We shall all have to suffer for it! How unlucky we are! How are
we to live, how can we ever get along, if your arm is lame?"

"Oh, Aunty dear, perhaps it will not be as bad as all that;" said the
child sobbing, "did not papa tell us to remember:

    "God holds us in his hand
     God knows the best to send."

"Certainly, of course that's true; but if you are lame, you will be lame;"
said Mrs. Ehrenreich, whimpering, "it makes me perfectly desperate. But
go--no--come here to the water. Where is Mrs. Kurd? Somebody must go for
the doctor."

Dora went to the wash-basin, while her aunt ran for Mrs. Kurd, and begged
her to send for the doctor to come immediately; it was a case of shooting,
and no one could tell how dangerous it might prove.

The doctor came as quickly as possible. He examined the wound, stopped the
bleeding, bound it up without a word, in spite of Aunt Ninette's
pertinacious attempts to make him express an opinion. He then took his hat
and made for the door.

But Aunt Ninette followed him up before he could make good his retreat.
"Do tell me, doctor, will her arm be lame? Stiff all the rest of her
life?"

"Oh, I trust not. I will call again to-morrow;" and the doctor was gone.

"'Oh I trust not,'" repeated Aunt Ninette in a despairing tone, "that's a
doctor's way of saying 'yes, of course.' I understand perfectly. What will
become of us? How shall we ever live through this misfortune?"

And she kept on fretting in this way until late into the evening.

When Wili's mother went in to hear her little boy's prayers that night,
she did not find him as usual, cheerfully sitting up in bed, ready for a
good chat with her, if she would stay. He was crouched down all in a heap,
and did not even look up at her, nor speak to her, when she sat down by
him.

"What is the matter with my little boy?" said she gently, "have you
something wrong in your heart? have you been doing what you ought not?"

The child made an unintelligible sound, neither yes nor no.

"Well, say your evening hymn, Wili; perhaps that will make you feel
better," said his mother.

Wili began:

    "The moon climbs up the sky,
     The stars shine out on high,
     Shine sparkling, bright and clear"--

and so on, but his thoughts were not on what he was saying; he was
listening to every sound outside the room, and he kept looking towards the
door as if he expected something terrible to come in at any moment; and in
his restless movements it was plain to see what a state of fear he was in.
When he had reached the end of his hymn,

    "Oh Father, spare thy rod;
     Send us sweet sleep, Oh God;
     Let our sick neighbor slumber, too"--

