think,

	THIRD READER. 	113
as I read the letter, of what he said to me years ago, 'Beware
of the first drink!'
12. "Ah, my dear boys, when old Uncle Philip is gone,
remember that he told you

the story of Tom Smith, and said to you, 'Beware of the first
drink!' The man who does this will never be a drunkard."



	114 	ECLECTIC SERIES.

LESSON XLIII.

SPEAK GENTLY.

1. Speak gently; it is better far
To rule by love than fear:
Speak gently; let no harsh words mar
The good we might do here.

2. Speak gently to the little child;
Its love be sure to gain;
Teach it in accents soft and mild;
It may not long remain.

3. Speak gently to the aged one;
Grieve not the careworn heart:
The sands of life are nearly run;
Let such in peace depart.

4. Speak gently, kindly, to the poor;
Let no harsh tone be heard;
They have enough they must endure,
Without an unkind word.

5. Speak gently to the erring; know
They must have toiled in vain;
Perhaps unkindness made them so;
Oh, win them back again.

	THIRD READER. 	115

6. Speak gently: 'tis a little thing
Dropped in the heart's deep well;
The good, the joy, which it may bring,
Eternity shall tell.
George Washington Langford.




LESSON XLIV.

THE SEVEN STICKS.
1. A man had seven sons, who were always quarreling.
They left their studies and work, to quarrel among
themselves. Some bad men were looking forward to the
death of their father, to cheat them out of their property by
making them quarrel about it.
2. The good old man, one day, called his sons around him.
He laid before them seven sticks, which were bound
together. He said, "I will pay a hundred dollars to the one
who can break this bundle."
3. Each one strained every nerve to break the bundle.
After a long but vain trial, they all said that it could not be
done.

	116 	ECLECTIC SERIES.
4. "And yet, my boys," said the father, "nothing is easier
to do." He then untied the bundle, and broke the sticks, one
by one, with perfect ease.

5. "Ah!" said his sons, "it is easy enough to do it so;
anybody could do it in that way."
6. Their father replied, "As it is with these sticks, so is it
with you, my sons. So

	THIRD READER. 	117
long as you hold fast together and aid each other, you will
prosper, and none can injure you.
7. "But if the bond of union be broken, it will happen to
you just as it has to these sticks, which lie here broken on the
ground."

Home, city, country, all are prosperous found,
When by the powerful link of union bound.



LESSON XLV.
THE MOUNTAIN SISTER.
1. The home of little Jeannette is far away, high up among
the mountains. Let us call her our mountain sister.
2. There are many things you would like to hear about her,
but I can only tell you now how she goes with her father and
brother, in the autumn, to help gather nuts for the long
winter.

	118 	ECLECTIC SERIES.
3. A little way down the mountain side is a chestnut wood.
Did you ever see a chestnut tree? In the spring its branches
are covered with bunches of  creamy flowers, like long
tassels. All the hot summer these are turning into sweet nuts,
wrapped safely in large, prickly, green balls.
4. But when the frost of autumn comes, these prickly balls
turn brown, and crack open. Then you may see inside one,
two, three, and even four, sweet, brown nuts.
5. When her father says, one night at supper time, "I think
there will be a frost tonight," Jeannette knows very well what
to do. She dances away early in the evening to her little bed,
made in a box built up against the wall.
6. Soon she falls asleep to dream about


	THIRD READER. 	119
the chestnut wood, and the little brook that springs from rock
to rock down under the tall, dark trees. She wakes with the
first daylight, and is out of bed in a minute, when she hears
her father's cheerful call, "Come, children; it is time to be
off."
7. Their dinner is ready in a large basket. The donkey
stands before the door with great bags for the nuts hanging at
each side. They go merrily over the crisp, white frost to the
chestnut trees. How the frost has opened the burs! It has
done half their work for them already.
8. How they laugh and sing, and shout to each other as
they fill their baskets! The sun looks down through the
yellow leaves; the rocks give them mossy seats; the birds
and squirrels wonder what these strange people are doing in
their woods.
9. Jeannette really helps, though she is only a little girl;
and her father says at night, that his Jane is a dear, good
child. This makes her very happy. She thinks about it at
night, when she says her prayers. Then she goes to sleep to
dream of the merry autumn days.
10. Such is our little mountain sister, and

	120 	ECLECTIC SERIES.


here is a picture of her far-away home. The mountain life is
ever a fresh and happy one.



	THIRD READER. 	121

LESSON XLVI.

HARRY AND THE GUIDEPOST.

1. The night was dark, the sun was hid
Beneath the mountain gray,
And not a single star appeared
To shoot a silver ray.

2. Across the heath the owlet flew,
And screamed along the blast;
And onward, with a quickened step,
Benighted Harry passed.

3. Now, in thickest darkness plunged,
He groped his way to find;
And now, he thought he saw beyond,
A form of horrid kind.

4. In deadly white it upward rose,
Of cloak and mantle bare,
And held its naked arms across,
To catch him by the hair.

5. Poor Harry felt his blood run cold,
At what before him stood;
But then, thought he, no harm, I'm sure,
Can happen to the good.

	122 	ECLECTIC SERIES.

6. So, calling all his courage up,
He to the monster went;
And eager through the dismal gloom
His piercing eyes he bent.

7. And when he came well nigh the ghost
That gave him such affright,
He clapped his hands upon his side,
And loudly laughed outright.

8. For 't was a friendly guidepost stood,
His wandering steps to guide;
And thus he found that to the good,
No evil could betide.



	THIRD READER. 	123

9.   Ah well, thought he, one thing I've learned,
Nor shall I soon forget;
Whatever frightens me again,
I'll march straight up to it.

10. And when I hear an idle tale,
Of monster or of ghost,
I'll tell of this, my lonely walk,
And one tall, white guidepost.




LESSON XLVII.

THE MONEY AMY DID N'T EARN.

1. Amy was a dear little girl, but she was too apt to waste
time in getting ready to do her tasks, instead of doing them at
once as she ought.

	124 	ECLECTIC SERIES.
2. In the village in which she lived, Mr. Thornton kept a
store where he sold fruit of all kinds, including berries in
their season. One day he said to Amy, whose parents were
quite poor, "Would you like to earn some money? "
3. "Oh, yes," replied she, "for I want some new shoes, and
papa has no money to buy them with."
4. "Well, Amy," said Mr. Thorhton, "I noticed some fine,
ripe blackberries in Mr. Green's pasture to-day, and he said
that anybody was welcome to them. I will pay you thirteen
cents a quart for all you will pick for me."
5. Amy was delighted at the thought of earning some
money; so she ran home to get a basket, intending to go
immediately to pick the berries.
6. Then she thought she would like to know how much
money she would get if she picked five quarts. With the help
of her slate and pencil, she found out that she would get
sixty-five cents.
7. "But supposing I should pick a dozen quarts," thought
she, "how much should I earn then?" "Dear me," she said,
after

	THIRD READER. 	125
figuring a while, "I should earn a dollar and fifty-six cents."
8. Amy then found out what Mr. Thornton would pay her
for fifty, a hundred, and two hundred quarts. It took her some
time to

do this, and then it was so near dinner time that she had to
stay at home until afternoon.
9. As soon as dinner was over, she took

	126 	ECLECTIC SERIES,
her basket and hurried to the pasture. Some boys had been
there before dinner, and all the ripe berries were picked. She
could not find enough to fill a quart measure.
10. As Amy went home, she thought of what her teacher
had often told her--"Do your task at once; then think about
it," for "one doer is worth a hundred dreamers."



LESSON XLVIII.
WHO MADE THE STARS?

1. "Mother, who made the stars, which light
The beautiful blue sky?
Who made the moon, so clear and bright,
That rises up so high?"

2. "'T was God, my child, the Glorious One,
He formed them by his power;
He made alike the brilliant sun,
And every leaf and flower.

	THIRD  READER. 	127

3. "He made your little feet to walk;
Your sparkling eyes to see;
Your busy, prattling tongue to talk,
And limbs so light and free.

4. "He paints each fragrant flower that blows,
With loveliness and bloom;
He gives the violet and the rose
Their beauty and perfume.

5. "Our various wants his hands supply;
He guides us every hour;
We're kept beneath his watchful eye,
And guarded by his power.

6. "Then let your little heart, my love,
Its grateful homage pay
To that kind Friend, who, from above,
Thus guides you every day.

7. "In all the changing scenes of time,
On Him our hopes depend;
In every age, in every clime,
Our Father and our Friend."



	128 	ECLECTIC SERIES.

LESSON XLIX.
DEEDS OF KINDNESS.
1. One day, as two little boys were walking along the
road, they overtook a woman carrying a large basket of
apples.
2. The boys thought the woman looked very pale and
tired; so they said, "Are you going to town? If you are, we
will carry your basket."
3. "Thank you," replied the woman, "you are very kind:
you see I am weak and ill." Then she told them that she was
a widow, and had a lame son to support.
4. She lived in a cottage three miles away, and was now
going to market to sell the apples which grew on the only
tree in her little garden. She wanted the money to pay her
rent.
5. "We are going the same way you are," said the boys.
"Let us have the basket;" and they took hold of it, one on
each side, and trudged along with merry hearts.
6. The poor widow looked glad, and said that she hoped
their mother would not be angry with them. "Oh, no," they
replied;

	THIRD READER. 	129
"our mother has taught us to be kind to everybody, and to be
useful in any way that we can."
7. She then offered to give them a few of  the ripest apples
for their trouble. "No,

thank you," said they; "we do not want any pay for what we
have done."
8. When the widow got home, she told her lame son what
had happened on the road,
3. 9.

	130 	ECLECTIC SERIES.
and they were both made happier that day by the kindness of
the two boys.
9. The other day, I saw a little girl stop and pick up a piece
of orange peel, which she threw into the gutter. "I wish the
boys would not throw orange peel on the sidewalk," said she.
"Some one may tread upon it, and fall."
10. "That is right, my dear," I said. "It is a little thing for
you to do what you have done, but it shows that you have a
thoughtful mind and a feeling heart."
11. Perhaps some may say that these are little things. So
they are; but we must not wait for occasions to do great
things. We must begin with little labors of love.


LESSON L.
THE ALARM CLOCK.
1. A lady, who found it not easy to wake in the morning as
early as she wished,

	THIRD READER. 	131
bought an alarm clock. These clocks are so made as to strike
with a loud whirring noise at any hour the owner pleases to
set them.
2. The lady placed her clock at the head of the bed, and at
the right time she found herself roused by the long, rattling
sound.
3. She arose at once, and felt better all day for her early
rising. This lasted for some weeks. The alarm clock
faithfully did its duty, and was plainly heard so long as it
was obeyed.
4. But, after a time, the lady grew tired of early rising.
When she was waked by the noise, she merely turned over in
bed, and slept again.
5. In a few days, the clock ceased to rouse her from her
sleep. It spoke just as loudly as ever; but she did not hear it,
because she had been in the habit of not obeying it.
6. Finding that she might as well be without it, she
resolved that when she heard the sound she would jump up.
7. Just so it is with conscience. If we will obey its voice,
even in the most trifling things, we can always hear it, clear
and strong.

	132 	ECLECTIC SERIES.
8. But if we allow ourselves to do what we have some
fears may not be quite right, we shall grow more and more
sleepy, until the voice of conscience has no longer power to
wake as.



LESSON LI.

SPRING.

1. The alder by the river
Shakes out her powdery curls;
The willow buds in silver
For little boys and girls.

2. The little birds fly over,
And oh, how sweet they sing!
To tell the happy children
That once again  't is Spring.

	THIRD READER. 	133

3. The gay green grass comes creeping
So soft beneath their feet;
The frogs begin to ripple
A music clear and sweet.

4. And buttercups are coming,
And scarlet columbine,
And in the sunny meadows
The dandelions shine.

5. And just as many daisies
As their soft hands can hold,
The little ones may gather,
All fair in white and gold.

6. Here blows the warm red clover,
There peeps the violet blue;
Oh, happy little children!
God made them all for you.
Celia Thaxter.






134 	ECLECTIC SERIES.

LESSON LII.
TRUE COURAGE.
One cold winter's day, three boys were passing by a
schoolhouse. The oldest was a bad boy. always in trouble
himself, and trying to get others into trouble. The youngest,
whose name was George, was a very good boy.
George wished to do right, but was very much wanting in
courage. The other boys were named Henry and James. As
they walked along, they talked as follows:
Henry. What fun it would be to throw a snowball against
the schoolroom door, and make the teacher and scholars all
jump!
James. You would jump, if you should. If the teacher did
not catch you and whip you, he would tell your father, and
you would get a whipping then; and that would make you
jump higher than the scholars, I think.
Henry. Why, we would get so far off, before the teacher
could come to the door, that he could not tell who we are.
Here is a snowball just as hard as ice, and George

	THIRD READER. 	135
would as soon throw it against the door as not.
James. Give it to him, and see. He would not dare to
throw it.
Henry. Do you think George is a coward? You do not
know him as well as I do.

Here, George, take this snowball, and show James that you
are not such a coward as he thinks you are.
George. I am not afraid to throw it; but I do not want to. I
do not see that it

	136 	ECLECTIC SERIES.
will do any good, or that there will be any fun in it.
James. There! I told you he would not dare to throw it.
Henry. Why, George, are you turning coward? I thought
you did not fear anything. Come, save your credit, and throw
