     Of the quivering lake, he spread
   A coat of mail, that it need not fear
   The downward point of many a spear,
   That he hung on its margin, far and near,
     Where a rock could rear its head.

3. He went to the windows of those who slept,
   And over each pane, like a fairy, crept;
   Wherever he breathed, wherever he stepped,
     By the light of the morn were seen
   Most beautiful things; there were flowers and trees;
   There were bevies of birds, and swarms of bees;
   There were cities with temples and towers, and these
     All pictured in silver sheen.

4. But he did one thing that was hardly fair;
   He peeped in the cupboard, and, finding there
   That all had forgotten for him to prepare,
     "Now just to set them a-thinking,
   I'll bite this basket of fruit," said he,
   "This costly pitcher I'll burst in three;
   And the glass of water they've left for me
     Shall 'tchick!' to tell them I'm drinking."


DEFINITIONS.--l. Blus'ter-ing, being noisy and loud. Bus'tle, stir. 2.
Crest, the top. Quiv'er-ing, trembling, shaking. Mar'gin, edge, border. 3.
Bev'ies, flocks. Pic'tured, painted. Sheen, brightness, splendor of
appearance.


EXERCISES.--What did the frost say? What did he do to the mountain? The
trees? The lake? What is a "coat of mail"? What did he do to the window?
The pitcher?



XXI. WASTE NOT, WANT NOT. (64)

1. Mr. Jones. Boys, if you have nothing to do, will you unpack these
parcels for me?

2. The two parcels were exactly alike, both of them well tied up with good
whipcord. Ben took his parcel to the table, and began to examine the knot,
and then to untie it.

3. John took the other parcel, and tried first at one corner, and then at
the other, to pull off the string. But the cord had been too well secured,
and he only drew the knots tighter.

4. John. I wish these people would not tie up their parcels so tightly, as
if they were never to be undone. Why, Ben, how did you get yours undone?
What is in your parcel? I wonder what is in mine! I wish I could get the
string off. I will cut it.

5. Ben. Oh, no, do not cut it, John! Look, what a nice cord this is, and
yours is the same. It is a pity to cut it.

6. John. Pooh! what signifies a bit of pack thread?

7. Ben. It is whipcord.

8. John. Well, whipcord then! what signifies a bit of whipcord? You can
get a piece of whipcord twice as long as that for three cents; and who
cares for three cents? Not I, for one. So, here it goes.

9. So he took out his knife, and cut it in several places.

10. Mr. Jones. Well, my boys, have you undone the parcels for me?

11. John. Yes, sir; here is the parcel.

12. Ben. And here is my parcel, father, and here is also the string.

13. Mr. Jones. You may keep the string, Ben.

14. Ben. Thank you, sir. What excellent whipcord it is!

15. Mr. Jones. And you, John, may keep your string, too, if it will be of
any use to you.

16. John. It will be of no use to me, thank you, sir.

17.  Mr. Jones. No, I am afraid not, if this is it.

18. A few weeks after this, Mr. Jones gave each of his sons a new top.

19. John. How is this, Ben? These tops have no strings. What shall we do
for strings?

20. Ben. I have a string that will do very well for mine. And he pulled it
out of his pocket.

21. John. Why, if that is not the whipcord! I wish I had saved mine.

22. A few days afterward, there was a shooting match, with bows and
arrows, among the lads. The prize was a fine bow and arrows, to be given
to the best marksman. "Come, come," said Master Sharp, "I am within one
inch of the mark. I should like to see who will go nearer."

23. John drew his bow, and shot. The arrow struck within a quarter of an
inch of Master Sharp's. "Shoot away," said Sharp; "but you must understand
the rules. We settled them before you came. You are to have three shots
with your own arrows. Nobody is to borrow or lend. So shoot away."

24. John seized his second arrow; "If I have any luck," said he;--but just
as he pronounced the word "luck," the string broke, and the arrow fell
from his hands.

25.  Master Sharp. There! It is all over with you.

26.  Ben. Here is my bow for him, and welcome.

27. Master Sharp. No, no, sir; that is not fair.  Did you not hear the
rules? There is to be no lending.

28. It was now Ben's turn to make his trial. His first arrow missed the
mark; the second was exactly as near as John's first. Before venturing the
last arrow, Ben very prudently examined the string of his bow; and, as he
pulled it to try its strength, it snapped.

29. Master Sharp clapped his hands and danced for joy. But his dancing
suddenly ceased, when careful Ben drew out of his pocket an excellent
piece of cord, and began to tie it to the bow.

30. "The everlasting whipcord, I declare!" cried John. "Yes," said Ben, "I
put it in my pocket today, because I thought I might want it."

31. Ben's last arrow won the prize; and when the bow and arrows were
handed to him, John said, "How valuable that whipcord has been to you,
Ben. I'll take care how I waste anything hereafter."


DEFINITIONS,--2. Ex-am'ine, to look at carefully. 6. Sig'ni--fies, to be
important. 22. Marks'man, one who shoots well. 28. Pru'dent-ly, with
proper caution. 29. Ceased, stopped. 30. Ev--er-last'ing, lasting always.


EXERCISES.--What is this lesson designed to teach? Which of the boys
preserved his whipcord? What good did it do him? What did the other boy do
with his? What was the consequence? What did he learn from it?

XXII. JEANNETTE AND JO. (67)

By Mary Mapes Dodge, who was born in New York City in 1838. She is the
editor of the "St. Nicholas" magazine, and has written many stories for
children.

1. Two girls I know--Jeannette and Jo,
   And one is always moping;
   The other lassie, come what may,
   Is ever bravely hoping.

2. Beauty of face and girlish grace
   Are theirs, for joy or sorrow;
   Jeannette takes brightly every day,
   And Jo dreads each to-morrow.

3. One early morn they watched the dawn--
   I saw them stand together;
   Their whole day's sport, 't was very plain,
   Depended on the weather.

4. "'T will storm!" cried Jo. Jeannette spoke low;
   "Yes, but 't will soon be over."
   And, as she spoke, the sudden shower
   Came, beating down the clover.

5. "I told you so!" cried angry Jo:
   "It always is a-raining!"
   Then hid her face in dire despair,
   Lamenting and complaining.

6. But sweet Jeannette, quite hopeful yet,--
   I tell it to her honor,--
   Looked up and waited till the sun
   Came streaming in upon her.

7. The broken clouds sailed off in crowds,
   Across a sea of glory.
   Jeannette and Jo ran, laughing, in--
   Which ends my simple story.

8. Joy is divine. Come storm, come shine,
   The hopeful are the gladdest;
   And doubt and dread, children, believe
   Of all things are the saddest.

9. In morning's light, let youth be bright;
   Take in the sunshine tender;
   Then, at the close, shall life's decline
   Be full of sunset splendor.

10. And ye who fret, try, like Jeannette,
    To shun all weak complaining;
   And not, like Jo, cry out too soon--
   "It always is a-raining!"



XXIII. THE LION. (69)

1. The lion is often called the "king of beasts," His height varies from
three to four feet, and he is from six to nine feet long. His coat is of
it yellowish brown or tawny color, and about his neck is a great shaggy
mane which gives his head a majestic appearance.

2. The strength of the lion is so great that he can easily crush the
skulls of such animals as the horse or ox with one blow of his paw. No one
who has not seen the teeth of a full grown lion taken out of their sockets
can have any idea of their real size; one of them forms a good handful,
and might easily be mistaken for a small elephant's tooth.

3. The home of the lion is in the forests of Asia and Africa, where he is
a terror to man and beast. He generally lies concealed during the day, but
as darkness comes on he prowls about where other animals are accustomed to
go for food or drink, and springs upon them unawares, with a roar that
sounds like the rumble of thunder.

4. The lion sometimes lives to a great age. One by the name of Pompey died
at London, in the year 1760, at the age of seventy years. If taken when
young the lion can be tamed, and will even show marks of kindness to his
keeper.

5. In a menagerie at Brussels, there was a cell where a large lion, called
Danco, used to be kept. The cell happened to be in need of repair, and the
keeper, whose name was William, desired a carpenter to come and mend it.
The carpenter came, but was so afraid of the lion, that he would not go
near the cell alone.

6. So William entered the cell, and led the lion to the upper part of it,
while the other part was refitting. He played with the lion for some time;
but, at last, being wearied, both he and the lion fell asleep. The
carpenter went on with his work, and when he had finished he called out
for William to come and see it.

7. He called again and again, but no William answered. The poor carpenter
began to be frightened, lest the lion had made his dinner of the keeper,
or else crushed him with his great paws. He crept round to the upper part
of the cell, and there, looking through the railing, he saw the lion and
William sleeping side by side as contentedly as two little brothers.

8. He was so astonished that he uttered a loud cry. The lion, awakened by
the noise, stared at the carpenter with an eye of fury, and then placing
his paw on the breast of his keeper, as if to say, "Touch him if you
dare," the heroic beast lay down to sleep again. The carpenter was
dreadfully alarmed, and, not knowing how he could rouse William, he ran
out and related what he had seen.

9. Some people came, and, opening the door of the cell, Contrived to
awaken the keeper, who, rubbing his eyes, quietly looked around him, and
expressed himself very well satisfied with his nap. He took the lion's
paw, shook it kindly, and then retired uninjured from the cell.


DEFINITIONS.--l. Ma-jes'tic, royal, noble. 3. Prowls, wanders in search of
prey.  Un-a-wares', unexpectedly. Rum'ble, a low heavy sound. 5.
Men-ag'er-ie, a collection of wild animals. 6. Re-fit'ting, repairing. 8.
He-ro'-ic, bold.


EXERCISES.--Describe the lion's appearance. What is said of his strength?
His teeth? Describe the lion's home and habits. To what age do lions live?
Can they be tamed? Relate the story about the lion Danco.



XXIV. STRAWBERRIES. (71)

By John Townsend Trowbridge, who was born at Ogden, N. Y., in 1827. He is
a well-known author, and has written much for children both in poetry and
prose.

1. Little Pearl Honeydew, six years old,
   From her bright ear parted the curls of gold;
   And laid her head on the strawberry bed,
   To hear what the red-cheeked berries said.

2. Their cheeks were blushing, their breath was sweet,
   She could almost hear their little hearts beat;
   And the tiniest, lisping, whispering sound
   That ever you heard, came up from the ground.

3. "Little friends," she said, "I wish I knew
   How it is you thrive on sun and dew!"
   And this is the story the berries told
   To little Pearl Honeydew, six years old.

4. "You wish you knew? And so do we.
   But we can't tell you, unless it be
   That the same Kind Power that cares for you
   Takes care of poor little berries, too.

5. "Tucked up snugly, and nestled below
   Our coverlid of wind-woven snow,
   We peep and listen, all winter long,
   For the first spring day and the bluebird's song.

6. "When the swallows fly home to the old brown shed,
   And the robins build on the bough overhead,
   Then out from the mold, from the darkness and cold,
   Blossom and runner and leaf unfold.

7. "Good children, then, if they come near,
   And hearken a good long while, may hear
   A wonderful tramping of little feet,--
   So fast we grow in the summer heat.

8. "Our clocks are the flowers; and they count the hours
   Till we can mellow in suns and showers,
   With warmth of the west wind and heat of the south,
   A ripe red berry for a ripe red month.

9. "Apple blooms whiten, and peach blooms fall,
   And roses are gay by the garden wall,
   Ere the daisy's dial gives the sign
   That we may invite little Pearl to dine.

10. "The days are longest, the month is June,
    The year is nearing its golden noon,
    The weather is fine, and our feast is spread
    With a green cloth and berries red.

11. "Just take us betwixt your finger and thumb,
    And quick, oh, quick! for, see! there come
    Tom on all fours, and Martin the man,
    And Margaret, picking as fast as they can.

12. "Oh, dear! if you only knew how it shocks
    Nice berries like us to be sold by the box,
    And eaten by strangers, and paid for with pelf,
    You would surely take pity, and eat us yourself!"

13. And this is the story the small lips told
    To dear Pearl Honeydew, six years old,
    When she laid her head on the strawberry bed
    To hear what the red-cheeked berries said.


DEFINITIONS.--3. Thrive, to grow well, to flourish. 5. Nes'tled, gathered
closely together. 6. Mold, fine, soft earth. Run'ner, a slender branch
running along the ground. 8. Mel'low, to ripen. 9. Di'al, the face of a
timepiece. 10. Feast, a festive or joyous meal, a banquet. 12. Pelf,
money.


EXERCISES.--What did little Pearl ask of the strawberries? What did they
reply? Can you tell what name is given to this kind of story?



XVV. HARRY'S RICHES. (74)

1. One day, our little Harry spent the morning with his young playmate,
Johnny Crane, who lived in a fine house, and on Sundays rode to church in
the grandest carriage to be seen in all the country round.

2. When Harry returned home, he said, "Mother, Johnny has money in both
pockets!"

3.  "Has he, dear?"

4. "Yes, ma'am; and he says he could get ever so much more if he wanted
it."

5. "Well, now, that's very pleasant for him," I returned, cheerfully, as a
reply was plainly expected. "Very pleasant; don't you think so?"

6.  "Yes, ma'am; only--"

7.  "Only what, Harry?"

8. "Why, he has a big popgun, and a watch, and a hobbyhorse, and lots of
things." And Harry looked up at my face with a disconsolate stare.

9. "Well, my boy, what of that?"

10. "Nothing, mother," and the telltale tears sprang to his eyes, "only I
guess we are very poor, aren't we?"

11. "No, indeed, Harry, we are very far from being poor. We are not so
rich as Mr. Crane's family, if that is what you mean."

12. "O mother!" insisted the little fellow, "I do think we are very poor;
anyhow, I am!"

13.  "O Harry!" I exclaimed, reproachfully.

14. "Yes, ma'am I am," he sobbed; "I have scarcely any thing--I mean
anything that's worth money--except things to eat and wear, and I'd have
to have them anyway."

15. "Have to have them?" I echoed, at the same time laying my sewing upon
the table, so that I might reason with him on that point; "do you not
know, my son--"

16. Just then Uncle Ben looked up from the paper he had been reading:
"Harry," said he, "I want to find out something about eyes; so, if you
will let me have yours, I will give you a dollar apiece for them."

17. "For my eyes!" exclaimed Harry, very much astonished.

18. "Yes," resumed Uncle Ben, quietly, "for your eyes. I will give you
chloroform, so it will not hurt you in the least, and you shall have a
beautiful glass pair for nothing, to wear in their place. Come, a dollar
apiece, cash down! What do you say? I will take them out as quick as a
wink."

19. "Give you my eyes, uncle!" cried Harry, looking wild at the very
thought, "I think not." And the startled little fellow shook his head
defiantly.

20. "Well, five, ten, twenty dollars, then." Harry shook his head at every
offer.

21. "No, sir! I wouldn't let you have them for a thousand dollars! What
could I do without my eyes? I couldn't see mother, nor the baby, nor the
flowers, nor the horses, nor anything," added Harry, growing warmer and
warmer.

22. "I will give you two thousand," urged Uncle Ben, taking a roll of bank
notes out of his pocket. Harry, standing at a respectful distance, shouted
that he never would do any such thing.

23. "Very well," continued the uncle, with a serious air, at the same time
writing something in his notebook, "I can't afford to give you more than
two thousand dollars, so I shall have to do without your eyes; but," he
added, "I will tell you what I will do, I will give you twenty dollars if
you will let me put a few drops from this bottle in your ears. It will not
hurt, but it will make you deaf. I want to try some experiments with
