on the morning of a day in the early part of November 183-, giving
Tom at the same time a shake by the shoulder, and then putting down a
candle; and carrying off his shoes to clean.

Tom and his father arrived in town from Berkshire the day before, and
finding, on inquiry, that the Birmingham coaches which ran from the city
did not pass through Rugby, but deposited their passengers at Dunchurch,
a village three miles distant on the main road, where said passengers
had to wait for the Oxford and Leicester coach in the evening, or to
take a post-chaise, had resolved that Tom should travel down by the
Tally-ho, which diverged from the main road and passed through Rugby
itself. And as the Tally-ho was an early coach, they had driven out to
the Peacock to be on the road.

Tom had never been in London, and would have liked to have stopped at
the Belle Savage, where they had been put down by the Star, just at
dusk, that he might have gone roving about those endless, mysterious,
gas-lit streets, which, with their glare and hum and moving crowds,
excited him so that he couldn't talk even. But as soon as he found that
the Peacock arrangement would get him to Rugby by twelve o'clock in the
day, whereas otherwise he wouldn't be there till the evening, all
other plans melted away, his one absorbing aim being to become a public
school-boy as fast as possible, and six hours sooner or later seeming to
him of the most alarming importance.

Tom and his father had alighted at the Peacock at about seven in the
evening; and having heard with unfeigned joy the paternal order, at the
bar, of steaks and oyster-sauce for supper in half an hour, and seen
his father seated cozily by the bright fire in the coffee-room with the
paper in his hand, Tom had run out to see about him, had wondered at all
the vehicles passing and repassing, and had fraternized with the boots
and hostler, from whom he ascertained that the Tally-ho was a tip-top
goer--ten miles an hour including stoppages--and so punctual that all
the road set their clocks by her.

Then being summoned to supper, he had regaled himself in one of the
bright little boxes of the Peacock coffee-room, on the beef-steak
and unlimited oyster-sauce and brown stout (tasted then for the first
time--a day to be marked for ever by Tom with a white stone); had at
first attended to the excellent advice which his father was bestowing
on him from over his glass of steaming brandy-and-water, and then
began nodding, from the united effects of the stout, the fire, and the
lecture; till the Squire, observing Tom's state, and remembering that it
was nearly nine o'clock, and that the Tally-ho left at three, sent the
little fellow off to the chambermaid, with a shake of the hand (Tom
having stipulated in the morning before starting that kissing should now
cease between them), and a few parting words:

"And now, Tom, my boy," said the Squire, "remember you are going, at
your own earnest request, to be chucked into this great school, like a
young bear, with all your troubles before you--earlier than we should
have sent you perhaps. If schools are what they were in my time, you'll
see a great many cruel blackguard things done, and hear a deal of foul,
bad talk. But never fear. You tell the truth, keep a brave and kind
heart, and never listen to or say anything you wouldn't have your mother
and sister hear, and you'll never feel ashamed to come home, or we to
see you."

The allusion to his mother made Tom feel rather choky, and he would have
liked to have hugged his father well, if it hadn't been for the recent
stipulation.

As it was, he only squeezed his father's hand, and looked bravely up and
said, "I'll try, father."

"I know you will, my boy. Is your money all safe?

"Yes," said Tom, diving into one pocket to make sure.

"And your keys?" said the Squire.

"All right," said Tom, diving into the other pocket.

"Well, then, good-night. God bless you! I'll tell boots to call you, and
be up to see you off."

Tom was carried off by the chambermaid in a brown study, from which he
was roused in a clean little attic, by that buxom person calling him a
little darling and kissing him as she left the room; which indignity
he was too much surprised to resent. And still thinking of his father's
last words, and the look with which they were spoken, he knelt down and
prayed that, come what might, he might never bring shame or sorrow on
the dear folk at home.

Indeed, the Squire's last words deserved to have their effect, for they
had been the result of much anxious thought. All the way up to London
he had pondered what he should say to Tom by way of parting
advice--something that the boy could keep in his head ready for use. By
way of assisting meditation, he had even gone the length of taking out
his flint and steel and tinder, and hammering away for a quarter of an
hour till he had manufactured a light for a long Trichinopoli cheroot,
which he silently puffed, to the no small wonder of coachee, who was an
old friend, and an institution on the Bath road, and who always expected
a talk on the prospects and doings, agricultural and social, of the
whole country, when he carried the Squire.

To condense the Squire's meditation, it was somewhat as follows: "I
won't tell him to read his Bible, and love and serve God; if he don't do
that for his mother's sake and teaching, he won't for mine. Shall I go
into the sort of temptations he'll meet with? No, I can't do that.
Never do for an old fellow to go into such things with a boy. He won't
understand me. Do him more harm than good, ten to one. Shall I tell him
to mind his work, and say he's sent to school to make himself a good
scholar? Well, but he isn't sent to school for that--at any rate,
not for that mainly. I don't care a straw for Greek particles, or the
digamma; no more does his mother. What is he sent to school for? Well,
partly because he wanted so to go. If he'll only turn out a brave,
helpful, truth-telling Englishman, and a gentleman, and a Christian,
that's all I want," thought the Squire; and upon this view of the case
he framed his last words of advice to Tom, which were well enough suited
to his purpose.

For they were Tom's first thoughts as he tumbled out of bed at the
summons of boots, and proceeded rapidly to wash and dress himself. At
ten minutes to three he was down in the coffee-room in his stockings,
carrying his hat-box, coat, and comforter in his hand; and there he
found his father nursing a bright fire, and a cup of hot coffee and a
hard biscuit on the table.

"Now, then, Tom, give us your things here, and drink this. There's
nothing like starting warm, old fellow."

Tom addressed himself to the coffee, and prattled away while he worked
himself into his shoes and his greatcoat, well warmed through--a
Petersham coat with velvet collar, made tight after the abominable
fashion of those days. And just as he is swallowing his last mouthful,
winding his comforter round his throat, and tucking the ends into the
breast of his coat, the horn sounds; boots looks in and says, "Tally-ho,
sir;" and they hear the ring and the rattle of the four fast trotters
and the town-made drag, as it dashes up to the Peacock.

"Anything for us, Bob?" says the burly guard, dropping down from behind,
and slapping himself across the chest.

"Young gen'lm'n, Rugby; three parcels, Leicester; hamper o' game,
Rugby," answers hostler.

"Tell young gent to look alive," says guard, opening the hind-boot and
shooting in the parcels after examining them by the lamps. "Here; shove
the portmanteau up a-top. I'll fasten him presently.--Now then, sir,
jump up behind."

"Good-bye, father--my love at home." A last shake of the hand. Up goes
Tom, the guard catching his hatbox and holding on with one hand, while
with the other he claps the horn to his mouth. Toot, toot, toot! the
hostlers let go their heads, the four bays plunge at the collar, and
away goes the Tally-ho into the darkness, forty-five seconds from the
time they pulled up. Hostler, boots, and the Squire stand looking after
them under the Peacock lamp.

"Sharp work!" says the Squire, and goes in again to his bed, the coach
being well out of sight and hearing.

Tom stands up on the coach and looks back at his father's figure as long
as he can see it; and then the guard, having disposed of his luggage,
comes to an anchor, and finishes his buttonings and other preparations
for facing the three hours before dawn--no joke for those who minded
cold, on a fast coach in November, in the reign of his late Majesty.

I sometimes think that you boys of this generation are a deal tenderer
fellows than we used to be. At any rate you're much more comfortable
travellers, for I see every one of you with his rug or plaid, and other
dodges for preserving the caloric, and most of you going in, those
fuzzy, dusty, padded first-class carriages. It was another affair
altogether, a dark ride on the top of the Tally-ho, I can tell you, in a
tight Petersham coat, and your feet dangling six inches from the floor.
Then you knew what cold was, and what it was to be without legs, for not
a bit of feeling had you in them after the first half-hour. But it had
its pleasures, the old dark ride. First there was the consciousness of
silent endurance, so dear to every Englishman--of standing out against
something, and not giving in. Then there was the music of the rattling
harness, and the ring of the horses' feet on the hard road, and the
glare of the two bright lamps through the steaming hoar frost, over the
leaders' ears, into the darkness, and the cheery toot of the guard's
horn, to warn some drowsy pikeman or the hostler at the next change; and
the looking forward to daylight; and last, but not least, the delight of
returning sensation in your toes.

Then the break of dawn and the sunrise, where can they be ever seen in
perfection but from a coach roof? You want motion and change and music
to see them in their glory--not the music of singing men and singing
women, but good, silent music, which sets itself in your own head, the
accompaniment of work and getting over the ground.

The Tally-ho is past St. Albans, and Tom is enjoying the ride, though
half-frozen. The guard, who is alone with him on the back of the coach,
is silent, but has muffled Tom's feet up in straw, and put the end of an
oat-sack over his knees. The darkness has driven him inwards, and he
has gone over his little past life, and thought of all his doings and
promises, and of his mother and sister, and his father's last words; and
has made fifty good resolutions, and means to bear himself like a brave
Brown as he is, though a young one. Then he has been forward into the
mysterious boy-future, speculating as to what sort of place Rugby is,
and what they do there, and calling up all the stories of public schools
which he has heard from big boys in the holidays. He is choke-full of
hope and life, notwithstanding the cold, and kicks his heels against the
back-board, and would like to sing, only he doesn't know how his friend
the silent guard might take it.

And now the dawn breaks at the end of the fourth stage, and the coach
pulls up at a little roadside inn with huge stables behind. There is a
bright fire gleaming through the red curtains of the bar window, and
the door is open. The coachman catches his whip into a double thong, and
throws it to the hostler; the steam of the horses rises straight up
into the air. He has put them along over the last two miles, and is two
minutes before his time. He rolls down from the box and into the inn.
The guard rolls off behind. "Now, sir," says he to Tom, "you just jump
down, and I'll give you a drop of something to keep the cold out."

Tom finds a difficulty in jumping, or indeed in finding the top of the
wheel with his feet, which may be in the next world for all he feels;
so the guard picks him off the coach top, and sets him on his legs, and
they stump off into the bar, and join the coachman and the other outside
passengers.

Here a fresh-looking barmaid serves them each with a glass of early purl
as they stand before the fire, coachman and guard exchanging business
remarks. The purl warms the cockles of Tom's heart, and makes him cough.

"Rare tackle that, sir, of a cold morning," says the coachman, smiling.
"Time's up." They are out again and up; coachee the last, gathering the
reins into his hands and talking to Jem the hostler about the mare's
shoulder, and then swinging himself up on to the box--the horses dashing
off in a canter before he falls into his seat. Toot-toot-tootle-too goes
the horn, and away they are again, five-and-thirty miles on their road
(nearly half-way to Rugby, thinks Tom), and the prospect of breakfast at
the end of the stage.

And now they begin to see, and the early life of the country-side comes
out--a market cart or two; men in smock-frocks going to their work, pipe
in mouth, a whiff of which is no bad smell this bright morning. The sun
gets up, and the mist shines like silver gauze. They pass the hounds
jogging along to a distant meet, at the heels of the huntsman's back,
whose face is about the colour of the tails of his old pink, as he
exchanges greetings with coachman and guard. Now they pull up at a
lodge, and take on board a well-muffled-up sportsman, with his gun-case
and carpet-bag, An early up-coach meets them, and the coachmen gather
up their horses, and pass one another with the accustomed lift of the
elbow, each team doing eleven miles an hour, with a mile to spare behind
if necessary. And here comes breakfast.

"Twenty minutes here, gentlemen," says the coachman, as they pull up at
half-past seven at the inn-door.

Have we not endured nobly this morning? and is not this a worthy reward
for much endurance? There is the low, dark wainscoted room hung with
sporting prints; the hat-stand (with a whip or two standing up in it
belonging to bagmen who are still snug in bed) by the door; the blazing
fire, with the quaint old glass over the mantelpiece, in which is stuck
a large card with the list of the meets for the week of the county
hounds; the table covered with the whitest of cloths and of china, and
bearing a pigeon-pie, ham, round of cold boiled beef cut from a mammoth
ox, and the great loaf of household bread on a wooden trencher. And
here comes in the stout head waiter, puffing under a tray of hot
viands--kidneys and a steak, transparent rashers and poached eggs,
buttered toast and muffins, coffee and tea, all smoking hot. The table
can never hold it all. The cold meats are removed to the sideboard--they
were only put on for show and to give us an appetite. And now fall on,
gentlemen all. It is a well-known sporting-house, and the breakfasts are
famous. Two or three men in pink, on their way to the meet, drop in, and
are very jovial and sharp-set, as indeed we all are.

"Tea or coffee, sir?" says head waiter, coming round to Tom.

"Coffee, please," says Tom, with his mouth full of muffin and kidney.
Coffee is a treat to him, tea is not.

Our coachman, I perceive, who breakfasts with us, is a cold beef man.
He also eschews hot potations, and addicts himself to a tankard of ale,
which is brought him by the barmaid. Sportsman looks on approvingly, and
orders a ditto for himself.

Tom has eaten kidney and pigeon-pie, and imbibed coffee, till his little
skin is as tight as a drum; and then has the further pleasure of paying
head waiter out of his own purse, in a dignified manner, and walks out
before the inn-door to see the horses put to. This is done leisurely and
in a highly-finished manner by the hostlers, as if they enjoyed the not
being hurried. Coachman comes out with his waybill, and puffing a fat
cigar which the sportsman has given him. Guard emerges from the tap,
where he prefers breakfasting, licking round a tough-looking doubtful
cheroot, which you might tie round your finger, and three whiffs of
which would knock any one else out of time.

The pinks stand about the inn-door lighting cigars and waiting to see us
start, while their hacks are led up and down the market-place, on which
the inn looks. They all know our sportsman, and we feel a reflected
credit when we see him chatting and laughing with them.

"Now, sir, please," says the coachman. All the rest of the passengers
are up; the guard is locking up the hind-boot.

"A good run to you!" says the sportsman to the pinks, and is by the
coachman's side in no time.

"Let 'em go, Dick!" The hostlers fly back, drawing off the cloths from
their glossy loins, and away we go through the market-place and down the
High Street, looking in at the first-floor windows, and seeing several
worthy burgesses shaving thereat; while all the shopboys who are
cleaning the windows, and housemaids who are doing the steps, stop and
look pleased as we rattle past, as if we were a part of their legitimate
morning's amusement. We clear the town, and are well out between the
hedgerows again as the town clock strikes eight.

The sun shines almost warmly, and breakfast has oiled all springs
and loosened all tongues. Tom is encouraged by a remark or two of the
guard's between the puffs of his oily cheroot, and besides is getting
tired of not talking. He is too full of his destination to talk about
anything else, and so asks the guard if he knows Rugby.

"Goes through it every day of my life. Twenty minutes afore twelve
down--ten o'clock up."

"What sort of place is it, please?" says Tom.

Guard looks at him with a comical expression. "Werry out-o'-the-way
place, sir; no paving to streets, nor no lighting. 'Mazin' big horse and
cattle fair in autumn--lasts a week--just over now. Takes town a week to
get clean after it. Fairish hunting country. But slow place, sir, slow
place-off the main road, you see--only three coaches a day, and one on
'em a two-oss wan, more like a hearse nor a coach--Regulator--comes from
Oxford. Young genl'm'n at school calls her Pig and Whistle, and goes up
to college by her (six miles an hour) when they goes to enter. Belong to
school, sir?"

"Yes," says Tom, not unwilling for a moment that the guard should think
him an old boy. But then, having some qualms as to the truth of the
assertion, and seeing that if he were to assume the character of an old
boy he couldn't go on asking the questions he wanted, added--"That is to
say, I'm on my way there. I'm a new boy."

The guard looked as if he knew this quite as well as Tom.

"You're werry late, sir," says the guard; "only six weeks to-day to the
end of the half." Tom assented. "We takes up fine loads this day six
weeks, and Monday and Tuesday arter. Hopes we shall have the pleasure of
carrying you back."

Tom said he hoped they would; but he thought within himself that his
fate would probably be the Pig and Whistle.

"It pays uncommon cert'nly," continues the guard. "Werry free with their
cash is the young genl'm'n. But, Lor' bless you, we gets into such rows
all 'long the road, what wi' their pea-shooters, and long whips, and
hollering, and upsetting every one as comes by, I'd a sight sooner
carry one or two on 'em, sir, as I may be a-carryin' of you now, than a
coach-load."

"What do they do with the pea-shooters?" inquires Tom.

"Do wi' 'em! Why, peppers every one's faces as we comes near, 'cept the
young gals, and breaks windows wi' them too, some on 'em shoots so hard.
Now 'twas just here last June, as we was a-driving up the first-day
boys, they was mendin' a quarter-mile of road, and there was a lot of
Irish chaps, reg'lar roughs, a-breaking stones. As we comes up, 'Now,
boys,' says young gent on the box (smart young fellow and desper't
reckless), 'here's fun! Let the Pats have it about the ears.' 'God's
sake sir!' says Bob (that's my mate the coachman); 'don't go for to
