was the matter. The boy that would take what did not belong to him, if no
more than a cherry, was not the boy for him. Henry Wilkins was sent about
his business without delay, with his mouth almost as hot as if he had put
a burning coal in to it.

13. Rufus Wilson was next introduced into the room and left to himself;
but he had not been there ten minutes before he began to move from one
place to another. He was of a bold, resolute temper, but not overburdened
with principle; for if he could have opened every cupboard, closet, and
drawer in the house, without being found out, he would have done it
directly.

14. Having looked around the room, he noticed a drawer to the table, and
made up his mind to peep therein. But no sooner did he lay hold of the
drawer knob than he set a large bell ringing, which was concealed under
the table. The old gentleman immediately answered the summons, and entered
the room.

15. Rufus was so startled by the sudden ringing of the bell, that all his
impudence could not support him. He looked as though anyone might knock
him down with a feather. The old gentleman asked him if he had rung the
bell because he wanted anything. Rufus was much confused and stammered,
and tried to excuse himself, but all to no purpose, for it did not prevent
him from being ordered off the premises.

16. George Jones was then shown into the room by an old steward; and being
of a cautious disposition, he touched nothing, but only looked at the
things about him. At last he saw that a closet door was a little open,
and, thinking it would be impossible for anyone to know that he had opened
it a little more, he very cautiously opened it an inch farther, looking
down at the bottom of the door, that it might not catch against anything
and make a noise.

17. Now had he looked at the top, instead of the bottom, it
might have been better for him; for to the top of the door was
fastened a plug, which filled up the hole of a small barrel of shot.
He ventured to open the door another inch, and then another, till,
the plug being pulled out of the barrel, the leaden shot began to
pour out at a strange rate. At the bottom of the closet was placed a
tin pan, and the shot falling upon this pan made such a clatter that
George was frightened half out of his senses.

18. The old gentleman soon came into the room to inquire what was the
matter, and there he found George nearly as pale as a sheet. George was
soon dismissed.

19. It now came the turn of Albert Jenkins to be put into the room. The
other boys had been sent to their homes by different ways, and no one knew
what the experience of the other had been in the room of trial.

20. On the table stood a small round box, with a screw top to it, and
Albert, thinking it contained something curious, could not be easy without
unscrewing the top; but no sooner did he do this than out bounced an
artificial snake, full a yard long, and fell upon his arm. He started
back, and uttered a scream which brought the old gentleman to his elbow.
There stood Albert, with the bottom of the box in one hand, the top in the
other, and the snake on the floor.

21. "Come, come," said the old gentleman, "one snake is quite enough to
have in the house at a time; therefore, the sooner you are gone the
better." With that he dismissed him, without waiting a moment for his
reply.

22. William Smith next entered the room, and being left alone soon began
to amuse himself in looking at the curiosities around him. William was not
only curious and prying, but dishonest, too, and observing that the key
was left in the drawer of a bookcase, he stepped on tiptoe in that
direction. The key had a wire fastened to it, which communicated with an
electrical machine, and William received such a shock as he was not likely
to forget. No sooner did he sufficiently recover himself to walk, than he
was told to leave the house, and let other people lock and unlock their
own drawers.

23. The other boy was Harry Gordon, and though he was left in the room
full twenty minutes, he never during that time stirred from his chair.
Harry had eyes in his head as well as the others, but he had more
integrity in his heart; neither the dish cover, the cherries, the drawer
knob, the closet door, the round box, nor the key tempted him to rise from
his feet; and the consequence was that, in half an hour after, he was
engaged in the service of the old gentleman at Elm Tree Hall. He followed
his good old master to his grave, and received a large legacy for his
upright conduct in his service.


DEFINITIONS.--2. Lan'guished, suffered, sank away. Im-pos'. tor, a
deceiver. 3. A-ver'sion, dislike. In-dulge', to give way to. Pound, a
British denomination of money equal in value to about $4.86. 4.
Ap-pli-ca'tion, the act of making a request. 9. Con--ster-na'tion,
excessive terror, dismay. Prin'ci-ple, a right rule of conduct. 12.
Ar-ti-fi'cial (pro. ar-ti-fish'al), made by art, not real.
In-tol'er-a-bly, in a manner not to be borne. 14. Sum'mons, a call to
appear. 19. Ex-pe'ri-ence, knowledge gained by actual trial. 23.
In-teg'ri-ty, honesty. Leg'a-cy, a gift, by will, of personal property.



VIII. WORK.

Eliza Cook (b. 1817, d. 1889) was born at London. In 1837 she commenced
contributing to periodicals. In 1840 the first collection of her poems was
made. In 1849 she became editor of "Eliza Cook's Journal."

1. Work, work, my boy, be not afraid;
     Look labor boldly in the face;
   Take up the hammer or the spade,
     And blush not for your humble place.

2. There's glory in the shuttle's song;
     There's triumph in the anvil's stroke;
   There's merit in the brave and strong
     Who dig the mine or fell the oak.

3. The wind disturbs the sleeping lake,
     And bids it ripple pure and fresh;
   It moves the green boughs till they make
     Grand music in their leafy mesh.

4. And so the active breath of life
     Should stir our dull and sluggard wills;
   For are we not created rife
     With health, that stagnant torpor kills?

5. I doubt if he who lolls his head
     Where idleness and plenty meet,
   Enjoys his pillow or his bread
     As those who earn the meals they eat.

6. And man is never half so blest
     As when the busy day is spent
   So as to make his evening rest
     A holiday of glad content.


DEFINITIONS.--3. Mesh, network. 4. Rife, abounding. Stag'nant, inactive.
2. Tor'por, laziness, stupidity. 5. Lolls, reclines, leans.



IX. THE MANIAC.

1. A gentleman who had traveled in Europe, relates that he one day visited
the hospital of Berlin, where he saw a man whose exterior was very
striking. His figure, tall and commanding, was bending with age, but more
with sorrow; the few scattered hairs which remained on his temples were
white almost as the driven snow, and the deepest melancholy was depicted
in his countenance.

2. On inquiring who he was and what brought him there, he started, as, if
from sleep, and, after looking around him, began with slow and measured
steps to stride the hall, repeating in a low but audible voice, "Once one
is two; once one is two."

3. Now and then he would stop, and remain with his arms folded on his
breast as if in contemplation, for some minutes; then again resuming his
walk, he continued to repeat, "Once one is two; once one is two." His
story, as our traveler understood it, is as follows:

4. Conrad Lange, collector of the revenues of the city of Berlin, had long
been known as a man whom nothing could divert from the paths of honesty.
Scrupulously exact in an his dealings, and assiduous in the discharge of
all his duties, he had acquired the good will and esteem of all who knew
him, and the confidence of the minister of finance, whose duty it is to
inspect the accounts of all officers connected with the revenue.

5. On casting up his accounts at the close of a particular year, he found
a deficit of ten thousand ducats. Alarmed at this discovery, he went to
the minister, presented his accounts, and informed him that he did not
know how it had arisen, and that he had been robbed by some person bent on
his ruin.

6. The minister received his accounts, but thinking it a duty to secure a
person who might probably be a defaulter he caused him to be arrested, and
put his accounts into the hands of one of his secretaries for inspection,
who returned them the day after with the information that the deficiency
arose from a miscalculation; that in multiplying, Mr. Lange had said, once
one is two, instead of once one is one.

7. The poor man was immediately released from confinement, his accounts
returned, and the mistake pointed out. During his imprisonment, which
lasted two days, he had neither eaten, drunk, nor taken any repose; and
when he appeared, his countenance was as pale as death. On receiving his
accounts, he was a long time silent; then suddenly awaking, as if from a
trance, he repeated, "Once one is two."

8. He appeared to be entirely insensible of his situation; would neither
eat nor drink, unless solicited; and took notice of nothing that passed
around him. While repeating his accustomed phrase, if anyone corrected him
by saying, "Once one is one," his attention was arrested for a moment, and
he said, "Ah, right, once one is one;" and then resuming his walk, he
continued to repeat, "Once one is two." He died shortly after the traveler
left Berlin.

9. This affecting story, whether true or untrue, obviously abounds with
lessons of instruction. Alas! how easily is the human mind thrown off its
balance; especially when it is stayed on this world only, and has no
experimental knowledge of the meaning of the injunction of Scripture, to
cast all our cares upon Him who careth for us, and who heareth even the
young ravens when they cry.


DEFINITIONS.--1. Ex-te'ri-or, outward appearance. De-pict'ed, painted,
represented. 3. Con-tem-pla'tion, continued attention of the mind to one
subject. 4. Rev'e-nues, the annual income from taxes, public rents, etc.
Scru'pu-lous-ly, carefully. As-sid'u-ous, constant in attention.
Fi-nance', the income of a ruler or a state. Def'i-cit, lack, want.
Duc'at, a gold coin worth about $2.00. 6. De-fault'er, one who fails to
account for public money intrusted to his care. 9. Ob'vi-ous-ly, plainly.
In-junc'tion, a command.



X. ROBIN REDBREAST.

William Allingham (b. 1828, d. 1889) was born at Ballyshannon, Ireland.
His father was a banker, and gave him a good education in Irish schools.
He showed his literary tastes at an early date, contributing to
periodicals, etc. In 1850 he published his first volume of poems; in 1854
his "Day and Night Songs" appeared, and in 1864 a poem in twelve chapters
entitled "Lawrence Bloomfield in Ireland," His reputation was established
chiefly through his shorter lyrics, or ballad poetry. In 1864 he received
a literary pension.

1. Good-by, good-by to Summer!
     For Summer's nearly done;
   The garden smiling faintly,
     Cool breezes in the sun;
   Our thrushes now are silent,
     Our swallows flown away,--
   But Robin's here in coat of brown,
     And scarlet brestknot gay.
   Robin, Robin Redbreast,
     O Robin dear!
   Robin sings so sweetly
     In the falling of the year.

2. Bright yellow, red, and orange,
     The leaves come down in hosts;
   The trees are Indian princes,
     But soon they'll turn to ghosts;
   The leathery pears and apples
     Hang russet on the bough;
   It's autumn, autumn, autumn late,
     'T will soon be winter now.
   Robin, Robin Redbreast,
     O Robin dear!
   And what will this poor Robin do?
     For pinching days are near.

3. The fireside for the cricket,
     The wheat stack for the mouse,
   When trembling night winds whistle
     And moan all round the house.
   The frosty ways like iron,
     The branches plumed with snow,--
   Alas! in winter dead and dark,
     Where can poor Robin go?
   Robin, Robin Redbreast,
     O Robin dear!
   And a crumb of bread for Robin,
     His little heart to cheer.

Note.--The Old World Robin here referred to is quite different in
appearance and habits from the American Robin. It is only about half the
size of the latter. Its prevailing color above is olive green, while the
forehead, cheeks, throat, and breast are a light yellowish red. It does
not migrate, but is found at all seasons throughout temperate Europe, Asia
Minor, and northern Africa.



XI. THE FISH I DID N'T CATCH.

John Greenleaf Whittier was born near Haverhill, Mass., in 1807, and died
at Hampton Falls, N.H., in 1892. His boyhood was passed on a farm, and he
never received a classical education. In 1829 he edited a newspaper in
Boston. In the following year he removed to Hartford, Conn., to assume a
similar position. In 1836 he edited an antislavery paper in Philadelphia.
In 1840 he removed to Amesbury, Mass. Mr. Whittier's parents were Friends,
and he always held to the same faith. He wrote extensively both in prose
and verse. As a poet, he ranked among those most highly esteemed and
honored by his countrymen. "Snow Bound" is one of the longest and best of
his poems.

1. Our bachelor uncle who lived with us was a quiet, genial man, much
given to hunting and fishing; and it was one of the pleasures of our young
life to accompany him on his expeditions to Great Hill, Brandy-brow Woods,
the Pond, and, best of all, to the Country Brook. We were quite willing to
work hard in the cornfield or the haying lot to finish the necessary day's
labor in season for an afternoon stroll through the woods and along the
brookside.

2. I remember my first fishing excursion as if it were but yesterday. I
have been happy many times in my life, but never more intensely so than
when I received that first fishing pole from my uncle's hand, and trudged
off with him through the woods and meadows. It was a still, sweet day of
early summer; the long afternoon shadows of the trees lay cool across our
path; the leaves seemed greener, the flowers brighter, the birds merrier,
than ever before.

3. My uncle, who knew by long experience where were the best haunts of
pickerel, considerately placed me at the most favorable point. I threw out
my line as I had so often seen others, and waited anxiously for a bite,
moving the bait in rapid jerks on the surface of the water in imitation of
the leap of a frog. Nothing came of it. "Try again," said my uncle.
Suddenly the bait sank out of sight. "Now for it," thought I; "here is a
fish at last."

4. I made a strong pull, and brought up a tangle of weeds. Again and again
I cast out my line with aching arms, and drew it back empty. I looked at
my uncle appealingly. "Try once more," he said; "we fishermen must have
patience."

5. Suddenly something tugged at my line, and swept off with it into deep
water. Jerking it up, I saw a fine pickerel wriggling in the sun. "Uncle!"
I cried, looking back in uncontrollable excitement, "I've got a fish!"
"Not yet," said my uncle. As he spoke there was a plash in the water; I
caught the arrowy gleam of a scared fish shooting into the middle of the
stream, my hook hung empty from the line. I had lost my prize.

6. We are apt to speak of the sorrows of childhood as trifles in
comparison with those of grown-up people; but we may depend upon it the
young folks don't agree with us. Our griefs, modified and restrained by
reason, experience and self-respect, keep the proprieties, and, if
possible, avoid a scene; but the sorrow of childhood, unreasoning and
all-absorbing, is a complete abandonment to the passion. The doll's nose
is broken, and the world breaks up with it; the marble rolls out of sight,
and the solid globe rolls off with the marble.

7. So, overcome with my great and bitter disappointment, I sat down on the
nearest hassock, and for a time refused to be comforted, even by my
uncle's assurance that there were more fish in the brook. He refitted my
bait, and, putting the pole again in my hands, told me to try my luck once
more.

8. "But remember, boy," he said, with his shrewd smile, "never brag of
catching a fish until he is on dry ground. I've seen older folks doing
that in more ways than one, and so making fools of themselves. It's no use
to boast of anything until it's done, nor then, either, for it speaks for
itself."

9. How often since I have been reminded of the fish that I did not catch.
When I hear people boasting of a work as yet undone, and trying to
anticipate the credit which belongs only to actual achievement, I call to
mind that scene by the brookside, and the wise caution of my uncle in that
particular instance takes the form of a proverb of universal application:
"NEVER BRAG OF YOUR FISH BEFORE YOU CATCH HIM."


DEFINITIONS.--1. Gen'ial, cheerful. 3. Haunts, places frequently visited.
Con-sid'er-ate-ly, with due regard to others, kindly thoughtful. 4.
Ap-peal'ing-ly, as though asking for aid. 6. Mod'i-fied, qualified,
lessened. Pro-pri'e-ties, fixed customs or rules of conduct. Ab-sorb'ing,
engaging the attention entirely. 7, Has'sock, a raised mound of turf. 9.
An-tic'i-pate, to take before the proper time. A-chieve'ment, performance,
deed.



XII. IT SNOWS.

Sarah Josepha Hale (b. 1788?, d.1879) was born in Newport, N.H. Her maiden
name was Buell. In 1814 she married David Hale, an eminent lawyer, who
died in 1822. Left with five children to support, she turned her attention
to literature. In 1828 she became editor of the "Ladies' Magazine." In
1837 this periodical was united with "Godey's Lady's Book," of which Mrs.
Hale was literary editor for more than forty years.

1. "It snows!" cries the Schoolboy, "Hurrah!" and his shout
     Is ringing through parlor and hall,
   While swift as the wing of a swallow, he's out,
     And his playmates have answered his call;
   It makes the heart leap but to witness their joy;
     Proud wealth has no pleasures, I trow,
   Like the rapture that throbs in the pulse of the boy
     As he gathers his treasures of snow;
   Then lay not the trappings of gold on thine heirs,
     While health and the riches of nature are theirs.

2. "It snows!" sighs the Imbecile, "Ah!" and his breath
     Comes heavy, as clogged with a weight;
   While, from the pale aspect of nature in death,
     He turns to the blaze of his grate;
   And nearer and nearer, his soft-cushioned chair
     Is wheeled toward the life-giving flame;
   He dreads a chill puff of the snow-burdened air,
     Lest it wither his delicate frame;
   Oh! small is the pleasure existence can give,
     When the fear we shall die only proves that we live!

3. "It snows!" cries the Traveler, "Ho!" and the word
     Has quickened his steed's lagging pace;
   The wind rushes by, but its howl is unheard,
     Unfelt the sharp drift in his face;
   For bright through the tempest his own home appeared,
     Ay, though leagues intervened, he can see:
   There's the clear, glowing hearth, and the table prepared,
     And his wife with her babes at her knee;
   Blest thought! how it lightens the grief-laden hour,
     That those we love dearest are safe from its power!

4. "It snows!" cries the Belle, "Dear, how lucky!" and turns
     From her mirror to watch the flakes fall,
   Like the first rose of summer, her dimpled cheek burns!
     While musing on sleigh ride and ball:
   There are visions of conquests, of splendor, and mirth,
     Floating over each drear winter's day;
   But the tintings of Hope, on this storm-beaten earth,
     Will melt like the snowflakes away.
   Turn, then thee to Heaven, fair maiden, for bliss;
     That world has a pure fount ne'er opened in this.

5. "It snows!" cries the Widow, "O God!" and her sighs
     Have stifled the voice of her prayer;
   Its burden ye'll read in her tear-swollen eyes,
     On her cheek sunk with fasting and care.
   'T is night, and her fatherless ask her for bread,
     But "He gives the young ravens their food,"
   And she trusts till her dark hearth adds horror to dread.,
     And she lays on her last chip of wood.
   Poor sufferer! that sorrow thy God only knows;
     'T is a most bitter lot to be poor when it snows.


 DEFINITIONS.--1. Trow, to think, to believe. Trap'pings, ornanents. 2.
 Im'be-cile, one who is feeble either in body or mind. 3. In-ter-vened',
 were situated between. 4. Mus'ing, thinking in an absent-minded way.
 Con'quests, triumphs, successes. Tint'ings slight colorings. 5. Sti'fled,
 choked, suppressed.

REMARK.--Avoid reading this piece in a monotonous style. Try to express
the actual feeling of each quotation; and enter into the descriptions with
spirit.



XIII. RESPECT FOR THE SABBATH REWARDED.

1. In the city of Bath, not many years since, lived a barber who made a
practice of following his ordinary occupation on the Lord's day. As he was
on the way to his morning's employment, he happened to look into some
place of worship just as the minister was giving out his text--"Remember
the Sabbath day, to keep it holy." He listened long enough to be convinced
that he was constantly breaking the laws of God and man by shaving and
dressing his customers on the Lord's day. He became uneasy, and went with
