

AN INDIAN STORY--II

The Indian houses were long huts covered with strips of birch bark.

Four or five families lived in each of these houses.

John was given to an Indian woman who had lost her own boy the year
before.

John's Indian mother was good to him, and treated him as if he were her
own son.

One time the Indian boys thought they would test John's courage, so they
formed in two lines, while each boy held a stout stick.

Then they ordered John to run down between the two long lines.

They had their sticks all ready to beat him.

They thought John would be afraid and so would do as they told him.

But John was a strong lad, and jumping upon the first Indian boy, he
took his stick away from him.

[Illustration]

Armed with this stick, John struck right and left at the heads of the
boys until they were all glad to run away.

The Indian men liked to see John's courage, and laughed long and loud
when the Indian boys ran away.

After this the boys were glad to have John play with them.

With their bows and arrows they shot at a mark.

They swam in the river and played games of tag, hide and seek, and ball.

In the spring the Indian women planted the yellow corn.

When the corn was up, the squaws went into the fields to hoe out the
weeds. For a hoe they used a flat piece of stone tied to a wooden
handle.

As John was a white boy the squaws tried to make him help hoe the corn.

When John took the hoe, he hoed up the corn and left the weeds.

The angry squaws made signs to him that he must not do so.

Then John threw the hoe far from him.

"Hoeing is fit for squaws, not for warriors," he shouted. He had learned
this from the Indian boys.

The old men were pleased. They thought John would make a fine warrior.


AN INDIAN STORY--III

John had lived with the Indians a year.

He had learned to speak their tongue, but they did not trust him.

Some of them were always with him, for they were afraid he would run
away.

All this time John had kept his skates carefully hidden.

One day the ice froze clear and smooth. John brought his skates down to
the river bank.

Many of the Indians followed to see what he was going to do.

They crowded around him on the ice.

John thought he would play a trick on them.

He strapped the skates upon the feet of an Indian boy.

The boy tried to stand up, but his feet slipped out from under him, and
down he bumped upon the ice.

How the Indians laughed!

They thought it was a great joke.

Each of them in turn tried on the skates.

How they sprawled and fell upon the ice!

What fun it was for the other Indians!

When they were tired of the sport they held out the skates to John and
asked him to put them on.

John strapped on the skates with great care. He was a good skater, but
he made believe that he could not skate at all.

He fell down and bumped his head.

He tripped over his toes and made great fun for the Indians.

They did not see that each time he fell he was a little farther out on
the ice.

All at once John jumped up.

Away he flew, skating for his life.

Down the river he went, swift as a bird.

The Indians rushed after him, but he had too great a start.

[Illustration]

The Indians were swift runners, but John, on his skates, was swifter
still.

He knew that the river must flow toward the ocean, and that near the
ocean lived the white people.

On and on he skated.

Two days later he saw the smoke of a white man's cabin and knew that he
was safe.

John soon found his father and mother.

How glad they were to see him!




    A GOOD PLAY

    We built a ship upon the stairs,
    All made of the back-bedroom chairs,
    And filled it full of sofa pillows,
    To go a-sailing on the billows.

    We took a saw and several nails,
    And water in the nursery pails;
    And Tom said, "Let us also take
    An apple and a slice of cake,"--
    Which was enough for Tom and me
    To go a-sailing on, till tea.

    We sailed along for days and days,
    And had the very best of plays;
    But Tom fell out and hurt his knee,
    So there was no one left but me.

    ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON




[Illustration]

DICK WHITTINGTON--I


Dick Whittington was a poor little boy who lived in the country.

His father and mother were both dead.

Poor little Dick was always willing to work, but sometimes there was no
work for him to do, so he often had nothing to eat.

Now Dick was a bright boy.

He kept both ears open to hear what was said around him.

He had heard many times about the great city of London.

Men said that in this great city the people were rich.

Dick had even heard that the streets were paved with gold.

"How I should like to visit that great city," thought Dick, "for I could
pick up gold from the streets!"

Dick had earned a little money, so one day he set out to walk to London.

He walked and walked and walked, but London was a long way from his
home.

At last a man with a wagon came along. He was a kind man, and he gave
Dick a ride.

"Where are you going?" asked Dick.

"I'm going to London," said the man.

"You are very good to give me a ride. I am going there, too," said Dick.

It was dark when they reached London.

That night Dick slept in a barn with the horses.

The next morning he looked for the golden stones in the streets.

He looked and looked, but he could find only dust and dirt.

There were many, many people in London, and Dick thought that he could
soon find something to do.

He wandered around the streets, seeking for work.

He asked many people, but no one wanted the poor little country boy.

As Dick had no money for food, he soon became very, very hungry.

At last he grew so weak that he fell down before the door of a great
house.

Here the cook found him and began to beat him with a stick.

"Run away, you lazy boy!" she cried.

Poor Dick tried to rise, but he was so faint from want of food that he
could not stand.

Just then the owner of the house, Mr. Fitzwarren, came up. He took pity
on the poor boy and ordered the cook to give him some food.

Then he turned to Dick and said:

"If you wish to work, you may help the cook in the kitchen. You will
find a bed in the attic."

Dick thanked Mr. Fitzwarren again and again for his kindness.

The cook was very cross to Dick and whipped him almost every day.

His bed in the attic was only a pile of old rags.

He soon found that there were many rats and mice in the attic.

They ran over his bed and made so much noise every night that he could
not sleep.

"I wish I had a cat," thought Dick, "for she could eat up these rats and
mice."

[Illustration]

One day Dick earned a penny by blacking a man's shoes.

"I will try to buy a cat with this penny," thought Dick.

So he started out and soon met a woman with a large cat.

"Will you sell me that cat?" said Dick. "I will give you this penny for
her."

"You are a good boy," said the woman, "and you may have the cat for a
penny, for I know you will treat her kindly."

That night Dick's bed was free from rats, and Miss Puss had a good
supper.

Dick began to love his cat dearly.


DICK WHITTINGTON--II

Now Mr. Fitzwarren had many ships which sailed to distant lands.

When a ship sailed Mr. Fitzwarren let every one in his house send
something on it.

The things were sold, and when the ship came back, each person had the
money for what he had sent.

One of the ships was ready to sail.

Every one in the house except Dick had sent something.

"What is Dick going to send in the ship?" said Mr. Fitzwarren.

"Oh, that boy has nothing to send," said the cross cook.

"It is true," said poor Dick; "I have nothing but my dear cat."

"Well, then you must send your cat," said Mr. Fitzwarren.

How lonely poor Dick was without Puss!

[Illustration]

The cook made fun of him for sending a cat on the ship.

At last Dick became so unhappy that he made up his mind to run away.

He started early in the morning, before any one in the house was up.

He had gone but a short way when he heard the sound of the six great
bells of Bow.

As they rang, "Ding-dong, ding-dong!" they seemed to say:

    Turn back, Whittington,
    Lord Mayor of London.

"It is strange that the bells should speak to me," said Dick, "but if I
am to be Lord Mayor of London, I will gladly turn back."

So he ran back to the house of Mr. Fitzwarren.

"I hope they have not missed me," said Dick, as he gently opened the
door and stole softly in.


DICK WHITTINGTON--III

Dick's cat was taken across the ocean. The ship sailed and sailed, until
at last it came to a distant country.

Now the king and queen of this country were very rich. When the captain
was asked to show his goods before them he was very glad indeed to do
so.

The king and queen first gave the captain a great feast.

Gold and silver dishes filled with food were brought in.

[Illustration]

When these dishes were placed upon the table an army of rats came out.

There were white rats, and black rats, and brown rats, and big rats, and
little rats.

At once they fell upon the food and ate it nearly all up.

"Why do you let the rats do this?" asked the captain.

"Alas, we cannot help ourselves," said the king. "I would give half my
kingdom to be rid of them."

Then the captain thought of Dick Whittington's cat.

"I have an animal which will rid you of them," said the captain.

"Pray bring it in at once," said the queen.

What fun Dick's cat had killing the rats and mice in the king's palace!

"We must buy that little animal," said the queen. "I do not care how
much she may cost."

The captain could hardly carry all the jewels and gold that the king
gave him for the cat.

Then the ship with Dick's money came back to London, and the captain
told the story to Mr. Fitzwarren.

"We must take these jewels and all this gold at once to Mr.
Whittington," said the honest man. "He is no longer a poor boy, for this
has made him rich."

[Illustration]

They found Dick in the kitchen blacking the stove.

"Come with me at once into the parlor," said Mr. Fitzwarren.

Then the bags of gold and jewels were piled at Dick's feet.

"See what your cat has brought you," said Mr. Fitzwarren. "You are now a
rich man and may yet be Lord Mayor of London."

And it is true that after Dick Whittington became a man, he was made
Lord Mayor of London.

_English Folk Tale_




[Illustration]

    THE NEW MOON

      Dear mother, how pretty
      The moon looks to-night!
    She was never so cunning before;
      Her two little horns
      Are so sharp and so bright,
    I hope she'll not grow any more.

      If I were up there,
      With you and my friends,
    I'd rock in it nicely, you'd see;
      I'd sit in the middle
      And hold by both ends.
      Oh, what a bright cradle 'twould be!

      I would call to the stars
      To keep out of the way,
    Lest we should rock over their toes;
      And then I would rock
      Till the dawn of the day,
    And see where the pretty moon goes.

      And there we would stay
      In the beautiful skies,
    And through the bright clouds we would roam;
      We would see the sun set,
      And see the sun rise,
    And on the next rainbow come home.

    ELIZA LEE FOLLEN




[Illustration]

BRIAR ROSE--I


A long time ago there lived a king and queen who were very, very sad
because they had no children.

One day, when the queen was resting near a spring, a frog crept out of
the water and said to her:

"You shall have your wish. Within a year you shall have a little girl."

What the frog said came true.

The queen had a little child who was so beautiful that the king gave a
party in her honor.

He wished to invite all the wise women in the land, for these wise women
could grant fairy gifts to his little child.

There were thirteen of them, but only twelve were invited, as the king
had only twelve golden plates.

After the dinner was over, the wise women in turn arose from the table
and named their fairy gifts to the little princess.

The first gave to her goodness; the second, beauty; the third, riches;
