    Who went his weary way with woeful sighs.
              And on another time,
    This Brook did hear that Poet read his rueful rhyme.
            Now in the poem that he read,
              This Poet said--
    "Oh! little Brook that babblest under grass!
    (_Ah me! Alack! Ah, well-a-day! Alas!_)
            Say, are you what you seem?
    Or is your life, like other lives, a dream?
    What time your babbling mocks my mortal moods,
            Fair Naiad of the stream!
            And are you, in good sooth,
    Could purblind poesy perceive the truth,
              A water-sprite,
    Who sometimes, for man's dangerous delight,
    Puts on a human form and face,
    To wear them with a superhuman grace?

    "When this poor Poet turns his bending back,
    (_Ah me! Ah, well-a-day! Alas! Alack!_)
    Say, shall you rise from out your grassy bed,
    With wreathed forget-me-nots about your head,
              And sing and play,
    And wile some wandering wight out of his way,
          To lead him with your witcheries astray?
    (_Ah me! Alas! Alack! Ah, well-a-day!_)
              Would it be safe for me
              That fateful form to see?"
    (_Alas! Alack! Ah, well-a-day! Ah me!_)

    So far the Poet read his pleasing strain,
            Then it began to rain:
            He closed his book.
    "Farewell, fair Nymph!" he cried, as with a lingering look
          His homeward way he took;
          And nevermore that Poet saw that Brook.

    The Brook passed several days in anxious expectation
              Of transformation
    Into a lovely nymph bedecked with flowers;
    And longed impatiently to prove those powers--
    Those dangerous powers--of witchery and wile,
    That should all mortal men mysteriously beguile;
    For life as running water lost its charm
    Before the exciting hope of doing so much harm.
              And yet the hope seemed vain;
              Despite the Poet's strain,
    Though the days came and went, and went and came,
    The seasons changed, the Brook remained the same.

    The Brook was almost tired
    Of vainly hoping to become a Naiad;
    When on a certain Summer's day,
    Dame Nature came that way,
              Busy as usual,
              With great and small;
    Who, at the water-side
    Dipping her clever fingers in the tide,
          Out of the mud drew creeping things,
    And, smiling on them, gave them radiant wings.
    Now when the poor Brook murmured, "Mother dear!"
          Dame Nature bent to hear,
    And the sad stream poured all its woes into her sympathetic ear,
    Crying,--"Oh, bounteous Mother!
    Do not do more for one child than another;
    If of a dirty grub or two
            (Dressing them up in royal blue)
    You make so many shining Demoiselles,[3]
    Change me as well;
    Uplift me also from this narrow place,
    Where life runs on at such a petty pace;
    Give me a human form, dear Dame, and then
    See how I'll flit, and flash, and fascinate the race of men!"

    [Footnote 3: The "Demoiselle" Dragon-fly, a well-known slender
    variety (_Libellula_), with body of brilliant blue.]

    Then Mother Nature, who is wondrous wise,
    Did that deluded little Brook advise
    To be contented with its own fair face,
        And with a good and cheerful grace,
    Run, as of yore, on its appointed race,
    Safe both from giving and receiving harms;
    Outliving human lives, outlasting human charms.
    But good advice, however kind,
    Is thrown away upon a made-up mind,
    And this was all that babbling Brook would say--
    "Give me a human face and form, if only for a day!"

    Then quoth Dame Nature:--"Oh, my foolish child!
        Ere I fulfil a wish so wild,
        Since I am kind and you are ignorant,
        This much I grant:
    You shall arise from out your grassy bed,
    And gathered to the waters overhead
              Shall thus and then
    Look down and see the world, and all the ways of men!"
              Scarce had the Dame
        Departed to the place from whence she came,
        When in that very hour,
        The sun burst forth with most amazing power.
              Dame Nature bade him blaze, and he obeyed;
        He drove the fainting flocks into the shade,
        He ripened all the flowers into seed,
        He dried the river, and he parched the mead;
    Then on the Brook he turned his burning eye,
    Which rose and left its narrow channel dry;
    And, climbing up by sunbeams to the sky,
    Became a snow-white cloud, which softly floated by.

          It was a glorious Autumn day,
    And all the world with red and gold was gay;
          When, as this cloud athwart the heavens did pass,
    Lying below, it saw a Poet on the grass,
          The very Poet who had such a stir made,
    To prove the Brook was a fresh-water mermaid.
            And now,
    Holding his book above his corrugated brow--
            He read aloud,
    And thus apostrophized the passing cloud:
                "Oh, snowy-breasted Fair!
    Mysterious messenger of upper air!
    Can you be of those female forms so dread,[4]
    Who bear the souls of the heroic dead
    To where undying laurels crown the warrior's head?
    Or, as you smile and hover,
    Are you not rather some fond goddess of the skies who waits a mortal
             lover?
                And who, ah! who is he?
   --And what, oh, what!--your message to poor me?"--
    So far the Poet. Then he stopped:
                His book had dropped.
    But ere the delighted cloud could make reply,
    Dame Nature hurried by,
    And it put forth a wild beseeching cry--
    "Give me a human face and form!"
    Dame Nature frowned, and all the heavens grew black with storm.

    [Footnote 4: The Walkyrie in Teutonic mythology, whose office it is to
    bear the souls of fallen heroes from the field of battle.]

                But very soon,
    Upon a frosty winter's noon,
    The little cloud returned below,
                Falling in flakes of snow;
    Falling most softly on the floor most hard
    Of an old manor-house court-yard.
    And as it hastened to the earth again,
    The children sang behind the window-pane:
        "Old woman, up yonder, plucking your geese,
         Quickly pluck them, and quickly cease;
    Throw down the feathers, and when you have done,
         We shall have fun--we shall have fun."
    The snow had fallen, when with song and shout
            The girls and boys came out;
        Six sturdy little men and maids,
    Carrying heather-brooms, and wooden spades,
    Who swept and shovelled up the fallen snow,
    Which whimpered,--"Oh! oh! oh!
            Oh, Mother, most severe!
            Pity me lying here,
    I'm shaken all to pieces with that storm,
    Raise me and clothe me in a human form."

    They swept up much, they shovelled up more,
        There never was such a snow-man before!
    They built him bravely with might and main,
        There never will be such a snow-man again!
    His legs were big, his body was bigger,
    They made him a most imposing figure;
    His eyes were large and as black as coal,
    For a cinder was placed in each round hole.
    And the sight of his teeth would have made yours ache,
    Being simply the teeth of an ancient rake.
    They smoothed his forehead, they patted his back,
    There wasn't a single unsightly crack;
    And when they had given the final pat,
    They crowned his head with the scare-crow's hat.

              And so
    The Brook--the Cloud--the Snow,
    Got its own way after so many days,
    And did put on a human form and face.
              But whether
    The situation pleased it altogether;
              If it is nice
        To be a man of snow and ice;
              Whether it feels
        Painful, when one congeals;
              How this man felt
        When he began to melt;
    Whether he wore his human form and face
        With any extraordinary grace;
        If many mortals fell
        As victims to the spell;
              Or if,
        As he stood, stark and stiff,
        With a bare broomstick in his arms,
    And not a trace of transcendental charms,
              That man of snow
              Grew wise enough to know
    That the Brook's hopes were but a Poet's dream,
    And well content to be again a stream,
              On the first sunny day,
              Flowed quietly away;
    Or what the end was--You must ask the Poet,
              I don't know it.




    [Illustration]

    A SOLDIER'S CHILDREN.


    Our home used to be in a hut in the dear old Camp, with lots of bands
             and trumpets and bugles and Dead Marches, and three times
             a day there was a gun,
    But now we live in View Villa at the top of the village, and it isn't
             nearly such fun.
    We never see any soldiers, except one day we saw a Volunteer, and we
             ran after him as hard as ever we could go, for we thought he
             looked rather brave;
    But there's only been one funeral since we came, an ugly black thing
             with no Dead March or Union Jack, and not even a firing party
             at the grave.
    There is a man in uniform to bring the letters, but he's nothing like
             our old Orderly, Brown;
    I told him, through the hedge, "Your facings are dirty, and you'd
             have to wear your belt if my father was at home," and oh,
             how he did frown!
    But things can't be expected to go right when Old Father's away, and
             he's gone to the war;
    Which is why we play at soldiers and fighting battles more than ever
             we did before.
    And I try to keep things together: every morning I have a parade of
             myself and Dick,
    To see that we are clean, and to drill him and do sword-exercise with
             poor Grandpapa's stick.
    Grandpapa's dead, so he doesn't want it now, and Dick's too young for
             a real tin sword like mine:
    He's so young he won't make up his mind whether he'll go into the
             Artillery or the Line.
    I want him to be a gunner, for his frock's dark blue, and Captain
             Powder gave us a wooden gun with an elastic that shoots
             quite a big ball.
    It's nonsense Dick's saying he'd like to be a Chaplain, for that's
             not being a soldier at all.
    Besides, he always wants to be Drum-Major when we've funerals, to
             stamp the stick and sing RUM--TUM--TUM--
    To the Dead March in _Saul_ (that's the name of the tune, and you play
             it on a drum).

    [Illustration]

    Mary is so good, she might easily be a Chaplain, but of course she
             can't be anything that wants man;
    She likes nursing her doll, but when we have battles she moves the
             lead soldiers about, and does what she can.
    She never grumbles about not being able to grow up into a General,
             though I should think it must be a great bore.
    I asked her what she would do if she were grown up into a woman,
             and belonged to some one who was wounded in the war,--
    She said she'd go out and nurse him: so I said, "But supposing you
             couldn't get him better, and he died; how would you behave?"
    And she said if she couldn't get a ship to bring him home in, she
             should stay out there and grow a garden, and make wreaths
             for his grave.
    Nurse says we oughtn't to have battles, now Father's gone to battle,
             but that's just the reason why!
    And I don't believe one bit what she said about its making Mother cry.
    Only she does like us to put away our toys on Sunday, so we can't
             have the soldiers or the gun;
    But yesterday Dick said, "I was thinking in church, and I've thought
             of a game about soldiers, and it's a perfectly Sunday one;
    It's a Church Parade: you'll have to be a lot of officers and men,
             Mary'll do for a few wives and families, and I'll be Chaplain
             to the Forces and pray for everyone at the war."
    So he put his nightgown over his knickerbocker suit, and knelt on the
             Ashantee stool, and Mary and I knelt on the floor.
    I think it was rather nice of Dick, for he said what put it into
             his head
    Was thinking they mightn't have much time for their prayers on active
             service, and we ought to say them instead.
    I should have liked to parade the lead soldiers, but I didn't, for
             Mother says, "What's the good of being a soldier's son if
             you can't do as you're bid?"
    But we thought there'd be no harm in letting the box be there if we
             kept on the lid.
    Dick couldn't pray out of the Prayer-book, because he's backward with
             being delicate, and he can't read;
    So he had to make a prayer out of his own head, and I think he did it
             very well indeed.
    He began, "GOD save the Queen, and the Army and the Navy, and the
             Irregular Forces and the Volunteers!
    Especially Old Father (he went out with the first draft, and he's a
             Captain in the Royal Engineers").
    But I said, "I don't think 'GOD save the Queen' is a proper prayer,
             I think it's only a sort of three cheers."
    So he said, "GOD bless the Generals, and the Colonels, and the Majors,
             and the Captains, and the Lieutenants, and the
             Sub-lieutenants, and the Quartermasters, and the
             non-commissioned officers, and the men;
    And the bands, and the colours, and the guns, and the horses and the
             wagons, and the gun-carriage they use for the funerals; and
             please I should like them all to come home safe again.
    (Don't, Mary! I haven't finished; it isn't time for you to say Amen.)
    I haven't prayed for the Chaplains, or the Doctors who help the poor
             men left groaning on the ground when the victories are won;
    And I want to pray particularly for the very poor ones who die of fever
             and miss all the fighting and fun.
    GOD bless the good soldiers, like Old Father, and Captain Powder,
             and the men with good-conduct medals; and please let the
             naughty ones all be forgiven;
    And if the black men kill our men, send down white angels to take
             their poor dear souls to Heaven!
    _Now_ you may both say Amen, and I shall give out hymn four hundred
             and thirty-seven."
    There are eight verses and eight Alleluias, and we can't sing very
             well, but we did our best,
    Only Mary would cry in the verse about "Soon, soon to faithful
             warriors comes their rest!"
    But we're both very glad Dick has found out a Sunday game about
             fighting, for we never had one before;
    And now we can play at soldiers every day till Old Father comes
             home from the war.




    [Illustration]

    "TOUCH HIM IF YOU DARE."

    A TALE OF THE HEDGE.


    HEDGE-PLANTS.

    "Beware!
       We advise you to take care.
    He lodges with us, so we know him well,
               And can tell
       You all about him,
    And we strongly advise you not to flout him."


    DANDELION.

    "At my time of life," said the Dandelion,
                "I keep an eye on
    The slightest sign of disturbance and riot,
    For my one object is to keep quiet
    The reason I take such very great care,"
    The old Dandy went on, "is because of my hair.
    It was very thick once, and as yellow as gold;
              But now I am old,
              It is snowy-white,
              And comes off with the slightest fright.
              As to using a brush--
              My good dog! I beseech you, don't rush,
              Go quietly by me, if you please
              You're as bad as a breeze.
    I hope you'll attend to what we've said;
    And--whatever you do--don't touch my head,
    In this equinoctial, blustering weather
    You might knock it off with a feather."


    THISTLE.

    Said the Thistle, "I can tickle,
    But not as a Hedgehog can prickle;
    Even my tough old friend the Moke
    Would find our lodger no joke."


    DOG-ROSE.

    "I have thorns," sighed the Rose,
    "But they don't protect me like those;
    He can pull his thorns right over his nose."


    NETTLE.

    "My sting," said the Nettle,
    "Is nothing to his when he's put on his mettle.
    No nose can endure it,
    No dock-leaves will cure it."


    DOG.

    "Bow-wow!" said the Dog:
    "All this fuss about a Hedgehog?
    Though I never saw one before--
               There's my paw!
    Good-morning, Sir! Do you never stir?
               You look like an overgrown burr.
    Good-day, I-say:
    Will you have a game of play?
    With your humped-up back and your spines on end,
    You remind me so of an intimate friend,
               The Persian Puss
               Who lives with us.
               How well I know her tricks!
               The dear creature!
    Just when you're sure you can reach her,
    In the twinkling of a couple of sticks
    She saves herself by her heels,
    And looks down at you out of the apple-tree, with eyes like catherine
             wheels.
               The odd part of it is,
    I could swear that I could not possibly miss
    Her silky, cumbersome, traily tail,
    And that's just where I always fail.
    But you seem to have nothing, Sir, of the sort;
    And I should be mortified if you thought
               That I'm stupid at sport;
    I assure you I don't often meet my match,
    Where I chase I commonly catch.
               I've caught cats,
               And rats,
    And (between ourselves) I once caught a sheep,
    And I think I could catch a weasel asleep."


    HEDGE-PLANTS.

    From the whole of the hedge there rose a shout,
    "Oh! you'll catch it, no doubt!
    But remember we gave you warning fair,
              Touch him if you dare!"


    DOG.

    "If I dare?" said the Dog--"Take that!"
    As he gave the Hedgehog a pat.
    But oh, how he pitied his own poor paw;
    And shook it and licked it, it was so sore.
