sparrows, and he makes holes in the garden-walls for them to build in.
Their sharp eyes see the tiny things that would spoil the fruit, and
their sharp beaks nip them up at once.

[Illustration]

5. 'He loves to see sparrows in an apple-tree in blossom-time; he knows
they are saving the apples for him.'

'But Jack says he has seen them pecking at fruit.'

6. 'Yes, they like fruit, just as you and I do. But there would be no
fruit at all, if the birds did not eat the grubs.

7. 'The man I was telling you about puts nets over his trees when the
fruit begins to ripen. And I heard only the other day that it is a good
plan to put pans of clean fresh water close to the trees and bushes.
Then the birds will not go so often to the fruit. They are thirsty and
hot, poor things!

8. 'And there would be no corn, if the birds did not kill the
wheat-fly's grubs.'

9. When Harry heard all this, he made up his mind not to throw stones at
the sparrows, as Jack wanted him to do.




A DAY IN THE COUNTRY.


    but'-ter-flies
    mer'-ry
    gath'-ered
    broth'-er
    flow'-ers
    o-bliged'
    roamed
    scoured
    pleas'-ant
    cheese
    hedge
    ease
    brook'-let
    crys'-tal
    thrush
    mus'-ic

    1.  Where the bees and butterflies
          Skim the grassy down,
        Four merry little children
          Gathered from the town;

    2.  Ragged little Johnnie,
          And his brother Ben,
        With wild-flowers are laden,
          These merry little men.
        Kate and Mat have posies
          Of colours bright and gay,
        For Tim, their tiny brother,
          At home obliged to stay.

    3.  They have roamed the meadow,
          They have scoured the wood,
        Seeking nuts and blackberries,
          For their pleasant food.
        With their nuts and blackberries
          And bits of bread and cheese,
        On a mossy hedge-bank,
          Now they take their ease.

    4.  Drinking from the brooklet
          'Neath the hawthorn tree,
        Clear it runs as crystal,
          Fresh and bright and free.
        And the thrush sings loudly
          On the hawthorn spray,
        And the brooklet ever
          Makes music on its way.

[Illustration]




SOME HERBS.


    stream
    through
    grav'-el
    mar'-ket
    tea
    lett'-uce
    tongue
    mus'-tard
    pow'-der
    sprin'-kled
    flan'-nel
    car'-ried
    pars'-ley
    thyme
    herbs
    sage

1. A little stream ran through one of the farmer's fields. The water was
so clear that you could see the sand and gravel at the bottom, and in it
there grew plenty of water-cress.

[Illustration: Water-cress.]

2. Harry went one afternoon to help Johnny and Tom to pick it for
market, and brought a big bunch home for tea.

3. His mother had picked a lettuce from the garden, and some mustard and
cress, and they were all put on one plate.

'They bite my tongue,' said Dora, 'all but the lettuce. I like it best.'

4. 'And I like the biting,' said Harry. 'Why is this called mustard,
mother?'

'Because the yellow mustard comes from it. The seeds are ground to
powder.'

'And we eat the leaves. It is a useful plant.'

[Illustration: Lettuce.]

5. After tea, mother took some cress-seed and mustard-seed out of two
little packets. Then she cut up one or two corks, put them into a deep
plate, filled it with water, and sprinkled seed on the cork.

6. 'This is for you, Harry,' she said. 'You will soon have a little crop
of mustard and cress. And here is one for Dora!'

In Dora's plate she laid a bit of flannel, poured water on it, and sowed
seed. The children carried off their plates to a safe place, and thought
it would be fine fun to see roots and leaves come out of the tiny seeds.

7. Then mother called them into the garden to see her parsley. She told
them that hares and rabbits would come a long way to feed on a
parsley-bed if they could get at it.

8. Close by grew mint, sage, and thyme. 'All these are herbs,' she said.
'They are not like trees, are they?'

'No; they have no bark, no hard wood, and they are so small.'

[Illustration: Leaves of Mint, Parsley, Thyme, and Sage.]

9. Dora picked a mint-leaf, a parsley-leaf, a thyme-leaf, and a
sage-leaf, and laid them side by side. She wanted to see if they were
like each other. But when she looked at them she found that they were
not alike.




COFFEE.


    cof'-fee
    beans
    kneel'-ing
    chair
    win'-dow
    bus'-y
    stock'-ings
    ket'-tle
    rat'-tled
    coun'-try
    cher'-ry
    to-geth'-er
    blos'-som
    cov'-ered
    cloths
    ber'-ries

1. 'What is coffee, mother dear? Does it grow?'

2. It was Dora who asked this. She and Harry were putting away some
things that had come from the shop, and she was now filling a tin with
coffee-beans.

3. She was kneeling on a chair by the table in the window. Her mother
was busy mending stockings, and the cat and the dog were both asleep.
The kettle was singing, and all was cosy.

4. The coffee-beans rattled into the tin, and Dora picked one out and
looked at it.

When Harry heard Dora asking about it, he also put his hand in and took
a coffee-bean. It smelt very nice, he thought. So did Dora.

5. They found that it had a flat side and a round side.

'It humps up,' said Dora.

'See, I can put the flat side of mine against the flat side of yours,'
said Harry.

'They grew like that,' said mother.

'Oh, then, they did grow? They were alive once?'

[Illustration: Coffee branch with Berries.]

6. 'Yes; they were seeds of a plant that grows in a warm country, far
away from here. They once lived inside a berry.

'The berry was red like a cherry, and the seeds inside were held
together in a little bag.'

7. 'There must have been a flower before the berry came,' said Harry,
thinking of the pea-flower and its pod.

[Illustration: Coffee-flower.]

[Illustration: Berry.]

[Illustration: Seeds in Berry.]

'A very pretty white flower,' said his mother. 'They say that a
coffee-garden looks lovely in blossom-time, just as if it were all
covered with snow.

8. 'In two or three days the snow-like blossoms are gone, and the fruit
is left. When it is ripe, men put cloths under the trees, and shake it
down.'

9. 'I wish I could go and help!' said Harry. 'What comes next?'

'They pick up the berries, dry them in the sun, and get the beans out.
Then they send the beans over the sea in a ship. And here they are!'

[Illustration: Dora and Harry tearing up the old papers.]




PAPER.


    un-hap'-py
    should
    tea
    heels
    per-haps'
    clean
    school
    clean'-ing
    hearth
    laugh
    jok'-ing
    in-deed'
    tear
    boil
    through
    clev'-er

1. 'It is such a wet day, I don't know what to do!' said Harry, looking
very unhappy.

2. 'Are you tired of your drawing and painting?' asked his mother.

'Oh yes! And we have played at houses, and had the bricks out on the
floor, and now there is nothing to do, and it is not nearly tea-time
yet. Will you read to us, mother?'

3. 'Not just now. But if you would help me a little I should get on
faster, and then we might have a nice time before tea.'

'Jolly!' cried Harry; and he ran to the foot of the stairs and called
Dora.

4. Down came Dora very fast, with her doll in her arms, and the dog at
her heels.

5. 'What I want you to do,' said mother, 'is to tear up these old papers
and put them into this sack. The man is coming soon to take it to the
paper-mill.'

6. 'Why is it taken to the paper-mill?' asked Harry.

'To be made over again into paper. Perhaps it will come back to us some
day, all clean.

7. 'Or it may be made into a newspaper, and father may bring it home in
his pocket.'

'Or we may get it in copy-books at school.'

'Yes; or it may come from the shop with rice in it.'

8. 'It may never come at all,' said Dora. 'Perhaps it will go to some
other house.'

'That is quite likely,' said mother, who was now cleaning the hearth.

9. They went on putting the paper into the sack for a long time, and
then Harry asked:

'How was paper made before there was old paper to make it of?'

10. 'Oh, it is not made of paper only. It is made of old rags, old
ropes'----

Harry and Dora began to laugh.

'And straw, and wood, and a kind of grass'----

'Now, are you joking, mother?'

11. 'No, indeed! They cut the wood and straw into tiny bits, and they
cut and tear the rags and boil them.'

'And what do they do with the grass?'

'They cut it up, boil it, and mix clay with it. Then it is put through a
very clever machine, which makes it into paper.'




A FLY.

[Illustration]


    spilt
    won'-der
    e-nough'
    fel'-low
    thirst'-y
    mouth
    su'-gar
    teeth
    ceil'-ing
    ei'-ther
    win'-dow
    pane
    won'-der-ful
    straight
    count'-ed
    friend

1. 'Just look here, Harry!' Dora called out.

A little milk had been spilt on the table, and two flies had found it
out.

'We won't wipe it up! Let us wait and see if they can take it all. See,
it is getting less! I wonder how they do it.'

2. 'There! one fly has gone. He has had enough. But this old fellow is
very thirsty. He does not look as if he were drinking, and yet the milk
goes. That long thing must be his mouth. Is it, mother?'

[Illustration: Enlarged view of Head of Fly showing Trunk.]

3. 'It is called his trunk. The mouth is at the end of it. He is very
clever with it. Do you know that he never eats? He only drinks.'

4. 'But I have seen him eating sugar.'

'No; I don't think you have. He has no teeth and no jaws. He can't bite
anything. What he does is to wet the sugar with his mouth and melt it,
and then suck it up.'

5. 'Well, that is clever! I wonder how he found out how to do it. And I
know something else that he is clever at.'

6. 'What is it, Harry?' asked Dora.

'Something you can't do! He can walk on the ceiling.'

'You can't do it either,' said Dora.

'How does he hold on, mother? We can see one up there now! He walks
about as if he were on the table.'

[Illustration: Enlarged view of Fly's Foot.]

7. 'He has something like gum inside his feet, and, when he wants to
stand or walk upside down, he presses this out, and it helps him to
stick on. Here is another fly walking up the window-pane.'

'I have often seen flies on the window-pane.'

8. 'How wonderful it is! The glass, you see, is smooth and hard, and it
stands straight up. We could not go up a hill like that, could we?'

9. They watched him go up and down, counted his six legs, and saw that
his wings were very pretty. Their mother told them a very strange thing,
that his eyes could see all ways at once!

10. Then they had to say good-bye to him, for out he went into the
garden. When they turned to the table, they found that their other
friend had gone too--and so had the milk.




THE WASP.


    wasp
    bus'-y
    win'-ter
    ground
    pass'-age
    loose
    per-haps'
    fence
    pow'-der
    spread
    brown
    comb
    pil'-lars
    cell
    hatched
    crawl'-ing

1. There was a great stir at dinner one day. A wasp came in, begging for
sugar and plum-tart. Harry and Dora ran this way and that.

2. At last their father got the wasp out into the garden, and, when all
was quiet again, he asked if they would like to hear its story.

'Oh yes, father!' said Dora.

3. Harry was busy with his plums, but he nodded, as much as to say, 'I
shall be glad to hear it too!'

4. So the father began:

'All last winter the wasp was asleep, but when spring came she waked up
and set out to look for a home. I am not quite sure where she found it,
but it was in the ground, I think.

5. 'She began to dig in the soft earth, and she dug on till she had made
a long passage. She had to carry out all the loose earth herself. Then
she made a little room at the end of the passage.

6. 'Next she looked about for some old wood, and found it in a tree,
perhaps, or post, or bit of fence. She rubbed away at it with her jaws
till she got some of it off in powder.

7. 'She made this powder into a paste with a sort of gum which came out
of her mouth, and off she went with it to her room.'

8. 'What did she do with it?'

'She spread it out in sheets of thin brown paper, and with these she
made a comb like a bee's.'

[Illustration: Wasp's Nest.]

'She made paper of it.'

'Only a bee's is made of wax. I know that!' said Harry.

9. 'She put many layers of paper on the top to keep the rain out, and
pillars under it to hold it up. Then she laid an egg in each cell. When
the eggs were hatched'----

'Little wasps came flying out,' said Dora.

'No; little grubs came crawling out!

10. 'The wasp was now more busy than ever. She fed each baby in turn,
and as they all grew bigger she had to get more and more food for them.'




THE SUNFLOWER


    blue
    buzz'-ing
    set'-tled
    watched
    sun'-flow-er
    course
