Derry sees so strong a force marching against it, it will open its gates
without resistance. A siege can only entail horrible suffering on the
town; and that suffering will, in the end, tell against James's cause,
for it will excite the sympathy of the Protestants in England and
Scotland, and make them all the hotter to conquer Ireland."

The following day, the troop was mustered in front of the castle, and,
after a tender farewell to his wife and mother, Captain Davenant placed
himself at their head and rode off. A quarter of an hour later Walter,
with Larry Doolan on a rough little pony by his side, rode after the
troop.

Dublin was reached in the afternoon. The town presented a festive
appearance. The principal streets were still draped with the flags which
had been hung out at the king's entry, five days before. The streets were
thronged with people, for loyalists had come in from all parts of the
country to welcome the king.

Large numbers of men, belonging to the newly raised regiments, wandered
among the crowd, and with these were mingled the French uniforms of the
Irish troops who had come over with James. The troop was loudly cheered
by the crowd, as it passed through the town to the spot assigned to it in
the camp of the force gathered near the city. Walter and Larry rode a
short distance behind the troop, and joined it as soon as it reached the
ground allotted to it.

"It was a brave sight, father, was it not, to see the city decked out,
and all the people cheering for the king? Dublin is setting a fine
example--isn't it?"

"You must not set much weight upon the cheering of a crowd, Walter. I do
not say that the people of Dublin may not, at the present moment, be
loyal to the king; but if he were defeated, and William were to march in,
you would see that they would cheer him just as heartily. The mob of
London cheered King James, as he passed through it, a week before he was
so ill advised as to fly; and they threw up their hats for joy, a
fortnight later, for William. No, my boy--there is no dependence on a
mob. They worship success, and the king who is present is sure to be
vastly more dear to them than the king who is absent.

"And now you had better help Larry picket your horses. Put them by the
side of mine. See how the troopers fasten theirs, and do yours the same.
When that is done, send Larry to get hold of some wood, and light a fire.
It will be cold when the sun goes down. As for food, we have brought
enough with us for tonight. Tomorrow, I suppose, we shall get rations."

Captain Davenant now posted a certain number of men to look after the
horses, and the rest set off to cut firewood; and, in an hour, four or
five great fires were blazing. Forage was served out for the horses, from
the stores which had been collected, and also a truss of straw to every
three soldiers, as bedding.

Walter had, in the meantime, strolled away among the other camps, and was
greatly amused at the various shifts and contrivances that the men had
made to make themselves comfortable. A few only of the officers had
tents; for these, as well as all other necessaries of war, were wanting;
and the troops who had, for some little time, been in camp there, had
raised all sorts of shelter from the weather. Some had constructed little
huts of turf, thatched with straw or rushes; others had erected little
tents, some of sailcloth obtained from the shipping, others of blankets,
coarse linen cloaks, or any other articles on which they could lay hands.
All were in high spirits at the prospect of the termination of the
monotony of continued drill, and of the commencement of active
campaigning. Huge fires blazed everywhere, and the country, for some
distance round, had been completely stripped of its wood.

Everywhere was life and bustle. Men were cleaning their arms, preparatory
to the march of next day. Others were cooking at the fires. Troopers were
grooming their horses. Snatches of song, and loud laughter, rose in the
air.

After wandering about for an hour, Walter rejoined his father. Captain
Davenant was sitting with the two officers of his troop, Lieutenant
O'Driscoll and Cornet Heron, by a fire, the materials for which the three
troopers who acted as their servants had collected. There was no cooking
to be done, for sufficient cold provisions had been brought with the
troop.

"You are just in time, Walter," his father said. "We are going to fall
to, at once, at our meal.

"Hand over that cold chicken, Larry; and do you, Tim Donelly, broach that
keg of claret. Give me the bread, Fergus--that's right.

"Now, gentlemen, here's a hunk each. Plates are a luxury which we must do
without, in the field. Now let us fall to."

Walter seated himself on a truss of straw beside his father, and thought
he had never enjoyed a meal so much, in his life, as the bread and cold
chicken, eaten as they were in the open air in front of the crackling
fire. Each was provided with a horn, and these were filled from the keg.

"Here's to the king, gentlemen. Success to his arms!"

All stood up to drink the toast, and then continued their meal. Three
chickens vanished rapidly, and the troopers kept their horns filled with
claret.

"If we always do as well as that," Captain Davenant said, as they
finished the meal, "we shall have no reason to grumble. But I fear that's
too much to expect.

"Bring me my pipe and tobacco, Larry. You will find them in the holsters
of my saddle.

"Fergus, do you undo these trusses, and lay the straw out even--that will
do.

"Now, lads, you will find plenty more provisions in the wallet. Do you go
and get your own suppers, then give an eye to the horses. We shall not
want anything more."

For two or three hours, the three officers and Walter sat chatting by the
fire, occasionally piling on fresh logs. Gradually the din of voices in
the camp died away, and the bright fires burned down.

"I think we had better turn in," Captain Davenant said at last. "We must
be astir an hour before daylight, for we march as soon as it's light."

Rolling themselves in their long cloaks, they lay down upon the straw. It
was some time before Walter got to sleep. The novelty of the situation,
and the strangeness of lying with the night air blowing in his face, made
him unusually wakeful. Occasionally, too, a laugh, from some party who
were sitting late round their fire, attracted his attention, and the
sound of the snorting and pawing of the horses also kept him awake; but
at last he, too, went off to sleep.

In spite of his warm cloak, he felt stiff and chilled when the sound of
the trumpets and drums roused the camp.

"Well, Walter, how do you like sleeping in the open?" his father said, as
he rose to his feet and shook himself.

"I don't mind the sleeping, father, but the waking is not so pleasant.
However, I shall soon get accustomed to it, I suppose. But I always did
hate getting up in the dark, even when we were going out fishing."

"You won't always get as comfortable a bed as this, Walter; so don't
expect it. The time will come, ere long, when you will look back upon
this as absolute luxury. We are not likely to get straw another night, I
can tell you.

"Now, Fergus, bring that wallet here. We must breakfast before we get in
the saddle."

Walter came to the conclusion that breakfast, eaten in the dark, was a
very inferior meal to dinner before a great fire. However, he kept his
thoughts to himself, and, as soon as he had finished, went to aid Larry
in saddling the horses.

"I suppose I can ride with you today, father?" he said, as he mounted.

"Yes; there will not be any military display by the way. Many of the
soldiers have got nothing in the way of uniform at present. So you can
ride with me. But if any general officer comes along, you must draw off a
little, and drop behind with Larry, who will follow in the rear of the
troop."

As soon as daylight appeared, the bugles gave the signal, and the force,
preceded by its cavalry, started on its march towards the north.



Chapter 4: The Siege Of Derry.


There was an air of excitement in the streets of Derry. Knots of people
were gathered, talking excitedly. Women stood at the doors of all the
houses, while men moved aimlessly and restlessly about between the
groups, listened for a time to a speaker, and then moved on again. The
work of strengthening the defences, which had gone on incessantly for the
last three months, had ceased, while numbers of persons were gathered on
the walls, looking anxiously towards the south. A general air of gloom
and despondency hung over the place. The storm which Derry had braved was
gathering around it at last. King James and his troops were advancing
against it.

Opinion was strongly divided in the city. Almost without exception, the
older citizens deprecated resistance. The walls, indeed, were strong, and
the position formidable. The king had no artillery worth speaking of, and
the walls, manned by brave men, might well, for a definite time, resist
assault; but the stores of food could not long support the large
population now gathered in the town, and there seemed no possibility,
whatever, of assistance from England before the horrors of famine would
be upon them. To what purpose, then, oppose resistance, which must, even
if successful, cause frightful sufferings to the inhabitants, and which,
if unsuccessful, would hand over the city to the vengeance of James.

The garrison had been strengthened by two regiments and a vast quantity
of supplies. But, including everything, there were but provisions for ten
days, and as many weeks might elapse before assistance could come.

The younger and more ardent spirits were for resistance to the last.

"Better," they said, "die of hunger, than surrender the Protestant
stronghold to the Papists."

Every hour brought crowds of fugitives, the inhabitants of all the
villages deserting their homes at the approach of the royal forces, and
flying, with what goods they could carry, to Derry.

Archdeacon Hamilton had arrived with a message from the king, offering
that if the city would, within four days, surrender, there should be an
amnesty to all for past offences, and that the property of all the
inhabitants should be respected. This proposition was now being
considered by the governor and his council, together with all the
principal officers of the English regiments.

John Whitefoot had been out all day, and had just returned to his
cousin's house, which was crowded with fugitives, as the tanner had
friends and connections in all the villages, and had opened his doors to
all who sought shelter, until every room was filled. It was a pitiful
sight to see women, with their babies in their arms and their children
gathered round them, sitting forlornly, almost indifferent to the
momentous consultation which was going on, and thinking only of their
deserted homes, and wondering what had befallen them. The men had, for
the most part, been out in the streets gathering news. The tanner's wife,
assisted by two or three of the women, was busy at the great fire on the
hearth, over which hung some huge pots in which broth and porridge were
being prepared.

One by one, the men dropped in. No news had yet been heard as to the
decision of the council. It was dark when the tanner himself entered. His
face was stern and pale.

"It is settled," he said shortly. "The council have broken up. I have
just spoken to one of the members. They and the officers are unanimously
in favour of accepting the terms of James."

Exclamations of anger broke from some of the men.

"I cannot say aught against it," the tanner said, "though my heart feels
well-nigh broken. Had we only men here, I should say let us fight to the
last, but look at all these women and children! Think what thousands and
thousands of them are in the town. Truly, I cannot blame the council that
they have decided not to bring this terrible suffering upon the city."

"The Lord will provide for his own," a minister, who had come in with his
flock, said. "Friend, I had looked for better things from you. I thought
that you were steadfast in the cause of the Lord, and now that the time
of trouble comes, you fall away at once. Remember how Sennacherib and his
host died before Jerusalem. Cannot the Lord protect Londonderry
likewise?"

"The age of miracles is past," the tanner said. "Did we not see, in
Germany, how Magdeburg and other Protestant cities were destroyed, with
their inhabitants, by the Papists? No, Brother Williams, the wicked are
suffered to work their will here, when they are stronger than the godly,
and we must look for no miracles. I am ready to fight, and, had the
council decided otherwise, would have done my share to the last; but my
heart sickens, as I look round on the women, the weak, and ailing. Did
James demand that we should renounce our religion, I would say let us all
die by sword or Famine rather than consent; but he has offered toleration
to all, that none shall suffer for what has been done, and that the
property as well as the lives of all shall be respected.

"Truly, it seems to me that resistance would be not bravery, but a sort
of madness. There are promises of aid from England; but how long may we
have to wait for them? And there are but ten days' provisions in the
town. If these English officers of King William think that resistance is
hopeless, why should I, who know nought of war, set myself against them?"

"Because they have not faith," the minister said, "and you should have
faith; because they think only of carnal weapons, and you should trust to
the Lord. Remember Leyden, how help came when all seemed lost."

"I do," the tanner replied, "and I remember how the women and children
suffered and died, how they dropped in the streets and perished with
famine in their houses. I remember this, and I shrink from saying 'let us
resist to the end.' I should rejoice if they had decided that Derry
should be deserted, that the women and children should be sent away to
shelter in the mountains of Donegal, and that every man should march out
and do combat with the army of James. We are numerous, and far better
armed than the Papists, and victory might be ours; but, were it
otherwise, were every man fated to fall on the field, I would still say
let us march forward. It is not death that I fear, but seeing these weak
and helpless ones suffer. I should not envy the feelings of the men who
decided on resistance, when the time came that the women and children
were dying of hunger around them. There is a time to fight; and a time to
sheath the sword, and to wait until a chance of drawing it successfully
again arrives; and methinks that, having such good terms offered, the
present is the time for waiting."

The preacher waved his hand impatiently, and, wrapping himself in his
cloak, left the house without another word. The next day the capitulation
was signed, and the following day the army of James was seen approaching,
and presently halted, on a hill within cannon shot of the town.

Londonderry stands in a bend of the river Foyle, and the position which
the army took up at once isolated it from the surrounding country. The
offer of capitulation had already been sent out to General Hamilton by
Captain White, the bearer receiving instructions to stipulate that the
army should not advance within four miles of the town, until all was
ready to hand over the city. In the meantime, General Rosen, who was in
chief command of the army, stationed it so as to extend from one corner
of the bend of the river to the other, and so to cut off all
communication between the city and the surrounding country; but, in the
course of the day, a country gentleman named Murray made his way through
their lines, with a body of cavalry, and rode up to the gate of the town.

The governor refused to open it, but, in spite of his orders, some of the
townspeople opened the gate, and Murray rode into the town, and, going
from point to point, exhorted the people not to surrender but to resist
to the last, accusing the governor and council of foul treachery, in thus
handing over the city.

The confusion and excitement in the streets was now great, and, while
this was going on, the governor sent a trumpeter to the king, requiring
one hour's time before the city should surrender.

Rosen took no notice of this, and, believing that all was arranged, rode
forward with the king and a portion of the army. But Murray's
exhortations and passionate harangues had their effect. A number of the
townspeople ran to the walls, and, loading the cannon, opened, with these
and their muskets, a heavy fire on the approaching troops. Several of the
soldiers were killed, and among them was Captain Troy, who was riding
close to the king.

Astonished at this unexpected resistance, the troops drew back, as they
were entirely without means of making an assault upon the city. The
governor and council at once sent Archdeacon Hamilton to the royal camp,
to excuse themselves for what had happened, and to explain that the
firing was the action of a turbulent body of men, whom they were unable
to restrain, and whom they represented as drunken rebels. The better
class of citizens, they said, were all resolved to surrender dutifully,
and were doing all they could to persuade the common people to do the
same.

As the royal artillery had not yet arrived, James drew off his troops to
Saint Johnston. Murray, with a body of horse, went out and skirmished
with them, but returned into the town on hearing that the council still
intended to surrender, and again harangued the people.

Eight thousand men assembled on the parade, and, after listening to a
passionate harangue, declared that they would resist to the last. They at
once chose a preacher named Walker, and a Mr. Baker, as joint governors,
