these are generally used as social cheer-fires, but you can have the
cheer-fire even though the substantial fireplace be _non est_, if in the
evening you pile more wood on the cook-fire, making it large enough for
all to gather around and have a good time, telling stories, laughing,
talking, and singing.

An excellent rule in camp is to have always on hand _plenty_ of
_fire-wood_. Replenish the reserve stock every day as inroads are made
upon it, and have some sort of shelter or covering where the wood will
be kept dry and ready for immediate use.


=Camp Cooking. Provisions=

In the woods one is generally hungry except immediately after a good
meal, and provisions and cooking are of vital interest to the camper.
The list of essentials is not very long and, when the camp is a
permanent one, non-essentials may be added to the larder with advantage.

Bread of some kind will form part of every meal, and a few loaves
freshly baked can be taken to camp to start with while you are getting
settled.

The quickest bread to cook is the delectable flapjack, and it is quite
exciting to toss it in the air, see it turn over and catch it again--if
you can.


=Flapjacks=

Mix dry flour, baking-powder, and salt together, 1 good teaspoonful of
Royal baking-powder to every 2 cups of flour, and 1 level teaspoonful of
salt to 1 quart (4 cups) of flour. To make the batter, beat 1 egg and
add 1-1/2 cups of milk, or 1 cup of milk and 1/2 cup of water;
unsweetened condensed milk diluted according to directions on can may be
used. Carefully and gradually stir in enough of the flour you have
prepared to make a creamy batter, be sure it is smooth and without
lumps; then stir in 1 heaping teaspoonful of sugar, better still
molasses, to make the cakes brown. Grease the frying-pan with a piece of
fat pork or bacon, have the pan hot, and, with a large spoon or a cup,
ladle out the batter into the pan, forming three small cakes to be
turned by a knife, or one large cake to be turned by tossing. Use the
knife to lift the edges of the cakes as they cook, and when you see them
a golden brown, turn quickly. Or, if the cake is large, loosen it; then
lift the pan and quickly toss the cake up into the air in such a way
that it will turn over and land safely, brown side up, on the pan.
Unless you are skilled in tossing flapjacks, don't risk wasting the cake
by having it fall on the ground or in the fire, but confine your efforts
to the small, knife-turned cakes. Serve them "piping hot," and if there
are no plates, each camper can deftly and quickly roll her flapjack into
cylinder form of many layers and daintily and comfortably eat it while
holding the roll between forefinger and thumb.

Keep the frying-pan well greased while cooking the cakes, rubbing the
pan with grease each time before pouring in fresh batter.

Flapjacks are good with butter, delicious with creamy maple-sugar soft
enough to spread smoothly over the butter. The sugar comes in cans.
Ordinary maple-syrup can be used, but is apt to drip over the edges if
the cake is held in the hand.

Well-cooked cold rice mixed with the batter will give a delicate
griddle-cake and make a change from the regular flapjack.


=Biscuits=

Biscuits are more easily made than raised bread and so are used largely
in its place while in camp. The proportions of flour and baking-powder
are the same as for flapjacks. To 4 cups of flour mix 2 teaspoonfuls of
Royal baking-powder and 1 level teaspoonful of salt; add shortening
about the size of an egg, either lard or drippings. Divide the
shortening into small bits and, using the tips of your fingers, rub it
well into the dry flour just prepared; then gradually stir in cold water
to make a soft dough, barely stiff enough to be rolled out 3/4 inch
thick on bread-board, clean flat stone, or large, smooth piece of
flattened bark. Whichever is used must be well floured, as must also
the rolling-pin and biscuit cutter. A clean glass bottle or smooth round
stick may be used as rolling-pin, and the cutter can be a baking-powder
can, or the biscuits may be cut square, or 4 inches long and 2 inches
wide with a knife. The dough may also be shaped into a loaf 3/4 inch
thick and baked in a pan by planting the pan in a bed of hot coals,
covering it with another pan or some substitute, and placing a deep
layer of hot coals all over the cover. The biscuits should bake in about
fifteen minutes. For a hurry meal each camper can take a strip of dough,
wind it spirally around a peeled thick stick, which has first been
heated, and cook her own spiral biscuit by holding it over the fire and
constantly turning the stick. Biscuits, in common with everything cooked
over a hot wood-fire, need constant watching that they may not burn.
Test them with a clean splinter of wood; thrust it into the biscuit and
if no dough clings to the wood the biscuits are done.


=Johnny-Cake=

Served hot, split open and buttered, these Kentucky johnny-cakes with a
cup of good coffee make a fine, hearty breakfast, very satisfying and
good.

Allow 1/2 cup of corn-meal for each person, and to every 4 cups of meal
add 1 teaspoonful of salt, mix well; then pour water, which is _boiling
hard_, gradually into the meal, stirring constantly to avoid having any
lumps. When the consistency is like soft mush, have ready a frying-pan
almost full of _hot_ drippings or lard, dip your hands into cold water
to enable you to handle the hot dough, and, taking up enough corn-meal
dough to make a _large_-sized biscuit, pat it in your hands into a
3/4-inch-thick cake and gently drop it into the hot fat; immediately
make another cake, drop it into the fat, and continue until the
frying-pan is full. As soon as one johnny-cake browns on the lower side
turn it over, remove each cake from the fat as soon as done, and serve
as they cook.

Corn-meal must be thoroughly scalded with boiling water when making any
kind of corn bread in order to have the bread soft and not dry and
"chaffy."

For baked corn bread add 2 full teaspoons of baking-powder and stir in 2
eggs, after 4 cups of meal and 1 teaspoonful of salt have been
thoroughly scalded and allowed to cool a little. Pour this corn-meal
dough into a pan which has been generously greased, and bake.

Corn-meal needs a hot oven and takes longer to bake than wheat-flour
biscuits.


=Corn-Meal Mush=

Corn-meal mush does not absolutely require fresh cream or milk when
served. It is good eaten with butter and very nourishing. Many like it
with maple-syrup or common molasses.

Time is required to make well-cooked mush; at least one hour will be
necessary. To 2 quarts of boiling, bubbling water add 1 teaspoonful of
salt, and very slowly, little by little, add 2 cups of corn-meal,
stirring constantly and not allowing the water to cease boiling. Do not
stop stirring until the mush has cooked about ten minutes. It may then
be placed higher up from the fire, where it will not scorch, and
_boiling_ water added from time to time as needed to keep the mush of
right consistency. The cold mush may be made into a tempting dish, if
sliced 1/2-inch thick and fried brown in pork fat. Many cold cooked
cereals can be treated in the same way; sprinkled with flour these will
brown better.


=Kentucky Bread=

Kentucky bread is made of flour, salt, and water. It is generally known
as beaten biscuit. Mix 2 scant teaspoonfuls of salt with 1 quart of
flour, add enough cold water to make a _stiff_, smooth dough and knead,
pull, and pound the dough until it blisters; the longer it is worked and
beaten the better. Roll out very thin, cut round or into squares and
bake. These biscuits may be quickly made, are simple and wholesome.


=Cocoa=

Good cocoa may be made by substituting cold milk and cold water for hot.
Follow directions on the can as to proportion, and add the cold liquids
after the cocoa is mixed to a smooth paste; then boil. Either
unsweetened condensed milk or milk powder can take the place of fresh
milk.


=Coffee=

For every camper allow 1 tablespoonful of ground coffee, then 1 extra
spoonful for the pot. Put the dry coffee into the coffee-pot, and to
settle it add a crumbled egg-shell; then pour in a little cold water and
stir all together; when there are no egg-shells use merely cold water.
Add 1 cupful of cold water for each camper, and 2 for the pot, set the
coffee-pot over the fire and let it boil for a few moments, take it from
the fire and pour into the spout a little cold water, then place the
coffee where it will keep hot--not cook, but settle.


=Tea=

Allow 1 scant teaspoonful of tea for each person, scald the teapot,
measure the tea into the pot, and pour in as many cups of _boiling_
water as there are spoonfuls of tea, adding an extra cupful for the pot.
_Never_ let _tea boil_.


=Boiled Potatoes=

Wash potatoes, cut out any blemish, and put them on to cook in cold
water over the fire. They are much better boiled while wearing their
jackets. Allow from one-half to three-quarters of an hour for boiling,
test them with a sliver of wood that will pierce through the centre when
the potato is done. When cooked pour off the boiling water, set off the
fire to one side where they will keep hot, and raise one edge of the lid
to allow the steam to escape. Serve while _very_ hot.


=Baked Potatoes=

Wrap each potato in wet leaves and place them all on hot ashes that lie
over hot coals, put more hot ashes on top of the potatoes, and over the
ashes place a deep bed of red-hot coals. It will require about forty
minutes or more for potatoes to bake. Take one out when you think they
should be done; if soft enough to yield to the pressure when squeezed
between thumb and finger, the potato is cooked. Choose potatoes as near
of a size as possible; then all will be baked to a turn at the same
time.


=Bean Soup and Baked Beans=

Look over one quart of dried beans, take out all bits of foreign matter
and injured beans; then wash the beans in several waters and put them to
soak overnight in fresh water. Next morning scald 1-1/2 pounds salt
pork, scrape it well, rinse, and with 1 teaspoonful of dried onion or
half of a fresh one, put on to boil with the beans in cold water. Cook
slowly for several hours. When the water boils low, add more boiling
water and boil until the beans are soft.

To make soup, dip out a heaping cupful of the boiled beans, mash them to
a paste, then pour the liquid from the boiled beans over the paste and
stir until well mixed; if too thin add more beans; if too thick add hot
water until of the right consistency, place the soup over the fire to
reheat, and serve very hot. To bake beans, remove the pork from the
drained, partially cooked beans, score it across the top and replace it
in the pot in midst of and extending a trifle above the surface of the
beans, add 1 cup of hot water and securely cover the top of the pot with
a lid or some substitute. Sink the pot well into the glowing coals and
shovel hot coals over all. Add more hot water from time to time if
necessary.

Beans cooked in a bean hole rival those baked in other ways. Dig the
hole about 1-1/2 feet deep and wide, build a fire in it, and keep it
burning briskly for hours; the oven hole must be _hot_. When the beans
are ready, rake the fire out of the hole; then sink the pot down into
the hole and cover well with hot coals and ashes, placing them all over
the sides and top of the pot. Over these shovel a thick layer of earth,
protecting the top with grass sod or thick blanket of leaves and bark,
that rain may not penetrate to the oven. Let the beans bake all night.


=Bacon=

Sliced bacon freshly cut is best; do not bring it to camp in jars or
cans, but cut it as needed. Each girl may have the fun of cooking her
own bacon.

Cut long, slender sticks with pronged ends, sharpen the prongs and they
will hold the bacon; or use sticks with split ends and wedge in the
bacon between the two sides of the split, then toast it over the fire.
Other small pieces of meat can be cooked in the same way. Bacon boiled
with greens gives the vegetable a fine flavor, as it also does
string-beans when cooked with them. It may, however, be boiled alone for
dinner, and is good fried for breakfast.


=Game Birds=

Game birds can be baked in the embers. Have ready a bed of red-hot coals
covered with a thin layer of ashes, and after drawing the bird, dip it
in water to wet the feathers; then place it on the ash-covered red
coals, cover the bird with more ashes, and heap on quantities of red
coals. If the bird is small it should be baked in about one-half hour.
When done strip off the skin, carrying feathers with it, and the bird
will be clean and appetizing. Birds can also be roasted in the bean-pot
hole, but in this way, they must first be picked, drawn, and rinsed
clean; then cut into good-sized pieces and placed in the pot with fat
pork, size of an egg, for seasoning; after pouring in enough water to
cover the meat, fasten the pot lid on securely and bury the pot in the
glowing hot hole under a heap of red-hot coals. Cover with earth, the
same as when baking beans.


=Fish=

Fish cooked in the embers is very good, and you need not first remove
scales or fins, but clean the fish, season it with salt and pepper, wrap
it in fresh, wet, green leaves or wet blank paper, not printed paper,
and bury in the coals the same as a bird. When done the skin, scales,
and fins can all be pulled off together, leaving the delicious hot fish
ready to serve.

To boil a fish: First scale and clean it; then cut off head and tail.
If you have a piece of new cheesecloth to wrap the fish in, it can be
stuffed with dressing made of dry crumbs of bread or biscuits well
seasoned with butter, or bits of pork, pepper, and a very small piece of
onion. The cloth covering must be wrapped around and tied with white
string. When the fish is ready, put it into boiling water to which has
been added 1 tablespoonful of vinegar and a little salt. The vinegar
tends to keep the meat firm, and the dressing makes the fish more of a
dinner dish; both, however, can be omitted. Allow about twenty minutes
for boiling a three-pound fish.

The sooner a fish is cooked after being caught the better. To scale a
fish, lay it on a flat stone or log, hold it by the head and with a
knife scrape off the scales. Scale each side and, with a quick stroke,
cut off the head and lower fins. The back fin must have incisions on
each side in order to remove it. Trout are merely scraped and cleaned by
drawing out the inside with head and gills. Do this by forcing your hand
in and grasping tight hold of the gullet.

To clean most fish it is necessary to slit open the under side, take out
the inside, wash the fish, and wipe it dry with a clean cloth.

If the camping party is fond of fish, and fish frequently forms part of
a meal, have a special clean cloth to use exclusively for drying the
fish.


          _Provisions for One Person for Two Weeks. To be
          Multiplied by Number of Campers, and Length of
          Time if Stay is over Two Weeks_


=Essential Foods=

Outdoor life seems to require certain kinds of foods; these we call
essentials; others in addition to them are in the nature of luxuries or
non-essentials.


=List=

          _Essentials_

          Wheat flour          6 lbs.
          Corn-meal        2-1/2 lbs.
          Baking-powder      1/2 lb.
          Coffee             1/2 lb.
          Tea                1/8 lb.
          Cocoa              1/2 lb.
          Pork                 1 lb.
          Bacon            2-1/2 lbs.
          Salt               1/2 lb.
          Pepper               1 oz.
          Sugar                3 lbs.
          Butter           1-1/2 lbs.
          Milk, dried        1/2 lb.
          Lard               3/4 lb.
          Egg powder         1/4 lb.
          Fruit, dried         1 lb.
          Potatoes, dried  1-1/2 lbs.
          Beans            1-1/2 lbs.
          Maple-syrup          1 pt.
          Vinegar            1/4 pt.


=List=

_Non-Essentials_

          Rice                                  2-1/2 lbs.
          Lemons                                  1/2 doz.
          Erbswurst                               1/4 lb.
          Soup tablets                            1/4 lb.
          Baker's chocolate (slightly sweetened)  1/2 lb.
          Maple-sugar                             1/2 lb.
          Ham                                       5 lbs.
          Nuts                                      2 lbs.
          Marmalade                               1/2 jar
          Preserves                                 1 can
          Citric acid                             1/8 lb.
          Onions, dried                             1 oz.
          Cheese                                    1 lb.
          Potatoes, fresh                          14
          Codfish                                   1 lb.
          Vegetables, dried                       1/2 lb.


=Sanitation=

_Keep your camp scrupulously clean._ Do not litter up the place, your
health and happiness greatly depend upon observing the laws of hygiene.
Make sure after each meal that all kitchen refuse is collected and
deposited in the big garbage hole, previously dug for that purpose, and
well covered with a layer of fresh earth.

[Illustration: 27

ANOTHER WAY OF HANGING THE CRANE OUT OF DOORS

28 29

Camp fires and camp sanitation.]
