
"If Miss Burd has arranged it, I suppose it's all serene," said Mabel
Hughes, of "The Old Brigade."

"You'll like it, I know. I'd explain now, only I haven't got any of the
papers, and besides, it would take such a long time, and it's rather
late, and I want to be getting home. Anyway, I hope we shall all take it
up hot and strong. Be sure to keep Wednesday free, though I'm going to
ask Miss Burd to let us have the meeting in school hours if possible,
then we're absolutely sure of everybody."

"Right you are!" agreed the wardens, separating in a rather
unparliamentary fashion to admire a vinaigrette, scented with
heliotrope, which Althea took from her pocket and handed round for
appreciative sniffs.

All the girls felt that Lispeth Scott was to be trusted. She was a
worthy leader for the new order of things. She was a tall, stout, fair
girl of almost eighteen, and rather grown-up for her age. She was the
youngest member of a large family who had made enormous exertions during
the war, and, with sisters who had nursed in Serbia, driven
motor-ambulances in France, served in canteens, in Y. M. C. A. huts, and
worked at munitions, she had excellent examples of what it is possible
to do for one's country. She was a decided favorite in the College,
being athletic as well as clever, and of a very jolly merry temperament
with a vein of great earnestness. Though the girls sometimes called her
"Jumbo," they meant the nickname in token of friendship, and submitted
to her dictatorship far more readily than they would have done to that
of any other member of the Sixth who had been put in her place. Miss
Burd had great confidence in Lispeth, and consequently, when they had
talked over the matter of the new society which she wished to be formed
in the school, she decided to leave its institution entirely in the
hands of her head girl.

"It will be far better for the mistresses not to be present at the
meeting," she said. "I can trust you, Lispeth, to explain things, and
the girls will like it much more if it seems to emanate from the new
Council. Talk to them in your own way, and they'll understand you. I
want the Society to be an absolutely voluntary one, or it's of no use.
Don't let them think they must join merely to please _me_. I'd rather
have a dozen who are in earnest over it than a hundred half-hearted
members. Only those who feel enthusiastic need give in their names. I
don't mind if it begins in quite a humble way. Indeed, I only expect a
small membership at first."

"On the contrary, Miss Burd, I think it will catch on," replied Lispeth.

In consequence of this conversation, the head prefect pinned a paper on
the notice-board, convening a general meeting of all girls over twelve
years of age, to be held in the big hall on Wednesday afternoon at 3:30
sharp, the last lesson of the day having been remitted by orders from
the Study. There was a universal feeling that something important was on
foot, so those forms that were eligible trooped in a body to the hall,
while the disappointed juniors tried to console themselves with the
reflection that they would be able to go home half an hour earlier than
their elders. After considerable shuffling about, places were taken.
Unwilling to waste further time, Lispeth mounted the platform, and rang
the bell for silence.

"Are we all here? Well, I can't wait for anybody else. Those who come in
late will have to hear what they can, and you must tell them the rest
afterwards. Oh, here they are! Quietly, please! There's plenty of room
over there. Violet, will you shut the door? Now that we're all together,
I want to have a talk with you. You know I'm what may be called 'Prime
Minister' of our School Parliament, and, though your wardens will report
all we say in council, I think it is well to have a public meeting
sometimes. This term everything seems to have made a fresh start. We're
in new buildings, and we have new rules, and our very Parliament is a
new institution. You're all in new forms, and I'm the new Head Prefect.
It's not only in school that everything's different, but in the outside
world as well. This is our first term since peace was signed. I can
remember our first term after War was declared. I was only in
IIIA. then--quite a youngster! Hetty Hughes, who was the head girl, made
a speech, and told us what we ought to do to try to help our country. I
think some of us who were here have never forgotten that. We nearly
hurrahed the roof off, and we formed a Knitting Club and a Soldiers'
Parcel Society on the spot. You know for yourselves how we worked to keep
those up. Well, to-day the Empire is at peace, but our country needs our
help as much as ever, or even more. It's making a fresh start, and we
want the new world to be a better place than the old. Hundreds of
thousands of gallant young lives have been gladly given to establish this
new world--in this school alone we know to our cost--and we owe it to our
heroic dead not to let their sacrifice be in vain. We want a better and
purer England to rise up and make a clean sweep of the bad things that
disgraced her before. I expect you'll say: 'Oh, that's for politicians,
and not for us schoolgirls!' but it isn't. Popular opinion is a mighty
thing. The schoolgirls of to-day are the women of to-morrow, and the
women of a country have an enormous amount to do with the formation of
public opinion--more nowadays than ever before--and their influence will
go on increasing with every year that passes. If each of us tries to help
the world instead of hindering it, think what an asset each one may be to
the country! It's really a tremendous honor to know that we can all take
our part in the reconstruction of England. It's like each being allowed
to lay a brick in the foundation of a new building. Of course you'll ask
me: 'Well, and how are we going to help?' That's just what I want to talk
about. We pride ourselves on being practical at the College. Some of us
thought we might start a new society, to be called 'The Rainbow League.'
It's a sort of 'Guild of Helpers,' and we want to do all kinds of jolly
things to help in the town, something like our old 'Knitting Club' and
'Soldiers' Parcel Society,' only of course different. We could give
concerts and make clothes for war orphans, and toys for the hospitals,
and scrap-books for crippled children. There are heaps of nice things
like that you'll just love doing. It's called 'The Rainbow League,'
because a rainbow was set in the sky after the Flood, to help people to
remember, and we want, in our small way, not to let the Great War be
forgotten, but to do our bit to help with the future of the race.

"I'm not any great hand at speaking or explaining, so I want you each to
take a copy of the rules of 'The Rainbow League' and to read them
quietly over at home. Then any girl who likes to join can put her name
down. All the Sixth want to become members, and I hope lots of others
will too. That's all I have to say. I'm afraid I'm rather a bungler, but
you'll understand everything if you read the papers. I'm going to give
them out now."

Lispeth, very red in the face, came down from the platform, and, aided
by her fellow-prefects, began to distribute papers right and left to the
girls as they filed from the benches. Amongst the others, Ingred took
hers, and put it in her pocket. She did not care to discuss it with the
crowd, so retired to a corner of the hostel garden, and, amid a shower
of falling autumn leaves, opened the typewritten sheet, and read as
follows:

     The Rainbow League

     A Society for Schoolgirls who wish to help in the great work of
     reconstruction after the War

     WHAT THE LEAGUE HOLDS

     That every soul is of infinite and equal value, because all are the
     children of one Father.

     That every girl must do her best to help all other girls, and to
     advance the Sisterhood of Women.

     That woman's greatest and strongest weapons are love and sweetness.

     That by conscious radiation of unselfish love to her fellow-beings,
     a girl may undoubtedly raise the moral atmosphere of the world
     around her.

     That every girl, however young, can help this glorious old country,
     and that, joined together for good, the schoolgirls of a nation can
     influence the well-being of a race.

     That good can always triumph over evil, and that love and
     unselfishness will wipe out many social blots, and put beauty in
     their place.

     As the rainbow has seven prismatic colors, these may stand for
     seven talents of woman.

     Violet = Virtue--the bed-rock of woman's
     influence.

     Indigo = Industry--which means willing service.

     Blue = Beauty--in its many and varied forms.

     Green = Generosity--to give of our best to
     others.

     Yellow = Youth--to offer our best years to God.

     Orange = Order--which includes organization.

     Red = Radiation--the Love Force going out to
     others.

     Fellowship

     Every member of the League shall pledge herself to forward its
     objects and to take an active part in any schemes of help that may
     be instituted in connection with it.

     Flower Emblem. The Iris.

     Motto. "Freely ye have received, freely give."

Ingred sat for a moment or two, watching the petals blow from the last
roses on the bush that hung over the worn stone wall. The old Abbey lay
on one hand, the buildings of the new school on the other. They seemed
the very personification of ancient and modern.

"The world can't stand still," she thought, "and if it's got to move on,
I suppose I'd better help to give it a shove in the right direction."

Walking into the hostel, she met Nora and Fil walking arm-in-arm.

"Hullo, Ingred! Have you read the paper about the Rainbow League?" asked
Fil eagerly. "I think it's ripping! Nora and I are both going to join."

"And so am I," said Ingred, as she passed by them, and went upstairs.




CHAPTER VII

Hockey


Ingred signed her name next morning as a member of the Rainbow League,
and received a neat notebook with a Japanese design of purple irises
stencilled on the cover. Though the new society was supposed to be run
entirely by the girls themselves, it was much encouraged at
head-quarters, and special allowances were made for its activities. Miss
Burd sent for a book on _Toy-making at Home_, and gave the Handicraft
classes an indulgence to concentrate for the present on the construction
of little windmills, carts, dolls' furniture, trains, jigsaw puzzles,
and other articles described in its fascinating pages. Such a number of
girls had joined the League that many willing hands were at work, and at
Christmas they hoped to have a sale of the best of the toys in aid of a
fund for War Orphans, and to send the remainder to be given away as
treats for poor children.

Lispeth was highly enthusiastic, and full of future schemes.

"We'll do toy-making this term," she decreed, "and then next term we can
think of something else. In the spring and summer we'll have a Posy
Union to send bunches of flowers to sick people. We can't do anything of
that, of course, during the winter, unless some of you like to put down
bulbs; it would be lovely to give a pot of purple crocuses to a little
crippled child! I think making the toys is just A1. I want to start a
manufactory!"

"Barring the glue," said Susie Wakefield. "It smells simply abominable
when it boils over. Why doesn't somebody bring out a patent for
sweet-scented glue?"

"Sweet-scented glue! You Sybarite!"

"Why not? They could make it out of all those delicious gums and resins
you read about in books on the Spice Islands, instead of--by the by,
what is glue made of?"

"Horses' hoofs, I believe, but I fancy it's better not to ask what it's
made of. I don't think your gums and resins would do the deed so well.
We'd best stick to good old-fashioned glue."

"That's just what I complained of--I _do_ stick to it, or rather it
sticks to me. I get it all over my hands, and smears down my overall."

"Then you're an untidy workwoman, old sport, and I can't do anything for
you except recommend 'Gresolvent.'"

The girls were grateful for the latitude of the Handicraft class, for
otherwise they would have had little or no time to give to the
construction of toys. The homework of the College was stiff, and
certain games were compulsory. The hockey season had begun, and fixtures
had been made with other schools in the neighborhood.

"We must see that the old Coll. keeps up its reputation," said Blossom
Webster, the games captain. "Last year, when we had Lennie Peters and
Sophy Aston, we did a thing or two, didn't we? 'What girl has done, girl
can do!' and we've just got to buck up and try."

"Rather!" agreed the team.

Among the various matches which had been arranged was one with The
Clinton High School Old Girls' Association. It was an amateur team of
enthusiasts, who, debarred from playing any longer for their school, had
established a club of their own. They had sent a challenge to Grovebury
College, and it had been accepted.

"Saturday morning's a weird time for a match!" said Blossom, re-reading
the letter to her chums. "But their captain says it's the only time they
can get their field. It's used by another club in the afternoons, so
she's fixed eleven o'clock."

"It suits me rather decently," said Janie Potter. "I'm going out to tea
in the afternoon, so I couldn't have come if the match had been at
three. Don't stare at me like that! _No_ I'm _not_ a slacker! I must
accept invitations to tea sometimes, even if I _am_ in the team. What a
dragon you are, Blossom!"

"Good thing some one keeps the team up, or you'd be gadding off
tea-drinking instead of playing!" returned Blossom grimly. "Grovebury
expects every girl to do her duty on Saturday. It will be bad luck for
the season if we lose our first match."

The Clinton Old Girls' Association had its field at Denscourt, a town
ten miles away from Grovebury. It was arranged by the team, and for any
girls from the college who cared to come as spectators, to meet at the
railway station at 10:15, and travel together under the escort of Miss
Giles.

Ingred, who was a keen player, and very proud of having been placed in
the reserve, was to spend Friday night at the hostel, instead of
returning as usual to Wynch-on-the-Wold.

Nora, Verity, and Fil were also to be numbered among the spectators.

On the eventful morning, as the girls were just finishing breakfast, a
telegram arrived for Rachel Grant. She tore open the yellow envelope,
and her face fell as she read the brief message. Her mother was
seriously ill, and she must return home immediately. Mrs. Best went
upstairs at once to arrange for her hurried journey, and to help her to
pack.

Downstairs at the breakfast-table the girls discussed the bad news. They
were very sorry for Rachel, and also for themselves, for she was their
right inner.

"It's like our luck!" fretted Janie Potter.

"Too disgusting for words!" groused Doreen Hayward.

"Poor old Rachel!" groaned Fil.

"What's going to be done?" asked everybody, as they folded their
serviettes and left the table.

That question was answered by Miss Giles, who beckoned to Ingred in the
hall, and said briefly:

"Ingred, will you fetch your hockey-stick and pads?"

Ingred did not need telling twice. To take Rachel's place was indeed an
honor. Such a chance did not come often. With huge satisfaction she
donned her neat navy-blue skirt, edged with its orange band, and her
blouse with its orange collar and cuffs.

"You lucker!" sighed Nora enviously. "I'd just jolly well give
everything I have to be in the match to-day. It's not much sport to
stand by and cheer. Oh, don't think I'm trying to get out of coming! I'm
going to look on and see that you do your duty. If you're not playing
up, I'll hiss!"

"I'll do my best," laughed Ingred, "and if I drop down for sheer lack of
breath, I shall expect you and Verity to carry me home. There!"

"Right you are! It's a bargain, though you'd be a jolly heavy burden, I
can tell you."

The team, Miss Giles, and about twenty girls as spectators, were
punctual to their appointment, and assembled at the station just in time
for the train. By a little maneuvering, combined with good fortune, they
secured three compartments to themselves, for a solitary old gentleman,
whom they found in possession of a corner seat, bolted in alarm at such
an invasion of schoolgirls, and sought sanctuary in a smoking carriage.
Some generous spirits had brought chocolates and butter-scotch, which
they shared round, and Nora, the irrepressible, produced from her pocket
a mouth-organ, with which she proceeded to entertain the company, until
frantic raps from the next compartment made her aware that Miss Giles
heard and disapproved of her amateur recital. Naturally the talk was
largely about hockey and the chances of the match. It was known that the
Old Clintonians were a strong team, for most of them had been the crack
players of their school. To beat them would indeed be a feather in the
cap of the college.

"Too good to come off!" groaned Blossom gloomily.

"Nonsense, you can't tell till you've tried! Make up your mind you're
going to win!" said Nora indignantly. "I shan't speak to you again if
you lose this match!"

"I'm only one out of eleven, please!"

"Well, I don't care! One who makes up her mind to fail can spoil
everything, and vice-versa, so just buck up and win!"

The hockey ground was not very far from the station at Denscourt, and
when the Grovebury contingent arrived they found the Old Clintonians
ready and waiting for them. The eleven ran into the pavilion and took
off the long coats that had covered their gym costumes; then trooped out
on to the field, as neat and business-like looking a team as could be
imagined. Blossom, with her chums, Janie and Doreen, took good stock of
their opponents.

"They're a strong set, and will take some beating," said Janie.

"Rather!" agreed Blossom. "You may be sure we're not going to goal just
when we please."

"They look topping sports!" commented Doreen.

Everything was now in perfect order; the teams were placed, and the
umpire blew her whistle for the match to begin. As the account of such a
contest is always much more interesting when narrated by an actual
spectator, and as Nora wrote a long and accurate description of it
afterwards to a cousin at school in London, I will insert her letter,
and allow it to speak for itself.

(_This letter is an account of a real match, written by a real
schoolgirl._)

     "Grovebury College.
