And the little black-eyed rebel, so cunning and so sly,
Was watching for his coming from the corner of her eye.

His face was broad and honest, his hands were brown and tough,
The clothes he wore upon him were homespun, coarse, and rough;
But one there was who watched him, who long time lingered nigh,
And cast at him sweet glances from the corner of her eye.

He drove up to the market, he waited in the line--
His apples and potatoes were fresh and fair and fine.
But long and long he waited, and no one came to buy,
Save the black-eyed rebel, watching from the corner of her eye.

"Now, who will buy my apples?" he shouted, long and loud;
And, "Who wants my potatoes?" he repeated to the crowd.
But from all the people round him came no word of reply,
Save the black-eyed rebel, answering from the corner of her eye.

For she knew that 'neath the lining of the coat he wore that day
Were long letters from the husbands and the fathers far away,
Who were fighting for the freedom that they meant to gain, or die;
And a tear like silver glistened in the corner of her eye.

But the treasures--how to get them? crept the question through her mind,
Since keen enemies were watching for what prizes they might find;
And she paused a while and pondered, with a pretty little sigh,
Then resolve crept through her features, and a shrewdness fired her eye.

So she resolutely walked up to the wagon old and red--
"May I have a dozen apples for a kiss?" she sweetly said;
And the brown face flushed to scarlet, for the boy was somewhat shy,
And he saw her laughing at him from the corner of her eye.

"You may have them all for nothing, and more, if you want," quoth he.
"I will have them, my good fellow, but can pay for them," said she.
And she clambered on the wagon, minding not who all were by,
With a laugh of reckless romping in the corner of her eye.

Clinging round his brawny neck, she clasped her fingers white and small,
And then whispered, "Quick! the letters! thrust them underneath my shawl!
Carry back again _this_ package, and be sure that you are spry!"
And she sweetly smiled upon him from the corner of her eye.

Loud the motley crowd was laughing at the strange, ungirlish freak;
And the boy was scared and panting, and so dashed he could not speak.
And "Miss, I have good apples," a bolder lad did cry;
But she answered, "No, I thank you," from the corner of her eye.

With the news from loved ones absent to the dear friends they would greet,
Searching them who hungered for them, swift she glided through the street.
"There is nothing worth the doing that it does not pay to try,"
Thought the little black-eyed rebel with a twinkle in her eye.

    _Will Carleton._




A Day Well Spent


If you sit down at set of sun
And count the deeds that you have done,
And, counting, find
One self-denying act, one word that eased the heart of him that heard;
One glance most kind, which felt like sunshine where it went,
Then you may count that day well spent.

But if through, all the livelong day
You've eased no heart by yea or nay,
If through it all you've nothing done that you can trace
That brought the sunshine to one face,
No act most small that helped some soul and nothing cost,
Then count that day as worse than lost.



Say Not the Struggle Nought Availeth


Say not the struggle nought availeth,
  The labor and the wounds are vain,
The enemy faints not, nor faileth,
  And as things have been they remain.

If hopes were dupes, fears may be liars;
  It may be, in yon smoke concealed,
Your comrades chase e'en now the fliers,
  And, but for you, possess the field.

For while the tired waves, vainly breaking,
  Seem here no painful inch to gain,
Far back, through creeks and inlets making,
  Comes silent, flooding in, the main,

And not by eastern windows only,
  When daylight comes, comes in the light,
In front, the sun climbs slow, how slowly,
  But westward, look, the land is bright.

    _A.H. Clough._




The Miller of the Dee


There dwelt a miller, hale and bold,
  Beside the river Dee;
He worked and sang from morn till night--
  No lark more blithe than he;
And this the burden of his song
  Forever used to be:
"I envy nobody--no, not I--
  And nobody envies me!"

"Thou'rt wrong, my friend," said good King Hal,
  "As wrong as wrong can be;
For could my heart be light as thine,
  I'd gladly change with thee.
And tell me now, what makes thee sing,
  With voice so loud and free,
While I am sad, though I'm a king,
  Beside the river Dee?"

The miller smiled and doffed his cap,
  "I earn my bread," quoth he;
"I love my wife, I love my friend,
  I love my children three;
I owe no penny I cannot pay,
  I thank the river Dee
That turns the mill that grinds the corn
  That feeds my babes and me."

"Good friend," said Hal, and sighed the while,
  "Farewell, and happy be;
But say no more, if thou'dst be true
  That no one envies thee;
Thy mealy cap is worth my crown,
  Thy mill my kingdom's fee;
Such men as thou art England's boast,
  O miller of the Dee!"

    _Charles Mackay._




The Old Red Cradle


Take me back to the days when the old red cradle rocked,
  In the sunshine of the years that are gone;
To the good old trusty days, when the door was never locked,
  And we slumbered unmolested till the dawn.

I remember of my years I had numbered almost seven,
  And the old cradle stood against the wall--
I was youngest of the five, and two were gone to heaven,
  But the old red cradle rocked us all.

And if ever came a day when my cheeks were flushed and hot,
  When I did not mind my porridge or my play,
I would clamber up its side and the pain would be forgot,
  When the old red cradle rocked away.

It has been a hallowed spot where I've turned through all the years,
  Which have brought me the evil with the good,
And I turn again to-night, aye, and see it through my tears,
  The place where the dear old cradle stood.

By its side my father paused with a little time to spare.
  And the care-lines would soften on his brow,
Ah! 't was but a little while that I knew a father's care,
  But I fancy in my dreams I see him now.

By my mother it was rocked when the evening meal was laid,
  And again I seem to see her as she smiled;
When the rest were all in bed, 'twas there she knelt and prayed,
  By the old red cradle and her child.

Aye, it cradled one and all, brothers, sisters in it lay,
  And it gave me the sweetest rest I've known;
But to-night the tears will flow, and I let them have their way,
  For the passing years are leaving me alone.

And it seems of those to come, I would gladly give them all
  For a slumber as free from care as then,
Just to wake to-morrow morn where the rising sun would fall
  Round the old red cradle once again.

But the cradle long has gone and the burdens that it bore,
  One by one, have been gathered to the fold;
Still the flock is incomplete, for it numbers only four,
  With one left out straying in the cold.

Heaven grant again we may in each other's arms be locked,
  Where no sad tears of parting ever fall;
God forbid that one be lost that the old red cradle rocked;
  And the dear old cradle rocked us all.

    _Annie J. Granniss._




The Moo Cow Moo


My papa held me up to the Moo Cow Moo
  So close I could almost touch,
And I fed him a couple of times or so,
  And I wasn't a fraid-cat, much.

But if my papa goes in the house,
  And my mamma she goes in too,
I keep still like a little mouse
  For the Moo Cow Moo might Moo.

The Moo Cow's tail is a piece of rope
  All raveled out where it grows;
And it's just like feeling a piece of soap
  All over the Moo Cow's nose.

And the Moo Cow Moo has lots of fun
  Just switching his tail about,
But if he opens his mouth, why then I run,
  For that's where the Moo comes out.

The Moo Cow Moo has deers on his head,
  And his eyes stick out of their place,
And the nose of the Moo Cow Moo is spread
  All over the Moo Cow's face.

And his feet are nothing but fingernails,
  And his mamma don't keep them cut,
And he gives folks milk in water pails,
  When he don't keep his handles shut.

But if you or I pull his handles, why
  The Moo Cow Moo says it hurts,
But the hired man sits down close by
  And squirts, and squirts, and squirts.

    _Edmund Vance Cooke._




All Things Bright and Beautiful


All things bright and beautiful,
  All creatures great and small,
All things wise and wonderful,--
  The Lord God made them all.

Each little flower that opens,
  Each little bird that sings,--
He made their glowing colors,
  He made their tiny wings.

The rich man in his castle,
  The poor man at his gate,
God made them, high or lowly,
  And ordered their estate.

The purple-headed mountain,
  The river running by,
The morning, and the sunset
  That lighteth up the sky,

The cold wind in the winter,
  The pleasant summer sun,
The ripe fruits in the garden,--
  He made them, every one.

The tall trees in the greenwood,
  The meadows where we play,
The rushes by the water
  We gather every day,--

He gave us eyes to see them,
  And lips that we might tell
How great is God Almighty,
  Who hath made all things well.

    _Cecil Frances Alexander._




An Order for a Picture


Oh, good painter, tell me true,
  Has your hand the cunning to draw
  Shapes of things that you never saw?
Aye? Well, here is an order for you.

Woods and cornfields, a little brown,--
  The picture must not be over-bright,--
  Yet all in the golden and gracious light
Of a cloud, when the summer sun is down.
  Alway and alway, night and morn,
  Woods upon woods, with fields of corn
    Lying between them, not quite sere,
And not in the full, thick, leafy bloom,
When the wind can hardly find breathing-room,
    Under their tassels,--cattle near,
Biting shorter the short green grass,
And a hedge of sumach and sassafras,
With bluebirds twittering all around,--
(Ah, good painter, you can't paint sound!)--
  These, and the little house where I was born,
Low and little, and black and old,
With children, many as it can hold,
All at the windows, open wide,--
Heads and shoulders clear outside,
And fair young faces all ablush:
  Perhaps you have seen, some day,
  Roses crowding the self-same way,
Out of a wilding, wayside bush.

Listen closer. When you have done
  With woods and cornfields and grazing herds,
A lady, the loveliest ever the sun
Looked down upon you must paint for me:
Oh, if I could only make you see
  The clear blue eyes, the tender smile,
The sovereign sweetness, the gentle grace,
The woman's soul, and the angel's face
  That are beaming on me all the while,
  I need not speak these foolish words:
  Yet one word tells you all I would say,--
She is my mother: you will agree
  That all the rest may be thrown away.

Two little urchins at her knee
You must paint, sir: one like me,--
    The other with a clearer brow,
  And the light of his adventurous eyes
  Flashing with boldest enterprise:
At ten years old he went to sea,--
    God knoweth if he be living now;
  He sailed in the good ship "Commodore,"--
Nobody ever crossed her track
To bring us news, and she never came back.
  Ah, it is twenty long years and more
Since that old ship went out of the bay
  With my great-hearted brother on her deck:
  I watched him till he shrank to a speck,
And his face was toward me all the way.
Bright his hair was, a golden brown,
  The time we stood at our mother's knee:
That beauteous head, if it did go down,
  Carried sunshine into the sea!

Out in the fields one summer night
  We were together, half afraid
  Of the corn-leaves' rustling, and of the shade
    Of the high hills, stretching so still and far,--
Loitering till after the low little light
  Of the candle shone through the open door,
And over the hay-stack's pointed top,
All of a tremble and ready to drop,
    The first half-hoar, the great yellow star,
  That we, with staring, ignorant eyes,
Had often and often watched to see
  Propped and held in its place in the skies
By the fork of a tall red mulberry-tree,
  Which close in the edge of our flax-field grew,--
Dead at the top, just one branch full
Of leaves, notched round, and lined with wool,
  From which it tenderly shook the dew
Over our heads, when we came to play
In its hand-breadth of shadow, day after day.
  Afraid to go home, sir; for one of us bore
A nest full of speckled and thin-shelled eggs,--
The other, a bird, held fast by the legs,
Not so big as a straw of wheat:
The berries we gave her she wouldn't eat,
But cried and cried, till we held her bill,
So slim and shining, to keep her still.

At last we stood at our mother's knee.
  Do you think, sir, if you try,
  You can paint the look of a lie?
  If you can, pray have the grace
  To put it solely in the face
Of the urchin that is likest me:
    I think 'twas solely mine, indeed:
  But that's no matter,--paint it so;
    The eyes of our mother--(take good heed)--
Looking not on the nestful of eggs,
Nor the fluttering bird, held so fast by the legs,
But straight through our faces down to our lies,
And, oh, with such injured, reproachful surprise!
I felt my heart bleed where that glance went, as though
A sharp blade struck through it.

You, sir, know
That you on the canvas are to repeat
Things that are fairest, things most sweet,--
Woods and cornfields and mulberry-tree,--
The mother,--the lads, with their bird at her knee:
  But, oh, that look of reproachful woe!
High as the heavens your name I'll shout,
If you paint me the picture, and leave that out.

    _Alice Cary._




Who Won the War?


        Who won the war?
'T was little Belgium stemmed the tide
Of ruthless hordes who thought to ride
Her borders through and prostrate France
Ere yet she'd time to raise her lance.
        'T was plucky Belgium.

        Who won the war?
Italia broke the galling chain
Which bound her to the guilty twain;
Then fought 'gainst odds till one of these
Lay prone and shattered at her knees.
        'T was gallant Italy.

        Who won the war?
Old England's watch dogs of the main
Their vigil kept, and not in vain;
For not a ship their wrath dared brave
Save those which skulked beneath the wave.
        'T was mighty England.

        Who won the war?
'T was France who wrote in noble rage
The grandest words on history's page,
"They shall not pass"--the devilish Hun;
And he could never pass Verdun.
        'T was sturdy France.

        Who won the war?
In darkest hour there rose a cry,
"Liberty, sweet Liberty, thou shalt not die!"
Thank God! they came across the sea,
Two million men and victory!
        'T was glorious America.

        Who won the war?
No one of these; not one, but all
Who answered Freedom's clarion call.
Each humble man who did his bit
In God's own book of fame is writ.
        These won the war.

    _Woodbury Pulsifer._




Mothers of Men


The bravest battle that ever was fought!
  Shall I tell you where and when?
On the map of the world you will find it not,
  'Twas fought by the mothers of men.

Nay, not with cannon or battle shot,
  With sword or nobler pen,
Nay, not with eloquent words or thought
  From mouths of wonderful men;

But deep in the walled-up woman's heart--
  Of woman that would not yield,
But bravely, silently, bore her part--
  Lo, there is the battle field!

No marshaling troup, no bivouac song,
  No banner to gleam or wave,
But oh, these battles, they last so long--
  From babyhood to the grave.

Yet, faithful as a bridge of stars,
  She fights in her walled-up town--
Fights on and on in the endless wars,
  Then, silent, unseen, goes down.

Oh, ye with banner and battle shot,
  And soldiers to shout and praises
I tell you the kingliest victories fought
  Were fought in those silent ways.

Oh, spotless in a world of shame,
  With splendid and silent scorn,
Go back to God as white as you came--
  The kingliest warrior born!

    _Joaquin Miller._




Plain Bob and a Job


Bob went lookin' for a job--
Didn't want a situation; didn't ask a lofty station:
Didn't have a special mission for a topnotcher's position;
Didn't have such fine credentials--but he had the real essentials--
Had a head that kept on workin' and two hands that were not shirkin';
Wasn't either shirk or snob;
Wasn't Mister--just plain Bob,
Who was lookin' for a job.

Bob went lookin' for a job;
And he wasn't scared or daunted when he saw a sign--"Men Wanted,"
Walked right in with manner fittin' up to where the Boss was sittin',
And he said: "My name is Bob, and I'm lookin' for a job;
And if you're the Boss that hires 'em, starts 'em working and that
          fires 'em,
Put my name right down here, Neighbor, as a candidate for labor;
For my name is just plain 'Bob,
And my pulses sort o' throb
For that thing they call a job."
Bob kept askin' for a job,
And the Boss, he says: "What kind?" And Bob answered:  "Never mind;
