Do you wonder that Lightfoot thought of men as utterly heartless? You
see, he could not know that those hounds had not been put on his trail,
but had left home to hunt for their own pleasure. He could not know that
it was against the law to hunt him with dogs. But though none of those
hunters looking for him were guilty of having put the hounds on his
trail, each one of them was willing and eager to take advantage of the
fact that the hounds were on his trail. Already he had been shot at once
and he knew that he would be shot at again if he should be driven where
a hunter was hidden.

The ground was damp and scent always lies best on damp ground. This
made it easy for the hounds to follow him with their wonderful noses.
Lightfoot tried every trick he could think of to make those hounds lose
the scent.

"If only I could make them lose it long enough for me to get a little
rest, it would help," panted Lightfoot, as he paused for just an instant
to listen to the baying of the hounds.

But he couldn't. They allowed him no rest. He was becoming very, very
tired. He could no longer bound lightly over fallen logs or brush, as he
had done at first. His lungs ached as he panted for breath. He realized
that even though he should escape the hunters he would meet an even more
terrible death unless he could get rid of those hounds. There would
come a time when he would have to stop. Then those hounds would catch up
with him and tear him to pieces.

It was then that he remembered the Big River. He turned towards it. It
was his only chance and he knew it. Straight through the Green Forest,
out across the Green Meadows to the bank of the Big River, Lightfoot
ran. For just a second he paused to look behind. The hounds were almost
at his heels. Lightfoot hesitated no longer but plunged into the Big
River and began to swim. On the banks the hounds stopped and bayed their
disappointment, for they did not dare follow Lightfoot out into the Big
River.




CHAPTER XXII

LIGHTFOOT'S LONG SWIM


The Big River was very wide. It would have been a long swim for
Lightfoot had he been fresh and at his best. Strange as it may seem,
Lightfoot is a splendid swimmer, despite his small, delicate feet. He
enjoys swimming.

But now Lightfoot was terribly tired from his long run ahead of the
hounds. For a time he swam rapidly, but those weary muscles grew still
more weary, and by the time he reached the middle of the Big River it
seemed to him that he was not getting ahead at all. At first he had
tried to swim towards a clump of trees he could see on the opposite bank
above the point where he had entered the water, but to do this he had to
swim against the current and he soon found that he hadn't the strength
to do this. Then he turned and headed for a point down the Big River.
This made the swimming easier, for the current helped him instead of
hindering him.

Even then he could feel his strength leaving him. Had he escaped those
hounds and the terrible hunters only to be drowned in the Big River?
This new fear gave him more strength for a little while. But it did not
last long. He was three fourths of the way across the Big River but
still that other shore seemed a long distance away. Little by little
hope died in the heart of Lightfoot the Deer. He would keep on just as
long as he could and then,--well, it was better to drown than to be torn
to pieces by dogs.

Just as Lightfoot felt that he could not take another stroke and that
the end was at hand, one foot touched something. Then, all four feet
touched. A second later he had found solid footing and was standing with
the water only up to his knees. He had found a little sand bar out in
the Big River. With a little gasp of returning hope, Lightfoot waded
along until the water began to grow deeper again. He had hoped that he
would be able to wade ashore, but he saw now that he would have to swim
again.

So for a long time he remained right where he was. He was so tired that
he trembled all over, and he was as frightened as he was tired. He knew
that standing out there in the water he could be seen for a long
distance, and that made him nervous and fearful. Supposing a hunter on
the shore he was trying to reach should see him. Then he would have no
chance at all, for the hunter would simply wait for him and shoot him as
he came out of the water.

But rest he must, and so he stood for a long time on the little sand bar
in the Big River. And little by little he felt his strength returning.




CHAPTER XXIII

LIGHTFOOT FINDS A FRIEND


As Lightfoot rested, trying to recover his breath, out there on the
little sand bar in the Big River, his great, soft, beautiful eyes
watched first one bank and then the other. On the bank he had left, he
could see two black-and-white specks moving about, and across the water
came the barking of dogs. Those two specks were the hounds who had
driven him into the Big River. They were barking now, instead of baying.
Presently a brown form joined the black-and-white specks. It was a
hunter drawn there by the barking of the dogs. He was too far away to be
dangerous, but the mere sight of him filled Lightfoot with terror again.
He watched the hunter walk along the bank and disappear in the bushes.

Presently out of the bushes came a boat, and in it was the hunter. He
headed straight towards Lightfoot, and then Lightfoot knew that his
brief rest was at an end. He must once more swim or be shot by the
hunter in the boat. So Lightfoot again struck out for the shore. His
rest had given him new strength, but still he was very, very tired and
swimming was hard work.

Slowly, oh so slowly, he drew nearer to the bank. What new dangers
might be waiting there, he did not know. He had never been on that side
of the Big River. He knew nothing of the country on that side. But the
uncertainty was better than the certainty behind him. He could hear the
sound of the oars as the hunter in the boat did his best to get to him
before he should reach the shore.

On Lightfoot struggled. At last he felt bottom beneath his feet. He
staggered up through some bushes along the bank and then for an instant
it seemed to him his heart stopped beating. Right in front of him stood
a man. He had come out into the back yard of the home of that man. It is
doubtful which was the more surprised, Lightfoot or the man. Right then
and there Lightfoot gave up in despair. He couldn't run. It was all he
could do to walk. The long chase by the hounds on the other side of the
Big River and the long swim across the Big River had taken all his
strength.

Not a spark of hope remained to Lightfoot. He simply stood still and
trembled, partly with fear and partly with weariness. Then a surprising
thing happened. The man spoke softly. He advanced, not threateningly but
slowly, and in a friendly way. He walked around back of Lightfoot and
then straight towards him. Lightfoot walked on a few steps, and the man
followed, still talking softly. Little by little he urged Lightfoot on,
driving him towards an open shed in which was a pile of hay. Without
understanding just how, Lightfoot knew that he had found a friend. So he
entered the open shed and with a long sigh lay down in the soft hay.




CHAPTER XXIV

THE HUNTER IS DISAPPOINTED


How he knew he was safe, Lightfoot the Deer couldn't have told you. He
just knew it, that was all. He couldn't understand a word said by the
man in whose yard he found himself when he climbed the bank after his
long swim across the Big River. But he didn't have to understand words
to know that he had found a friend. So he allowed the man to drive him
gently over to an open shed where there was a pile of soft hay and there
he lay down, so tired that it seemed to him he couldn't move another
step.

It was only a few minutes later that the hunter who had followed
Lightfoot across the River reached the bank and scrambled out of his
boat. Lightfoot's friend was waiting just at the top of the bank. Of
course the hunter saw him at once.

"Hello, Friend!" cried the hunter. "Did you see a Deer pass this way a
few minutes ago? He swam across the river, and if I know anything about
it he's too tired to travel far now. I've been hunting that fellow for
several days, and if I have any luck at all I ought to get him this
time."

"I'm afraid you won't have any luck at all," said Lightfoot's friend.
"You see, I don't allow any hunting on my land."

The hunter looked surprised, and then his surprise gave way to anger.
"You mean," said he, "that you intend to get that Deer yourself."

Lightfoot's friend shook his head. "No," said he, "I don't mean anything
of the kind. I mean that that Deer is not to be killed if I can prevent
it, and while it is on my land, I think I can. The best thing for you to
do, my friend, is to get into your boat and row back where you came
from. Are those your hounds barking over there?"

"No," replied the hunter promptly. "I know the law just as well as you
do, and it is against the law to hunt Deer with dogs. I don't even know
who owns those two hounds over there."

"That may be true," replied Lightfoot's friend. "I don't doubt it is
true. But you are willing to take advantage of the fact that the dogs of
some one else have broken the law. You knew that those dogs had driven
that Deer into the Big River and you promptly took advantage of the fact
to try to reach that Deer before he could get across. You are not
hunting for the pleasure of hunting but just to kill. You don't know the
meaning of justice or fairness. Now get off my land. Get back into your
boat and off my land as quick as you can. That Deer is not very far
from here and so tired that he cannot move. Just as long as he will stay
here, he will be safe, and I hope he will stay until this miserable
hunting season is ended. Now go."

Muttering angrily, the hunter got back into his boat and pushed off, but
he didn't row back across the river.




CHAPTER XXV

THE HUNTER LIES IN WAIT


If ever there was an angry hunter, it was the one who had followed
Lightfoot the Deer across the Big River. When he was ordered to get off
the land where Lightfoot had climbed out, he got back into his boat, but
he didn't row back to the other side. Instead, he rowed down the river,
finally landing on the same side but on land which Lightfoot's friend
did not own.

"When that Deer has become rested he'll become uneasy," thought the
hunter. "He won't stay on that man's land. He'll start for the nearest
woods. I'll go up there and wait for him. I'll get that Deer if only to
spite that fellow back there who drove me off. Had it not been for him,
I'd have that Deer right now. He was too tired to have gone far. He's
got the handsomest pair of antlers I've seen for years. I can sell that
head of his for a good price."

So the hunter tied his boat to a tree and once more climbed out. He
climbed up the bank and studied the land. Across a wide meadow he could
see a brushy old pasture and back of that some thick woods. He grinned.

"That's where that Deer will head for," he decided. "There isn't any
other place for him to go. All I've got to do is be patient and wait."

So the hunter took his terrible gun and tramped across the meadow to the
brush-grown pasture. There he hid among the bushes where he could peep
out and watch the land of Lightfoot's friend. He was still angry because
he had been prevented from shooting Lightfoot. At the same time he
chuckled, because he thought himself very smart. Lightfoot couldn't
possibly reach the shelter of the woods without giving him a shot, and
he hadn't the least doubt that Lightfoot would start for the woods just
as soon as he felt able to travel. So he made himself comfortable and
prepared to wait the rest of the day, if necessary.

Now Lightfoot's friend who had driven the hunter off had seen him row
down the river and he had guessed just what was in that hunter's mind.
"We'll fool him," said he, chuckling to himself, as he walked back
towards the shed where poor Lightfoot was resting.

He did not go too near Lightfoot, for he did not want to alarm him. He
just kept within sight of Lightfoot, paying no attention to him but
going about his work. You see, this man loved and understood the little
people of the Green Forest and the Green Meadows, and he knew that there
was no surer way of winning Lightfoot's confidence and trust than by
appearing to take no notice of him. Lightfoot, watching him, understood.
He knew that this man was a friend and would do him no harm. Little by
little, the wonderful, blessed feeling of safety crept over Lightfoot.
No hunter could harm him here.




CHAPTER XXVI

LIGHTFOOT DOES THE WISE THING


All the rest of that day the hunter with the terrible gun lay hidden in
the bushes of the pasture where he could watch for Lightfoot the Deer to
leave the place of safety he had found. It required a lot of patience on
the part of the hunter, but the hunter had plenty of patience. It
sometimes seems as if hunters have more patience than any other people.

But this hunter waited in vain. Jolly, round, red Mr. Sun sank down in
the west to his bed behind the Purple Hills. The Black Shadows crept
out and grew blacker. One by one the stars began to twinkle. Still the
hunter waited, and still there was no sign of Lightfoot. At last it
became so dark that it was useless for the hunter to remain longer.
Disappointed and once more becoming angry, he tramped back to the Big
River, climbed into his boat and rowed across to the other side. Then he
tramped home and his thoughts were very bitter. He knew that he could
have shot Lightfoot had it not been for the man who had protected the
Deer. He even began to suspect that this man had himself killed
Lightfoot, for he had been sure that as soon as he had become rested
Lightfoot would start for the woods, and Lightfoot had done nothing of
the kind. In fact, the hunter had not had so much as another glimpse of
Lightfoot.

The reason that the hunter had been so disappointed was that Lightfoot
was smart. He was smart enough to understand that the man who was saving
