
"Do take it, Bobby."

"No, mother; it will only make me lazy and indifferent."

Taking a clean shirt, a pair of socks, and a handkerchief in his
bundle, he was ready for a start.

"Good by, mother," said he, kissing her and taking her hand. "I shall
try and come home on Saturday, so as to be with you on Sunday."

Then kissing the children, who had not yet got up, and to whom he had
bidden adieu the night before, he left the house. He had seen the
flood of tears that filled his mother's eyes, as he crossed the
threshold; and he could not help crying a little himself. It is a sad
thing to leave one's home, one's mother, especially, to go out into
the great world; and we need not wonder that Bobby, who had hardly
been out of Riverdale before, should weep. But he soon restrained the
flowing tears.

"Now or never!" said he, and he put his best foot forward.

It was an epoch in his history, and though he was too young to realize
the importance of the event, he seemed to feel that what he did now
was to give character to his whole future life.

It was a bright and beautiful morning--somehow it is always a bright
and beautiful morning when boys leave their homes to commence the
journey of life; it is typical of the season of youth and hope, and it
is meet that the sky should be clear, and the sun shine brightly, when
the little pilgrim sets out upon his tour. He will see clouds and
storms before he has gone far--let him have a fair start.

He had to walk five miles to the nearest railroad station. His road
lay by the house of his friend, Squire Lee; and as he was approaching
it, he met Annie. She said she had come out to take her morning walk;
but Bobby knew very well that she did not usually walk till an hour
later; which, with the fact that she had asked him particularly, the
day before, what time he was going, made Bobby believe that she had
come out to say good by, and bid him God speed on his journey. At any
rate, he was very glad to see her. He said a great many pretty things
to her, and talked so big about what he was going to do, that the
little maiden could hardly help laughing in his face.

Then at the house he shook hands with the squire and shook hands again
with Annie, and resumed his journey. His heart felt lighter for having
met them, or at least for having met one of them, if not both; for
Annie's eyes were so full of sunshine that they seemed to gladden his
heart, and make him feel truer and stronger.

After a pleasant walk, for he scarcely heeded the distance, so full
was he of his big thoughts, he reached the railroad station. The cars
had not yet arrived, and would not for half an hour.

"Why should I give them a dollar for carrying me to Boston, when I can
just as well walk? If I get tired, I can sit down and rest me. If I
save the dollar, I shall have to earn only fifty-nine more to pay my
note. So here goes;" and he started down the track.




CHAPTER VII

IN WHICH BOBBY STANDS UP FOR "CERTAIN INALIENABLE RIGHTS"


Whether it was wise policy, or "penny wise and pound foolish" policy
for Bobby to undertake such a long walk, is certainly a debatable
question; but as my young readers would probably object to an
argument, we will follow him to the city, and let every one settle the
point to suit himself.

His cheerful heart made the road smooth beneath his feet. He had
always been accustomed to an active, busy life, and had probably often
walked more than twenty miles in a day. About ten o'clock, though he
did not feel much fatigued, he seated himself on a rock by a brook
from which he had just taken a drink, to rest himself. He had walked
slowly so as to husband his strength; and he felt confident that he
should be able to accomplish the journey without injury to himself.

After resting for half an hour, he resumed his walk. At twelve o'clock
he reached a point from which he obtained his first view of the
city. His heart bounded at the sight, and his first impulse was to
increase his speed so that he should the sooner gratify his curiosity;
but a second thought reminded him that he had eaten nothing since
breakfast; so, finding a shady tree by the road side, he seated
himself on a stone to eat the luncheon which his considerate mother
had placed in his bundle.

Thus refreshed, he felt like a new man, and continued his journey
again till he was on the very outskirts of the city, where a sign, "No
passing over this bridge," interrupted his farther progress. Unlike
many others, Bobby took this sign literally, and did not venture to
cross the bridge. Having some doubts as to the direct road to the
city, he hailed a man in a butcher's cart, who not only pointed the
way, but gave him an invitation to ride with him, which Bobby was glad
to accept.

They crossed the Milldam, and the little pilgrim forgot the long walk
he had taken--forgot Riverdale, his mother, Squire Lee, and Annie, for
the time, in the absorbing interest of the exciting scene. The Common
beat Riverdale Common all hollow; he had never seen anything like it
before. But when the wagon reached Washington Street, the measure of
his surprise was filled up.

"My gracious! how thick the houses are!" exclaimed he, much to the
amusement of the kind-hearted butcher.

"We have high fences here," he replied.

"Where are all these folks going to?"

"You will have to ask them, if you want to know."

But the wonder soon abated, and Bobby began to think of his great
mission in the city. He got tired of gazing and wondering, and even
began to smile with contempt at the silly fops as they sauntered
along, and the gayly dressed ladies, that flaunted like so many idle
butterflies, on the sidewalk. It was an exciting scene; but it did not
look real to him. It was more like Herr Grunderslung's exhibition of
the magic lantern, than anything substantial. The men and women were
like so many puppets. They did not seem to be doing anything, or to
be walking for any purpose.

He got out of the butcher's cart at the Old South. His first
impression, as he joined the busy throng, was, that he was one of the
puppets. He did not seem to have any hold upon the scene, and for
several minutes this sensation of vacancy chained him to the spot.

"All right!" exclaimed he to himself at last. "I am here. Now's my
time to make a strike. Now or never."

He pulled Mr. Bayard's card from his pocket, and fixed the number of
his store in his mind. Now, numbers were not a Riverdale institution,
and Bobby was a little perplexed about finding the one indicated. A
little study into the matter, however, set him right, and he soon had
the satisfaction of seeing the bookseller's name over his store.

"F. Bayard," he read; "this is the place."

"Country!" shouted a little ragged boy, who dodged across the street
at that moment.

"Just so, my beauty!" said Bobby, a little nettled at this imputation
of verdancy.

"What a greeny!" shouted the little vagabond from the other side of
the street.

"No matter, rag-tag! We'll settle that matter some other time."

But Bobby felt that there was something in his appearance which
subjected him to the remarks of others, and as he entered the shop, he
determined to correct it as soon as possible.

A spruce young gentleman was behind the counter, who cast a
mischievous glance at him as he entered.

"Mr. Bayard keep here?" asked Bobby.

"Well, I reckon he does. How are all the folks up country?" replied
the spruce clerk, with a rude grin.

"How are they?" repeated Bobby, the color flying to his cheek.

"Yes, ha-ow do they dew?"

"They behave themselves better than they do here."

"Eh, greeny?"

"Eh, sappy?" repeated Bobby, mimicking the soft, silky tones of the
young city gentleman.

"What do you mean by sappy?" asked the clerk indignantly.

"What do you mean by greeny?"

"I'll let you know what I mean!"

"When you do, I'll let you know what I mean by sappy."

"Good!" exclaimed one of the salesmen, who had heard part of this
spirited conversation. "You will learn better by and by, Timmins,
than to impose upon boys from out of town."

"You seem to be a gentleman, sir," said Bobby, approaching the
salesman. "I wish to see Mr. Bayard."

"You can't see him!" growled Timmins.

"Can't I?"

"Not at this minute; he is engaged just now," added the salesman, who
seemed to have a profound respect for Bobby's discrimination. "He
will be at liberty in a few moments."

"I will wait, then," said Bobby, seating himself on a stool by the
counter.

Pretty soon the civil gentleman left the store to go to dinner, and
Timmins, a little timid about provoking the young lion, cast an
occasional glance of hatred at him. He had evidently found that
"Country" was an embryo American citizen, and that he was a firm
believer in the self-evident truths of the Declaration of
Independence.

Bobby bore no ill will towards the spruce clerk, ready as he had been
to defend his "certain inalienable rights."

"You do a big business here," suggested Bobby, in a conciliatory tone,
and with a smile on his face which ought to have convinced the
uncourteous clerk that he meant well.

"Who told you so?" replied Timmins, gruffly.

"I merely judged from appearances. You have a big store, and an
immense quantity of books."

"Appearances are deceitful," replied Timmins; and perhaps he had been
impressed by the fact from his experience with the lad from the
country.

"That is true," added Bobby, with a good-natured smile, which, when
interpreted, might have meant, "I took you for a civil fellow, but I
have been very much mistaken."

"You will find it out before you are many days older."

"The book business is good just now, isn't it?" continued Bobby,
without clearly comprehending the meaning of the other's last remark.

"Humph! What's that to you?"

"O, I intend to go into it myself."

"Ha, ha, ha! Good! You do?"

"I do," replied Bobby, seemingly unconcerned at the taunts of the
clerk.

"I suppose you want to get a place here," sneered Timmins, alarmed at
the prospect. "But let me tell you, you can't do it. Bayard has all
the help he wants; and if that is what you come for, you can move on
as fast as you please."

"I guess I will see him," added Bobby, quietly.

"No use."

"No harm in seeing him."

As he spoke he took up a book that lay on the counter, and began to
turn over the leaves.

"Put that book down!" said the amiable Mr. Timmins.

"I won't hurt it," replied Bobby, who had just fixed his eye upon some
very pretty engravings in the volume.

"Put it down!" repeated Mr. Timmins, in a loud, imperative tone.

"Certainly I will, if you say so," said Bobby, who, though not much
intimidated by the harsh tones of the clerk, did not know the rules of
the store, and deemed it prudent not to meddle.

"I _do_ say so!" added Mr. Timmins, magnificently; "and what's
more, you'd better mind me, too."

Bobby had minded, and probably the stately little clerk would not have
been so bold if he had not. Some people like to threaten after the
danger is over.

Then our visitor from the country espied some little blank books lying
on the counter. He had already made up his mind to have one, in which
to keep his accounts; and he thought, while he was waiting, that he
would purchase one. He meant to do things methodically; so when he
picked up one of the blank books, it was with the intention of buying
it.

"Put that book down!" said Mr. Timmins, encouraged in his aggressive
intentions by the previous docility of our hero.

"I want to buy one."

"No, you don't; put it down."

"What is the price of these?" asked Bobby, resolutely.

"None of your business!"

"Is that the way you treat your customers?" asked Bobby, with a
little sternness in his looks and tones. "I say I want to buy one."

"Put it down."

"But I will not; I say I want to buy it."

"No, you don't!"

"What is the price of it?"

"Twenty-five cents," growled Timmins, which was just four times the
retail price.

"Twenty-five cents! That's high."

"Put it down, then."

"Is that your lowest price?" asked Bobby, who was as cool as a
cucumber.

"Yes, it is; and if you don't put it down, I'll kick you out of the
store."

"Will you? Then I won't put it down."

Mr. Timmins took this as a "stump;" his ire was up, and he walked
round from behind the counter to execute his threat.

I must say I think Bobby was a little forward, and I would have my
young readers a little more pliant with small men like Timmins. There
are always men enough in the world who are ready and willing to
quarrel on any provocation; and it is always best not to provoke them,
even if they are overbearing and insolent, as Mr. Timmins certainly
was.

"Hold on a minute before you do it," said Bobby, with the same
provoking coolness. "I want to buy this book, and I am willing to pay
a fair price for it. But I happen to know that you can buy them up in
Riverdale, where I came from, for six cents."

"No matter," exclaimed the indignant clerk, seizing Bobby by the coat
collar for the purpose of ejecting him; "you shall find your way into
the street."

Now Bobby, as I have before intimated, was an embryo American citizen,
and the act of Mr. Timmins seemed like an invasion of his inalienable
rights. No time was given him to make a formal declaration of rights
in the premises; so the instinct of self-preservation was allowed to
have free course.

Mr. Timmins pulled and tugged at his coat collar, and Bobby hung back
like a mule; and for an instant there was quite a spirited scene.

"Hallo! Timmins, what does this mean?" said a voice, at which the
valiant little clerk instantly let go his hold.




