
"Halloo, Jasper!" said Thorne, boisterously. "How are you?"

"I am well," said Jasper, distantly.

"Where's mother?"

"Your mother? Your aunt, you mean."

"No, I don't. That's all gammon. She's my mother."

"She is!" exclaimed Jasper. "What made you deny it, then?"

"Policy," said Thorne, laughing. "Your father might not have liked it.
Now it's all right."

"Did your mother send for you?" asked Jasper.

"Yes, of course she did. This is to be my home now."

Jasper made no comment. What could he say? If Thorne were his
step-mother's son, it was only natural that he should live in the house
of which she was mistress.

But it seemed to him as if he were being pushed out of his own father's
house, and these strangers were coming in to occupy it He felt that it
would no longer seem like home to him.

"Well, where's my mother?" asked Thorne.

"She's up stairs. Shall I show you the way?"

"If you're a mind to. I guess I'll know my own way round here pretty
soon."

"What a detestable fellow!" thought Jasper. "I am afraid we shall
quarrel soon."

He led the way up stairs, and ushered Nicholas into his mother's
presence.

This uncouth boy was the one object this selfish woman loved. She
uttered an exclamation of delight.

"Welcome home, my dear Nicholas!" she exclaimed, advancing hastily and
throwing her arms round his neck.

He received the embrace apathetically, but made no opposition, as at
another time he might have done. He felt on good terms with his mother
and the whole world, in the face of the brilliant improvement of his
prospects.

"Are you well, my dear boy?" asked Mrs. Kent.

"Oh, I'm well enough, mother. This is a splendid old place, isn't it?"

Mrs. Kent laughed at Jasper.

"Yes, it is a fine country-place."

Jasper left the two, and went down stairs.

"Say, mother, how about the will?" asked Thorne. "Is it all right?"

"A third of the estate is left to me."

"Only a third! Does Jasper get the rest?"

"Yes."

"That's a shame. You ought to have had half."

"I shall have control of the whole till Jasper is of age. I am left his
guardian."

"That's good, anyhow. You must make him toe the mark, mother."

"I mean to."

"He's always had his own way, and he may give you trouble. He feels high
and mighty. I can tell you."

"I shall know how to deal with him," said Mrs. Kent, closing her thin
lips resolutely. "He will find me as firm as himself."

"I guess that's so, mother. You'll prove a tough customer."

Mrs. Kent smiled, as if she enjoyed the compliment.

"I'll stand by you, mother. If you have any trouble, just call me in."

"I don't expect to need any help, Nicholas; but I am glad to find I have
a brave son, who will stand by his mother."

Certainly no one believed in Nicholas so thoroughly as his mother. To
the world generally he was a cowardly bully, rough, brutal, and selfish.
In his mother's eyes he was manly and a paragon of youthful virtue. I
have already said that Thorne's affection for his mother was far less
disinterested, as is very apt to be the case with boys. His intention to
benefit by the change of circumstances was shown at once.

"What allowance are you going to give me, mother?" he asked.

"I have not thought, yet, Nicholas."

"Then I want you to think, mother."

"How much do you want?"

"I want as much as Jasper gets."

"You shall receive as much," said his mother, promptly. "Do you know how
much he has received?"

"Yes--he has had five dollars a week."

"That's too much."

"It isn't too much for me."

"I shall reduce his allowance to three dollars a week."

"You don't expect me to get along on three dollars?" grumbled Thorne.

"I will give you five."

"And Jasper only three?"

"Yes."

"Won't he be mad!" exclaimed Nicholas, with malicious satisfaction.
"What'll you say to him about it?"

"I shall merely announce my decision," said Mrs. Kent, coolly. "I am not
bound to assign any reasons."

"Won't there be a precious row!" said Thorne.

"I presume he will complain, but he has not conducted himself toward me
in a manner to secure any favors."

"I say, mother, can you give me my first week's allowance in advance?
I'm awful hard up."

"Here, my son," said Mrs. Kent, drawing out her pocket-book and placing
a five-dollar bill in her son's hand.

"Good for you, mother. When are you going to have supper?"

"In an hour."

"How much property did the old man leave?"

"The estate is probably fully up to one hundred thousand dollars. This
place is worth fifteen thousand. The rest is in good interest-paying
stocks and bonds."

"And a third belongs to you! I say, mother, you've feathered your nest
well. I guess I'll go out and take a look round."

In the rear of the house, in front of the stable, Nicholas caught sight
of Jasper.

He smiled maliciously.

"I'll go and tell him about the reduction in his allowance," he said to
himself.




CHAPTER XI.

THE OUTBREAK OF HOSTILITIES.


Jasper was quietly thinking over his change of circumstances when he was
roused by a rather violent slap on the shoulder.

Turning hastily, he saw that it was Nicholas.

"I say, this is a jolly place, Jasper," said Thorne.

"Yes," said Jasper. "It has been my home as far back as I can remember."

"That's where you have the advantage of me, but after all it doesn't
make much difference, as long as it's going to be my home now."

Jasper didn't reply.

"I say, Kent, it seems odd that me and you are brothers," said Thorne,
not very grammatically.

"We are not," said Jasper, quickly.

"It's all the same--we've got the same mother."

"You are mistaken," said Jasper, coldly.

"You know what I mean. She's my mother and your step-mother."

"That's very different. Besides, the relationship is so very recent that
I find it hard to think of your mother as any relation at all."

"She is, though. I suppose me and you will be a good deal together now."

"I don't know what my future plans will be," said Jasper, not very much
elated by this prospect.

"No, I suppose not. Mother'll arrange about them. How much allowance did
your father use to give you?"

Jasper thought at first of refusing to reply, but it occurred to him
that under the new and strange circumstances it was not an improper
question for Nicholas to ask. He therefore decided to reply.

"Five dollars a week," he answered.

"When was it paid?"

"On Saturday."

"See here," said Thorne, drawing from his vest pocket the five-dollar
bill his mother had given him.

"What of it?" said Jasper.

"It's my allowance for this week," said Thorne, triumphantly.

"I congratulate you," said Jasper, coldly.

"That's kind in you," returned Thorne, with a sneer, "especially as you
are cut down."

"What do you mean?" asked Jasper, hastily.

"Mother says five dollars a week is too much for you. She's going to cut
you down to three."

The indignant color came to Jasper's cheek. Was this interloper--this
stranger--to be preferred to him in his own father's house? He was not
excessively fond of money, and had there been need would not have
objected to a reduction of his allowance. But to be deprived of his
rights in favor of a fellow like Thorne was intolerable. If Nicholas
wished to annoy and anger him, he had succeeded.

"Who told you this?" demanded Jasper, sharply.

"My mother," answered Nicholas, with a gratified smile.

"When?"

"About fifteen minutes ago," replied Thorne, with provoking coolness.

"I don't think she would do anything so outrageous."

"Don't you? You'll find mother's got plenty of grit."

"So have I," said Jasper, his face hardening. "If your mother undertakes
to wrong me she will repent it."

"You had better not say that to her," said Thorne, insolently.

"I shall when the proper time comes. My allowance is not due yet. I
don't care for the money, but my father knew what it was proper for me
to have."

"There's going to be a row," thought Nicholas, with satisfaction. "I'll
bet on mother. She'll put down this whipper-snapper."

Jasper turned away, and walked out of the yard.

"Where are you going?" asked Thorne.

"To walk."

"I guess I'll go along, too."

"I would rather go alone."

"You're not very polite."

"Excuse me," said Jasper, with the instinct of a gentleman. "You would
find me very poor company. Another time we will walk together."

"Oh, just as you like; I don't want to intrude," said Thorne, sulkily.

They did not meet again till supper. Mrs. Kent presided. On one side sat
Nicholas, on the other Jasper. Our hero looked sad. The kind, worn face
he was accustomed to see at the head of the table was gone forever. He
felt that he was indeed desolate. His appetite was very small, while, on
the other hand, Nicholas seemed to be famished. His mother kept plying
him with dainties and tidbits, and he appeared to like the treatment
amazingly.

"Why don't you eat, Jasper?" asked Thorne with his mouth full.

"I am not hungry."

"I should think your walk might have given you an appetite."

"It doesn't appear to."

"You look awful glum. Is it what I said this afternoon?"

"About what?"

"Your allowance being cut down."

"I wasn't thinking about that particularly. Besides, you are not the one
from whom I expect to receive such communications."

"It's all true, though, as you will find. Ain't it, mother?" persisted
Nicholas, who was anxious to have the row come off as soon as possible.

Jasper turned his glance upon Mrs. Kent.

"You needn't have introduced the subject, Nicholas," she said, with
slight reproof.

"Why not, mother?"

"It isn't a proper subject to introduce at the supper-table."

"You see, Jasper didn't half believe what I told him."

"He may rely upon your statement," said Mrs. Kent.

"Am I to understand that my allowance is reduced to three dollars a
week?" asked Jasper, who felt that he had been dragged into the
discussion.

"Yes. I consider that three dollars a week is a liberal allowance for a
boy of your age."

"My father gave me five."

"Your father acted according to his judgment," said Mrs. Kent, coldly.
"On some points I differ from him in judgment. I think that he indulged
you too much, probably because you were his only child."

"He was always kind to me," said Jasper. "It was his nature to be kind."

"You will find me kind, too, if you deserve it," said his step-mother.
But her tone belied her words.

"Nicholas tells me that his allowance is to be five dollars," said
Jasper.

"I conceive that the amount of his allowance has nothing to do with
yours," said Mrs. Kent.

"Is it true?" persisted Jasper.

"It is," said Mrs. Kent, with a defiant look, which Jasper interpreted
to mean "What are you going to do about it?"

"Why is he to receive five dollars, if I am only to get three?"

"Because I choose."

"You have answered rightly," said Jasper, scornfully. "Even you are
unable to defend it on the score of fairness or justice."

Mrs. Kent's thin lips compressed.

"Audacious boy!" she exclaimed, "do you dare to speak to me in this
style?"

"I am not aware of any impropriety, madam. I am protesting against your
unjust partiality for Nicholas."

"He is my son."

"I am aware of that; but the money out of which the allowance is paid
came to you from my father."

"Do you dare to continue your impertinent remarks?" exclaimed his
step-mother, pale with rage.

"Madam, I am only stating the truth," said Jasper, sturdily. "You cannot
expect me to submit tamely to such an injustice. Had you reduced my
allowance and given Nicholas no more I would have let it pass."

"I won't submit to this impertinence!" exclaimed Mrs. Kent, furiously.
"Nicholas, will you sit there and see your mother insulted?"

"What do you want me to do, mother?" asked Thorne, not exactly liking
the turn matters had taken.

"Put that unmannerly boy out of the room."

"Oh, there ain't any need of that," said Thorne, who knew by experience
Jasper's strength.

"Do as I say, or I will give you no allowance at all!" said Mrs. Kent,
stamping her foot angrily.

Nicholas unwillingly arose from his seat and approached Jasper.

"You'd better not try it, Thorne," said Jasper, coolly.

"Do you hear that, sir? He has insulted you, too," said Mrs. Kent, in a
furious passion.

It was these words, perhaps, that spurred Nicholas to his task. Jasper
had now risen, and Thorne threw himself upon him.

But Jasper was prepared. In less time than I have required to tell it,
Thorne found himself prostrate on the floor.

"Madam," said Jasper, turning to his step-mother, "I am ready to leave
your presence now, but of my own accord."

He left the room. Mrs. Kent was too astonished to speak. She had felt no
doubt that Nicholas was more than a match for Jasper, as he certainly
was bigger, and weighed twenty pounds more.

"My poor boy!" she said, pitifully, bending over her son; "are you much
hurt?"

"Yes," said Nicholas; "and it's all on account of you!"

"I thought you were stronger than he."

"So I am, but he knows how to wrestle; besides, he's so quick."

"I thought you could have put him out easily."

"Well, don't set me to doing it again," said Thorne, sulkily. "I didn't
want to fight. You made me."

"Don't mind it, my dear boy. It was because I was angry with him."

"Oh, how my head aches!"

"I'll put on some cologne. I'll give you an extra five dollars, too, for
standing by your mother."

"All right, mother," said Thorne, in a more cheerful tone. "That's the
way to talk. Give it to me now."

Jasper did not see either of them again that evening. He called on a
