Poteet of humour, and he rode off with a sort of grim desire to laugh
at himself and the rest of the world. The repose of the mountain
fretted him; the vague blue mists that seemed to lift the valleys into
prominence and carry the hills further away, tantalised him; and the
spirit of spring, just touching the great woods with a faint suggestion
of green, was a mockery. There was a purpose--a decisiveness--in the
stride of his horse that he envied, and yet he was inclined to resent
the swift amiability with which the animal moved away.

But it was a wise steed, for when it came upon Sis Poteet standing by
the side of the road, it threw up its head and stopped. Woodward lifted
his hat, and held it in his hand. She gave him one little glance, and
then her eyes drooped.

"I wanted to ask you something," she said, pulling a dead leaf to
pieces. Her air of humility was charming. She hesitated a moment, but
Woodward was too much astonished to make any reply. "Are you very mad?"
she asked with bewitching inconsequence.

"Why should _I_ be mad, Miss Sis? I am glad you have given me the
opportunity to ask your pardon for coming up here to worry you."

"I wanted to ask you if pap--I mean, if father went to Atlanta to see
you," she said, her eyes still bent upon the ground.

"He said he wanted to see me on business," Woodward replied.

"Did he say anything about me?"

"Not that I remember. He never said anything about his business even,"
Woodward went on. "I told him about some of my little troubles, and
when he found I was coming back here, he seemed to forget all about his
own business. I suppose he saw that I wouldn't be much interested in
anybody else's business but my own just then." Sis lifted her head and
looked steadily at Woodward. A little flush appeared in her cheeks, and
mounted to her forehead, and then died away.

"Pap doesn't understand--I mean he doesn't understand everything, and I
was afraid he had----Why do you look at me so?" she exclaimed, stopping
short, and blushing furiously.

"I ask your pardon," said the young man; "I was trying to catch your
meaning. You say you were afraid your father----"

"Oh, I am not afraid now. Don't you think the weather is nice?"

Woodward was a little puzzled, but he was not embarrassed. He swung
himself off his horse and stood beside her.

"I told your father," he said, drawing very near to the puzzling
creature that had so wilfully eluded him--"I told your father that I
was coming up here to ask his daughter to marry me. What does the
daughter say?"

She looked up in his face. The earnestness she saw there dazzled and
conquered her. Her head drooped lower, and she clasped her hands
together. He changed his tactics.

"Is it really true, then, that you hate me?"

"Oh! if you only knew!" she cried, and with that Woodward caught her in
his arms.

An hour afterwards, Teague Poteet, sitting in his low piazza, cleaning
and oiling his rifle, heard the sound of voices coming from the
direction of the Gullettsville road. Presently Sis and Woodward came in
sight. They walked slowly along in the warm sunshine, wholly absorbed
in each other. Woodward was leading his horse, and that intelligent
animal improved the opportunity to nip the fragrant sassafras buds just
appearing on the bushes. Teague looked at the two young people from
under the brim of his hat and chuckled, but when Sis caught sight of
him, a little while after, he was rubbing his rifle vigorously, and
seemed to be oblivious to the fact that two young people were making
love to each other in full view. But Sis blushed all the same, and the
blushes increased as she approached the house, until Woodward thought
in his soul that her rosy shyness was the rarest manifestation of
loveliness to be seen in all the wide world. As she hovered a moment at
the gate, blushing and smiling, the old mountaineer turned the brim of
his hat back from his eyes and called out with a great pretence of
formal hospitality--

"Walk in an' rest yourselves; thes walk right in! Hit's lots too soon
in the season for the dogs to bite. Looks to me, Cap, like you hain't
so mighty tender wi' that 'ar hoss er your'n. Ef you uv rid 'im down to
Gullettsville an' back sence a while ago, he'll be a-needin' feed
thereckly. Thes come right in an' make yourselves at home."

Woodward laughed sheepishly, but Sis rushed across the yard, flung her
arms around Teague's neck, and fell to crying with a vehemence that
would have done credit to the most broken-hearted of damsels. The
grizzled old mountaineer gathered the girl to his bosom and stroked her
hair gently, as he had done a thousand times before. He looked at
Woodward with glistening eyes.

"Don't min' Sis, Cap. Sis hain't nothin' but a little bit of a slip of
a gal, an' sence the day she could toddle 'roun' an' holler--good news
or bad, mad er glad--she's bin a-runnin' an' havin' it out wi' her ole
pappy. Wimmen an' gals hain't like we all, Cap; they er mighty kuse.
She never pestered wi' Puss much," continued league, as his wife came
upon the scene, armed with the plaintive air of slouchiness, which is
at once the weapon and shield of women who believe that they are
martyrs--"she never pestered wi' Puss much, but, cry or laugh, fight or
frolic, she allers tuck it out on her ole pappy."

Puss asked no questions. She went and stood by Teague, and toyed gently
with one of Sis's curls.

"Sis don't take airter none er the Pringles," she said after a while,
by way of explanation. "They hain't never bin a day when I couldn't
look at Teague 'thout battin' my eyes, an' ma use to say she 'uz thes
that away 'bout pap. I never know'd what the all-overs wuz tell thes
about a hour before me an' Teague wuz married. We 'uz thes about ready
for to go an' face the preacher, when ma comes a-rushin' in--an' she
won't never be no paler when she's laid out than she wuz right that
minnit. 'In the name er the Lord, ma, is you seed a ghost?' s' I.
'Puss!' se' she, 'the cake hain't riz!' I thes tell you what, folks, I
like to a-went through the floor--that I did!"

At this Sis looked up and laughed, and they all laughed except Puss,
who eyed Woodward with an air of faint curiosity, and dryly remarked--

"I reckon you hain't brung me my maccaboy snuff. I lay me an' my snuff
wan't in your min'. 'Let the old hen cluck,' ez the sparrer-hawk said
when he courted the pullet. Well," she continued, smiling with genuine
satisfaction as she saw that Woodward no more than half-relished the
comparison, "I better be seein' about dinner. Ol' folks like me can't
live on love."

The days that followed were very happy ones for the two young people--
and for the two old people for that matter. Teague enjoyed the
situation immensely. He would watch the young lovers from afar, and
then go off by himself and laugh heartily at his own conceits. He was
very proud that Sis was going to marry Somebody--a very broad term, as
the old mountaineer employed it. At night when they all sat around the
fire (spring on Hog Mountain bore no resemblance to summer) Teague gave
eager attention to Woodward's stories, and laughed delightedly at his
silliest jokes.

If Teague was delighted with Woodward, he was astounded at Sis. She was
no longer the girl that her surroundings seemed to call for. She was a
woman, and a very delightful one. From the old scholar, whom fate or
circumstance had sent to preside over the Gullettsville Academy, she
had caught something of the flavour and grace of cultivation--a gentle
dignity, leaning always to artlessness, and a quick appreciation, which
was in itself a rare accomplishment.

The day for the wedding was set, and Woodward went his way to Atlanta.
He had urged that the ceremony be a very quiet one, but Teague had
different views, and he beat down all opposition.

"Why, good Lord, Cap'." he exclaimed, "what 'ud the boys say?--Poteet's
gal married an' no stools [Footnote: Invitations] give out! No, siree!
Not much. We hain't that stripe up here, Cap. We hain't got no quality
ways, but we allers puts on the pot when comp'ny comes. Me an' Sis an'
Puss hain't had many weddin's 'mongst us, an' we're thes a-gwine to
try an' put the bes' foot foremos'. Oh no, Cap! You fetch your frien's
an' we'll fetch our'n, an' ef the house hain't roomy enough, bless you,
the woods is."

When Hog Mountain heard the news, which it did by special messenger,
sent from house to house with little pink missives written by Sis, it
was as proud as Teague himself. Fat Mrs. Hightower laid aside her
spectacles when the invitation was translated to her, and remarked--

"They hain't nobody on the face er the yeth good enough fer Sis, but
that air feller's got the looks an' the spunk. I'll set in this very
day an' hour, an' I'll bake Sis a cake that'll make the'r eyes water."
And so it went. Everybody on Hog Mountain had some small contributions
to make.

The wedding, however, was not as boisterous as the boys proposed to
make it. They had their frolic, to be sure, as Sid Parmalee or Tip
Watson will tell you, but an incident occurred which took the edge off
their enjoyment, and gave them the cue of soberness.

Two of Woodward's friends--young men from Atlanta--bore him company to
Hog Mountain. At Gullettsville they fell in with Uncle Jake Norris, at
all times a jovial and companionable figure.

"Roundabout man, roundabout way," remarked Uncle Jake, by way of
explaining his presence in Gullettsville. "My house is away an' beyan'
frum Poteet's, but I says to myself, s' I, in obejunce to the naked
demands of the law I'll go this day an' git me a jug er licker that's
bin stomped by the Govunment, an' hide it an' my wickedness, ez you may
say, in league's hoss-stable. Yes, frien's, them wuz the words. 'Let
the licker be stomped by the Govunment for the sakes of the young
chap,' s' I, 'an' I'll hide the jug along er my wickedness in Teague's
hoss-stable.' So then, frien's, yess be a sojourneyin', an' ef you feel
the needance er somethin' quick an' strong for to brace you for
endurance, make your way to the lot, an' feel behin' the stable-door--
an' watch out for the kickin' mule! I give you my intentionals cle'r
an' clean. What does St. Paul say?--'Ef you can't do good by slippance,
do it by stealth.'"

They journeyed along as rapidly as the nature of the mountain road
would permit, but before they reached Poteet's the shadows of twilight
began to deepen. The road, like most mountain roads, wound itself
painfully about. At one point they were within a short half-mile of
Poteet's, but a towering wall of rock barred their approach. The road,
accommodating itself to circumstances, allowed the towering wall to
drive it three miles out of the way. Uncle Jake Norris, turning readily
to reminiscences, connected the precipitous shelf with many of the
mysterious disappearances that had at various times occurred in army
and revenue circles.

"Natur' built it," he said lightly, "an' a jaybird showed it to the
boys. Teague, up thar, he 'lowed that a man wi' grey eyes an' a nimble
han' could git on that rock an' lay flat of his belly an' disembowel a
whole army. Them wuz his words--disembowel a whole army."

While Uncle Jake was speaking, the travellers had passed beyond the
wall, but the declivity on their left was still too steep to
accommodate the highway, and so they rode along with the shadows of
night on one side of them and pale symptoms of the day on the other.

Suddenly a thin stream of fire, accompanied by the sharp crack of a
rifle, shot out of the side of the mountain straight at Woodward, and
seemed, as one of his companions said afterwards, to pass through him.
His horse shied with a tremendous lurch, and Woodward fell to the
ground.

"He is shot!" cried one of the young men.

"What devil's work is this?" exclaimed Uucle Jake. "Cap, you ain't
hurt, is you?"

Receiving no reply, for Woodward was stunned into semi-unconsciousness,
Uncle Jake addressed himself to the bushes--

"Come forth," he cried. "Jestify this deed!"

There was a moment's silence, but not a moment's inaction. Uncle Jake
leaped from his horse, and, telling the frightened yoxing men to look
after Woodward, ran up the mountain-side a quarter of a mile, placed
his hands to his mouth, and hallooed three times in rapid succession.
Then he heard Poteet's dogs bark, and he hallooed again. This time he
was answered from above, and he turned and ran back to where he left
Woodward.

When he got there he beheld a sight and heard words that made his blood
run cold. Woodward was still lying upon the ground, but by his side was
kneeling a gaunt and hollow-eyed woman. Her thin grey hair hung loose
upon her shoulders and about her eyes, and the ragged sleeves of her
gown fluttered wildly as she flung her bony arms in the air. She was
uttering loud cries.

"Oh, Lordy! it's little Ab! I uv done killed little Ab over ag'in! Oh,
my little Ab! It's your pore ole mammy, honey! Oh, Mister! make little
Ab wake up an' look at his pore ole mammy!"

The two young men from Atlanta were paralysed with horror. When Uncle
Jake Norris ran up the mountain to alarm Poteet, the witch-like figure
of the woman sprang from the bushes and fell upon Woodward with a loud
outcry. The whole occurrence, so strange, so unnatural, and so
unexpected, stripped the young men of their power of reasoning; and if
the rocks had opened and fiery flames issued forth, their astonishment
and perplexity and terror could have been no greater.

But if they had been acquainted with the history of this wild-eyed
woman,--if they had known that for weeks she had been wandering over
the mountain bereft of reason, and seeking an opportunity to avenge
with her own hands the murder of Ab Bonner, her son,--they would have
been overcome by pity. Uncle Jake Norris understood at once that Ab
Bonner's mother had shot Woodward, and he forgot to be merciful.

"Woe unto you, woman, ef you have done this deed! Woe unto you an'
your'n, Rachel Bonner, ef you have murdered this innocent!"

"That he wuz innocent!" exclaimed the woman, swaying back and forth and
waving her hands wildly. "The unborn babe wan't no innocenter than
little Ab!"

"Woe unto you, Sister Bonner!" Uncle Jake went on, examining Woodward
and speaking more calmly when he found him breathing regularly. "Woe
unto you, and shame upon you, Sister Bonner, to do this deed of
onjestifiable homicide, ez I may say. Let flesh an' min' rankle, but
shed no blood."

"Oh, my little Ab! I uv kilt 'im ag'in!"

"You may well sesso, Sister Rachel Bonner," said Uncle Jake, turning
Woodward over and examining him with the crude skill of an old soldier;
"you may well sesso. Drap down where you is, an' call on the Lord not
to give you over to a reprobate min' for to do the things that were
unconvenient, ez St. Paul says. Let tribulation work patience, lest you
git forsook of hope, Sister Jane Bonner. Come, Cap," he went on,
addressing himself to Woodward, "Teague'll be a drappin' on us,
thereckly, an' it twon't never do in the roun' worl' for to be a-makin'
faces at 'im frum the groun'. Roust up, roust up."

Woodward did rouse up. In fact his unconsciousness was only momentary,
but he had been making a vain effort to trace his surroundings,
disordered as they were by the wild cribs of the woman, to a reasonable
basis.

By the time he had been helped to his feet, and had discovered that the
bullet from Mrs. Bonner's rifle had merely grazed the fleshy part of
his shoulder, Teague and a number of his friends had arrived upon the
scene. There was nothing to be said, nothing to be done, except to move
up the mountain to Poteet's.

"Ah, pore woman!" exclaimed Uncle Jake. "Pore mizerbul creetur! Come
wi' us, Sister Jane Bonner, come wi' us. Ther's a warm place at
Teague's h'a'th fer sech ez you."

The woman followed readily, keeping close to Woodward. To her
distracted eyes he took the shape of her murdered son. Poteet was
strangely reticent. His tremendous stride carried him ahead of the
horses, and he walked with his head held down, as if reflecting. Once
he turned and spoke to Parmalee--

"Oh, Sid!"

"Ah-yi?"

'S'posen it had thes a bin a man?'

"Good-bye, Mr. Man!"

It is not necessary to describe the marriage of Sis and Woodward, or to
recite here the beautiful folk-songs that served for the wedding music.
As Mrs. Poteet remarked after it was all over, "They wer'n't a bobble
frum beginnin' to en';" and when the wedding party started down the
mountain in the early hours of the morning to take conveyances at
Gullettsville for the railroad station, thirty miles away, Uncle Jake
Norris was sober enough to stand squarely on his feet as he held Sis's
hand.

"Ez St. Paul says, I prophesy in perportion to my faith. You all is
obleege to be happy. Take keer of thish 'ere gal, Cap!"

Teague Poteet went down the mountain a little way, and returned after a
while like a man in a dream. He paused at a point that overlooked the
valley and took off his hat. The morning breeze, roused from its sleep,
stirred his hair. The world, plunging swiftly and steadily through its
shadow, could not rid itself of a star that burned and quivered in the
east. It seemed to be another world toward which Sis was going.


An old woman, grey-haired, haggard, and sallow, who had been drawn from
the neighbourhood of Hog Mountain by the managers of the Atlanta Cotton
Exposition to aid in illustrating the startling contrasts that the
energy and progress of man have produced, had but one vivid remembrance
of that remarkable display. She had but one story to tell, and, after
the Exposition was over, she rode forty miles on horseback, in the mud
and rain, to tell it at Teague Poteet's.

"I wish I may die," she exclaimed, flinging the corners of her shawl
back over her shoulders and dipping her clay pipe in the glowing
embers--"I wish I may die ef I ever see sech gangs, an' gangs, an'
_gangs_ of folks, an' ef I git the racket out'n my head by next
Chris'mas, I'll be _mighty_ lucky. They sot me over ag'in the biggest
fuss they could pick out, an' gimme a pa'r er cotton kyards. Here's
what kin kyard when she gits her han' in, an' I b'leeve'n my soul I
kyarded 'nuff bats to thicken all the quilts betwix' this an'
Californy. The folks, they 'ud come an' stan', an' star', an' then they
'ud go some'rs else; an' then new folks 'ud come an' stan', an' star',
an' go some'rs else. They wuz jewlarkers thar frum ever'wheres, an'
they lookt like they wuz too brazen to live skacely. Not that _I_
keer'd. No, bless you! Not when folks is a plumpin' down the cash
money. Not me! No, siree! I wuz a-settin' thar one day a-kyardin' away,
a-kyardin' away, when all of a sudden some un retched down' an' grabbed
me 'roun' the neck, an' bussed me right here on the jaw. Now, I hain't
a-tellin' you no lie, I like to 'a' fainted. I lookt up, an' who do you
reckon it wuz?"

"I bet a hoss," said Teague dryly, "that Sis wa'n't fur from thar when
that bussin' wuz a-gwine on."

"Who should it be _but_ Sis!" exclaimed the old woman, leaning forward
eagerly as she spoke. "Who else but Sis wuz a-gwine to grab me an'
gimme a buss right here on the jaw, a-frontin' of all them jewlarkers?
When I lookt up an' seen it twuz Sis, I thought in my soul she 'uz the
purtiest creetur I ever laid eyes on. 'Well, the Lord love you, Sis,'
s' I; 'whar on the face er the yeth did you drap frum?' s' I. I ketched
'er by the arm an' belt 'er off, an' s' I, 'Ef I don't have a tale to
tell when I git home, no 'oman never had none,' s' I. She took an'
buss'd me right frontin' of all them jewlarkers, an' airter she 'uz
gone I sot down an' had a good cry. That I did. I sot right whar I wuz,
an' had a good cry."

And then the old woman fell to crying softly at the remembrance of it,
and those who had listened to her story cried with her. And narrow as
their lives were, the memory of the girl seemed to sweeten and inspire
all who sat around the wide hearth that night at Teague Poteet's.



A PIECE OF LAND.

THE history of Pinetucky District in Putnam County is preserved in
tradition only, but its records are not less savoury on that account.
The settlement has dispersed and disappeared, and the site of it is
owned and occupied by a busy little man, who wears eye-glasses and a
bob-tailed coat, and who is breeding Jersey cattle and experimenting
with ensilage. It is well for this little man's peace of mind that the
dispersion was an accomplished fact before he made his appearance. The
Jersey cattle would have been winked at, and the silo regarded as an
object of curiosity; but the eye-glasses and the bob-tailed coat would
not have been tolerated. But if Pinetucky had its peculiarities, it
also had its advantages. It was pleased with its situation and
surroundings, and was not puzzled, as a great many people have since
been, as to the origin of its name. In brief, Pinetucky was satisfied
with itself. It was a sparsely settled neighbourhood, to be sure, but
the people were sociable and comparatively comfortable. They could
remain at home, so to speak, and attend the militia musteri, and they
were in easy reach of a church-building which was not only used by all
denominations--Methodists, Baptists, and Presbyterians--as a house of
worship, but was made to serve as a schoolhouse. So far as petty
litigation was concerned, Squire Ichabod Inchly, the wheel-wright, was
prepared to hold justice-court in the open air in front of his shop
when the weather wag fine, and in any convenient place when the weather
was foul. "Gentlemen," he would say, when a case came before him, "I'd
a heap ruther shoe a horse or shrink a tire; yit if you _will_ have the
law, I'll try and temper it wi' jestice." This was the genuine
Pinetucky spirit, and all true Pinetuckians tried to live up to it.
When occasion warranted, they followed the example of larger
communities, and gossiped about each other; but rural gossip is oftener
harmless than not; besides, it is a question whether gossip does not
serve a definite moral purpose. If our actions are to be taken note of
by people whose good opinion is worth striving for, the fact serves as
a motive and a cue for orderly behaviour.

Yet it should be said that the man least respected by the Pinetuckians
was the man least gossiped about. This was Bradley Gaither, the richest
man in the neighbourhood. With few exceptions, all the Pinetuckians
owned land and negroes; but Bradley Gaither owned more land and more
negroes than the most of them put together. No man, to all appearances,
led a more correct life than Bradley Gaither. He was first at church,
and the last to leave; he even affected a sort of personal interest in
politics; but the knack of addressing himself to the respect and esteem
of his neighbours he lacked altogether. He was not parsimonious, but,
as Squire Inchly expressed it, "narrer-minded in money matters." He had
the air of a man who is satisfied with himself rather than with the
world, and the continual exhibition of this species of selfishness is
apt to irritate the most simple-minded spectator. Lacking the sense of
humour necessary to give him a knowledge of his own relations to his
neighbours, he lived under the impression that he was not only one of
the most generous of men, but the most popular. He insisted upon his
rights. If people made bad bargains when they traded with him--and he
allowed them to make no other kind,--they must stand or fall by them.
Where his lands joined those of his neighbours, there was always "a
lane for the rabbits," as the saying is. He would join fences with none
of them. Indeed, he was a surly neighbour, though he did not even
suspect the fact.

He had one weakness,--a greed for land. If he drove hard bargains, it
was for the purpose of adding to his landed possessions. He overworked
and underfed his negroes in order that he might buy more land. Day and
night he toiled, and planned, and pinched himself and the people around
him to gratify his land-hunger.

Bradley Gaither had one redeeming feature,--his daughter Rose. For the
sake of this daughter Pinetueky was willing to forgive him a great many
things. To say that Rose Gaither was charming or lovely, and leave the
matter there, would ill become even the casual historian of Pinetucky.
She was lovely, but her loveliness was of the rare kind that shows
itself in strength of character as well as in beauty of form and
feature. In the appreciative eyes of the Pinetuckians she seemed to
invest womanhood with a new nobility. She possessed dignity without
vanity, and her candour was tempered by a rare sweetness that won all
hearts. She carried with her that mysterious flavour of romance that
belongs to the perfection of youth and beauty; and there are old men in
Rockville to-day, sitting in the sunshine on the street corners and
dreaming of the past, whose eyes will kindle with enthusiasm at mention
of Rose Gaither's name.

But in 1840 Bradley Gaither's beautiful daughter was not by any means
the only representative of womankind in Pinetucky. There was Miss Jane
Inchly, to go no further. Miss Jane was Squire Inchly's maiden sister;
and though she was neither fat nor fair, she was forty. Perhaps she was
more than forty; but if she was fifty she was not ashamed of it. She
had a keen eye and a sharp tongue, and used both with a freedom
befitting her sex and her experience.

Squire Inchly's house was convenient to his shop; and just opposite
lived the Carews, father and son, once the most prosperous and
prominent family in the neighbourhood. It was the custom of Pinetucky
to take a half-holiday on Saturdays, and on one of these occasions
Squire Inchly, instead of going to his shop or to the store, sat in his
porch and smoked his pipe. After a while Miss Jane brought out her
sewing and sat with him. Across the way Uncle Billy Carew sat in his
easy-chair under the shade of a tree, and made queer gestures in the
air with his hands and cane, while his son, a young man of twenty-five
or thereabouts, paced moodily up and down the veranda. The birds
fluttered in and out of the hedges of Cherokee rose that ran along both
sides of the road, and over all the sun shone brightly.

"Billy is cuttin' up his antics ag'in," said the Squire, finally.
"First the limbs give way, and then the mind. It's Providence, I
reckon. We're all a-gittin' old."

"Why, you talk, Ichabod, as if Providence went around with a drink of
dram in one hand and a stroke of palsy in t'other one," said Miss Jane.
"It's the Old Boy that totes the dram. And don't you pester yourself on
account of old Billy Oarew's palsy. A man's nimble enough in the legs
when he can git to the dimmy-john."

"Well, I'm sorry for Jack, Sister Jane," exclaimed the Squire,
heartily. "I am, from the bottom of my heart. The boy is too lonesome
in his ways. He needs comp'ny; he needs to be holp up, Sister Jane. He
does, certain and shore."

"Well, we're all near-sighted; but when Im in trouble, I'm like a hen
a-layin'; I don't want nobody to stand around and watch me. Not even
them that feeds me. The Lord knows what he keeps old Billy Carew here
to fret poor Jack for, but I don't," continued Miss Jane, with a sigh.
"I'm much mistaken if that old creetur hain't got years before him to
drink and dribble in."

"It passes me, Sister Jane," said Squire Inchly, moving uneasily in his
chair. "It passes me, certain and shore. Here was Billy, rich and
healthy, Jack at college, and ever'thing a-runnin' slick and smooth,
when nothin' must do but the old creetur must take to the jug, and it's
gone on and gone on, till old Bradley Gaither owns in-about all the
Carew plantation that's wuth ownin'. Maybe it was Billy's wife druv him
to it, Sister Jane."

"I say the word!" exclaimed Miss Jane, scornfully,--"I say the word!
How could a little bit of a dried-up 'oman drive a grown man to drink?"

"They are a heap livelier than they look to be, Sister Jane," said the
Squire reassuringly. "Little as she was, I lay Billy Carew's wife had
her say."

"Well," said Miss Jane, "a mouse'll squeal if you tromple on it."
