has given me his word."

"I am glad to hear it," I said. "Why have we been kept at all? Why did
he not free us five days agone?"

He shook his head. "I do not know. Opechancanough has many thoughts
which he shares with no man. But now he will send you with presents for
the governor, and with messages of his love for the white men. There
will be a great feast to-day, and to-night the young men and maidens
will dance before you. Then in the morning you will go."

When we had sat by the fire for an hour, the old men and the warriors
came to visit us, and the smoking began. The women laid mats in a great
half circle, and each savage took his seat with perfect breeding: that
is, in absolute silence and with a face like a stone. The peace paint
was upon them all--red, or red and white--and they sat and looked at the
ground until I had made the speech of welcome. Soon the air was dense
with fragrant smoke; in the thick blue haze the sweep of painted figures
had the seeming of some fantastic dream. An old man arose and made a
long and touching speech, with much reference to calumets and buried
hatchets. Then they waited for my contribution of honeyed words. The
Pamunkeys, living at a distance from the settlements, had but little
English, and the learning of the Paspaheghs was not much greater. I
repeated to them the better part of a canto of Master Spenser's _Faery
Queen_, after which I told them the moving story of the Moor of Venice.
It answered the purpose to admiration.

The day wore on, with relay after relay of food, which we must taste at
least, with endless smoking of pipes and speeches which must be listened
to and answered. When evening came and our entertainers drew off to
prepare for the dance, they left us as wearied as by a long day's march.

Suddenly, as we sat staring at the fire, we were beset by a band of
maidens, coming out of the woods, painted, with antlers upon their heads
and pine branches in their hands. They danced about us, now advancing
until the green needles met above our heads, now retreating until there
was a space of turf between us. They moved with grace, keeping time to a
plaintive song, now raised by the whole choir, now fallen to a single
voice.

The Indian girls danced more and more swiftly, and their song changed,
becoming gay and shrill and sweet. Higher and higher rang the notes,
faster and faster moved the dark feet; then quite suddenly song and
motion ceased together. From the darkness now came a burst of savage
cries only less appalling than the war whoop itself. In a moment the men
of the village had rushed from the shadow of the trees into the broad,
firelit space before us. They circled around us, then around the fire;
now each man danced and stamped and muttered to himself. For the most
part they were painted red, but some were white from head to
heel--statues come to life--while others had first oiled their bodies,
then plastered them over with small, bright-colored feathers.

Diccon and I watched that uncouth spectacle, that Virginian [v]masque,
as we had watched many another one, with disgust and weariness. It would
last, we knew, for the better part of the night. For a time we must stay
and testify our pleasure, but after a while we might retire, and leave
the women and children the sole spectators. They never wearied of gazing
at the rhythmic movement.

I observed that among the ranks of the women one girl watched not the
dancers but us. Now and then she glanced impatiently at the wheeling
figures, but her eyes always returned to us. At length I became aware
that she must have some message to deliver or warning to give. Once when
I made a slight motion as if to go to her, she shook her head and laid
her finger on her lips.

Presently I rose and, making my way to the werowance of the village,
where he sat with his eyes fixed on the spectacle, told him that I was
wearied and would go to my hut, to rest for the few hours that yet
remained of the night. He listened dreamily, but made no offer to escort
me. After a moment he acquiesced in my departure, and Diccon and I
quietly left the press of savages and began to cross the firelit turf
between them and our lodge. When we had reached its entrance, we paused
and looked back to the throng we had left. Every back seemed turned to
us, every eye intent upon the leaping figures. Swiftly and silently we
walked across the bit of even ground to the friendly trees and found
ourselves in a thin strip of shadow. Beneath the trees, waiting for us,
was the Indian maid. She would not speak or tarry, but flitted before us
as dusk and noiseless as a moth, and we followed her into the darkness
beyond the firelight. Here a wigwam rose in our path; the girl, holding
aside the mats that covered the entrance, motioned to us to enter. A
fire was burning within the lodge and it showed us Nantaquas standing
with folded arms.

"Nantaquas!" I exclaimed, and would have touched him but that with a
slight motion of his hand he kept me back.

"Well!" I asked at last. "What is the matter, my friend?"

For a full minute he made no answer, and when he did speak his voice
matched his strained and troubled features.

"My _friend_," he said, "I am going to show myself a friend indeed to
the English, to the strangers who were not content with their own
hunting-grounds beyond the great salt water. When I have done this, I do
not know that Captain Percy will call me 'friend'."

"You were wont to speak plainly, Nantaquas," I answered him. "I am not
fond of riddles."

Again he waited, as though he found speech difficult. I stared at him in
amazement, he was so changed in so short a time.

He spoke at last: "When the dance is over and the fires are low and the
sunrise is at hand, Opechancanough will come to you to bid you farewell.
He will give you the pearls he wears about his neck for a present to the
governor and a bracelet for yourself. Also he will give you three men
for a guard through the forest. He has messages of love to send the
white men, and he would send them by you who were his enemy and his
captive. So all the white men shall believe in his love."

"Well!" I said drily as he paused. "I will bear the messages. What
next?"

"Your guards will take you slowly through the forest, stopping to eat
and sleep. For them there is no need to run like the stag with the
hunter behind it."

"Then we should make for Jamestown as for life," I said, "not sleeping
or eating or making pause?"

"Yes," he replied, "if you would not die, you and all your people."

In the silence of the hut the fire crackled, and the branches of the
trees outside, bent by the wind, made a grating sound against the bark
roof.

"How die?" I asked at last. "Speak out!"

"Die by the arrow and the tomahawk," he answered,--"yea, and by the guns
you have given the red men. To-morrow's sun, and the next, and the
next--three suns--and the tribes will fall upon the English. At the same
hour, when the men are in the fields and the women and children are in
the houses, they will strike--all the tribes, as one man; and from where
the Powhatan falls over the rocks to the salt water beyond Accomac,
there will not be one white man left alive."

He ceased to speak, and for a minute the fire made the only sound in the
hut. Then I asked, "All die? There are three thousand Englishmen in
Virginia."

"They are scattered and unwarned. The fighting men of the villages of
the Powhatan and the Pamunkey and the great bay are many, and they have
sharpened their hatchets and filled their quivers with arrows."

"Scattered!" I cried. "Strewn broadcast up and down the river--here a
lonely house, there a cluster of two or three--the men in the fields or
at the wharves, the women and children busy within doors, all unwarned!"

I leaned against the side of the hut, for my heart beat like a
frightened woman's. "Three days!" I exclaimed. "If we go with all our
speed, we shall be in time. When did you learn this thing?"

"While you watched the dance," the Indian answered, "Opechancanough and
I sat within his lodge in the darkness. His heart was moved, and he
talked to me of his own youth in a strange country, south of the sunset.
Also he spoke to me of Powhatan, my father--of how wise he was and how
great a chief before the English came, and how he hated them. And
then--then I heard what I have told you!"

"How long has this been planned?"

"For many moons. I have been a child, fooled and turned aside from the
trail; not wise enough to see it beneath the flowers, through the smoke
of the peace pipes."

"Why does Opechancanough send us back to the settlements?" I demanded.

"It is his fancy. Every hunter and trader and learner of our tongues,
living in the villages or straying in the woods, has been sent back to
Jamestown or his home with presents and fair words. You will lull the
English in Jamestown into a faith in the smiling sky just before the
storm bursts on them in fullest fury."

There was a pause.

"Nantaquas," I said, "you are not the first child of Powhatan who has
loved and shielded the white men."

"Pocahontas was a woman, a child," he answered. "Out of pity she saved
your lives, not knowing that it was to the hurt of her people. Then you
were few and weak and could not take your revenge. Now, if you die not,
you will drink deep of vengeance--so deep that your lips may never leave
the cup. More ships will come, and more; you will grow ever stronger.
There may come a moon when the deep forests and the shining rivers will
know us, to whom [v]Kiwassa gave them, no more."

"You will be with your people in the war?" I asked.

"I am an Indian," was his simple reply.

"Come against us if you will," I returned. "Nobly warned, fair upon our
guard, we will meet you as knightly foe should be met."

Very slowly he raised his arm from his side and held out his hand. His
eyes met mine in somber inquiry, half eager, half proudly doubtful. I
went to him at once and took his hand in mine. No word was spoken.
Presently he withdrew his hand from my clasp, and, putting his finger to
his lips, whistled low to the Indian girl. She drew aside the mats, and
we passed out, Diccon and I, leaving him standing as we had found him,
upright against the post, in the red firelight.

Should we ever go through the woods, pass through that gathering storm,
reach Jamestown, warn them there of the death that was rushing upon
them? Should we ever leave that hated village? Would the morning ever
come? It was an alarm that was sounding, and there were only two to
hear; miles away beneath the mute stars English men and women lay
asleep, with the hour thundering at their gates, and there was none to
cry, "Awake!" I could have cried out in that agony of waiting, with the
leagues on leagues to be traveled and the time so short! I saw, in my
mind's eye, the dark warriors gathering, tribe on tribe, war party on
war party, thick crowding shadows of death, slipping through the silent
forest ... and in the clearings the women and children!

It came to an end, as all things earthly will. When the ruffled pools
amid the marshes were rosy red beneath the sunrise, the women brought us
food, and the warriors and old men gathered about us. I offered them
bread and meat and told them that they must come to Jamestown to taste
the white man's cookery.

Scarcely was the meal over when Opechancanough issued from his lodge,
and, coming slowly up to us, took his seat upon the white mat that was
spread for him. Through his scalp lock was stuck an eagle's feather;
across his face, from temple to chin, was a bar of red paint; the eyes
above were very bright and watchful.

One of his young men brought a great pipe, carved and painted, stem and
bowl; it was filled with tobacco, lit, and borne to the emperor. He put
it to his lips and smoked in silence, while the sun climbed higher and
higher and the golden minutes that were more precious than heart's blood
went by swiftly.

At last, his part in the solemn mockery played, he held out the pipe to
me.

"The sky will fall, and the rivers will run dry, and the birds cease to
sing," he said, "before the smoke of this peace-pipe fades from the
land."

I took the symbol of peace and smoked it as silently and soberly as he
had done before me, then laid it leisurely aside and held out my hand.

"Come to Jamestown," I said, "to smoke of the Englishman's pipe and
receive rich presents--a red robe like your brother Powhatan, and a cup
from which you shall drink, you and all your people."

But the cup I meant was that of punishment.

The savage laid his dark fingers in mine for an instant, withdrew them,
and, rising to his feet, motioned to three Indians who stood out from
the throng of warriors.

"These are Captain Percy's guides and friends," he announced. "The sun
is high; it is time that he was gone. Here are presents for him and my
brother the governor." As he spoke, he took from his neck the rope of
pearls and from his arm a copper bracelet, and laid both upon my palm.

"Thank you, Opechancanough," I said briefly. "When we meet again I will
not greet you with empty thanks."

We bade farewell to the noisy throng and went down to the river, where
we found a canoe and rowers, crossed the stream, and entered the forest,
which stretched black and forbidding before us--the blacker that we now
knew the dreadful secret it guarded.


II

     After leaving the Indian village, Captain Percy and Diccon found
     that their guides purposely delayed the march, so that they would
     not reach Jamestown until just before the beginning of the attack,
     when it would be too late for them to warn the English, if they
     suspected anything. Percy and Diccon, in this dilemma, surprised
     the Indian guides and killed them, then hurried on with all
     possible speed toward Jamestown. As they hastened through the
     forest, Diccon was shot by an Indian and mortally wounded; Captain
     Percy remained with him until his death, and again took up the
     journey, now alone and greatly fearing that he would arrive too
     late.

The dusk had quite fallen when I reached the neck of land. Arriving at
the palisade that protected Jamestown, I beat upon the gate and called
to the warden to open. He did so with starting eyes. Giving him a few
words and cautioning him to raise no alarm in the town, I hurried by him
into the street and down it toward the house that was set aside for the
governor of Virginia, Sir Francis Wyatt.

The governor's door was open, and in the hall servingmen were moving to
and fro. When I came in upon them, they cried out as if it had been a
ghost, and one fellow let a silver dish fall to the floor with a
clatter. They shook with fright and stood back as I passed them without
a word and went on to the governor's great room. The door was ajar, and
I pushed it open and stood for a minute on the threshold. They were all
there--the principal men of the colony, the governor, the [v]treasurer,
[v]West, [v]John Rolfe.

At sight of me the governor sprang to his feet; through the treasurer's
lips came a long, sighing breath; West's dark face was ashen. I came
forward to the table, and leaned my weight upon it; for all the waves of
the sea were roaring in my ears and the lights were going up and down.

"Are you man or spirit!" cried Rolfe through white lips. "Are you Ralph
Percy?"

"Yes," I said, "I am Percy."

With an effort I drew myself erect, and standing so, told my tidings,
quietly and with circumstance, so as to leave no room for doubt as to
their verity, or as to the sanity of him who brought them. They listened
with shaking limbs and gasping breath; for it was the fall and wiping
out of a people of which I brought warning.

When all was told I thought to ask a question myself; but before my
tongue could frame it, the roaring of the sea became so loud that I
could hear naught else, and the lights all ran together into a wheel of
fire. Then in a moment all sounds ceased and to the lights succeeded the
blackness of outer darkness.

When I awoke from the sleep into which I must have passed from that
swoon, it was to find myself lying in a room flooded with sunshine. For
a moment I lay still, wondering where I was and how I came there. A drum
beat, a dog barked, and a man's quick voice gave a command. The sounds
stung me into remembrance.

There were many people in the street. Women hurried by to the fort with
white, scared faces, their arms filled with household gear; children ran
beside them; men went to and fro, the most grimly silent, but a few
talking loudly.

I could not see the palisade across the neck, but I knew that it was
there that the fight--if fight there were--would be made. Should the
Indians take the palisade, there would yet be the houses of the town,
and, last of all, the fort in which to make a stand. I believed not that
they would take it, for Indian warfare ran more to ambuscade and
surprise than to assault in the open field.

The drum beat again, and a messenger from the palisade came down the
street at a run.

"They're in the woods over against us, thicker than ants!" he cried to
West, who was coming along the way. "A boat has just drifted ashore,
with two men in it, dead and scalped!"

I looked again at the neck of land and the forest beyond, and now, as if
by magic, from the forest and up and down the river as far as the eye
could reach, rose here and there thin columns of smoke. Suddenly, as I
stared, three or four white smoke puffs, like giant flowers, started out
of the shadowy woods across the neck. Following the crack of the
muskets--fired out of pure bravado by the Indians--came the yelling of
the savages. The sound was prolonged and deep, as though issuing from
many throats.

The street, when I went out into it, was very quiet. All windows and
doors were closed and barred. The yelling from the forest had ceased for
the moment, but I knew well that it would soon begin with doubled noise.
I hurried along the street to the palisade, where all the men of
Jamestown were gathered, armed and helmeted and breast-plated, waiting
for the foe in grim silence.

Through a loophole in the gate of the palisade I looked and saw the
sandy neck joining the town to the mainland, and the deep and dark woods
beyond, the fairy mantle giving invisibility to the foe. I drew back
from my loophole and held out my hand to a woman for a loaded musket. A
quick murmur like the drawing of a breath came from our line. The
governor, standing near me, cast an anxious glance along the stretch of
wooden stakes that were neither so high nor so thick as they should have
been.

"I am new to this warfare, Captain Percy," he said. "Do they think to
use those logs they carry as battering rams?"

"As scaling ladders, your honor," I replied. "It is possible that we may
have some sword play after all."

"We'll take your advice the next time we build a palisade, Ralph Percy,"
muttered West on my other side. Mounting the breastwork that we had
thrown up to shelter the women who were to load the muskets, he coolly
looked over the pales at the oncoming savages.

"Wait until they pass the blasted pine, men!" he cried. "Then give them
a hail of lead that will beat them back to the Pamunkey."

An arrow whistled by his ear; a second struck him on the shoulder but
pierced not his coat of mail. He came down from his dangerous post with
a laugh.

"If the leader could be picked off"--I said. "It's a long shot, but
there's no harm in trying."

As I spoke I raised my gun to my shoulder, but West leaned across Rolfe,
who stood between us, and plucked me by the sleeve.

"You've not looked at him closely," he said. "Look again."

I did as he told me, and lowered my musket. It was not for me to send
that Indian leader to his account. Rolfe's lips tightened and a sudden
pallor overspread his face. "Nantaquas?" he muttered in my ear, and I
nodded yes.

The volley that we fired full into the ranks of our foe was deadly, and
we looked to see them turn and flee, as they had fled so often before at
a hot volley. But this time they were led by one who had been trained in
English steadfastness. Broken for the moment by our fire, they rallied
and came on yelling, bearing logs, thick branches of trees, oars tied
together--anything by whose help they could hope to surmount the
palisade. We fired again, but they had planted their ladders. Before we
could snatch the loaded muskets from the women a dozen painted figures
appeared above the sharpened stakes. A moment, and they and a score
behind them had leaped down upon us.

It was no time now to skulk behind a palisade. At all hazards, that tide
from the forest must be stemmed. Those that were among us we might kill,
but more were swarming after them, and from the neck came the exultant
yelling of madly hurrying reinforcements.

We flung open the gates. I drove my sword through the heart of an Indian
who would have opposed me, and, calling for my men to follow, sprang
forward. Perhaps thirty came at my call; together we made for the
opening. A party of the savages in our midst interposed. We set upon
them with sword and musket butt, and though they fought like very devils
drove them before us through the gateway. Behind us were wild clamor,
the shrieking of women, the stern shouts of the English, the whooping of
