    "Though young in years, yet, oh! how oft
        Have I a rebel been;
    My punishment, O Lord, is mild,
        Nor equals all my sin.

    "Since all the chastisements I feel
        Are from Thy love alone,
    Let not one murmuring thought arise,
        But may Thy will be done.

    "Then let me blush with holy shame,
        And mourn before my Lord,
    That I have lived to Thee no more,
        No more obeyed Thy word."

                      --"Hymns for Sunday-Schools"

At last he fell asleep, and oh! to wake; from that sleep! It was surely
good to be afflicted, and in the happiness of his mind Louis forgot his
trouble. But he had yet to endure much more, and the bitterest part of
his punishment came the next morning, when, according to his master's
orders, he repaired to the study with his books. He had been desired to
remain in this room out of school-hours, and was forbidden to speak
to any of his school-fellows without leave. While he was sitting
there the first morning after the inquiry related in this chapter,
Dr. Wilkinson entered with a letter, and sat down at the table where
Louis was reading. As he opened his desk, he said, "I have a painful
task to perform. This is a letter from your father, Louis Mortimer,
and he particularly requests that I should give him an account of
your conduct and your brother's; you know what an account I can give
of you both."

Louis had listened very attentively to his master's speech, and when
it was concluded he gave way to such a burst of sorrow as quite touched
the doctor. For some minutes he wept almost frantically, and then
clasping his hands, he implored Dr. Wilkinson not to tell his father
what had happened: "It will break mamma's heart, it will break mamma's
heart, sir--do not tell my father."

"Confess your fault, Louis, and I may then speak of amendment,"
said the doctor.

"I cannot, indeed--indeed I cannot. It will all come out by and bye:
you will see, sir--oh! you will see, sir," sobbed Louis, deprecating
the gathering of the angry cloud on the doctor's face. "Oh! do not
tell mamma, for it is not true."

"I do not wish to hear any more, sir," said the doctor, sternly.

"Oh! what shall I do--what shall I do!" cried Louis; and he pushed
his chair quickly from the table, and, throwing himself on his knees
by Dr. Wilkinson, seized the hand that was beginning to date the
dreaded letter--"I assure you I did not, sir--I am speaking the truth."

"As you always do, doubtless," said the doctor, drawing his hand
roughly away. "Get up, sir; kneel to Him you have so deeply offended,
but not to me."

Louis rose, but stood still in the same place. "Will you hear only this
one thing, sir? I will not say any thing more about my innocence--just
hear me, if you please, sir."

Dr. Wilkinson turned his head coldly towards him.

Louis dried his tears, and spoke with tolerable calmness: "I have
one thing to ask, sir--will you allow me still to remain in the
second class, and to do my lessons always in this room? You will
then see if I can do without keys, or having any help."

"I know you can if you choose," replied Dr. Wilkinson, coldly,
"or I should not have placed you in that class."

"But, if you please, sir, I know all,"--Louis paused, he had promised
to say no more on that subject.

There was a little silence, during which Dr. Wilkinson looked earnestly
at Louis. At last he said, "You may stay in the class; but, remember,
you are forbidden to speak to any of your school-fellows for the next
week without express permission."

"Not to my brother, sir?"

"No; now go."

"May I write to mamma?"

"Yes, if you wish it."

After timidly thanking the doctor, Louis returned to his seat, and
Dr. Wilkinson continued his letter, which went off by the same post
that took Louis' to his mother.




CHAPTER V.

  "Now no chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous,
  but grievous; nevertheless, afterward it yieldeth the
  peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them which are
  exercised thereby."--Heb. xii. 11.

  "Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now have
  I kept Thy word."--Psalm cxix. 67.


Perhaps there is no state more dangerous to a Christian's peace of
mind than one of continual prosperity. In adversity even the worldly
man will sometimes talk of resignation, and feel that it is a good
thing to be acquainted and at peace with God, and that when all human
help is cut off, it is a sweet thing to have a sure refuge in an
almighty Saviour. But in prosperity the ungodly never look to Him;
and His own children, carrying about with them a sinful nature, against
which they must continually maintain a warfare, are too apt to forget
the Giver in his gifts, and to imagine that all is well because nothing
occurs to disturb the regularity of their blessings.

Our little Louis, though the trial he now underwent was a bitter one,
and though at times it seemed almost too hard to be endured, learned by
degrees to feel that it was good for him. He had been in too high favor,
he had trusted too much in the good word of his school-fellows, and had
suffered the fear of man to deter him from his duty to God; and now,
isolated and looked upon as an unworthy member of the little society
to which he belonged, he learned to find his sole happiness in that
sweet communion which he had now solitary leisure to enjoy. His very
troubles carried him to a throne of grace; his desolate condition made
him feel that there was only One who never changed nor forsook His
people; only One who could understand and feel for the infirmities
and sorrows of a human creature; and though to the ungodly it is a
terror to know that there is "nothing that is not manifest in God's
sight," to the true child of God it is an unspeakable comfort to feel
that his thoughts and actions are "known long before" by his unwearied
Guardian.

The effects of Louis' lonely communings were soon visible in his daily
conduct, and after his term of punishment had expired, the meekness of
his bearing, and the gentle lowliness of his demeanor, often disarmed
the most severe and unpitying of his youthful judges. There was no
servility in his manner, for he neither courted nor shunned observation;
nor, though he was as willing as ever to do a kind action for any
one, did he allow himself to be persuaded to give up all his time to
his idler school-fellows. There seemed more firmness and decision in his
naturally yielding disposition, and those who knew not the power of
assisting grace, looked and wondered at the firmness the sweet but weak
boy could at times assume. He would have told them it was not his own.
He was very quiet, and spoke little, even to his brother, of what was
passing in his mind, and sometimes his thoughts were so quietly happy
that he did not like to be spoken to. To Ferrers, Louis was as gentle
and courteous as to the rest of his companions, and, indeed, he had now
little other feeling towards him than that of sorrow and pity.

There had been an unusual noise in the study one evening, while Louis
was absent, and when he entered it, he found the confusion attendant on
a grand uproar. Very little was doing, and tokens of the late skirmish
lay about the floor in torn and scattered books, and overthrown forms.
Among others, Ferrers was hunting for a missing book, but to discover
it in such a chaos was a difficult task, especially as no one would
now allow the candles to be used in the search.

With many expressions, so unfitted for refined ears that I do not choose
to present them to my reader, Ferrers continued his search, now and then
attempting to snatch a candle from the table, in which he was regularly
foiled by those sitting there.

"Well, at least have the civility to move and let me see if it is under
the table," he said at length.

"You have hindered us long enough," said Salisbury; "Smith, Jones, and
I have done nothing to-night. If you will have rows, you must e'en take
the consequences."

"Can't you get under the form?" asked Smith, derisively.

Ferrers was going to make some angry, reply, when Louis dived between
the table and the form, with some trouble, and, at the expense of
receiving a few unceremonious kicks, recovered the book and gave it
to Ferrers, who hardly thanked him, but leaning his head on his hand,
seemed almost incapable of doing any thing. Presently he looked up,
and asked in a tone of mingled anger and weariness, what had become
of the inkstand he had brought.

    "Loosing's seeking,
     Finding's keeping,"

said Salisbury. "Which is yours? Perhaps it's under the table too."

"Hold your nonsense," cried Ferrers, angrily. "It's very shabby of you
to hinder me in this manner."

Louis quietly slipped an inkstand near him, an action of which Ferrers
was quite aware, and though he pretended not to notice it, he availed
himself presently of the convenience. A racking headache, however,
almost disabled him from thinking, and though he was really unwell,
there was only the boy he had so cruelly injured who felt any sympathy
for his suffering.

Louis carefully avoided any direct manifestation of his anxiety to
return good for evil, for he felt, though he hardly knew why, that
his actions would be misconstrued, but whenever any little opportunity
occurred in which he could really render any service, he was always
as ready to do it for Ferrers as for another; and now, when from his
classmates Ferrers met with nothing but jokes on his "beautiful temper,"
and "placid state of mind," he could not help feeling the gentleness of
Louis' conduct, the absence of pleasure in his annoyance, and the look
of evident sympathy he met whenever he accidentally turned his eyes in
his direction. For a few days after this he was obliged to keep his bed,
and during this time, though Louis only once saw him, he thought of every
little kind attention he could, that might be grateful to the invalid.
Knowing that he was not a favorite, and that few in the school would
trouble themselves about him, he borrowed books and sent them to him for
his amusement, and empowered the old cake man to procure some grapes,
which he sent up to him by a servant, with strict orders to say nothing
of where they came from. The servant met Hamilton at the door of the
room, and he relieved her of her charge, and as she did not consider
herself under promise of secrecy towards him, she mentioned it, desiring
him at the same time to say nothing to Ferrers.

Louis had now established a regular time for doing his own lessons,
and kept to it with great perseverance to the end of the half-year,
with one exception, when he had been acting prisoner in a trial
performed in the school-room, by half his own class and the third,
and let the evening slip by without remembering how late it grew.
His class-fellows were in the same predicament as himself, and as
they had barely time to write a necessary exercise, they agreed among
themselves to learn each his own piece of the lesson they had to repeat.
Louis did not seriously consider the deceit they were practising, and
adopted the same plan. One of the number, not trusting to his memory,
hit upon the singular expedient of writing the whole of his piece and
the next on a piece of paper, and wafering it to the instep of his shoe
when he went up to his class. Unhappily for his scheme, he was so placed
that he dared not expose his foot so as to allow him to avail himself
of this delectable assistance, and consequently, after much looking on
the floor for inspiration, and much incoherent muttering, was passed
over, and the order of things being thereby disturbed, of course no one
could say the missing lines until the head boy was applied to, and the
lower half of the class was turned down, with the exception of Louis,
who, standing on this occasion just above the gentleman of shoe memory,
had been able to say his share.

As they were breaking up, Mr. Danby said to Louis, "You have been very
industrious lately, Louis Mortimer: I am glad you have been so correct
to-day."

Louis blushed from a consciousness of undeserved praise; but though
his natural fear of offending and losing favor sprung up directly, a
higher principle faced it, and bearing down all obstacles, forced him
to acknowledge his unworthiness of the present encomium.

"I ought to learn mine, sir,--I learned my piece to-day."

"What do you mean?" asked Mr. Danby.

"I learned my part of the lesson, as well as Harris, Williams, Sutton,
and Charles Salisbury. We forgot our lessons last night, but it is quite
an accident that I have said mine to-day."

"I am glad you have had the honor to say so," said Mr. Danby.
"Of course you must learn yours, but let me have no more
learning pieces, if you please."




CHAPTER VI.

  "Blessed are they that dwell in Thy house, they will
  be still praising Thee. For a day in Thy courts is
  better than a thousand. I had rather be a door-keeper
  in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents
  of wickedness."--Psalm lxxxiv. 4, 10.


Dr. Wilkinson's school was too large to be entirely accommodated with
sittings in the nearest church--and, consequently, was divided into two
bodies on Sunday, one of which regularly attended one of the churches in
Bristol, where Mr. Wilkinson, the doctor's son, occasionally did duty.
It fell to Louis' lot, generally, to be of the Bristol party, and unless
the day was rainy he was not ill-pleased with his destiny, for the walk
was very pleasant, and there was something in the chorus of bells in that
many-churched city, and the sight of the gray towers and spires, very
congenial to his feelings. It happened that the Sunday after Louis had
received permission to mix as usual with his school-fellows was one
of those peculiarly sunny days that seem to call upon God's people
especially to rejoice and be glad in the Works of His hand. Louis' mind
was in a more than usually peaceful state, and his heart overflowed
with quiet happiness as he looked down from the height of Brandon Hill
upon the city below. He and his companion had walked on rather faster
than the rest of their school-fellows, and now stood waiting till they
came up.

"A penny for your thoughts, Mortimer," said his companion, a
pleasant-looking boy of fifteen or sixteen years of age; "you
are very silent to-day--what may be the subject of your profound
meditations?"

Louis hardly seemed to hear the question, for he suddenly turned his
bright face to his interrogator, and exclaimed, "What a beautiful sight
it is to see so many churches together, Meredith! I think our churches
make us such a happy country."

[Illustration: Louis and Meredith on Brandon Hill.]

"Upon my word," replied Meredith, "you are endowing those piles of
stone with considerable potency. What becomes of commerce and--"

"I mean, of course," interrupted Louis, "that it is religion that
makes us a happier country than others. I love so to look at the
churches; the sight of one sometimes, when all is fair and quiet,
brings the tears into my eyes."

"Hey-dey! quite sentimental! You'd better be a parson, I think."

"I hope I shall be a clergyman--I wish very much to be one--there is
not such another happy life. I was just thinking, Meredith, when you
spoke to me, of a verse we read yesterday morning, which quite expresses
my feelings: 'One thing have I desired of the Lord which I will seek
after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life,
to behold the fair beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in His temple.'"

Meredith looked with some surprise at Louis, and as they moved on he
said carelessly, "I suppose somebody will have the gratification of
beholding me in a long gown some day, holding forth for the edification
of my devoted flock."

"Are you going to be a clergyman?" asked Louis.

"Yes, I suppose I must. Don't you think I shall be a most
useful character?"

"Oh! surely you wish it, do you not?"

"Well, I don't much mind," replied Meredith, snatching a handful of
leaves from the hedge near him; "I shall have a nice fat living, and
it's a respectable kind of thing."

Louis was horror-struck--he had not imagined such an idea--he almost
gasped out, "Oh! Meredith, I can hardly understand you. Surely that is
not your only wish about it: that cannot be a reason--not a right one."

"Why, what's the harm?" said Meredith, laughing. "I only say outright
what hundreds think. If I could choose, perhaps I might like the army
best, but my father has a comfortable provision in the church for me,
and so I, like a dutiful son, don't demur, especially as, if I follow
the example of my predecessor, it will be vastly more easy than a
soldier's life."

"Meredith, Meredith, this is too solemn a thing to laugh about. I have
often wondered how it is there are clergymen who can take their duties
so easily as some do; but if they only undertake them for your reasons,
I cannot feel so much surprised that they should be so careless. How
can you expect any happiness from such a life! I should be afraid to
talk so."

Meredith stared contemptuously. "You are a Methodist, Louis," he said;
"I have no doubt I shall preach as good sermons as you: just put on a
grave face, and use a set of tender phrases, and wear a brilliant on
your little finger, and a curly head, and there you are a fashionable
preacher at once--and if you use your white pocket-handkerchief
occasionally, throw your arms about a little, look as if you intended
to tumble over the pulpit and embrace the congregation, and dose your
audience with a little pathos, you may draw crowds--the ladies will
idolize you."

"I should not think that such popularity would be very good,"
replied Louis, "supposing you could do as you say; but it seems
to me quite shocking to speak in such a slighting manner of so
holy a thing. Were you ever at an ordination, Meredith?"

"Not I," said Meredith.

"I should think if you had been you would be afraid to think of going
to answer the solemn questions you will be asked when you are ordained.
I was once with papa at an ordination at Norwich cathedral, and I shall
never forget how solemnly that beautiful service came upon me. I could
not help thinking how dreadful it must be to come there carelessly, and
I wondered how the gentlemen felt who were kneeling there--and the hymn
was so magnificent, Meredith. I think if you were there with your present
feelings, you would be afraid to stay. It would seem like mocking God to
come to answer all those solemn questions, and not mean what you said.
I think it is wicked."

Louis spoke rapidly, and with great emotion.

Meredith looked angry, struggling with a feeling of shame, and a wish to
laugh it off. "You are exclusively precise," he said; "others are not,
and have as much right to their opinion as you to yours. Trevannion,
for instance--he's going into the church because it is so genteel."

"I hope you are mistaken," said Louis, quickly.

"Not I; I heard him say the same thing myself."

