balanced; but the former course was decided upon. The march itself
would be more perilous; but as Conde, the Admiral, and his brother
D'Andelot would be with the force gathered there, it was the most
important point; and moreover Francois de la Noue would be there.

So well was the secret of the intended movement kept that the
French court, which was at Meaux, had no idea of the danger that
threatened; and when a report of the intentions of the Huguenots
came from the Netherlands, it was received with incredulity. A spy
was, however, sent to Chatillon to report upon what the Admiral was
doing; and he returned with the news that he was at home, and was
busily occupied in superintending his vintage.

On the evening of the 26th the troop, fifty strong, mustered in the
courtyard of the chateau. All were armed with breast and back
pieces, and steel caps, and carried lances as well as swords. In
addition to this troop were Philip's four men-at-arms; and four
picked men who were to form Francois' bodyguard, one of them
carrying his banner. He took as his body servant a man who had
served his father in that capacity. He and Pierre wore lighter
armour than the others, and carried no lances.

Francois and Philip were both in complete armour; Philip donning,
for the first time, that given to him by his uncle. Neither of them
carried lances, but were armed with swords, light battle-axes, and
pistols.

Before mounting, service was held. The pastor offered up prayers
for the blessing of God upon their arms, and for his protection
over each and all of them in the field. The countess herself made
them a stirring address, exhorting them to remember that they
fought for the right to worship God unmolested, and for the lives
of those dear to them. Then she tenderly embraced her son and
Philip, the trumpets sounded to horse, and the party rode out from
the gates of the chateau.

As soon as they were away, the two young leaders took off their
helmets and handed them to their attendants, who rode behind them.
Next to these came their eight bodyguards, who were followed by the
captain and his troop.

"It may be that this armour will be useful, on the day of battle,"
Philip said; "but at present it seems to me, Francois, that I would
much rather be without it."

"I quite agree with you, Philip. If we had only to fight with
gentlemen armed with swords, I would gladly go into battle
unprotected; but against men with lances, one needs a defence.
However, I do not care so much, now that I have got rid of the
helmet; which, in truth, is a heavy burden."

"Methinks, Francois, that armour will ere long be abandoned, now
that arquebuses and cannon are coming more and more into use.
Against them they give no protection; and it were better, methinks,
to have lightness and freedom of action, than to have the trouble
of wearing all this iron stuff merely as a protection against
lances. You have been trained to wear armour, and therefore feel
less inconvenience; but I have never had as much as a breast plate
on before, and I feel at present as if I had almost lost the use of
my arms. I think that, at any rate, I shall speedily get rid of
these arm pieces. The body armour I don't so much mind, now that I
am fairly in the saddle.

"The leg pieces are not as bad as those on the arms. I was scarcely
able to walk in them; still, now that I am mounted, I do not feel
them much. But if I am to be of any use in a melee, I must have my
arms free, and trust to my sword to protect them."

"I believe that some have already given them up, Philip; and if you
have your sleeves well wadded and quilted, I think you might, if
you like, give up the armour. The men-at-arms are not so protected,
and it is only when you meet a noble, in full armour, that you
would be at a disadvantage."

"I don't think it would be a disadvantage; for I could strike
twice, with my arms free, to once with them so confined."

"There is one thing, you will soon become accustomed to the
armour."

"Not very soon, I fancy, Francois. You know, you have been
practising in it almost since you were a child; and yet you admit
that you feel a great difference. Still, I daresay as the novelty
wears off I shall get accustomed to it, to some extent."



Chapter 5: Taking The Field.


A guide thoroughly acquainted with the country rode ahead of the
party, carrying a lantern fixed at the back of his saddle. They
had, after leaving the chateau, begun to mount the lofty range of
hills behind. The road crossing these was a mere track, and they
were glad when they began to descend on the other side. They
crossed the Clain river some ten miles above Poitiers, a few miles
farther forded the Vienne, crossed the Gartempe at a bridge at the
village of Montmorillon and, an hour later, halted in a wood, just
as daylight was breaking, having ridden nearly fifty miles since
leaving the chateau.

So far they had kept to the south of the direct course, in order to
cross the rivers near their sources. Every man carried provisions
for himself and his horse and, as soon as they had partaken of a
hearty meal, the armour was unstrapped, and all threw themselves
down for a long sleep; sentries being first placed, with orders to
seize any peasants who might enter the wood to gather fuel. With
the exception of the sentries, who were changed every hour, the
rest slept until late in the afternoon; then the horses were again
fed and groomed, and another meal was eaten.

At sunset the armour was buckled on again, and they started. They
crossed the Creuse at the bridge of Argenton about midnight and,
riding through La Chatre, halted before morning in a wood two miles
from Saint Amand. Here the day was passed as the previous one had
been.

"Tell me, Francois," Philip said, as they were waiting for the sun
to go down, "something about your cousin De la Noue. As we are to
ride with him, it is as well to know something about him. How old
is he?"

"He is thirty-six, and there is no braver gentleman in France. As
you know, he is of a Breton family, one of the most illustrious of
the province. He is connected with the great houses of Chateau-Briant
and Matignon. As a boy he was famous for the vigour and strength that
he showed in warlike exercises; but was in other respects, I have
heard, of an indolent disposition, and showed no taste for reading or
books of any kind. As usual among the sons of noble families, he went
up to the court of Henry the Second as a page; and when there became
seized with an ardour for study, especially that of ancient and
modern writers who treated on military subjects. As soon as he
reached manhood he joined the army in Piedmont, under Marshal de
Brissac, that being the best military school of the time.

"On his return he showed the singular and affectionate kindness of
his nature. His mother, unfortunately, while he was away, had
become infected with the spirit of gambling; and the king, who had
noted the talent and kind disposition of the young page, thought to
do him a service by preventing his mother squandering the estates
in play. He therefore took the management of her affairs entirely
out of her hands, appointing a royal officer to look after them.
Now most young men would have rejoiced at becoming masters of their
estates; but the first thing that Francois did, on his return, was
to go to the king and solicit, as a personal favour, that his
mother should be reinstated in the management of her estates. This
was granted, but a short time afterwards she died. De La Noue
retired from court, and settled in Brittany upon his estates, which
were extensive.

"Shortly afterwards D'Andelot, Coligny's brother, who was about to
espouse Mademoiselle De Rieux, the richest heiress in Brittany,
paid a visit there. He had lately embraced our faith, and was bent
upon bringing over others to it; and he brought down with him to
Brittany a famous preacher named Cormel. His preaching in the
chateau attracted large numbers of people, and although Brittany is
perhaps the most Catholic province in France, he made many
converts. Among these was De La Noue, then twenty-seven years old.
Recognizing his talent and influence, D'Andelot had made special
efforts to induce him to join the ranks of the Huguenots, and
succeeded.

"My cousin, who previous to that had, I believe, no special
religious views, became a firm Huguenot. As you might expect with
such a man, he is in no way a fanatic, and does not hold the
extreme views that we have learned from the preachers of Geneva. He
is a staunch Huguenot, but he is gentle, courtly, and polished; and
has, I believe, the regard of men of both parties. He is a personal
friend of the Guises, and was appointed by them as one of the group
of nobles who accompanied Marie Stuart to Scotland.

"When the war broke out in 1562, after the massacre of Vassy, he
joined the standard of Conde. He fought at Dreux, and distinguished
himself by assisting the Admiral to draw off our beaten army in
good order. The assassination of Francois de Guise, as you know,
put an end to that war. De la Noue bitterly regretted the death of
Guise and, after peace was made, retired to his estates in
Brittany, where he has lived quietly for the last four years.

"I have seen him several times, because he has other estates in
Poitou, within a day's ride of us. I have never seen a man I admire
so much. He is all for peace, though he is a distinguished soldier.
While deeply religious, he has yet the manners of a noble of the
court party. He has no pride, and he is loved by the poor as well
as by the rich. He would have done anything to have avoided war;
but you will see that, now the war has begun, he will be one of our
foremost leaders. I can tell you, Philip, I consider myself
fortunate indeed that I am going to ride in the train of so brave
and accomplished a gentleman."

During the day they learned, from a peasant, of a ford crossing the
Cher, two or three miles below Saint Amand. Entering a village near
the crossing place, they found a peasant who was willing, for a
reward, to guide them across the country to Briare, on the
Loire--their first guide had returned from their first halting
place--and the peasant, being placed on a horse behind a
man-at-arms, took the lead. Their pace was much slower than it had
been the night before, and it was almost daybreak when they passed
the bridge at Briare, having ridden over forty miles. They rode two
or three miles into the mountains after crossing the Loire, and
then halted.

"We must give the horses twenty-four hours here," Francois said. "I
don't think it is above twenty miles on to Chatillon-sur-Loing; but
it is all through the hills, and it is of no use arriving there
with the horses so knocked up as to be useless for service. We have
done three tremendous marches, and anyhow, we shall be there long
before the majority of the parties from the west and south can
arrive. The Admiral and Conde will no doubt be able to gather
sufficient strength, from Champagne and the north of Burgundy, for
his purpose of taking the court by surprise.

"I am afraid there is but little chance of their succeeding. It is
hardly possible that so many parties of Huguenots can have been
crossing the country in all directions to the Admiral's, without an
alarm being given. Meaux is some sixty miles from Chatillon, and if
the court get the news only three or four hours before Conde
arrives there, they will be able to get to Paris before he can cut
them off."

In fact, even while they were speaking, the court was in safety.
The Huguenots of Champagne had their rendezvous at Rosoy, a little
more than twenty miles from Meaux, and they began to arrive there
in the afternoon of the 28th. The Prince of Conde, who was awaiting
them, feeling sure that the news of the movement must, in a few
hours at any rate, be known at Meaux, marched for Lagny on the
Mane, established himself there late in the evening, and seized the
bridge. The news however had, as he feared, already reached the
court; and messages had been despatched in all haste to order up
six thousand Swiss troops, who were stationed at Chateau-Thierry,
thirty miles higher up the Maine.

During the hours that elapsed before their arrival, the court was
in a state of abject alarm, but at one o'clock the Swiss arrived;
and two hours later the court set out, under their protection, for
Paris. The Prince of Conde, who had with him but some four hundred
gentlemen, for the most part armed only with swords, met the force
as it passed by Lagny. He engaged in a slight skirmish with it; but
being unable, with his lightly-armed followers, to effect anything
against the solid body of the Swiss mountaineers, armed with their
long pikes, he fell back to await reinforcements; and the court
reached Paris in safety.

A messenger had arrived at Chatillon with the news when Francois
and Philip rode in. The castle gate stood open. Numbers of Huguenot
gentlemen were standing in excited groups, discussing the news.

"There is my cousin De la Noue!" Francois exclaimed, as he alighted
from his horse. "This is good fortune. I was wondering what we
should do, if we did not find him here;" and he made his way to
where a singularly handsome gentleman was talking with several
others.

"Ah, Francois, is that you? Well arrived, indeed!

"Gentlemen, this is my cousin and namesake, Francois de Laville. He
has ridden across France to join us. Is that your troop, Francois,
entering the gate now? Ah, yes, I see your banner.

"By my faith, it is the best accoutred body we have seen yet. They
make a brave show with their armour and lances. The countess has
indeed shown her goodwill right worthily, and it is no small credit
to you that you should have brought them across from the other side
of Poitou, and yet have arrived here before many who live within a
few leagues of the castle.

"And who is this young gentleman with you?"

"It is my cousin, Philip Fletcher, son of my mother's sister Lucie.
I spoke to you of his coming to us, when you were at Laville three
months since. He has come over in order that he may venture his
life on behalf of our religion and family."

"I am glad to welcome you, young sir. We are, you see, connections;
I being Philip's first cousin on his father's side, and you on that
of his mother. Your spirit in coming over here shows that you
inherit the bravery of your mother's race, and I doubt not that we
shall find that the mixture with the sturdy stock of England will
have added to its qualities. Would that your queen would but take
her proper place, as head of a league of the Protestants of Europe.
Our cause would then be well-nigh won, without the need of striking
a blow."

"Is it true, cousin, that the court has escaped to Paris?"

"Yes. I would that Conde had had but a few hours longer, before
they took the alarm. Another day, and he would have had such a
gathering as it would have puzzled the Swiss to have got through.
His forces were doubled yesterday, and eight hundred have ridden
forth from here this morning to join him.

"I myself, though I made all speed, arrived but two hours since;
and shall, with all who come in this evening, ride forward
tomorrow. The Admiral and his brother, the Cardinal of Chatillon,
will go with us. D'Andelot is already with Conde.

"Now, as your troop is to ride with mine, I will see that they are
disposed for the night together, and that their wants are attended
to. My men have picketed their horses just outside the castle moat;
for, as you see, we are crowded here with gentlemen and their
personal followers, and it would be impossible to make room for
all. I will take your officer to the seneschal, who will see that
your men are provided with bread, meat, and wine.

"Ah, Captain Montpace, you are in command of the troop, I see. I
thought the countess would send so experienced a soldier with them,
and I am proud to have such a well-appointed troop behind me. None
so well armed and orderly have yet arrived. My own at present are
forty strong, and have, like you, made their way across France from
Poitou.

"I could not bring my Bretons," he said, turning to Francois. "The
Huguenots there are but a handful among the Catholics. Happily on
my estates they are good friends together, but I could not call
away men from their homes, at a time like this.

"Now, Captain Montpace, I will show you where your men are to
bivouac, next to my own. Then, if you will come with me to the
seneschal, rations shall be served out to them. Are your horses fit
for another journey?"

"They will be by tomorrow morning, Count. They have only come from
this side of Briare this morning, but though the journey is not
long the road is heavy. They had twenty-four hours' rest before
that, which they needed sorely, having travelled from Laville in
three days."

"Draw a good supply of forage for them from the magazines," De la
Noue said. "See that the saddlebags are well filled in the morning.
There is another heavy day's work before them, and then they can
take a good rest."

Francois and Philip accompanied the troop, and waited until they
saw that they were supplied with provisions and forage, and with
straw for lying down on; then they re-entered the castle. De la
Noue presented them to many of his friends, and then took them in
to the Admiral.

He quite fulfilled the anticipations that Philip had formed of him.
He was of tall figure, with a grave but kindly face. He was dressed
entirely in black, with puffed trunks, doublet to match, and a
large turned-down collar. As was usual, he wore over his shoulders
a loose jacket with a very high collar, the empty sleeves hanging
down on either side. When riding, the arms were thrust into these.
He wore a low soft cap with a narrow brim all round.

The expression of his face, with its short pointed beard,
moustache, and closely trimmed whiskers, was melancholy. The
greatest captain of his age, he was more reluctant than any of his
followers to enter upon civil war; and the fact that he felt that
it was absolutely necessary, to save Protestantism from being
extinguished in blood, in no way reconciled him to it.

He received Francois and his cousin kindly.

"I am glad," he said to the former, "to see the representative of
the Lavilles here. Your father was a dear friend of mine, and fell
fighting bravely by my side. I should have been glad to have had
you riding among my friends; but it is better still for you to be
with your cousin, De la Noue, who is far more suitable as a leader
and guide for youth than I am. You can follow no better example.

"I am glad also," he said, turning to Philip, "to have another
representative of the old family of the De Moulins here; and to
find that, though transplanted to England, it still retains its
affection for France. I trust that, ere long, I may have many of
your countrymen fighting by my side. We have the same interests
and, if the Protestant nations would unite, the demand for the
right of all men, Catholic and Protestant, to worship according to
their consciences could no longer be denied. I regret that your
queen does not permit free and open worship to her Catholic
subjects, since her not doing so affords some sort of excuse to
Catholic kings and princes. Still, I know that this law is not put
rigidly into force, and that the Catholics do, in fact, exercise
the rights of their religion without hindrance or persecution; and
above all, that there is no violent ill will between the people of
the two religions. Would it were so here.

"Were it not that you are going to ride with my good friend here, I
would have said a few words to you; praying you to remember that
you are fighting, not for worldly credit and honour, but for a holy
cause, and it behoves you to bear yourselves gravely and seriously.
But no such advice is needed to those who come under his
influence."

Leaving the Count de la Noue in conversation with the Admiral,
Francois and Philip made their way to the hall; where the tables
were laid, so that all who came, at whatever hour, could at once
obtain food. Their own servants, who were established in the
castle, waited upon them.

"I think that lackey of yours will turn out a very useful fellow,
Philip," Francois said, as they left the hall. "He is quick and
willing, and he turned out our dinner yesterday in good fashion. It
was certainly far better cooked than it had been, by Charles, the
day before."

"I fancy Pierre has done a good deal of cooking in the open air,"
Philip said, "and we shall find that he is capable of turning out
toothsome dishes from very scanty materials."

"I am glad to hear it for, though I am ready to eat horseflesh, if
necessary, I see not why, because we happen to be at war, one
should have to spoil one's teeth by gnawing at meat as hard as
leather. Soldiers are generally bad cooks. They are in too much
haste to get their food, at the end of a long day's work, to waste
much time with the cooking.

"Here comes La Noue again."

"Will you order your troop to be again in the saddle at five
o'clock in the morning, De Laville?" the Count said. "I start with
a party of two hundred at that hour. There will be my own men and
yours. The rest will be gentlemen and their personal retainers."

"I would that it had been three hours later," Francois said, as the
Count left them and moved away, giving similar orders to the other
gentlemen. "I own I hate moving before it is light. There is
nothing ruffles the temper so much as getting up in the dark,
fumbling with your buckles and straps, and finding everyone else
just as surly and cross as you feel yourself. It was considered a
necessary part of my training that I should turn out and arm myself
at all times of the night. It was the part of my exercises that I
hated the most."

Philip laughed.

"It will not make much difference here, Francois. I don't like
getting out of a warm bed, myself, on a dark winter's morning; but
as there will be certainly no undressing tonight, and we shall
merely have to get up and shake the straw off us, it will not
matter much. By half-past five it will be beginning to get light.
At any rate, we should not mind it tomorrow, as it will be really
our first day of military service."

Up to a late hour fresh arrivals continued to pour in, and the
cooks and servants of the castle were kept hard at work,
administering to the wants of the hungry and tired men. There was
no regular set meal, each man feeding as he was disposed. After it
became dark, all the gentlemen of family gathered in the upper part
of the great hall, and there sat talking by the light of torches
until nine. Then the Admiral, with a few of the nobles who had been
in consultation with him, joined them and, a quarter of an hour
later, a pastor entered and prayers were read. Then a number of
retainers came in with trusses of straw, which were shaken down
thickly beside the walls; and as soon as this was done, all present
prepared to lie down.

"The trumpet will sound, gentleman," Francois de la Noue said in a
loud voice, "at half-past four; but this will only concern those
who, as it has already been arranged, will ride with me--the rest
will set out with the Admiral, at seven. I pray each of you who go
with me to bid his servant cut off a goodly portion of bread and
meat, to take along with him, and to place a flask or two of wine
in his saddlebags; for our ride will be a long one, and we are not
likely to be able to obtain refreshment on our way."

"I should have thought," Francois said, as he lay down on the straw
by Philip's side, "that we should have passed through plenty of
places where we could obtain food. Whether we go direct to Paris,
or by the road by Lagny, we pass through Nemours and Melun."

"These places may not open their gates to us, Francois; and in that
case probably we should go through Montereau and Rosoy, and it may
be considered that those who have already gone through to join
Conde may have pretty well stripped both places of provisions."

The trumpet sounded at half-past four. The torches were at once
relighted by the servants, and the gentlemen belonging to La Noue's
party rose, and their servants assisted them to buckle on their
armour. They gave them instructions as to taking some food with
them, and prepared for their journey by an attack on some cold
joints, that had been placed on a table at the lower end of the
hall.

There was a scene of bustle and confusion in the courtyard, as the
horses were brought up by the retainers. The Admiral himself was
there to see the party off and, as they mounted, each issued out
and joined the men drawn up outside. Before starting the minister,
according to Huguenot custom, held a short service; and then, with
a salute to the Admiral, La Noue took his place at their head and
rode away.

With him went some twenty or thirty gentlemen, behind whom rode
their body servants. After these followed some fifty men-at-arms,
and the troops of La Noue and Laville. As soon as they were off, La
Noue reined in his horse so as to ride in the midst of his friends,
and chatted gaily with them as they went along.

An hour and a half's brisk riding took them to Montargis. Instead
of keeping straight on, as most of those present expected, the two
men who were riding a short distance in advance of the column
turned sharp off to the left, in the middle of the town.

"I am going to give you a surprise, gentlemen," De la Noue said,
with a smile. "I will tell you what it is when we are once outside
the place."

"I suppose," one of the gentlemen from the province, who was riding
next to Philip, said, "we are going to strike the main road from
Orleans north; to ride through Etampes, and take post between
Versailles and Paris on the south side of the river; while the
Prince and his following beleaguer the place on the north. It is a
bold plan thus to divide our forces, but I suppose the Admiral's
party will follow us and, by taking post on the south side of the
river, we shall straiten Paris for provisions."

"Gentlemen," the Count said, when they had issued from the streets
of Montargis, "I can now tell you the mission which the Admiral has
done me the honour to confide to me. It was thought best to keep
the matter an absolute secret, until we were thus fairly on our
way; because, although we hope and believe that there is not a man
at Chatillon who is not to be trusted, there may possibly be a spy
of the Guises there, and it would have been wrong to run the risk
of betrayal.

"Well, my friends, our object is the capture of Orleans."

An exclamation of surprise broke from many of his hearers.

"It seems a bold enterprise to undertake, with but little over two
hundred men," La Noue went on with a smile; "but we have friends
there. D'Andelot has been, for the last ten days, in communication
with one of them. We may, of course, expect to meet with a stout
resistance but, with the advantage of a surprise, and with so many
gallant gentlemen with me, I have no shadow of fear as to the
result. I need not point out to you how important its possession
will be to us. It will keep open a road to the south; will afford a
rallying place for all our friends, in this part of France; and the
news of its capture will give immense encouragement to our
co-religionists throughout the country. Besides, it will
counterbalance the failure to seize the court, and will serve as an
example, to others, to attempt to obtain possession of strong
places.

"We shall ride at an easy pace today, for the distance is long and
the country hilly. We could not hope to arrive there until too late
to finish our work before dark. Moreover, most of our horses have
already had very hard work during the past few days. We have
started early, in order that we may have a halt of four hours in
the middle of the day. We are to be met tonight by our friend, the
Master of Grelot, five miles this side of the city. He will tell us
what arrangements have been made for facilitating our entrance."

"This is a glorious undertaking, Philip, is it not?" Francois said.
"Until now I have been thinking how unfortunate we were, in being
too late to ride with Conde. Now I see that what I thought was a
loss has turned out a gain."

"You do not think Conde will be able to do anything against Paris?"
Philip asked.

"Certainly not at present. What can some fifteen hundred horsemen
and as many infantry (and he will have no more force than that, for
another three or four days) do against Paris with its walls and its
