
"You'll go later on," consoled Peachy. "Miss Rodgers is really very
decent in that way. She'll see that you get your turn once in a term at
any rate. Last time I went we had hot brown scones and molasses. Oh,
they were good! There! I oughtn't to have told you that when your turn's
off. Never mind. It will be something to look forward to. We always play
paper games there, and they're _such_ fun. There I am again! Well, if
you went to-day it would be over and done with by to-morrow, and it's
still all to come. That's one way of taking it."

"Oh, it's all very well to moralize!" grumped Lorna, who was feeling
thoroughly cross. "It's easy enough to count up other people's
blessings. I'm a blighted blossom!"

          "Poor little thing!
           She lived all the winter
           And died in the spring,"

quoted Peachy with an extra wide grin. "Cheer up! Don't you realize
it's only ten days to half-term? Oh, do, for goodness' sake, look less
like a statue of melancholy! Do you know, child, that you're getting
permanent wrinkles along that forehead of yours, and it makes you more
like fifty than fifteen. You're too sedate. That's what's the matter
with you, Lorna Carson! It's a fault that ought to be overcome. Copy
Delia and me. We know how to enjoy ourselves. There--my lecture is over
and now let's talk of earthquakes."

"It's all very well for _you_, you've got everything you want," murmured
Lorna bitterly under her breath. "Some people haven't half the luck, and
it's hard to be content with a short allowance and pretend you're the
same as every one else. It can't always be done."

She turned away as she said it, so Peachy only caught the sound of a
grumble and did not hear the actual words. Had she done so she might
possibly have exhibited more sympathy, for she was a very kind-hearted
girl. Neither she nor anybody at the Villa Camellia understood Lorna in
the least. So far their classmate had been somewhat of a chestnut-bur,
and nobody in the Transition had ever penetrated her husk of reserve.
There is generally a reason for most things in life, if we could only
know it, and poor Lorna's morose and hermit attitude at school was
really the result of matters at home. To get into her innermost
confidence we must follow her to Naples on her half-term holiday and see
for ourselves the peculiar circumstances amid which she had been placed,
and the disadvantages that had caused her to differ from other girls.

Lorna's family was the smallest possible, for it consisted only of her
father. Nobody at the Villa Camellia had ever seen Mr. Carson--not even
Miss Rodgers. He had communicated with her by writing when he wished to
place his daughter at the school, but he had never paid a single visit
to Fossato. He pleaded stress of business as the excuse for this
remissness, but Lorna herself knew only too well that he had no
intention of coming. Except to the office at which he was employed he
never went to any place where he would be likely to meet English
visitors. The furnished rooms where he lived were in the strictly
Italian portion of Naples, and not in the vicinity of the big hotels.
Secretly Lorna dreaded her holidays. There was nothing for her to do
while her father was at the office. She was not allowed to go out alone,
and unless she could induce fat Signora Fiorenza, their landlady, to be
philanthropic and chaperon her to look at the shops, she was obliged to
amuse herself in the house during the day as best she could. In the
evening things were certainly better. Her father would take her to dine
at an Italian restaurant, and would sometimes treat her to a performance
at a theater or cinema close at hand, or would escort her for a
lamplight walk along the streets, but these brief expeditions were
evidently made out of a sense of duty, and Mr. Carson was plainly
unhappy until he was once more ensconced in his own sitting-room with
his favorite books and his reading-lamp. He had seen so little of his
daughter during the five years they had lived at Naples that, though in
a sense he was fond of her, she was more of an embarrassment to him than
an asset. Lorna realized this only too keenly. Her sensitive disposition
shrank away from her father. She was shy in his presence, and never knew
what to say to him. She seemed always aware of some enormous shadow that
hung over their lives and darkened the daylight. What this was she had
no means of guessing, but it was emphatically there. She had learned, by
bitter experience, never to ask to be taken to the fashionable portions
of the city; she knew that the sound of a voice speaking English at a
neighboring table was enough to cause her father to finish his meal in a
hurry and leave the restaurant. They never went to the British Church,
and even such cosmopolitan spots as the aquarium or the museum were
equally taboo.

Long and often did Lorna puzzle over this idiosyncrasy of her father.
She retained vague memories of her early childhood, when he had surely
been utterly different and would come into the nursery to romp with her.
It had not been altogether her mother's death; that had happened when
she was only six years old, and there were bright memories after it of
happy times together. No--it was when she was ten years old that the
unknown catastrophe must have occurred which had ruined her father's
life. She could remember plainly the visit of several gentlemen, and of
loud angry voices talking inside the drawing-room; she was standing on
the stairs as they came out into the hall, and her father had told her
roughly to run away. Then had followed a hasty removal, and they had
left their comfortable home in London and had come to live in Naples.
After a dreary time in a second-rate Italian boarding-house she had been
sent to the Villa Camellia, and all link with England was lost and
broken. No aunt or cousins ever wrote to her, and the earlier portion of
her life seemed a period that was utterly ended.

So far Lorna had never had the courage to make any inquiries into the
why and wherefore of this unsatisfactory state of affairs. If a question
rose to her lips the sight of her father's forbidding face effectually
curbed her curiosity. That some tragedy had been concealed from her she
was positive. The suspicion, nay the absolute certainty, was sufficient
to place a division between herself and other girls. She would hear her
schoolfellows discussing their homes, relations, and friends, and when
she contrasted their gay doings with her own barren holidays she shrank
into her shell, and would make no allusion to her private affairs.

"Lorna's an absolute oyster, you can get nothing out of her," was the
universal verdict of her form.

But if she said little she thought a great deal. She would listen
jealously to the accounts of other people's fun, and a bitter feeling
had grown in her heart. Why should her life be so shadowed? She had as
much right to happiness as the rest of the school. Why should she seem
singled out by a vindictive fate and separated from her companions?

In justice to the girls at the Villa Camellia it is only fair to say
that any separation was entirely of Lorna's own making. Had she been
more expansive she would have readily enough found friends. No one knew
of the misery of her home life, and she was simply judged as what her
schoolfellows thought her--a queer-tempered crank who refused to join in
the general fun of the place, and in consequence was left out of most
things.

Irene, pleasant and hail-fellow-well-met with all comers, had at once
noticed this attitude of the others towards Lorna. At the drawing of
lots in the sorority she had somehow realized that everybody was
extremely thankful to have escaped having her unpopular chum as a buddy.
Chance remarks and slight allusions, hardly noticed at the time, but
remembered later, had confirmed this.

"They're not exactly unkind, but they're down on that girl," she had
concluded. "I haven't made up my mind yet whether I altogether like her,
but I'm going to be decent to her all the same."

As the very first who had treated her on a real equality of girlhood
Irene had been placed on a pedestal in Lorna's empty heart. The
separation between the two added to the loneliness of the latter's brief
half-term holiday. She had never missed school so much before, or hated
her surroundings so entirely. The long week-end dragged itself slowly
away. Sunday was wet and they stayed all day in the little sitting-room,
Mr. Carson reading as usual, and Lorna trying to amuse herself with
Italian magazines and fidgeting as much as she dared. Towards evening
the rain cleared a little and her father went out, refusing, however, to
allow her to accompany him. At the end of an hour he returned and flung
himself heavily into his chair. He was in a state such as she had never
witnessed before, violently excited, with glaring eyes and twitching
hands.

"Lorna!" he exclaimed in quick panting accents, "I have met my enemy.
The man who ruined me! Yes, the man who deliberately blackened and
ruined me!"

Lorna turned to him half frightened.

"What is it, Father?" she asked. "Have you an enemy? You've never let me
know before. Oh, I wish you'd tell me! I'm fifteen now, and surely old
enough to hear. It's so horrible to feel there's something you're always
keeping from me."

"I suppose you'll find out some time, so I may as well tell you myself,"
replied Mr. Carson grimly. "I'm a wronged, ruined man, Lorna, suffering
for the sin of another who goes scotfree. The world judged me guilty of
embezzlement, but before God I am innocent! I never touched a penny of
the money. Do you believe me innocent? Surely my own daughter won't turn
against me?"

"No, no, Father! Indeed I believe you innocent. Tell me how it
happened. Was it when we left London? I seem to remember the trouble
there was then, though you never explained. We had a different name
then, hadn't we?"

"You were too young at the time to understand, and it wasn't a subject I
wished to revive. Briefly, a big sum, for which I was responsible,
disappeared. The head of the firm believed me guilty, but for the sake
of old associations he would not prosecute; he simply told me to go. I
consulted my lawyer, and, if there had been the slightest chance of
clearing myself, I'd have fought the matter to a finish, but he told me
my case hadn't a leg to stand on, and that, if I were foolish enough to
bring it into court, I should certainly be convicted of embezzlement,
and sent to penal servitude; that it was only the clemency of my chief's
attitude that saved me, and that he advised me to go abroad while I
could. So I left England in a hurry, a disgraced man, disowned by his
family and his friends. I changed my name to Carson, and through the
kindness of a business acquaintance I was offered a clerkship in an
Italian counting-house in Naples, which post I have kept ever since. How
I should otherwise have made a living God only knows! It's always my
haunting fear that some one in Naples will recognize me and tell them at
the office who I am. If that old story leaks out I may once more be
ruined."

"But who did it, Father?" asked Lorna. "Had you no clew at all?"

"Not enough to convict, only a strong suspicion, so strong that it is
practically a certainty. The man who ruined me was once my friend. Now
for five long years, he has been my bitterest enemy. We were both heads
of departments in the firm of Burgess and Co. Probably he's a partner
now, as I ought to have been. I've never heard news of him since I left
London, but to-day I saw him in the Corso. I saw him plainly without any
possibility of mistake. What is he doing in Naples? Has he come here to
ruin me again?"

"No, no, Dad, surely not! Perhaps he doesn't know you're in Italy.
Probably he's only taking a holiday and will go back to England soon,"
faltered Lorna, suddenly realizing that in her father's excited nervous
condition she ought to offer consolation and soothe him instead of
adding to his agitation. "It's very unlikely that he would find you out.
Dad, don't grieve so, _please_!"

She went near to her father's chair and laid a timid hand on his
shoulder. An immense gush of pity for him flooded her heart. If she had
known this story before, she would have understood, and instead of
thinking him unkind and misanthropic she would have tried to be a better
daughter to him. The new-found knowledge illuminated all the past and
seemed to draw them closely together.

"_Mother_ would have believed in you, Dad," she ventured to say.

"Thank God she never knew! She was spared that at any rate. I raged
against Providence when I lost her, but afterwards I felt she had been
'taken away from the evil to come.' Her relations thought me guilty. I
went to them and explained, but they practically told me I was lying.
When I went abroad I never sent them my address. I just wished to
vanish. I don't suppose they have ever troubled to inquire for me. Who
cares about a ruined and disgraced man?"

"_I_ care, Dad," said Lorna. "I'm only fifteen and I can't understand
everything, but if you'll let me the least little bit take Mother's
place, may I try? I'm not much, but perhaps I'm better than nobody, and
we two seem all alone in the world."

For the first time in five years the barrier between them was down, and
Lorna was hugging her father as in the old happy childish days. To know
all is to forgive all, and her resentment against his treatment of her
turned into a deep pitying love. She would never be frightened of him
again. A new impulse seemed to have come to her. If she could in any way
comfort him for what he had suffered, it would be something to live for.

"He's my father, and I'll stick to him through thick and thin," she
said to herself fiercely, as she went to bed that night. "I don't know
who this enemy is, but if ever I meet him I'll hate him and all
belonging to him. I say it, and I don't go back on my word. I'll be my
own witness as nobody else is present. Lorna Carson, you've taken up a
feud and you've got to carry it through. May all the bad luck in the
world come down upon you if you break your oath."




CHAPTER VIII

At Pompeii


Lorna returned to Fossato feeling as if she had passed through a great
crisis. The short week-end and its revelation seemed to have added years
to her life. She had never been a typical specimen of "sparkling
girlhood," but her new knowledge made her more sedate than ever. It
brought her both gain and loss: gain in the fact that she now shared her
father's confidence, and could help him to bear his heavy burden, and
loss in the sense of a yet wider division between herself and her
schoolmates. She realized now, only too bitterly, why her father so
persistently shunned all English people. It would surely have been
better to have placed her at an Italian school than among girls of her
own nationality. Lorna, naturally morbid and over-sensitive, shrank yet
deeper into her shell, and became more sphinx-like than ever. Her one
bright spot at the Villa Camellia was her devotion to her buddy. Half a
dozen other girls had at various periods tried to "take Lorna up," but
all had promptly dropped her, declaring that they could not get any
further, and that she was a solitary "hermit-crab." Irene, after one or
two ventures, realized that Lorna was utterly reserved and
uncommunicative, but was content to continue the friendship on a
one-sided basis, giving confidences, but receiving none in return. She
was a little laughed at in certain quarters on the subject of her chum.

"Hope you like crab sauce."

"We're tickled to bits at the pair of you."

"It won't last long."

"Shall we give you an oyster-opener for a birthday present?"

"You've got the champion chestnut-bur of the school--aren't you full of
prickles?"

"Go on!" smiled Irene calmly. "I've been teased all my life by my
brother, so I'm pretty well bomb-proof. Say just what you like. I'm sure
I don't care."

It really did not trouble Irene that Lorna should cling to this habit of
closeness. She had so many affairs of her own in which to be interested.
She had spent a glorious half-term holiday with her family in their flat
at Naples, and was delighted to describe every detail of her
experiences. She chatted about her relations till Lorna knew Mr. and
Mrs. Beverley and Vincent absolutely well by hearsay, though she had
never met them in the flesh. The accounts of their doings gave her a
peep of home life such as she had not hitherto realized.

"Lovely to be you," she ventured once.

"You must come and see us," replied Irene impulsively. "I'll get Mother
to ask you some day. Don't look so scared. They wouldn't eat you. Don't
you like paying visits? Oh well, of course, if you don't want to come I
won't worry you. No, I'm not offended. Why should I be? Let everybody
please herself is my motto. Oh, _don't_ apologize, for it really doesn't
matter in the very least! I'd far rather people were frank and said what
they thought."

"I'm going with you to Pompeii to-morrow at any rate," said Lorna. "I'm
glad they've put us both down together for that excursion."

It was part of the educational scheme of Miss Rodgers and Miss Morley
that the girls should be taken to certain places of interest in the
neighborhood. They were carefully prepared in class beforehand, so that
they should thoroughly understand what they were going to see. All the
school studied Greek and Roman history, and since Christmas there had
been special lectures by Miss Morley on the buried city of Pompeii,
illustrated by lantern-slides. But photography, however excellent, is a
poor substitute for reality when the latter can be obtained. Had the
Villa Camellia been situated in England or America no doubt the pupils
would have considered those views a tremendous asset to their history
class, but being in the near neighborhood of Naples they were able to
"go one better," and have actual expeditions to Pompeii itself. A dozen
of the girls, personally conducted by Miss Morley, were to start on
Thursday, take their lunch, and make a day of it. Most of those chosen
were comparative newcomers to the school, or for some reason had not
done the excursion before, so it would be a fresh experience to nearly
all of them. Six seniors and six members of the Transition made up the
party, with little Desiree Legrand tagged on at the last as a mascot,
because Stella and Carrie had pointed out that twelve pupils and one
mistress would make thirteen at table if they had tea together, and
though Miss Morley had scoffed at such ridiculous superstition, she took
Desiree all the same to break the possible bad luck. They had the
satisfaction of assembling in the hall for the start exactly as their
companions were filing into classrooms.

"Got your nose-bag?" asked Delia, indicating her lunch satchel. "It
wouldn't do to leave those behind. I always feel famished when I'm out
sightseeing. Hope I shan't eat my lunch before the picnic. Renie, it's
no use lugging that camera with you. You won't be allowed to take any
photos inside the ruins, so I warn you."

"Miss Morley's taking hers," objected Irene, loath to relinquish the
object in question.

"Miss Morley has a special government permit to sketch or photo in
Pompeii. Nobody may take the slightest snap-shot or drawing without.
I've been once before, so I know, Madam Doubtful. You'll see ever so
many officials will ask to look at Miss Morley's ticket. Why? Because
the place would get choked up with artists I suppose. And also they want
to sell their own photos. You'll be pestered to buy post-cards outside
the gates."

"I'd adore to get just one or two snaps," persisted Irene. "I won't take
this big camera, but I'll slip my wee one inside my pocket, and see if I
find a chance."

"Are you ready, girls?" came Miss Morley's voice from the porch, and the
waiting thirteen formed into double line and marched.

They were to go by the electric tram from Fossato to Castellamare, from
which it was only a comparatively short drive to Pompeii. The jogging,
jolting, little tramcar ran along the coast, linking up several towns
and villages and conveying people intent on either business or pleasure.
There were many visitors anxious to make the excursion to-day, but the
contingent from the Villa Camellia had posted themselves by the statue
of Garibaldi in the square, and scrambled for the car as soon as it
arrived, boarding it with three hatless Italian girls, two women with
orange baskets, a sailor carrying a little boy, and a stout old padre,
who apologized prettily for pushing.

"We did those folks from the Hotel Royal," chuckled Delia, sitting on
Irene's knee for lack of further accommodation. "Did you ever see a tram
fill up quicker? I'm afraid I'm heavy. I know I'm an awful lump. We'll
take it in turns, and I'll nurse you after a while. I call this rather
priceless. Everybody's good-tempered even if they do hustle. They don't
seem to mind people treading on their toes. It's infectious. I catch
myself smiling, and I'd jolly well frown as a rule if any one yanked a
basket into my back."

"I think it's the climate," remarked Irene. "In a London tram most faces
don't look too cheerful, but with this sky overhead people are simply
chirping like crickets. It's like a perpetual summer holiday."

The car was rattling along the steep coast road through miles of
glorious scenery. On the left was an ultramarine sea, with white-sailed
boats, and to the right lay cliffs and olive groves. Some of the trees
were covered with catkins, and others had already burst into green leaf;
gorgeous yellow genistas clothed the hillsides, and the banks were
dappled with blue borage and marigolds. There were so many things to
look at from either window of the tram; goats were feeding along the
crags, and a gray businesslike battle-ship was wending its way across
the harbor in the direction of Naples. They passed through several small
towns or villages, getting a vivid impression of the lives of the
inhabitants, who, on sunny days, seemed to do much of their domestic
work out of doors, and to peel potatoes, wash salads, cook on charcoal
braziers, sew, mend shoes, make lace, and pursue many other vocations on
the pavements in front of the houses, and so far from being disturbed by
onlookers, would smile and even wave friendly hands at the strangers on
the tramcar.

"That darling old soul in the green apron blew me a kiss," chuckled
Delia. "She looks as happy as a queen, though she's probably living on
about ten cents a day."

"Did you see them dressing the baby on the pavement?" squealed Stella.
"They were winding it round and round in yards of bandages _exactly_
like old Italian pictures. I didn't know it was done nowadays."

"Oh! Look at the carts drawn by bullocks."

"And the lamb with its fleece all combed out and tied with blue
ribbons."

"That's because it's Mid-Lent."

"Don't you see the baby donkey? There! Quick!"

In her efforts to watch everything at once Delia craned her neck through
the window of the car and away went her school hat, sailing over a
bridge and down into a deep ravine below, lost forever so far as she was
concerned, as the tram certainly would not stop and wait while she
searched for it.

"You've come down a peg in life, old sport, that's all," laughed
Carrie. "In Italy wearing a hat is a sign of gentility. No work-girl
ever has one on her head even on Sundays. I offered a cast-off of mine
to the _bonne_ at a hotel once, and she eyed it longingly, but said she
daren't wear it if she took it, her friends would think it such swank."

"What do they have on in church then?" asked Delia.

"Handkerchiefs, of course. Every Neapolitan has one handy to slip round
her head at the church door. It must save millinery bills."

"And they all have the most beautiful hair. Hello! Here we are at the
terminus. What a crowd of beggars. They look like brigands waiting to
pounce on us. Help!"

Once out of the shelter of the tramcar the girls made the unpleasant
discovery that in Italy begging is not forbidden, but quite a recognized
profession with certain of the poorer classes. They were immediately
surrounded by a ragged rabble, some of whom exhibited sores or other
unsightly afflictions to compel compassion, and all of whom held out
