
"Jackanapes!"

"Yes, sir!"

"I've bought Lollo, but I believe you were right. He hardly stands
high enough for me. If you can ride him to the other end of the Green,
I'll give him to you."

How Jackanapes tumbled on to Lollo's back he never knew. He had just
gathered up the reins when the Gipsy-father took him by the arm.

"If you want to make Lollo go fast, my little gentleman--"

"_I_ can make him go!" said Jackanapes, and drawing from his pocket
the trumpet he had bought in the fair, he blew a blast both loud and
shrill.

Away went Lollo, and away went Jackanapes' hat. His golden hair flew
out an aureole from which his cheeks shone red and distended with
trumpeting. Away went Spitfire, mad with the rapture of the race, and
the wind in his silky ears. Away went the geese, the cocks, the hens,
and the whole family of Johnson. Lucy clung to her mamma, Jane saved
Emily by the gathers of her gown, and Tony saved himself by a
somersault.

The Grey Goose was just returning when Jackanapes and Lollo rode back,
Spitfire panting behind.

"Good, my little gentleman, good!" said the Gipsy. "You were born to
the saddle. You've the flat thigh, the strong knee, the wiry back,
and the light caressing hand, all you want is to learn the whisper.
Come here!"

"What was that dirty fellow talking about, grandson?" asked the
General.

"I can't tell you, sir. It's a secret."

They were sitting in the window again, in the two Chippendale
arm-chairs, the General devouring every line of his grandson's face,
with strange spasms crossing his own.

"You must love your aunt very much, Jackanapes?"

"I do, sir," said Jackanapes warmly.

"And whom do you love next best to your aunt?"

The ties of blood were pressing very strongly on the General himself,
and perhaps he thought of Lollo. But Love is not bought in a day, even
with fourteen pounds nineteen shillings and tenpence. Jackanapes
answered quite readily, "The Postman."

"Why the Postman?"

"He knew my father," said Jackanapes, "and he tells me about him, and
about his black mare. My father was a soldier, a brave soldier. He
died at Waterloo. When I grow up I want to be a soldier too."

"So you shall, my boy. So you shall."

"Thank you, grandfather. Aunty doesn't want me to be a soldier for
fear of being killed."

"Bless my life! Would she have you get into a feather-bed and stay
there? Why, you might be killed by a thunderbolt, if you were a
butter-merchant!"

"So I might. I shall tell her so. What a funny fellow you are, sir! I
say, do you think my father knew the Gipsy's secret? The Postman says
he used to whisper to his black mare."

"Your father was taught to ride as a child, by one of those horsemen
of the East who swoop and dart and wheel about a plain like swallows
in autumn. Grandson! Love me a little too. I can tell you more about
your father than the Postman can."

"I do love you," said Jackanapes. "Before you came I was frightened.
I'd no notion you were so nice."

"Love me always, boy, whatever I do or leave undone. And--GOD help
me--whatever you do or leave undone, I'll love you! There shall never be
a cloud between us for a day; no, sir, not for an hour. We're imperfect
enough, all of us, we needn't be so bitter; and life is uncertain enough
at its safest, we needn't waste its opportunities. Look at me! Here sit
I, after a dozen battles and some of the worst climates in the world,
and by yonder lych gate lies your mother, who didn't move five miles, I
suppose, from your aunt's apron-strings,--dead in her teens; my
golden-haired daughter, whom I never saw."

Jackanapes was terribly troubled.

"Don't cry, grandfather," he pleaded, his own blue eyes round with
tears. "I will love you very much, and I will try to be very good. But
I should like to be a soldier."

"You shall, my boy, you shall. You've more claims for a commission
than you know of. Cavalry, I suppose; eh, ye young Jackanapes? Well,
well; if you live to be an honor to your country, this old-heart
shall grow young again with pride for you; and if you die in the
service of your country--GOD bless me, it can but break for ye!"

And beating the region which he said was all waistcoats, as if they
stifled him, the old man got up and strode out on to the Green.




CHAPTER IV.

     "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his
     life for his friends."--JOHN XV. 13.


Twenty and odd years later the Grey Goose was still alive, and in full
possession of her faculties, such as they were. She lived slowly and
carefully, and she lived long. So did Miss Jessamine; but the General
was dead.

He had lived on the Green for many years, during which he and the
Postman saluted each other with a punctiliousness that it almost
drilled one to witness. He would have completely spoiled Jackanapes if
Miss Jessamine's conscience would have let him; otherwise he somewhat
dragooned his neighbors, and was as positive about parish matters as a
ratepayer about the army. A stormy-tempered, tender-hearted soldier,
irritable with the suffering of wounds of which he never spoke, whom
all the village followed to his grave with tears.

The General's death was a great shock to Miss Jessamine, and her
nephew stayed with her for some little time after the funeral. Then he
was obliged to join his regiment, which was ordered abroad.

One effect of the conquest which the General had gained over the
affections of the village, was a considerable abatement of the popular
prejudice against "the military." Indeed the village was now somewhat
importantly represented in the army. There was the General himself,
and the Postman, and the Black Captain's tablet in the church, and
Jackanapes, and Tony Johnson, and a Trumpeter.

[Illustration]

Tony Johnson had no more natural taste for fighting than for riding,
but he was as devoted as ever to Jackanapes, and that was how it came
about that Mr. Johnson bought him a commission in the same cavalry
regiment that the General's grandson (whose commission had been given
him by the Iron Duke) was in, and that he was quite content to be the
butt of the mess where Jackanapes was the hero; and that when
Jackanapes wrote home to Miss Jessamine, Tony wrote with the same
purpose to his mother; namely, to demand her congratulations that they
were on active service at last, and were ordered to the front. And he
added a postscript to the effect that she could have no idea how
popular Jackanapes was, nor how splendidly he rode the wonderful red
charger whom he had named after his old friend Lollo.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Sound Retire!"

A Boy Trumpeter, grave with the weight of responsibilities and
accoutrements beyond his years, and stained, so that his own mother
would not have known him, with the sweat and dust of battle, did as he
was bid; and then pushing his trumpet pettishly aside, adjusted his
weary legs for the hundredth time to the horse which was a world too
big for him, and muttering, "'Tain't a pretty tune," tried to see
something of this, his first engagement, before it came to an end.

Being literally in the thick of it, he could hardly have seen less or
known less of what happened in that particular skirmish if he had been
at home in England. For many good reasons; including dust and smoke,
and that what attention he dared distract from his commanding officer
was pretty well absorbed by keeping his hard-mouthed troop-horse in
hand, under pain of execration by his neighbors in the melee.
By-and-by, when the newspapers came out, if he could get a look at one
before it was thumbed to bits, he would learn that the enemy had
appeared from ambush in overwhelming numbers, and that orders had been
given to fall back, which was done slowly and in good order, the men
fighting as they retired.

Born and bred on the Goose Green, the youngest of Mr. Johnson's
gardener's numerous off-spring, the boy had given his family "no
