now-a-days as they can learn to love; nor do I mean such pleasures as
the month at the seaside, which I should be sorry to describe as a
light matter for papa's purse. But I mean little pleasures of the
children's own devising, for which some trifling help from the elders
will make all the difference between failure and success. In short, my
dear Rouge Pot, at the present moment I mean the children's
theatricals; and papa himself will confess that, whereas two or three
pounds, "up or down," in the seaside move, would hardly be considered,
and fifteen shillings "more or less" in the price of a new dining-room
fender would upset nobody's nerves in the household--if "the children"
asked for a day's work of the village carpenter, and seven and
sixpence worth of wood, to carry out a project of their own, it would
be considered a great waste of money. However, it is only fair to add
that the young people themselves will do wisely to establish a
"theatrical fund" box, which will not open, and to put in a fixed
percentage of everybody's pocket-money to accumulate for some genuine
properties when the theatrical season begins.

The question of _scenery_ of course must depend on the resources of
the company. But _acting may be very successful without any at all_.
It must never be forgotten that _those who look and listen can also
imagine_, and unless tolerably good scenes can be had, it is almost
better to content oneself with what served in the days of
Shakespeare--a written placard of what the scene is supposed to be.
_Shakespeare scenery_, as we may call it, will amuse people of itself,
and a good piece and good actors will not suffer from its use. Thus,
if _The Barmecide_ is being played, Alnaschan and Ina will be
"discovered" standing in an empty room, at the back of which a placard
will bear this inscription in large letters--A STREET IN BAGDAD.

It is possible, however, that your company may include some
water-colour artist, who will try his or her hand at scene-painting in
the barn. Well: he will want canvas or unbleached calico, which must
be covered completely with a "first wash" of whitening and size, mixed
to a freely working consistency, and laid on with a white-wash brush.
When dry, he must outline his scene on this in charcoal. The painting
is then to be done in distemper--all the effects are put in by the
first wash; lights and shadows in their full tone, &c. He will use
powder paints, mix them with size (which must be kept warm on a fire),
and add white for body-colour when he wants to lay one colour over
another. I will add four hints. _For a small stage avoid scenes with
extreme perspective. Keep the general colouring rather sober, so as to
harmonize with the actors' dresses. Only broad effects will show. Keep
stepping back to judge your work from a distance._ In a wood, for
instance, the distance may be largely blue and grey, and the
foreground trees a good deal in warm browns and dull olive. _Paint by
candle-light when convenient._

_All the lights in your theatre must be protected by glasses. The
footlights should have reflectors behind them_, or a board about
eighteen inches high with block-tin nailed on it. Failing this, a
plain polished fender, in which candles or lamps can be placed, will
serve. _There must also be sidelights_, or the footlights will cast
shadows. _Long strips of coloured glass, in frames, can lie flat in
front of the stage when not in use, and be raised up when wanted,
between the footlights and the stage--blue for moonlight, yellow for
sunshine, rose-colour for sunset scenes and fairy effects._ A shade
may be quickly thrown up between the footlights and the stage, _on the
same principle, if darkness is required. For thunder, shake a thin
sheet of iron behind the scenes. Powdered resin or lycopodium thrown
on to the flame of a candle from a quill_ is said to be effective as
_lightning_. But any tricks with naked lights, in the confusion of
private theatricals, are objectionable, and should never be used
except by some grown-up person not among the actors. _For rain, shake
parched peas in a box with irregular partitions. For a full moon, cut
a round hole in your scene, cover it with some translucent material,
and hold a lamp behind it_; the blue-glass shade must be up before the
footlights. A similar hole, or, if low on the horizon, a
half-moon-shaped one, with a crimson transparency, will do for a
setting sun--then the rose-coloured glass will be required before the
footlights.

I have no further space just now, my dear Rouge Pot; but you may
expect another letter from me on Scenery Screens, Properties and
Costumes.

Yours, &c.,

BURNT CORK.


HINTS FOR PRIVATE THEATRICALS.--III.

MY DEAR ROUGE POT,--I promised to say something about _scenery
screens_.

If the house happens to boast a modern pseudo-Japanese screen of a
large size (say six feet high), it will make a very pretty background
for a drawing-room scene, and admit of entrances as I suggested. But
_screens with light grounds are also very valuable as reflectors_,
carrying the light into the back of the stage. There is generally a
want of light on the amateur stage, and all means to remedy this
defect and brighten up matters are worth considering.

_Folding screens_ may be covered on both sides _with strips of lining
wall-paper of delicate tints, pinned on with drawing-pins_. The paper
can be left plain, or it may serve as the background on which to affix
"Shakespeare Scenery." Or again, your amateur painter will find an
easier and more effective reward for such labour as he will not
grudge to bestow in the holidays, if, instead of attempting the
ambitious task of scene-painting on canvas, he adorns these scenery
screens with Japanese designs in water-colours. Bold and not too
crowded combinations of butterflies and flamingoes, tortoises,
dragons, water-reeds, flowers and ferns. He need not hesitate to
employ Bessemer's gold and silver paints, with discretion, and the two
sides of the screen can be done in different ways. The Japanesque side
would make a good drawing-room background, and some other scene (such
as a wood) might be indicated on the other with a nearer approach to
real scene-painting. _These screens light up beautifully, and are well
adapted for drawing-room theatricals._

In the common event of your requiring a bit of a cottage with a
practicable door to be visible, it will be seen that two folds of a
screen, painted with bricks and windows, may be made to do duty in no
ill fashion as the two sides of a house, and with a movable porch (a
valuable stage property) the entrance can be contrived just out of
sight. _The stage will be brightened up by laying down a "crumb
cloth," or covering it with holland._ A drawing-room scene is made
very pretty _by hanging up pairs of the summer white muslin curtains,
looped with gay ribbons, as if there were windows in the sides of the
stage_.

If a fireplace is wanted and will do at the side, a mantelpiece is
easily represented, and a banner screen will help to conceal the
absence of a grate. A showy specimen of that dreadful thing, a paper
grate-ornament, flowing well down into the fender, may sometimes hide
deficiencies. The appearance of _hot coals in a practicable grate_ is
given by _irregularly-shaped pieces of red glass, through which light
is thrown from a candle behind_.

A very important part of your preparations will be _the dresses_.

Now of dresses it may be said--as we have said of scenery--that if the
actors are clever, very slight (if suggestive) accessories in the way
of costume will suffice. At the same time, whilst the scenery can
never be good enough in amateur theatricals to cover deficiencies in
the performance, good costumes may be a most material help to the
success of a piece. Very little wit is demanded from the young
gentleman who plays the part of a monkey, if his felt coat is well
made, and his monkey-mask comical, and if he has acquired some
dexterity in the management of his tail.

I think, my dear Rouge Pot, that you were taken to see that splendid
exhibition of stage properties, _Babil and Bijou_? Do you remember the
delightful effect of the tribe of oysters? The little boys who played
the oysters had nothing to do but to hop and run, and keep their
shells nicely in front of them, and yet how we laughed at them! Now,
in a large family, such parts as these afford an opportunity for
allowing "the little ones" to "act," and so to become accustomed to
the stage, before they can be trusted to learn written parts. Nor are
_comical costumes_ beyond the powers of home manufacturers.

You know those men--sandwich-men as they are often called!--who go
about the London streets with one board in front and one behind. These
boards are of simple shape and only reach from the shoulder, to a
little below the knee; they are only wanted to paste advertisements
on. But if you think about it, you will see that to have the boards
high enough to hide the head, and low enough to hide the legs, rounded
at the top like a scallop shell, with the ribs of the shell nicely
painted, eyeholes to peep through, and the hinge of the shell arranged
to conceal the feet, would be no very great effort of skill. _Sandwich
costumes for the little ones_ might be of many effective shapes. Thick
paste-board would probably be strong enough for very little people,
and in many cases a covered framework would be better still, and if
you have a kite-maker in your troupe, you had better commit these
costumes to his skill and ingenuity. A very simple device would be
that of flower-pots painted red. They need come no higher than the
chin, if a good thick bush is firmly held by the little hands behind,
so as to conceal the face. But no doubt, my dear Rouge Pot, you will
say, "if we have no plays with such characters in, we cannot have
them, however desirable it may be to bring in the little ones." But I
think you will find some of the elders ingenious enough to "tack them
on" to your pieces if required, especially to those founded on fairy
tales.

_Glazed calico_ is the amateur costume-maker's best friend. It is
cheap, it is shiny, and it can be had in all the most effective
colours. I have never seen a very good green; but the turquoise blue,
the pink, and the yellow, are of those pretty Dresden china shades
which Mr. Marcus Ward and other Christmas-card makers use to such good
purpose against gold backgrounds. Many of these Christmas cards, by
the bye, with children dressed in ancient costumes painted by good
artists, will give you and your sisters help in a tasteful combination
of colours; and besides the gold and silver powder paints, which
answer admirably, gold and silver paper can be had to cut stars and
trimmings of various sorts from, to stitch or gum on to fairies'
dresses, &c.

Tarlatan can now be had in hues that almost rival the colours of
flowers, but I fear that only the white can be had "fire-proof."
Gauze wings, flowing hair, and tarlatan skirts, combined with the
"flurry" of the performances, the confined space behind the scenes,
and lights everywhere, form a dangerous combination which it makes one
shudder to think of. The truth is, my dear Rouge Pot, it cannot be too
often or too emphatically repeated that _naked lights on the stage or
behind the scenes in amateur theatricals are as wrong as in a
coal-mine_. Glass shades for the bedroom candles--with which
boy-brothers, seeing imperfectly through masks, will rush past little
sisters whose newly-crimped hair and tarlatan skirts are sticking out,
they can't feel how far behind them--cost a few shillings, _and the
mental effort of resolving to have and use them_. Depend upon it,
Rouge Pot, the latter is the greater difficulty! And yet our petty
economies in matters which affect our health, our daily comfort, or
our lives, are wonderful, when the dangers or discomforts we have to
avert may, _by chance_, be averted by good luck at no cost at all. So
perhaps the few shillings have something to do with it. I hope they
will always be expended on safety glasses for all lights in use on or
about your stage.

Well, glazed calico and tarlatan are very effective, and so is cotton
velvet or velveteen; but in every family there will probably be found
a few articles of finery originally made of expensive materials, but
which are now yielded to the juvenile property-box, and from
experience I can assure you that these are valuable treasures. I have
a tender remembrance of a few which were our _pieces de resistance_
when we "dressed up" either for charades or one of Miss Corner's
plays--"in my young days." A black satin dress--ancient, but of such
lustre and softness as satins are not made now; a real camel's-hair
burnous, dyed crimson; a green satin driving cloak, lined with
fur--these things did not crush and tumble during their long periods
of repose in the property-box, as tarlatan skirts and calico doublets
were apt to do. Most valuable of all, a grey wig, worn right side
foremost by our elderly gentlemen, and wrong side foremost (so as to
bring the pig-tail curls over the forehead) by our elderly ladies. Fur
gloves, which, with a black rabbit-skin mask over her rosy cheeks,
gave ferocity in the part of "the Beast" to our jolliest little
actress. A pair of claret-coloured stockings, silk throughout, and a
pair of yellow leather slippers, embroidered with gold, doubtless
bought long years back in some Eastern bazaar, &c., &c. There came a
date in our theatrical history when only one pair of feet could get
right into these much-desired shoes, heels and all; and as the
individual who owned them was also supposed to display the
claret-coloured stockings to the best advantage, both these important
properties, with the part of Prince to which our custom assigned
them, fell to an actor who could lay no other claim to pre-eminence.

Surely your home will provide one or two of these "stand-bys" of the
green-room, and you will not fail to value them, I assure you. I hope
you will not fight for them!

_Wigs are very important. Unbleached calico is a very fair imitation
of the skin of one's head._ A skull-cap made of it will do for a bald
pate, or, with a black pig-tail and judicious face-painting, will turn
any smooth-faced actor into a very passable Chinaman. Flowing locks of
tow, stitched on round the lower part, will convert it into a
patriarchal wig. _Nigger wigs are made of curly black horsehair
fastened on to a black skull-cap._ Moustaches and whiskers can be
bought at small expense, but if well painted the effect is nearly as
good.

As to _face-painting_. Rouge is indispensable, but care must be taken
not to overdo it. The eyebrows must be darkened with sepia or Indian
ink, and a camel's-hair brush--especially for fair people. With the
same materials you must deepen all the lines of the face, if you want
to make a young person look like an old one. The cheek lines on each
side of the nose, furrows across the forehead, and crow's-foot marks
by the eyes, are required for an old face; but if the audience are to
be very close to the stage, you must be careful not to overdo your
painting. Violet powder is the simplest and least irritating white for
the skin. Rouge should be laid on with a hare's foot. If your "old
man" is wearing a bald wig, be careful to colour his forehead to match
as well as possible with his bald pate. All these applications are
more or less irritating to one's skin. It is said to be a mistake to
_wash_ them off. Cold cream should be rubbed over the face, and then
wiped off with a soft towel.

As a parting hint, my dear Rouge Pot, when you have passed the stage
of child-plays in rhyme--but do not be in a _hurry_ to discard such
universal favourites as _Dick Whittington_, _Beauty and the Beast_,
and _Cinderella_--don't be too ambitious in your selection from
"grown-up" plays. As a matter of experience, when _we_ got beyond Miss
Corner we took to farces, and found them very successful. There are
many which play well in young hands, and only require the omission of
a few coarse expressions, which, being intended to raise a laugh among
"roughs" in the gallery of a public theatre, need hardly be hurled at
the ears of one's private friends.

I am bound to say that competent critics have told me that farces were
about the most difficult things we could have attempted. I can only
say that we found them answer. Partly, perhaps, because it requires a
less high skill to raise a laugh than to move by passion or pathos.
Partly, too, because farces are short, and amateurs can make no
greater mistake than to weary their audience.

If you prefer "dress pieces" and dramas to farces or burlesque, let
some competent person curtail the one you choose to a suitable length.

The manager of juvenile theatricals should never forget the wisdom
embodied in Sam Weller's definition of the art of letter-writing, that
the writer should stop short at such a point as that the reader should
"wish there wos more of it."

Yours, &c.,

BURNT CORK.




SNAP-DRAGONS.




SNAP-DRAGONS.

A TALE OF CHRISTMAS EVE.

MR. AND MRS. SKRATDJ.


Once upon a time there lived a certain family of the name of Skratdj.
(It has a Russian or Polish look, and yet they most certainly lived in
England.) They were remarkable for the following peculiarity. They
seldom seriously quarrelled, but they never agreed about anything. It
is hard to say whether it were more painful for their friends to hear
them constantly contradicting each other, or gratifying to discover
that it "meant nothing," and was "only their way."

It began with the father and mother. They were a worthy couple, and
really attached to each other. But they had a habit of contradicting
each other's statements, and opposing each other's opinions, which,
though mutually understood and allowed for in private, was most trying
to the bystanders in public. If one related an anecdote, the other
would break in with half-a-dozen corrections of trivial details of no
interest or importance to any one, the speakers included. For
instance: Suppose the two dining in a strange house, and Mrs. Skratdj
seated by the host, and contributing to the small-talk of the
dinner-table. Thus:--

"Oh yes. Very changeable weather indeed. It looked quite promising
yesterday morning in the town, but it began to rain at noon."

"A quarter-past eleven, my dear," Mr. Skratdj's voice would be heard
to say from several chairs down, in the corrective tones of a husband
and a father; "and really, my dear, so far from being a promising
morning, I must say it looked about as threatening as it well could.
Your memory is not always accurate in small matters, my love."

But Mrs. Skratdj had not been a wife and a mother for fifteen years,
to be snuffed out at one snap of the marital snuffers. As Mr. Skratdj
leaned forward in his chair, she leaned forward in hers, and defended
herself across the intervening couples.

"Why, my dear Mr. Skratdj, you said yourself the weather had not been
so promising for a week."

"What I said, my dear, pardon me, was that the barometer was higher
than it had been for a week. But, as you might have observed if these
details were in your line, my love, which they are not, the rise was
extraordinarily rapid, and there is no surer sign of unsettled
weather.--But Mrs. Skratdj is apt to forget these unimportant
trifles," he added, with a comprehensive smile round the dinner-table;
"her thoughts are very properly absorbed by the more important
domestic questions of the nursery."

"Now I think that's rather unfair on Mr. Skratdj's part," Mrs. Skratdj
would chirp, with a smile quite as affable and as general as her
husband's. "I'm sure he's _quite_ as forgetful and inaccurate as _I_
am. And I don't think _my_ memory is at _all_ a bad one."

"You forgot the dinner hour when we were going out to dine last week,
nevertheless," said Mr. Skratdj.

"And you couldn't help me when I asked you," was the sprightly retort.
"And I'm sure it's not like you to forget anything about _dinner_, my
dear."

"The letter was addressed to you," said Mr. Skratdj.

"I sent it to you by Jemima," said Mrs. Skratdj.

"I didn't read it," said Mr. Skratdj.

"Well, you burnt it," said Mrs. Skratdj; "and, as I always say,
there's nothing more foolish than burning a letter of invitation
before the day, for one is certain to forget."

"I've no doubt you always do say it," Mr. Skratdj remarked, with a
smile, "but I certainly never remember to have heard the observation
from your lips, my love."

"Whose memory's in fault there?" asked Mrs. Skratdj triumphantly; and
as at this point the ladies rose, Mrs. Skratdj had the last word.

Indeed, as may be gathered from this conversation, Mrs. Skratdj was
quite able to defend herself. When she was yet a bride, and young and
timid, she used to collapse when Mr. Skratdj contradicted her
statements and set her stories straight in public. Then she hardly
ever opened her lips without disappearing under the domestic
extinguisher. But in the course of fifteen years she had learned that
Mr. Skratdj's bark was a great deal worse than his bite. (If, indeed,
he had a bite at all.) Thus snubs that made other people's ears
tingle, had no effect whatever on the lady to whom they were
addressed, for she knew exactly what they were worth, and had by this
time become fairly adept at snapping in return. In the days when she
succumbed she was occasionally unhappy, but now she and her husband
understood each other, and having agreed to differ, they unfortunately
agreed also to differ in public.

Indeed, it was the bystanders who had the worst of it on these
occasions. To the worthy couple themselves the habit had become second
nature, and in no way affected the friendly tenour of their domestic
relations. They would interfere with each other's conversation,
contradicting assertions, and disputing conclusions for a whole
evening; and then, when all the world and his wife thought that these
ceaseless sparks of bickering must blaze up into a flaming quarrel as
soon as they were alone, they would bowl amicably home in a cab,
criticizing the friends who were commenting upon them, and as little
agreed about the events of the evening as about the details of any
other events whatever.

Yes, the bystanders certainly had the worst of it. Those who were near
wished themselves anywhere else, especially when appealed to. Those
who were at a distance did not mind so much. A domestic squabble at a
certain distance is interesting, like an engagement viewed from a
point beyond the range of guns. In such a position one may some day be
placed oneself! Moreover, it gives a touch of excitement to a dull
evening to be able to say _sotto voce_ to one's neighbour, "Do listen!
The Skratdjs are at it again!" Their unmarried friends thought a
terrible abyss of tyranny and aggravation must lie beneath it all, and
blessed their stars that they were still single, and able to tell a
tale their own way. The married ones had more idea of how it really
was, and wished in the name of common sense and good taste that
Skratdj and his wife would not make fools of themselves.

So it went on, however; and so, I suppose, it goes on still, for not
many bad habits are cured in middle age.

On certain questions of comparative speaking their views were never
identical. Such as the temperature being hot or cold, things being
light or dark, the apple-tarts being sweet or sour. So one day Mr.
Skratdj came into the room, rubbing his hands, and planting himself at
the fire with "Bitterly cold it is to-day, to be sure."

"Why, my dear William," said Mrs. Skratdj, "I'm sure you must have got
a cold; I feel a fire quite oppressive myself."

"You were wishing you'd a seal-skin jacket yesterday, when it wasn't
half as cold as it is to-day," said Mr. Skratdj.

"My dear William! Why, the children were shivering the whole day, and
the wind was in the north."

"Due east, Mrs. Skratdj."

"I know by the smoke," said Mrs. Skratdj, softly but decidedly.

"I fancy I can tell an east wind when I feel it," said Mr. Skratdj,
jocosely, to the company.

"I told Jemima to look at the weathercock," murmured Mrs. Skratdj.

"I don't care a fig for Jemima," said her husband.

On another occasion Mrs. Skratdj and a lady friend were conversing.

... "We met him at the Smiths'--a gentleman-like agreeable man, about
forty," said Mrs. Skratdj, in reference to some matter interesting to
both ladies.

"Not a day over thirty-five," said Mr. Skratdj, from behind his
newspaper.
