Kashmir troops followed, staggering along dragging the guns and
ammunition. The snow had ceased, but there was a bitter wind, and
the glare from the newly-fallen snow was terrible.

The guns, wheels, and ammunition had been told off to different
squads, who were relieved every fifty yards. In spite of the cold,
the men were pouring with perspiration. At one point in the march a
stream had to be crossed. This was done only with great difficulty,
and the rear guard did not reach the camping ground, at the mouth
of the Shandur Pass, until eleven at night; and even then the guns
had to be left a mile behind. Then the weary men had to cut fuel to
light fires. Many of them were too exhausted to attempt to cook
food, and at once went to sleep round the fires.

Early the next morning, the Pioneers and levies started to cross
the pass. The Kashmir men brought up the guns into camp but, though
the distance was short, the work took them the best part of the
day. The march was not more than ten miles; but Borradaile's party,
though they left Langar at daylight, did not reach Laspur till
seven o'clock at night. The slope over the pass was a gradual one,
and it was the depth of the snow, alone, that caused so much delay.
The men suffered greatly from thirst, but refused to eat the snow,
having a fixed belief that, if they did so, it would bring on
violent illness.

On arriving at the top of the pass, the Hunza levies skirmished
ahead. So unexpected was their arrival that the inhabitants of the
village were all caught and, naturally, they expressed their
extreme delight at this visit, and said that they would be glad to
help us in any way. They were taken at their word, and sent back to
bring up the guns. Their surprise was not feigned, for the
Chitralis were convinced that it would be impossible to cross the
pass, and letters were found stating that the British force was
lying at Ghizr.

The feat, indeed, was a splendid one. Some two hundred and fifty
men, Hindoos and Mussulmans had, at the worst time of the year,
brought two mountain guns, with their carriages and ammunition,
across a pass which was blocked for some twenty miles by deep, soft
snow; at the same time carrying their own rifles, eighty rounds of
ammunition, and heavy sheepskin coats. They had slept for two
nights on the snow and, from dawn till dark, had been at work to
the waist at every step, suffering acutely from the blinding glare
and the bitter wind. Stewart and Gough had both taken their turns
in carrying the guns, and both gave their snow glasses to sepoys
who were without them.

Borradaile's first step was to put the place in a state of defence,
and collect supplies and coolies. In the evening the guns were
brought in by the Kashmir troops, who were loudly cheered by the
Pioneers.

Lisle had borne his share in the hardships and had done so bravely,
making light of the difficulties and cheering his comrades by his
jokes. He had escaped the thirst which had been felt by so many,
and was one of those who volunteered to assist in erecting
defences, on the evening of their arrival at Laspur.

At two o'clock the next day, the rest of the force came into camp.
A reconnoitring party went out and, three miles ahead, came upon
the campfires of the enemy. They were seen, three miles farther
down the valley, engaged in building sangars; but as the force
consisted of only one hundred and fifty men, it was not thought
advisable to attack, and the troops consequently returned to camp.

The next day was spent in making all the arrangements for the
advance. Messengers were sent out to all the villages, calling on
the men to come in and make their submission. This they did, at the
same time bringing in supplies and, by night, a sufficient number
of native coolies had been secured to carry all the baggage,
including ammunition and guns.

A native chief came in with a levy of ninety native coolies. These
were found most valuable, both in the work and in obtaining
information. From their knowledge of the habits of the people, they
were able to discover where the natives had hidden their supplies;
which was generally in the most unlikely places.

The reconnoitring party had found that, some six miles on, the snow
ceased; and all looked forward with delight to the change. A small
garrison of about a hundred, principally levies, were left at
Laspur; with instructions to come on when the second party arrived.
The main force started at nine o'clock.

At Rahman the snow was left behind. Here they learned that the
enemy would certainly fight, between the next village and Mastuj.
Lieutenant Beynon went on with a party of levies and gained a hill,
from which he could view the whole of the enemy's position. Here he
could, with the aid of his glasses, count the men in each sangar,
and make out the paths leading up the cliffs from the river. When
he had concluded his observations, he returned and reported to
Colonel Kelly; and orders were issued for the attack, the next day.

The levies were expected to join the next morning. They were to
advance with a guide, and turn out the enemy from the top of a
dangerous shoot; from which they would be enabled to hurl down
rocks upon the main body, as it advanced. Beynon was to start, at
six, to work through the hills to the right rear of the enemy's
position. The main body were to move forward at nine o'clock.

Beynon encountered enormous difficulties and, in many places, he
and his men had to go on all fours to get along. He succeeded,
however, in driving off the enemy; who occupied a number of sangars
on the hills, and who could have greatly harassed the main body by
rolling down rocks upon them.

The enemy's principal position consisted of sangars blocking the
roads to the river, up to a fan-shaped alluvial piece of ground.
The road led across this ground to the foot of a steep shoot,
within five hundred yards of sangars on the opposite side of the
river and, as it was totally devoid of any sort of shelter, it
could be swept by avalanches of stones, by a few men placed on the
heights for the purpose.

When the troops arrived within eight hundred yards, volley firing
was opened; and the guns threw shells on the sangar on the extreme
right of the enemy's position. The enemy were soon seen leaving it,
and the fire was then directed on the next place, with the same
result. Meanwhile Beynon had driven down those of the enemy who
were posted on the hill; and general panic set in, the guns pouring
shrapnel into them until they were beyond range.

The action was over in an hour after the firing of the first shot.
The losses on our side were only one man severely, and three
slightly wounded. After a short rest, the force again proceeded,
and halted at a small village a mile and a half in advance. A ford
was found, and the column again started. Presently they met a
portion of the garrison who, finding the besieging force moving
away, came out to see the reason.

In the meantime, the baggage column was being fiercely attacked;
and an officer rode up, with the order that the 4th company were to
go back to their assistance. The company was standing in reserve,
eager to go forward to join in the fight and, without delay, they
now went off at the double.

They were badly wanted. The baggage was struggling up the last
kotal that the troops had passed, and the rear guard were engaged
in a fierce fight with a great number of the enemy; some of whom
were posted on a rise, while others came down so boldly that the
struggle was sometimes hand to hand. When the 4th company reached
the scene, they were at once scattered along the line of baggage.

For a time the enemy fell back but, seeing that the reinforcement
was not a strong one, they were emboldened to attack again. Their
assaults were repulsed with loss, but the column suffered severely
from the fire on the heights.

"We must stop here," the officer in command said, "or we shall not
get the baggage through before nightfall; and then they would have
us pretty well at their mercy. The Punjabis must go up and clear
the enemy off the hill, till the baggage has got through."

The Punjabis were soon gathered and, led by an English officer,
they advanced up the hill at a running pace, until they came to a
point so precipitous that they were sheltered from the enemy's
fire. Here they were halted for a couple of minutes to gain breath,
and then the order was given to climb the precipitous hill, which
was some seventy feet high.

It was desperate work, for there were points so steep that the men
were obliged to help each other up. Happily they were in shelter
until they got to within twenty feet of its summit, the intervening
distance being a steep slope. At this point they waited until the
whole party had come up; and then, with a cheer, dashed up the
slope.

The effect was instantaneous. The enemy, though outnumbering them
by five to one, could not for a moment withstand the line of
glittering bayonets; and fled precipitately, receiving volley after
volley from the Pioneers. As the situation was commanded by still
higher slopes, the men were at once ordered to form a breastwork,
from the stones that were lying about thickly. After a quarter of
an hour's severe work, this was raised to a height of three feet,
which was sufficient to enable the men to lie down in safety.

By the time the work was done, the enemy were again firing heavily,
at a distance of four hundred yards, their bullets pattering
against the stones. The Punjabis, however, did not return the fire
but, turning round, directed their attention to the enemy on the
other side of the valley, who were also in considerable force.

Illustration: He carefully aimed and fired.

"Here!" the officer said to Lisle, "do you think you can pick off
that fellow in the white burnoose? He is evidently an important
leader, and it is through his efforts that the enemy continues to
make such fierce attacks."

"I will try, sir," Lisle replied in Punjabi; "but I take it that
the range must be from nine hundred to a thousand yards, which is a
long distance for a shot at a single man."

Lying down at full length, he carefully aimed and fired. The
officer was watching through his field glass.

"That was a good shot," he said. "You missed the man, but you
killed a fellow closely following him. Lower your back sight a
trifle, and try again."

The next shot also missed, but the third was correctly aimed, and
the Pathan dropped to the ground. Some of his men at once carried
off his body. His fall created much dismay; and as, at that moment,
the whole of the Punjabis began to pepper his followers with volley
firing, they lost heart and quickly retired up the hill.

"Put up your sights to twelve hundred yards," the officer said.
"You must drive them higher up, if you can; for they do us as much
harm, firing from there, as they would lower down. Fire
independently. Don't hurry, but take good aim.

"That was a fine shot of yours, Mutteh Ghar," he said to Lisle, by
whose side he was still standing; for they had gone so far down the
slope that they were sheltered from the fire behind. "But for his
fall, the baggage guard would have had to fight hard, for he was
evidently inciting his men to make a combined rush. His fall,
however, took the steam out of them altogether. How came you to be
such a good shot?"

"My father was fond of shooting," Lisle said, "and I used often to
go out with him."

"Well, you benefited by his teaching, anyhow," the officer said. "I
doubt if there is any man in the regiment who could have picked off
that fellow, at such a distance, in three shots. That has really
been the turning point of the day.

"See, the baggage is moving on again. In another hour they will be
all through.

"Now, lads, turn your attention to those fellows on the hill
behind. As we have not been firing at them for some time, they will
probably think we are short of ammunition. Let us show them that
our pouches are still pretty full! We must drive them farther away
for, if we do not, we shall get it hot when we go down to join the
rear guard. Begin with a volley, and then continue with independent
firing, at four hundred yards."

The tribesmen were standing up against the skyline.

"Now, be careful. At this distance, everyone ought to bring down
his man."

Although that was not accomplished, a number of men were seen to
fall, and the rest retired out of sight. Presently heads appeared,
as the more resolute crawled back to the edge of the crest; and a
regular duel now ensued. Four hundred yards is a short range with a
Martini rifle, and it was not long before the Punjabis proved that
they were at least as good shots as the tribesmen. They had the
advantage, too, of the breastwork behind which to load, and had
only to lift their heads to fire; whereas the Pathans were obliged
to load as they lay.

Presently the firing ceased, but the many black heads dotting the
edge of the crest testified to the accurate aim of the troops. The
tribesmen, seeing that their friends on the other side of the
valley had withdrawn, and finding that their own fire did not avail
to drive their assailants back, had at last moved off.

For half an hour the Pioneers lay, watching the progress of the
baggage and, when the last animal was seen to pass, they retired,
taking up their position behind the rear guard. The column arrived
in camp just as night fell.

"That young Bullen can shoot," the officer who commanded the
company said, that evening, as the officers gathered round their
fire. "When, as I told you, we had driven off the fellows on the
right of the valley, things were looking bad on the left, where a
chief in a white burnoose was working up a strong force to make a
rush. I put young Bullen on to pick him off. The range was about
nine hundred and fifty yards. His first shot went behind the chief.
I did not see where the next shot struck, but I have no doubt it
was close to him. Anyhow, the third rolled him over. I call that
splendid shooting, especially as it was from a height, which makes
it much more difficult to judge distance.

"The chief's fall took all the pluck out of the tribesmen and, as
we opened upon them in volleys, they soon went to the right about.
We peppered them all the way up the hill and, as I could see from
my glasses, killed a good many of them. However, it took all the
fight out of them, and they made no fresh attempt to harass the
column."

"The young fellow was a first-rate shot," the colonel said. "If you
remember he carried off several prizes, and certainly shot better
than most of us; though there were one or two of the men who were
his match. You did not speak to him in English, I hope, Villiers?"

"No, no, colonel. You said that he was to go on as if we did not
know him, till we reached Chitral; and of course spoke to him in
Punjabi.

"One thing is certain: if he had not brought down that chief, the
enemy would have been among the baggage in a minute or two; so his
shot was really the turning point of the fight."

"I will make him a present of twenty rupees, in the morning," the
colonel said. "That is what I should have given to any sepoy who
made so useful a shot, and it will be rather fun to see how he
takes it."

"You will see he will take it without winking," the major said. "He
will know very well that any hesitation would be noticed, and he
will take it as calmly as if he were a native."

Accordingly the next morning, as the regiment fell in, the colonel
called Lisle out from the ranks.

"Mutteh Ghar," he said, "Lieutenant Villiers reports that you did
great service, yesterday, in picking off the leader of the Pathans
who were attacking the column from the left. Here are twenty
rupees, as a token of my satisfaction."

Lisle did not hesitate for a moment, but took off his turban, and
held it out for the colonel to drop the money into it; murmuring
his thanks as he did so. Then he put on his turban again, saluted,
and retired.

"I told you he would not hesitate, colonel," the major laughed.
"The young beggar was as cool as a cucumber, and I doubt if we
should catch him napping, however much we tried."

"He is a fine young fellow, major, and will make a splendid
officer. I shall be disappointed, indeed, if I fail to get him a
commission."

"I don't think you are likely to fail, colonel. The young fellow
has really distinguished himself greatly. Even without that, the
fact that he enlisted to go through the campaign, and took his
share with the troops both in their fighting and their hardships,
would show that he really deserved a commission; even putting aside
the fact of his father's death. It would be a thousand pities if
such a promising young fellow should have to waste the next three
years of his life, cramming up classics and mathematics. It would
be like putting a young thoroughbred into a cart."

"That is so," the colonel said; "but there is no answering for the
War Office, or saying what view they may take of any given subject.
However, if we get first to Chitral, as I feel sure we shall do, I
suppose I shall be in high favour; and they won't like to refuse so
small a request, backed as it is by the facts of the case."

At half-past five the force marched into Mastuj, and found the
garrison comfortably settled there, and well fed. The fort was a
square building, with a tower at each corner and at the gateway.
Late in the evening the baggage came in. The enemy had made no
serious attack upon the place; and Moberley, who was in command,
had even been able to send a force to Buni, whence they brought off
Jones and the survivors of Ross's force.

The next day a fatigue party were sent out to destroy the enemy's
sangars and, on the same day, the remaining half of the Pioneers
came up. The day was spent by those in the fort in examining the
state of supplies; and despatching messengers to all the villages
round ordering them to send in supplies, and coolies to carry the
baggage.

On the morning of the 1st of April, Beynon was sent on to
reconnoitre the enemy's position; and returned with the report that
it was a strong one. They had got very close to it, and had a fair
view of the position. Next morning the force started, the levies
being ahead. It was a fine, bright morning. They crossed the river
on a bridge built by the sappers.

When they reached the maidan, they found that it was a gentle,
grassy slope. The levies were in advance, with two companies in the
firing line, two in support, and the Kashmir company in reserve, In
this order they pushed on, until they came under the fire of the
sangars. Stewart brought his guns into action. After a time, the
fire of the levies drove the enemy from the nearest sangar; while
three of the Pioneer companies paid attention to another sangar.

Beynon was sent on, to find some way down into the valley. He found
no path leading to the nullah. The drop from the edge was sheer,
for some seventy feet; then came a ledge from which he thought they
could scramble down to the edge of the stream, and thence to the
opposite side, where he noticed a track. With this information, he
went back to report to Colonel Kelly.

The sappers were brought up and, also, a reserve company of Kashmir
troops. When Beynon got back to the nullah, he found the Pioneers
extended along the edge, and Oldham's sappers already at work.
These, aided by ropes and scaling ladders, got down to the ledge;
and from this point they and Oldham slung themselves down to the
bed of the stream, by the same means. A few sappers had followed,
when a box of dynamite exploded with a violent detonation, and the
rest of the company were called back.

Lisle happened to be stationed at the point where the descent was
made, and when the explosion took place he seized the rope and,
sliding down, joined the two officers and the eleven sappers who
had passed. They scrambled to the opposite side, and saw that the
Pioneers were moving down the nullah towards the river, while the
levies were nearing the sangars. The enemy were seen bolting, and
the little party opened fire upon them. The sappers were armed only
with carbines, which were uncertain at so long a range; but Lisle,
with his rifle, brought down an enemy at every shot.

"That is a good one," he muttered, as a mounted officer at whom he
had aimed fell from his horse.

He was startled when the man behind him said:

"Hillo, young fellow, who on earth are you?

"I will tell you after it is done, sir," Lisle said. "But I hope
you will keep my secret."

Some of the levies and a few Pioneers now came up, and they learned
what had been the cause of the explosion. The Kashmir company had
not followed and, as the sappers were at work, they had laid down
cakes of dynamite at the head of the pass. One of the enemy's
bullets striking these had ignited them, and the troops there were
called upon to retire. The enemy, seeing our men falling back,
rushed out of their sangars and opened fire; but were speedily
driven in again by volleys from the Pioneers. Just then the levies
showed on the ridge, and the Pioneers moved down the nullah, by a
goat track they had found.

The battle was now over, and a company of Pioneers were sent ahead
to the next village, while the rest of the force encamped. When all
were settled down, Lisle saw Lieutenant Moberley walking along the
lines of the regiment, and evidently looking for someone. Lisle
hesitated a minute. If he remained quiet he might not be recognized
by the officer, but in that case the latter might report what he
had heard, and an investigation might be made. He therefore went
forward to the officer.

"Ah!" the latter said, "you are the man I heard speak in English."

"It was very foolish, sir, but I had no idea that I should be
overheard."

"Well, who are you, and how in the world is it that you are a
private in the Pioneers?"

"My father was Captain Bullen, who was killed in a native raid. I
remained with the regiment for a time, because there was no
opportunity of my being sent home. I wanted to see the campaign, so
I took the place of a sepoy who had died and, as I speak the
language perfectly, it has never been suspected that I was anything
but what I seem."

"Well, lad, I will keep your secret for a time, but when we get to
Chitral I think it will be my duty to tell the colonel; especially
as I shall report that you were with me, and behaved with the
greatest coolness, accounting for at least eight of the enemy. The
campaign will be over, then, for we know that the Peshawar column
are also near Chitral, so that there will be no chance of further
fighting.

"I don't suppose you will be sent home. You have shown yourself a
man, and I have no doubt that Colonel Kelly will make some mention
in his report of your conduct, and strongly recommend you for a
