down at the bows; so they rigged the pumps as quickly as possible.
While working them one of the men cried out:

"God have mercy! he comes again!"

This was too true.  The whale had turned, and was now bearing down on
them at full speed, leaving a white track of foam behind him.  Rushing
at the ship like a battering-ram, he hit her fair on the weather bow
and stove it in, after which he dived and disappeared.  The horrified
men took to their boats at once, and in _ten minutes_ the ship went
down.

The condition of the men thus left in three open boats far out upon the
sea, without provisions or shelter, was terrible indeed.  Some of them
perished, and the rest, after suffering the severest hardships, reached
a low island called Ducies on the 20th of December.  It was a mere
sand-bank, which supplied them only with water and sea-fowl.  Still
even this was a mercy, for which they had reason to thank God; for in
cases of this kind one of the evils that seamen have most cause to
dread is the want of water.

Three of the men resolved to remain on this sand-bank, for dreary and
uninhabited though it was, they preferred to take their chance of being
picked up by a passing ship rather than run the risks of crossing the
wide ocean in open boats, so their companions bade them a sorrowful
farewell, and left them.  But this island is far out of the usual track
of ships.  The poor fellows have never since been heard of.

It was the 27th of December when the three boats left the sand-bank
with the remainder of the men, and began a voyage of two thousand
miles, towards the island of Juan Fernandez.  The mate's boat was
picked up, about three months after, by the ship _Indian_ of London,
with only three living men in it.  About the same time the captain's
boat was discovered, by the _Dauphin_ of Nantucket, with only two men
living; and these unhappy beings had only sustained life by feeding on
the flesh of their dead comrades.  The third boat must have been lost,
for it was never heard of; and out of the whole crew of twenty men,
only five returned home to tell their eventful story.

Before resuming the thread of my narrative, I must not omit to mention,
that in the head of the sperm whale there is a large cavity or hole
called the "case", which contains pure oil that does not require to be
melted, but can be baled at once into casks and stowed away.  This is
the valuable spermaceti from which the finest candles are made.  One
whale will sometimes yield fifteen barrels of spermaceti oil from the
"case" of its head.  A large fish will produce from eighty to a hundred
barrels of oil altogether, sometimes much more; and when whalemen
converse with each other about the size of whales, they speak of
"eighty-barrel fish", and so on.

Although I have written much about the fighting powers of the sperm
whale, it must not be supposed that whales are by nature fond of
fighting.  On the contrary, the "right" whale is a timid creature, and
never shows fight except in defence of its young.  And the sperm whale
generally takes to flight when pursued.  In fact, most of the accidents
that happen to whalemen occur when the wounded monster is lashing the
water in blind terror and agony.

The whale has three bitter enemies, much smaller, but much bolder than
himself, and of these he is terribly afraid.  They are: the swordfish,
the thrasher, and the killer.  The first of these, the sword-fish, has
a strong straight horn or sword projecting from his snout, with which
he boldly attacks and pierces the whale.  The thrasher is a strong
fish, twenty feet long, and of great weight.  Its method of attack is
to leap out of the water on the whale's back, and deal it a tremendous
blow with its powerful tail.

The sword-fish and thrasher sometimes act together in the attack; the
first stabbing him below, and the second belabouring him above, while
the whale, unable, or too frightened to fight, rushes through the
water, and even leaps its whole gigantic length into the air in its
endeavours to escape.  When a whale thus leaps his whole length out of
the water, the sailors say he "breaches", and breaching is a common
practice.  They seem to do it often for amusement as well as from
terror.

But the most deadly of the three enemies is the killer.  This is itself
a kind of small whale, but it is wonderfully strong, swift, and bold.
When one of the killers gets into the middle of a school of whales, the
frightened creatures are seen flying in all directions.  His mode of
attack is to seize his big enemy by the jaw, and hold on until he is
exhausted and dies.




CHAPTER VII

TOM'S WISDOM--ANOTHER GREAT BATTLE

One day I was standing beside the windlass, listening to the
conversation of five or six of the men, who were busy sharpening
harpoons and cutting-knives, or making all kinds of toys and things out
of whales' bones.  We had just finished cutting in and trying out our
third whale, and as it was not long since we reached the
fishing-ground, we were in high hopes of making a good thing of it that
season; so that everyone was in good spirits, from the captain down to
the youngest man in the ship.

Tom Lokins was smoking his pipe, and Tom's pipe was an uncommonly black
one, for he smoked it very often.  Moreover, Tom's pipe was uncommonly
short, so short that I always wondered how he escaped burning the end
of his nose.  Indeed, some of the men said that the redness of the end
of Tom's nose was owing to its being baked like a brick by the heat of
his pipe.  Tom took this pipe from his mouth, and while he was pushing
down the tobacco with the end of his little finger, he said:

"D'ye know, lads, I've been thinkin'----"

"No, have ye?" cried one of the men, interrupting him with a look of
pretended surprise.  "Well now, I do think, messmates, that we should
ax the mate to make a note o' that in the log, for it's not often that
Tom Lokins takes to thinkin'."

There was a laugh at this, but Tom, turning with a look of contempt to
the man who interrupted him, replied:

"I'll tell you wot it is, Bill Blunt, if all the thoughts that _you_
think, and especially the jokes that you utter, wos put down in the
log, they'd be so heavy that I do believe they would sink the ship!"

"Well, well," cried Bill, joining in the laugh against himself, "if
they did, _your_ jokes would be so light and triflin' that I do believe
they'd float her again.  But what have you been a-thinkin' of, Tom?"

"I've been thinkin'," said Tom slowly, "that if a whale makes his
breakfast entirely off them little things that you can hardly see when
you get 'em into a tumbler--I forget how the captain calls 'em--wot a
_tree-mendous_ heap of 'em he must eat in the course of a year!"

"Thousands of 'em, I suppose," said one of the men.

"Thousands!" cried Tom, "I should rather say billions of them."

"How much is billions, mate?" enquired Bill.

"I don't know," answered Tom.  "Never could find out.  You see it's
heaps upon heaps of thousands, for the thousands come first and the
billions afterwards; but when I've thought uncommon hard, for a long
spell at a time, I always get confused, because millions comes in
between, d'ye see, and that's puzzlin'."

"I think I could give you some notion about these things," said Fred
Borders, who had been quietly listening all the time, but never putting
in a word, for, as I have said, Fred was a modest bashful man and
seldom spoke much.  But we had all come to notice that when Fred spoke,
he had always something to say worth hearing; and when he did speak he
spoke out boldly enough.  We had come to have feelings of respect for
our young shipmate, for he was a kind-hearted lad, and we saw by his
conversation that he had been better educated than the most of us, so
all our tongues stopped as the eyes of the party turned on him.

"Come, Fred, let's hear it then," said Tom.

"It's not much I have to tell," began Fred, "but it may help to make
your minds clearer on this subject.  On my first voyage to the whale
fishery (you know, lads, this is my second voyage) I went to the
Greenland Seas.  We had a young doctor aboard with us--quite a youth;
indeed he had not finished his studies at college, but he was cleverer,
for all that, than many an older man that had gone through his whole
course.  I do believe that the reason of his being so clever was, that
he was for ever observing things, and studying them, and making notes,
and trying to find out reasons.  He was never satisfied with knowing a
thing; he must always find out _why_ it was.  One day I heard him ask
the captain what it was that made the sea so green in some parts of
those seas.  Our captain was an awfully stupid man.  So long as he got
plenty oil he didn't care two straws for the reason of anything.  The
young doctor had been bothering him that morning with a good many
questions, so when he asked him what made the sea green, he answered
sharply, 'I suppose it makes itself green, young man,' and then he
turned from him with a fling.

"The doctor laughed, and came forward among the men, and began to tell
us stories and ask questions.  Ah! he was a real hearty fellow; he
would tell you all kinds of queer things, and would pump you dry of all
you knew in no time.  Well, but the thing I was going to tell you was
this.  One of the men said to him he had heard that the greenness of
the Greenland Sea was caused by the little things like small bits of
jelly on which the whales feed.  As soon as he heard this he got a
bucket and hauled some sea-water aboard, and for the next ten days he
was never done working away with the sea-water; pouring it into
tumblers and glasses; looking through it by daylight and by lamplight;
tasting it, and boiling it, and examining it with a microscope."

"What's a microscope?" enquired one of the men.

"Don't you know?" said Tom Lokins, "why, it's a glass that makes little
things seem big, when ye look through it.  I've heerd that say beasts
that are so uncommon small you that can't see them at all are made to
come into sight and look quite big by means o' this glass.  But I can't
myself say that it's true."

"But I can," said Fred, "for I have seen it with my own eyes.  Well,
after a good while, I made bold to ask the young doctor what he had
found out.

"'I've found,' said he, 'that the greenness of these seas is in truth
caused by uncountable numbers of medusae----'"

"Ha! that's the word," shouted Tom Lokins, "Medoosy, that's wot the
captain calls 'em.  Heave ahead, Fred."

"Well then," continued Fred, "the young doctor went on to tell me that
he had been counting the matter to himself very carefully, and he found
that in every square mile of sea-water there were living about eleven
quadrillions, nine hundred and ninety-nine trillions of these little
creatures!"

"Oh! hallo! come now!" we all cried, opening our eyes very wide indeed.

"But, I say, how much is that?" enquired Tom Lokins.

"Ah! that's just what I said to the young doctor, and he said to me,
'I'll tell you what, Fred Borders, no man alive understands how much
that is, and what's more, no man ever will; but I'll give you _some
notion_ of what it means'; and so he told me how long it would take
forty thousand men to count that number of eleven quadrillions, nine
hundred and ninety-nine trillions, each man of the forty thousand
beginning 'one ', 'two', 'three', and going on till the sum of the
whole added together would make it up.  Now, how long d'ye think it
would take them?--guess."

Fred Borders smiled as he said this, and looked round the circle of men.

"I know," cried one; "it would take the whole forty thousand _a week_
to do it."

"Oh! nonsense, they could do it easy in two days," said another.

"That shows how little you know about big numbers," observed Tom
Lokins, knocking the ashes out of his pipe.  "I'm pretty sure it
couldn't be done in much less than six months; workin' hard all day,
and makin' allowance for only one hour off for dinner."

"You're all wrong, shipmates," said Fred Borders.  "That young doctor
told me that if they'd begun work at the day of creation they would
only have just finished the job last year!"

"Oh! gammon, you're jokin'," cried Bill Blunt.

"No, I'm not," said Fred, "for I was told afterwards by an old
clergyman that the young doctor was quite right, and that anyone who
was good at 'rithmetic could work the thing out for himself in less
than half an hour."

Just as Fred said this there came a loud cry from the mast-head that
made us all spring to our feet like lightning.

"There she blows!  There she breaches!"

The captain was on deck in a moment.

"Where away?" he cried.

"On the lee beam, sir.  Sperm whale, about two miles off.  There she
blows!"

Every man was at his station in a moment; for, after being some months
out, we became so used to the work, that we acted together like a piece
of machinery.  But our excitement never abated in the least.

"Sing out when the ship heads for her."

"Aye, aye, sir."

"Keep her away!" said the captain to the man at the helm.  "Bob
Ledbury, hand me the spy-glass."

"Steady," from the mast-head.

"Steady it is," answered the man at the helm.

While we were all looking eagerly out ahead we heard a thundering snore
behind us, followed by a heavy splash.  Turning quickly round, we saw
the flukes of an enormous whale sweeping through the air not more than
six hundred yards astern of us.

"Down your helm," roared the captain; "haul up the mainsail, and square
the yards.  Call all hands."

"All hands, ahoy!" roared Bill Blunt, in a voice of thunder, and in
another moment every man in the ship was on deck.

"Hoist and swing the boats," cried the captain.  "Lower away."

Down went the boats into the water; the men were into their places
almost before you could wink, and we pulled away from the ship just as
the whale rose the second time, about half a mile away to leeward.

From the appearance of this whale we felt certain that it was one of
the largest we had yet seen, so we pulled after it with right good
will.  I occupied my usual place in the captain's boat, next the bow
