returned in the afternoon and, in reply to the latter's question,
he acknowledged at once that the only thing he could see was to
take to the forest, until the active search for him had ceased.

"You would find it difficult to maintain yourself. I have thought
of a better way than that. I am acquainted with a Phongee, who
lives in a temple in a lonely spot, four miles away. He is a good
man, though somewhat strange in his habits; and I feel sure that,
on my recommendation, he would take you in. There would be little
chance of your being discovered there. You could not go dressed as
you are, but must disguise yourself as a peasant; though it might
be well to retain your present attire, which may be useful to you,
afterwards. I fear that you will fare badly with him, in the way of
food; there will be enough to eat, but it will be of the simplest."

"So that there is enough to keep life together, it matters little
what it is."

"Then that is settled.

"Now, about making your escape from here. Your door is closely
barred, at night; and there is no window save those four little
holes, high up in the wall, which scarce a bird could get through."

"I could cut through the thatch above," Stanley said, "if I had but
something that I could stand upon to do so. There are some bamboos
lying just at the bottom of the steps. With these and some cord I
might make a sort of ladder, and should then be able to get at the
thatch."

"I will bring you some cord, tomorrow, for that and to let yourself
down to the ground. Then I will arrange where to meet you, and will
guide you out of the town and take you to the priest. I will bring
a disguise for you, and some stain for your body and arms for, as a
peasant, you would be naked to the waist. I can think of nothing
better."

"I thank you most heartily," Stanley said, "and trust that you may
get into no trouble for the kindness that you have shown me."

"There is no fear of that, my friend. No one will know that I have
been away from the town. I am greatly afraid that this will be all
that I shall be able to do for you; for I am told that I am to go
down the river with the next batch of troops, which will start in
three days. I have only been informed of it since I saw you this
morning. Had it not been for you I should have been glad; for it is
in war time, only, that one can obtain honour and promotion."

"I am sorry that you are going, sir. I shall miss your kindness,
sorely; but I can understand your desire to go to the front. It is
the same with us; when there is a war, every officer and soldier
hopes that his regiment will be sent there. However, I shall see
you again.

"Has Bandoola's army moved yet?"

"No; nor do I think that it will do so. It is a long march down to
Rangoon from Ramoo; and I believe that he will remain where he is,
until he sees how matters go at Rangoon. As soon as your people are
driven out, he will be joined by a great army, and will march to
Dacca. There our troops from the north will join him; and then he
will go to India, we think."

"I fancy," Stanley said with a smile, "if he waits until we are
turned out from Rangoon, his stay at Ramoo will be a long one."

The next day the officer brought several yards of strong cloth,
such as was worn by the peasants; a piece of muslin to make the
circular band that was worn by the lower class, instead of a
complete turban; and a lot of horse hair to be worn on the top of
the head.

"Now," he said, "strip to the waist, and I will dye your body. I
have dyes of two colours here; one for the skin, and the other to
draw lines on the face, so as to make you look older; and with this
I can also imitate tattoo marks on your chest and shoulders. Here
is a long knife, such as everyone wears, and here is the cord.

"As soon as it is getting dark you must carry up two of the bamboo
poles, taking care that no one observes you do so. There is seldom
anyone in the courtyard. I have had the knife sharpened, and it
will cut through the thatch, easily enough. When you get away, walk
straight to the market that lies nearest to us. I will be at its
entrance. It will take you, I suppose, two hours to make your
ladder and get out. You cannot begin until the guard closes your
door. You tell me he never comes in."

"No, he brings the last meal an hour before sunset. I generally sit
on the top of the steps, till he comes up to lock the door, which
is about nine o'clock; and I do not see him again until he unbars
the door in the morning. I should not think that it will take as
long as two hours to make the ladder, and cut the thatch; at any
rate, by eleven I ought to join you.

"I suppose the gates are open."

"Oh, yes! They are never closed, though of course they would be, if
an enemy were near. There is no guard anywhere."

After staining Stanley's skin, the officer waited a quarter of an
hour for it to dry thoroughly; and then proceeded to draw lines on
his face, across the forehead, and from the corners of his eyes;
and then spent nearly an hour in executing rough tattoo marks on
his body and arms.

"This dye is very good, and will last for weeks before it begins to
fade. I will bring with me another bottle, tonight, so that you can
at least re-dye your skin.

"Here is some wax. You must turn your hair up from the neck, and
plaster it in its place with it. The turban will prevent anyone
seeing how short the hair is. Here is a little bottle of black dye,
with which you had better colour it, before fixing it with the
wax."

Stanley's hair had not been cut for some time before he had been
captured by the Burmese and, in the two months that had since
elapsed, it had grown very long; and could therefore be turned up
as the officer suggested. Putting on his usual garments, he sat at
his place, at the door of the cell, until the guard brought up his
evening meal. Having eaten this, he dyed his hair and, half an hour
later, turned it up, plastering it with wax, and tied a bit of
fibre round where the turban would come.

By this time it was getting dusk. He sat at the door at the top of
the steps, until he saw that the courtyard was deserted; the guard
at the gate having gone outside, to enjoy the coolness of the air.
Then he ran down the steps, took two bamboo poles about ten feet in
length, and two short pieces of the same wood no thicker than his
finger and, hurrying up the steps with them, laid them down against
the side of the room. Then he went to the steps again, and sat
there until he saw the guard coming across to fasten his door; when
he went in and, as soon as he heard the bars put up, began his
preparations.

First he lashed the short pieces across the ends of the two
bamboos, so as to keep them a foot apart; then he put ratlines
across, and soon had the ladder completed. He made up his clothes
into a bundle, wrapped the rough cloth round his waist, adjusted
the knot of horse hair on the top of his head, and fastened it
there with wax. He wound the turban round below, and his disguise
was complete.

Fixing the ladder against the wall he climbed it, and it was not
long before he cut a hole through the thatch of sufficient size to
pass out. The work had taken him longer than he had expected, for
it had to be done in absolute darkness; however, he was sure that
he was well within his time. Fastening the end of the rope to one
of the bamboo rafters, he descended the ladder and picked up his
bundle; then climbed up again, got halfway out of the hole, and
listened intently. Everything was quiet in the street and, in
another minute, he stood on the ground.

When he turned into the principal street, there were still many
people about. Sounds of music and singing came from the windows,
for the Burmese are very fond of music, and often pass the whole
night in playing and singing. There was no risk whatever of
detection now, and he stepped briskly along until he came to the
open space, with its rows of little thatched huts. Here he paused
for a minute, and the officer stepped out from behind a house and
joined him.

"I was not sure at first that it was you," he said. "Your disguise
is excellent. You had better follow me, now, until we get beyond
the busy streets."

Keeping some twenty yards behind his guide, Stanley went on until,
after nearly half an hour's walking, they passed through a gate in
the city walls. He now closed up to the officer and, after another
half-hour's walk across a cultivated country, they entered a
forest. The ground now rose steadily and, after keeping on for two
miles, they emerged from the trees at the top of a hill. The space
had been cleared of timber, but it was nearly covered with bushes
and young trees. In the centre were the ruins of a temple, that had
evidently existed long before the Burmese dynasty occupied the
country, and had been erected by some older race. It was roofless;
the walls had, in places, fallen; and the ruins were covered with
vegetation.

The Burman ascended some broken steps, entered the temple, and
crossed to one of the opposite corners. A dim light was burning in
a small apartment, which had been roofed with thatch. A man was
lying, dressed, on a heap of leaves at one side. He started up as
the officer entered.

"Who is it who comes here at this hour?" he asked.

"Thekyn," the officer answered.

"I am glad to see you," the Phongee said, "whatever may bring you
here. You have not fallen into trouble, I hope?"

"In no way, good priest. I am starting, in two days, down the river
to fight the barbarians; but before I go, I want you to do me a
favour."

The Phongee smiled.

"Beyond naming you in my prayers, Thekyn, there is but little that
a hermit can do for any man."

"Not so, in this case," the officer said. "I have one here with me
who needs rest, and concealment. I would rather that you did not
ask who he is. He has done no crime, and yet he is in danger; and
for a month, maybe, he needs a shelter. Will you give it him, for
my sake?"

"Assuredly I will," the priest said. "Your father was one of my
dearest friends, in the days when I dwelt in the city. I would
gladly do all in my power for his son, and this is but a small
thing that you ask. Let him enter."

Stanley went in. The priest took down the little lamp, from a shelf
on which it stood, and held it near the lad's face. Then he turned,
with a smile, to Thekyn:

"The painting is but clumsily done," he said, "though maybe it
would pass without close examination. He is a stranger, and comes
of a race unknown to me but, as you said, it matters not to me who
he is; suffice that he is a friend of yours. He is welcome to a
share of my shelter, and my food; though the shelter is rough, and
the food somewhat scanty. Of late few, indeed, have sought me for,
as I hear, most of the men have gone down to the war."

"I have brought you some food," the officer said; for Stanley had
observed that he also carried a bundle, a larger one than his own.
"Here is a supply of rice, that will last for some time; and this,
with your offerings, will suffice to keep things going. My friend
is not, like you, bound by his religion not to take life; and I
know that snakes are very plentiful round here."

Snakes had formed a frequent article of his diet, since he had been
captured; and Stanley had lost the repugnance to them that he at
first felt, so the prospect of their forming the staple of his food
was not disagreeable to him. It would also afford him some
employment to search for and kill them.

"I shall be well content," he said, "with anything that I can get,
and trust that I shall be no burden upon you."

"You will assuredly be none," the priest replied. "Here must be at
least thirty pounds of rice which, alone, would keep two men alive
for a month. As regards the snakes, though I may not kill them, I
may eat them when killed; and indeed, there are few things better.
In truth, I should not be sorry to have some of the creatures out
of the way; for they swarm round here so thickly that I have to pay
great heed, when I walk, lest I step upon them."

"Have you been troubled with robbers, of late, father?" Thekyn
asked.

"They trouble me not at all," the priest said. "Men come,
sometimes. They may be robbers, or they may not. I ask no
questions. They sometimes bring fruit and other offerings, and I
know that I need not fear them. I have nought to lose, save my
life; and he would be indeed an evil man who would dare to lift his
finger against a priest--one who harms not anyone, and is ready to
share what food he has with any man who comes to him hungry."

"Well, father, I will say goodbye. I must be back to the city
before men are about, as I would not that my absence should be
discovered."

"Peace be with you, my son. May you come back safe from the wars.
My prayers will be said for you, night and morning.

"Be in no uneasiness as to your friend. If any should ask me about
my companion, I shall reply that he is one who has undertaken to
rid me of some of the snakes, who dispute the possession of this
place with me."

Thekyn motioned to Stanley to come outside the hut with him and,
when he did so, handed to him a small but heavy bag.

"This is lead," he said. "You will need it, when you start on your
journey down the country. There are eight pounds of it and, from
what you have seen in the market, you will know how much food can
be got for a small amount of lead. I would that I could do more for
you, and assist your flight."

"You have done much indeed, very much and, should I regain my
friends, I will endeavour to do as much by one of your countrymen,
for your sake. I hope that, when this war is over, I may meet you
again."

"I hope so," the Burman said warmly. "I cannot but think that you
will succeed in getting away."

"My son," the old priest said, when Stanley returned to his cell,
"I am going to my prayers. I always rise at this hour, and pray
till morning; therefore you may as well lay yourself down on these
leaves. There is another cell, like this, in the opposite corner of
the temple. In the morning you can cut boughs, and roof it like
this; and make your bed there. There is no room for another, here;
and it will doubtless be more pleasant for you to have a place to
yourself, where you can go and come as you like; for in the day
women come up to consult me, and ask for my prayers--but mind how
you enter it for the first time as, like as not, there will be
snakes sheltering there."

Stanley lay awake for a time, listening to the monotonous voice of
the priest as he repeated his prayers; but his senses soon
wandered, and he slept soundly till daybreak.

His first step was to cut a stout stick, and he then proceeded to
the other cell, which was partially blocked up with stone from the
fallen roof. It took him two hours to carry this stuff out, and he
killed no less than nine snakes that he disturbed in his work. The
prospect of sleeping in a place so frequented was not a pleasant
one, especially as the cell had no door to it; and he resolved at
once to erect some sort of bed place, where he might be beyond
their reach. For this purpose he cut two poles, each three or four
inches longer than the cell. One end of each he sharpened, and
drove in between the interstices of the stone, at a distance of
some two feet and a half apart and four feet from the ground. The
other ends he hammered with a heavy stone against the opposite
wall, until they would go down no farther. Then he split up some
more wood and lashed strips, almost touching each other, underneath
the two poles, by the aid of some strong creepers. Then he filled
up the bed place, between the poles, with dry leaves.

One end of the bed was some inches higher than the other. This was
immaterial, and he felt satisfied that even the craftiest snake
could not reach him.

As to the roof, he was by no means particular about it. In this
part of Burma the rainfall is very small, the inundations being the
effect of heavy rains in the distant hill country which, as they
come down, raise the level of the rivers, in some cases, as much as
eighteen feet, and overflow the low-lying country.

Before beginning to construct the bed, he had carried the snakes
into the Phongee; after first cutting off their heads which, as he
knew, the Burmans never touch.

"This is good, indeed, my son," the priest said. "Here we have our
breakfast and dinner. I will boil some rice, and fry four of them
for breakfast."

The bed was but half completed, when he heard the priest sound a
bell. It was doubtless used as a call to prayer. However, Stanley
rightly conjectured that, in this case, it was a summons to a meal;
and was soon seated on the ground by the side of the priest. Little
was said at breakfast, which Stanley enjoyed heartily.

"So my friend Thekyn is starting for the wars. What think you of
it, my son? Shall we easily overpower these barbarians? We have
never met them in war before and, doubtless, their methods of
fighting are different from ours."

"Quite different. Their men are trained as soldiers. They act as
one man, while the Burmese fight each for himself. Then they have
cannon with them, which they can drag about quickly, and use with
great effect. Although they are few, in comparison with the armies
going down to attack them, the latter will find it very difficult
work to turn them out of Rangoon."

"Do you think that they will beat us, then?"

"That I cannot say, but I should not be surprised if it were to
prove so."

"The Burmese have never been beaten yet," the priest said. "They
have been victorious over all their enemies."

"The Burmese are very brave," Stanley agreed, "but, hitherto, they
have only fought against people less warlike than themselves. Now
they have to deal with a nation that has made war a study, and
which always keeps up a large army of men who are trained to fight,
and who spend all their time in military exercises. It is not that
they are stronger than the Burmese, for the Burmese are very strong
men; but only that men who are trained to act together must,
necessarily, possess a great advantage over those who have had no
such training--who simply take up arms for the occasion and, when
the trouble is over, return to their homes and lay them by, until
called out to fight again.

"Besides, their weapons are better than yours; and they have many
cannon which, by practice, they can load and fire very quickly; and
each of which, when the armies are near each other, can fire fifty
or sixty bullets at once."

"I have heard a strange story that the barbarians have a ship
without sails, with a great chimney that pours out quantities of
black smoke, and a wheel on each side and, as the wheels move
round, the vessel can go straight up the river against the tide,
even if the wind is blowing strongly down."

"It is true, father, there are many such ships; but only two or
three that have made the long voyage across stormy seas to India."

"It is wonderful how these men can force fire to be their servant,
and how it can make the wheels of the ship to move round."

"That I cannot tell you, father. I have never seen one of these
