Cedar Bird,
Cowbird,
Martin,
Veery,
Chewink,
Vireo,
Oriole,
Blackbird,
Fifebird,
Wren,
Linnet,
Pewee,
Phoebe,
Yoke Bird,
Lark,
Sandpiper.

It should be noted that the result of this petition was the passage of
a law by the Legislature of Massachusetts forbidding the wearing of
parts of wild birds. A bill forbidding the transportation of feathers
or the skins of birds from one state to another was also introduced by
Senator Hoar in the United States Senate.

2. At this first exercise it would be well to have read "Our New
Neighbors at Ponkapog," by T. B. Aldrich.

3. The best essays that have been written by the pupils during their
preliminary study may be given. If the school has not made this
preliminary study, select subjects and have essays written according
to the directions already given, allowing as much time as possible for
original observations.

4. Have recitations from the poets. These will add a peculiar charm to
the occasion. A short list of suitable poems will be given. Many
others may be found in a book called "Voices of the Speechless,"
published by Houghton, Mifflin & Co.

The works of John Burroughs, Bradford Torrey, Maurice Thompson, Mrs.
Olive Thorne Miller, and Dr. C. C. Abbott abound in passages which are
excellent for recitation. It is surprising how familiar the best-known
novelists have been and are with birds. In appreciation of them they
are second only to the poets. Charles Reade's description of the
lark's song in the mines of Australia, in "Never Too Late to Mend," is
an inspiring recitation.

5. Short quotations from well known authors should be given, if
possible, by every pupil in the school. We give a few taken almost at
random:--

     Away over the hayfield the lark floated in the blue, making
     the air quiver with his singing; the robin, perched on a
     fence, looked at us saucily and piped a few notes by way of
     remark; the blackbird was heard, flute-throated, down in the
     hollow recesses of the wood; and the thrush, in a holly tree
     by the wayside, sang out his sweet, clear song that seemed
     to rise in strength as the wind awoke a sudden rustling
     through the long woods of birch and oak.--WILLIAM BLACK, in
     _Adventures of a Phaeton_.

     We seemed to hear all the sounds within a great compass--in
     the hedges and in the roadside trees, far away in woods or
     hidden up in the level grayness of the clouds: twi, twi,
     trrrr-weet!--droom, droom, phloee!--tuck, tuck, tuck, tuck,
     feer!--that was the silvery chorus from thousands of
     throats. It seemed to us that all the fields and hedges had
     but one voice, and that it was clear and sweet and
     piercing.--WILLIAM BLACK, _Ibid._

     Silvia could hear the twittering of the young starlings in
     their nests as their parents went and came carrying food,
     and the loud and joyful "tirr-a-wee, tirr-a-wee, prooit,
     tweet!" of the thrushes, and the low currooing of the wood
     pigeon, and the soft call of the cuckoo, that seemed to come
     in whenever an interval of silence fitted. The swallows
     dipped and flashed and circled over the bosom of the lake.
     There were blackbirds eagerly but cautiously at work, with
     their spasmodic trippings, on the lawn. A robin perched on
     the iron railing eyed her curiously and seemed more disposed
     to approach than to retreat.--WILLIAM BLACK, in _Green
     Pastures and Piccadilly_.

     A jay fled screaming through the wood, just one brief
     glimpse of brilliant blue being visible.--WILLIAM BLACK,
     _Ibid._

     And as they came near to one dark patch of shrubbery, lo!
     the strange silence was burst asunder by the rich, full song
     of a nightingale.--WILLIAM BLACK, _Ibid._

     A sudden sound sprang into the night, flooding all its
     darkness with its rich and piercing melody--a joyous, clear,
     full-throated note, deep-gurgling now, and again rising with
     thrills and tremors into bursts of far-reaching silver song
     that seemed to shake the hollow air. A single nightingale
     had filled the woods with life. We cared no more for those
     distant and silent stars. It was enough to sit here in the
     gracious quiet and listen to the eager tremulous outpouring
     of this honeyed sound.--WILLIAM BLACK, in _Strange
     Adventures of a House-Boat_.

     Shoot and eat my birds! The next step beyond, and one would
     hanker after Jenny Lind or Miss Kellogg.--HENRY WARD
     BEECHER.

     There on the very topmost twig, that rises and falls with
     willowy motion, sits that ridiculous, sweet-singing
     bobolink, singing as a Roman candle fizzes, showers of
     sparkling notes.--_Ibid._

This poet affirms that our bobolink is superior to the nightingale:--

    Bobolink, that in the meadow,
    Or beneath the orchard's shadow,
    Keepest up a constant rattle
    Joyous as my children's prattle,
    Welcome to the North again,
    Welcome to mine ear thy strain,
    Welcome to mine eye the sight
    Of thy buff, thy black and white.
    Brighter plumes may greet the sun
    By the banks of Amazon;
    Sweeter tones may weave the spell
    Of enchanting Philomel;
    But the tropic bird would fail,
    And the English nightingale,
    If we should compare their worth
    With thine endless, gushing mirth.

--THOMAS HILL.

     The mocking bird is a singer that has suffered much from its
     powers of mimicry. On ordinary occasions, and especially in
     the daytime, it insists on playing the harlequin. But when
     free in its own favorite haunts at night, it has a song, or
     rather songs, which are not only purely original, but are
     also more beautiful than any other bird music whatsoever.
     Once I listened to a mocking bird singing the livelong
     spring night, under the full moon, in a magnolia tree; and I
     do not think I shall ever forget its song.

     The great tree was bathed in a flood of shining silver; I
     could see each twig, and mark every action of the singer,
     who was pouring forth such a rapture of ringing melody as I
     have never listened to before or since. Sometimes he would
     perch motionless for many minutes, his body quivering and
     thrilling with the outpour of music. Then he would drop
     softly from twig to twig till the lowest limb was reached,
     when he would rise, fluttering and leaping through the
     branches, his song never ceasing for an instant until he
     reached the summit of the tree and launched into the warm
     scent-laden air, floating in spirals, with outspread wings,
     until, as if spent, he sank gently back into the tree and
     down through the branches, while his song rose into an
     ecstasy of ardor and passion. His voice rang like a
     clarionet in rich, full tones, and his execution covered the
     widest possible compass; theme followed theme, a torrent of
     music, a swelling tide of harmony, in which scarcely any two
     bars were alike. I stayed till midnight listening to him; he
     was singing when I went to sleep; he was still singing when
     I woke a couple of hours later; he sang through the livelong
     night.--THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

     Amid the thunders of Sinai God uttered the rights of cattle,
     and said that they should have a Sabbath. "Thou shalt not do
     any work, thou, nor thy cattle." He declared with infinite
     emphasis that the ox on the threshing-floor should have the
     privilege of eating some of the grain as he trod it out, and
     muzzling was forbidden. If young birds were taken from the
     nest for food, the despoiler's life depended on the mother
     going free. God would not let the mother-bird suffer in one
     day the loss of her young and her own liberty. And he who
     regarded in olden time the conduct of man toward the brutes,
     to-day looks down from heaven and is interested in every
     minnow that swims the stream, and every rook that cleaves
     the air.--DEWITT TALMAGE, D.D.

     And how refreshing is the sight of the birdless bonnet! The
     face beneath, no matter how plain it may be, seems to
     possess a gentle charm. She might have had birds, this
     woman, for they are cheap enough and plentiful enough,
     heaven knows; but she has them not, therefore she must wear
     within things infinitely precious, namely, good sense, good
     taste, good feeling. Does any woman imagine these withered
     corpses (cured with arsenic), which she loves to carry
     about, are beautiful? Not so; the birds lost their beauty
     with their lives.--CELIA THAXTER.

     I walked up my garden path as I was coming home from
     shooting. My dog ran on before me; suddenly he went slower
     and crept carefully forward as if he scented game. I looked
     along the path and perceived a young sparrow, with its downy
     head and yellow bill. It had fallen from a nest (the wind
     was blowing hard through the young birch trees beside the
     path) and was sprawling motionless, helpless, on the ground,
     with its little wings outspread. My dog crept softly up to
     it, when suddenly an old black-breasted sparrow threw
     himself down from a neighboring tree and let himself fall
     like a stone directly under the dog's nose, and, with
     ruffled feathers, sprang with a terrified twitter several
     times against his open, threatening mouth. He had flown down
     to protect his young at the sacrifice of himself. His little
     body trembled all over, his cry was hoarse, he was
     frightened to death; but he sacrificed himself. My dog must
     have seemed to him a gigantic monster, but for all that, he
     could not stay on his high, safe branch. A power stronger
     than himself drove him down. My dog stopped and drew back;
     it seemed as if he, too, respected this power. I hastened to
     call back the amazed dog, and reverently withdrew. Yes,
     don't laugh; I felt a reverence for this little hero of a
     bird, with his paternal love.

     Love, thought I, is mightier than death and the fear of
     death; love alone inspires and is the life of all.--IVAN
     TOURGUENEFF.

     The first sparrow of spring! The year beginning with younger
     hope than ever! The faint, silvery warblings heard over the
     partially bare and moist fields from the bluebird, the song
     sparrow, and the redwing, as if the last flakes of winter
     tinkled as they fell!--H. D. THOREAU.

     I heard a robin in the distance, the first I had heard for
     many a thousand years, methought, whose note I shall not
     forget for many a thousand more,--the same sweet, powerful
     song as of yore.--_Ibid._

     Walden is melting apace. A great field of ice has cracked
     off from the main body. I hear a song sparrow from the
     bushes on the shore,--_olit, olit, olit--chip, chip, chip,
     che char--che wis, wis, wis_. He, too, is helping to crack
     the ice.--_Ibid._

     The bluebird carries the sky on his back.--_Ibid._

6. One of the most interesting features of a Bird Day program will be
the personations of birds.

The following was given by a boy in the seventh grade:--

     One day in February a gentleman and his wife stopped beside
     the wall of old Fort Marion, in St. Augustine, to listen to
     my song. The sun was shining brightly, and little white
     flowers were blooming in the green turf about the old fort.
     It was not time yet to build my nest, so I had nothing to do
     but sing and get my food and travel a little every day
     toward my Northern home.

     I am about as large as a robin, and although there is
     nothing brilliant in my plumage I am not a homely bird. I
     like the songs of other birds and sometimes sing them. I
     frequently sing like my cousins, the catbirds and robins and
     thrushes. But I have my own song, which is unlike all the
     others. My mate and I build a large nest of small sticks,
     pieces of string, cotton, and weeds, in thick bushes or low
     trees. We have five eggs that are greenish blue and spotted
     with brown. We eat many beetles, larvae, and many kinds of
     insects which we find feeding upon plants. The worst enemy
     we have is man. He steals our children almost before we have
     taught them to sing, and puts them in cages. He is a
     monster.

     Many poems have been written about me. One of the finest is
     by Sidney Lanier, in which he calls me "yon trim Shakespeare
     on the tree."

     Any one who has heard my song can never forget me.

     What is my name?

7. Bird facts and proverbs form a valuable part of a program and may
be given by some of the children. Let the pupils search for them and
bring some similar to these:--

     Birds flock together in hard times.

     A bird in the bush is worth two in the hand.

     The American robin is not the same bird as the English.

     The bluebird and robin may be harbingers of spring, but the
     swallow is the harbinger of summer.

     The dandelion tells me to look for the swallow; the
     dog-toothed violet when to expect the wood thrush.--JOHN
     BURROUGHS.

     It is not thought that any one bird spends the year in one
     locality, but that all birds migrate, if only within a
     limited range.

     A loon was caught, by a set line for fishing, sixty-five
     feet below the surface of a lake in New York, having dived
     to that depth for a fish.

     The wood pewee, like its relative, the phoebe, feeds
     largely on the family of flies to which the house fly
     belongs.

     The birds of prey, the majority of which labor night and day
     to destroy the enemies of the husbandman, are unceasingly
     persecuted.

     Seventy-five per cent of the food of the downy woodpecker is
     insects.
