
A few mornings after Gwen's introduction to the Fifth there was a
class for memory map drawing with the assistant teacher. Each girl was
supposed to come prepared to make a map of India, and to mark in a
large number of places, a fairly difficult task, and one over which
many of them grumbled in unison.

"It's not fair! It takes such heaps of time to go over it at home, one
hasn't a second for anything else!" wailed Minna Jennings.

"I'd a raging headache last night, and my mother said she thought
Rodenhurst was getting too much for me," bleated Millicent Cooper.

"Poor frail flower! You look as if you'd wither at a breath! Better
pack you off to a sanatorium!" laughed Netta.

"And you to a lunatic asylum, you mad thing! Don't you ever get
headaches with all this over-swatting?"

"No, my child, for I know a dodge or two! N. G. is no infant in arms,
I assure you."

"Deign to explain, O commander of the faithful!" begged Annie Edwards.

"Well, as I told you, I'm up to a thing or two, and I flatter myself I
know just exactly how to tackle Grinnie."

"Who's Grinnie?" asked Gwen rather sharply.

The others roared.

"My sweet babe, my dear ex-Junior, let us initiate you into the
shibboleths of the Fifth! Yes, Seniors indulge in their little
nicknames as well as the Lower School, though perhaps we are rather
more cultured in our choice of them. Be it known to you then that our
respected Head, vulgarly called The Bogey by ill-trained Juniors, is
among our elect set yclept Lemonade, partly owing to her habit of
fizzing over, and partly to a certain acid quality in her temper,
otherwise hard to define. Miss Douglas, our honoured Form mistress,
being a canny Scot, goes by the familiar appellation of Thistles,
intended also to subtly convey our appreciation--or shall I say
depreciation?--of her prickly habit."

"And Grinnie?" continued Gwen.

"Your sister, by her perpetual smile, courted the title."

"It's no good exploding, Gwen!" said Annie Edwards. "If you've got a
sister who's a teacher you'll just have to hear her called nicknames.
You don't suppose we're going to shut up on your account?"

"And you needn't go sneaking, either, or it'll be the worse for you,"
added Minna Jennings.

"We'd soon know who'd told tales," snapped Millicent Cooper.

"Peace, turbulent herd!" said Netta, holding up her hand. "Our friend
Gwen, being of a sensible disposition, and a lover, like ourselves, of
all wholesome jests, fully realizes the exigencies of her peculiar
situation. Though in the seclusion of her home she may be bound by
many natural ties, family obligations cease entirely in the classroom.
If her sister is a mistress, she is a pupil, and therefore bound to
side with her Form through all those trials of tact known as 'thick
and thin'. Have I not put the thing in a nutshell, O Gwendolen mine?"

Gwen could not help laughing, for there was undoubted truth in Netta's
argument. Winnie would, she knew, treat her with the utmost
impartiality, probably even more strictly, owing to their
relationship. It would certainly never do if she were to be regarded
as a sneak in the Form, ready to report misdoings and make mischief;
such a character would be intolerable to her. Winnie must fight her
own battles, and she would throw in her luck with her peers.

"You needn't be afraid of me!" she protested. "I'd be the very last to
blab; and I like fun as well as anybody."

"I knew it, oh, altogether-wise-in-judgment! Have I not proved thee?"
returned Netta, with a meaning look in her eyes which only Gwen
understood. "Now, having established thy reputation, I will return to
my original thingumgigs."

"Oh, Netta, stop being a lunatic, and tell us how you mean to tackle
Grinnie!" interposed Minna.

"Well, my little dears, it's extremely simple, but a work of genius
all the same. Genius always is simple, I believe! Behold my mapping
book with its virgin page. Behold also this spotless piece of blotting
paper. I turn it over, and hey, presto! a transformation. Here's my
map, nicely done in pencil, with all the names marked. Nothing to do
but copy it, you see. At the least approach of danger I turn it with
its most innocent side up."

The girls sniggered their admiration. Gwen could not approve, but she
did not protest. It was not her business to preach, so she told
herself. As long as she did her own work honestly, she could not begin
her career in the Fifth by assuming the very character she had just
denied. Minna and Annie, inspired by Netta's brilliant idea, were
copying the map on to pieces of blotting paper as fast as they could.

"It wouldn't be a bad plan to trace it the wrong way, and then rub it
off like a transfer," suggested Millicent.

"Just a little too clever, most astute one! Grinnie comes round to
look, and she'd think you'd got on too quickly, and want to know the
reason why. You're bright, Millicent Cooper, but you're not
far-seeing."

"You'll get caught yourself some time," said Millicent.

"True, O Queen! But I'll have somewhat in the shape of a run first,"
laughed Netta.

Gwen felt rather indignant as she began her map drawing. She hated
cheating, and it seemed very unjust that Netta and the others should
win credit for what was not fairly their own work.

"Winnie's not half sharp enough," she thought. "If it were Beatrice,
now, there isn't a girl in the room would dare to try any tricks."

Possibly even Winnie had her suspicions. She kept a watchful eye on
the Form, and made an occasional tour round the desks. Netta was
extremely cautious, but all the same her attention to her blotting
paper was rather conspicuous.

"Netta Goodwin, hand me your mapping book!"

Netta started in some confusion at the abrupt order, and dropped both
mapbook and blotting paper on to the floor. Gwen, equally startled,
moved her hand hastily and sent her book spinning after the other. It
was a complete accident, but one by which Netta did not hesitate to
profit. Under the shelter of the desk she rapidly substituted Gwen's
piece of blotting paper for her own, then passed up the book with an
air of sangfroid truly heroic in the eyes of Annie, Minna, and
Millicent. Miss Gascoyne examined the pages carefully, but finding
nothing incriminating, supposed she had been mistaken. Netta might be
the chief sinner of the Form, certainly, but she was not invariably at
fault.

"She thought I was as innocent as Mary's little lamb!" laughed that
damsel afterwards. "You were a trump, Gwen, to help me. It was a smart
notion of yours to drop your book too. You did it so promptly!" Then
putting her arm round Gwen's neck she whispered: "I helped you when
you were in a tight hole, and I'm glad to see you're going to stand by
me. I shall always count upon you in future."

So thus it happened that almost in spite of herself Gwen became
Netta's ally, pledged to support her on all occasions. She was afraid
to risk a quarrel lest Netta should press for the return of the ten
shillings she had lent. The debt felt a millstone round her neck, from
which there was no immediate chance of relief. Netta's particular
clique of friends, proving Gwen safe, included her in their special
set, a compromising arrangement which seemed nevertheless inevitable.
The girls did not really mean much harm, but they were silly and
flippant, and enjoyed evading rules simply for the fun of the thing.
Netta loved to show off before the others, and because she found Miss
Gascoyne an easier victim than Miss Douglas, she kept most of her
sallies for the junior teacher. She could estimate to a nicety the
fine distinction between giving trouble and open defiance. She never
actually overstepped the line, but she contrived to make matters very
unpleasant for poor Winnie. It was her boast that she could always
raise a spark out of Miss Gascoyne, and her admirers were ready to
titter in sympathy.

Winnie, mindful of her position as teacher, never mentioned school
affairs to Gwen; but one day Beatrice tackled the latter on the
subject.

"I hear you've struck up a friendship with Netta Goodwin," she began.
"I'm very surprised, for she doesn't seem a nice sort of girl."

"She's the only one who's been kind to me," returned Gwen, up in arms
at once at Beatrice's tone.

"Indeed! Well, I wouldn't be too much with her if I were you. I'm
afraid she's anything but desirable."

"Who said I was much with her? Has Winnie been telling tales about
me?"

"Don't be nasty, Gwen. You know Winnie never tells."

"There's no particular harm in Netta," protested Gwen, taking up the
cudgels for her schoolmate out of sheer contrariness. "She's only
rather lively and funny. I suppose that's no great crime."

"Are you sure Father would like her?"

"Dad doesn't know her, so I can't pretend to say what he'd think of
her," retorted Gwen, shuffling out of the matter with what she knew
was a lame excuse.




CHAPTER VI

A Casting Vote


Gwen had not been prepared to find the Fifth exactly a bed of roses,
therefore she was hardly surprised at the thorns which beset her new
path. In spite of the extra teaching from Miss Woodville, she found
the work of the Form extremely difficult, especially in mathematics.
There was a whole book of Euclid theorem which she had not been
through, and the consequence was that every other problem had some
little point proved by a theorem of which she had never heard. It was
a most decided stumblingblock. It is possible to sit and look at a
problem for hours without getting any further if there is just one
statement of whose existence one is not aware. More than once Gwen had
to hand in a blank page, and felt very humiliated at the meaning
glances which passed between Rachel Hunter and Edith Arnold. Neither
of these was yet reconciled to Gwen's presence in the Form. Rachel,
mindful of her own delayed promotion to the Upper School, persisted in
regarding her as an "intruding kid", and Edith could not forgive her
intimacy with Netta Goodwin. Manifold small slights and snubs fell to
Gwen's share, and though she affected to make light of them, they
hurt all the same. She knew that under happier auspices she might have
been friendly with Hilda Browne, Iris Watson, Louise Mawson, and
several others of whom Father would have approved, and whom, with his
entire sanction, she might have invited occasionally to the Parsonage.
She was aware that she was in the worst set in the Form, and that not
one of her new chums would pass muster if judged according to her home
standards.

"I can't ever ask them, that's all," she declared. "Annie's giggles
would give Beatrice a fit, Millicent puts on side horribly, Minna
would probably make fun of everything, Claire Harris is absolutely
vulgar, and as for Netta--no! Dad mustn't see Netta on any account."

Another not unexpected trouble had fallen to Gwen's share. As a member
of the Upper Fourth she had, at the beginning of the term, been chosen
Junior Basket-ball Captain, to arrange Lower School team games and
matches, and she had worked very hard to get things going. On her
promotion, however, it had been a greatly discussed point whether she
should resign or finish the season. Some of the Upper Fourth, knowing
how much was due to Gwen's exertions, had been anxious for her to
retain her post, but on the whole the popular verdict was against her.
To Gwen's disgust, her old friends, Eve Dawkins and Alma Richardson,
were the loudest in her disfavour, and it was chiefly owing to their
eloquence that she was requested to resign. She had been proud of her
captaincy, and to give it up was a wrench. There seemed nothing at all
in her new Form to compensate for the loss, and sometimes she wished
heartily that she had never been moved.

The present excitement in the Fifth was a "Literary and Dramatic
Club", the members of which intended to act a piece at Christmas. It
was a rather cliquish society, worked with more favour than fairness,
and was principally among those girls whose homes lay near to the
school.

"They stay behind at four o'clock to rehearse," explained Netta. "It's
really only among about half a dozen."

"Are you in it?" queried Gwen.

"I, my dear child? Hardly! You don't imagine the high and mighty Iris
Watson would ask yours truly? Saints and sinners don't mix in this
Form, if you please!"

"Do you mean to tell me the whole thing is in the hands of Iris and a
few others?"

"With your usual astuteness you've hit the nail on the head."

"But that's monstrously unfair!" exclaimed Gwen indignantly. "A
Dramatic Club ought to be for the whole Form. Everybody ought to have
an innings, in the name of common justice."

Netta shrugged her shoulders.

"I don't want to act with Iris and Edith and Louise, thank you! A
pleasant performance it would be! They may keep their precious piece
to themselves, so far as I'm concerned."

"But that's not the point," persisted Gwen. "It's the fairness of the
thing I'm talking about. One set has no right to monopolize
everything."

"It is sickening, certainly."

"It's worse than sickening, it's intolerable, and I'm going to make a
stand against it."

"You can try if you like, but you needn't expect success."

When Gwen had a cause to champion, she was ready for a fight, even on
the losing side. One of her characteristics was a strong sense of
justice, and here, she considered, was a distinct case of oppression.
She thought over her plan of campaign, and decided that she would ask
to be admitted to the Dramatic Club. Next morning, accordingly, she
approached the five or six girls who constituted that society.

"Want to join our Dramatic Club!" exclaimed Louise Mawson almost
incredulously. "I dare say you do!"

"But you won't!" said Hilda Browne quickly.

"Cheek!" ejaculated Rachel Hunter.

"Why shouldn't I join?"

"On the other hand, why should you?"

"Because a society ought to be open to the whole Form, and not just
kept amongst a few. We didn't manage things like that in the Upper
Fourth."

"How very kind of you, fresh from the Juniors, to come and give us
Seniors a lesson in managing our affairs! Perhaps you'd like to be
