Victor of one of the men.

"Succeed?  Ay, no fear of that!" replied the hunter, with a vindictive
scowl.  "It's not the first time some of them have been out after the
Sioux."

"We will ride back to camp, Vic," said Ian, rousing himself from a
reverie; "it is no part of our duty to assist in executing vengeance.
If the camp were assailed we should indeed be bound to help defend it,
but there are more than enough men out to hunt down these murderers.  If
a cart is not already on its way for the corpse we will send one.
Come."

That night the avengers returned; they had overtaken and shot down eight
of the Sioux,--the remaining four gained the bushes and escaped.  None
of themselves were hurt, but one had a narrow escape, an arrow having
passed between his shirt and skin.

Next day Victor and his friends prepared to leave the hunters and resume
the chase of Petawanaquat, but they were arrested by one of those
terrific thunderstorms which occasionally visit the prairies.  They were
already mounted and on the point of taking leave, when the air darkened
suddenly, the sky became overcast, lightning began to flash in vivid
gleams, and a crash of thunder seemed to rend the earth and heavens.

Presently Herr Winklemann, who meant to ride with the parting guests a
short way, and was also mounted, uttered a shout, and immediately horse
and man rolled upon the plain.  The man rose slowly, but the horse lay
still--killed by lightning!  By the same flash, apparently, another
horse was struck dead.

"Vell, you has tomble very often vid me," said the German, contemplating
the fallen steed, "bot you vill tomble again no mor."

"Oui, he is mort," sighed Rollin, looking down.

After this first burst there was a considerable lull, but appearances
were so gloomy that departure was delayed.

Soon after, the storm burst with a degree of violence that the oldest
hunter said he had never before witnessed.  Lightning, wind, rain,
thunder, seemed to have selected the spot for a battle-ground.  Although
the camp was pitched on comparatively high and rocky ground, the deluge
was so great that in the course of ten minutes nearly everything was
afloat.  (See Note 1.)  The camp was literally swimming, and some of the
smaller children were with difficulty saved from drowning.  So furious
was the wind that the tents were either thrown down or blown to ribbons.
During the storm three of the Indian tents, or lodges, were struck by
lightning.  In one of these a Canadian was killed; in another all the
inmates--an Indian, his wife, two children, and two dogs--were killed,
and a gun beside them was melted in several parts as though it had been
lead.

Then there fell a shower of hail, the stones of which were solid angular
pieces of ice larger than a hen's egg, by which some of the people were
severely wounded before they found shelter under the carts and
overturned tents.

It was a terrible display of the power of God, and yet, strange to say,
so far is such a scene incapable of influencing man's fallen nature for
good, that occasions such as these, when the camp is in disorder, are
often taken advantage of by Indians to approach and steal the horses.

Being well aware of this propensity of the red man, Baptiste Warder and
his captains kept a sharp look-out.  It was well they did so, for, after
the storm, a formidable band of Sioux was discovered within a short
distance of the camp.

Their wily chief was, however, equal to the occasion.  He assumed the
role of an injured man.  He had come to remonstrate with the
half-breeds, and charge them with cruelty.

"My warriors," said he, "killed only one of your people, and for that
one you murdered eight of my braves."

The half-breeds spoke the chief fairly, however, and entertained him and
his followers hospitably, so that the affair was amicably settled, and
they went away in peace.  But dark eyes had met in deadly hatred during
the conference.

The party of Indians who had joined the hunters with Victor and his
comrades were Saulteaux, (Pronounced Sotoes), and the bitter enemies of
the Sioux.  Some time after the Sioux had taken their departure, a band
of about fifty of these Saulteaux left the camp stealthily, and pursued
a detached party of their foes for about ten miles.  They overtook them
at a small stream.  The unsuspecting Sioux prepared to swim over to
them, mistaking them at first for friends, but a volley which killed
three undeceived them.  The fire was instantly returned and a smoke
raised to alarm the country.  The Saulteaux retreated, while the Sioux,
gathering force, pursued, and it is probable that the whole of the
assailants would have been scalped if night had not favoured them.  In
this raid seven Sioux were killed and three wounded.  Of the Saulteaux
three were killed and four wounded.

Again the camp was visited by enraged and armed Sioux to the number of
300, who challenged the Saulteaux to come forth man to man, and fight it
out.  The latter declined, and the half-breeds, many of whom were
related by marriage to the Saulteaux, managed to patch up a hollow peace
between them.

At last Victor, Ian, and Rollin got away, glad to have done both with
buffalo and savages.  They now possessed three good horses, a supply of
fresh provisions, and plenty of ammunition.  Thus provided they galloped
off with light hearts over the boundless plains, and soon left the camp
of the hunters far behind them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  This is no picture of the fancy, but true in all its details.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

THE CHASE CONTINUED, AND BROUGHT TO A FIERY TERMINATION.

With the unerring certainty of blood-hounds, the three friends now
settled down to the pursuit of Petawanaquat.  From the Saulteaux Indians
they had received an exact description of the spot where the fugitive
had parted from them; they had, therefore, little difficulty in finding
it.  Still less difficulty had they in following up the trail, for the
grass was by that time very long, and a horse leaves a track in such
grass which, if not very obvious to unaccustomed eyes, is as plain as a
highway to the vision of a backwoods hunter or a redskin.

Over the prairie waves they sped, with growing excitement as their hopes
of success increased; now thundering down into the hollows, anon
mounting the gentle slopes at full swing, or rounding the clumps of
trees that here and there dotted the prairie like islets in an
interminable sea of green; and ever, as they rounded an islet or topped
a prairie wave, they strained their eyes in earnest expectation of
seeing the objects of their pursuit on the horizon, but for several days
they raced, and gazed, and hoped in vain.  Still they did not lose
confidence, but pressed persistently on.

"Our horses are fresh and good," said Victor as they reined in to a
gentle trot on the brow of a knoll to rest for a few minutes, "and
Petawanaquat's horse, whether good or bad, is double-weighted--although,
to be sure, Tony is not heavy."

"Besides," said Ian, "the redskin does not dream now of pursuit; so
that, pressing on as we do, we _must_ overtake him ere long."

"Voila, de buffalo!" said Rollin, pointing to a group of these huge
creatures, in the midst of which two bulls were waging furious war,
while the cows stood by and looked on.  "Shall ve go an' chase dem?"

"No, Rollin; we have more important game to chase," said Victor, whose
conscience, now that he was free from the exciting influences of the
camp, had twinged him more than once for his delay--even although it was
partly justifiable--while the image of poor Tony, with outstretched,
appealing hands on a flying horse behind a savage, was ever before him.
"Come on come on!"

He switched his horse, and went skimming down the slope, followed by his
comrades.

Soon they came to a place where the ground was more broken and rocky.

"Voila! a bar! a bar!" shouted the excitable half-breed; "com, kill
him!"

They looked, and there, sure enough, was an object which Rollin declared
was a large grizzly bear.  It was a long way off, however, and the
ground between them seemed very broken and difficult to traverse on
horseback.  Ian Macdonald thought of the bear's claws, and a collar, and
Elsie, and tightened his reins.  Then he thought of the risk of breaking
a horse's leg if the bear should lead them a long chase over such
ground, and of the certain loss of time, and of Petawanaquat pushing on
ahead.  It was a tempting opportunity, but his power of self-denial
triumphed.

"No, Rollin, we have no time to hunt."

"Behold!" exclaimed Rollin again; "more buffalo!"

They had swept past the stony ground and rounded a clump of trees,
behind which a small herd of animals stood for a few seconds, staring at
them in mute amazement.  These snorted, set up their tails, and tore
wildly away to the right.  This was too much.  With a gleeful yell,
Rollin turned to pursue, but Victor called to him angrily to let the
buffalo be.  The half-breed turned back with a sigh.

"Ah, vell! ve must forbear."

"I say, Vic," remarked Ian, with a significant smile, "why won't you go
after the buffalo?"

Victor looked at his friend in surprise.

"Surely," he said, "it is more important as well as more interesting to
rescue one's brother than to chase wild animals!"

"True, but how does that sentiment accord with your wish that you might
spend eternity in hunting buffalo?"

"Oh, you know," returned Victor, with a laugh, "when I said that I
wasn't thinking of--of--"

He switched his horse into a wilder gallop, and said no more.  He had
said quite enough.  He was not the only youth in North America and
elsewhere who has uttered a good deal of nonsense without "thinking."
But then that was long ago.  Youths are wiser now!

On the evening of that day, when the sun went down, and when it became
too dark to follow the trail, and, therefore, unsafe to travel for fear
of stumbling into badger-holes, the three friends pulled up beside a
clump of wood on the margin of a little stream, and prepared their
encampment.

Little did they imagine, while busy with the fire and kettle, how nearly
they had gained their end, yet how disastrously they had missed it.
Well for man, sometimes, that he is ignorant of what takes place around
him.  Had the three pursuers known who was encamped in a clump of trees
not half a mile beyond them, they would not have feasted that night so
heartily, nor would they have gone to sleep with such calm placidity.

In the clump of trees referred to, Petawanaquat himself sat smoking over
the dying embers of the fire that had cooked his recently devoured
supper, and Tony, full to repletion, lay on his back gazing at him in
quiet satisfaction, mingled slightly with wonder; for Tony was a
philosopher in a small way, and familiarity with his father's pipe had
failed to set at rest a question which perplexed his mind, namely, why
men should draw smoke into their mouths merely to puff it out again!

When the pipe and the camp-fire had burnt low, Tony observed, with much
interest, that the Indian's eyes became suddenly fixed, that his
nostrils dilated, his lips ceased to move, the cloud that had just
escaped from them curled round the superincumbent nose and disappeared
without being followed by another cloud, and the entire man became rigid
like a brown statue.  At that point Tony ceased to think, because tired
nature asserted her claims, and he fell sound asleep.

The practised ear of the Indian had detected the sound of horses' feet
on the prairie.  To any ordinary man no sound at all would have been
perceptible save the sighing of the night wind.  Petawanaquat, however,
not only heard the tramp, but could distinguish it from that of buffalo.
He rose softly, ascertained that Tony was asleep, turned aside the
bushes, and melted into darkness among the trees.  Presently he emerged
on the plain at the other side of the clump, and there stood still.
Patience is one of the red man's characteristics.  He did not move hand
or foot for half an hour, during which time, despite the distance of the
neighbouring clump, he could easily make out the sound of an axe
chopping wood, and even heard human voices in conversation.  Then a
gleam of light flickered among the trees, and the kindling camp-fire of
our three friends became visible.

The Indian now felt comparatively safe.  He knew that, whoever the new
arrivals might be, they were unsuspicious of his presence in the
vicinity, and had encamped for the night.  He also knew that when men
are busy with supper they are not very watchful, especially when danger
is not expected.  He, therefore, gave them another quarter of an hour to
prepare supper, and then moved stealthily over the plain towards them.

On gaining the shelter of the trees, Petawanaquat advanced with cat-like
caution, until he could clearly see the travellers.  He recognised them
instantly, and a dark frown settled on his features.  His first thought
was to steal their horses, and thus leave them incapable of pursuing
further, but Ian Macdonald was too much of a backwoodsman to give a foe
the opportunity to do this.  The horses were tethered close beside the
fire.  Then the Indian thought of shooting them, but his gun being a
single-barrel, such as was sold to the Indians by the fur-traders, could
only dispose of one horse at a time, thus leaving the other two to his
incensed enemies, who would probably capture him before he could reload
or regain his own camp.  With a feeling of baffled rage he suddenly
thought of murder.  He could easily kill Ian Macdonald, could probably
reload before Rollin should overtake him, and as for Victor, he was
nothing!  Quick as thought the Indian raised his gun, and took a long
steady aim at Ian's forehead.

The contemplative schoolmaster was looking at the fire, thinking of
Elsie at the time.  He smiled as he thought of her.  Perhaps it was the
smile that checked the savage perhaps it was the words, "Thou shalt not
kill," which had been sounded in his ears more than once during the past
winter by the missionary.  At all events, the fatal trigger was not
drawn.  Ian's contemplations were not disturbed, the gun was lowered,
and the savage melted once more into the deep shade of the thicket.

Returning to his own camp in the same cat-like manner as before,
Petawanaquat quietly but quickly packed his provisions, etcetera, on his
horse.  When all was ready he tried to awaken Tony, but Tony slept the
sleep of infancy and comparative innocence.  The Indian pushed him,
kicked him, even lifted him up and shook him, before he awoke.  Then,
expressing astonishment at having to resume the journey at so early an
hour, the child submitted silently to orders.

In a few minutes the Indian led his horse down to the rivulet close at
hand, crossed it with Tony, half asleep, clinging to his back, ascended
the opposite bank, and gained the level plain.  Here he mounted, with
Tony in front to guard against the risk of his falling off in a state of
slumber, and galloped away.

Fortunately for him, the moon had risen, for red men are not a whit
better than white at seeing in the dark.  Indeed, we question the
proverbial capacity of cats in that way.  True, the orb of night was
clouded, and only in her first quarter, but she gave light enough to
enable the horseman to avoid dangers and proceed at full speed.  Thus,
while the pursuers snored, the pursued went scouring over the prairies,
farther and farther towards the fair west.

Michel Rollin, being a lively, restless character, used generally to be
up before his comrades in the mornings, and gratified an inquisitive
propensity by poking about.  In his pokings he discovered the trail of
the midnight visitor, and thereupon set up a howl of surprise that
effectually roused Ian and Victor.  These, guns in hand, rushed, as they
fancied, to the rescue.

"What a noisy goose you are!" said Victor, on learning the cause of the
cry.

"There is reason for haste, however," said Ian, rising from a close
inspection of the trail.  "Some one has been here in the night watching
us.  Why he didn't join us if a friend, or kill us if an enemy, puzzles
me.  If there were horse-tracks about I should say it must have been
Petawanaquat himself.  Come, we must mount and away without breakfast."

They went off accordingly, and soon traced the Indian's original track
to the place where he had encamped.  Petawanaquat had taken the
precaution to pour water on his fire, so as to cool the ashes, and thus
lead to the supposition that he had been gone a considerable time, but
Ian was not to be so easily deceived.  The moment he had examined the
extinct fire, and made up his mind, he leaped up and followed the trail
to the spot where the Indian had mounted.

"Now then, mount, boys!" he cried, vaulting into the saddle, "no time to
lose.  The redskin seems to have a good horse, and knows we are at his
heels.  It will be a straight end-on race now.  Hup! get along!"

Their course at first lay over a level part of the plain, which rendered
full speed possible; then they came to a part where the thick grass grew
rank and high, rendering the work severe.  As the sun rose high, they
came to a small pond, or pool.

"The rascal has halted here, I see!" cried Ian, pulling up, leaping off,
and running to the water, which he lifted to his mouth in both hands,
while his panting horse stooped and drank.  "It was very likely more for
Tony's sake than for his own.  But if he could stop, so can we for a few
minutes."

"It vill make de horses go more better," said Rollin, unstrapping the
pemmican bag.

"That's right," cried Victor, "give us a junk--a big one--so--thanks, we
can eat it as we go."

Up and away they went again, urging their horses now to do their utmost,
for they began to hope that the day of success had surely arrived.

Still far ahead of his pursuers, the Indian rode alone without check or
halt, to the alarm of Tony, who felt that something unusual had occurred
to make his self-appointed father look so fierce.

"What de matter?" he ventured to ask.  "Nobody chase us."

"Let Tonyquat shut his mouth," was the brief reply.  And Tony obeyed.
He was learning fast!

Suddenly the air on the horizon ahead became clouded.  The eyes of the
savage dilated with an expression that almost amounted to alarm.  Could
it be fire?  It was--the prairie on fire!  As the wind blew towards him,
the consuming flames and smoke approached him at greater speed than he
approached them.  They must soon meet.  Behind were the pursuers; in
front the flames.

There was but one course open.  As the fire drew near the Indian
stopped, dismounted, and tore up and beat down a portion of the grass
around him.  Then he struck a light with flint and steel and set fire to
the grass to leeward of the cleared space.  It burned slowly at first,
and he looked anxiously back as the roar of the fiery storm swelled upon
his ear.  Tony looked on in mute alarm and surprise.  The horse raised
its head wildly and became restive, but the Indian, having now lighted
the long grass thoroughly, restrained it.  Presently he sprang on its
back and drew Tony up beside him.  Flames and smoke were now on both
sides of him.  When the grass was consumed to leeward he rode on to the
blackened space--not a moment too soon, however.  It was barely large
enough to serve as a spot of refuge when the storm rolled down and
almost suffocated horse and riders with smoke.  Then the fire at that
spot went out for want of fuel, and thus the way was opened to the
coal-black plain over which it had swept.  Away flew the Indian then,
diverging sharply to the right, so as to skirt the fire, (now on its
windward side), and riding frequently into the very fringe of flame, so
that his footprints might be burnt up.

When, some hours later, the pursuers met the fire, they went through the
same performance in exactly the same manner, excepting that Victor and
Rollin acted with much greater excitement than the savage.  But when
they had escaped the flames, and rode out upon the burnt prairie to
continue the chase, every trace of those of whom they were in pursuit
had completely vanished away.



CHAPTER NINE.

METEOROLOGICAL CHANGES AND CONSEQUENCES, AND A GRAND OPPORTUNITY
MISIMPROVED.

It must not be supposed that the life of a backwoodsman is all pleasure
and excitement.  Not wishing to disappoint our readers with it, we have
hitherto presented chiefly its bright phases, but truth requires that we
should now portray some of the darker aspects of that life.  For
instance, it was a very sombre aspect indeed of prairie-life when Victor
Ravenshaw and his party crossed a stony place where Victor's horse
tripped and rolled over, causing the rider to execute a somersault which
laid him flat upon the plain, compelling the party to encamp there for
three days until he was sufficiently recovered to resume the journey.
Perhaps we should say the chase, for, although the trail had been lost,
hope was strong, and the pursuers continued to advance steadily in what
they believed to be the right direction.

The aspect of things became still more dreary when the fine weather,
which was almost uninterrupted as summer advanced, gave way to a period
of wind and rain.  Still, they pushed on hopefully.  Michel Rollin alone
was despondent.

"It is a wild goose chase now," he remarked sulkily one day, while the
wet fuel refused to kindle.
