were deeply interested with the operations of the little coral insect,
which, I was informed by Jack, is supposed to have entirely constructed
many of the numerous islands in the Pacific Ocean.  And certainly, when
we considered the great reef which these insects had formed round the
island on which we were cast, and observed their ceaseless activity in
building their myriad cells, it did at first seem as if this might be
true; but then, again, when I looked at the mountains of the island, and
reflected that there were thousands of such (many of them much higher)
in the South Seas, I doubted that there must be some mistake here.  But
more of this hereafter.

I also became much taken up with the manners and appearance of the
anemones, and starfish, and crabs, and sea-urchins, and such-like
creatures; and was not content with watching those I saw during my dives
in the Water Garden, but I must needs scoop out a hole in the coral rock
close to it, which I filled with salt water, and stocked with sundry
specimens of anemones and shell-fish, in order to watch more closely how
they were in the habit of passing their time.  Our burning-glass, also,
now became a great treasure to me, as it enabled me to magnify, and so
to perceive more clearly, the forms and actions of these curious
creatures of the deep.

Having now got ourselves into a very comfortable condition, we began to
talk of a project which we had long had in contemplation--namely, to
travel entirely round the island, in order, first, to ascertain whether
it contained any other productions which might be useful to us; and,
second, to see whether there might be any place more convenient and
suitable for our permanent residence than that on which we were now
encamped.  Not that we were in any degree dissatisfied with it.  On the
contrary, we entertained quite a home-feeling to our bower and its
neighbourhood; but if a better place did exist, there was no reason why
we should not make use of it.  At any rate, it would be well to know of
its existence.

We had much earnest talk over this matter.  But Jack proposed that,
before undertaking such an excursion, we should supply ourselves with
good defensive arms; for, as we intended not only to go round all the
shore, but to descend most of the valleys, before returning home, we
should be likely to meet in with--he would not say _dangers_--but at
least with everything that existed on the island, whatever that might
be.

"Besides," said Jack, "it won't do for us to live on cocoa-nuts and
oysters always.  No doubt they are very excellent in their way, but I
think a little animal food now and then would be agreeable as well as
good for us; and as there are many small birds among the trees, some of
which are probably very good to eat, I think it would be a capital plan
to make bows and arrows, with which we could easily knock them over."

"First-rate!" cried Peterkin.  "You will make the bows, Jack, and I'll
try my hand at the arrows.  The fact is, I'm quite tired of throwing
stones at the birds.  I began the very day we landed, I think, and have
persevered up to the present time, but I've never hit anything yet."

"You forget," said I, "you hit me one day on the shin."

"Ah, true!" replied Peterkin; "and a precious shindy you kicked up in
consequence.  But you were at least four yards away from the impudent
paroquet I aimed at, so you see what a horribly bad shot I am."

"But, Jack," said I, "you cannot make three bows and arrows before
to-morrow; and would it not be a pity to waste time, now that we have
made up our minds to go on this expedition?--Suppose that you make one
bow and arrow for yourself, and we can take our clubs?"

"That's true, Ralph.  The day is pretty far advanced, and I doubt if I
can make even one bow before dark.  To be sure, I might work by
firelight after the sun goes down."

We had, up to this time, been in the habit of going to bed with the sun,
as we had no pressing call to work o' nights; and, indeed, our work
during the day was usually hard enough--what between fishing, and
improving our bower, and diving in the Water Garden, and rambling in the
woods--so that when night came we were usually very glad to retire to
our beds.  But now that we had a desire to work at night, we felt a wish
for candles.

"Won't a good blazing fire give you light enough?" inquired Peterkin.

"Yes," replied Jack, "quite enough; but then it will give us a great
deal more than enough of heat in this warm climate of ours."

"True," said Peterkin; "I forgot that.  It would roast us."

"Well, as you're always doing that at any rate," remarked Jack, "we
could scarcely call it a change.  But the fact is, I've been thinking
over this subject before.  There is a certain nut growing in these
islands which is called the candle-nut, because the natives use it
instead of candles; and I know all about it, and how to prepare it for
burning--"

"Then why don't you do it?" interrupted Peterkin.  "Why have you kept us
in the dark so long, you vile philosopher?"

"Because," said Jack, "I have not seen the tree yet, and I'm not sure
that I should know either the tree or the nuts if I did see them.  You
see, I forget the description."

"Ah! that's just the way with me," said Peterkin with a deep sigh.  "I
never could keep in my mind for half-an-hour the few descriptions I ever
attempted to remember.  The very first voyage I ever made was caused by
my mistaking a description--or forgetting it, which is the same thing.
And a horrible voyage it was.  I had to fight with the captain the whole
way out, and made the homeward voyage by swimming!"

"Come, Peterkin," said I, "you can't get even _me_ to believe that."

"Perhaps not, but it's true notwithstanding," returned Peterkin,
pretending to be hurt at my doubting his word.

"Let us hear how it happened," said Jack, while a good-natured smile
overspread his face.

"Well, you must know," began Peterkin, "that the very day before I went
to sea I was greatly taken up with a game at hockey, which I was playing
with my old school-fellows for the last time before leaving them.--You
see I was young then, Ralph."  Peterkin gazed, in an abstracted and
melancholy manner, out to sea.--"Well, in the midst of the game, my
uncle, who had taken all the bother and trouble of getting me bound
'prentice and rigged out, came and took me aside, and told me that he
was called suddenly away from home, and would not be able to see me
aboard, as he had intended.  `However,' said he, `the captain knows you
are coming, so that's not of much consequence; but as you'll have to
find the ship yourself, you must remember her name and description.
D'ye hear, boy?'  I certainly did hear, but I'm afraid I did not
understand; for my mind was so taken up with the game, which I saw my
side was losing, that I began to grow impatient, and the moment my uncle
finished his description of the ship and bade me good-bye I bolted back
to my game, with only a confused idea of three masts, and a
green-painted taffrail, and a gilt figurehead of Hercules with his club
at the bow.  Next day I was so much cast down with everybody saying
good-bye, and a lot o' my female friends cryin' horribly over me, that I
did not start for the harbour, where the ship was lying among a thousand
others, till it was almost too late.  So I had to run the whole way.
When I reached the pier, there were so many masts, and so much
confusion, that I felt quite humble-bumbled in my faculties.  `Now,'
said I to myself, `Peterkin, you're in a fix.'  Then I fancied I saw a
gilt figurehead and three masts belonging to a ship just about to start;
so I darted on board, but speedily jumped on shore again when I found
that two of the masts belonged to another vessel and the figurehead to a
third!  At last I caught sight of what I made sure was it--a fine large
vessel just casting off her moorings.  The taffrail was green.  Three
masts--yes, that must be it--and the gilt figurehead of Hercules.  To be
sure, it had a three-pronged pitchfork in its hand instead of a club;
but that might be my uncle's mistake, or perhaps Hercules sometimes
varied his weapons.  `Cast off!' roared a voice from the quarter-deck.
`Hold on!' cried I, rushing frantically through the crowd.  `Hold on!
hold on!' repeated some of the bystanders, while the men at the ropes
delayed for a minute.  This threw the captain into a frightful rage; for
some of his friends had come down to see him off, and having his orders
contradicted so flatly was too much for him.  However, the delay was
sufficient.  I took a race and a good leap; the ropes were cast off; the
steam-tug gave a puff, and we started.  Suddenly the captain walks up to
me: `Where did you come from, you scamp, and what do you want here?'

"`Please, sir,' said I, touching my cap, `I'm your new 'prentice come
aboard.'

"`New 'prentice!' said he, stamping; `I've got no new 'prentice.  My
boys are all aboard already.  This is a trick, you young blackguard!
You've run away, you have!'  And the captain stamped about the deck and
swore dreadfully; for, you see, the thought of having to stop the ship
and lower a boat and lose half-an-hour, all for the sake of sending a
small boy ashore, seemed to make him very angry.  Besides, it was
blowin' fresh outside the harbour, so that to have let the steamer
alongside to put me into it was no easy job.  Just as we were passing
the pier-head, where several boats were rowing into the harbour, the
captain came up to me.

"`You've run away, you blackguard!' he said, giving me a box on the ear.

"`No, I haven't!' said I angrily, for the box was by no means a light
one.

"`Hark'ee, boy, can you swim?'

"`Yes,' said I.

"`Then do it!' and seizing me by my trousers and the nape of my neck, he
tossed me over the side into the sea.  The fellows in the boats at the
end of the pier backed their oars on seeing this; but observing that I
could swim, they allowed me to make the best of my way to the
pier-head.--So you see, Ralph, that I really did swim my first homeward
voyage."

Jack laughed, and patted Peterkin on the shoulder.

"But tell us about the candle-nut tree," said I.  "You were talking
about it."

"Very true," said Jack; "but I fear I can remember little about it.  I
believe the nut is about the size of a walnut; and I think that the
leaves are white, but I am not sure."

"Eh! ha! hum!" exclaimed Peterkin; "I saw a tree answering to that
description this very day."

"Did you?" cried Jack.  "Is it far from this?"

"No, not half-a-mile."

"Then lead me to it," said Jack, seizing his axe.

In a few minutes we were all three pushing through the underwood of the
forest, headed by Peterkin.

We soon came to the tree in question, which, after Jack had closely
examined it, we concluded must be the candle-nut tree.  Its leaves were
of a beautiful silvery white, and formed a fine contrast to the
dark-green foliage of the surrounding trees.  We immediately filled our
pockets with the nuts, after which Jack said:

"Now, Peterkin, climb that cocoa-nut tree and cut me one of the long
branches."

This was soon done; but it cost some trouble, for the stem was very
high, and as Peterkin usually pulled nuts from the younger trees, he was
not much accustomed to climbing the high ones.  The leaf or branch was a
very large one, and we were surprised at its size and strength.  Viewed
from a little distance, the cocoa-nut tree seems to be a tall, straight
stem, without a single branch except at the top, where there is a tuft
of feathery-looking leaves that seem to wave like soft plumes in the
wind.  But when we saw one of these leaves or branches at our feet, we
found it to be a strong stalk, about fifteen feet long, with a number of
narrow, pointed leaflets ranged alternately on each side.  But what
seemed to us the most wonderful thing about it was a curious substance
resembling cloth, which was wrapped round the thick end of the stalk
where it had been cut from the tree.  Peterkin told us that he had the
greatest difficulty in separating the branch from the stem on account of
this substance, as it was wrapped quite round the tree, and, he
observed, round all the other branches, thus forming a strong support to
the large leaves while exposed to high winds.  When I call this
substance cloth I do not exaggerate.  Indeed, with regard to all the
things I saw during my eventful career in the South Seas, I have been
exceedingly careful not to exaggerate, or in any way to mislead or
deceive my readers.  This cloth, I say, was remarkably like to coarse
brown cotton cloth.  It had a seam or fibre down the centre of it, from
which diverged other fibres, about the size of a bristle.  There were
two layers of these fibres, very long and tough, the one layer crossing
the other obliquely, and the whole was cemented together with a still
finer fibrous and adhesive substance.  When we regarded it attentively,
we could with difficulty believe that it had not been woven by human
hands.  This remarkable piece of cloth we stripped carefully off, and
found it to be above two feet long by a foot broad, and we carried it
home with us as a great prize.

Jack now took one of the leaflets, and cutting out the central spine or
stalk, hurried back with it to our camp.  Having made a small fire, he
baked the nuts slightly and then peeled off the husks.  After this he
wished to bore a hole in them, which, not having anything better at hand
at the time, he did with the point of our useless pencil-case.  Then he
strung them on the cocoa-nut spine, and on putting a light to the
topmost nut we found, to our joy, that it burned with a clear, beautiful
flame, upon seeing which Peterkin sprang up and danced round the fire
for at least five minutes in the excess of his satisfaction.

"Now, lads," said Jack, extinguishing our candle, "the sun will set in
an hour, so we have no time to lose.  I shall go and cut a young tree to
make my bow out of, and you had better each of you go and select good
strong sticks for clubs, and we'll set to work at them after dark."

So saying, he shouldered his axe and went off; followed by Peterkin;
while I took up the piece of newly discovered cloth, and fell to
examining its structure.  So engrossed was I in this that I was still
sitting in the same attitude and occupation when my companions returned.

"I told you so!" cried Peterkin with a loud laugh.--"Oh Ralph, you're
incorrigible!  See, there's a club for you.  I was sure, when we left
you looking at that bit of stuff, that we would find you poring over it
when we came back, so I just cut a club for you as well as for myself."

"Thank you, Peterkin," said I.  "It was kind of you to do that instead
of scolding me for a lazy fellow, as I confess I deserve."

"Oh, as to that," returned Peterkin, "I'll blow you up yet if you wish
it; only it would be of no use if I did, for you're a perfect mule!"

As it was now getting dark we lighted our candle, and placing it in a
holder made of two crossing branches inside of our bower, we seated
ourselves on our leafy beds and began to work.

"I intend to appropriate the bow for my own use," said Jack, chipping
the piece of wood he had brought with his axe.  "I used to be a pretty
fair shot once.--But what's that you're doing?" he added, looking at
Peterkin, who had drawn the end of a long pole into the tent, and was
endeavouring to fit a small piece of the hoop-iron to the end of it.

"I'm going to enlist into the Lancers," answered Peterkin.  "You see,
Jack, I find the club rather an unwieldy instrument for my delicately
formed muscles, and I flatter myself I shall do more execution with a
spear."

"Well, if length constitutes power," said Jack, "you'll certainly be
invincible."

The pole which Peterkin had cut was full twelve feet long, being a very
strong but light and tough young tree, which merely required thinning at
the butt to be a serviceable weapon.

"That's a very good idea," said I.

"Which--this?" inquired Peterkin, pointing to the spear.

"Yes," I replied.

"Humph!" said he; "you'd find it a pretty tough and matter-of-fact idea
if you had it stuck through your gizzard, old boy!"

"I mean the idea of making it is a good one," said I, laughing.  "And,
now I think of it, I'll change my plan too.  I don't think much of a
club, so I'll make me a sling out of this piece of cloth.  I used to be
very fond of slinging, ever since I read of David slaying Goliath the
Philistine, and I was once thought to be expert at it."

So I set to work to manufacture a sling.  For a long time we all worked
very busily without speaking.  At length Peterkin looked up.  "I say,
Jack, I'm sorry to say I must apply to you for another strip of your
handkerchief to tie on this rascally head with.  It's pretty well torn
at any rate, so you won't miss it."

Jack proceeded to comply with this request, when Peterkin suddenly laid
his hand on his arm and arrested him.

"Hist, man!" said he; "be tender!  You should never be needlessly cruel
if you can help it.  Do try to shave past Lord Nelson's mouth without
tearing it, if possible!  Thanks.  There are plenty more handkerchiefs
on the cocoa-nut trees."

Poor Peterkin! with what pleasant feelings I recall and record his jests
and humorous sayings now!

While we were thus engaged we were startled by a distant, but most
strange and horrible, cry.  It seemed to come from the sea, but was so
far away that we could not clearly distinguish its precise direction.
Rushing out of our bower, we hastened down to the beach and stayed to
listen.  Again it came, quite loud and distinct on the night air--a
prolonged, hideous cry, something like the braying of an ass.  The moon
