
With this end in view he shut his eyes, and remained quite still for a
few seconds, and when Di looked at his pinched and pale face in this
placid condition, the tears _would_ overflow their natural boundary, and
sobs _would_ rise up in her pretty throat, but she choked them back for
fear of disturbing her boy.

Presently the boy opened his eyes.

"Wot, are you there yet?" he asked.

"Oh yes.  Did you think I was going away?" she replied, with a look of
innocent surprise.  "I won't leave you now.  I'll stay here and nurse
you, if papa will let me.  I have slept once on a shake-down, when I was
forced by a storm to stay all night at a juv'nile party.  So if you've a
corner here, it will do nicely--"

"My dear child," interrupted her amazed father, "you are talking
nonsense.  And--do keep a little further from the bed.  There may be--
you know--infection--"

"Oh! you needn't fear infection here, sir," said Mrs Frog, somewhat
sharply.  "We are poor enough, God knows, though I _have_ seen better
times, but we keep ourselves pretty clean, though we can't afford to
spend much on soap when food is so dear, and money so scarce--so _very_
scarce!"

"Forgive me, my good woman," said Sir Richard, hastily, "I did not mean
to offend, but circumstances would seem to favour the idea--of--of--"

And here Wealth--although a bank director and chairman of several
boards, and capable of making a neat, if weakly, speech on economic laws
and the currency when occasion required--was dumb before Poverty.
Indeed, though he had often theorised about that stricken creature, he
had never before fairly hunted her down, run her into her den, and
fairly looked her in the face.

"The fact is, Mrs Frog," said Giles Scott, coming to the rescue, "Sir
Richard is anxious to know something about your affairs--your family,
you know, and your means of--by the way, where is baby?" he said looking
round the room.

"She's gone lost," said Mrs Frog.

"Lost?" repeated Giles, with a significant look.

"Ay, lost," repeated Mrs Frog, with a look of equal significance.

"Bless me, how did you lose your child?" asked Sir Richard, in some
surprise.

"Oh! sir, that often happens to us poor folk.  We're used to it," said
Mrs Frog, in a half bantering half bitter tone.

Sir Richard suddenly called to mind the fact--which had not before
impressed him, though he had read and commented on it--that 11,835
children under ten years of age had been lost that year, (and it was no
exceptional year, as police reports will show), in the streets of
London, and that 23 of these children were _never found_.

He now beheld, as he imagined, one of the losers of the lost ones, and
felt stricken.

"Well now," said Giles to Mrs Frog, "let's hear how you get along.
What does your husband do?"

"He mostly does nothin' but drink.  Sometimes he sells little birds;
sometimes he sells penny watches or boot-laces in Cheapside, an' turns
in a little that way, but it all goes to the grog-shop; none of it comes
here.  Then he has a mill now an' again--"

"A mill?" said Sir Richard,--"is it a snuff or flour--"

"He's a professional pugilist," explained Giles.

"An' he's employed at a music-hall," continued Mrs Frog, "to call out
the songs an' keep order.  An' Bobby always used to pick a few coppers
by runnin' messages, sellin' matches, and odd jobs.  But he's knocked
over now."

"And yourself.  How do you add to the general fund?" asked Sir Richard,
becoming interested in the household management of Poverty.

"Well, I char a bit an' wash a bit, sir, when I'm well enough--which
ain't often.  An' sometimes I lights the Jews' fires for 'em, an' clean
up their 'earths on Saturdays--w'ich is their Sundays, sir.  But Hetty
works like a horse.  It's she as keeps us from the work'us, sir.  She's
got employment at a slop shop, and by workin' 'ard all day manages to
make about one shillin' a week."

"I beg your pardon--how much?"

"One shillin', sir."

"Ah, you mean one shilling a day, I suppose."

"No, sir, I mean one shillin' a _week_.  Mr Scott there knows that I'm
tellin' what's true."

Giles nodded, and Sir Richard said, "ha-a-hem," having nothing more
lucid to remark on such an amazing financial problem as was here set
before him.

"But," continued Mrs Frog, "poor Hetty has had a sad disappointment
this week--"

"Oh! mother," interrupted Hetty, "don't trouble the gentleman with that.
Perhaps he wouldn't understand it, for of course he hasn't heard about
all the outs and ins of slop-work."

"Pardon me, my good girl," said Sir Richard, "I have not, as you truly
remark, studied the details of slop-work minutely, but my mind is not
unaccustomed to financial matters.  Pray let me hear about this--"

A savage growling, something between a mastiff and a man, outside the
door, here interrupted the visitor, and a hand was heard fumbling about
the latch.  As the hand seemed to lack skill to open the door the foot
considerately took the duty in hand and burst it open, whereupon the
huge frame of Ned Frog stumbled into the room and fell prostrate at the
feet of Sir Richard, who rose hastily and stepped back.

The pugilist sprang up, doubled his ever ready fists, and, glaring at
the knight, asked savagely:

"Who the--"

He was checked in the utterance of a ferocious oath, for at that moment
he encountered the grave eye of Number 666.

Relaxing his fists he thrust them into his coat-pockets, and, with a
subdued air, staggered out of the house.

"My 'usband, sir," said Mrs Frog, in answer to her visitor's inquiring
glance.

"Oh! is that his usual mode of returning home?"

"No, sir," answered Bobby from his corner, for he was beginning to be
amused by the succession of surprises which Wealth was receiving, "'e
don't always come in so.  Sometimes 'e sends 'is 'ead first an' the feet
come afterwards.  In any case the furniture's apt to suffer, not to
mention the in'abitants, but you've saved us to-night, sir, or, raither,
Mr Scott 'as saved both us an' you."

Poor little Di, who had been terribly frightened, clung closer to her
father's arm on hearing this.

"Perhaps," said Sir Richard, "it would be as well that we should go, in
case Mr Frog should return."

He was about to say good-bye when Di checked him, and, despite her
fears, urged a short delay.

"We haven't heard, you know, about the slops yet.  Do stop just one
minute, dear papa.  I wonder if it's like the beef-tea nurse makes for
me when I'm ill."

"It's not that kind of slops, darling, but ready-made clothing to which
reference is made.  But you are right.  Let us hear about it, Miss
Hetty."

The idea of "Miss" being applied to Hetty, and slops compared to
beef-tea proved almost too much for the broken-legged boy in the corner,
but he put strong constraint on himself and listened.

"Indeed, sir, I do not complain," said Hetty, quite distressed at being
thus forcibly dragged into notice.  "I am thankful for what has been
sent--indeed I am--only it _was_ a great disappointment, particularly at
this time, when we so much needed all we could make amongst us."

She stopped and had difficulty in restraining tears.  "Go on, Hetty,"
said her mother, "and don't be afraid.  Bless you, he's not goin' to
report what you say."

"I know that, mother.  Well, sir, this was the way on it.  They
sometimes--"

"Excuse me--who are `they'?"

"I beg pardon, sir, I--I'd rather not tell."

"Very well.  I respect your feelings, my girl.  Some slop-making firm, I
suppose.  Go on."

"Yes, sir.  Well--they sometimes gives me extra work to do at home.  It
do come pretty hard on me after goin' through the regular day's work,
from early mornin' till night, but then, you see, it brings in a little
more money--and, I'm strong, thank God."

Sir Richard looked at Hetty's thin and colourless though pretty face,
and thought it possible that she might be stronger with advantage.

"Of late," continued the girl, "I've bin havin' extra work in this way,
and last week I got twelve children's ulsters to make up.  This job when
finished would bring me six and sixpence."

"How much?"

"Six and sixpence, sir."

"For the whole twelve?" asked Sir Richard.

"Yes, sir--that was sixpence halfpenny for makin' up each ulster.  It's
not much, sir."

"No," murmured Wealth in an absent manner; "sixpence halfpenny is _not_
much."

"But when I took them back," continued Hetty--and here the tears became
again obstreperous and difficult to restrain--"the master said he'd
forgot to tell me that this order was for the colonies, that he had
taken it at a very low price, and that he could only give me three
shillin's for the job.  Of--of course three shillin's is better the
nothin', but after workin' hard for such a long long time an' expectin'
six, it was--"

Here the tears refused to be pent up any longer, and the poor girl
quietly bending forward hid her face in her hand.

"Come, I think we will go now," said Sir Richard, rising hastily.
"Good-night, Mrs Frog, I shall probably see you again--at least--you
shall hear from me.  Now, Di--say good-night to your boy."

In a few minutes Sir Richard stood outside, taking in deep draughts of
the comparatively fresher air of the court.

"The old screw," growled Bobby, when the door was shut.  "'E didn't
leave us so much as a single bob--not even a brown, though 'e pretends
that six of 'em ain't much."

"Don't be hard on him, Bobby," said Hetty, drying her eyes; "he spoke
very kind, you know, an' p'raps he means to help us afterwards."

"Spoke kind," retorted the indignant boy; "I tell 'ee wot, Hetty, you're
far too soft an' forgivin'.  I s'pose that's wot they teaches you in
Sunday-school at George Yard--eh?  Vill speakin' kind feed us, vill it
clothe us, vill it pay for our lodgin's!"

The door opened at that moment, and Number 666 re-entered.

"The gentleman sent me back to give you this, Mrs Frog," laying a
sovereign on the rickety table.  "He said he didn't like to offer it to
you himself for fear of hurting your feelings, but I told him he needn't
be afraid on that score!  Was I right, Missis?  Look well after it, now,
an' see that Ned don't get his fingers on it."

Giles left the room, and Mrs Frog, taking up the piece of gold, fondled
it for some time in her thin fingers, as though she wished to make quite
sure of its reality.  Then wrapping it carefully in a piece of old
newspaper, she thrust it into her bosom.

Bobby gazed at her in silence up to this point, and then turned his face
to the wall.  He did not speak, but we cannot say that he did not pray,
for, mentally he said, "I beg your parding, old gen'l'm'n, an' I on'y
pray that a lot of fellers like you may come 'ere sometimes to 'urt our
feelin's in that vay!"

At that moment Hetty bent over the bed, and, softly kissing her
brother's dirty face, whispered, "Yes, Bobby, that's what they teach me
in Sunday-school at George Yard."

Thereafter Wealth drove home in a cab, and Poverty went to bed in her
rags.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

BICYCLING AND ITS OCCASIONAL RESULTS.

It is pleasant to turn from the smoke and turmoil of the city to the
fresh air and quiet of the country.

To the man who spends most of his time in the heart of London, going
into the country--even for a short distance--is like passing into the
fields of Elysium.  This was, at all events, the opinion of Stephen
Welland; and Stephen must have been a good judge, for he tried the
change frequently, being exceedingly fond of bicycling, and occasionally
taking what he termed long spins on that remarkable instrument.

One morning, early in the summer-time, young Welland, (he was only
eighteen), mounted his iron horse in the neighbourhood of Kensington,
and glided away at a leisurely pace through the crowded streets.
Arrived in the suburbs of London he got up steam, to use his own phrase,
and went at a rapid pace until he met a "chum," by appointment.  This
chum was also mounted on a bicycle, and was none other than our friend
Samuel Twitter, Junior--known at home as Sammy, and by his companions as
Sam.

"Isn't it a glorious day, Sam?" said Welland as he rode up and sprang
off his steed.

"Magnificent!" answered his friend, also dismounting and shaking hands.
"Why, Stephen, what an enormous machine you ride!"

"Yes, it's pretty high--48 inches.  My legs are long, you see.  Well,
where are we to run to-day?"

"Wherever you like," said Sam, "only let it be a short run, not more
than forty miles, for I've got an appointment this afternoon with my old
dad which I can't get off."

"That'll do very well," said Welland, "so we can go round by--"

Here he described a route by country road and village, which we pretend
not to remember.  It is sufficient to know that it represented the
required "short" run of forty miles--such is the estimate of distance by
the youth of the present day!

"Now then, off we go," said Welland, giving his wheel--he quite ignored
the existence of the little thing at the back--a shove, putting his left
foot on the treadle, and flinging his right leg gracefully over.

Young Twitter followed suit, but Sammy was neither expert nor graceful.
True, he could ride easily, and travel long distances, but he could only
mount by means of the somewhat clumsy process of hopping behind for
several yards.

Once up, however, he went swiftly enough alongside his tall companion,
and the two friends thereafter kept abreast.

"Oh! isn't it a charming sensation to have the cool air fanning one's
cheeks, and feel the soft tremor of the wheel, and see the trees and
houses flow past at such a pace?  It is the likest thing to flying I
ever felt," said Welland, as they descended a slight incline at,
probably, fifteen miles an hour.

"It is delightful," replied Sam, "but, I say, we better put on the
brakes here a bit.  It gets much steeper further down."

Instead of applying the brake, however, young Welland, in the exuberance
of his joy, threw his long legs over the handles, and went down the
slope at railway speed, ready, as he remarked, for a jump if anything
should go wrong.

Twitter was by no means as bold as his friend, but, being ashamed to
show the white feather, he quietly threw his shorter legs over the
handles, and thus the two, perched--from a fore-and-aft point of view--
upon nothing, went in triumph to the bottom of the hill.

A long stretch of smooth level road now lay before them.  It required
the merest touch on the treadles to send them skimming along like
skaters on smooth ice, or swallows flying low.  Like gentle ghosts they
fleeted along with little more than a muffled sound, for their axles
turned in ball-sockets and their warning bells were silent save when
touched.

Onward they went with untiring energy, mile after mile, passing
everything on the way--pedestrians, equestrians, carts and gigs; driving
over the level ground with easy force, taking the hills with a rush to
keep up the pace, and descending on the other sides at what Welland
styled a "lightning run."

Now they were skimming along a road which skirted the margin of a canal,
the one with hands in his coat-pockets, the other with his arms crossed,
and both steering with their feet; now passing under a railway-arch, and
giving a wild shout, partly to rouse the slumbering echoes that lodged
there, and partly to rouse the spirit of a small dog which chanced to be
passing under it--in both cases successfully!  Anon they were gliding
over a piece of exposed ground on which the sun beat with intense light,
causing their shadows to race along with them.  Again they were down in
a hollow, gliding under a row of trees, where they shut off a little of
the steam and removed their caps, the better to enjoy the grateful
shade.  Soon they were out in the sunshine again, the spokes of their
wheels invisible as they topped a small eminence from the summit of
which they took in one comprehensive view of undulating lands, with
villages scattered all round, farm-houses here and there, green fields
and flowering meadows, traversed by rivulet or canal, with cattle,
sheep, and horses gazing at them in silent or startled wonder, and birds
twittering welcome from the trees and hedge-rows everywhere.

Now they were crossing a bridge and nearing a small town where they had
to put hands to the handles again and steer with precaution, for little
dogs had a tendency to bolt out at them from unexpected corners, and
poultry is prone to lose its heads and rush into the very jaws of
danger, in a cackling effort to avoid it.  Stray kittens and pigs, too,
