rabbit and attached it to his belt.  After this, advancing through the
woods in a north-westerly direction, they made for a somewhat elevated
ridge, hoping to obtain from that point a more extended view of the
land.

Towards noon, feeling hungry, they began to look out for a suitable spot
whereon to lunch, or rather to dine; for while travelling on foot in
wild countries men usually find it convenient to take a very substantial
meal about, or soon after, noon.

"To have water handy," remarked Paul, as they stopped to look round, "is
essential to comfort as well as cookery."

"Look there, away to the nor'-west o' that bunch o' trees," said the
captain, pointing to a distant spot, "there's a depression in the ground
there; and from the lie o' the land all round I should say we shall find
a stream o' some sort near it."

"I hope so," said Oliver; "for I shall want water to wash the rabbit
with, and I have a strong hope that we may find fish in the rivers of
this land, and although my hooks are big, I think the fish may not be
particular, seein' that they have never before been tempted in that
way."

"That's true, Olly; I hope you won't be disappointed.  But what makes
you want to wash the rabbit, my boy?" asked the captain; "it is not
dirty?"

"Perhaps not; but I don't quite relish the dirty work of cleaning out a
rabbit before cooking it, so I want to try the plan of cutting it open,
holding it under water, and scraping out the inside while in that
position."

"My son, you won't be so particular when you've been a few weeks huntin'
in the wild woods.  But what about the hair?"

"Oh, we can singe that off, daddy."

"What! singe off wet hair?  And the skin--I doubt we might find that
tough?"

The young cook--for such he became to the exploring expedition--looked
puzzled.

"I never skinned a rabbit," he said, "but no doubt it is easy enough.
I'll just cut it open at the head--or tail--and pull it off like a
glove."

"Not quite so easily done as that" remarked Paul, with a laugh; "but I
happen to know something about skinning birds and beasts, Olly, so make
your mind easy.  I will show you how to do it."

"You happen to know something about almost everything, I think," said
the captain.  "Tell me now, d'ye happen to know what sort o' beast it is
that I see starin' at us over the bushes yonder?"

"No, Master Trench, I do not; but it looks marvellously like a deer of
some sort," said Paul, as he hastily fitted an arrow to his bow.  But
before he could discharge it the animal wisely retired into the shelter
of its native wilds.

By this time, having walked smartly, they had gained the crest of one of
the lower ridges, or plateaus, that rose in gentle slopes from the rocky
shore, and there, as had been anticipated, they found a small rivulet,
such as Americans would call a creek, and Scotsmen a burn.  It flowed in
a north-easterly direction, and was broken by several small rapids and
cascades.

With a little shout of satisfaction, Oliver ran down to its banks,
getting his hooks out as he went.  Arriving at the margin of a deep
pool, he bent over it and gazed earnestly down.  The water was as clear
as crystal, showing every stone at the bottom as if it had been covered
merely with a sheet of glass, and there, apparently undisturbed by the
intruder, lay several large fish.

What they were he knew not--cared not.  Sufficient for him that they
seemed large and fat.  His first impulse was to turn and shout the
discovery to his companions; but seeing that they had already set to
work to cut firewood a little higher up the stream, he checked himself.

"I'll catch a fish first maybe," he muttered, as he quickly adjusted to
his piece of cord one of the smallest cod-hooks he possessed.  A few
minutes sufficed for this; but when he was ready, it occurred to him
that he had no bait.  He looked around him, but nothing suitable was to
be seen, and he was about to attempt the all but hopeless task of
tearing up the soil with his fingers in search of a worm, when his eyes
fell on a small bright feather that had been dropped by some passing
bird.  "Happy thoughts" occurred to people in the days of which we
write, even as now, though they were not recognised or classified as
such.

Fly-fishing was instantly suggested to the eager boy.  He had often
tried it in Old England; why not try it in Newfoundland?  A very brief
period sufficed to unwind a thread from the cord, and therewith to
attach the feather to the hook.  He had no rod, and neither time nor
patience to make one.  Gathering the cord into a coil, such as wharfmen
form when casting ropes to steamers; he swung it round his head, and
hove his hook half-way across the glassy pool.

The fish looked up at him, apparently in calm surprise--certainly
without alarm.  Then Olly began to haul in the hook.  It was a fearful
fly to look at, such as had never desecrated those waters since the days
of Adam, yet those covetous fish rushed at it in a body.  The biggest
caught it, and found himself caught!  The boy held on tenderly, while
the fish in wild amazement darted from side to side, or sprang high into
the air.  Oliver was far too experienced a fisher not to know that the
captive might be but slightly hooked, so he played it skilfully, casting
a sidelong glance now and then at his busy comrades in the hope that
they had not observed him.

At last the fish became tired, and the fisher drew it slowly to the
bank--a four- or five-pound trout at the very least!  Unfortunately the
bank was steep, and the boy found, to his distress, that the hook had
only caught hold slightly of the fish's lip.  To lift out the heavy
creature with the line was therefore impossible, to catch hold of it
with the hand was almost equally so; for when he lay down and stretched
out his arm as far as possible, he could scarcely touch it with the end
of his finger.

"If it makes another dash it'll escape," muttered the anxious boy, as he
slid further and further down the bank--a hairbreadth at a time.

Just then the fish showed symptoms of revival.  Olly could stand this no
longer.  He made a desperate grasp and caught it by the gills just as
the hook came away.  The act destroyed what little balance he had
retained, and he went with a sharp short yell into the pool.

Paul looked up in time to see his friend's legs disappear.  He ran to
the spot in considerable alarm, supposing that the boy might have taken
a fit, and not knowing whether he could swim.  He was relieved, however,
to find that Olly, on reappearing, struck out manfully with one hand for
a shallow place at the lower end of the pool, while with the other he
pressed some object tightly to his bosom.

"You don't mean to say," exclaimed Paul, as he assisted his friend out
of the water, "that you went in for that splendid trout and caught it
with your hands!"

"You saw me dive," replied the boy, throwing the fish down with affected
indifference, and stooping to wring the water from his garments as well
as to hide his face; "and you don't suppose, surely, that I caught it
with my feet.  Come, look at the depth I had to go down to catch him!"

Seizing his prize, Olly led his friend to the spot where he had fallen
in, and pointed with a look of triumph to the clear, deep pool.  At the
moment a smile of intelligence lit up Paul's features, and he pointed to
the extemporised fly-hook which still dangled from the bank.

Bursting into a hearty fit of laughter, the successful fisher ran up to
the encampment, swinging the trout round his head, to the surprise and
great satisfaction of his father, who had already got the fire alight
and the rabbit skinned.

Need it be said that the meal which followed was a hearty one, though
there was no variety save roast rabbit, roast trout, and roast pork,
with the last of the cakes as pudding?

"A first-rate dinner!" exclaimed Paul, after swallowing a draft of
sparkling water from the stream.

"Not bad," admitted Captain Trench, "if we only had something stronger
than water to wash it down."

Paul made no reply to this remark, but he secretly rejoiced in the
necessity which delivered his friend from the only foe that had power to
overcome him.

"Now," remarked Paul, when he had finished dinner, "I will strengthen my
bow before starting, for it does not send the arrows with sufficient
force, and the only way to do that, that I can think of, is to shorten
it."

"And I will feather the last arrow I made," said Oliver, drawing the
shaft in question out of his quiver.

"Well, as my bow and bolts are all ship-shape and in perfect order, I
will ramble to the top of the ridge before us and take a look out
ahead."

So saying the captain departed, and the other two were soon so deeply
absorbed in their work and in conversation about future plans that they
had almost forgotten him when a loud shout caused them to start up.  On
looking towards the ridge they beheld Captain Trench tossing his arms
wildly in the air, and shouting and gesticulating violently.

"Sees savages, I think," said Paul.

"Or gone mad!" cried Olly.

Catching up their arms, the two ran hastily to the top of the ridge,
where they arrived perspiring and panting, to find that their excitable
comrade had only gone into ecstasies about the magnificent scenery that
had burst upon his sight.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

BEAUTIFUL SCENES AND STRANGE EXPERIENCES.

And, truly, the scene which met their gaze was of a nature calculated to
arouse enthusiasm in a much less ardent bosom than that of Captain
Trench.  A wide undulating country, studded with lakelets and rich with
verdure, stretched away from their feet to the horizon, where a range of
purple hills seemed to melt and mingle with cloudland, so that the eye
was carried, as it were, by imperceptible gradations from the rugged
earth up into the soft blue sky; indeed, it was difficult to distinguish
where the former ended and the latter began.  The lakes and ponds were
gay with yellow water-lilies, and the air was musical with the sweet
cries of wildfowl; while the noon-tide sun bathed the whole in a golden
glory.

The effect of such a sight on our wanderers was at first too powerful
for words, and when words did burst forth they served to show how
wonderfully diverse are the spirits of men.  Captain Trench, as we have
seen, was moved by this vision of beauty to shout, almost to dance, with
delight, while in thought he bounded over the length and breadth of the
new land, taking bearings, and making notes and charts with the view of
extending the geographical knowledge of mankind!  His son Oliver, on the
other hand, allowed his imagination to revel freely through the forests
and over the hills and across lakes and savannahs in powerful sympathy
with the aspirations which must have animated Nimrod; while to Paul
Burns, whose temperament was sedate and earnest, as well as cheerful and
hearty, the glorious vision at once suggested thoughts of that tranquil
home in which man's lot was originally cast by the loving heart of God.

"Now it is quite plain," said Trench, as they slowly descended into this
beautiful scene, "that this land is no collection of small islands, as
we have been led to suppose, but a great land full of all that is
needful to make it the happy abode of man."

"Just so, daddy!" exclaimed the enthusiastic Oliver, "and _we_ have been
sent to explore it and carry home the news--perhaps to bring out the
first settlers and show them the way!"

"Why, Olly, you carry too much sail for so small a craft; you look out
rather too far ahead.  And what mean ye by saying we are sent?  Nobody
sent us on this journey that I know of, unless you mean that Swinton--
the big scoundrel!--sent us."

"Whatever Olly meant by the expression," interposed Paul, "I think he is
right; for all men are sent by the Almighty, no matter where they go."

"What! d'ye mean that men are sent by the Almighty whether they go to do
good or evil?"

"Ay, Master Trench, that is what I mean; they _are_ sent by Him, though
not sent to _do evil_.  Look here, don't you admit that God created all
men and _sent_ them into this world?"

"Of course I do."

"And that He made you an Englishman, and so _sent_ you to England; and
that He made you a sea-captain, and among other places _sent_ you to
Newfoundland."

"Well--I--I suppose He did," returned the captain, with that puzzled
expression of countenance which was wont to indicate that his mind was
grappling difficulties.

"Well, then," continued Paul, "_being_ good, of course the Almighty sent
us to _do_ good; but He also gave us free wills, which just means
permission to do as we please; so it remains to be seen whether we will
use our free wills in working with Him, or in _trying_ to work against
Him, for, strange to say, we cannot really work against God, we can only
_try_ to do it, and in so trying we establish the fact of our own
wickedness; but His grand and good purposes shall be carried out in
spite of us notwithstanding, for he can bring good out of evil."

"Now, Paul, I've lost soundings altogether, and it's my opinion that you
are foolishly talking about things that you, don't understand."

"I never heard, Master Trench, that it was foolish to talk about what
one does not understand!  On the contrary, it is by talking of things
that we don't understand that we manage at last to understand them.  You
had a deal of talking about navigation, had you not, before you
understood it?"

"Look 'ee here, lad," said Trench, stopping suddenly, with his legs
planted firmly apart as though on the quarter-deck of his ship in a
cross sea, while he drove his right fist into the palm of his left hand
argumentatively.  "Look 'ee here.  How can it be possible that--that--
pooh!  Come along, we'll never get on with our survey of the land if we
dispute at this rate."

The stout mariner turned away with an air of exasperation, and resumed
his walk at a rapid pace, closely followed by his amused friend and son.

This irreverent mode of dismissing a grave and difficult subject was not
peculiar to Captain Trench.  It has probably been adopted by those who
shrink from mental effort ever since the days of Adam and Eve.  Minds
great and small have exercised themselves since the beginning of time on
this perplexing subject--God's sovereignty and man's free will--with
benefit, probably, to themselves.  We recommend it in passing, good
reader, to your attention, and we will claim to be guiltless of
presumption in thus advising, so long as the writing stands, "Prove all
things, and hold fast that which is good."

Before the sun went down that night our explorers had plunged into the
very heart of the beautiful country which we have described--now pushing
through tangled underwood, or following the innumerable deer-tracks with
which the country was seamed, or breasting the hill-sides, or making
detours to get round small lakes, being guided, in a westerly direction,
by a small pocket-compass which Captain Trench was fortunately in the
habit of carrying with him wherever he went.  No large lakes or broad
rivers had yet been met with, so that up to this point the divergencies
from the direct line had not been great.

Thus they advanced for several days, subsisting on game and fish,
chiefly the last, however; for their shooting powers were very
defective, and Oliver was an ardent--too ardent--fisher.  Their
inability to shoot became at last a serious matter, for many arrows and
bolts were lost, as well as much game.

"Look, now, there's _another_ chance," whispered Paul, pointing to a
plump willow-grouse that sat in a bush in front of them.  "You try
first, Master Trench."

"An' _don't_ miss, daddy," said Oliver entreatingly; "there's only the
bones of a rabbit left from this morning's breakfast."

The captain took a fervently careful aim, but went far wide of the mark,
to his intense chagrin.  Paul then bent his bow, but without success,
though his arrows stuck in a branch close under the bird, which, being
very tame, only glanced down inquiringly.  Oliver's arrow went over it,
and the stone which he afterwards slang made such a rattling in the bush
that the puzzled creature finally retired.

"This is becoming serious," remarked the captain, with a face so solemn
that Paul burst into a fit of laughter.

"Ha! you may laugh, lad," continued Trench, "but if you were as hungry
as I am you'd be more inclined to cry.  D'ye think a stout man like me
can sup heartily on rabbit bones?"

"You've forgot, daddy, the four big trout I caught to-day."

"So I have, Olly; well, come and let's have 'em cooked at once."

The fish, which were really more than sufficient without the rabbit
bones, were soon grilling over a huge fire under the canopy of a
spreading birch-tree.

When the skipper had disposed of enough to allay the pangs of hunger, he
turned and said to his comrades, in a tone of marked decision--
