being cruel to dogs or cats, but it did not prevent his ruffling some of
the former into furious rage, and terrifying many of the latter into
cataleptic fits.

One afternoon, having roved about for some time without aim, sometimes
howling in at open doors and bolting, frequently heaping banter upon
good-natured policemen, occasionally asking of mild old ladies the way
to places he had never heard of, or demanding what o'clock it was of
people who did not possess watches, and whistling most of the time with
irritating intensity--our little hero at last came to the conclusion
that felicity was not to be obtained by such courses--not at least, at
that time.  He was out of sorts, somehow, so he would return to the
garden and comfort Susy and the old woman, i.e. find comfort to himself
in their society.  He went whistling along, therefore, until his steps
were suddenly and violently arrested.

To account for this we must tell how, about this time, it chanced that a
very drunk man of the very lowest London type, as far as appearance
went, awoke from a heavy slumber which he had been enjoying under the
seat of a compartment in a certain low gin-palace.  He was about to
stretch himself and give vent to a noisy yawn when the word "Laidlaw"
smote his ear.  Pale, worn-out, cadaverous, threadbare, inexpressibly
mean, the man gently raised his dissolute form on one elbow and listened
to two men in a box beside him.  Their heads met almost over the spot
where his own head rested.  The men were Lockhart and Spivin, and the
occasion was that on which we have already described them as engaged in
plotting, or referring to, the downfall of the man from Scotland.

Trumps (for he was the listener), though well practised in the art of
eavesdropping, could not gather the gist of the plotters' discourse.
Only this he made out, that, in some way or other, they meant to do, or
had done, mischief to the man who had spared and helped, and, above all,
had _trusted him_!  It was tantalising to hear so little, though so
near, for, from his position under the seat, he could have grasped Mr
Lockhart's ankles.  But the plotters were much too knowing to speak in
tones that could be easily overheard.  Besides, other noisy people were
arguing in the neighbouring and opposite compartments, so that the
confusion of tongues rendered them, they thought, safe.  Even the man
under the seat although so very near, would have failed to catch the
drift of a single sentence had not the name of Laidlaw sharpened his
ears and faculties.  One that he did catch, however, was suggestive,
viz., "put the 50 pound note in his bag," or something to that effect.

When the two friends rose to depart, Trumps sank noiselessly on the
ground like a filthy shadow, but the quick eye of the lawyer caught
sight of his leg.

Lockhart started, turned aside, and gave Trumps a kick in the ribs.  It
was a sharp painful kick, but drew from him only a heavy snore.  To make
quite sure the man of law administered another kick.  This caused the
recumbent man to growl forth a savage oath which terminated in a snore
so very natural that the lawyer fell into the trap, and went off with
the contemptuous remark--"Dead drunk!"

Trumps, however, was very much the reverse.  He was indeed all alive and
greatly sobered by his nap as well as by what he had heard.  He rose and
followed the plotters, but missed them in the crowd outside.  In his
anxiety to overtake them he ran somewhat violently against Tommy Splint,
and thus arrested him, as we have said, in the pursuit of pleasure.

"Hallo, Thunderbolt!" exclaimed the boy sternly, as he started back and
doubled his fists, "who let _you_ out o' Noogate?"

The thief was about to pass without deigning a reply, when, glancing at
the small questioner, he suddenly stopped and held out his hand.

"I say, Splint, is it _you_ I've run into?"

"Well, it's uncommon like me.  Any'ow, not a twin brother, I s'pose it
must be myself.  But I hain't got the pleasure o' _your_ acquaintance as
I knows on."

"What!  Don't you remember Trumps?"

"No, I don't remember Trumps, an', wot's more, I don't b'lieve from the
look of 'im that any of Trumps's family or friends wants to remember
'im."

The possibility that the boy might remember Trumps was not so unlikely
after all, for, being of a highly social disposition, Tommy was pretty
well acquainted with, and known to, nearly all the thieves and
pickpockets of the locality.  Indeed he would certainly have been one of
themselves but for garret-garden influences.

"Well, Tommy," said the thief confidentially, "I remember _you_, an' I
wants a little conversation with you."

"No, you don't" returned the boy, retreating; "you wants my wipe, or
puss, or ticker, you do--or suthin' o' that sort--but you've come to the
wrong shop, you have."

"But really, Tommy, I've got summat to say to 'ee about your noo friend
from Scotland, David Laidlaw."

"How d'ee know he's _my_ friend?" asked Tommy, becoming suddenly
interested.

"'Cause I've seen you jawin' with 'im; an' I've seen you go up together
to visit chimney-pot Liz an' Susy; an'--"

"Oh! you knows chimley-pot Liz an' Susy, do ye?  But of course you does.
Everybody as knows anythink knows _them_."

"Ay, lad, an' I knows lawyer Lockhart too," said Trumps, with a peculiar
look; "him that owns the 'ouses 'ereabouts, an' draws the rents--"

"_Draws_ the rents!" interrupted the boy, with a look of scorn;
"_screws_ the rents, you mean."

"Jus' so, boy--screws 'em.  Ah, 'e _is_ a thief, is lawyer Lockhart."

"Come, if that's so, you've no occasion to be 'ard on 'im, Trumps, for
you're in the same boat, you know."

"No, I ain't," replied Trumps, with virtuous indignation, "for 'e's a
_mean_ thief!"

"Oh, an' you're a 'ighminded one, I s'pose," returned the boy, with a
hearty chuckle; "but come along, young man.  If you've suthin' to tell
me about Da-a-a-vid Laidlaw I'm your man.  This way."

He led the man down the alley, across the court, round the corner, and
up the stair to the landing.

"There you are," he said, "this is my snuggery--my boodwar, so to speak.
Sot down, an' out with it."

Seated there, the thief, in low confidential and solemn tones, related
what he had seen and heard in the public-house, and told of his own
acquaintance with and interest in Laidlaw.

"The willains!" exclaimed Tommy.  "An' wot d'ee think they're agoin' to
do?"

"Screw 'im some'ow, an' git 'im out o' the way."

"But w'y?"

"That's wot I wants to ask _you_, lad.  I knows nothing more than I've
told 'ee."

"We must save Da-a-a-vid!" exclaimed Tommy in a tragic manner, clutching
his hair and glaring.

Tommy's sense of the ludicrous was too strong for him, even in the most
anxious times, and the notion of him and Trumps saving anybody
overwhelmed him for a moment; nevertheless, he really was excited by
what he had heard.

"Come--come with me," he cried, suddenly seizing Trumps by the sleeve of
his shabby coat and half dragging him up to the garret, where he found
old Liz and Susy in the garden on the roof.

"Allow me to introdooce a friend, granny.  'E ain't much to look at, but
never mind, 'e's a good 'un to go."

Old Liz and Susy had become too much accustomed to low life in its worst
phases to be much troubled by the appearance of their visitor, and when
he had explained the object of his visit they became deeply interested.

"You think, then," said Liz, after listening to the whole story, "that
lawyer Lockhart intends to hide a 50 pound note in Mr Laidlaw's
travelling bag, and say he stole it?"

"Yes, ma'am; that's what I think."

"And for what purpose?" asked Susy with some anxiety.

"To git him convicted an' sent to prison, miss," replied Trumps
promptly.  "I know lawyer Lockhart--we call 'im liar Lockhart in the--
well, ahem! an' as I was sayin', 'e's a villain as'll stick at nothing.
If 'e sets 'is 'art on gittin' Mr Laidlaw into prison 'e'll git 'im in;
for what purpus, of course, _I_ don't know."

After further discussion of the subject it was finally arranged that
Tommy Splint should go straight to the house of Mr Spivin, where the
Scotsman lodged, and reconnoitre.

"And be sure, Tommy," whispered Susan at the head of the stair when he
was about to leave, "that you find out all about this horrid plot.  We
_must_ save him.  He saved _me_, you know," she added, with a blush.

"Yes, we _must_ save 'im," said the boy in a tone of determination that
inspired confidence in the girl, even though it made her laugh.

Trumps accompanied Tommy part of the way, and told him that he knew some
ugly things about lawyer Lockhart that might get that gentleman into
difficulties if he could only prove them, but he couldn't quite see his
way to that, not being learned enough in the law.

"You see, Tommy--"

"Thomas, if you please," interrupted the urchin with dignity.  "My
hintimates calls me Tommy, but you ain't one o' _them_ yet, Mr Trumps.
You ain't even on my wisitin' list.  P'r'aps I may promote yer to that
some day, but--it depends.  Now, look 'ere, slimey-coat--if any one
larned in the law was inclined to pump you, could you be pumped?"

With a remarkably sly look Trumps replied, "Yes--for a consideration!"

"All right, young man.  Give me your card; or, if you hain't got one,
let me know w'ere you 'ang hout."

Having been satisfied on this point, Tommy told the thief that he had no
further use for him, and as he wished to cross London Bridge alone, he
(Trumps) was free to make himself scarce.



CHAPTER TEN.

DETECTIVE DOINGS.

For a considerable time the boy prowled about the house of Mr Spivin in
the hope of seeing David Laidlaw go out or in; but our Scot did not
appear.  At last a servant-girl came to the open door with a broom in
her hand to survey the aspect of things in general.  Tommy walked
smartly up to her, despite the stern gaze of a suspicious policeman on
the opposite side of the street.

"My sweet gal," he said affably touching his cap, "is Capting Laidlaw
within?"

"There's no _Captain_ Laidlaw here," answered the girl sharply; "there
_was_ a Daivid Laidlaw, but--"

"Da-a-a-vid, my dear, not Daivid.  The gen'l'm'n hisself told me, and
surely 'e knows 'ow to prenounce 'is own name best."

"You've a deal of cheek, boy--anyway, Laidlaw 'as bin took up, an' 'e's
now in prison."

The sudden look of consternation on the boy's face caused the girl to
laugh.

"D'ee know w'ere they've took 'im to?"

"No, I don't."

"But surely you don't b'lieve 'e's guilty?" said the boy, forgetting
even his humorous tendencies in his anxiety about his friend.

"No, I don't" said the girl, becoming suddenly earnest, "for Mary an' me
saw--"

"Martha-a-a!" shouted a female voice from the interior of the house at
that moment.

The girl ran in.  At the same time the suspicious policeman came up
with, "Now then, youngster, move on."

"Move off you mean, bobby.  Hain't you been to school yet, stoopid?"
cried the boy, applying his thumb to his nose and moving his fingers in
what he styled a thumbetrical manner as he ran away.

But poor Tommy Splint was in no jesting mood.  He had been impressed
with the idea from infancy--rightly or wrongly--that once in the
clutches of the law it was no easy matter to escape from them; and he
was now utterly incapable of deciding what his next step should be.  In
this difficulty he was about to return disconsolate to Cherub Court when
it occurred to him that it might be worth while to pay a visit to the
good ship _Seacow_, and obtain the opinion of Sam Blake.

Although it was broad day and the sun was glowing gloriously in an
unclouded sky, he found Sam down in a dark hole, which he styled his
bunk, fast asleep.

Sam did not move when Tommy shook and woke him.  He merely opened his
eyes quietly and said, "All right, my lad; what's up?"  After hearing
the boy's story to the end he merely said, "Mind your helm--clear out!"
flung off his blankets, and bounded to the floor like an acrobat.

Being already in his shirt, short drawers, and stockings, it did not
take quite a minute to don trousers, vest and coat.  Another minute
sufficed for the drawing on of boots, fastening a necktie, running a
broken comb through his front locks, and throwing on a glazed hat.  Two
minutes all told!  Men whose lives often depend on speed acquire a
wonderful power of calmly-rapid action.

"What d'ee say to it, Sam?" asked Tommy as they hurried along the
streets.

"Hold on! avast! belay!  I'm thinkin'!" said Sam.  The boy accordingly
held on, avasted, and belayed until his companion had thought it out.

"Yes, that's it," said the sailor at last.  "I'll go an' see Colonel--
Colonel--what's 'is name? old Liz's friend--Burntwood, is it, or--"

"Brentwood," said Tommy.

"That's it--Brentwood.  You don't know his address, do you?  No?  Never
mind; we'll go to Cherub Court an' get it, and then make sail for the
Colonel's.  I've no more notion which way to steer, lad, than the man in
the moon; but the Colonel will be sure to know how to lay our course,
an' he'll be willin', I've no doubt first for his own sake, seein' that
this Lockhart is his own lawyer; second, for old Liz's sake, seein' that
her affairs are involved in it; and third, for the sake of his country,
if he's a good and true man."

The sailor was not disappointed.  Colonel Brentwood did not indeed
himself know exactly how to act but he knew that the best thing to do in
the circumstances was to seek aid from those who did know.  He therefore
went straight to Scotland Yard--that celebrated centre of the London
Police Force--and put the matter before the authorities there.  A
detective, named Dean, was appointed to take the job in hand.

"John," observed Mrs Brentwood to her husband, prophetically, after an
interview with the detective at their own house, "you may depend upon it
that Mr Dean will discover that more things are amiss than this affair
of the Scotsman and dear old nurse."

"Possibly--indeed probably," returned the Colonel; "but what makes you
think so?"

"The fact that no thorough scoundrel ever yet confined himself to one or
two pieces of villainy."

"But Lockhart is not yet proved to be a thorough scoundrel.  You have
condemned the poor man, my dear, without trial, and on insufficient
evidence."

"Insufficient evidence!" echoed Dora indignantly.  "What more do you
want?  Has he not systematically robbed dear old Liz?  Are not the
Railway Share Lists and Reports open to inspection?"

"True, Dora, true.  Be not indignant.  I have admitted that you may be
right.  Our detective will soon find out.  He has the calm,
self-confident, penetrating look of a man who could, if possible, screw
something out of nothing."

Whether or not Mr Dean possessed the power ascribed to him is yet to be
seen.  We have not space to follow him through the whole of the
serpentine sinuosities of his investigations, but we will watch him at
one or two salient points of his course.

First of all he visited Tommy Splint, who, in the privacy of his
"boodwar" revealed to him, as he thought, every scrap of information
about the affair that he possessed.  To all of this Mr Dean listened in
perfect silence, patiently, and with a smile of universal benevolence.
He not only appreciated all the boy's commentaries and jests and
prophecies on the situation, but encouraged the full development of his
communicative disposition.  Tommy was charmed.  Never before had he met
with such an audience--except, perhaps, in Susy.

When the boy had fairly run himself out Mr Dean proceeded to pump and
squeeze, and the amount of relevant matter that he pumped and squeezed
out of him, in cross-questioning, was so great, that Tommy was lost in a
mixture of admiration and humility.  You see, up to that time he had
thought himself rather a knowing fellow; but Mr Dean managed to remove
the scales from his eyes.

"Now, my boy," said the detective, after having squeezed him quite flat,
and screwed the very last drop out of him, "you are quite sure, I
suppose, as to Mr Trumps's words--namely, that he knew Mrs Morley--
chimney-pot Liz, as you call her--"

"Parding.  I never called her that--chimley-pot is her name."

"Well, chimley-pot be it--and that he had formerly known Mr Lockhart
but did not say when or where he had first become acquainted with
either; yet Trumps's peculiar look and manner when speaking of the
lawyer led you to think he knew more about him than he chose to tell?"

"Right you air, sir.  That's 'ow it stands."

"Good; and in reference to the servant-girl--you are sure that she
became suddenly very earnest when she said she believed Laidlaw was not
guilty, and that she and some one named Mary had `seen something,' but
you don't know what, owing to a sudden interruption?"

"Right again, sir."

"Now, then," said Mr Dean, rising, "we will go up and see Mrs Morley."

They found the old woman alone, knitting in her rustic chair in her
floral bower on the roof.  Mr Dean sat down to have a chat and Tommy
seated himself on a stool to gaze and listen, for he was fascinated,
somehow, by the detective.

It was really interesting to observe the tact with which the man
approached his subject and the extreme patience with which he listened
to the somewhat garrulous old woman.

Being a Briton he began, of course, with the weather, but slid quickly
and naturally from that prolific subject to the garden, in connection
with which he displayed a considerable knowledge of horticulture--but
this rather in the way of question than of comment.  To slide from the
garden to the gardener was very easy as well as natural; and here Mr
Dean quite won the old woman's heart by his indirect praise of Susy's
manipulation of plants and soils.  To speak of Susy, without referring
to Susy's early history, would have been to show want of interest in a
very interesting subject.  Mr Dean did not err in this respect.  From
Susy's mother he naturally referred to the family in which she and old
Liz had been in service, and to the return of the only surviving member
of it to England.

All this was very interesting, no doubt, but it did not throw much light
into the mind of Mr Dean, until old Liz mentioned the fact that Mr
Lockhart, besides being solicitor to the Brentwoods, was also solicitor
to old Mr Weston, who had left his property to Colonel Brentwood.  She
also said that she feared, from what Mrs Brentwood had recently said to
her, there was some difficulty about the will, which was a pity, as the
only people she knew besides Mr Lockhart who knew anything about it
