of natives, gave them the information they desired.  No sooner had he
finished than with loud cries they turned and darted away, tossing their
arms wildly in the air, and looking more like to a band of scared
monkeys than to human beings.

"They're queer fellows," remarked Peterkin.

"So they are," replied the trader, "and they're kindly fellows too--
jovial and good-humoured, except when under the influence of their
abominable superstitions.  Then they become incarnate fiends, and commit
deeds of cruelty that make one's blood run cold to think of."

I felt much saddened by these remarks, and asked the trader if the
missionaries accomplished any good among them.

"Oh yes," he replied, "they do much good, such of them at least as
really are missionaries; for it does not follow that every one who wears
a black coat and white neck-cloth, and goes abroad, is a missionary.
But what can a few men scattered along the coast here and there, however
earnest they be, do among the thousands upon thousands of savages that
wander about in the interior of Africa?  No good will ever be done in
this land, to any great extent, until traders and missionaries go hand
in hand into the interior, and the system of trade is entirely
remodelled."

"From what you remark," said I, feeling much interested, "I should
suppose that you have given this subject a good deal of attention."

"I have.  But there are people in this world who, supposing that because
I am a trader I am therefore prone to exalt trade to an equality with
religion, do not give me credit for disinterestedness when I speak.
Perhaps you are one of these."

"Not I, in truth," said I, earnestly.  "My chief desire in conversing
with mankind is to acquire knowledge; I therefore listen with attention
and respect to the opinions of others, instead of endeavouring to assert
my own.  In the present instance, being ignorant, I have no opinions to
assert."

"I wish there were more people in your country," replied the trader,
"who felt as you do.  I would tell them that, although a trader, I
regard the salvation of men's souls as the most important work in this
world.  I would argue that until you get men to listen, you cannot
preach the gospel to them; that the present system of trade in Africa is
in itself antagonistic to religion, being based upon dishonesty, and
that, therefore, the natives will not listen to missionaries--of course,
in some cases they will; for I believe that the gospel, when truly
preached, is never preached in vain--but they will throw every possible
impediment in their way.  I would tell them that in order to make the
path of the missionary practicable, the system of trade must be
inverted, the trader and the missionary must go hand in hand, and
commerce and religion--although incomparably different in their nature
and ends--must act the part of brother and sister if anything _great_ is
to be done for the poor natives of Africa."

Conversing thus we beguiled the time pleasantly while we proceeded
rapidly on our way, for the day was drawing to a close, and we were
still at a considerable distance from the native village.



CHAPTER FIVE.

PREPARATIONS FOR A GRAND HUNT.

All was bustle, noise, and activity in the village, or, more correctly
speaking, in the native town of his Majesty King Jambai, early in the
morning after our arrival.  A great elephant-hunt had been resolved on.
The hunters were brushing up their spears and old guns--all of which
latter were flint-locks that had been procured from traders, and were
not worth more than a few shillings.  The women were busy preparing
breakfast, and the children were playing around their huts.

These huts were of the simplest construction--made of bamboo, roofed
with large palm-leaves, and open in front.  The wants of savages are
generally few; their household furniture is very plain, and there is
little of it.  A large hut near to that of his sable majesty had been
set apart for the trader and his party during our residence at the town.
In this we had spent the night as pleasantly as we could, but the
mosquitoes kept up an unceasing warfare upon us, so that daylight was
welcomed gladly when it came.

On going to the hut of King Jambai, who had invited us to breakfast with
him, we found the Princess Oninga alone, seated in the king's armchair
and smoking her pipe with uncommon gusto.  She had spent the early part
of the morning in preparing breakfast for her father and ourselves, and
was now resting from her labours.

"You are early astir, Princess Oninga," said the trader as we entered
and took our seats round the fire, for at that hour the air felt chilly.

The princess took her pipe from her lips and admitted that she was,
blowing a long thin cloud of smoke into the air with a sigh of
satisfaction.

"We are ready for breakfast," added the trader.  "Is the king at home?"

"He is in the woods, but will be back quickly."  With this remark the
princess rose, and knocking the ashes out of her pipe, left the tent.

"Upon my word, she's a cool beauty," said Peterkin.

"I should rather say a black one," remarked Jack.

"Perhaps an odd one would be the most appropriate term," said I.  "Did
you ever see such a headdress?"

The manner in which the Princess Oninga had seen fit to dress her head
was indeed peculiar, I may say ludicrous.  Her woolly hair had been
arranged in the form of a cocked hat, with a horn projecting in front,
and at a short distance off it might easily have been mistaken for the
headpiece of a general officer minus the feathers.  There was little in
the way of artificial ornament about it, but the princess wore a number
of heavy brass rings on her arms and ankles.  Those on the latter
reached half-way up to her knees, and they were so heavy that her walk
was little better than a clumsy waddle.  Before we could pass further
comment on her appearance, King Jambai entered, and saluted us by taking
us each separately and rubbing noses with us.  This done, he ordered in
breakfast, which consisted of roast and boiled plantains, ground nuts,
roast fowl, and roast pig; so we fell to at once, and being exceedingly
hungry after our long walk of the day before, made a hearty meal.

"Now, sir," said Jack, when our repast was about concluded, "as you are
going to leave us soon, you had better arrange with the king about
getting us an interpreter and supplying us with a few men to carry our
goods.  I think you said there was once a man in the tribe who spoke a
little English.  Have you found out whether he is alive?"

"Yes; I have heard that he is alive and well, and is expected in every
day from a hunting expedition.  He is a splendid hunter and a capital
fellow.  His name is Makarooroo, and if you get him you will be
fortunate."

"Then ask his black majesty," said Peterkin, "as quick as you please,
for, to say truth, I'm rather anxious on this point.  I feel that we
should never get on without a good interpreter."

To our satisfaction we found that the king was quite willing to do all
that we wished and a great deal more.  In fact, we soon perceived that
he felt highly honoured by our visit, and had boasted not a little of
"_his white men_" to the chiefs of neighbouring tribes, some of whom had
come a considerable distance to see us.

"You have made quite a conquest, gentlemen, of worthy Jambai," said the
trader, after translating the king's favourable reply.  "The fact is he
is pleased with the liberality you have shown towards him in the way of
gifts, and is proud of the confidence you have placed in him.  Had you
been bent on a trading expedition, he would have opposed your further
progress; but knowing that you are simply hunters, he is anxious to
assist you by all the means at his command.  He is surprised, indeed, at
your taking so much trouble and coming so far merely to kill wild
animals, for he cannot understand the idea of sporting.  He himself
hunts for the sake of procuring meat."

"Can he not understand," said Peterkin, "that _we_ hunt for fun?"

"No, he don't quite see through that.  He said to me a few minutes ago,
`Have these men no meat at home, that they come all this long way to get
it?'  I told him that you had plenty, and then endeavoured to explain
your idea of hunting `for fun.'  But he shook his head, and I think he
does not believe you."

At this point in our conversation the king rose and gave the signal to
set out on the hunting expedition.  Instantly the whole population of
the town turned out and rushed to the banks of the river, near which it
stood, where canoes were prepared for us.  Suddenly there arose a great
shout, and the name "Makarooroo, Makarooroo," passed from mouth to
mouth.  Presently a fine, tall, deep-chested and broad-shouldered negro
stepped up to the king and laid a leopard skin at his feet, while the
people shouted and danced with delight at the success of their
companion; for, as I have already stated, it is deemed a bold feat to
attack and slay a leopard single-handed.

While the commotion caused by this event was going on, I said to the
trader--

"How comes it that Makarooroo can speak English?"

"He spent a couple of years on the coast, in the service of a
missionary, and during that time attended the missionary school, where
he picked up a smattering of English and a trifle of geography and
arithmetic; but although a stout, sturdy hunter, and an intelligent man,
he was a lazy student, and gave the good missionary much trouble to
hammer the little he knows into his thick skull.  At last he grew tired
of it, and returned to his tribe; but he brought his Bible with him, and
I am told is very diligent in the study of it.  His education has gained
for him a great reputation as a fetishman, or doctor of mysteries, among
his people.  I used often to see him at school hammering away at m-a,
ma-b-a, ba, and so on, amid a group of children.  He used to sit beside
the king--"

"The king!" said I, in surprise.

"Ay; the king of that district became a Christian, and he and the queen,
with one or two others of the royal household, used to attend school
with the children every day, and their diligence in studying the A B C
was beyond all praise.  But they were terribly stupid.  The children
beat them easily, showing how true is the saying that `youth is the time
to learn.'  The king was always booby, and Makarooroo was always beside
him."

As the trader spoke, Makarooroo came forward and shook hands with him in
the English fashion.  He was then introduced to us, and expressed his
willingness to become our interpreter in somewhat curious but quite
comprehensible English.  As I looked at his intelligent, good-natured
countenance, I could not help thinking that the trader had underrated
his intellectual powers.

"He's a funny dog that Makarooroo," said Peterkin, as our interpreter
hastened away to fetch his rusty old gun and spears; for he meant to
join our hunting expedition, although he had only that moment arrived
from a long and fatiguing chase.

"Do you think so?" said Jack.

"I don't agree with you," said I; "to me he seems rather of a grave and
quiet disposition."

"O Ralph, what a bat you are!  He was grave enough just now, truly; but
did you not observe the twinkle in his eye when he spoke to us in
English?  Depend on it he's a funny dog."

"There must be freemasonry, then, among funny dogs," I retorted, "for
Jack and I don't perceive it."

"Is this our canoe?" inquired Jack of the trader.

"It is."

"Then let's jump in."

In a few seconds the river was crowded with a fleet of small canoes, and
we all paddled quickly up the stream, which was sluggish at that part.
We did not intend to proceed more than a few miles by water, as the
place where game was expected was at some distance from the river.  I
felt some regret at this, for the trip up the river was to me most
enchanting.

Every yard we advanced new beauties of scenery were revealed to view.
The richness of the tropical vegetation seemed in this place to
culminate, it was so rank and gorgeous.  The day was fine, too, and all
the strange-looking creatures--ugly and beautiful, large and small--
peculiar to those regions, seemed to have resolved on a general peace in
order to bask in the sunshine and enjoy the glorious weather.  Man alone
was bent on war, and our track, alas! was marked with blood wherever we
passed along.  I pondered much on this subject, and wondered at the
bloodthirsty spirit which seems to be natural to man in all conditions
and climes.  Then I thought of the difficulty these poor Africans have
at times in procuring food, the frequency with which they are reduced
almost to a state of starvation, and I ceased to wonder that they shot
and speared everything that came in their way.

We proceeded up the left bank of the river, keeping close in to the
shore in order to obtain the protection of the overhanging boughs and
foliage; for the sun soon began to grow hot, and in the middle of the
day became so intense that I sometimes feared that I or my companions
would receive a sunstroke.  I confess that the subject of health often
caused me much anxiety; for although I knew that we were all old
experienced travellers--though young in years--and had become in a great
degree inured to hardships, I feared that the deadly climate of Central
Africa might prove too much for our European constitutions.  By the free
use of quinine, however, and careful attention to the roles of health as
far as circumstances would permit, we were fortunate enough to keep in
excellent health and spirits during the whole course of our sojourn
there; for which, when I thought of the hundreds of Europeans who had
perished on that deadly coast without even venturing into the interior,
I felt very thankful.  One of our chief delights, to which I in a great
degree attribute our uninterrupted health, was bathing daily in the
streams and ponds with which we fell in, or on which we paddled during
our travels.  On these occasions we were fain, however, to be exceeding
careful in the selection of our bathing-pool, as crocodiles and
alligators, and I know not what other hideous animals, were constantly
on the lookout for prey, and I make no doubt would have been very ready
to try the flavour of a morsel of English food had we given them the
chance.

On these occasions, when we had made sure of our pool, we were wont to
paddle about in the cool refreshing stream, and recall to mind the
splendid dips we had had together six years before in the clear waters
of the coral island.  Since that time Peterkin had learned to swim well,
which was not only a source of much satisfaction and gratification to
himself now, but, he told me, had been the means of preserving not only
his own life on more than one occasion, but the life of a little child
which he had the good fortune to rescue from drowning when cruising off
the island of Madagascar.

Peterkin used to speak very strongly when talking on this subject, and I
observed, from the unusual seriousness of his manner, that he felt
deeply too.

"Ralph," he said to me one day, "half the world is mad--I am not sure
that I might not say three-quarters of the world is mad--and I'm quite
certain that all the _ladies_ in the world are mad with the exception of
the brown ladies of the South Seas, and a few rare specimens elsewhere;
they're all mad together in reference to the matter of swimming.  Now
that I have learned it nothing is so easy, and any one who is not as
blind as a rheumatic owl must see that nothing is more important; for
every one almost is subject to being pitched now and then into deep
water, and if he can't swim it's all up with him.  Why, every time an
angler goes out to _fish_ he runs the chance of slipping and being swept
into a deep hole, where, if he cannot swim, he is certain to be drowned.
And yet five strokes would save his life.  _Good_ swimming is by no
means what is wanted; swimming of any kind, however poor, is all that is
desiderated.  Every time a lady goes to have a row on a lake she is
liable to be upset by the clumsiness of those who accompany her, and
although it may be close to shore, if she cannot swim, down she goes to
the bottom.  And _floating_ won't do.  Some ladies delude themselves
with the idea that floating is of great value.  In nine cases out of ten
it is of no value at all; for unless water be perfectly smooth and
still, a person cannot float so as to keep the waves from washing over
the face, in which case choking is the certain result.  There is no
excuse for not learning to swim.  In most large cities there are
swimming-baths; if the sea is not available, a river is, everywhere.  I
tell you what it is, Ralph: people who don't learn to swim are--are--I
was going to say asses, but that would be an insult to the much-maligned
long-eared animal; and parents who don't teach their offspring to swim
deserve to be drowned in butter-milk; and I wish I saw--no, I _don't_
quite wish I saw them all drowned in that way, but I do wish that I
could impress upon mankind over the length and breadth of this rotund
world the great, the immense, the intense importance of boys _and girls_
being taught to swim."

"You make use of strong language," said I.

"Quite a powerful orator," added Jack, laughing.

"Bah!" exclaimed Peterkin; "your reception of this grand truth is but a
type of the manner in which it will be received by the pig-headed world.
What's the use of preaching common sense?  I'm a perfect donkey!"

"Nay, Peterkin," said Jack; "I appreciate what you say, and have no
doubt whatever that your remarks, if made public, would create quite a
revolution in the juvenile world, and convert them speedily into aquatic
animals.  Did you ever think of sending your views on that subject to
the _Times_?"

"The _Times_!" cried Peterkin.

"Yes, the _Times_; why not?"

"Because," said Peterkin slowly, "I once sent a letter to that great but
insolent periodical, and what do you think it did?"

"Can't tell, I'm sure."

"_Took no notice of it whatever_!" said Peterkin, with a look of
ineffable disgust.
