
"Why, slip down, of course."

"But I can't.  The bark seems to be made of needle-joints, all sticking
upwards.  If I try to slip, my trousers vill remain behind, and--and--I
can't hold on much longer!"

"Let go then, and drop," said Dominick, stepping close to the tree.

"Oh no, don't!" cried Pauline, with a little shriek; "if you do you'll--
you'll--"

"Bust!  Yes, I know I shall," shouted Otto, in despair.

"No fear," cried Dominick, holding out his arms, "let go, I'll cat--"

He was stopped abruptly by receiving a shock from his little brother
which sent him sprawling on his back.  He sprang up, however, with a
gasp.

"Why, boy, I had no idea you were so heavy," he exclaimed, laughing.

"Now, don't you go boasting in future, you prime minister, that I can't
knock you down," said Otto, as he gathered himself up.  "But I say,
you're not hurt, are you?" he added, with a look of concern, while
Pauline seized one of Dominick's hands and echoed the question.

"Not in the least--only a little wind knocked out of me.  Moreover, I'm
not yet convinced that the ascent of that tree is an impossibility."

"You'll have to do it yourself, then," said Otto; "and let me warn you
beforehand that, though I'm very grateful to you, I won't stand under to
catch you."

"Was it not you who said the other night at supper that whatever a
fellow resolved to do he could accomplish, and added that, where there's
a will, there's a way?"

"I rather think it was you, Dom, who gave expression to those boastful
sentiments."

"It may be so.  At all events I hold them.  Come, now, lend a hand and
help me.  The work will take some time, as we have no other implements
than our gully-knives, but we'll manage it somehow."

"Can I not help you?" asked Pauline.

"Of course you can.  Sit down on the bank here, and I'll give you
something to do presently."

Dominick went, as he spoke, to a small tree, the bark of which was long,
tough, and stringy.  Cutting off a quantity of this, he took it to his
sister, and showed her how to twist some of it into stout cordage.
Leaving her busily at work on this, he went down to the nearest bamboo
thicket and cut a stout cane.  It took some time to cut, for the bamboo
was hard and the knife small for such work.  From the end of the cane he
cut off a piece about a foot in length.

"Now, Otto, my boy, you split that into four pieces, and sharpen the end
of each piece, while I cut off another foot of the bamboo."

"But what are you going to do with these bits of stick?" asked Otto, as
he went to work with a will.

"You shall see.  No use in wasting time with explanations just now.  I
read of the plan in a book of travels.  There's nothing like a good book
of travels to put one up to numerous dodges."

"I'm not so sure o' that," objected the boy.  "I have read _Robinson
Crusoe_ over and over, and over again, and I don't recollect reading of
his having made use of pegs to climb trees with."

"Your memory may be at fault, perhaps.  Besides, Robinson's is not the
only book of travels in the world," returned Dominick, as he hacked away
at the stout bamboo.

"No; but it is certainly the best," returned Otto, with enthusiasm, "and
I mean to imitate its hero."

"Don't do that, my boy," said Dominick; "whatever you do, don't imitate.
Act well the part allotted to you, whatever it may be, according to the
promptings of your own particular nature; but don't imitate."

"Humph!  I won't be guided by your wise notions, Mr Premier.  All I
know is, that I wish my clothes would wear out faster, so that I might
dress myself in skins of some sort.  I would have made an umbrella by
this time, but it never seems to rain in this country."

"Ha!  Wait till the rainy season comes round, and you'll have more than
enough of it.  Come, we've got enough of pegs to begin with.  Go into
the thicket now; cut some of the longest bamboos you can find, and bring
them to me; six or eight will do--slender ones, about twice the
thickness of my thumb at the ground."

While Otto was engaged in obeying this order, his brother returned to
the signal-tree.

"Well done, Pina," he said; "you've made some capital cordage."

"What are you going to do now, brother?"

"You shall see," said Dominick, picking up a heavy stone to use as a
hammer, with which he drove one of the hard, sharp pegs into the tree,
at about three feet from the ground.  We have said the peg was a foot
long.  As he fixed it in the tree about three inches deep, nine inches
of it projected.  On this he placed his foot and raised himself to test
its strength.  It bore his weight well.  Above this first peg he fixed a
second, three feet or so higher, and then a third about level with his
face.

"Ah!  I see," exclaimed Otto, coming up at that moment with several long
bamboos.  "But, man, don't you see that if one of these pegs should give
way while you're driving those above it, down you come by the run, and,
if you should be high up at the time, death will be probable--lameness
for life, certain."

Dominick did not condescend to answer this remark, but, taking one of
the bamboos, stood it up close to the tree, not touching, but a few
inches from the trunk, and bound it firmly with the cord to the three
pegs.  Thus he had the first three rounds or rungs of an upright ladder,
one side of which was the tree, the other the bamboo.  Mounting the
second of these rungs he drove in a fourth peg, and fastened the bamboo
to it in the same way, and then, taking another step, he fixed a fifth
peg.  Thus, step by step, he mounted till he had reached between fifteen
and twenty feet from the ground, where the upright bamboo becoming too
slender, another was called for and handed up by Otto.  This was lashed
to the first bamboo, as well as to three of the highest pegs, and the
operation was continued.  When the thin part of the second long bamboo
was reached, a third was added; and so the work progressed until the
ladder was completed, and the lower branches of the tree were gained.

Long before that point, however, Otto begged to be allowed to continue
and finish the work, which his brother agreed to, and, finally, the
signal flag was renewed, by the greater part of an old hammock being
lashed to the top of the tree.

But weeks and months passed away, and the flag continued to fly without
attracting the attention of any one more important, or more powerful to
deliver them, than the albatross and the wild sea-mew.

During this period the ingenuity and inventive powers of the party were
taxed severely, for, being utterly destitute of tools of any kind, with
the exception of the gully-knives before mentioned, they found it
extremely difficult to fashion any sort of implement.

"If we had only an axe or a saw," said Otto one morning, with a groan of
despair, "what a difference it would make."

"Isn't there a proverb," said Pauline, who at the time was busy making
cordage while Otto was breaking sticks for the fire, "which says that we
never know our mercies till we lose them?"

"Perhaps there is," said Otto, "and if there isn't, I don't care.  I
don't like proverbs, they always tell you in an owlishly wise sort o'
way what you know only too well, at a time when you'd rather not know it
if possible.  Now, if we only had an axe--ever so small--I would be able
to fell trees and cut 'em up into big logs, instead of spending hours
every day searching for dead branches and breaking them across my knee.
It's not a pleasant branch of our business, I can tell you."

"But you have the variety of hunting," said his sister, "and that, you
know, is an agreeable as well as useful branch."

"Humph!  It's not so agreeable as I used to think it would be, when one
has to run after creatures that run faster than one's-self, and one is
obliged to use wooden spears, and slings, instead of guns.  By the way,
what a surprising, I may say awful, effect a well-slung stone has on the
side of a little pig!  I came upon a herd yesterday in the cane-brake,
and, before they could get away, I slung a big stone at them, which
caught the smallest of the squeakers fair in the side.  The sudden
squeal that followed the slap was so intense, that I thought the life
had gone out of the creature in one agonising gush; but it hadn't, so I
slung another stone, which took it in the head and dropt it."

"Poor thing!  I wonder how you can be so cruel."

"Cruel!" exclaimed Otto, "I don't do it for pleasure, do I?  Pigs and
other things have got to be killed if we are to live."

"Well, I suppose so," returned Pauline, with a sigh; "at all events it
would never do to roast and eat them alive.  But, about the axe.  Is
there no iron-work in the wreck that might be fashioned into one?"

"Oh yes, sister dear," returned Otto, with a short laugh, "there's
plenty of iron-work.  Some crowbars and ringbolts, and an anchor or two;
but do you suppose that I can slice off a bit of an anchor in the shape
of an axe as you slice a loaf?"

"Well no, not exactly, but I thought there might be some small flat
pieces that could be made to do."

"What is your difficulty," asked Dominick, returning from a hunting
expedition at that moment, and flinging down three brace of fowls on the
floor of the golden cave.

When the difficulty was stated, he remarked that he had often pondered
the matter while lying awake at night, and when wandering in the woods;
and he had come to the conclusion that they must return to what was
termed the stone period of history, and make their axes of flint.

Otto shook his head, and thought Pina's idea of searching the wreck till
they found a piece of flat metal was a more hopeful scheme.

"What do you say to trying both plans?" cried Pauline, with sudden
animation.  "Come, as you have voluntarily elected me queen of this
realm, I command you, Sir Dominick, to make a flint axe without delay,
and you, Sir Otto, to make an iron one without loss of time."

"Your majesty shall be obeyed," replied her obedient subjects, and to
work they went accordingly, the very next morning.

Dominick searched far and near for a flint large enough for his purpose.
He found several, and tried to split them by laying them on a flat
stone, upheaving another stone as large as he could lift, and hurling it
down on them with all his might.  Sometimes the flint would fly from
under the stone without being broken, sometimes it would be crushed to
fragments, and at other times would split in a manner that rendered it
quite unsuitable.  At last, however, by patient perseverance, he
succeeded in splitting one so that an edge of it was thin and sharp,
while the other end was thick and blunt.

Delighted with this success, he immediately cut with his knife, a branch
of one of the hardest trees he could find, and formed it into an
axe-handle.  Some of Pauline's cord he tied round the middle of this,
and then split it at one end, using his flint for the purpose, and a
stone for a hammer.  The split extended only as far as the cord, and he
forced it open by means of little stones as wedges until it was wide
enough to admit the thick end of his flint axe-head.  Using a piece of
soft stone as a pencil, he now marked the form of the flint, where it
touched the wood, exactly, and worked at this with his knife, as
patiently as a Chinaman, for several hours, until the wood fitted the
irregularities and indentations of the flint to a nicety.  This of
itself caused the wood to hold the flint-head very firmly.  Then the
wedges were removed, and when the handle was bound all round the split
part with cord, and the flint-head enveloped in the same, the whole
thing became like a solid mass.

Gingerly and anxiously did Dominick apply it to a tree.  To his joy his
axe caused the chips to fly in all directions.  He soon stopped,
however, for fear of breaking it, and set off in triumph to the golden
cave.

Meanwhile Otto, launching the raft, went on board the wreck to search
for a suitable bit of iron.  As he had said, there was plenty on board,
but none of the size or shape that he required, and he was about to quit
in despair when he observed the flat iron plates, about five inches
square and quarter of an inch thick, with a large hole in the centre of
each, which formed the sockets that held the davits for suspending the
ship's boats.  A crowbar enabled him, after much trouble, to wrench off
one of these.  A handspike was, after some hours' labour, converted into
a handle with one side cut flat.  Laying the plate on this, he marked
its exact size, and then cut away the wood until the iron sank its own
thickness into it.  There were plenty of nails in the wreck; with these
he nailed the iron, through its own nail-holes, to the hard handspike,
and, still further to secure it, he covered it with a little piece of
flat wood, which he bound firmly on with some cordage made by his sister
from cocoa-nut fibre.  As the iron projected on both sides of the
handle, it thus formed a double-edged axe of the most formidable
appearance.  Of course the edges required grinding down, but this was a
mere matter of detail, to be accomplished by prolonged and patient
rubbing on a stone!

Otto arrived triumphantly at the golden cave almost at the same moment
with his brother, and they both laid their axes at the feet of the
queen.

"Thanks, my trusty vassals," she said; "I knew you would both succeed,
and had prepared a royal feast against your return."

"To which I have brought a royal appetite, your majesty," said Otto.

"In truth so have I," added Dominick.

There was a good deal of jesting in all this; nevertheless the trio sat
down to supper that night highly pleased with themselves.  While eating,
they discussed, with much animation, the merits of the axes, and
experienced no little difficulty in deciding which was the better tool.
At last Pauline settled the matter by declaring that the iron axe, being
the strongest, was, perhaps, the best; but as it was not yet sharpened,
while Dominick's was ready for immediate use, the flint axe was in
present circumstances better.

"So then, being equal," said Otto, "and having had a splendid supper, we
will retire to rest."

Thus, in devising means for increasing their comforts, and supplying
their daily necessities, the days and weeks flew swiftly by.



CHAPTER FIVE.

STIRRING EVENTS AND CHANGES.

An event was now pending over the castaway family which was destined to
darken their bright sky, and interrupt them in the even tenor of their
way.

Up to this time the interest, not to say delight, with which they went
about their daily avocations, the fineness of the weather, and the
romance of their situation, had prevented their minds from dwelling much
on the flight of time, and if Pauline had not remembered the Sundays by
conscientiously keeping a daily record with a pencil on a piece of bark,
not one of them would have believed it possible that two months had
elapsed since they were cast ashore.

The sanguine hope, too, which filled the breast of each, that a vessel
would certainly pass by sooner or later and take them off, prevented
their being disturbed by gloomy anticipations of a long exile, and it is
probable that they would have gone on pleasantly for a much longer time,
improving the golden cave, and exploring the reef, and developing the
resources of what Otto styled the Queendom, without much caring about
the future, had not the event above referred to come upon them with the
sudden violence of a thunder-clap, terminating their peaceful life in a
way they had never anticipated, and leading to changes which the wildest
imagination could hardly have conceived.

That event was, indeed, the arrival of a ship, but it did not arrive in
the manner that had been expected.  It came in the dead of a dark night,
when the elements seemed to have declared fierce war against each other,
for it was difficult to say whether the roaring of the sea, the crashing
of the thunder, or the flashing of the forked lightning was most
tremendous.

A previous storm or two, of a mild type, having warned our trio that
Paradise had not been quite regained, even in that lovely region, they
had fitted something like a front, formed of wreckage, to the golden
cave, and this had, up to that time, formed a sufficient protection
against slight inclemencies of weather; but on this particular night the
gusts of wind were so violent, and shook the front of their dwelling so
much, that both Dominick and his brother found it impossible to sleep.
Their sister, however, lay undisturbed, because she reposed in an inner
chamber, which had been screened off with broken planks, and these not
only checked draughts, but deadened sounds.

"I'm afraid our wall will come down," said Dominick, raising himself at
last on one elbow, and gazing at the wooden erection uneasily.

"Oh, let it come!" growled Otto, who had been so frequently checked
while dropping into slumber that night that he was getting quite cross.

Not feeling quite so regardless of consequences, his brother Dominick
arose and endeavoured to prop the weak part of the structure with an
additional piece of timber.

