ado about it."

"If we didn't take care of it, my man, it might cost you your limb, and
we can't afford to bury such a well-made member before its time!  You
must give it perfect rest for a day or two.  I'll speak to the captain
about it."

"I'd rather you didn't, sir," objected the seaman.  "I feel able enough
to go about, and my mates'll think I'm shirkin' dooty."

"There's not a man a-board as'll think that o' Dick Darvall," growled
the boatswain, who had just entered and heard the last remark.

"Right, bo's'n," said Brooke, "you have well expressed the thought that
came into my own head."

"Have ye seen Samson yet, sir?" asked the boatswain, with an unusually
grave look.

"No; I was just going to inquire about him.  No worse, I hope?"

"I think he is, sir.  Seems to me that he ain't long for this world.
The life's bin too much for him: he never was cut out for a sailor, an'
he takes things so much to heart that I do believe worry is doin' more
than work to drive him on the rocks."

"I'll go and see him at once," said our hero.

Fred Samson, the sick man referred to, had been put into a swing-cot in
a berth amidships to give him as much rest as possible.  To all
appearance he was slowly dying of consumption.  When Brooke entered he
was leaning on one elbow, gazing wistfully through the port-hole close
to his head.  His countenance, on which the stamp of death was evidently
imprinted, was unusually refined for one in his station in life.

"I'm glad you have come, Mr Brooke," he said slowly, as his visitor
advanced and took his thin hand.

"My poor fellow," said Charlie, in a tone of low but tender sympathy, "I
wish with all my heart I could do you any good."

"The sight of your kind face does me good," returned the sailor, with a
pause for breath between almost every other word.  "I don't want you to
doctor me any more.  I feel that I'm past that, but I want to give you a
message and a packet for my mother.  Of course you will be in London
when you return to England.  Will you find her out and deliver the
packet?  It contains only the Testament she gave me at parting and a
letter."

"My dear fellow--you may depend on me," replied Brooke earnestly.
"Where does she live?"

"In Whitechapel.  The full address is on the packet.  The letter
enclosed tells all that I have to say."

"But you spoke of a message," said Brooke, seeing that he paused and
shut his eyes.

"Yes, yes," returned the dying man eagerly, "I forgot.  Give her my dear
love, and say that my last thoughts were of herself and God.  She always
feared that I was trusting too much in myself--in my own good
resolutions and reformation; so I have been--but that's past.  Tell her
that God in His mercy has snapped that broken reed altogether, and
enabled me to rest my soul on Jesus."

As the dying man was much exhausted by his efforts to speak, his visitor
refrained from asking more questions.  He merely whispered a comforting
text of Scripture and left him apparently sinking into a state of
repose.

Then, having bandaged the finger of a man who had carelessly cut himself
while using his knife aloft, Charlie returned to the cabin to continue
an interrupted discussion with the first mate on the subject of
astronomy.

From all which it will be seen that our hero's tendencies inclined him
to be as much as possible "all things to all men."



CHAPTER SIX.

DISASTER, STARVATION, AND DEATH.

The least observant of mortals must have frequently been impressed with
the fact that events and incidents of an apparently trifling description
often lead to momentous--sometimes tremendous--results.

Soon after the occurrence of the incidents referred to in the last
chapter, a colony of busy workers in the Pacific Ocean were drawing
towards the completion of a building on which they had been engaged for
a long time.  Like some lighthouses this building had its foundations on
a rock at the bottom of the sea.  Steadily, perseveringly, and with
little cessation, the workers had toiled for years.  They were small
insignificant creatures, each being bent on simply performing the little
bit of work which he, she, or it had been created to do probably without
knowing or caring what the result might be, and then ending his, her, or
its modest labours with life.  It was when this marine building had
risen to within eight or ten feet of the surface of the sea that the
_Walrus_ chanced to draw near to it, but no one on board was aware of
the existence of that coral-reef, for up to the period we write of it
had failed to attract the attention of chart-makers.

The vessel was bowling along at a moderate rate over a calm sea, for the
light breeze overhead that failed to ruffle the water filled her
topsails.  Had the wind been stormy a line of breakers would have
indicated the dangerous reef.  As it was there was nothing to tell that
the good ship was rushing on her doom till she struck with a violent
shock and remained fast.

Of course Captain Stride was equal to the emergency.  By the quiet
decision with which he went about and gave his orders he calmed the
fears of such of his crew as were apt to "lose their heads" in the midst
of sudden catastrophe.

"Lower away the boats, lads.  We'll get her off right a way," he said,
in a quick but quiet tone.

Charlie Brooke, being a strong believer in strict discipline, at once
ran to obey the order, accompanied by the most active among the men,
while others ran to slack off the sheets and lower the topsails.

In a few minutes nearly all the men were in the boats, with hawsers
fixed to the stern of the vessel, doing their uttermost to pull her off.

Charlie had been ordered to remain on deck when the crew took to the
boats.

"Come here, Mr Brooke, I want you," said the Captain, leading his young
friend to the taffrail.  "It's pretty clear to me that the poor old
_Walrus_ is done for--"

"I sincerely hope not sir," said Charlie, with anxious looks.

"A short time will settle the question," returned the Captain, with
unwonted gravity.  "If she don't move in a few minutes, I'll try what
heaving out some o' the cargo will do.  As supercargo, you know where
it's all stowed, so, if you'll pint out to me which is the least
valooable, an' at the same time heaviest part of it, I'll send the mate
and four men to git it on deck.  But to tell you the truth even if we do
git her off I don't think she'll float.  She's an oldish craft, not fit
to have her bottom rasped on coral rocks.  But we'll soon see."

Charlie could not help observing that there was something peculiarly sad
in the tone of the old man's voice.  Whether it was that the poor
captain knew the case to be utterly hopeless, or that he was overwhelmed
by this calamity coming upon him so soon after the wreck of his last
ship, Charlie could not tell, but he had no time to think, for after he
had pointed out to the mate the bales that could be most easily spared
he was again summoned aft.

"She don't move," said the captain, gloomily.  "We must git the boats
ready, for if it comes on to blow only a little harder we'll have to
take to 'em.  So do you and the stooard putt your heads together an' git
up as much provisions as you think the boats will safely carry.  Only
necessaries, of course, an' take plenty o' water.  I'll see to it that
charts, compasses, canvas, and other odds and ends are ready."

Again young Brooke went off, without saying a word, to carry out his
instructions.  Meanwhile one of the boats was recalled, and her crew set
to lighten the ship by heaving part of the cargo overboard.  Still the
_Walrus_ remained immovable on the reef, for the force with which she
struck had sent her high upon it.

"If we have to take to the boats, sir," said Charlie, when he was
disengaged, "it may be well to put some medicines on board, for poor
Samson will--"

"Ay, ay, do so, lad," said the captain, interrupting; "I've been
thinkin' o' that, an' you may as well rig up some sort o' couch for the
poor fellow in the long-boat, for I mean to take him along wi' myself."

"Are you so sure, then, that there is no chance of our getting her off?"

"Quite sure.  Look there."  He pointed, as he spoke, to the horizon to
windward, where a line of cloud rested on the sea.  "That'll not be long
o' comin' here.  It won't blow very hard, but it'll be hard enough to
smash the old _Walrus_ to bits.  If you've got any valooables aboard
that you'd rather not lose, you'd better stuff 'em in your pockets now.
When things come to the wust mind your helm, an' look out as I used to
say to my missus--"

He stopped abruptly and turned away.  Evidently the thought of the
"missus" was too much for him just then.

Charlie Brooke hurried off to visit the sick man, and prepare him for
the sad change in his position that had now become unavoidable.  But
another visitor had been to see the invalid before him.  Entering the
berth softly, and with a quiet look, so as not to agitate the patient
needlessly, he found to his regret, though not surprise, that poor Fred
Samson was dead.  There was a smile on the pale face, which was turned
towards the port window, as if the dying man had been taking a last look
of the sea and sky when Death laid a hand gently on his brow and
smoothed away the wrinkles of suffering and care.  A letter from his
mother, held tightly in one hand and pressed upon his breast told
eloquently what was the subject of his last thoughts.

Charlie cut a lock of hair from the sailor's brow with his clasp-knife,
and, taking the letter gently from the dead hand, wrapped it therein.

"There's no time to bury him now.  His berth must be the poor fellow's
coffin," said Captain Stride, when the death was reported to him.  "The
swell o' the coming squall has reached us already.  Look alive wi' the
boats, men!"

By that time the rising swell was in truth lifting the vessel every few
seconds and letting her down with a soft thud on the coral reef.  It
soon became evident to every one on board that the _Walrus_ had not many
hours to live--perhaps not many minutes--for the squall to which the
Captain had referred was rapidly bearing down, and each successive thud
became more violent than the previous one.  Knowing their danger full
well, the men worked with a will and in a few minutes three boats, well
provisioned, were floating on the sea.

The need for haste soon became apparent, for the depth of water
alongside was so insufficient that the long-boat--drawing as she did
considerably more water than the others--touched twice when the swells
let her drop into their hollows.

It was arranged that Charlie should go in the long-boat with the
captain, Raywood the passenger, and ten men of the crew.  The remainder
were to be divided between the other two boats which were to be in
charge of the first and second officers respectively.

"Jump in, Brooke," cried the Captain, as he sat in the stern-sheets
looking up at our hero, who was busily engaged assisting the first mate
to complete the arrangements of his boat, "we've struck twice already.
I must shove off.  Is Raywood ready?"

"He's in the cabin looking for something, sir; I'll run and fetch him."

"Stay!  We've touched again!" shouted the Captain.  "You an' Raywood can
come off with one o' the other boats.  I'll take you on board when in
deep water--shove off, lads."

"Jump in with me, sir," said the first mate, as he hastily descended the
side.

"Come along, Raywood," shouted Charlie, as he followed.  "No time to
lose!"

The passenger rushed on deck, scrambled down the side, and took his seat
beside Charlie, just as the long threatened squall burst upon them.

The painter was cut, and they drifted into deep water with the second
mate's boat, which had already cast off.

Fortunate was it for the whole crew that Captain Stride had provided for
every emergency, and that, among other safeguards, he had put several
tarpaulins into each boat, for with these they were enabled to form a
covering which turned off the waves and prevented their being swamped.
The squall turned out to be a very severe one, and in the midst of it
the three boats were so far separated that the prospect of their being
able to draw together again until evening was very remote.  Indeed the
waves soon ran so high that it required the utmost attention of each
steersman to keep his craft afloat, and when at last the light began to
fade the boats were almost out of sight of each other.

"No chance, I fear, of our ever meeting again," remarked the mate, as he
cast a wistful look at the southern horizon where the sail of the
long-boat could be barely seen like the wing of a sea-gull.  "Your lot
has been cast with us, Mr Brooke, so you'll have to make the best of
it."

"I always try to make the best of things," replied Charlie.  "My chief
regret at present is that Raywood and I, being two extra hands, will
help to consume your provisions too fast."

"Luckily my appetite is a poor one," said Raywood, with a faint smile;
"and it's not likely to improve in the circumstances."

"I'm not so sure o' that sir," returned the mate, with an air that was
meant to be reassuring; "fresh air and exposure have effected wonders
before now in the matter of health--so they say.  Another pull on the
halyards, Dick; that looks like a fresh squall.  Mind your sheets, Will
Ward."

A prompt "Ay, ay, sir" from Dick Darvall and the cabin-boy showed that
each was alive to the importance of the duty required of him, while the
other men--of whom there were six--busied themselves in making the
tarpaulin coverings more secure, or in baling out the water which, in
spite of them, had found its way into the boat.

Charlie rose and seated himself on the thwart beside the fine-looking
seaman Dick Darvall, so as to have a clearer view ahead under the sail.

"Long-boat nowhere to be seen now," he murmured half to himself after a
long look.

"No, sir--nor the other boat either," said Darvall in a quiet voice.
"We shall never see 'em no more."

"I hope you are wrong," returned Charlie; "indeed I feel sure that the
weather will clear during the night, and that we shall find both boats
becalmed not far off."

"Maybe so, sir," rejoined the sailor, in the tone of one willing to be,
but not yet, convinced.

Our hero was right as to the first, but not as to the second, point.
The weather did clear during the night, but when the sun arose next
morning on a comparatively calm sea neither of the other boats was to be
seen.  In fact every object that could arrest the eye had vanished from
the scene, leaving only a great circular shield of blue, of which their
tiny craft formed the centre.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

ADRIFT ON THE SEA.

"You are ill, Will Ward," was Dick Darvall's first remark when there was
sufficient daylight to distinguish faces.

"You're another!" was the cabin-boy's quick, facetious retort, which
caused Darvall to smile and had the effect of rousing the half-sleeping
crew.

"But you _are_ ill, my boy," repeated the seaman earnestly.

"No, Dick, not exactly ill," returned Will, with a faint smile, "but I'm
queer."

Each man had spent that stormy night on the particular thwart on which
he had chanced to sit down when he first entered the boat, so that all
were looking more or less weary, but seamen are used to uncomfortable
and interrupted slumbers.  They soon roused themselves and began to look
about and make a few comments on the weather.  Some, recurring naturally
to their beloved indulgence, pulled out their pipes and filled them.

"Have 'ee a light, Jim?" asked a rugged man, in a sleepy tone, of a
comrade behind him.

"No, Jack, I haven't" answered Jim, in a less sleepy tone, slapping all
his pockets and thrusting his hands into them.

"Have _you_, Dick?" asked the rugged man in some anxiety.

"No, I haven't," replied Darvall, in a very serious voice, as he also
took to slapping his pockets; "no--nor baccy!"

It was curious to note at this point how every seaman in that boat
became suddenly sympathetic and wide awake, and took to hasty, anxious
examination of all his pockets--vest jacket, and trousers.  The result
was the discovery of a good many clay pipes, more or less blackened and
shortened, with a few plugs of tobacco, but not a single match, either
fusee or congreve.  The men looked at each other with something akin to
despair.

"Was no matches putt on board wi' the grub an' other things?" asked Jim
in a solemn tone.

"And no tobacco?" inquired the mate.

No one could answer in the affirmative.  A general sigh--like a
miniature squall--burst from the sailors, and relieved them a little.
Jim put his pipe between his lips, and meekly began, if we may say so,
to smoke his tobacco dry.  At an order from the mate the men got out the
oars and began to pull, for there was barely enough wind to fill the
sail.

"No rest for us, lads, 'cept when it blows," said the mate.  "The
nearest land that I know of is five hundred miles off as the crow flies.
We've got a compass by good luck, so we can make for it, but the grub
on board won't hold out for quarter o' that distance, so, unless we fall
in with a ship, or fish jump aboard of us, ye know what's before us."

"Have we any spirits aboard?" asked the rugged man, in a growling,
somewhat sulky, voice.

"Hear--hear!" exclaimed Jim.

"No, Jack," returned the mate; "at least not for the purpose o' lettin'
you have a short life an' a merry one.  Now, look here, men: it has
pleased Providence to putt you an' me in something of a fix, and I
shouldn't wonder if we was to have some stiffish experiences before we
see the end of it.  It has also pleased Providence to putt me here in
command.  You know I'm not given to boastin', but there are times when
it is advisable to have plain speakin'.  There _is_ a small supply of
spirits aboard, and I just want to tell 'ee--merely as a piece of useful
