side, and tied them firmly together with ropes.  Then they collected all
the spare timbers that were in the ship, and putting these above the
others, fastened them with ropes too.  After that they tore off some of
the planks from the decks and bulwarks, with which they made a kind of
floor to the raft.  All this, although it takes a short time to tell,
took a long, long time to do; for it was hard work moving such heavy
timbers, and the poor men were very tired, having been up in the storm
all night.  Besides this, although the wind had ceased, the waves were
still high and would not let them work quietly.  However, they finished
it at last, and after it was done, they put a number of barrels of
biscuit and some casks of water and wine on board.  Then they put a few
blankets and a compass--that useful little machine that points always to
the north, and shows the sailor which way to go, so that he sails in the
dark night as surely as in the broad day.

"Now," said the captain, "I think that there is a chance of escape yet.
Get on board, lads, as fast as you can.  I fear the ship won't float
long."  All the men now hastened on board.  The captain's wife, who was
the only female in the ship, was the first to step on the raft, and it
soon began to be crowded.  When about half of the sailors had left the
ship the captain suddenly cried out, "Ho!  Ben Block, we've forgot a
mast and sail.  Run below with a couple of hands and fetch one as fast
as you can."  Just at that moment the ship gave a heavy plunge, the
ropes broke, and the raft floated slowly away, leaving the men who were
yet in the ship in a state of despair.  One or two of them jumped into
the sea and tried to swim to the raft; but the first man who did so was
nearly drowned, and the others got back to the ship with great
difficulty.  It was a terrible sight to witness the misery of the poor
captain, as he beheld his wife, standing with her arms stretched out
towards him, and the raft drifting slowly away, until at length it
appeared like a small black spot far off upon the sea.

"Oh, my poor wife!" he cried, "I shall never see you more."

The tears were rolling down Ben Block's weatherbeaten face as he went up
to the captain and took him by the hand.

"Never fear, sir," said he; "the Almighty can save her."

"Thank you, Ben, for saying that," replied the captain; "but the ship
won't float long.  My wife may indeed be saved, but we are sure to be
lost."

"I don't know that," cried Ben, trying to look cheerful.  "When you sent
me down below, sir, to look for a mast and sail, I observed that the
water in the hold had ceased rising.  If we can only keep her afloat a
little longer, we may manage to make another raft."  The captain smiled
sadly and shook his head, and Davy, who had been standing beside him all
the time, felt his heart sink again.

To add to the horror of the scene, night came on, and the water was so
high in the cabin that the captain and men who had been left in the
wreck had to try to sleep on the wet decks the best way they could.
Next morning the wind was still blowing pretty hard, and they now saw
that they were drawing near to a wild shore, where there seemed to be
many large rocks in the water near the beach.  The crew of the _Fair
Nancy_ looked anxiously towards the land, hoping to see people there who
might help them when the ship struck on the rocks; but they saw no one.
In about an hour afterwards the ship struck, and the shock was so great
that Davy's heart seemed to leap into his throat.  The shore was lined
with great dark cliffs and precipices, at the foot of which the waves
roared furiously.  While the men stood looking helplessly at the land
another wave lifted the ship, carried her forward a long way, and dashed
her down on the rocks, where she stuck fast, with a sharp rock quite
through her hull, and the water foaming round her.  What made their
situation more dreadful was, that a great deal of snow had fallen during
the night.  It covered the decks of the ship, and made the land look
cold and dreary.

"We must swim for it now," said the captain, as he looked sorrowfully at
the boiling surf and immense waves which swept over the rocks, and
bursting like thunder on the cliffs, were flung back upon the ship in
spray.

"No one can swim in such a surf as that," said one of the sailors
gloomily.

"Surf" is the name given to the white foam which is formed by the waves
when they dash upon the shore.  It is very difficult, sometimes quite
impossible, to swim in the surf of the sea, and many poor sailors have
been hurled on the rocks by it and dashed in pieces while attempting to
swim from their wrecked vessels to the land.

Every time a wave came it lifted the _Fair Nancy_, and, as it passed,
let her fall heavily on the sharp rocks, so that she began to break up.
Still the men were afraid to venture into the sea, and they clung to the
bulwarks, quite uncertain what to do.  At last Ben Block turned to the
captain and said--

"I'm a good swimmer, captain, and I think I could swim to the shore well
enough perhaps; but there are some o' the men who can't swim, and poor
Davy, there, could never do it; so I'll just throw a rope round my
shoulders and make for the shore.  If I land I'll fix the rope to the
cliffs, and you'll all be able to get ashore easy enough.  If I should
be drowned,--it'll only be a little sooner, that's all, and it's well
worth risking my life to save my shipmates."

"You're a brave fellow, Ben," said the captain.  "Go and do it if you
can."

Ben Block went down below and soon returned with a stout rope.  On the
end of this he made a loop, which he passed round his shoulders, and
