around, and offered up an earnest prayer; but nothing could blind the
mourners, especially the parents, to the harsh fact that the remains
were about to be consigned to a never resting grave, and that they were
going through the form rather than the reality of burial, while, as if
to emphasise this fact, the back fin of a great shark was seen to cut
the calm water not far astern.  It followed the ship until the hollow
plunge was heard, and the weighted coffin sank into the unknown depths
of the sea.

An impression that never faded quite away was made that day on some of
the more thoughtful and sensitive natures in the ship.  And who can say
that even amongst the thoughtless and the depraved no effect was
produced!  God's power is not usually exerted in visibly effective
processes.  Seeds of life may have been sown by that death, which shall
grow and flourish in eternity.  Certain it is that some of the reckless
were solemnised for a time, and that the young Wesleyan was held in
higher esteem throughout the ship from that day forward.

Some of the passengers, however, seemed very soon to forget all about
the death, and relapsed into their usual frames of mind.  Among these
was Ned Jarring.  For several days after the funeral he kept sober, and
it was observed that the Wesleyan minister tried to get into
conversation with him several times, but he resisted the good man's
efforts, and, when one of his chums laughingly remarked that he, "seemed
to be hand and glove wi' the parson now," Black Ned swung angrily round,
took to drinking again, and, as is usually the case in such
circumstances, became worse than before.

Thus the little world of ship-board went on from day to day, gradually
settling down into little coteries as like-minded men and women began to
find each other out.  Gradually, also, the various qualities of the
people began to be recognised, and in a few weeks--as in the greater
world--each man and woman was more or less correctly gauged according to
worth.  The courageous and the timid, the sensible and the vain, the
weak and the strong, the self-sacrificing and the selfish, all fell
naturally into their appropriate positions, subject to the moderate
confusion resulting from favouritism, abused power, and other forms of
sin.  It was observable also that here, as elsewhere, all the coteries
commented with considerable freedom on each other, and that each coterie
esteemed itself unquestionably the best of the lot, although it might
not absolutely say so in words.  There was one exception, namely in the
case of the worst or lowest coterie, which, so far from claiming to be
the best, openly proclaimed itself the worst, gloried in its shame, and
said that, "it didn't care a button," or words, even more expressive, to
the same effect.

Ned Jarring belonged to this last class.  He was probably the worst
member of it.

One night an incident occurred which tested severely some of the
qualities of every one on board.  It was sometime after midnight when
the dead silence of the slumbering ship was broken by perhaps the most
appalling of all sounds at sea--the cry of "Fire!"

Smoke had been discovered somewhere near the fore-cabin.  Fortunately
the captain had just come up at the time to speak with the officer of
the watch on deck.  At the first cry he ran to the spot pointed out,
telling the officer to call all hands and rig the pumps, and especially
to keep order among the passengers.

The first man who leaped from profound slumber into wide-awake activity
was Dr Hayward.  Having just lain down to sleep on a locker, as he
expected to be called in the night to watch beside a friend who was ill,
he was already dressed, and would have been among the first at the scene
of the fire, but for an interruption.  At the moment he was bounding up
the companion-ladder, a young man of feeble character--who would have
been repudiated by the sex, had he been born a woman--sprang down the
same ladder in abject terror.  He went straight into the bosom of the
ascending doctor, and they both went with a crash to the bottom.

Although somewhat stunned, Hayward was able to jump up and again make
for the region of the fire, where he found most of the men and male
passengers working with hose and buckets in the midst of dire confusion.
Fortunately the seat of the conflagration was soon discovered; and,
owing much to the cool energy of the captain and officers, the fire was
put out.

It was about a week after this thrilling event that Mrs Massey was on
the forecastle talking with Peggy Mitford.  A smart breeze was blowing--
just enough to fill all the sails and carry the ship swiftly on her
course, without causing much of a sea.  The moon shone fitfully through
a mass of drifting clouds, mingling its pallid light with the wondrous
phosphoric sheen of the tropical seas.

Mrs Mitford had been regaling her companion with a long-winded and
irrelevant, though well-meant, yarn about things in general and nothing
in particular; and Nellie, who was the personification of considerate
patience, had seated herself on the starboard rail to listen to and
comment on her lucubrations.

"Yes, as I was sayin', Nellie," remarked Peggy, in her soft voice, after
a brief pause, during which a variety of weak little expressions crossed
her pretty face, "I never could abide the sea.  It always makes me sick,
an' when it doesn't make me sick, it makes me nervish.  Not that I'm
given to bein' nervish; an', if I was, it wouldn't matter much, for the
sea would take it out o' me, whether or not.  That's always the way--if
it's not one thing, it's sure to be another.  Don't you think so,
Nellie?  My John says 'e thinks so--though it isn't to be thought much
of what _'e_ says, dear man, for 'e's got a way of sayin' things when 'e
don't mean 'em--you understand?"

"Well, I don't quite understand," answered Mrs Massey, cutting in at
this point with a laugh, "but I'm quite sure it's better to say things
when you don't mean them, than to mean things when you don't say them!"

"Perhaps you're right, Nellie," rejoined Mrs Mitford, with a mild nod
of assent; "I've sometimes thought on these things when I've 'ad one o'
my sick 'eadaches, which prevents me from thinkin' altogether, almost;
an', bless you, you'd wonder what strange idears comes over me at such
times.  Did you ever try to think things with a sick 'eadache, Nellie?"

With a laugh, and a bright look, Mrs Massey replied that she had never
been in a position to try that curious experiment, never having had a
headache of any kind in her life.

While she was speaking, a broad-backed wave caused the ship to roll
rather heavily to starboard, and Mrs Massey, losing her balance, fell
into the sea.

Sedate and strong-minded though she was, Nellie could not help shrieking
as she went over; but the shriek given by Mrs Mitford was tenfold more
piercing.  It was of a nature that defies description.  Its effect was
to thrill the heart of every one who heard it.  But Peggy did more than
shriek.  Springing on the rail like an antelope, she would have plunged
overboard to the rescue of her friend, regardless of her own inability
to swim, and of everything else, had not a seaman, who chanced to be
listening to the conversation--caught her with a vice-like grip.

"Hold on, Peggy!" he cried.

But Peggy shrieked and struggled, thus preventing the poor fellow from
attempting a rescue, while shouts and cries of "man overboard" rang
through the ship from stem to stern, until it became known that it was a
woman.  Then the cries redoubled.  In the midst of the hubbub the strong
but calm voice of the captain was heard to give orders to lower a boat
and port the helm--"hard a-port."

But, alas! for poor Nellie that night if her life had depended on
shouters, strugglers, shriekers, or boatmen.

At the moment the accident happened two men chanced to be standing on
the starboard side of the ship--one on the quarter-deck, the other on
the forecastle.  Both men were ready of resource and prompt in action,
invaluable qualities anywhere, but especially at sea!  The instant the
cry arose each sprang to and cut adrift a life-buoy.  Each knew that the
person overboard might fail to see or catch a buoy in the comparative
darkness.  He on the forecastle, who chanced to see Nellie fall over, at
once followed her with the life-buoy in his arms.  Ignorant of this act
the man near the stern saw something struggling in the water as the ship
flew past.  Without an instant's hesitation he also plunged into the sea
with a life-buoy in his grasp.

The faint light failed to reveal who had thus boldly plunged to the
rescue, but the act had been observed both at bow and stern, and a cheer
of hope went up as the ship came up to the wind, topsails were backed,
and the boat was dropped into the water.

Twenty minutes elapsed before there was any sign of the boat returning,
during which time the ship's bell was rung continually.  It may be
better imagined than described the state of poor Bob Massey, who had
been asleep on a locker in the fore-cabin when the accident occurred,
and who had to be forcibly prevented, at first, from jumping into the
sea when he heard that it was Nellie who was overboard.

At last oars were heard in the distance.

"Stop that bell! boat ahoy!" shouted the captain.

"Ship aho-o-oy!" came faintly back on the breeze, while every voice was
hushed and ear strained to listen, "All right! all saved!"

A loud "Thank the Lord!" burst from our coxswain's heaving chest, and a
wild ringing cheer leaped upwards alike from passengers and crew, while
warm tears overflowed from many an eye that was more intimate with cold
spray, for a noble deed and a life saved have always the effect of
stirring the deepest enthusiasm of mankind.

A few minutes more and three dripping figures came up the gangway.
First came Nellie herself; dishevelled and pale, but strong and hearty
nevertheless, as might be expected of a fisher-girl and a lifeboat
coxswain's wife!  She naturally fell into, or was caught up by, her
husband's arms, and was carried off to the cabin.

Following her came two somewhat exhausted men.

The cheer that greeted them was not unmingled with surprise.

"The best an' the worst men i' the ship!" gasped Joe Slag, amid laughter
and hearty congratulations.

He was probably right, for it was the young Wesleyan minister and Ned
Jarring who had effected this gallant rescue.

The performance of a good action has undoubtedly a tendency to elevate,
as the perpetration of a bad one has to demoralise.

From that day forward Black Ned felt that he had acquired a certain
character which might be retained or lost.  Without absolutely saying
that he became a better man in consequence, we do assert that he became
more respectable to look at, and drank less!

Thus the voyage progressed until the good ship _Lapwing_ sailed in among
some of the innumerable islands of the Southern seas.



STORY ONE, CHAPTER 6.

Darkness, whether physical, mental, or spiritual, is probably the
greatest evil that man has had to contend with since the fall.  At all
events, the physical and mental forms of it were the cause of the good
ship _Lapwing_ sailing one night straight to destruction.

It happened thus.  A pretty stiff breeze, amounting almost to half a
gale, was blowing on the night in question, and the emigrant ship was
running before it under close-reefed topsails.  For some days previously
the weather had been "dirty," and the captain had found it impossible to
obtain an observation, so that he was in the dark as to the exact part
of the ocean, in which he was sailing.

In an open sea this is not of serious moment, but when one is nearing
land, or in the neighbourhood of islands, it becomes cause for much
anxiety.  To make matters worse, the ship had been blown considerably
out of her course, and, worst of all, the night was so intensely dark
that it was not possible to see more than a few yards beyond the flying
jibboom.

The captain and mate, with several of the men, stood on the forecastle
peering anxiously out into the darkness.

"I don't like the look o' things at all," muttered the captain to the
chief mate.

"Perhaps it would be well, sir, to lay-to till daylight," suggested the
mate.

Whether the captain agreed with his chief officer or not was never
known, for just then a dull sound was heard which sent a thrill to the
bravest heart on board.

"Breakers ahead!" cried the look-out, as in duty bound, but he was
instantly contradicted by the mate, who shouted that they were on the
starboard beam, while another voice roared that they were on the
port-bow.

The helm was instantly put hard a-port, and immediately after the order
was given "hard a-starboard," for it was discovered that the sound of
breakers came from both sides of the vessel.  They were, obviously,
either running in a narrow strait between two islands, or into a bay.
In the first case the danger was imminent, in the second case,
destruction was almost inevitable.

"Clear the anchor, and stand by to let go!" cried the captain, in loud
sharp tones, for he felt that there was no room to turn and retreat.
The order was also given to take in all sail.

But before either order could be obeyed, a cry of terror burst from many
throats, for right in front of them there suddenly loomed out of the
darkness an object like a great black cloud, which rose high above and
seemed about to fall upon them.  There was no mistaking its nature,
however, for by that time the roar of the breakers right ahead told but
too plainly that they were rushing straight upon a high perpendicular
cliff.  At this moment the vessel struck a rock.  It was only a slight
touch at the stern, nevertheless it tore the rudder away, so that the
intention of the captain to put about and take his chance of striking on
the rocks to starboard was frustrated.

"Let go," he shouted, in this extremity.

Quick as lightning the anchor went to the bottom but with such way on
the ship, the sudden strain snapped the chain, and the _Lapwing_ rushed
upon her doom, while cries of terror and despair arose from the
passengers, who had by that time crowded on deck.

To the surprise of the captain, and those who were capable of
intelligent observation, the ship did not immediately strike again, but
sailed straight on as if right against the towering cliffs.  Still
onward it went, and as it did so there settled around them a darkness so
profound that no one could see even an inch before his eyes.  Then at
last the ill-fated vessel struck, but not with her hull, as might have
been expected.  High up above them a terrific crash was heard.

"God help us," exclaimed the captain, "we've sailed straight into a
cave!"

That he was right soon became evident, for immediately after the
crashing of the topmasts against the roof of the cave, a shower of small
stones and several large fragments fell on the deck with a rattle like
that of musketry.  Some of the people were struck and injured, though
not seriously so, by the shower.

"Get down below, all of you!" cried the captain, himself taking shelter
under the companion hatchway.  But the order was needless, for the
danger was so obvious that every one sought the shelter of the cabins
without delay.

The situation was not only terrible but exceedingly singular, as well as
trying, for as long as stones came thundering down on the deck it would
have been sheer madness to have attempted to do anything aboveboard, and
to sit idle in the cabins with almost certain death staring them in the
face, was a severe test of endurance.

From the motion of the vessel several facts could be deduced.  Although
