Then he took off the stained handkerchief, and, lo, there was not even a
mark where the wound had been!  For this was the famous Weapon Salve
which you may read about in Sir Kenelm Digby, and which the Lady of
Branxholme used, in _The Lay of the Last Minstrel_.  But the secret of
making it has long been lost, except in Pantouflia.

"You are the best girl in the world, Jaqueline," said Ricardo.  "You may
give me a kiss if you like; and I won't call you 'Jack,' or laugh at you
for reading books, any more.  There's something in books after all."

The princess did not take advantage of Dick's permission, but advised him
to lie down and try to sleep.

"I say, though," he said, "what about my father?"

"The king need never be told anything about it," said Jaqueline, "need
he?"

"Oh, that won't do!  I tell my father everything; but then, I never had
anything like this to tell him before.  Don't you think, Jaqueline, you
might break it to him?  He's very fond of you.  Just tell him what I told
you; it's every word of it true, and he ought to know.  He might see
something about it in the _Mercure de France_."

This was the newspaper of the period.

"I don't think it will get into the papers," said Jaqueline, smiling.
"Nobody could tell, except the king and the princes, and they have
reasons for keeping it to themselves."

"I don't trust that younger one," said Dick, moodily; "I don't care for
that young man.  Anyway, my father _must_ be told; and, if you won't, I
must."

"Well, I'll tell him," said Jaqueline.  "And now lie down till evening."

After dinner, in the conservatory, Jaqueline told King Prigio all about
it.

His Majesty was very much moved.

"What extraordinary bad luck that family has!" he thought.  "If I had not
changed the rug, the merest accident, Prince Charles would have dined at
St. James's to-night, and King George in Hanover.  It was the very
nearest thing!"

"This meddling with practical affairs will never do," he said aloud.

"Dick has had a lesson, sire," said the princess.  "He says he'll never
mix himself up with politics again, whatever happens.  And he says he
means to study all about them, for he feels frightfully ignorant, and,
above all, he means to practise his fencing."

These remarks were not part of the conversation between Ricardo and
Jaqueline, but she considered that Dick _meant_ all this, and, really, he
did.

"That is well, as far as it goes," said the king.  "But, Jaqueline, about
that mosquito?" for she had told him this part of the adventure.  "That
was a very convenient mosquito, though I don't know how Dick was able to
observe it from any distance.  I see _your_ hand in that, my dear, and I
am glad you can make such kind and wise use of the lessons of the good
Fairy Paribanou.  Jaqueline," he added solemnly, laying his hand on her
head, "You have saved the honour of Pantouflia, which is dearer to me
than life.  Without your help, I tremble to think what might have
occurred."

The princess blushed very much, and felt very happy.

"Now run away to the queen, my dear," said his Majesty, "I want to think
things over."

He did think them over, and the more he thought the more he felt the
inconvenience attending the possession of fairy things.

"An eclipse one day, as nearly as possible a revolution soon after!" he
said to himself.  "But for Jaqueline, Ricardo's conduct would have been
blazed abroad, England would have been irritated.  It is true she cannot
get at Pantouflia very easily; we have no sea-coast, and we are
surrounded by friendly countries.  But it would have been a ticklish and
discreditable position.  I must really speak to Dick," which he did next
morning after breakfast.

"You have broken my rules, Ricardo," he said.  "True, there is no great
harm done, and you have confessed frankly; but how am I to trust you any
longer?"

"I'll give you my sacred word of honour, father, that I'll never meddle
with politics again, or start on an expedition, without telling you.  I
have had enough of it.  And I'll turn over a new leaf.  I've learned to
be ashamed of my ignorance; and I've sent for Francalanza, and I'll fence
every day, and read like anything."

"Very good," said the king.  "I believe you mean what you say.  Now go to
your fencing lesson."

"But, I say, father," cried Ricardo, "was it not strange about the magic
carpet?"

"I told you not to trust to these things," said the king.  "Some
enchanter may have deprived it of its power, it may be worn out, someone
may have substituted a common Persian rug; anything may happen.  You
_must_ learn to depend on yourself.  Now, be off with you, I'm busy.  And
remember, you don't stir without my permission."

The prince ran off, and presently the sounds of stamping feet and "_un_,
_deux_; _doublez_, _degagez_, _vite_; _contre de carte_," and so forth,
might be heard over a great part of the royal establishment.




CHAPTER VII.
Prince Ricardo and an Old Enemy.


{The Yellow Dwarf: p123.jpg}

"There is one brute I wish I could get upsides with," said Ricardo, at
breakfast one morning, his mouth full of sardine.

"Really, Ricardo, your language is most unprincely," said his august
father; "I am always noticing it.  You mean, I suppose, that there is one
enemy of the human race whom you wish to abolish.  What is the name of
the doomed foe?"

"Well, he is the greatest villain in history," said Ricardo.  "You must
have read about him, sir, the Yellow Dwarf."

"Yes, I have certainly studied what is told us about him," said the king.
"He is no favourite of mine."

"He is the only one, if you notice, sir, of all the scoundrels about whom
our ancestors inform us, who escaped the doom which he richly merited at
the sword of a good knight."

You may here remark that, since Dick took to his studies, he could speak,
when he chose, like a printed book, which was by no means the case
before.

"If you remember, sir, he polished off--I mean, he slew--the King of the
Golden Mines and the beautiful, though frivolous, Princess Frutilla.  All
that the friendly Mermaid could do for them was to turn them into a pair
of beautiful trees which intertwine their branches.  Not much use in
_that_, sir!  And nothing was done to the scoundrel.  He may be going on
still; and, with your leave, I'll go and try a sword-thrust with him.
Francalanza says I'm improving uncommon."

"You'll take the usual Sword of Sharpness," said his Majesty.

"What, sir, to a dwarf?  Not I, indeed: a common small sword is good
enough to settle _him_."

"They say he is very cunning of fence," said the king; "and besides, I
have heard something of a diamond sword that he stole from the King of
the Golden Mines."

"Very likely he has lost it or sold it, the shabby little miscreant;
however, I'll risk it.  And now I must make my preparations."

The king did not ask what they were; as a rule, they were simple.  But,
being in the shop of the optician that day, standing with his back to the
door, he heard Dick come in and order a pair of rose-coloured spectacles,
with which he was at once provided.  The people of Pantouflia were
accustomed to wear them, saying that they improved the complexions of
ladies whom they met, and added cheerfulness to things in general.

"Just plain rose-coloured glass, Herr Spex," said Dick, "I'm not short-
sighted."

"The boy is beginning to show some sense," said the king to himself,
knowing the nature and the difficulties of the expedition.

Ricardo did not disguise his intention of taking with him a Dandie
Dinmont terrier, named Pepper, and the king, who understood the motive of
this precaution, silently approved.

"The lad has come to some purpose and forethought," the king said, and he
gladly advanced a considerable sum for the purchase of crocodiles' eggs,
which can rarely be got quite fresh.  When Jaqueline had made the
crocodiles' eggs, with millet-seed and sugar-candy, into a cake for the
Dwarf's lions, Ricardo announced that his preparations were complete.

Not to be the mere slave of custom, he made this expedition on horseback,
and the only magical thing he took with him was the Cap of Darkness (the
one which would not work, but he did not know that), and this he put in
his pocket for future use.  With plenty of egg sandwiches and marmalade
sandwiches, and cold minced-collop sandwiches, he _pricked forth_ into
the wilderness, making for the country inhabited by the Yellow Dwarf.  The
princess was glad he was riding, for she privately accompanied him in the
disguise of a wasp; and a wasp, of course, could not have kept up with
him in his Seven-league Boots.

"Hang that wops!" said Prince Ricardo several times, buffeting it with
his pocket-handkerchief when it buzzed in his ear and round his horse's
head.

{"Hang that wops!" said Prince Ricardo: p129.jpg}

Meanwhile, King Prigio had taken his precautions, which were perfectly
simple.  When he thought Ricardo was getting near the place, the king put
on his Wishing Cap, sat down before the magic crystal ball, and kept his
eye on the proceedings, being ready to wish the right thing to help
Ricardo at the right moment.  He left the window wide open, smoked his
cigar, and seemed the pattern of a good and wise father watching the
conduct of a promising son.

The prince rode and rode, sometimes taking up Pepper on his saddle;
passing through forests, sleeping at lonely inns, fording rivers, till
one day he saw that the air was becoming Yellow.  He knew that this
showed the neighbourhood of Jaunia, or Daunia, the country of the Yellow
Dwarf.  He therefore drew bridle, placed his rose-coloured spectacles on
his nose and put spurs to his horse, for the yellow light of Jaunia makes
people melancholy and cowardly.  As he pricked on, his horse stumbled and
nearly came on its nose.  The prince noticed that a steel chain had been
drawn across the road.

"What caitiff has dared!" he exclaimed, when his hat was knocked off by a
well-aimed orange from a neighbouring orange-tree, and a vulgar voice
squeaked:

"Hi, Blinkers!"

There was the Yellow Dwarf, an odious little figure, sitting sucking an
orange in the tree, swinging his wooden shoes, and grinning all over his
wrinkled face.

"Well, young Blinkers!" said the Dwarf, "what are you doing on my
grounds?  You're a prince, by your look.  Yah! down with kings!  I'm a
man of the people!"

"You're a dwarf of the worst description, that's what _you_ are," said
Ricardo; "and let me catch you, and I'll flog the life out of you with my
riding-whip!"

The very face of the Dwarf, even seen through rose-coloured spectacles,
made him nearly ill.

"Yes, when you can catch me," said the Dwarf; "but that's not to-day, nor
yet to-morrow.  What are you doing here?  Are you an ambassador, maybe
come to propose a match for me?  I'm not proud, I'll hear you.  They say
there's a rather well-looking wench in your parts, the Princess
Jaqueline--"

"Mention that lady's name, you villain," cried Dick, "and I'll cut down
your orange-tree!" and he wished he had brought the Sword of Sharpness,
for you cannot prod down a tree with the point of a rapier.

"Fancy her yourself?" said the Dwarf, showing his yellow teeth with a
detestable grin; while Ricardo turned quite white with anger, and not
knowing how to deal with this insufferable little monster.

"I'm a widower, I am," said the Dwarf, "though I'm out of mourning," for
he wore a dirty clay-coloured Yellow jacket.  "My illustrious consort,
the Princess Frutilla, did not behave very nice, and I had to avenge my
honour; in fact, I'm open to any offers, however humble.  Going at an
alarming sacrifice!  Come to my box" (and he pointed to a filthy clay
cottage, all surrounded by thistles, nettles, and black boggy water),
"and I'll talk over your proposals."

"Hold your impudent tongue!" said Dick.  "The Princess Frutilla was an
injured saint; and as for the lady whom I shall not name in your
polluting presence, I am her knight, and I defy you to deadly combat!"

We may imagine how glad the princess was when (disguised as a wasp) she
heard Dick say he was her knight; not that, in fact, he had thought of it
before.

"Oh! you're for a fight, are you?" sneered the Dwarf.  "I might tell you
to hit one of your own weight, but I'm not afraid of six of you.  Yah!
mammy's brat!  Look here, young Blinkers, I don't want to hurt you.  Just
turn old Dobbin's head, and trot back to your mammy, Queen Rosalind, at
Pantouflia.  Does she know you're out?"

"I'll be into _you_, pretty quick," said Ricardo.  "But why do I bandy
words with a miserable peasant?"

"And don't get much the best of them either," said the Dwarf,
provokingly.  "But I'll fight, if you will have it."

The prince leaped from his horse, leaving Pepper on the saddle-bow.

No sooner had he touched the ground than the Dwarf shouted:

"Hi! to him, Billy! to him, Daniel! at him, good lions, at him!" and,
with an awful roar, two lions rushed from a neighbouring potato-patch and
made for Ricardo.  These were not ordinary lions, history avers, each
having two heads, each being eight feet high, with four rows of teeth;
their skins as hard as nails, and bright red, like morocco. {135}

The prince did not lose his presence of mind; hastily he threw the cake
of crocodiles' eggs, millet-seed, and sugar-candy to the lions.  This is
a dainty which lions can never resist, and running greedily at it, with
four tremendous snaps, they got hold of each other by their jaws, and
their eight rows of teeth were locked fast in a grim and deadly _struggle
for existence_!

The Dwarf took in the affair at a glance.

"Cursed be he who taught you this!" he cried, and then whistled in a
shrill and vulgar manner on his very dirty fingers.  At his call rushed
up an enormous Spanish cat, ready saddled and bridled, and darting fire
from its eyes.  To leap on its back, while Ricardo sprang on his own
steed, was to the active Dwarf the work of a moment.  Then clapping spurs
to its sides (his spurs grew naturally on his bare heels, horrible to
relate, like a cock's spurs) and taking his cat by the head, the Dwarf
forced it to leap on to Ricardo's saddle.  The diamond sword which slew
the king of the Golden Mines--that invincible sword which hews iron like
a reed--was up and flashing in the air!

At this very moment King Prigio, seeing, in the magic globe, all that
passed, and despairing of Ricardo's life, was just about to wish the
dwarf at Jericho, when through the open window, with a tremendous whirr,
came a huge vulture, and knocked the king's wishing cap off!  Wishing was
now of no use.

This odious fowl was the Fairy of the Desert, the Dwarf's trusted ally in
every sort of mischief.  The vulture flew instantly out of the window;
and ah! with what awful anxiety the king again turned his eyes on the
crystal ball only a parent's heart can know.  Should he see Ricardo
bleeding at the feet of the abominable dwarf?  The king scarcely dared to
look; never before had he known the nature of fear.  However, look he
did, and saw the dwarf un-catted, and Pepper, the gallant Dandie Dinmont,
with his teeth in the throat of the monstrous Spanish cat.

No sooner had he seen the cat leap on his master's saddle-bow than
Pepper, true to the instinct of his race, sprang at its neck, just behind
the head--the usual place,--and, with an awful and despairing mew, the
cat (Peter was its name) gave up its life.

