
IV.


When the children had done marching, Mrs. Lee took charge of
the games. Several new plays, which none of them had heard
of before, were introduced. The boys and girls all liked
them very well, and the time passed away most rapidly.

Just before they were going to supper, an old man, with a
fiddle in his hand, tottered into the garden, and down the
lawn. He was a very queer-looking old man. He had long white
hair, and a long white beard.

He was dressed in old, worn-out, soldier clothes, in part,
and had a sailor's hat upon his head, so that they could not
tell whether he was a soldier or a sailor.

As he approached the children, they began to laugh with all
their might; and he certainly was a very funny old man. His
long beard and hair, his tattered finery, and his hobbling
walk, would have made almost any one laugh--much more a
company of children as full of fun as those who were
attending the birthday party.

"Children," said the old man, as he took off his hat and
made a low bow, "I heard there was a party here, and I came
to play the fiddle for you. All the boys and girls like a
fiddle, because it is so merry."

"O mother! what did send that old man here?" cried Flora.

"He came of himself, I suppose," replied Mrs. Lee,
laughing.

"I think it is too bad to laugh at an old man like him,"
added Flora.

"It would be, if he were in distress; but don't you see he
is as merry as any of the children?"

"Play us some tunes," said the children.

"I will, my little dears;" and the old man raised the
fiddle. "Let's see--I will play 'Napoleon's Grand March.'"

The fiddler played, but he behaved so queerly that the
children laughed so loud they could hardly hear the music.

"Why, that's 'Yankee Doodle,'" said Henry Vernon; and they
all shouted at the idea of calling that tune "Napoleon's
Grand March."

"Now I will play you the solo to the opera of 'La
Sonnambula,'" said the old man.

"Whew!" said Henry.

The old man fiddled again, with the same funny movements as
before.

"Why, that's 'Yankee Doodle' too!" exclaimed Henry.

"I guess he don't know any other tune."

"You like that tune so well, I will play you 'Washington's
March;'" and the funny old fiddler, with a great flourish,
began to play again; but still it was "Yankee Doodle."

And so he went on saying he would play many different tunes,
but he played nothing but "Yankee Doodle."

"Can't you tell us a story now?" asked Charley Green.

"O, yes, my little man, I can tell you a story. What shall
it be?"

"Are you a soldier or a sailor?"

"Neither, my boy."

"The story! the story!" shouted the boys, very much
excited.

"Some years ago I was in New York," the old man commenced.

"Did you see me there?" demanded Tommy Woggs.

"Well, my little man, I don't remember that I saw you."

"O, I was there;" and Tommy thrust his hands down to the
bottom of his pockets, and strutted up the space between
the children and the comical old fiddler.

"I did see a very nice-looking little gentleman----"

"That was me," pompously added Tommy.

"He was stalking up Broadway. He thought every body was
looking at and admiring him; but such was not the case. He
looked just like--just like----"

"Like me?" asked Tommy.

"Like a sick monkey," replied the fiddler.

"Go on with your story."

"I will, children. Several years ago I was in New York. It
is a great city; if you don't believe it, ask Master Tommy
Woggs."

"You tell the truth, Mr. Fiddler. It is a great city, and I
have been all over it, and can speak from observation,"
replied Master Woggs.

"The story!" shouted the children.

"I was walking up Broadway. This street is always crowded
with people, as well as with carts and carriages."

"I have seen that street," said Tommy.

"Now you keep still a few minutes, Tommy, if you can,"
interposed Mrs. Lee.

"At the corner of Wall Street----"

