
     TO  ALL  LOYAL  SUBJECTS.

     Whereas,

     Our eldest son, Prince Prigio, hath of late been guilty of
     several high crimes and misdemeanours.

     First: By abandoning the post of danger against the
     Firedrake, whereby our beloved sons, Prince Alphonso and
     Prince Enrico, have perished, and been overdone by that
     monster.

     Secondly: By attending an unseemly revel in the town of
     Gluckstein, where he brawled in the streets.

     Thirdly: By trying to seduce away the hearts of our loyal
     subjects in that city, and to blow up a party against our
     crown and our peace.

     [Illustration: Page 61]

     This is to give warning,

     That whoever consorts with, comforts, aids, or abets the
     said Prince Prigio, is thereby a partner in his treason; and
     That a reward of Five Thousand Purses will be given to
     whomsoever brings the said prince, alive, to our Castle of
     Falkenstein.

     Grognio R.


And here is the second proclamation:

     Reward. The firedrake. _Whereas_,

     Our dominions have lately been devastated by a Firedrake
     (the _Salamander Furiosus_ of Buffon);

     _This is to advise all_,

     That whosoever brings the horns and tail of the said
     Firedrake to our Castle of Falkenstein, shall receive Five
     Thousand Purses, the position of Crown Prince, with the
     usual perquisites, and the hand of the king's niece, the
     Lady Molinda.

     Grognio R.


"H'm," said the prince; "I did not think his majesty wrote so well;"
and he would have _liked_ to say, "Don't you think we might join the
ladies?"

"But, sir," said the ambassador, "the streets are lined with soldiers;
and I know not how you have escaped them. _Here_, under my roof, you
are safe for the moment; but a prolonged stay--excuse my
inhospitality--could not but strain the harmonious relations which
prevail between the Government of Pantouflia and that which I have the
honour to represent."

"We don't want to fight; and no more, I think, do you," said the prince,
smiling.

"Then how does your royal highness mean to treat the proclamations?"

"Why, by winning these ten thousand purses. I can tell you L1,000,000
is worth having," said the prince. "I 'll deliver up the said prince,
alive, at Falkenstein this very night; also the horns and tail of the
said Firedrake. But I don't want to marry my Cousin Molly."

"May I remind your royal highness that Falkenstein is three hundred
miles away? Moreover, my head butler, Benson, disappeared from the house
before dinner, and I fear he went to warn Captain Kopzoffski that you
are _here!_"

"That is nothing," said the prince; "but, my dear Lord Kelso, may I
not have the pleasure of presenting Lady Rosalind with a little gift, a
Philippine which I lost to her last night, merely the head and tail of a
Firedrake which I stalked this morning?"

The ambassador was so astonished that he ran straight upstairs,
forgetting his manners, and crying:

"Linda! Linda! come down at once; here's a surprise for you!"

Lady Rosalind came sweeping down, with a smile on her kind face. _She_
guessed what it was, though the prince had said nothing about it at
dinner.

"Lead the way, your royal highness!" cried the ambassador; and the
prince offering Lady Rosalind his arm, went out into the hall, where he
saw neither his carpet nor the horns and tail of the Firedrake!

He turned quite pale, and said:

"Will you kindly ask the servants where the little Persian prayer-rug
and the parcel which I brought with me have been placed?"

Lord Kelso rang the bell, and in came all the servants, with William,
the under-butler, at their head.

"William," said his lordship, "where have you put his royal highness's
parcel and his carpet?"

"Please, your lordship," said William, "we think Benson have took them
away with him."

"And where is Benson?"

"We don't know, your lordship. We think he have been come for!"

"Come for--by whom?"

William stammered, and seemed at a loss for a reply.

"Quick! answer! what do you know about it?"

William said at last, rather as if he were making a speech:

"Your royaliness, and my lords and ladies, it was like this. His
royaliness comed in with a rug over his arm, and summat under it. And
he lays it down on that there seat, and Thomas shows him into the
droring-room. Then Benson says: 'Dinner'll be ready in five minutes; how
tired I do feel! 'Then he takes the libbuty of sitting hisself down
on his royaliness's rug, and he says, asking your pardon, 'I 've
had about enough of service here. I 'm about tired, and I thinks of
bettering myself. I wish I was at the king's court, and butler.'

[Illustration: Page 65]

But before the words was out of his mouth, off he flies like a shot
through the open door, and his royaliness's parcel with him. I run to
the door, and there he was, flying right hover the town, in a northerly
direction. And that's all I know; for I would not tell a lie, not if it
was hever so. And me, and Thomas--as didn't see it,--and cook, we thinks
as how Benson was come for. And cook says as she don't wonder at it,
neither; for a grumblinger, more ill-conditioneder--"

"Thank you, William," said Lord Kelso; "that will do; you can go, for
the present."

[Illustration: Chapter Thirteen]




CHAPTER XIII.--_Surprises_

THE prince said nothing, the ambassador said nothing, Lady Rosalind said
never a word till they were in the drawing-room. It was a lovely warm
evening, and the French windows were wide open on the balcony, which
looked over the town and away north to the hills. Below them flowed the
clear, green water of the Gluckthal And still nobody said a word. At
last the prince spoke: "This is a very strange story, Lord Kelso!"

"Very, sir!" said the ambassador. "But true," added the prince; "at
least, there is no reason in the nature of things why it shouldn't be
true."

"I can hardly believe, sir, that the conduct of Benson, whom I always
found a most respectable man, deserved--"

"That he should be 'come for,'" said the prince. "Oh, no; it was a mere
accident, and might have happened to any of us who chanced to sit down
on my carpet."

And then the prince told them, shortly, all about it: how the carpet
was one of a number of fairy properties, which had been given him at
his christening; and how so long a time had gone by before he discovered
them; and how, probably, the carpet had carried the butler where he had
said he wanted to go--namely, to the king's Court at Falkenstein.

"It would not matter so much," added the prince, "only I had relied on
making my peace with his majesty, my father, by aid of those horns and
that tail. He was set on getting them; and if the Lady Rosalind had
not expressed a wish for them, they would to-day have been in his
possession."

"Oh, sir, you honour us too highly," murmured Lady Rosalind; and the
prince blushed and said:

"Not at all! Impossible!"

Then, of course, the ambassador became quite certain that his daughter
was admired by the crown prince, who was on bad terms with the king
of the country; and a more uncomfortable position for an
ambassador--however, they are used to them.

"What on earth am I to do with the young man?" he thought. "He can't
stay here for ever; and without his carpet he can't get away, for the
soldiers have orders to seize him as soon as he appears in the street.
And in the meantime Benson will be pretending that _he_ killed the
Firedrake--for he must have got to Falkenstein by now,--and they will be
for marrying him to the king's niece, and making my butler crown prince
to the kingdom of Pantouflia! It is dreadful!"

Now all this time the prince was on the balcony, telling Lady Rosalind
all about how he got the Firedrake done for, in the most modest way;
for, as he said: "I didn't kill him: and it is really the Remora, poor
fellow, who should marry Molly; but he 's dead."

At this very moment there was a _whizz_ in the air; something shot past
them, and, through the open window, the king, the queen, Benson, and the
mortal remains of the Firedrake were shot into the ambassador's drawing
room!

[Illustration: Page 69]

[Illustration: Chapter Fourteen]




CHAPTER XIV.--_The King Explains._

THE first who recovered his voice and presence of mind was Benson.

"Did your lordship ring for coffee?" he asked, quietly; and when he was
told "Yes," he bowed and withdrew, with majestic composure. When he had
gone, the prince threw himself at the king's feet, crying:

"Pardon, pardon, my liege!" "Don't speak to me, sir!" answered the
king, very angrily; and the poor prince threw himself at the feet of the
queen.

But she took no notice of him whatever, no more than if he had been a
fairy; and the prince heard her murmur, as she pinched her royal arms:

"I shall waken presently; this is nothing out of the way for a dream.
Dr. Rumpfino ascribes it to imperfect nutrition."

All this time, the Lady Rosalind, as pale as a marble statue, was
leaning against the side of the open window. The prince thought he could
do nothing wiser than go and comfort her, so he induced her to sit down
on a chair in the balcony,--for he felt that he was not wanted in the
drawing-room;--and soon they were talking happily about the stars, which
had begun to appear in the summer night.

Meanwhile, the ambassador had induced the king to take a seat; but there
was no use in talking to the queen.

"It would be a miracle," she said to herself, "and miracles do not
happen; therefore this has not happened. Presently, I shall wake up in
my own bed at Falkenstein."

Now, Benson, William, and Thomas brought in the coffee, but the queen
took no notice. When they went away, the rest of the company slipped off
quietly, and the king was left alone with the ambassador; for the queen
could hardly be said to count.

"You want to know all about it, I suppose?" said his majesty in a sulky
voice. "Well, you have a right to it, and I shall tell you. We were just
sitting down to dinner at Falkenstein, rather late,--hours get later
every year, I think--when I heard a row in the premises, and the captain
