  Inter.;-- Right file (Jill); Three chasses to the left.
  Inter.;-- Left file (Jack); No activity.




DIDDLE, DIDDLE DUMPLING


[Music:
  Diddle, Diddle Dumpling, my son John;
  Went to bed with his trousers on.
  One shoe off and one shoe on.
  Diddle, Diddle Dumpling, my son John.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle in partner formation. Open line
formation; partners facing each other; arms raised forward (shoulder
height) and clasp partner's hands.

NOTE.-- If desk width is too great have pupils place hands on hips.

NOTE.-- Description of movement of pupil facing to the left. Movements
of partner;-- reverse.


1st Line;-- Diddle, Diddle Dumpling,

  Interpretation;-- Step throw, right and left. (Four counts.)

my son John;

  Inter.;-- Stamp feet; right, left, right and hold. (Four counts.)

2nd Line;-- Went to bed with his

  Inter.;-- Step throw, left and right. (Four counts.)

trousers on.

  Inter.;-- Replace left foot, bend knees deeply; lower arms with hands
  clenched. Stretch knees, pulling trousers on and place hands on hips.
  (Two counts per movement; four counts in all.)

3rd Line;-- One shoe off and

  Inter.;-- Arms raised forward (shoulder height) and clasp partner's
  hands. Step right sideward and close left to right and step throw,
  right. (Schottische.) (Four counts.)

one shoe on,

  Inter.;-- Step left sideward and close right to left and step throw,
  left. (Schottische.) (Four counts.)

4th Line;-- Diddle, Diddle

  Inter.;-- Jump, in place, once. (Two counts.)

Dumpling

  Inter.;-- Jump, in place, once. (Two counts.)

my son John.

  Inter.;-- Jump, in place, three times and hold. (Four counts.)


[Illustration: SING A SONG OF SIXPENCE (_See page 40_)]




SING A SONG OF SIXPENCE


_Permission to use words and music:-- McLoughlin Bros._

+J. W. Elliot+

_1st Verse._

[Music:
  Sing a song of sixpence,
  A pocket full of Rye;
  Four and twenty Blackbirds bak'd in a Pie.
  When the Pie was open'd,
  The Birds began to sing;
  Wasn't that a dainty dish to set before a King!]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle facing each other with hands
on hips. (Open line formation; partners facing each other.)


1st Line;-- Sing a song of sixpence,

  Interpretation;-- Step to the right, place left toe behind right heel,
  bending both knees slightly. Repeat to the left. (Cues:-- Step and
  bend and step and bend.)

2nd Line;-- A pocket full of Rye;

  Inter.;-- Execute three slides to the right and bring heels together
  on the fourth count. (Cues; Slide, slide, slide and heels.)

3rd Line;-- Four and twenty Blackbirds,

  Inter.;-- Repeat the activity of the first line, starting to the left.

4th Line;-- Bak'd in a Pie.

  Inter.;-- Repeat activity of the second line to the left.

5th Line;-- When the Pie was open'd,

  Inter.;-- Pupils face forward; raise arms forward (shoulder height)
  in circle form and then extend sideward, imitating the opening of
  the pie.

6th Line;-- The Birds began to sing;

  Inter.;-- Fluttering of arms up and down, imitating the flying of
  birds.

7th Line;-- Wasn't that a dainty dish

  Inter.;-- Replace both hands to hips on the word, "dainty." Upon the
  word, "dish," stretch the right hand forward as if holding the dish
  and nod the head in approval.

8th Line;-- To set before a King!

  Inter.;-- Step sideward to the right, close feet and bow with arms
  stretched sideward.


_2nd Verse._

[Music:
  The King was in the counting house,
    Counting out his money;
  The Queen was in the parlour,
    Eating bread and honey;
  The maid was in the garden,
    Hanging out the clothes;
  There came a little Dicky Bird
    And popp'd upon her nose.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle with hands on hips, facing the
front of room.


1st Line;-- The King

  Interpretation;-- Jump, in place, with a quarter turn to the right.

was in

  Inter.;-- Jump, in place, with a quarter turn to the left. (Front.)

the counting

  Inter.;-- Place left foot in seat area.

house,

  Inter.;-- Sit in seat.

Counting out his money;

  Inter.;-- Suit activity to words, holding imaginary coins in palm of
  left hand and count with the right hand.

2nd Line;-- The Queen

  Inter.;-- Stand in the right aisle; face to the left and immediately
  place hands in support on back of seat and edge of desk.

was in

  Inter.;-- Vault over seat, (Upon completion of vault, the hands assume
  normal position.)

the parlour,

  Inter.;-- Face to the right; place right foot in seat area and become
  seated.

Eating bread and honey;

  Inter.;-- Suit activity to words, encircling imaginary plate with left
  arm and imitate eating with the right hand.

3rd Line;-- The maid

  Inter.;-- Place right foot in right aisle.

was in

  Inter.;-- Stand in right aisle and place hands on hips.

the garden,

  Inter.;-- Bow and assume erect position.

Hanging

  Inter.;-- Bend trunk forward downward; stretch arms downward,
  grasping clothes.

out

  Inter.;-- Raise trunk, stretch arms upward and grasp imaginary
  clothesline.

the clothes;

  Inter.;-- Using right hand, take clothes-pin out of mouth and pin
  clothes on the line.

4th Line;-- There came a little Dicky Bird,

  Inter.;-- Replace hands to hips and mark time, in place.
  (Left, right, left and right.)

And popped

  Inter.;-- Jump, in place, and clap hands once.

upon her

  Inter.;-- Replace hands to hips; step right sideward and close
  left to right.

nose!

  Inter.;-- Bow and assume erect position.




SEE SAW, MARJORY DAW


_Permission to use words and music:-- McLoughlin Bros._

+J. W. Elliott+

[Music:
  Seesaw, Marjory Daw,
  Jack shall have a new master,
  He shall have but a penny a day,
  Because he won't work any faster.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Arrange class so that three aisles may work together.

Center aisle;-- Jump to stride stand with arms raised sideward.

Outer aisles;-- Face the center and grasp with both hands the
outstretched hand of pupil in center.

The center player acts as the Board; outer players as riders.


1st Line;-- See Saw, Marjory Daw,

  Interpretation;-- Center activity;-- Pupil bends trunk to the right,
  left, right and left.

Outer aisles;-- When center pupils bend to the right, the children on
  the right act as riders on board, bending and stretching knees. In
  reversing the movement, similar activity for those on the left.

2nd Line;-- Jack shall have a new master,

  Inter.;-- Center and outer aisles activity;-- Continue movement as
  described for the first line, finishing in erect position with hands
  on hips.

3rd Line;-- He shall have but a penny a day,

  Inter.;-- Outer aisles;-- Placing left hand to right elbow, shake
  index finger three times upon the words, "he shall have"; repeat
  motion with the left hand upon the words, "but a penny a day."
  Finish with hands on hips.

  Center activity;-- Nod to the right upon the words, "he shall have";
  assume erect position and nod to the left upon the words, "but a penny
  a day." Finish with hands on hips.

4th Line;-- Because he won't work any faster.

  Inter.;-- Repeat activity of first line. (Center and outer aisles.)


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *


_Circle_

(Outer aisles of classroom or in open area.)

  [Transcriber's Note:
  The above lines are printed in the middle of a blank page, similar
  to the "CLASSROOM" page earlier.]

NOTE.-- The following Rhythm Plays are suitable to any open area.


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *


LITTLE JACK HORNER


_Permission to use words and music:-- McLoughlin Bros._

Arr. by +J. W. Elliott+

[Music:
  Little Jack Horner sat in a corner,
  Eating a Christmas pie;
  He put in his thumb,
    And pulled out a plum,
  And said, "What a good boy am I!"
  Nice Plum! Nice Plum! Nice Plum! Nice Plum!]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Single circle formation facing line of direction with
hands on hips.


1st Line;-- Little

  Interpretation;-- Step forward, right.

Jack Horner

  Inter.;-- Step forward, left.

sat in a

  Inter.;-- Step forward, right, turn to the left, closing left foot to
