"No, nothing of the sort," said Rosamund stoutly.

"Then I know," said Irene, knitting her black eyebrows till they almost
met in her anxiety to express herself clearly; "she was telling you to
have a good influence over me. She always begins like that with the new
governesses. She has an interview with them the morning after they
arrive. They are generally by that time reduced to a state of pulp, and
she has them, as she thinks, alone. But I generally contrive to listen.
I am a great eavesdropper. Oh, I am not a bit ashamed of it--not a
bit--so you needn't begin to preach. She tells them to try and reform
me. She says money is no object if only I can be reformed. As though a
changeling could be reformed! She has been asking you to reform me,
hasn't she? I know her little ways, dear, good old Mumsy-pums. But she
can't reform a changeling. Now the boat is ready, and Betty is toiling
for dear life with our tea-tray. I darted into the kitchen, where she
was having a Sunday doze. I sprang upon her back, and she gave such a
shriek as though something awful had happened; and I said, 'Tea in a
twinkling, or I'll dress up and frighten you when you are in bed
to-night.' Oh, didn't she hop round as though she were walking on
red-hot irons! And there she is now, panting down the path with our tea.
Come along, Rosamund."

"But I don't think I must. I ought not to come," said Rosamund.

She was tempted, fascinated. To feel conscious that she was not one
scrap afraid of this queer girl, to feel conscious also that the girl
herself, notwithstanding her extreme naughtiness, could in the end be
managed by her, brought such a rush of interest into her life that she
forgot everything else for the moment; and, besides, Irene was
exceedingly strong, and although she was much slimmer and not so tall as
Rosamund, she dragged her down the path with a power that it was almost
impossible to resist.

"That will do, Betty. I won't frighten you to-night by dressing up and
making my eyes fiery," said Irene as the cook appeared with the tea.

"Oh, bless me, miss!" replied the cook, "for heaven's sake keep out of
my bedroom. If you will only give me back my key and let me lock my door
I wouldn't have such dreadful nightmares. I wish you would, Miss Irene."

"I give you back your key?" said Irene. "I'd have no fun if I hadn't
power over you. There, that will do. You may sleep sound to-night. I
always keep my word."

The cook departed, red and panting. She was as much afraid of Irene as
any of the other servants. But the place was a good one, the wages
exceedingly liberal, and Lady Jane the kindest and most patient of
mistresses. In short, many of the servants stayed for her sake,
notwithstanding the life of terror which naughty Irene gave them.

The little boat, painted sky-blue and tipped with white, was now pulled
out of the boat-house. Irene put in the basket of provisions, and a
moment later she and Rosamund were skimming across the smooth bosom of
the lake. It was quite a big lake, being a quarter of a mile across and
half a mile long, and in the centre was a rapid current which was
considered, and really was in times of storm, somewhat dangerous. For
this current Irene made, and when they got there she suddenly rested on
her oars, and looking at Rosamund, said, "Are you afraid, or are you
not? If the current gets a little stronger we will be drifted to the
edge of the lake, and at the edge of the lake there is a waterfall, and
over it we will go, and, splash! splash! splash! I took a girl there
once; she was my governess, but I was quite tired of her, and knew the
fright she would get in when I took her out in the boat. I never take
those who are dead sick with fright; but I took her, and she was nearly
drowned--not quite, for I can swim in almost any water, and I held her
up and brought her safe to land. But she left that evening. She was a
poor thing, absolutely determined to stop. I hated her the moment I saw
her face, it was so white and pasty; and she wasn't at all interesting.
She couldn't tell stories; she didn't believe in changelings. She had
never read the _Arabian Nights_. She knew hardly any history; but she
was great at dates. Oh, she was a horror! She was rather fond of
grammar, too, and odds and ends of things that aren't a bit interesting.
And needlework! Oh, the way she worried me to death with her needlework!
She did criss-cross and cross-criss, and every other stitch that was
ever invented. So I said to myself, 'Miss Carter must go,' and I took
her out on a rather stormy day, and we got into mid-current. Mother and
the servants came shouting to us to get out of it; but of course we
couldn't, and poor Miss Carter, how she did shriek! And I said, 'We are
certain to go over the fall; but we won't get drowned, for I won't let
you, if you will promise faithfully to give notice the very instant you
get back to the house.' Oh, poor thing, didn't she promise! Her very
teeth were chattering. She was in a most awful state. Now, we can go
over the waterfall to-day if you don't mind. You wouldn't be frightened,
would you?"

"Frightened? Not I! But I don't intend to go over the waterfall, all the
same."

"Now, what on earth do you mean by that remark?" asked Irene.

"I am quite as strong as you, and if it comes to a fight I can take the
oars. The current is not yet very strong; but I wish to get out of it,
for the see-sawing up and down makes me a little bit sea-sick. I am not
your governess. I am just a girl who has come to live at the Merrimans',
and I can make myself very pleasant to you if you make yourself pleasant
to me, or I can take not the slightest notice of you. There are heaps
and heaps of other girls about. There are all the Singletons."

"Oh, for primness!" began Irene. "Oh, those Green Leaves! they are
positively detestable. But you shall have your way, Rosamund. You really
are not afraid, so just you take one oar and I will take the other, and
we will get into smooth water and enjoy ourselves for once. It is a
comfort to talk to some one who hasn't a scrap of fear in her."

"Nobody ought to be afraid of you," said Rosamund, taking up an oar as
she spoke; and with a few vigorous strokes the girls got out of the
current into the still, blue waters of the lake.

Poor Lady Jane, who was watching them from her boudoir window, breathed
a sigh of relief.

"I knew that girl was sent to be a blessing to me," she said to herself;
"and my dear old friend's child, too. Oh, why was I given such a
creature as Irene to bring up and look after? I can no more manage her
than an old hen could manage a fierce young ostrich."

Meanwhile Rosamund and Irene began to enjoy themselves. The tea, as it
was called, consisted of a bottle of cold tea; but the rest of the
provisions were first-rate, the most delicious cakes of all sorts and
descriptions, with a few other dainties in the shape of sandwiches. The
girls ate and talked, and Irene, perhaps for the first time in her life,
became almost rational in her behavior.

"And now," said Irene, "I want you to tell me again what you said about
mother being naughty, because it will give me a most tremendous hold
over her. I wish you would tell me some of the sort of things she used
to do; because if I can say, 'I got it from you, mother, and you are the
one to blame,' it would be an immense pull. I wish you would tell me.
Do, won't you?"

"She never did the sort of things you have done," said Rosamund.

"How in the world do you know that?"

"Well, for instance, she was never cruel."

"I cruel? Well, I like that! I often and often put slugs and snails and
worms, and that sort of thing, out of the path for fear any one should
tread on them. I cruel?"

"You are in one way," said Rosamund. "I am not a scrap afraid of you,
and I say you are cruel when you terrify the servants and your poor
mother, who has no one but you, and"----

"We will get back into the current if you say another word," said Irene.

"No, we won't," replied Rosamund, "for I will keep this oar, and you
cannot wrench it from me."

She grasped it more firmly as she spoke. Irene looked at her for a
moment, and her small, wild, charming face seemed to lighten as though
with sudden passion. Then she broke into a merry laugh.

"I declare it is refreshing to hear you," she said. "Only don't scold me
too much at first. Let us be jolly for a little bit. When will you come
to see me again?"

"That depends on your mother and, I suppose, on the people I am living
with--the Merrimans."

"I don't know them."

"Don't know them? Why, they live quite close."

"I don't know any of the girls round here. There is a Merriman called
Lucy, a horrid prig, isn't there?"

"I must confess that I don't care for her," said Rosamund.

"Ah! then we have something in common. I shall cultivate her just for
the express purpose of finding out her faults, and then we will have
more in common. Only, promise me one thing, Rose."

"What is that?" said Rosamond, suddenly struck by the gentle tone which
the queer child's voice could assume.

"You won't take up with the Leaves. Do let the Leaves alone. Mother is
always harping on them, and bringing them up to me. But the fact is,
they are afraid to come here. They have been invited scores of times;
but they always make excuses at the last moment. I know the reason, for
that terrible Miss Carter, who was nearly drowned, went straight from us
to them, and has remained with them ever since. Of course, she told
them about the boat, and the current in the middle of the lake, and the
waterfall. I have been rather curious to see them, and to give them a
good round fright, every one of them, till they blanch to the color of
ghosts, and then their green dresses wouldn't suit them any longer. But
they wouldn't come. I have got no friends. That is why I am so anxious
to have you as a friend. You don't think me so dreadful, do you?"

"I think you could be splendid; but at the present moment I consider
that you are exceedingly naughty," said Rosamund. "But then, I am not a
bit too good myself, so I suppose that is why I tolerate you. Now, will
you please row back to the shore, for I am afraid I must be returning to
the Merrimans'?"




CHAPTER VII.

TEA ON THE LAKE.


It was with some difficulty that Rosamund persuaded Irene to obey her
orders; but firmness won the day. That young lady was accustomed to
ruling with a rod of iron, but she had at last found a girl who was not
the least afraid of her, who really did not mind what she did, and who
insisted on taking one oar while she took the other. This was a new
experience, and she could do nothing, try as she would, to terrify
Rosamund, who laughed when she assured her that she was a changeling,
and might perhaps take any form at any time, and might return to her
real home with the fairies at any moment; who laughed still more merrily
when she vowed she would upset the boat.

"I can swim like a duck," said Rosamund, "and I am a great deal bigger
than you are; and, clever as you think yourself, you would be no match
for me in the water."

In the end the merry laugh, the good nature, the charm and beauty of the
face, touched something which had never yet been awakened in Irene's
wild little heart. She turned to her oar, and they rowed quite silently,
and soon both girls landed on the shore. There they found Lady Jane
awaiting them.

"As you did not get leave, dear, to come here to-day, I think I had
better take you back myself to the Merrimans', for I should like to see
Mr. Merriman and have a chat with him; so will you come straight with me
to the carriage?"

"May I come too?" asked Irene suddenly.

"No, dear, I think not. I could not take you in that red frock. If you
were to put on a white dress, perhaps; but I think not to-day, Irene."

Lady Jane looked anxiously at her little daughter. Irene gave a wild
laugh, which really sounded to poor Rosamund as scarcely human, and the
next moment, with a whoop, she disappeared into the thick shrubbery of
young trees near by. Her voice could then be heard calling, "Frosty!
Frosty! come at once;" and then a thin and very emaciated woman was seen
coming out of a summer-house just beyond.

Meanwhile Lady Jane put her hand on Rosamund's arm.

"You have done wonders," she said. "You amaze me. I scarcely know how to
thank you. Come with me at once. I must see more of you; but you will
have to go home now."

Rosamund took the lady's hand, and they walked up to the house, where an
open landau was waiting for them. They drove quickly through the summer
air. Rosamund remained silent, afraid to speak, and yet longing to say
something. It was not until they had gone nearly a mile that Lady Jane
broke the silence.

"I have always felt that if her heart could be touched she would be all
right," was her first remark. "I think, somehow, you have touched it.
She has been a great and dreadful trial to me--her extraordinary
spirits, the way she fears nothing, the impossibility of giving her the
slightest discipline, the--the"----

Here the poor lady burst into tears.

"Oh, don't, Lady Jane!" said Rosamund. "I am not a very good girl
myself, and perhaps that is why I partly understand her. At the present
moment I hate my position. I like Mr. and Mrs. Merriman very well, and
some of the girls; but I can't stand that priggish Lucy. Perhaps that
is why I comprehend Irene--anyhow, if I may sometimes come to see her."

"Sometimes, dear! Sometimes! But I am going to see Mr. Merriman on that
very point this evening. I want you to be constantly with her."

"How can I be if I have to do all my lessons?"

"I will write to your mother. Something will have to be done. I can't
lose this one chance. It was Heaven directed me; and, oh, your face in
church--so like your mother's, and withal so spirited and so sweet! And
then I felt that if only my little darling were in any way like you! I
have had sorrow in my life; but no sorrow has been so great and terrible
as that which I have endured with regard to that poor child."

"She has a lovely face," said Rosamund; "but the fact is, she is
untamed. She wants some one to tame her; and no one can break her in.
She must be led, not driven."

"I know it; but then I cannot lead her, and she has got the whole house
so thoroughly in her power that she gloats over the position. But I must
not say any more."

"I am afraid Mr. and Mrs. Merriman will be very angry with me," said
Rosamund; "but, to tell the truth," she added, "I should not mind a bit
if I had not met Irene. But somehow, now, I would rather be good than
naughty, because I want really to help her."

They had now turned in at the avenue and were driving up to the house.
They could see several girls coming to meet them. Jane Denton was the
first to notice Rosamund. She went up to her at once.

"Oh, Rose," she said, "they are making such a fuss!" and then she
colored and glanced at Lady Jane.

"Don't say a word against Rosamund. Whether she has been disobedient or
not, she has done a splendid afternoon's work," said Lady Jane. Then she
added, "Introduce me to your young friend, my dear."

Rosamund did so. Jane was much pleased. She had heard a good deal about
Lady Jane in the course of the afternoon, and when Lucy and Mrs.
Merriman and one or two other girls were inveighing against Rosamund's
extreme naughtiness in going to see the great lady without permission,
Jane was envying her in her heart.

Now Rosamund jumped lightly from the carriage, put her hand inside
Jane's arm, and conducted Lady Jane into the house. She walked straight
toward the study, that sacred room which was seldom invaded, and opening
the door, announced Lady Jane Ashleigh, then at once closed it behind
the good lady, and went with her friend Jane Denton into the grounds.

"You have got into a scrape," said Jane. "I never knew anything like it.
What a pity you went!"

"Oh! don't bother me, Jane. I really don't care a bit if they do punish
me. What punishment can they inflict?"

"Lucy said that you ought to be expelled," said Jane. "You never knew
anything like her rage. But I rather think she did harm than otherwise,
for the Professor said to her, 'Oh, gently, Lucy--gently. It is her
first offense.' So I don't expect they will do that."

"It would be rather delightful if they did," said Rosamund, "for then I
could go to Lady Jane and have a right good time. There, come along. I
have a lot to tell you, but nothing at all to tell the others. Here they
are coming to meet us, with that precious Lucy at their head. Wouldn't I
like to take her out on the lake?" thought Rosamund, but she did not
utter her thought aloud.

The fact was, seeing these good, well-behaved girls brought back a great
deal of her naughty spirit, whereas terribly naughty Irene made her feel
more or less good.

"What a strange creature I am!" she thought, with a sigh. "And how can I
hope to influence any one?"

Meanwhile Lucy came straight up until she stood a few feet away from
Rosamund.

"I wonder," she said, speaking in even a more formal way than usual,
"how you can look me in the face, Rosamund. Have you ever been at school
before?"

"I don't call this school," said Rosamund; "it is a private house. It is
true we are subject to rules." Then she added, making a great effort to
control herself and to speak quietly, "I will tell your father and
mother what I feel with regard to this day's expedition; but I will not
tell you, for you are only a school-girl like myself, and I expect, when
all is said and done, not a bit better."

"Not a bit better?" repeated Lucy, her voice almost choking. "Why, I
never disobeyed my parents in the whole course of my life."

"I am not aware that I have disobeyed mine," said Rosamund. "But," she
continued, turning to the other girls, "I will talk of this to my master
and mistress, Professor and Mrs. Merriman, and not to you, Lucy."

Then she linked her hand through Jane Denton's arm, called to Laura
Everett to follow her, while Annie Millar, Laura's special friend,
immediately turned to join the little group, and the four children soon
found themselves in the shade of one of the thickest plantations in
Sunnyside.

"Oh dear! oh dear!" said Laura, speaking excitedly, "there has been a
fuss made. I always did admire you, Rosamund; but I must own I was
disappointed at your creeping away in the manner you did, without
telling anybody. And as to dear Professor Merriman, his face was quite
full of pain. I could scarcely bear to look at him."
