punishments. All she wanted was to get her child back in her own
keeping.

"Isn't it possible there's a mistake?" demanded Greg of the dismayed
housekeeper. "The little one may have gotten up out of bed. She may be
in some other part of the house."

"Not much!" interjected the housekeeper. "The child's jacket and coat
are gone from a hook near by."

After the first moment of fright Mrs. Dexter had raced upstairs; now she
came down again.

"Myra's really gone," she cried, sobbing. "And no one but Dexter would
think of stealing her from me. He has done it for spite--or as the means
of extorting more money from me."

"A man could hardly go through the streets carrying a child that didn't
want to be carried. The child could cry out and attract attention,"
guessed Dick.

"Myra wouldn't cry out. She would be cowed by her father's threats. She
always was afraid of him," wailed Mrs. Dexter.

"Are you going to appeal to the police?" Dick asked.

"I--I must."

"Then you're losing time, Mrs. Dexter--and there's your telephone. We
boys will go out into the streets and see if we can find any trace--pick
up any word. When we came along there was a cab standing in front of the
Grahams. But I suppose that cab belonged to some of their visitors."

"The Grahams have been out of town for the last few days," broke in Mrs.
Dexter. "There has been no one at their house, except one old man who
acts as care-taker."

"Then Dexter may have had that cab waiting for him," flashed young
Prescott. "Come along, fellows! Let's see what we can find out."

Dave and Greg were at the street door ahead of their young leader. None
of the boys paused longer, for Mrs. Dexter was already at her telephone.

Out in the street the three Grammar School lads raced along the sidewalk
until they reached the house of the Graham family. The cab was gone.

"We can find that cab anywhere," declared Dick. "Any one else would
recognize it. It had one brown, or dark horse, and one gray horse."

"I didn't notice the driver," stated Darrin.

"He was sitting inside the cab," spoke up Greg. "I didn't get a good
look at him, either."

"Going to race on into Main Street?" asked Dave, as the three came to a
street corner.

"Dexter would hardly drive right into the clutches of the police, would
he?" pondered Prescott. "No; I think it'll turn out that he went the
opposite way, out of town."

Saying this, Dick headed for the outskirts of Gridley, still keeping
along at a dog-trot. Dave and Greg didn't talk now; they were husbanding
their store of "wind."

After a short time all three boys had to slow down to a walk. That "pain
in the side," which seizes all boys who try to run far without training
and practice, had caught them. Still, they moved along as fast as they
could go.

"Excuse me, mister," hailed Dick, halting the first man they met, who
came strolling toward them, smoking a pipe, "have you seen a cab go by?"

"Yes."

"Oldish cab?" broke in Dave.

"One gray horse and one dark or brown?" breathed Greg.

"Yep."

"How long ago?" asked all three.

"'Bout two minutes ago. Why?"

"Which way did it go?" breathed Dick anxiously.

"Why, the driver stopped me," explained the man, taking out his pipe,
"and asked if there was a drug store ahead in this part of the town. I
told him he'd find one on the next block, around the next corner to the
left. So----"

"Thank you!" came politely from three breathless boys, and off they
started again on a trot.

"Any one sick?" called the man after them. "Huh! Curious how excited
those boys are!"

"Two minutes! I'm afraid horses will leave us far behind with that
start," groaned Dick.

Then they turned around the corner. Ahead of them, in front of the
little drug store, or rather, just past the entrance, stood the cab that
occupied all their thoughts at the present time.

"There it is!" breathed Dick excitedly, as though forgetful of the fact
that his chums had eyes also. "Come along--over on the other side of the
street--in the dark."

In a twinkling all three lads had crossed stealthily to the further side
of the little street.

"Oh, for a policeman!" appealed Dick. "Or any full-grown man, who would
listen to us and have the grit to give us a strong hand."

"If Dexter has the little girl, and that's his cab, what has he taken
her into a drug store for?" whispered Dave.

"We don't know that he has taken her into the store. We don't know
anything until we see it," was Dick's answer. "Dexter didn't stop for a
trifle. He isn't buying Myra a glass of soda, or anything like that."

The three boys were stealing down the street, on the further side,
keeping close in the shadow of the buildings. They did not wish to risk
being seen until they had had a chance for a good look at the cab and
its possible contents.

Dick's reason for crossing the street had been that he had first caught
sight of the driver standing on the sidewalk beside the cab. If he could
get down close to the cab, and have that vehicle between himself and the
driver, Dick hoped that he would have a chance to steal across the
street and look inside the rig.

By good luck, combined with stealth, Dick, Dave and Greg succeeded in
gaining a point on the street opposite the cab.

"Careful, now," whispered Dick, "one bad move might spoil everything."

On tip-toe they crossed. At a point midway in the street they halted a
brief instant. From this point they could make out the unmistakable form
of Ab. Dexter at the back of the drug store, walking to and fro as if
waiting for something.

No word was spoken. Still on tip-toe the boys went on until they stood
by one of the doors of the cab.

Dave and Greg made way for Dick to get up close and peer into the
vehicle.

Young Prescott gave a start of exultation as he made out a little,
wrapped-up human bundle huddled on the back seat. It was little
four-year-old Myra. She had collapsed into a heap and was very softly
sobbing to herself, wholly unaware of what might be passing outside.

On the further side of the cab, standing on the sidewalk, Dick caught
sight of the man whom he presumed to be the driver. The fellow was
standing staring fixedly ahead.

"If he had been looking the other way he would have caught us coming
down the street," flashed through Prescott's mind.

Then he turned, nodding swiftly, silently, at his companions.

They had found Myra, these Grammar School lads, but in a desperate
fight, Dexter and the driver would prove overwhelming odds. The pair of
rascals could knock these youngsters senseless and whip up the horses
for a dash.

What was to be done?

In sheer nervousness Dave Darrin began to try the handle of the cab
door. Then, understanding coming to him, Dave tried in earnest to see
whether he could unfasten the door with out making the least noise.

All three of the lads realized that it was a ticklish moment. Even Myra,
if startled, might give the scream that would betray and defeat them.

Steadily Dave worked at his problem. Dick and Greg, quivering, stood
alertly on guard on either side of him.

Squeak! That cab-door handle needed oiling sadly. Even under Darrin's
cautious handling it gave forth a noise that sounded startling in the
stillness.

"What's that?" they heard the driver mutter, as he started. Then came
the sound of footsteps, as the driver wheeled and ran around behind the
cab.

He was bearing down straight upon them!




CHAPTER VII

DICK LEADS A SPIRITED RUSH


"Hustle, Dave--into the cab!" shouted Dick Prescott lustily.

Darrin obeyed like a flash, pulling the door shut.

"What are you young monkeys doing here?" yelled the driver hoarsely.
Then, as he caught better sight of them, he snarled:

"Oh, I know you boys! You belong to the Butt-insky family!"

The driver's next remark was "ouch!" as Greg darted in and struck him
fairly at the belt line. In the same instant young Prescott managed to
trip the fellow.

"Boss!" bawled the driver, as he struck the pavement.

"Into the cab with you, Greg!" shouted Dick.

Dave swung the door open, and in the same instant Greg bolted inside,
while Dick Prescott made a single bound at the front wheel, from which
he mounted to the driver's seat.

"None of that!" yelled the driver, getting upon his feet and moving
forward. At the same moment another man came to the door of the drug
store.

That man was--must have been--Abner Dexter. He wore the same clothes
that Dick remembered, but over his head and face were drawn a wig and
beard that made him look some one else.

Whish! Dick's left hand clutched at the reins, but his right hand
grasped the whip. That useful implement described an arc downward and
caught the driver roundly, judging by the yell that the fellow let out.

"Gid-dap!" yelled young Prescott, completing the swing of the whip by
bringing it down across the horses' backs.

The startled animals leaped forward, the lurch almost throwing Dick from
the box; in fact, it nearly overturned the cab.

But the vehicle soon righted itself, and Dick, somewhat scared, yet
steady, pulled the horses down to a steady trot and reined them in
closer together.

The disguised man who had come out of the drug store succeeded in
resting one hand for an instant on the body of the cab. But the
springing horses carried it away from him. For a few rods the man
pursued, the smarting driver bringing up the rear.

Then both pursuers halted, panting, cursing, at the same time, as only
foul-mouthed ruffians can.

Inside, Myra was shrieking with fright.

"We're your mother's friends, Myra, and are taking you back to her,"
explained Dave, holding the small child on his knee and trying to quiet
her.

Greg Holmes, in the meantime, was more concerned with looking out of the
window.

"Why, say," muttered Greg. "Dick ain't driving to Mrs. Dexter's, not by
a long shot. He seems to be heading straight into the business part of
the town."

"You leave Dick Prescott alone to know what he's doing," advised Dave
Darrin calmly.

"Yes; I guess that's right," assented Greg.

"Dick is the longest-headed fellow in our school."

"Except me," grinned Greg modestly.

"You? Huh! I'm glad you're not outside on the box."

"I reckon it's the first time Dick ever drove cab horses."

"He'll do it right, anyway."

"But I wonder why he isn't going to the Dexter house," pursued young
Holmes.

Then Myra took fright again.

"Take me home!" she cried. "I want to see my mamma!"

From that she passed into wild sobbing, taxing all Dave Darrin's powers
to ease her mind.

[Illustration: The Whip Caught the Driver Roundly.]

"You're going home, Myra," he wound up. "You're going to see your
mother."

"My papa is a bad man!"

"Well, he's not here now," smiled Dave. "Did you ever hear of Dick
Prescott?"

"Yes; he's a nice boy."

"You're right he is," added Dave with enthusiasm. "Well, Dick is up
outside, driving the horses, and he'll take us home by the way that it's
best to go."

"Here we are in Main Street," announced Greg wonderingly.

Dave thought he began to understand Prescott's plan, but he said
nothing. A few moments later the cab turned down one of the side
streets, then halted before a cluster of lights.

"The police station!" exploded Greg.

"Of course," nodded Dave.

"Why 'of course'?"

"Because it's part of Dick's plan."

"Come out, fellows," called Dick. "We're at the end of our trip, thank
goodness."

Greg opened the door, Dave stepping out with Myra in his arms.

"My mamma doesn't live here," cried the child uneasily.

"No, but it's all right," Dave urged soothingly. "You come right along
and see if it isn't."

Dick led the way up the police-station steps. In the office three
uniformed members of the force were talking excitedly. One of them was
the night lieutenant, Janeway.

"I tell you, Lieutenant, the thing was done so slickly that the child
ain't going to be found to-night," one of the patrolmen was saying.

"If you're talking about Myra Dexter, guess again," laughed young
Prescott. "Here she is now."

Three astounded policemen turned to regard the happy-faced Grammar
School boys.

"Then she wasn't stolen at all?" demanded one of the patrolmen. "Just
strolled away and got lost, eh?"

"Oh, no!" Dick retorted. "Myra was stolen, all right; but we stole her
back again."

"How?"

"We took her away from her father and a cab-driver," chuckled Greg
Holmes.

"Stop telling us any nonsense like that," interposed the lieutenant
sternly. "Tell us where you found the child."

Dick related the story briefly. The policemen were at first inclined to
doubt the story, but one of them glanced outside and saw the cab.

"If you'll let me offer a suggestion," went on Dick, "there's a mother
at home who is nearly crazy with grief. Hadn't you better call Mrs.
Dexter on the telephone and tell her that Myra is safe with you?"

The lieutenant quickly wheeled to his 'phone, calling for Mrs. Dexter's
number. One of the policemen, in the meantime, received Myra in his
arms.

"Mrs. Dexter?" called the lieutenant into the transmitter. "This is the
police station. We have your little girl here, all safe and sound. How
was she found? Three schoolboys, Dick Prescott, Dave Dar---- Oh, you
know the names? Well, they trailed the cab to where it had stopped
outside of a drug store. They knocked the driver down and got away with
the cab. How did three boys manage to do such a deed? Wait! I'll let
Master Prescott himself tell you over the 'phone."

The lieutenant wheeled about.

"Where in the name of mischief are those boys?" he demanded. The two
policemen turned in equal confusion. Certain it was that the Grammar
School boys had bolted.

So the lieutenant sent out to find a driver, and one of his policemen
got inside with Myra, to take her home. The policeman was also
instructed to remain on guard outside through the night, in case Dexter
and his confederate should feel inclined to make another attempt to
abduct the little one.

Dick and his chums, after leaving the station house silently, had run
until they found themselves around the corner on Main Street.

"We don't want to be thanked any more by Mrs. Dexter to-night," Dick
ventured to his friends.

"We certainly don't," agreed Dave.

"What'll we do now?" asked Greg.

"We'll go home," suggested young Prescott. "Our folks will be wondering
where we are."

"Whee! But we'll have a lot to tell the folks!" chuckled Greg. "When my
mother hears what we've been through to-night the chances are ten to one
that she'll make me stay in nights."

"Not if she pauses to think what you did to help another mother out,"
hinted Dave.
