    And well earned indeed is their rest!
While the children give chase to the hare that's hard prest,
Or the bird by the harvest disturbed from her nest.

For what care the children for heat or for work,
At that age when all labor so gaily we shirk?
      Play, then, little ones, play,
      And enjoy while ye may,
    But to all of God's creatures be kind--
Then when months have rolled by and left Summer behind,
Its joys unalloyed shall still dwell in your mind.




TIMOTHY.


Timothy was our pet hedgehog. I bought him in Leadenhall Market, brought
him home, and put him into the back-garden, which is walled in. There,
to that extent, he had his liberty, and many, and many a time did I
watch him from my study window walking about in the twilight among the
grass, searching for worms and other insects. And very useful was he to
the plants by so doing. When the dry weather came food got more scarce;
then Timothy was fed with bread and milk from the back-kitchen window,
which is on a level with the stone. Soon he came to know that when he
was hungry there was the supply; and often he would come and scratch at
the glass or at the back-door for his supper, and after getting it, walk
off to the garden beds to make himself useful. Few people know of the
great use of a hedgehog in a garden, or they would be more generally
kept. Our Timothy, poor fellow, however, in spite of all his good
qualities, came to a bad end. A strange dog coming one day, saw him
walking about in search of his accustomed food, and pounced on him and
bit him; still I had hopes of his recovery, but in a few days he died,
and all of us were sorry.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: GOLD ORE.

SILVER ORE.

TIN ORE.

IRON ORE.]

[Illustration: NORTH AMERICAN INDIAN.

MONGOLIAN.

CAUCASIAN. HEAD OF BELVEDERE APOLLO.

CAUCASIAN.--MODERN TURK.]




THE BRAVE COCKATOO.


One Charles Durand, of whose travels and adventures a book has been
written, owned a cockatoo, which he carried about with him on his
journeys; the bird's name was Billy, and he seems to have been as wise
as he was loving. Charles was asleep in his tent, when he was roused by
a sharp, shrill cry of the bird, of "Time to rise! time to rise!"
accompanied by a violent flapping of the wings. So awakened, Charles
looked around, wondering what had disturbed his feathered friend. The
cause was soon plain--a deadly snake lay coiled up close to his bed,
prepared to spring on the defenseless man. Just when he thought that all
hope was at an end, the brave cockatoo sprang from his perch, seized the
reptile by the neck, and held him tight till his master could summon
help.

[Illustration]




HARE TAKING THE WATER.


I was pike-fishing one season on the Dorset Stour below Canford Major,
when on passing from one field to another, I disturbed a hare. The
animal at once entered an open, dry drain, and I lost sight of her.
Presently, as I silently made my way plying my rod by the bank, I saw
her, this time without any appearance of alarm, take to the water, and
making her way through the sedges. She put her head to the stream so
that the force of the current, with but slight exertion by swimming on
her part, carried her nearly in a straight line to the opposite bank.
Here I watched her to see whether she would trundle herself like a dog,
but she merely rested a bit, letting the water run from her, and then
set off at a rattling pace across the mead, which doubtless soon
thoroughly dried her.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




AUTUMN.


The breeze is somewhat cooler growing,
  The flowers less scent unfold--
But see!--the luscious grape is growing
  With purple or with gold.
    Now drain we up
    The social cup,
  When music blithe invites us--
Though Winter threatens from afar
Our present mirth he shall not mar,
  While Autumn still delights us.

Yes! Autumn brings the best of pleasures,
  With grape and garnered corn--
And lays in stores of future treasures
  To glad the year unborn.
    What need we dread,
    When wine and bread
  God's bounteous hand hath given?
Oh! rather let our voices raise,
In fervent hope and humble praise,
  A grateful hymn to Heaven!

[Illustration]




WINTER.


Stern Winter--most unwelcome guest!--
The earth in whitest robes has drest;
And hast'ning through the crunching snow,
With tinkling bells, the sledges go.

The leafless wood looks drear and sad,
No birds sing now with voices glad;--
But boys are romping far and wide,
And o'er the ice delight to slide.

When on the panes with frost encased,
The mimic fir-trees may be traced,
In spite of biting cold and snow,
Poor housewives to the forest go.

And there they gather moss to form
Their children's bed all soft and warm,
And dried up twigs to make a blaze
That cheers the hearth with kindling rays.

Their treasures next the ashes yield,
And hot potatoes lie revealed,
Which little hungry mouths invite,
With dainty smell and welcome sight.

Lord! all Thy ways are great and good!
Thou giv'st e'en orphaned birds their food--
Thy blessing and Thy fostering care
Alike the hut and palace share!




OUR WILD BIRDS.


I dare say you notice that all the birds in this picture have long
beaks. We may be sure from this that they live in places and seek for
their food in ways in which long beaks are just what they want. The fact
is they are all marsh birds, and the soil of marshes being wet and soft,
and full of worms, these long beaks enable them to probe it, and so get
at the worms. I think the beaks of birds afford a striking example of
how good God is in adapting creatures to the mode of life He has
appointed for them. The eagles and hawks, you know, are provided with
strong, short bills to enable them to seize and tear flesh. Those of
canaries and all the finches are just the very instruments to crack
seeds with. Parrots, with their tremendous weapons, can crush the
hardest nuts of the tropic forest. The crossbill is fitted with a
wonderful tool for tearing fir-cones to pieces. Robins and the other
warblers have soft bills, which are all they want for eating insects and
grubs.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

I would rather be my lady's hawk,
  And perch upon her hand,
Than I would be the deerhound grim,
  To range this forest-land.




[Illustration]


P--THE PELICAN.


_On river banks, on shores of lakes,
  Or marge of sounding sea,
The Pelican, in quest of fish,
  Roams uncontrolled and free._


[Illustration]


Q--THE QUAIL.


_When come the leaves and buds of spring
  Then comes the swift-winged quail:
But ever quits our western lands
  Before the winter pale._


[Illustration]


R--THE RHINOCEROS.


_Down to the waterside to drink,
  Within the jungle's shade,
Has come the huge Rhinoceros,
  In knotty hide arrayed._




BLACKBIRDS AND YOUNG.


A country lad having taken the nest of some blackbirds containing young
ones, made off with it, but was closely pursued by the parents, who
tried to peck his face so as to make him give them up. Mr. Jesse relates
a similar instance, where a pair of old birds followed a boy into a
house, pecking at his head while he was carrying off one of their young
ones. People little think of the misery they cause when they rob the
birds of their nestlings.

The bird's nest is thus described:

Now put together odds and ends,
Picked up from enemies and friends:
See bits of thread and bits of rag,
Just like a little rubbish bag.

[Illustration]




A USEFUL PILOT.


There is a trained sheep kept on board a steamer plying in California.
It goes out on the gang-plank, when a flock is to be loaded, to show
that the approach is safe, and to act as pilot to the flock, which
readily follows it on to the boat. The sheep, when in a flock, are all
alike timid, and it is difficult to find a leader among them, each being
afraid to go first; but when one goes, they all follow after, so that
this clever sheep is very valuable. The only other way to get a flock on
board a ship is to catch one and drag it on board; but this is not such
a good way as having the clever "Pilot."

