  What Inflection does a negative statement usually
  require? Give examples from the second paragraph.
  (Introduction, p. 17.)

  Give examples, from the second paragraph, of momentary
  completeness. (Introduction, pp. 15 and 16.)

  Select the words which are emphatic because they express
  (_a_) new and important ideas. (_b_) contrast.

  BEARETH ALL THINGS, ETC. How may the repetition of a
  word or phrase affect the Emphasis? (Introduction, pp.
  31 and 32.)

  How are the principal clauses in the first three
  sentences made prominent? (Introduction, p. 33.)

       *       *       *       *       *


THE LEGEND BEAUTIFUL

From "Tales of a Wayside Inn"


  "Hadst thou stayed, I must have fled!"
  That is what the Vision said.

  In his chamber all alone,
  Kneeling on the floor of stone,
  Prayed the Monk in deep contrition                                   5
  For his sins of indecision,
  Prayed for greater self-denial
  In temptation and in trial;
  It was noonday by the dial,
  And the Monk was all alone.                                         10

  Suddenly, as if it lightened,
  An unwonted splendour brightened
  All within him and without him
  In that narrow cell of stone;
  And he saw the Blessed Vision                                       15
  Of our Lord, with light Elysian
  Like a vesture wrapped about Him,
  Like a garment round Him thrown.
  Not as crucified and slain,
  Not in agonies of pain,                                             20
  Not with bleeding hands and feet,
  Did the Monk his Master see;
  But as in the village street,
  In the house or harvest-field,
  Halt and lame and blind He healed,                                  25
  When He walked in Galilee.

  In an attitude imploring,
  Hands upon his bosom crossed,
  Wondering, worshipping, adoring,
  Knelt the Monk in rapture lost.                                     30
  Lord, he thought, in heaven that reignest,
  Who am I, that thus Thou deignest
  To reveal Thyself to me?
  Who am I, that from the centre
  Of Thy glory Thou shouldst enter                                    35
  This poor cell, my guest to be?

  Then amid his exaltation,
  Loud the convent bell appalling,
  From its belfry calling, calling,
  Rang through court and corridor                                     40
  With persistent iteration
  He had never heard before.
  It was now the appointed hour
  When alike in shine or shower,
  Winter's cold or summer's heat,                                     45
  To the convent portals came
  All the blind and halt and lame,
  All the beggars of the street,
  For their daily dole of food
  Dealt them by the brotherhood;                                      50
  And their almoner was he
  Who upon his bended knee,
  Rapt in silent ecstasy
  Of divinest self-surrender,
  Saw the Vision and the Splendour.                                   55

  Deep distress and hesitation
  Mingled with his adoration;
  Should he go or should he stay?
  Should he leave the poor to wait
  Hungry at the convent gate,                                         60
  Till the Vision passed away?
  Should he slight his radiant guest,
  Slight this visitant celestial,
  For a crowd of ragged, bestial
  Beggars at the convent gate?                                        65
  Would the Vision there remain?
  Would the Vision come again?
  Then a voice within his breast
  Whispered, audible and clear
  As if to the outward ear:                                           70
  "Do thy duty; that is best;
  Leave unto thy Lord the rest!"

  Straightway to his feet he started,
  And with longing look intent
  On the Blessed Vision bent,                                         75
  Slowly from his cell departed,
  Slowly on his errand went.

  At the gate the poor were waiting,
  Looking through the iron grating,
  With that terror in the eye                                         80
  That is only seen in those
  Who amid their wants and woes
  Hear the sound of doors that close,
  And of feet that pass them by;
  Grown familiar with disfavour,                                      85
  Grown familiar with the savour
  Of the bread by which men die!
  But to-day, they knew not why,
  Like the gate of Paradise
  Seemed the convent gate to rise,                                    90
  Like a sacrament divine
  Seemed to them the bread and wine.
  In his heart the Monk was praying,
  Thinking of the homeless poor,
  What they suffer and endure;                                        95
  What we see not, what we see;
  And the inward voice was saying:
  "Whatsoever thing thou doest
  To the least of Mine and lowest,
  That thou doest unto Me!"                                          100

  Unto Me! but had the Vision
  Come to him in beggar's clothing,
  Come a mendicant imploring,
  Would he then have knelt adoring,
  Or have listened with derision,                                    105
  And have turned away with loathing?
  Thus his conscience put the question,
  Full of troublesome suggestion,
  As at length, with hurried pace,
  Toward his cell he turned his face,                                110
  And beheld the convent bright
  With a supernatural light,
  Like a luminous cloud expanding
  Over floor and wall and ceiling.
  But he paused with awestruck feeling                               115
  At the threshold of his door,
  For the Vision still was standing
  As he left it there before,
  When the convent bell appalling,
  From its belfry calling, calling,                                  120
  Summoned him to feed the poor.
  Through the long hour intervening
  It had waited his return,
  And he felt his bosom burn,
  Comprehending all the meaning,                                     125
  When the Blessed Vision said,
  "Hadst thou stayed, I must have fled!"

      --_Henry Wadsworth Longfellow_


  HADST, LIGHTENED, BRIGHTENED, REIGNEST, DEIGNEST,
  DIVINEST (Appendix, A, 3.)

  ll. 29, 38-39, 78-79. (Appendix, A, 4.)

  How can the reader show that the first two lines are
  merely introductory?

  Divide the poem proper into five parts, giving to each
  part a suggestive title. How can the reader make each
  part stand out by itself? (Introduction, p. 10.)

  Select the principal statement in each stanza and show
  how the voice may make it prominent. (Introduction, p.
  33.)

  What Inflection is placed on the principal statement?
  What Inflection on the subordinate phrases and clauses?
  (Introduction, p. 15.)

  Select examples of momentary completeness from the poem.

  ll. 19-22. What is the Inflection on these negative
  phrases? (Introduction, pp. 17 and 18.)

  What is the Inflection on the various questions
  throughout the poem? (Introduction, p. 18.)

       *       *       *       *       *


THE VICAR'S FAMILY USE ART

From "The Vicar of Wakefield"


1. Whatever might have been Sophia's sensations, the rest of the
family was easily consoled for Mr. Burchell's absence by the company
of our landlord, whose visits now became more frequent, and longer.
Though he had been disappointed in procuring my daughters the
amusements of the town, as he designed, he took every opportunity of
supplying them with those little recreations which our retirement
would admit of. He usually came in the morning; and while my son and I
followed our occupations abroad, he sat with the family at home, and
amused them by describing the town, with every part of which he was
particularly acquainted. He could repeat all the observations that
were retailed in the atmosphere of the play-houses, and had all the
good things of the high wits by rote, long before they made their way
into the jest-books. The intervals between conversation were employed
in teaching my daughters piquet, or sometimes in setting my two little
ones to box, to make them _sharp_, as he called it; but the hopes of
having him for a son-in-law, in some measure blinded us to all his
imperfections. It must be owned, that my wife laid a thousand schemes
to entrap him; or, to speak it more tenderly, used every art to
magnify the merit of her daughter. If the cakes at tea ate short and
crisp, they were made by Olivia; if the gooseberry wine was well knit,
the gooseberries were of her gathering; it was her fingers that gave
the pickles their peculiar green; and in the composition of a pudding,
it was her judgment that mixed the ingredients. Then the poor woman
would sometimes tell the Squire that she thought him and Olivia
extremely of a size, and would bid both stand up to see which was
tallest. These instances of cunning, which she thought impenetrable,
yet which everybody saw through, were very pleasing to our benefactor,
who gave every day some new proofs of his passion, which, though they
had not risen to proposals of marriage, yet we thought fell but little
short of it; and his slowness was attributed sometimes to native
bashfulness, and sometimes to his fear of offending his uncle. An
occurrence, however, which happened soon after, put it beyond a doubt
that he designed to become one of our family; my wife even regarded it
as an absolute promise.

2. My wife and daughters happening to return a visit at neighbour
Flamborough's, found that family had lately got their pictures drawn
by a limner, who travelled the country, and took likenesses for
fifteen shillings a head. As this family and ours had long a sort of
rivalry in point of taste, our spirit took the alarm at this stolen
march upon us; and notwithstanding all I could say, and I said much,
it was resolved that we should have our pictures done too. Having,
therefore, engaged the limner--for what could I do?--our next
deliberation was to shew the superiority of our taste in the
attitudes. As for our neighbour's family, there were seven of them,
and they were drawn with seven oranges--a thing quite out of taste, no
variety in life, no composition in the world. We desired to have
something in a brighter style; and after many debates, at length came
to an unanimous resolution of being drawn together, in one large
historical family piece. This would be cheaper, since one frame would
serve for all, and it would be infinitely more genteel; for all
families of any taste were now drawn in the same manner. As we did not
immediately recollect an historical subject to hit us, we were
contented each with being drawn as independent historical figures. My
wife desired to be represented as Venus, and the painter was desired
not to be too frugal of his diamonds in her stomacher and hair. Her
two little ones were to be as Cupids by her side; while I, in my gown
and band, was to present her with my books on the Whistonian
controversy. Olivia would be drawn as an Amazon, sitting upon a bank
of flowers, dressed in a green joseph richly laced with gold, and a
whip in her hand. Sophia was to be a shepherdess, with as many sheep
as the painter could put in for nothing; and Moses was to be dressed
out with an hat and white feather. Our taste so much pleased the
Squire that he insisted on being put in as one of the family, in the
character of Alexander the Great, at Olivia's feet. This was
considered by us all as an indication of his desire to be introduced
into the family, nor could we refuse his request. The painter was
therefore set to work, and as he wrought with assiduity and
expedition, in less than four days the whole was completed. The piece
was large, and it must be owned he did not spare his colours; for
which my wife gave him great encomiums. We were all perfectly
satisfied with his performance; but an unfortunate circumstance which
had not occurred till the picture was finished, now struck us with
dismay. It was so very large that we had no place in the house to fix
it. How we all came to disregard so material a point is inconceivable;
but certain it is, we had been all greatly remiss. The picture,
therefore, instead of gratifying our vanity, as we hoped, leaned, in a
most mortifying manner, against the kitchen wall, where the canvas was
stretched and painted, much too large to be got through any of the
doors, and the jest of all our neighbours. One compared it to Robinson
Crusoe's long-boat, too large to be removed; another thought it more
resembled a reel in a bottle; some wondered how it could be got out.
but still more were amazed how it ever got in.

3. But though it excited the ridicule of some, it effectually raised
more malicious suggestions in many. The Squire's portrait being found
united with ours, was an honour too great to escape envy. Scandalous
whispers began to circulate at our expense, and our tranquillity was
continually disturbed by persons, who came as friends, to tell us what
was said of us by enemies. These reports we always resented with
becoming spirit; but scandal ever improves by opposition.

4. We once again, therefore, entered into a consultation upon
obviating the malice of our enemies, and at last came to a resolution
which had too much cunning to give me entire satisfaction. It was
this: as our principal object was to discover the honour of Mr.
Thornhill's addresses, my wife undertook to sound him, by pretending
to ask his advice in the choice of an husband for her eldest daughter.
If this was not found sufficient to induce him to a declaration, it
was then resolved to terrify him with a rival. To this last step,
however, I would by no means give my consent, till Olivia gave me the
most solemn assurances that she would marry the person provided to
rival him upon this occasion, if he did not prevent it by taking her
himself. Such was the scheme laid, which, though I did not strenuously
oppose, I did not entirely approve.

5. The next time, therefore, that Mr. Thornhill came to see us, my
girls took care to be out of the way, in order to give their mamma an
opportunity of putting her scheme in execution; but they only retired
to the next room, whence they could overhear the whole conversation.
My wife artfully introduced it, by observing, that one of the Miss
Flamboroughs was like to have a very good match of it in Mr. Spanker.
To this the Squire assenting, she proceeded to remark, that they who
had warm fortunes were always sure of getting good husbands: "But
heaven help," continued she, "the girls that have none! What signifies
beauty, Mr. Thornhill? or what signifies all the virtue, and all the
qualifications in the world, in this age of self-interest? It is not,
What is she? but, What has she? is all the cry."

6. "Madam," returned he, "I highly approve the justice, as well as the
novelty, of your remarks, and if I were a king, it should be
otherwise. It should then, indeed, be fine times for the girls without
fortunes: our two young ladies should be the first for whom I would
provide."

7. "Ah, sir," returned my wife, "you are pleased to be facetious: but
I wish I were a queen, and then I know where my eldest daughter
should look for an husband. But now that you have put it into my head,
seriously, Mr. Thornhill, can't you recommend me a proper husband for
her? She is now nineteen years old, well grown and well educated, and,
in my humble opinion, does not want for parts."

8. "Madam," replied he, "if I were to choose, I would find out a
person possessed of every accomplishment that can make an angel happy.
One with prudence, fortune, taste, and sincerity; such, madam, would
be, in my opinion, the proper husband."--"Ay, sir," said she, "but do
you know of any such person?"--"No, Madam," returned he, "it is
impossible to know any person that deserves to be her husband: she's
too great a treasure for one man's possession: she's a goddess! Upon
my soul, I speak what I think, she's an angel!"--"Ah, Mr. Thornhill,
you only flatter my poor girl: but we have been thinking of marrying
her to one of your tenants, whose mother is lately dead, and who wants
a manager; you know whom I mean, Farmer Williams; a warm man, Mr.
Thornhill, able to give her good bread; and who has several times made
her proposals" (which was actually the case); "but, sir," concluded
she, "I should be glad to have your approbation of our choice."--"How,
Madam," replied he, "my approbation!--my approbation of such a choice!
Never. What! Sacrifice so much beauty, and sense, and goodness, to a
creature insensible of the blessing! Excuse me, I can never approve of
such a piece of injustice. And I have my reasons."--"Indeed, sir,"
cried Deborah, "If you have your reasons, that's another affair; but I
should be glad to know those reasons."--"Excuse me, Madam," returned
he, "they lie too deep for discovery" (laying his hand upon his
bosom); "they remain buried, rivetted here."

9. After he was gone, upon a general consultation, we could not tell
what to make of these fine sentiments. Olivia considered them as
instances of the most exalted passion; but I was not quite so
sanguine; yet, whatever they might portend, it was resolved to
prosecute the scheme of Farmer Williams, who, from my daughter's first
appearance in the country, had paid her his addresses.

      --_Oliver Goldsmith_


  ABSOLUTE, RESOLUTION, INTRODUCED, (Appendix, A, 2.)
  VISITS, NATIVE, INFINITELY, CUPIDS, VANITY, GRATIFYING,
  MORTIFYING, SANGUINE. (Appendix, A, 8.) UNFORTUNATE,
  FORTUNE, VIRTUE. (Appendix, A, 9.)

  Show by numerous examples from this selection that the
  dependent clause of a sentence takes the rising
  Inflection--whilst the principal clause takes the
  falling. Which of the two has the heavier shading?
  (Introduction, p. 33.)

  How are such parenthetical clauses as AS HE DESIGNED, in
  the second sentence, kept in the background?
  (Introduction, pp. 24 and 27.) Give similar examples
  from this selection.

  What Inflection is placed on the rhetorical questions in
  par. v? (Introduction, p. 19.)

  How is the effect of the climax in par. viii brought
  out? (Introduction, p. 31.)

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SOLDIER'S DREAM


  Our bugles sang truce--for the night-cloud had lowered
    And the sentinel stars set their watch in the sky;
  And thousands had sunk on the ground overpowered,
    The weary to sleep, and the wounded to die.

  When reposing that night on my pallet of straw,                      5
    By the wolf-scaring faggot that guarded the slain,
  At the dead of the night a sweet vision I saw,
    And thrice ere the morning I dreamt it again.

  Methought from the battlefield's dreadful array,
    Far, far I had roamed on a desolate track;                        10
