the attempt, and the watchful jailer began the second part of his
scheme. He introduced a coy young lady Pigeon. But it did not seem to
answer; Arnaux was not even civil to her. After a time the jailer
removed the female, and Arnaux was left in solitary confinement for a
month. Now a different female was brought in, but with no better luck;
and thus it went on--for a year different charmers were introduced.
Arnaux either violently repelled them or was scornfully indifferent,
and at times the old longing to get away, came back with twofold power,
so that he darted up and down the wire front or dashed with all his
force against it.

When the storied feathers of his wings began their annual moult, his
jailer saved them as precious things, and as each new feather came he
reproduced on it the record of its owner's fame.

Two years went slowly by, and the jailer had put Arnaux in a new loft
and brought in another lady Pigeon. By chance she closely resembled the
faithless one at home. Arnaux actually heeded the newcomer. Once the
jailer thought he saw his famous prisoner paying some slight attention
to the charmer, and, yes, he surely saw her preparing a nest. Then
assuming that they had reached a full understanding, the jailer, for
the first time, opened the outlet, and Arnaux was free. Did he hang
around in doubt? Did he hesitate? No, not for one moment. As soon as
the drop of the door left open the way, he shot through, he spread
those wonderful blazoned wings, and, with no second thought for the
latest Circe, sprang from the hated prison loft--away and away.


V

We have no means of looking into the Pigeon's mind; we may go wrong in
conjuring up for it deep thoughts of love and welcome home; but we are
safe in this, we cannot too strongly paint, we cannot too highly praise
and glorify that wonderful God-implanted, mankind-fostered home-love
that glows unquenchably in this noble bird. Call it what you like, a
mere instinct deliberately constructed by man for his selfish ends,
explain it away if you will, dissect it, misname it, and it still is
there, in overwhelming, imperishable master-power, as long as the brave
little heart and wings can beat.

Home, home, sweet home! Never had mankind a stronger love of home than
Arnaux. The trials and sorrows of the old pigeon-loft were forgotten in
that all-dominating force of his nature. Not years of prison bars, not
later loves, nor fear of death, could down its power; and Arnaux, had
the gift of song been his, must surely have sung as sings a hero in his
highest joy, when sprang he from the 'lighting board, up-circling free,
soaring, drawn by the only impulse that those glorious wings would
honor,--up, up, in widening, heightening circles of ashy blue in the
blue, flashing those many-lettered wings of white, till they seemed
like jets of fire--up and on, driven by that home-love, faithful to his
only home and to his faithless mate; closing his eyes, they say;
closing his ears, they tell; shutting his mind,--we all believe,--to
nearer things, to two years of his life, to one half of his prime, but
soaring in the blue, retiring, as a saint might do, into his inner
self, giving himself up to that inmost guide. He was the captain of the
ship, but the pilot, the chart and compass, all, were that
deep-implanted instinct. One thousand feet above the trees the
inscrutable whisper came, and Arnaux in arrowy swiftness now was
pointing for the south-southeast. The little flashes of white fire on
each side were lost in the low sky, and the reverent robber of Syracuse
saw Arnaux nevermore.

The fast express was steaming down the valley. It was far ahead, but
Arnaux overtook and passed it, as the flying wild Duck passes the
swimming Muskrat. High in the valleys he went, low over the hills of
Chenango, where the pines were combing the breezes.

Out from his oak-tree eyrie a Hawk came wheeling and sailing, silent,
for he had marked the Flyer, and meant him for his prey. Arnaux turned
neither right nor left, nor raised nor lowered his flight, nor lost a
wing-beat. The Hawk was in waiting in the gap ahead, and Arnaux passed
him, even as a Deer in his prime may pass by a Bear in his pathway.
Home! home! was the only burning thought, the blinding impulse.

Beat, beat, beat, those flashing pinions went with speed unslacked on
the now familiar road. In an hour the Catskills were at hand. In two
hours he was passing over them. Old friendly places, swiftly coming
now, lent more force to his wings. Home! home! was the silent song that
his heart was singing. Like the traveller dying of thirst, that sees
the palm-trees far ahead, his brilliant eyes took in the distant smoke
of Manhattan.

Out from the crest of the Catskills there launched a Falcon. Swiftest
of the race of rapine, proud of his strength, proud of his wings, he
rejoiced in a worthy prey. Many and many a Pigeon had been borne to his
nest, and riding the wind he came, swooping, reserving his strength,
awaiting the proper time. Oh, how well he knew the very moment! Down,
down like a flashing javelin; no wild Duck, no Hawk could elude him,
for this was a Falcon. Turn back now, O Homer, and save yourself; go
round the dangerous hills. Did he turn? Not a whit! for this was
Arnaux. Home! home! home! was his only thought. To meet the danger, he
merely added to his speed; and the Peregrine stooped; stooped at
what?--a flashing of color, a twinkling of whiteness--and went back
empty. While Arnaux cleft the air of the valley as a stone from a
sling, to be lost--a white-winged bird--a spot with flashing halo--and,
quickly, a speck in the offing. On down the dear valley of Hudson, the
well-known highway; for two years he had not seen it! Now he dropped
low as the noon breeze came north and ruffled the river below him.
Home! home! home! and the towers of a city are coming in view! Home!
home! past the great spider-bridge of Poughkeepsie, skimming, skirting
the river-banks. Low now by the bank as the wind arose. Low, alas! too
low!

What fiend was it tempted a gunner in June to lurk on that hill by the
margin? what devil directed his gaze to the twinkling of white that
came from the blue to the northward? Oh, Arnaux, Arnaux, skimming low,
forget not the gunner of old! Too low, too low you are clearing that
hill. Too low--too late!  Flash--bang! and the death-hail has reached
him; reached, maimed, but not downed him. Out of the flashing pinions
broken feathers printed with records went fluttering earthward. The
"naught" of his sea record was gone. Not two hundred and ten, but
twenty-one miles it now read. Oh, shameful pillage! A dark stain
appeared on his bosom, but Arnaux kept on. Home, home, homeward bound.
The danger was past in an instant. Home, homeward he steered straight
as before, but the wonderful speed was diminished; not a mile a minute
now; and the wind made undue sounds in his tattered pinions. The stain
in his breast told of broken force; but on, straight on, he flew. Home,
home was in sight, and the pain in his breast was forgotten. The tall
towers of the city were in clear view of his far-seeing eye as he
skimmed by the high cliffs of Jersey. On, on--the pinion might flag,
the eye might darken, but the home-love was stronger and stronger.

Under the tall Palisades, to be screened from the wind, he passed, over
the sparkling water, over the trees, under the Peregrines' eyrie, under
the pirates' castle where the great grim Peregrines sat; peering like
black-masked highwaymen they marked the on-coming Pigeon. Arnaux knew
them of old. Many a message was lying undelivered in that nest, many a
record-bearing plume had fluttered away from its fastness. But Arnaux
had faced them before, and now he came as before--on, onward, swift,
but not as he had been; the deadly gun had sapped his force, had
lowered his speed. On, on; and the Peregrines, biding their time, went
forth like two bow-bolts; strong and lightning-swift they went against
one weak and wearied.

Why tell of the race that followed? Why paint the despair of a brave
little heart in sight of the home he had craved in vain? in a minute
all was over. The Peregrines screeched in their triumph. Screeching and
sailing, they swung to their eyrie, and the prey in their claws was the
body, the last of the bright little Arnaux. There on the rocks the
beaks and claws of the bandits were red with the life of the hero. Torn
asunder were those matchless wings, and their records were scattered
unnoticed. In sun and in storm they lay till the killers themselves
were killed and their stronghold rifled. And none knew the fate of the
peerless Bird till deep in the dust and rubbish of that pirate-nest the
avenger found, among others of its kind, a silver ring, the sacred
badge of the High Homer, and read upon it the pregnant inscription:
"ARNAUX, 2590 C."




BADLANDS BILLY

The Wolf that Won

I

THE HOWL BY NIGHT

Do you know the three calls of the hunting Wolf:--the long-drawn deep
howl, the muster, that tells of game discovered but too strong for the
finder to manage alone; and the higher ululation that ringing and
swelling is the cry of the pack on a hot scent; and the sharp bark
coupled with a short howl that, seeming least of all, is yet a gong of
doom, for this is the cry "Close in"--this is the finish?

We were riding the Badland Buttes, King and I, with a pack of various
hunting Dogs stringing behind or trotting alongside. The sun had gone
from the sky, and a blood-streak marked the spot where he died, away
over Sentinel Butte. The hills were dim, the valleys dark, when from
the nearest gloom there rolled a long-drawn cry that all men recognize
instinctively--melodious, yet with a tone in it that sends a shudder up
the spine, though now it has lost all menace for mankind. We listened
for a moment. It was the Wolf-hunter who broke silence: "That's
Badlands Billy; ain't it a voice? He's out for his beef to-night."


II

ANCIENT DAYS

In pristine days the Buffalo herds were followed by bands of Wolves
that preyed on the sick, the weak, and the wounded. When the Buffalo
were exterminated the Wolves were hard put for support, but the Cattle
came and solved the question for them by taking the Buffaloes' place.
This caused the wolf-war. The ranchmen offered a bounty for each Wolf
killed, and every cowboy out of work, was supplied with traps and
poison for wolf-killing. The very expert made this their sole business
and became known as wolvers. King Ryder was one of these. He was a
quiet, gentlespoken fellow, with a keen eye and an insight into animal
life that gave him especial power over Broncos and Dogs, as well as
Wolves and Bears, though in the last two cases it was power merely to
surmise where they were and how best to get at them. He had been a
wolver for years, and greatly surprised me by saying that "never in all
his experience had he known a Gray-wolf to attack a human being."

We had many camp-fire talks while the other men were sleeping, and then
it was I learned the little that he knew about Badlands Billy. "Six
times have I seen him and the seventh will be Sunday, you bet. He takes
his long rest then." And thus on the very ground where it all fell out,
to the noise of the night wind and the yapping of the Coyote,
interrupted sometimes by the deep-drawn howl of the hero himself, I
heard chapters of this history which, with others gleaned in many
fields, gave me the story of the Big Dark Wolf of Sentinel Butte.


III

IN THE CANYON

Away back in the spring of '92 a wolver was "wolving" on the east side
of the Sentinel Mountain that so long was a principal landmark of the
old Plainsmen. Pelts were not good in May, but the bounties were high,
five dollars a head, and double for She-wolves. As he went down to the
creek one morning he saw a Wolf coming to drink on the other side. He
had an easy shot, and on killing it found it was a nursing She-wolf.
Evidently her family were somewhere near, so he spent two or three days
searching in all the likely places, but found no clue to the den.

Two weeks afterward, as the wolver rode down an adjoining canyon, he saw
a Wolf come out of a hole. The ever-ready rifle flew up, and another
ten-dollar scalp was added to his string. Now he dug into the den and
found the litter, a most surprising one indeed, for it consisted not of
the usual five or six Wolf-pups, but of eleven, and these, strange to
say, were of two sizes, five of them larger and older than the other
six. Here were two distinct families with one mother, and as he added
their scalps to his string of trophies the truth dawned on the hunter.
One lot was surely the family of the She-wolf he had killed two weeks
before. The case was clear: the little ones awaiting the mother that
was never to come, had whined piteously and more loudly as their
hunger-pangs increased; the other mother passing had heard the Cubs;
her heart was tender now, her own little ones had so recently come, and
she cared for the orphans, carried them to her own den, and was
providing for the double family when the rifleman had cut the gentle
chapter short.

Many a wolver has dug into a wolf-den to find nothing. The old Wolves
or possibly the Cubs themselves often dig little side pockets and off
galleries, and when an enemy is breaking in they hide in these. The
loose earth conceals the small pocket and thus the Cubs escape. When
the wolver retired with his scalps he did not know that the biggest of
all the Cubs, was still in the den, and even had he waited about for
two hours, he might have been no wiser. Three hours later the sun went
down and there was a slight scratching afar in the hole; first two
little gray paws, then a small black nose appeared in a soft sand-pile
to one side of the den. At length the Cub came forth from his hiding.
He had been frightened by the attack on the den; now he was perplexed
by its condition.

It was thrice as large as it had been and open at the top now. Lying
near were things that smelled like his brothers and sisters, but they
were repellent to him. He was filled with fear as he sniffed at them,
and sneaked aside into a thicket of grass, as a Night-hawk boomed over
his head. He crouched all night in that thicket. He did not dare to go
near the den, and knew not where else he could go. The next morning
when two Vultures came swooping down on the bodies, the Wolf-cub ran
off in the thicket, and seeking its deepest cover, was led down a
ravine to a wide valley. Suddenly there arose from the grass a big
She-wolf, like his mother, yet different, a stranger, and instinctively
the stray Cub sank to the earth, as the old Wolf bounded on him. No
doubt the Cub had been taken for some lawful prey, but a whiff set that
right. She stood over him for an instant. He grovelled at her feet. The
impulse to kill him or at least give him a shake died away. He had the
smell of a young Cub. Her own were about his age, her heart was
touched, and when he found courage enough to put his nose up and smell
her nose, she made no angry demonstration except a short half-hearted
growl. Now, however, he had smelled something that he sorely needed. He
had not fed since the day before, and when the old Wolf turned to leave
him, he tumbled after her on clumsy puppy legs. Had the Mother-wolf
been far from home he must soon have been left behind, but the nearest
hollow was the chosen place, and the Cub arrived at the den's mouth
soon after the Mother-wolf.

A stranger is an enemy, and the old one rushing forth to the defense,
met the Cub again, and again was restrained by something that rose in
her responsive to the smell. The Cub had thrown himself on his back in
utter submission, but that did not prevent his nose reporting to him
the good thing almost within reach. The She-wolf went into the den and
curled herself about her brood; the Cub persisted in following. She
snarled as he approached her own little ones, but disarming wrath each
time by submission and his very cubhood, he was presently among her
brood, helping himself to what he wanted so greatly, and thus he
adopted himself into her family. In a few days he was so much one of
them that the mother forgot about his being a stranger. Yet he was
different from them in several ways--older by two weeks, stronger, and
marked on the neck and shoulders with what afterward grew to be a dark
mane.

Little Duskymane could not have been happier in his choice of a
foster-mother, for the Yellow Wolf was not only a good hunter with a
fund of cunning, but she was a Wolf of modern ideas as well. The old
tricks of tolling a Prairie Dog, relaying for Antelope, houghing a
Bronco or flanking a Steer she had learned partly from instinct and
partly from the example of her more experienced relatives, when they
joined to form the winter bands. But, just as necessary nowadays, she
had learned that all men carry guns, that guns are irresistible, that
the only way to avoid them is by keeping out of sight while the sun is
up, and yet that at night they are harmless. She had a fair
comprehension of traps, indeed she had been in one once, and though she
left a toe behind in pulling free, it was a toe most advantageously
disposed of; thenceforth, though not comprehending the nature of the
trap, she was thoroughly imbued with the horror of it, with the idea
