on which there seemed to be a large turban, which, on closer inspection,
turned out to be his own hair curled and fizzed out artificially.
Altogether he was an imposing and gigantic fellow.

When about fifty yards from the shore, the savages checked the canoe's
progress and stood up.  Now was the time for action, so, according to
previous arrangement, the sailors laid their weapons down on the beach,
and held up their hands, at the same time making such signs of
friendship as they thought would be understood.  The savages, who were
quick-witted fellows, at once ran the canoe ashore, leaped out, and
hastened towards the white men.

As they did so, Captain Dall put his telescope to his eye for a moment,
wishing to scan closely the features of the chief.  Instantly the whole
band turned with a howl, and, making towards the canoe, jumped in and
pushed off.

"Ha!" exclaimed the captain, with a smile, "these fellows have been
fired at by Europeans before now.  They evidently mistook my telescope
for a musket."

The savages paused, and again faced about at a short distance from the
beach, and the captain sought by every imaginable sign and gesticulation
to remove the bad impression he had so innocently created.  He
succeeded.  In a short time the natives again landed and advanced
towards them.  On drawing near, the chief stopped and made a short
speech--which, of course, none of the white men understood.  To this
Captain Dall replied in a short speech--which, of course, none of the
natives understood.  Both parties looked very amiably, however, at each
other, and by degrees drew closer together, when the natives began to
manifest much curiosity in reference to the costume of the sailors.
Soon they became more familiar, and the truth of the proverb, that,
"familiarity breeds contempt," was quickly illustrated by one of the
savages seizing hold of the musket which Larry O'Hale carried.  The hot
blood of the Irishman instantly fired.

"Let go, ye dirty bit o' mahogany," he cried, holding the musket tight
with his left hand, and clenching his right in a threatening manner.

Captain Dall, foreseeing what would be the result of a blow, sought to
create a diversion by raising his telescope to his eye.  The
quick-sighted savage observed the motion, let go his hold of the musket
and shrank behind his comrades, who, however, did not appear disposed to
screen him, for they all began to dodge behind each other until the
telescope was lowered.

The temporary distraction of attention which this incident caused
emboldened another savage to pounce upon the other musket, which was
carried by old Bob.  He wrenched it out of the sailor's hand and bounded
away with a shout, swinging it over his head.  Unfortunately his fingers
touched the trigger and the piece exploded, knocking down the man who
held it, and sending the ball close past the chief's ear.

Instantly there followed a loud yell, clubs were brandished, cutlasses
gleamed, and blood would certainly have been spilt had not Captain Dall
suddenly seized the chief by the shoulders and rubbed noses with him.
He knew this to be the mode of salutation among some of the South Sea
tribes, and sought to make a last effort at conciliation.  The act was
reciprocated by the chief, who signed to his men to forbear.

Captain Dall now felt convinced that any undecided course of action
would only render their case more desperate, so he turned to his men
with a look of authority and said sternly--

"My lads, we have only one hope left to us, and that is, submission.
Throw down your weapons, and put your trust in the Almighty."

The men obeyed--some with hesitation and others sullenly; they flung
their cutlasses on the sand and crossed their arms on their breasts.  No
sooner was this done than the savages rushed upon them in overwhelming
numbers, and they were instantly overpowered.  Larry O'Hale and Will
Osten, with some of the younger men, struggled fiercely, and knocked
down several of their opponents before they were subdued, but against
such overwhelming odds they had no chance.  It would have been better
for them had they acted on the captain's advice.  Whatever is worth
doing is worth doing well, and this truth is not less applicable to the
act of submission than to that of resistance.  The only result of their
ill-timed display of valour was the tighter fastening of the cords with
which the savages bound them hand and foot, and somewhat rough handling
when they, with their comrades, were tossed into the bottom of the
canoe.

After the sailors were secured, the natives collected the provisions
that had been brought by them to the island, and stowed these also in
the canoe.  This occupied a considerable time, for they were so careful
to avoid missing anything, that they ranged over the whole island,
examining every part minutely, and leaving nothing behind that had the
slightest appearance of value in their eyes.  During all this time the
white men were left lying in the water which had leaked into the canoe.
Indeed, the valiant Larry would certainly have been drowned, but for the
aid extended to him by our hero, for he chanced to have been thrown into
the canoe with his face downwards near the stern, and as the water
gradually settled down there from the prow, which was raised on the
sand, it covered his mouth.  Fortunately Will, who was near him, managed
to assist the unfortunate man in his struggles so as to enable him to
rest his head on the blade of a paddle!

When everything belonging to the crew of the _Foam_ had been collected,
the savages returned to their canoe, re-launched her, paddled out to
sea, and ere long left the little coral island out of sight behind them.



CHAPTER NINE.

CONTAINS AN ACCOUNT OF THE DESPERATE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE PRISONERS.

Five hours passed away, during which the savages continued to paddle
almost without intermission, and our hero with his friends lay fast
bound in the bottom of the canoe.  They suffered great pain from the
swelling of their limbs and the tightening of the cords that bound them;
but although Larry O'Hale, in the exasperation of his spirit, gave vent
to one or two howls, accompanied by expressions that were the reverse of
complimentary, no attention was paid to them until the island towards
which they steered was reached.

The instant the canoe touched the sand the captives were lifted out--
their hands and feet were tied together in a bunch, and, each being
slung on a stout pole as one might sling a bundle, they were carried up
to a native village on the margin of a wood.  On the way, Wandering Will
could see that the beach swarmed with natives--a fact, however, of which
his ears had already assured him, for the air was filled with yells of
delight as the captives were successively lifted out of the canoe.  He
also observed that the island appeared to be a large one, for he got a
glimpse of a huge mountain rising over the tree tops.  Neither he nor
any of his comrades, however, had time to make many observations, for
they were hurried up the beach and into the village, where they were
thrown down under a rudely built hut which was covered with broad
leaves.

Here the cords that fastened them were unloosed; but if this for a
moment raised the hope that they were about to be set free, they were
quickly undeceived by the savages, who rebound their hands behind them.
Our hero, Captain Dall, Mr Cupples, Larry O'Hale, and Muggins, were
then fastened with cords of cocoa-nut fibre to the several posts of the
hut in such a manner that they could stand up or lie down at pleasure.
George Goff, old Bob, and the others were led away.  Seeing that they
were about to be separated, Captain Dall suddenly called out, "Farewell,
lads," in a tone so sad, that Goff looked back at him in surprise, but
his captors forced him away before he could reply.

"You think we won't see them again?" said Osten, when they were left
alone.

"I think not.  From what I know of those savages, I fear they have taken
our comrades away to be sacrificed, and that our own time will soon
come."

Something between a groan and a growl escaped from O'Hale when this was
said.

"Cudn't we break thim ropes, and run amuck amongst the murtherin'
blackguards," he exclaimed, seizing the rope that bound him with his
teeth and endeavouring to tear it--an effort which it is needless to say
was futile, and nearly cost him a tooth.

"It's of no use, Larry," said the captain; "we can't help ourselves.  If
the Lord don't help us, we're dead men."

Although Will Osten was much depressed, not to say alarmed, by what he
heard, he could not help wondering why the captain had so suddenly lost
his buoyant spirit.  At the time when a slow death by starvation had
stared him in the face, he had not only retained his own heartiness of
spirit, but had kept up wonderfully the spirits of his companions.  Now,
however--when, as Will thought, they had the chance of escaping by
stratagem or by force from their captors, or, at the worst, of selling
their lives dearly--his spirit seemed to have utterly forsaken him.  Yet
the captain was only despondent--not despairing.  He had seen the deeds
of savages in former years, and knew that with them there was seldom a
long period between the resolve to kill and the accomplishment of the
crime.  He feared for the lives of his shipmates, and would have given
his right hand at that moment to have been free to aid them, but the
attempts of himself and his comrades to break their bonds were
fruitless, so, after making one or two desperate efforts, they sat down
doggedly to await their fate.

It might have been a curious study to have noted the different spirit in
which these unfortunate men submitted to their unavoidable doom on that
occasion.  The captain sat down on a log of wood that chanced to be near
him, folded his hands quietly on his knees, allowed his head to sink
forward on his chest, and remained for a long time quite motionless.
Will Osten, on the other hand, stood up at first, and, leaning his head
on his arm against the wall of the hut, appeared to be lost in reverie.
Doubtless he was thinking of home; perhaps reproaching himself for the
manner and spirit in which he had quitted it--as many a poor wanderer
has done before when too late!  He quickly changed his thoughts,
however, and, with them, his position: sat down and got up frequently,
frowned, clenched his hands, shook his head, stamped his foot, bit his
lips, and altogether betrayed a spirit ill at ease.  Mr Cupples, whose
soul had from the moment of their capture given way to the deepest
possible dejection, lay down, and, resting his elbow on the floor and
his head on his hand, gazed at his comrades with a look so dreadfully
dolorous that, despite their anxiety, they could hardly suppress a
smile.  As for Muggins and O'Hale, the former, being a phlegmatic man
and a courageous, sat down with his back against the wall, his hands
thrust into his pockets, and a quid in his cheek, and shook his head
slowly from side to side, while he remarked that every one had to die
once, an' when the time came no one couldn't escape and that was all
about it!  Poor Larry O'Hale could not thus calm his mercurial spirit.
He twisted his hard features into every possible contortion,
apostrophised his luck, and his grandmother, and ould Ireland in the
most pathetic manner, bewailed his fate, and used improper language in
reference to savages in general, and those of the South Seas in
particular, while, at intervals, he leaped up and tried to tear his
bonds asunder.

Thus several hours were spent.  Evening approached, and darkness set in;
still no one came near the prisoners.  During this period, however, they
heard the continual shouting and singing of the savages, and sometimes
caught a glimpse of them through crevices between the logs of which the
hut was built.  It was not possible for them to ascertain what they were
about, however, until night set in, when several large fires were
lighted, and then it could be seen that they were feasting and dancing.
Suddenly, in the midst of the din, an appalling shriek was heard.  It
was quickly succeeded by another and another.  Then the yells of the
revellers increased in fury, and presently a procession of them was
observed approaching the hut, headed by four men bearing a sort of stage
on their shoulders.

The shrieks had struck like a death-chill to the hearts of the
prisoners.  No one spoke, but each had recognised familiar tones in the
terrible cries.  For the first time some of them began to realise the
fact that they were really in the hands of murderers, and that the
bloody work had actually begun.  Great drops of sweat rolled down the
face of Muggins as he gazed in horror through one of the crevices, and
his broad chest heaved convulsively as he exclaimed, "God be merciful to
us, it's George Goff!"  This was too true.  On the stage, carried by
four natives, sat the unfortunate seaman.  It required no second glance
to tell that his spirit had fled, and that nothing but a corpse sat
swaying there, supported by means of a pole, in a sitting posture.  The
cannibals were conveying it to their temple, there to cut it up and
prepare it for that dreadful feast which is regarded as inexpressibly
repulsive by all the human race except these islanders of the South
Seas, who, incredible though it may appear, absolutely relish human
flesh as a dainty morsel.

At sight of this, poor Will Osten, who had never quite believed in such
terrible things, sank down on his knees with a deep groan, and, for the
first time in his life, perhaps, prayed _earnestly_.

O'Hale's spirit blazed up in ungovernable fury.  Like a wild beast, he
tore and wrenched at the rope which bound him, and then, finding his
efforts unavailing, he flung himself on the ground, while deep sobs
burst at intervals from his oppressed heart.

A few minutes elapsed; then there was a rush of footsteps without,
accompanied by fierce yells and the waving of torches.  The prisoners
leaped up, feeling almost instinctively that there hour had come.  A
moment later and the hut was filled with natives.  All were naked, with
the exception of a small piece of cloth round their loins.  They were
tatooed, however, and painted nearly from head to foot.

The prisoners were instantly seized and overpowered, and preparations
were being rapidly made to carry them away, when a shout was heard
outside, and a remarkably tall, powerful, and thickly painted savage
sprang in.  He pushed the natives violently aside, and gave some stern
orders to those who held the prisoners.  The immediate result was, that
the latter were released and allowed to rise, although their hands were
still bound behind them.  Meanwhile the tall savage, standing beside
them, harangued his comrades with great energy of tone and action.

While this was going on, Larry O'Hale whispered excitedly to his
companions--

"Howld on, lads, a bit.  Sure I've burst the ropes at last.  The moment
I git howld o' that blackguard's knife I'll cut yer lashin's.  Stand by
for a rush."

As Larry spoke, the tall savage drew the knife referred to from his
girdle, and, glancing over his shoulder, said in English--

"Keep quiet, lads.  I'll do my best to save 'ee; but if you offer to
fight, you're dead men all in five minutes."

Amazement, if no other feeling had operated, would have rendered the
prisoners perfectly quiet after that.  They waited in deep anxiety and
wonder, while the tall savage continued his harangue, at the conclusion
of which his hearers uttered an expressive grunt or growl, as if of
assent, and then they all filed out of the hut, leaving the prisoners
alone with their deliverer.



CHAPTER TEN.

OUR HERO AND HIS COMRADES IN DISTRESS BECOME SAVAGE WARRIORS FOR THE
NONCE.

"Friend," said Captain Dall, taking the hand of the tall savage in his
and speaking with some emotion, "you have been sent as our deliverer, I
know, but how a South Sea islander should happen to befriend us, and how
you should come to speak English as well as ye do, is more than I can
understand."

"Onderstand!" exclaimed Larry; "it's past belaif.  It baits
cock-fightin' intirely."

A grim smile crossed the painted face of the savage, as he said somewhat
hurriedly:--

"I'm no more a South Sea islander than you are, lads, but this is not
the time for explanations.  It's enough for you to know, in the
meantime, that I'm an Englishman, and will befriend you if you agree to
obey me."

"Obey ye!" cried Larry with enthusiasm, "blissin's on yer painted mug,
it's warship ye we will, av ye only git us out o' this scrape."

"That's so," said Muggins, nodding his head emphatically, while Mr
Cupples, in tones of the most awful solemnity, and with a look that
cannot be described, vowed eternal friendship.

"Well, then," said the tall man, "we have no time to waste, for you are
in a greater fix just now than ye think for.  About myself it's enough
to know that I'm a runaway sailor; that I made my way among these
fellers here by offering to join 'em and fight for 'em, and that I won
their respect at first by knocking down, in fair stand-up fight, all the
biggest men o' the tribe.  I don't think they would have spared me even
after that, but I curried favour with the chief and married one of his
daughters.  Now I'm a great man among them.  I didn't hear of your
having been brought here till half an hour ago, havin' bin away with a
war party in canoes.  I returned just too late to save your comrades."
