There was the faintest semblance of a smile on the hermit's face as he
quietly observed his visitor, and waited till he should recover
self-possession.  As for Moses--words are wanting to describe the fields
of teeth and gum which he displayed, but no sound was suffered to escape
his magnificent lips, which closed like the slide of a dark lantern when
the temptation to give way to feeling became too strong.

"My cave interests you," said the hermit at last.

"It amazes me," returned our hero, recovering himself and looking
earnestly at his host, "for you seem not only to have all the
necessaries of life around you in your strange abode, but many of the
luxuries; among them the cheering presence of sunshine--though how you
manage to get it is beyond my powers of conception."

"It is simple enough, as you shall see," returned the hermit.  "You have
heard of the saying, no doubt, that `all things are possible to
well-directed labour?'"

"Yes, and that `nothing can be achieved without labour.'"

"Well, I have proved that to some extent," continued the hermit.  "You
see, by the various and miscellaneous implements on my shelves, that I
am given to dabbling a little in science, and thus have made my lonely
home as pleasant as such a home can be--but let us not talk of these
matters just now.  You must be hungry.  Have you had breakfast?"

"No, we have not--unless, at least, you count a sea biscuit dipped in
salt water a breakfast.  After all, that may well be the case, for
hermits are noted for the frugality of their fare."

"I am not a genuine hermit," remarked his host gravely.  "Men do indeed
call me the Hermit of Rakata, because I dwell alone here under the
shadow of this particular cone of Krakatoa, but I do not ape the austere
life of the conventional hermit, as you see, either in my domestic
arrangements or food.  Come, your breakfast is ready.  From my outlook I
saw your boat approaching some hours ago, and knew that it was mine, so
I made ready for your arrival, though I did not guess that Moses was
bringing me a guest instead of a servant!"

So saying, he led the way through a short natural passage to an inner
cave, the entrance to which, like the outer one, was boarded.  On
opening a small door, Nigel was again greeted as before with brilliant
rays of sunshine, and, in addition, with a gush of odours that were
exceedingly grateful to a hungry man.  A low "Ho! ho!" behind him told
that his black companion was equally gratified.

The inner cave or mess-room, as the host styled it, combined dining-room
and kitchen, for while in one corner stood a deal table with plates,
cups, etcetera, but no tablecloth, in another stood a small stove,
heated by an oil-lamp, from which issued puffing and sputtering sounds,
and the savoury odours above referred to.

Nigel now perceived that although his strange host necessarily spoke a
good deal while welcoming him and offering him the hospitalities of his
abode, he was by no means communicative.  On the contrary, it was
evident that he was naturally reserved and reticent, and that although
polite and gentle in the extreme, there was a quiet grave dignity about
him which discouraged familiarity.  It must not be supposed, however,
that he was in any degree morosely silent.  He was simply quiet and
undemonstrative, said little except when asked questions, and spoke,
alike to Nigel and Moses, in the soft, low, kindly tones with which one
might address very young people.

Going to the stove he took a coffee-pot therefrom and set it on the
table.  At the same time, Moses, without requiring to be told, opened
the oven and brought forth fried fish, meat of some kind, and cakes of
he knew not what, but cared little, for their excellence was
unquestionable.

During the meal that followed, Nigel ventured as far as politeness
permitted--indeed a little further, if truth must be told--to inquire
into the circumstances and motives of his entertainer in taking up his
abode in such a strange place, but he soon found that his eccentric
friend was not one who could be "pumped."  Without a touch of rudeness,
and in the sweetest of voices, he simply assumed an absent manner and
changed the subject of discourse, when he did not choose to reply, by
drawing attention to some irrelevant matter, or by putting a counter
question which led away from the subject.  Nigel also found that his
host never laughed and rarely smiled, though, when he did so, the smile
was so slight as merely to indicate a general feeling of urbanity and
goodwill, and it was followed instantly by a look of gravity, if not
sadness.  Altogether the guest was much perplexed about the host at
first, and somewhat constrained in consequence, but gradually he began
to feel at ease.  Another discovery that he soon made was, that the
hermit treated Moses not as a servant, but as if he were in all respects
an equal and a comrade.

After eating for some time in silence, and having tried to draw out his
host without success, Nigel changed his tactics and said--

"You were so kind as to speak of me as your guest, Mr--Mr--I beg
pardon, may I--"

"My name is Van der Kemp," said the hermit quietly.

"Well, Mr Van der Kemp, I must tell you that I am quite willing to
accept the position for which Moses hired me--"

"No, I didn't," contradicted the negro, flatly yet very gently, both in
tone and manner, for long residence with the hermit had apparently
imbued him with something of his spirit.

"Well, then," said Nigel, "the position for which Moses _should have_
hired some one else."  ("K'rect _now_," whispered Moses.) "Of course I
do not intend to ask for or accept wages, and also, of course, I accept
the position on the understanding that you think me fit for the service.
May I ask what that service is to be, and where you think of going to?"

"The service," returned the hermit slowly and with his eyes fixed on the
floor as if pondering his reply, "is to accompany me as my attendant and
companion, to take notes as occasion may serve, and to paddle a canoe."

At this reply our hero almost laughed, but was prevented from doing so
by his host asking abruptly if he understood canoeing.

"Well, yes.  At least I can manage what in England is known as the Rob
Roy canoe, having possessed one in my boyhood."

"That will do," returned the hermit gravely.  "Can you write shorthand?"

"I can.  A friend of mine, a reporter on one of the London dailies, once
gave me a few lessons, and, becoming fond of the subject, I followed it
up."

"That is well; you did well.  It is of immense advantage to a man,
whatever his position in life, that he should be able to write shorthand
with facility.  Especially useful is it in commerce.  I know that,
having had some experience of commercial life."

At this point in the conversation Nigel was startled by what was to him
an absolutely new sensation, namely a shaking or trembling of the whole
cavern, accompanied by faint rumbling sounds as if in deeper caverns
below him.

He glanced quickly at his host and at the negro, but to his surprise
these remarkable men seemed not to be aware of the shaking, although it
was severe enough to cause some of the furniture to rattle.  Observing
his look of surprise, Moses remarked, with a benignant though capacious
smile, "Mountain's got de mulligrumps pritty bad jist now."

"We are pretty well accustomed to that," said the host, observing that
Nigel turned to him for an explanation.  "No doubt you are aware that
this region is celebrated for earthquakes and volcanoes, so much so that
the inhabitants pay little attention to them unless they become
unusually violent.  This island of Krakatoa is itself the fragment of an
extinct volcano; but the term `extinct' is scarcely applicable to
volcanoes, for it is well-known that many which were for centuries
supposed to be extinct have awakened to sudden and violent
activity--`quiescent' might be a more appropriate term."

"Yes," said Moses, ceasing to masticate for purposes of speech; "dem
'stinkt volcanoes hab got an okard habit ob unstinkin' dereselves
hereabouts when you don' 'spect it of 'em.  Go on, massa.  I ax yer
pard'n for 'truptin'."

The hermit's peculiar good-natured little smile played for a moment on
his massive features, and then faded away as he continued--

"Perhaps you may have heard that this is the very heart of the district
that has long been recognised as the greatest focus of volcanic activity
on the globe?"

"I have heard something of the sort," answered Nigel, "but I confess
that my knowledge is limited and my mind hazy on the subject."

"I doubt it not," returned his friend, "for geographical and scientific
training in primary schools anywhere is not what it might be.  The
island of Java, with an area about equal to that of England, contains no
fewer than forty-nine great volcanic mountains, some of which rise to
12,000 feet above the sea-level.  Many of these mountains are at the
present time active."  ("Yes, much _too_ active," muttered the negro),
"and more than half of them have been seen in eruption since Java was
occupied by Europeans.  Hot springs, mud-volcanoes, and vapour-vents
abound all over the island, whilst earthquakes are by no means uncommon.
There is a distinct line in the chain of these mountains which seems to
point to a great fissure in the earth's crust, caused by the
subterranean fires.  This tremendous crack or fissure crosses the
Straits of Sunda, and in consequence we find a number of these vents--as
volcanic mountains may be styled--in the Island of Sumatra, which you
saw to the nor'ard as you came along.  But there is supposed to be
another great crack in the earth's crust--indicated by several volcanic
mountains--which crosses the other fissure almost at right angles, and
at the exact point where these two lines intersect _stands this island
of Krakatoa_.

"I emphasise the fact," continued the hermit after a pause, "first,
because, although this has been a quiescent volcano since the year 1680,
and people have come to regard it as extinct, there are indications now
which lead me to believe that its energy is reviving; and, second,
because this focus where fissures cross each other--this Krakatoa
Island--is in reality part of the crater of an older and much larger
volcanic mountain, which must have been literally blown away in
prehistoric times, and of which Krakatoa and the neighbouring islets of
Varlaten, Polish Hat, Lang Island, and the rest, are but the remnants of
the great crater ring.  If these rumblings and minor earthquakes, which
I have noticed of late--and the latest of which you have just
experienced--are the precursors of another explosion, my home here may
be rendered untenable."

"Hi!" exclaimed Moses, who had been listening with open mouth and eyes
to this discourse, which was obviously news to him, "I hope, massa, he
ain't a-gwine to 'splode to-day--anyhow, not till arter breakfast!"

"You must have studied the subject of volcanoes a good deal, I suppose,
from what you say," observed Nigel.

"Naturally, living as I do almost on the top of one.  My library, which
I will show you presently, contains many interesting works on the
subject.  But come, if you have finished we will ascend the Peak of
Rakata and I will introduce you to my sunshine."

He rose and led his guest back to the outer cavern, leaving Moses still
busy with knife and fork, apparently meditating on the pleasure of
breakfasting with the prospect of a possible and immediate explosion.

In passing through the first chamber, Nigel observed, in a natural
recess, the library just referred to.  He also noted that, besides
stuffed birds and other specimens and sea-shells, there were chisels,
saws, hammers, and other tools, besides something like a forge and
carpenter's bench in a side-chamber opening out of the large one, which
he had not at first seen--from all which he concluded that the hermit
was imbued with mechanical as well as scientific and literary tastes.

At the further and darker end of the outer cave there was a staircase,
partly natural, and partly improved by art, which led upward into
profound darkness.

"Let me take your hand here," said the hermit, looking down upon his
guest with his slight but winning smile; "it is a rough and dark
staircase.  You will be apt to stumble."

Nigel placed his hand in that of his host with perfect confidence, and
with a curious feeling--aroused, probably, by the action--of having
returned to the days of childhood.

The stair was indeed rugged as well as winding, and so pitchy dark that
the youth could not have advanced at all without stumbling, unless his
host had held him all the way.  At last a glimmer of light was seen in
the distance.  It seemed to increase suddenly, and in a few moments the
two emerged from total darkness into dazzling sunshine.

When Nigel looked round him he saw that they had gained a plateau, high
up on the very summit of the mountain, which appeared to be absolutely
inaccessible by any means save that by which they had reached it.

"This is what I call my observatory," said the hermit, turning to his
guest.  "We have passed right through the peak of Rakata, and reached
its northern side, which commands, as you see, a view of all the
northern part of the island.  I come here often in the night to study
the face of the heavens, the moon, and stars, and meditate on their
mysterious Maker, whose ways are indeed wonderful and past finding out;
but all which must, in the nature of things, be _right_."

As this was the first mention that the hermit had made of the Creator,
and the reference was one requiring more thought than Nigel had yet
bestowed on it, he made no rejoinder.

"Have you studied astronomy, Mr Roy?"

"No--at least not more of it than was needful for navigation.  But pray,
sir, do not call me Mr Roy," said the youth, with a somewhat
embarrassed air.  "If I am to be your assistant and familiar companion
for two or three months, I hope that you will agree to call me Nigel.
Your man has done so already without asking leave!"

"I will, on one condition."

"And that is?"

"That you also dispense with the `Mr' and `sir,' and call me Van der
Kemp."

"Agreed," said Nigel, "though it does not seem so appropriate in me as
in you, considering the difference of our years."

"Look here," said the hermit, turning abruptly to a small wooden shed
which had hitherto escaped the youth's observation, so covered was it
with overhanging boughs and tropical creeping plants, "these are my
astronomical instruments."

He pointed to a table in the hut on which stood several telescopes--and
microscopes as well--one of the former being a large instrument,
certainly not less than six feet long, with a diameter of apparently six
or eight inches.

"Here, you see, I have the means of investigating the wonders of Nature
in her grandest as well as her minutest scales.  And there," he added,
pointing to a couple of large reflecting mirrors in strong wooden
frames, erected on joints in such a way that they could be turned in any
direction,--"there you have the secret of my sunshine.  One of these
mirrors catches the sunshine direct and reflects it on the other, which,
as you see, is so arranged that it transmits the rays down the natural
funnel or chimney into the cave.  By means of chains connected with the
mechanism, and extending below, I can change the direction of the
mirrors as the sun changes its place in the sky, without requiring to
come up here."

"Very ingenious!" said Nigel; "but how do you manage when the mountain
comes between you and the sun, as I see it cannot fail to do during some
part of the day?"

"Simply enough," returned the hermit, pointing to a distant projecting
cliff or peak.  "On yon summit I have fixed four mirrors similar to
these.  When the sun can no longer be reflected from this pair, the
first of the distant mirrors takes it up and shoots a beam of light over
here.  When the sun passes from that, the second mirror is arranged to
catch and transmit it, and so on to the fourth.  After that I bid
good-bye to the sun, and light my lamp!"

Nigel felt an almost irresistible tendency to smile at this, but the
grave simplicity of the man forbade such familiarity.

"Look yonder," continued the hermit, sweeping one of his long arms
towards Sumatra, "in that direction runs the line of volcanic
disturbance--the fissure of which I have already spoken.  Focus this
telescope to suit your sight.  Now, do you see the little island away
there to the nor'-west?"

"Yes."

"Well, that is _Varlaten_.  I mentioned it when at breakfast.  Sweep
your glass round to the nor'ard, the little island there is _Polish
Hat_, and you see _Lang Island_ in the nor'-east.  These, with Krakatoa,
are merely the higher parts still remaining above water of the ring or
lip of the ancient crater.  This will give you some idea what an
enormous mountain the original of this old volcano must have been.  This
island-mountain is estimated to have been twenty-five miles in
circumference, and 10,000 to 12,000 feet high.  It was blown into the
air in 1680, and this island, with the few islets I have pointed out, is
all that remains of it.  Now, cast your eye down the centre of the
island on which we stand; you see several cones of various sizes.  These
are ancient vents, supposed to be extinct--"

"But one of them, the one furthest away," interrupted Nigel, steadying
his telescope on the branch of a tree, "seems to be anything but
extinct, for I see a thin column of white smoke or steam rising from
it."

"That is just what I was going to point out.  They call that
Perboewatan.  It is the lowest peak on the island, about 400 feet high,
and stands, I should say, in the very centre of the ancient crater,
where are the two fissures I have mentioned.  For two hundred years
Perboewatan has not smoked like that, and, slight though it is at
present, I cannot help thinking that it indicates an impending eruption,
especially when I consider that earthquakes have become more numerous of
late years, and there was one in 1880 which was so violent as to damage
seriously the lighthouse on Java's First Point."

"Then you have resided here for some time?" said Nigel.

"Yes, for many years," replied the hermit, in a low, sad tone.

"But is it wise in you to stay if you think an explosion so likely?
Don't you needlessly run considerable risk?"

"I do not fear to die."

Nigel looked at his new friend in surprise, but there was not a shadow
of boastfulness or affectation either in his look or tone.

"Besides," he continued, "the explosion may be but slight, and
Perboewatan is, as you see, about four miles off.  People in the
neighbourhood of the straits and passing ships are so accustomed to
volcanic explosions on a more or less grand scale that they will never
notice this little cloud hanging over Krakatoa.  Those who, like myself,
know the ancient history of the island, regard it in a more serious
light, but we may be wrong.  Come, now, we will descend again and have a
ramble over part of the island.  It will interest you.  Not many men
have penetrated its luxuriant forests or know their secrets.  I have
wandered through them in all directions, and can guide you.  Indeed,
Moses could do that as well as I, for he has lived with me many years.
Come."

Returning to the cavern they found that the active negro had not only
finished his breakfast, but had washed the dishes and cleared up the
