in a louder tone, "let me put this to your lips."

The youth opened a pair of brilliant black eyes and gazed earnestly at
the speaker, then smiled faintly and sipped the offered beverage.

As might have been expected, he at once revived a little under its
influence.

"There, that's enough just now; it don't do to take much at a time.
I'll give 'ee somethin' else in a minute," said Bellew, as he went from
one to another and administered a teaspoonful or two to each.

They were very grateful, and said so in words more or less emphatic.
One of them, indeed, who appeared to have once been a jovial seaman,
intimated that he would be glad to take as many more teaspoonfuls of
"that same" as Bellew chose to administer! but the trapper, paying no
attention to the suggestion, proceeded to open his store of provisions
and to concoct, in his tin tea-kettle, a species of thin soup.  While
this was simmering, he began to remove the blankets with which Bob Smart
had covered the unfortunate men.

"Don't you think," said Bob, "that it would be well to leave their wraps
alone till we get them up to the fort?  They're badly bitten, and I know
little about dressing sores.  By the time we get there Mr Redding will
probably have returned from Partridge Bay, and he's more than half a a
doctor, I believe."

"Nevertheless I'll have a look," said Bellew, with a smile, "for I'm a
bit of a doctor myself in such matters,--about a quarter of one, if I
may say so."

Without further parley the trapper laid bare their sores, and truly the
sad sight fully justified Smart's remark that the poor fellows were
badly bitten.  One of them, the seaman above referred to, whom his
comrades styled Ned, had only lost the ends of one or two toes and the
forefinger of his left hand, but some of the others had been so severely
frost-bitten in their feet that all the toes were rotting off; the negro
in particular had lost his left foot, while the heel-bone of the other
was exposed to the extent of nearly an inch, and all the toes were gone.
(We describe here, from memory, what we have actually seen.)

In perfect silence, but with a despatch that would have done credit to
hospital training, the trapper removed the dead flesh, dressed the
sores, applied poultices of certain herbs gathered in the woods, and
bandaged them up.  This done, he served out the thin soup, with another
small allowance of spirits and hot water, after which, with the able
assistance of Bob Smart and his men, he wrapped them up in their
blankets and made arrangements for having them conveyed to the boat,
which had been pulled into a convenient creek further down the shore
than the wreck.

Strange to say, the youth who appeared to be dying was the least injured
by frost-bites of the party, his fingers and face being untouched, and
only a portion of the skin of his feet damaged; but this was explained
by the seaman, Ned, who, on hearing Bellew's expression of surprise,
said, with a touch of feeling:--

"It's not the frost as damaged him, sir, it's the water an' the rocks.
W'en we was wrecked, sir,--now three weeks ago, or thereby,--we'd
ableeged to send a hawser ashore, an' not one of us could swim, from the
cap'n to the cabin-boy, so Mister McLeod he wolunteered to--"

"Mister who?" demanded Bellew hastily.

"Mister McLeod."

"What was your ship's name?"

"The _Betsy_, sir."

"From what port?"

"Plymouth."

"Ho ho! well, go on."

"Well, as I was a-sayin', sir, Mister McLeod, who's as bold as a lion,
he wolunteered to swim ashore wi' a line, an' swim he did, though the
sea was rollin' in on the cliffs like the Falls o' Niagery,--which I'm
told lie somewhere in these latitudes,--leastwise they're putt down in
all the charts so.  We tried for to dissuade him at first, but when the
starn o' the ship was tore away, and the cargo began to wash out, we all
saw that it was neck or nothin', so we let him go.  For a time he swam
like a good 'un, but when he'd bin dashed agin' the cliffs two or three
times an' washed back again among the wreck of spars, cargo, and
riggin', we thought it was all over with all of us.  Hows'ever we wasn't
forsooken at the eleventh hour, for a wave all of a sudden washed him
high and dry on a ledge of rock, an' he stood up and waved his hand and
then fell down in a swound.  Then we thought again it was all up with
us, for every wave went roarin' up to young Mister McLeod, as if it wor
mad to lose him, and one or two of 'em even sent the foam washin' in
about his legs.  Well, sir, the last one that did that, seemed to bring
him to, for as it washed over his face he jumped up and held on to the
rocks like a limpet.  Then he got a little higher on the cliff, and when
we saw he was looking out to us we made signs to him that a hawser was
made fast to the line, an' all ready.  He understood us an' began to
haul away on the line, but we could see that he had bin badly hurt from
the way he stopped from time to time to git breath, and rested his head
on a big rock that rose at his side like a great capstan.  Hows'ever, he
got the hawser ashore at last, an' made it fast round the big rock, an'
so by means of that, an' the blessin' o' Providence, we all got ashore.
P'r'aps," added Ned thoughtfully, "it might have bin as well if some of
us hadn't--hows'ever, we wasn't to know that at the time, you
understand, sir."

It must not be supposed that Ned said all this in the hearty tones that
were peculiar to his former self.  The poor fellow could only utter it
sentence by sentence in a weak voice, which was strengthened
occasionally by a sip from "that same" beverage which had first awakened
his admiration.  Meanwhile the object of his remarks had fallen asleep.

"Now, Mister Smart," said Bellew, taking the fur-trader aside, "from all
that I have heard and seen, it is clear to me that this wreck is the
vessel, in which the McLeods of Jenkins Creek had shipped their property
from England, and that this youth is Roderick, the youngest son of the
family.  I've bin helping the McLeods of late with their noo saw-mill,
and I've heard the father talking sometimes with his sons about the
_Betsy_ of Plymouth and their brother Roderick."

At another time Bob Smart would not have been at all sorry to hear that
the interloping McLeods had lost all their property, but now he was
filled with pity, and asked Jonas Bellew with much anxiety what he
thought was best to be done.

"The best thing to do," said Bellew, "is to carry these men to the boat
and have them up to the Cliff Fort without delay."

"We'll set about it at once.  You'll go with us, I suppose."

"No, I'll remain behind and take care of young McLeod.  In his present
state it would likely cost him his life to move him."

"Then I'll leave some of my men with you."

"Not needful," replied the trapper, "you know I'm used to bein' alone
an' managin' things for myself.  After you get them up you may send down
a couple of men with some provisions and their hatchets.  For to-night I
can make the poor fellow all snug with the tarpaulin of your boat."

In accordance with these plans the shipwrecked men were sent up to the
Cliff Fort.  Roderick McLeod was sheltered under a tarpaulin tent and
carefully tended by Bellew, and one of Smart's most active Indians was
despatched with a pencil-note to Jenkins Creek.

It was this note which interrupted the conversation between Reginald
Redding and the elder McLeod at a somewhat critical moment, and this
note, as the reader may easily believe, threw the whole establishment
into sudden consternation.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

SHIFTING WINDS.

Immediately on receipt of the note referred to, vigorous preparations
were made to convey relief to Roderick McLeod.  Such provisions as the
party at Jenkins Creek could muster were packed into the smallest
possible space, because the boat, or cobble, which was to convey them
down the gulf was very small--scarcely large enough to hold the party
which meant to embark in it.  This party consisted of McLeod senior,
Kenneth, and Flora, it being arranged that Ian and Rooney should remain
to prosecute, as well as to guard, the works at the Creek.

Seeing that there was so little room to spare in the boat, Reginald
Redding decided to hasten down on foot to the Cliff Fort, in order to
see to the comfort of the wrecked men who had been sent there.  He,
however, offered the rescue party the services of his man, Le Rue, an
offer which was accepted all the more readily that the Canadian
possessed some knowledge of the coast.

It was very dark when they started, but, fortunately, calm.  McLeod had
resolved to travel night and day, if the weather permitted, until he
should reach the scene of the wreck, and to take snatches of rest if
possible in the boat.

There were only two oars in the boat, so that one of its crew was always
idle.  This, however, proved to be rather an advantage, for, by
affording frequent relief to each rower, it saved the strength of all,
and at the same time enabled them to relieve the tedium of the journey
to poor Flora.

At first they proceeded along under the deep shade of the ghost-like
cliffs in unbroken silence, the mind of each no doubt being busy with
the wreck of their last remnant of fortune, as well as with the
dangerous condition in which the youthful Roderick lay; but, as the dawn
of day approached, they began to talk a little, and when the sun arose
its gladdening beams appeared to carry hope to each breast, inducing an
almost cheerful state of mind.  In the case of Francois Le Rue, the
influence of sunshine was so powerful that a feeling of sympathy and
respect for the McLeods in the calamity which had overtaken them alone
restrained him from breaking out into song!

"Father," said Flora, as her sire, wearied by a long spell at the bow
oar, resigned his seat to Kenneth, and sat down beside her, "that
glorious light brings to my remembrance a very sweet verse, `Weeping may
endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning.'"

"True, true, Flo," returned her father, "I wish I had the simple faith
that you seem to possess, but I haven't, so there's no use in pretending
to it.  This," he added bitterly, "seems only a pure and unmitigated
disaster.  The last remnant of my fortune is wrecked, I am utterly
ruined, and my poor boy is perhaps dying."

Flora did not reply.  She felt that in his present state of mind nothing
she could say would comfort him.

At that moment Le Rue suddenly roused himself, and suggested that it was
about time to think of breakfast.

As all the party were of the same mind, the boat was allowed to drift
down the gulf with the tide, while the pork and biscuit-bags were
opened.  Little time was allowed for the meal, nevertheless the
mercurial Canadian managed, between mouthfuls, to keep up a running
commentary on things in general.  Among other things he referred to the
property which his master had just purchased in Partridge Bay.

"Whereabouts is this property that you talk of?" asked McLeod, becoming
interested at the mention of Partridge Bay.

"About la tete of de village near de house of Monsieur Gambart."

"What like a place is it?" asked McLeod, becoming suddenly much more
interested.

"Oh! one place mos bootiful," replied Le Rue, with enthusiasm; "de house
is superb, de grounds splendeed, et le prospect magnifique, wid plenty
of duck--perhaps sometimes goose, vild vons--in von lac near cliff
immense."

At the mention of the lake and the cliff McLeod's brow darkened, and he
glanced at Flora, who met his glance with a look of surprise.

"Did you happen to hear the name of the place?" asked McLeod.

"Oui, it vas, I tink, Lac Do, or Doo--someting like so."

"The scoundrel!" muttered McLeod between his teeth, while a gleam of
wrath shot from his eyes.

Le Rue looked at him with some surprise, being uncertain as to the
person referred to by this pithy remark, and Flora glanced at him with a
look of anxiety.

After a brief silence he said to Flora in a low tone, as though he were
expressing the continuation of his thoughts, "To think that the fellow
should thus abuse my hospitality by inducing me to speak of our fallen
fortunes, and of our being obliged to part with the old home we had
loved so well, and never to utter a word about his having bought the
place."

"Perhaps," suggested Flora, "you had not mentioned the name of the
place, and so it might not have occurred to him that--"

"Oh yes, I did," interrupted her father, with increasing anger, as his
memory recalled the converse with Redding on the preceding night, "I
remember it well, for he asked the name, and I told it him.  It's not
that I care a straw whether the old place was bought by Tom, Dick, or
Harry, but I can't stand his having concealed the fact from me after so
much, I may say, confidential conversation about it and our affairs
generally.  When I meet him again the young coxcomb shall have a piece
of my mind."

McLeod was, as we have said, an angry man, and, as the intelligent
reader well knows, angry men are apt to blind themselves and to become
outrageously unreasonable.  He was wrong in supposing that he did not
care a straw who should have bought the old place.  Without, perhaps,
admitting it to himself, he had entertained a hope that the home which
was intimately associated with his wife, and in which some of the
happiest years of his life had been spent, would remain unsold until he
should manage to scrape together money enough to repurchase it.  If it
had been sold to the proverbial Tom, or Dick, or Harry, he would have
been bitterly disappointed; the fact that it was sold to one who had, as
he thought, deceived him while enjoying his hospitality, only served as
a reason for his finding relief to disappointment in indignation.
Flora, who had entertained similar hopes in regard to Loch Dhu, shared
the disappointment, but not the indignation, for, although it did seem
unaccountable that one so evidently candid and truthful as Redding
should conceal the actual state of matters, she felt certain that there
was some satisfactory explanation of the mystery, and in that state of
mind she determined to remain until time should throw further light on
the affair.

Neither she nor her father happened to remember that the truth had
broken on Redding at the moment when the Indian entered the hut at
Jenkins Creek with the news of the wreck, which created such a sudden
excitement there that it banished thoughts of all other things from the
minds of every one.

The elder McLeod was a man of very strong and sensitive feelings, so
that, although possessed of an amiable and kindly disposition, he found
it exceedingly difficult to forget injuries, especially when these were
unprovoked.  His native generosity might have prompted him perhaps to
find some excuse for the fur-trader's apparent want of candour, or to
believe that there might be some explanation of it, but, as it was, he
flung into the other scale not only the supposed injury inflicted by
Redding, but all his weighty disappointments at the loss of his old
home, and of course generosity kicked the beam!

Acting on these feelings, he turned the bow of the boat inshore without
uttering a word, and when her keel grated on the gravelly beach, he
looked somewhat sternly at Le Rue, and said:--

"You may jump ashore, and go back to your fort."

"Monsieur?" exclaimed Le Rue, aghast with surprise.

"Jump ashore," repeated McLeod, with a steady, quiet look of
impassibility.  "Go, tell your master that I do not require further
assistance from him."

The Canadian felt that McLeod's look and tone admitted of neither
question nor delay.  His surprise therefore gave way to a burst of
indignation.  He leaped ashore with a degree of energy that sent the
little boat violently off the beach, and the shingles spurted from his
heels as he strode into the forest, renewing his vows of vengeance
against his late friends and old enemies, "de Macklodds!"



CHAPTER NINE.

SURMISINGS, DISAGREEMENTS, VEXATIONS, AND BOTHERATIONS.

Great was the amazement and perplexity of Reginald Redding when his
faithful cook returned to the Cliff Fort bearing the elder McLeod's
message.  At first he jumped to the conclusion that McLeod had observed
his affection for Flora, and meant thus to give him a broad hint that
his addresses were not agreeable.  Being, like McLeod, an angry man, he
too became somewhat blind.  All his pride and indignation were aroused.
The more he brooded over the subject, however, the more he came to see
that this could not be the cause of McLeod's behaviour.  He was terribly
perplexed, and, finally, after several days, he determined to go down to
the scene of the wreck and demand an explanation.

"It is the proper course to follow," he muttered to himself, one day
after breakfast, while brooding alone over the remnants of the meal,
"for it would be unjust to allow myself to lie under a false imputation,
and it would be equally unjust to allow the McLeods to remain under a
false impression.  Perhaps some enemy may have put them against me.
