the Master in his heart.  But I trust I have that."

"You have, Fred, thank God!" said the Admiral of the fleet.

"And now, Skipper Fox," continued Fred facetiously, "as I'm a sort of
doctor, you must allow me to prescribe something for your complaint.
Here, boy," he added, hailing one of his crew, "fetch Skipper Fox a
draught o' that physic--the brown stuff that you keep in the kettle."

"Ay, ay, sir," answered a youthful voice, and in another minute Pat
Stiver forced his way through the crowd, bearing in his hand a large cup
or bowl of coffee.

"It's not exactly the tipple I'm used to," said Fox, accepting the cup
with a grin, and wisely resolving to make the best of circumstances, all
the more readily that he observed other visitors had been, or still
were, enjoying the same beverage.  "Howsever, it's not to be expected
that sick men shall have their physic exactly to their likin', so I
thank 'ee all the same, Dr Martin!"

This reply was received with much approval, and the character of Groggy
Fox immediately experienced a considerable rise in the estimation of his
comrades of the fleet.

Attention was drawn from him just then by the approach of another boat.

"There is some genuine surgeon's work coming to you in that boat, Fred,
if I mistake not," remarked Stephen Lockley, as he stood beside his old
friend.

"Hasn't that man in the stern got his head tied up?"

"Looks like it."

"By the way, what of your uncle, Dick Martin?" asked the Admiral.  "It
was you that picked him up, wasn't it?"

This reference to the sad event which had occurred that morning
solemnised the fishermen assembled on the _Sunbeam's_ deck, and they
stood listening with sympathetic expressions as Fred narrated what he
had seen of the catastrophe, and told that his uncle was evidently
nothing the worse of it, and was lying asleep in the cabin, where
everything had been done for his recovery and comfort.

In the boat which soon came alongside was a fisherman who had met with a
bad accident some days before.  A block tackle from aloft had fallen on
his head and cut it severely.  His mates had bound it up in
rough-and-ready fashion; but the wound had bled freely, and the clotted
blood still hung about his hair.  Latterly the wound had festered, and
gave him agonising pain.  His comrades being utterly ignorant as to the
proper treatment, could do nothing for him.  Indeed, the only effectual
thing that could be done was to send the poor man home.  This sudden and
unexpected appearance of one of the mission ships was therefore hailed
as a godsend, for it was well-known that these vessels contained
medicines, and it was believed that their skippers were more or less
instructed in the healing art.  In this belief they were right; for in
addition to the well-appointed medicine-chest, each vessel has a skipper
who undergoes a certain amount of instruction, and possesses a practical
and plain book of directions specially prepared under the supervision of
the Board of Trade for the use of captains at sea.

One can imagine, therefore, what a relief it was to this poor wounded
man to be taken down into the cabin and have his head at last attended
to by one who "knew what he was about."  The operation of dressing was
watched with the deepest interest and curiosity by the fishermen
assembled there, for it was their first experience of the value, even in
temporal matters, of a Gospel ship.  Their ears were open, too, as well
as their eyes, and they listened with much interest to Fred Martin as he
tried, after a silent prayer for the Holy Spirit's influence, to turn
his first operation to spiritual account in his Master's interest.

"Tell me if I hurt you," he said, observing that his patient winced a
little when he was removing the bandage.

"Go on," said the man quietly.  "I ain't a babby to mind a touch of
pain."

The cabin being too small to hold them all, some of the visitors
clustered round the open skylight, and gazed eagerly down, while a few
who could not find a point of vantage contented themselves with
listening.  Even Dick Martin was an observer at that operation, for,
having been roused by the bustle around him, he raised himself on an
elbow, and looking down from his berth, could both hear and see.

"There now," said Fred Martin, when at last the bandage was removed and
the festering mass laid bare.  "Hand the scissors, Pat."

Pat Stiver, who was assistant-surgeon on that occasion, promptly handed
his chief the desired instrument, and stood by for further orders.

"I'll soon relieve you," continued Fred, removing the clotted hair,
etcetera, in a few seconds, and applying a cleansing lotion.  "I cut it
off, you see, just as the Great Physician cuts away our sins, and washes
us clean in the fountain of His own blood.  You feel better already,
don't you?"

"There's no doubt about that," replied the patient looking up with a
great sigh of relief that told far more than words could convey.

We will not record all that was said and done upon that occasion.  Let
it suffice to say that the man's wound was put in a fair way of recovery
without the expense and prolonged suffering of a trip home.

Thereafter, as a breeze was beginning to blow which bid fair to become a
"fishing breeze," it became necessary for the visitors to leave in
haste, but not before a few books, tracts, and worsted mittens had been
distributed, with an earnest invitation from the skipper of the
_Sunbeam_ to every one to repeat the visit whenever calm weather should
permit, and especially on Sundays, when regular services would be held
on deck or in the hold.

On this occasion Bob Lumpy and Pat Stiver had met and joined hands in
great delight, not unmingled with surprise.

"Well, who'd ever have expected to find _you_ here?" said Bob.

"Ah, who indeed?" echoed Pat.  "The fact is, I came to be near _you_,
Bob."

"But how did it happen?  Who got you the sitivation?  Look alive!  Don't
be long-winded, I see they're gittin' our boat ready."

"This is 'ow it was, Bob.  I was shovin' Eve about the roads in the
bath-chair, as you know I've bin doin' ever since I entered your
service, w'en a gen'lem'n come up and axed all about us.  `Would ye like
a sitivation among the North Sea fishermen?' says he.  `The very
ticket,' says I.  `Come to Lun'on to-night, then,' says he.
`Unpossible,' says I, fit to bu'st wi' disappointment; `'cos I must
first shove Miss Eve home, an' git hold of a noo shover to take my
place.'  `All right,' says he, laughin'; `come when you can.  Here's my
address.'  So away I goes; got a trustworthy, promisin' young feller as
I've know'd a long time to engage for Miss Eve, an' off to Lun'on, an'--
here I am!"

"Time's up," cried the Admiral at this point, shaking hands with Fred
Martin; while Bob Lumsden sprang from the side of his little friend, and
there was a general move towards the boats.

"Good-bye, mate," said Skipper Fox, holding out his hand.

"Stop, friends," cried Fred, in a loud voice; "that's not the way we
part on board o' the _Sunbeam_."

Taking off his hat and looking up,--a sign that all understood, for they
immediately uncovered and bowed their heads,--the missionary skipper, in
a few brief but earnest words, asked for a blessing on the work which he
had been privileged that day to begin, that Satan might be foiled, and
the name of Jesus be made precious among the fishermen of the North Sea.

Thereafter the boats scattered towards their various smacks, their crews
rejoicing in this latest addition to the fleet.  Even Groggy Fox gave it
as his opinion that there might be worse things after all in the world
than "mission wessels!"



CHAPTER NINE.

BEGINNING OF THE GOOD WORK.

The breeze which had begun to blow freshened as the day advanced, and
the Admiral, directing his course to the nor'-east, made for the
neighbourhood of the Dogger Bank.  Having reached what he deemed
suitable fishing-ground, he changed his course and gave the signal to
"put to."  With the precision of well-trained troops the smacks obeyed,
and let down their trawls.  The _Sunbeam_ also let down her net, and
shaped her course like the rest, thus setting an example of attention to
secular duty.  She trawled for fish so as to help to pay expenses, until
such time as suitable weather and opportunity offered for the main and
higher duty of fishing for men.

The first haul of the mission vessel was a great success, prophetic of
the great successes in store, thought her skipper, as the cod-end was
finally swung inboard in an almost bursting condition.  When the lower
end was opened, and the living fountain of fish gushed over the deck,
there was a general exclamation of satisfaction, mingled with
thanksgiving, from the crew, for fishes great and small were there in
abundance of every sort that swims in the North Sea.

"All sorts and conditions of men" leaped into Fred Martin's mind, for he
was thinking of higher things at the moment.  "A good beginning and a
good omen," he murmured.

"_Wot_ a haul!" exclaimed Pat Stiver, who was nearly swept off his legs,
and to whom the whole thing was an entirely new experience.

"Use your eyes less and your hands more, my boy," said Fink, the mate,
setting the example by catching hold of a magnificent turbot that would
have graced a lord mayor's feast, and commencing to clean it.

Pat was by no means a lazy boy.  Recovering from his surprise, he set to
work with all the vigour of a man of purpose, and joined the rest of the
crew in their somewhat disagreeable duty.

They wrought with such goodwill that their contribution of trunks to the
general supply was the largest put on board the steamer next day.

Calm and storm sometimes succeed each other rapidly on the North Sea.
It was so on the present occasion.  Before the nets could be cleared and
let down for another take, the breeze had died away.  The weather that
was unsuited, however, for fishing, was very suitable for "ferrying" to
the steamer; and when that all-important duty was done, the comparative
calm that prevailed was just the thing for the work of the _Sunbeam_.

Well aware of this, Manx Bradley and other like-minded skippers, kept
close to the mission ship, whose great blue flag was waving welcome to
all.  Boats were soon pulling towards her, their crews being influenced
by a great variety of motives; and many men who, but for her presence,
would have been gambling or drinking, or oppressed with having nothing
to do, or whistling for a breeze, found an agreeable place of meeting on
her deck.

On this occasion a considerable number of men who had received slight
injuries from accidents came on board, so that Fred had to devote much
of his time to the medical part of his work, while Fink, his mate,
superintended the distribution of what may be styled worsted-works and
literature.

"Hallo, Jim Freeman!" said Fred, looking round from the medicine shelves
before which he stood searching for some drug; "you're the very man I
want to see.  Want to tempt you away from Skipper Lockley, an' ship with
me in the _Sunbeam_."

"I'm not worth much for anybody just now," said Freeman, holding up his
right hand, which was bound in a bloody handkerchief.  "See, I've got
what'll make me useless for weeks to come, I fear."

"Never fear, Jim," said Fred, examining the injured member, which was
severely bruised and lacerated.  "How got ye that?"

"Carelessness, Fred.  The old story--clapped my hand on the gunwale o'
the boat when we were alongside the carrier."

"I'd change with 'ee, Jim, if I could," growled Joe Stubley, one of the
group of invalids who filled the cabin at the time.

There was a general laugh, as much at Joe's lugubrious visage as at his
melancholy tone.

"Why, what's wrong with _you_, Stubs?" asked Fred.

"DT," remarked the skipper of the _Cormorant_, who could hardly speak
because of a bad cold, and who thus curtly referred to the drunkard's
complaint of _delirium tremens_.

"Nothin' o' the sort!" growled Joe.  "I've not seed a _coper_ for a week
or two.  Brandy's more in your way, Groggy Fox, than in mine.  No, it's
mulligrumps o' some sort that's the matter wi' me."

"Indeed," said Fred, as he continued to dress the bruised hand.  "What
does it feel like, Stubs?"

"Feel like?" exclaimed the unhappy man, in a tone that told of anguish,
"it feels like red-hot thunder rumblin' about inside o' me.  Just as if
a great conger eel was wallopin' about an' a-dinin' off my witals."

"Horrible, but not incurable," remarked Fred.  "I'll give you some
pills, boy, that'll soon put you all to rights.  Now, then, who's next?"

While another of the invalids stepped forward and revealed his
complaints, which were freely commented on by his more or less
sympathetic mates, Fink had opened out a bale of worsted comforters,
helmets, and mitts on deck, and, assisted by Pat Stiver, was busily
engaged in distributing them.  "Here you are--a splendid pair of mitts,
Jack," he said, tossing the articles to a huge man, who received them
with evident satisfaction.

"Too small, I fear," said Jack, trying to force his enormous hand into
one of them.

"Hold on! don't bu'st it!" exclaimed Pat sharply; there's all sorts and
sizes here.  "There's a pair, now, that would fit Goliath."

"Ah, them's more like it, little 'un," cried the big fisherman.  "No
more sea-blisters now, thanks to the ladies on shore," he added, as he
drew the soft mittens over his sadly scarred wrists.

"Now then, who wants this?" continued Fink, holding up a worsted helmet;
"splendid for the back o' the head and neck, with a hole in front to let
the eyes and nose out."

"Hand over," cried David Duffy.

"I say, wot's this inside?" exclaimed one of the men, drawing a folded
paper from one of his mittens and opening it.

"Read, an' you'll maybe find out," suggested the mate.

"`God, who giveth us richly all things to enjoy,'" said the fisherman,
reading from the paper.

"Just so," said Fink, "that's what the lady as made the mitts wants to
let you know so's you may larn to think more o' the Giver than the
gifts."

"I wish," said another of the men testily, as he pulled a tract from
inside one of his mitts, and flung it on the deck, "I wish as how these
same ladies would let religion alone, an' send us them things without
it.  We want the mitts, an' comforters, an' helmets, but we don't want
their humbuggin' religion."

"Shame, Dick!" said David Duffy, as he wound a comforter round his thick
neck.  "You shouldn't look a gift horse in the mouth.  We're bound to
take the things as they've been sent to us, an' say `Thank 'ee.'"

"If it wasn't for what you call `humbuggin' religion,'" remarked Fink,
looking Dick straight in the face, "it's little that we'd see o'
comforters, or books, or mission ships on the North Sea.  Why, d'ee
think that selfishness, or greed, or miserliness, or indifference, or
godlessness would ever take the trouble to send all them things to us?
Can't you understand that the love of God in the heart makes men and
women wish to try to keep God's commandments by bein' kind to one
another, an' considering the poor, an' feedin' the hungry, an' clothin'
the naked?"

"Right you are, Fink," said Lockley, with a nod of approval, which was
repeated by several of those around.

"But, I say, you spoke of books, mate," remarked Bob Lumsden, who came
forward at the moment, much to the satisfaction of his little friend Pat
Stiver; "you han't showed us any books yet."

"One thing at a time, boy," returned the mate.

"We've got lots o' books too.  Go below, Pat, an' ask the skipper to
send up that big case o' books; say I've about finished givin' out the
mitts an' mufflers."

"Just so, boy," put in his friend Bob; "say that the mate has
distributed the soft goods, an' wants some hard facts now."

"Don't be cheeky, you young rascal!" cried the mate, hitting Bob on the
nose with a well aimed pair of mittens.

"Thankee!  On'y them things was meant for the hands not for the nose.
Howsever, I won't quarrel with a gift, no matter what way it comes to
me," retorted Bob, picking up the mitts and putting them in his pocket.

While he was speaking two men brought on deck a large box, which was
quickly opened by the mate.  The men crowded around with much interest
and curiosity, for it was the first batch of books that had ever reached
that fleet.  The case was stuffed to the lid with old periodicals and
volumes, of every shape, and size, and colour.

"W'y, they've bin an' sent us the whole British Museum, I do believe!"
exclaimed David Duffy, whose younger brother chanced to be a porter in
our great storehouse of literature.

"Here you are, lads!" cried Fink, going down on his knees and pulling
out the contents.  "Wollum of _The Leisure Hour, Sunday Magazine_, odd
numbers o' _The Quiver_, wollum of _The Boy's Own Paper, Young England,
Home Words_, and _Good Words_ (to smother our bad words, you know).
There you are, enough to make doctors or professors of every man Jack o'
you, if you'll on'y take it all in."

"Professors!" growled Joe Stubley, who had come on deck, still suffering
from his strange internal complaint.  "More like to make fools on us.
Wot do _we_ want wi' books and larnin'!"

"Nothin' wotsumdever," answered Pat Stiver, with a look of the most
patronising insolence.  "You're right, Joe, quite right--as you always
are.  Smacksmen has got no souls, no brains, no minds, no hintellects."

"They've got no use for books, bless you!  All they wants is wittles an'
grog--"

The boy pulled up at this point, for Stubley made a rush at him, but Pat
was too quick for him.

"Well said, youngster; give it him hot," cried one of the men
approvingly, while the others laughed; but they were too much interested
in the books to be diverted from these for more than a few seconds.
Many of them were down on their knees beside the mate, who continued in
a semi-jocular strain--"Now then, take your time, my hearties; lots o'
books here, and lots more where these came from.  The British public
will never run dry.  I'm cheap John!  Here they are, all for nothin',
_on loan_; small wollum--the title ain't clear, ah!--_The Little Man as
Lost his Mother_; big wollum--_Shakespeare; Pickwick_; books by Hesba
Stretton; Almanac; Missionary Williams; _Polar Seas an' Regions;
Pilgrim's Progress_--all sorts to suit all tastes--Catechisms, Noo
Testaments, _Robinson Crusoe_."

"Hold on there, mate; let's have a look at that!" cried Bob Lumsden
eagerly--so eagerly that the mate handed the book to him with a laugh.

"Come here, Pat," whispered Bob, dragging his friend out of the crowd to
a retired spot beside the boat of the _Sunbeam_, which lay on deck near
the mainmast.  "Did you ever read _Robinson Crusoe_?"

"No, never--never so much as 'eard of 'im."

"You can read, I suppose?"

"Oh yes; I can read well enough."

"What have you read?" demanded Bob.

"On'y bits of old noospapers," replied Pat, with a look of contempt,
"an' I don't like readin'."

"Don't like it?  Of course you don't, you ignorant curmudgeon, if
noospapers is all you've read.  Now, Pat, I got this book, not for
myself but a purpus for _you_."

"Thankee for nothin'," said Pat; "I doesn't want it."

"Doesn't want it!" repeated Bob.  "D'ee know that this is the very best
book as ever was written?"

"You seems pretty cock-sure," returned Pat, who was in a contradictory
mood that day; "but you know scholards sometimes differ in their
opinions about books."

"Pat I'll be hard upon you just now if you don't look out!" said Bob
seriously.  "Howsever, you're not so far wrong, arter all.  People
_does_ differ about books, so I'll only say that _Robinson Crusoe_ is
the best book as was ever written, in _my_ opinion, an' so it'll be in
yours, too, when you have read it; for there's shipwrecks, an' desert
