"If it comes to exercise I get all I want right at home," persisted the
boy. "I've a crew of little brothers and sisters, too, and when I'm not
busy I help take care of them so Ma can sew. Just you try doing it once
if you are looking for exercise. And then I wheel the baby out."

There was a twinkle in the eye of the man at the desk but he said
gravely:

"Isn't it going to bother them at home if you take a position? How does
your mother feel about it?"

"I haven't had a chance to ask her," Carl blurted out with honesty.
"All last evening she was rushing to finish that spangled thing; and
this morning she had the kids to dress and I had errands to do. It's
awful hard to get a chance to talk to Ma by herself. Some of the
children are always clawing at her skirts and bothering her."

"You do believe, though, in talking things over with your mother."

"Sure! We always tell Ma everything if we can get a chance. So does all
Mulberry Court, for that matter. Ma's that sort."

The stranger toyed with an ivory letter-opener thoughtfully.

"Now I'll tell you what we'll do," began he at last. "To-day is
Saturday, isn't it?"

Carl nodded.

"Well, if your friends, the Harlings, are not straightened out by
Monday morning I will let you begin a week from to-day as errand boy in
this office."

"Bully!" cried the delighted applicant.

"If, on the other hand," continued the gentleman at the desk, speaking
slowly and evenly, and not heeding the interruption, "Miss Harling
finds work and the family do not need your aid, you must agree to put
in your free time at home helping your mother as you have been doing in
the past. Is that a bargain?"

"Y-e-s."

"What's the matter?"

"It just seems to me we might as well settle it definitely now that I
am to come here next week. To-day is Saturday and I don't believe
Louise will find work before Monday morning. Of course she can't do
anything about getting a job Sunday."

Although there was a perceptible tremor of disappointment in the boy's
voice the stranger appeared not to notice it. Rising, he put out his
hand with a kindly smile.

"I am afraid the agreement I have made with you is the best I can do at
present," said he. "I will be true to my part of it if you will be true
to yours. I promise you that if the Harlings' affairs do not take an
upward turn by Monday you shall come to their rescue."

"Thank you, sir."

"I wouldn't worry any more about this, if I were you, sonny," concluded
the man. "Go home and try to be satisfied. I'll keep the place for you,
remember. It is Carl McGregor, isn't it, of----"

"Mulberry Court--the top flat."

"And did you tell me these friends of yours, the Harlings, lived there
too?"

"Oh, no, sir! I wish they did. The Harlings are at Number 40 Broad
Street. It is the corner house. They took the tenement because there
was sun, and because it entertains Grandfather and Mrs. Harling to look
out the window. They can't ever go out and it cheers them up to have
something to see. It costs more to live there than where we do, but Hal
and Louise decided it was worth it."

"Under the circumstances I imagine it is," assented the stranger.
"Well, we will wish them luck."

"I hope they have it!"

"So do I." As he spoke the man pressed a bell in answer to which the
uniformed page appeared.

"Show this young gentleman out, Billie," said he. "Good-by, youngster!
Good-by!"

The farewell was cordial and in its cadence rang so disconcerting a
finality that try as he might Carl could not repress a conviction that
in spite of his suave promises his new-found friend did not really
expect to see him again.

"I guess there are folks like that," meditated he, as he walked
dispiritedly home. "They are awful pleasant to your face and give you
the feeling they are going to do wonders for you. But when it comes to
the scratch they slide from under. This chap is one of that slick
bunch, I'll bet a hat."

It was not a cheering reflection and with every step lower and lower
ebbed his hopes. It chanced that his pathway to Mulberry Court led past
the corner of Broad Street (or if it did not really lead him there his
subconscious mind did) and once in the vicinity what more natural than
that he should drop in at Number 40 to pass the time of day?
Grandfather Harling loved to have visitors. He said they cheered him
up.

But to-day neither the old gentleman nor any of the Harling family
needed cheering. Carl found them in such high spirits that for a time
it was difficult to get any of the group to talk coherently.

"What do you suppose has happened, Carl?" cried Louise, the instant he
was inside the door. "The most wonderful thing! You never could guess
if you guessed forever."

"If it is as hopeless as that I shan't try," laughed Carl.

"But it is amazing, a miracle!" put in Mrs. Harling.

"We can't understand it at all," quavered Grandfather Harling, who was
quite as excited as the rest.

"Well, what _is_ it?" the boy demanded.

"You'll never believe it," laughed Louise with shining eyes. "I've had
a letter. You couldn't guess who it's from!"

She held a square white envelope high above her head.

"I'm going to have it framed and hand it down to my
great-great-grandchildren."

"You might let me see it," coaxed Carl, putting out his hand.

"Oh, it is far too precious to be touched. It is going to be an
archive, an heirloom, you know."

"Oh, come on and tell a chap what's happened," urged Carl, his patience
beginning to wane.

"Well, think of this! I've had a note from Mr. Coulter--not from the
firm, understand, but from the great J. W. himself, written by his own
hand. He says he hears that through some error my name has been dropped
from the Davis and Coulter payroll, and he not only asks me to come
back to the mill but sends me a cheek for double the sum that I have
lost by being out. Can you beat that?"

"Oh, Louise, how bully! I _am_ glad! But how do you suppose----"

"That's exactly what we don't know. It seems like magic, doesn't it? I
never knew before that Mr. Coulter kept such close track of what went
on at the mills. He doesn't come there often because he is always at
the down-town office. When he does visit the mills he simply strolls
through them as if they belonged to somebody else rather than to
himself. Of course he doesn't know one of the workers and I've always
fancied he didn't care much about us. But this proves how wrong I was
to think so. He does care, you see, and means everybody shall have a
square deal. I shall go back Monday and work harder than ever for him.
You will work your fingers off for such a man as that, you know."

"It certainly is white of him!" Carl agreed.

"It is nothing but justice," asserted Mrs. Harling proudly. "Still,
justice isn't a common commodity in this world."

"Evidently it isn't Mr. Coulter's fault if it isn't, Mother," Louise
replied. "And isn't it nice, Carl, that I am not to go back to work
under Mr. Corcoran. Oh, I forgot to tell you that. That is almost the
best of all. No! I am to be in the shipping department where the work
is lighter and the pay better. Won't Hal be tickled to death when he
hears it? He'll be more convinced than ever that he did the right thing
to lay Corcoran out."

"I think he did. Still, it was a dangerous experiment and this should
be a warning to him," put in Mrs. Harling. "Hal must learn to be more
careful with his temper, his tongue, and those fists of his. If he
isn't he is going to get into serious trouble some day."

Carl, however, was not listening to Mrs. Harling's moralizing.

"I wish I knew how Mr. Coulter found out about Louise," murmured he,
half aloud.

Well, this was certainly a most satisfactory termination to the
Harlings' troubles. He was genuinely glad the affair had turned so
fortunately. And yet in his heart lurked a vague regret. This would
mean that probably he would never see or hear from the mysterious hero
of the red racing car again. Could the stranger have had any knowledge
of what was to happen and did that information account for his jaunty
adieu? Of course such a thing was impossible. And yet how odd and
puzzling it all was!




CHAPTER VI

THE WEB WIDENS


"Wherever did you disappear to?" inquired his mother when, hungry but
triumphant, Carl came home. "I've been looking everywhere for you."

"I didn't know you wanted me this morning, Ma," the boy replied, an
afterglow of happiness still on his face.

"I didn't really want you but I wanted to know where you were. I've
asked you time and time again when you go out to tell me where you're
going."

"I wanted to, Mother, but it was such a long story. Last night you were
too busy to hear it; and this morning there was no chance to talk to
you either."

He heard his mother sigh.

"It's a pretty kind of a life I lead if my own children can't get a
minute to talk to me."

"But you are busy, Ma. You know you are."

"I certainly do. Nobody knows it better," replied the woman with a sad
shake of her head.

Carl, sensing the regret in her tone, hastened to say:

"Well, at least the family is not so thick around here now as usual.
Where is everybody?"

"Mary is out with James Frederick; Timmie has gone to the park to
coast; and Martin and Nell are at the day nursery."

"Then we have it all to ourselves."

"For a second or two, yes."

"That's bully!"

Drawing up a kitchen chair he sat down beside his mother.

"It's nice to have them gone sometimes," remarked he. "The kids make
such a racket."

"They'll not always be making it," returned Mrs. McGregor philosophically.
"And anyway, the three of them put together can never equal the
hullabaloo you used to make when you were their age."

"I'm quiet enough now," grinned Carl sheepishly.

"Quiet, you call it, do you? Quiet! And you prancing home from every
ball game with a black eye or else the clothes half torn off you!" She
chuckled mischievously. "But you're not telling me where you've been.
Up to some deviltry, I'll be bound, or you wouldn't be so anxious to
get it off your conscience."

"I haven't been up to any high jinks this time, Ma," protested the lad
soberly. "You'll see when I tell you."

Slowly he related his story while his mother bent over her needle,
spangling with brilliants a gauze of azure hue. She was a wonderful
listener, sympathetic in her intentness.

When the boy had finished her hand wandered to touch his rough sleeve.

"A kind deed is never amiss in the world," observed she briefly. "If we
would but pass on to other folks the kindness people do to us the world
would soon become a pleasanter place. I'm thankful to know Louise has
her job back, or rather that she has a better one. She's a good girl
and deserves it. Besides, with Christmas coming, it would be hard to be
without money."

"And Mr. Coulter--wasn't he great? And wasn't it all funny?"

"Funny is hardly the word; but I'll agree that Mr. Coulter was great.
It is always great for a big man to take on his soul the troubles of
those needier than himself. Well, he's done a good deed this day and
may he be the happier for it. And he will be--never fear! I wonder how
he got wind of the trouble Louise was in? You don't suppose----" She
halted a moment as if suddenly struck by a new thought; then she
laughed and shrugged her shoulders, "Of course it couldn't be--how
ridiculous! Well, anyway, it is splendid everything has come out so
well. And now that you're here, sonny, would you mind fetching some
coal from the shed and starting up the fire for dinner? Mary'll be back
soon and 'twould be a nice surprise for her to find the kettle
boiling."

"So it would!" answered Carl, leaping up to do his mother's bidding.

"I'm not forgetting you'd like to do a bit of coasting or skating
to-day," Mrs. McGregor continued. "If you will fit in a few errands
early in the afternoon I'll let you off at two o'clock for a holiday."

"That will be great, Ma! But--but don't you----"

"It will be all right, sonny. Tim has had his play this morning and he
shall help the rest of the day. Hush a minute! Isn't that Mrs. O'Dowd's
knock? Very like she's up to ask me to run down and see little Katie
who is laid up with a sore throat. Well, I'll go but I won't be long.
Meantime if you can lend Mary a hand dinner will be through the quicker
and you will be off to play the earlier."

Thus it happened that before two o'clock Carl McGregor was one of the
shouting throng of boys that crowded the small pond in Davis Park. Amid
swirling skaters and a confusion of hockey sticks he moved in and out
the thick of the game. So intent was he upon the sport that he might
have continued playing until dark had not a boy at his elbow suddenly
piped:

"There goes Hal Harling! Hi, Hal! Come on down!"

"Harling! Harling!" cried the other boys, taking up the call.

"Come on and play, Hal! You can have Sanderson's skates. He's going
home."

"Can't do it!" laughed the giant, waving his hand.

"Oh, come on, old top!"

"Not to-night, fellers! Got to go home."

"I've got to see Harling!" Carl exclaimed, hurriedly loosening his
skates.

"You're not going, too!"

"Got to. So long! Hold on, Hal! I'm coming with you."

Scrambling up the bank, Carl overtook his friend.

"Hullo, Carlie! What struck you to quit?" asked he unceremoniously.

"Time I was getting home. Besides, I wanted to see you."

A smile passed between them.

"To tell the truth, I hoped I'd spy you somewhere, kid. I've got great
news! Corcoran has been fired! What do you know about that?"

"Corcoran!"

"The old man himself--no other!"

"Jove! Why, I thought you said he'd been at the mills all his life."

"So he has."

"But--but--to fire him now!"

"Well, he hasn't actually been fired," amended young Harling, "but so
far as I'm concerned it amounts to the same thing. He's been
transferred to another department and he isn't to be a boss any more,
poor old chap!"

"But aren't you glad?" questioned Carl with surprise.

"Why, yes, in some ways," returned Hal thoughtfully. "Yes, of course
I'm glad not to have him sarsing the girls and pestering me. Still, I'm
sort of sorry for him."

"_Sorry?_"

Hal nodded.

"But I thought you----"

"I know! I know! I'm not saying he wasn't an awful old screw. But
somehow I don't believe he meant to be so flinty-hearted. You see, he
came and talked to me to-day--talked like a regular human being. You
could have knocked me over. It seems--a funny thing--that kid I picked
up out of the street the other day was his."

"Corcoran's kid!"

"Yep! Can you beat it? Of course I hadn't a notion who the little tike
belonged to; but even if I had I should have done the same thing. You
wouldn't let a kid like that be run over no matter who his father was."

"But--but--Corcoran!" gasped Carl. "How did he know it was you who
rescued his baby?"

"Somebody told him. He said it cut him up terribly because of the way
he'd treated Louise."

"Served him right."

"Maybe! But he was cut up, poor old cuss! You'd have been sorry for him
yourself, if you'd heard him. He isn't all brute by any means. Why,
when he spoke about his little boy----"

"But Louise!"

"I know. It was a low-down trick and he said so himself. But he
declared it was an ill wind that blew nobody good, and he hinted that
maybe in consequence of the trouble she would be better off than if it
hadn't happened."

Carl bit his tongue to keep it silent. How he longed to impart to his
chum the good tidings that would greet him when he reached home! But he
must not spoil Louise's pleasure by telling the story of her good luck
for her.

"Oh, somehow things do seem to come round right if you wait long
enough," mumbled he.

