Sicinius in the host, a man of singular strength and courage, who took
it ill that the Ten should thus set themselves above all law, and was
wont to say to his comrades that the Commons should depart from the city
as they had done in time past, or should at the least make them tribunes
to be their champions as of old. This Sicinius the Ten sent on before
the army, there being then war with the Sabines, to search out a place
for a camp; and with him they sent certain others, bidding them slay him
when they should have come to some convenient place. This they did, but
not without suffering much loss; for the man fought for his life and
defended himself, slaying many of his enemies. Then they that escaped
ran into the camp, saying that Sicinius had fallen into an ambuscade,
and had died along with certain others of the soldiers. At the first,
indeed, this story was believed; but afterwards, when, by permission of
the Ten, there went some to bury the dead, they found that none of the
dead bodies had been spoiled, and that Sicinius lay with his arms in the
midst, the others having their faces towards him; also that there was
no dead body of an enemy in the place, nor any track as of them that had
gone from the place; for which reasons they brought back tidings that
Sicinius had certainly been slain by his own comrades. At this there was
great wrath in the camp; and the soldiers were ready to carry the body
of Sicinius to Rome, but that the Ten made a military funeral for him at
the public cost. So they buried Sicinius with great lamentation; but the
Ten were thereafter in very ill repute among the soldiers.

Again, there was a certain centurion, Lucius Virginius by name, an
upright man and of good credit both at home and abroad. This Virginius
had a daughter, Virginia, a very fair and virtuous maiden, whom he
had espoused to a certain Icilius that had once been a tribune of the
Commons. On this maiden Appius Claudius, the chief of the Ten, sought to
lay hands, and for this end gave commandment to one Marcus Claudius, who
was one of the clients of his house, that he should claim the girl for
a slave. On the morrow therefore as Virginia passed across the
market-place, being on her way to school (for the schools in those days
were held in the market-place), this Claudius seized her, affirming that
she was born of a woman that was a slave, and was therefore by right
a slave herself. The maiden standing still for fear, the nurse that
attended her set up a great cry and called the citizens to help.
Straightway there was a great concourse, for many knew the maiden's
father Virginius, and Icilius to whom she was betrothed. Then said
Claudius, seeing that he could not take her by force, "There is no
need of tumult or of gathering a crowd. I would proceed by law, not by
force." Thereupon he summoned the girl before the judge. When they came
to the judgment-seat of Appius the man told a tale that had already
been agreed upon between the two. "This girl," he said, "was born in
my house, and was thence secretly taken to the house of Virginius,
and passed off on the man as his daughter. Of this I will bring proof
sufficient, such as will convince Virginius himself, who doubtless has
received the chief wrong in this matter. But in the meanwhile it is
reasonable that the slave should remain in the house of her master." To
this the friends of the girl made answer, "Virginius is absent on the
service of the State, and will be here within the space of two days, if
tidings of this matter be sent to him. Now it is manifestly wrong that
judgment concerning a man's children should be given while he is himself
absent. Let the cause, therefore, be postponed till he come. Meanwhile
let the maiden have her freedom according to the law which Appius and
his fellows have themselves established."

Appius gave sentence in these words: "That I am a favourer of freedom
is manifest from this law of which ye make mention. Yet this law must
be observed in all cases and without respect of persons; and as to this
girl, there is none but her father only to whom her owner may yield
the custody of her. Let her father therefore be sent for; but in the
meanwhile Claudius must have custody of her, as is his right, only
giving security that he will produce her on the morrow."

At this decree, so manifestly unrighteous was it, there was much
murmuring, yet none dared to oppose it, till Numitorius, the girl's
uncle, and Icilius came forth from the crowd. The lictor cried,
"Sentence has been given," and bade Icilius give place. Then Icilius
turned to Appius, saying, "Appius, thou must drive me hence with the
sword before thou canst have thy will in this matter. This maiden is my
espoused wife; and verily, though thou call hither all thy lictors and
the lictors of thy colleagues, she shall not remain in any house save
the house of her father."

To this Appius, seeing that the multitude was greatly moved and were
ready to break forth into open violence, made this reply: "Icilius cares
not for Virginia, but being a lover of sedition and tumult, seeks an
occasion for strife. Such occasion I will not give him to-day. But that
he may know that I yield not to his insolence, but have regard to the
rights of a father, I pronounce no sentence. I ask of Marcus Claudius
that he will concede something of his right, and suffer surety to be
given for the girl against the morrow. But if on the morrow the father
be not present here, then I tell Icilius and his fellows that he who is
the author of this law will not fail to execute it. Neither will I call
in the lictors of my colleagues to put down them that raise a tumult.
For this my own lictors shall suffice."

So much time being thus gained, it seemed good to the friends of the
maiden that the son of Numitorius and the brother of Icilius, young men
both of them and active, should hasten with all speed to the camp, and
bring Virginius thence as quickly as might be. So the two set out, and
putting their horses to their full speed, carried tidings of the matter
to the father. As for Appius, he sat awhile on the judgment-seat,
waiting for other business to be brought before him, for he would not
have it seem that he had come for this cause only; but finding that
there was none, and indeed the people were wholly intent on the matter
of Virginia, he departed to his own house. Thence he sent an epistle to
his colleagues that were at the camp, saying, "Grant no leave of absence
to Virginius, but keep him in safe custody with you." But this availed
nothing, for already, before ever the epistle was brought to the camp,
at the very first watch of the night, Virginius had set forth.

When Virginius was come to the city, it being then early dawn, he put on
mean apparel, as was the custom with such as were in danger of life or
liberty, and carried about his daughter, who was clad in like manner,
praying all that he met to help and succour him. "Remember," said he,
"that day by day I stand fighting for you and for your children against
your enemies. But what shall this profit you or me if, this city being
safe, nevertheless our children stand in peril of slavery and shame?"
Icilius spake in like manner, and the women (for a company of matrons
followed Virginia) wept silently, stirring greatly the hearts of all
that looked upon them. But Appius, so set was his heart on evil, heeded
none of these things; but so soon as he had sat him down on the seat of
judgment, and he that claimed the girl had said a few words complaining
that right had not been done to him, he gave his sentence; suffering
not Virginius to speak. What pretence of reason he gave can scarce be
imagined, but the sentence (for this only is certain) was that the girl
should be in the custody of Claudius till the matter should be decided
by law. But when Claudius came to take the maiden, her friends and all
the women that bare her company thrust him back. Then said Appius, "I
have sure proof, and this not from the violence only of Icilius, but
from what is told to me of gatherings by night in the city, that there
is a purpose in certain men to stir up sedition. Knowing this I have
come hither with armed men; not to trouble quiet citizens, but to punish
such as would break the peace of the State. Such as be wise, therefore,
will keep themselves quiet. Lictor, remove this crowd, and make room for
the master that he may take his slave." These words he thundered forth
in great anger; and the people, when they heard them, fell back in fear,
so that the maiden stood without defence. Then Virginius, seeing that
there were none to help him, said to Appius, "I pray thee, Appius, if
I have said aught that was harsh to thee, that thou wilt pardon it,
knowing how a father must needs suffer in such a case. But now suffer me
to enquire somewhat of this woman that is the girl's nurse, that I may
know what is the truth of the matter. For if I have been deceived in
the matter, and am not in truth father to the girl, I shall be more
content." Then, Appius giving permission, he led his daughter and her
nurse a little space aside, to the shops that are by the temple of
Cloacina, and snatching a knife from a butcher's, said, "My daughter,
there is but this one way that I can make thee free," and he drave the
knife into her breast.

[Illustration: The death of Virginia 200]

Then he looked back to the judgment-seat and cried, "With this blood,
Appius, I devote thee and thy life to perdition." There went up a great
cry from all that stood there when they saw so dreadful a deed, and
Appius commanded that they should seize him. But no man laid hands on
him, for he made a way for himself with the knife that he carried in his
hand, and they that followed defended him, till he came to the gate of
the city.

Then Icilius and Numitorius took up the dead body of the maiden and
showed it to the people, saying much of the wickedness of him who had
driven a father to do such a deed, and much also of the liberty which
had been taken from them, and which, if they would only use this
occasion, they might now recover. As for Appius, he cried out to his
lictors that they should lay hands on Icilius, and when the crowd
suffered not the lictors to approach, would himself have made a way
to him, by the help of the young nobles that stood by him. But now the
crowd had leaders, themselves also nobles, Valerius and Horatius. These
said, "If Appius would deal with Icilius according to law we will be
securities for him; if he mean to use violence, we are ready to meet
him." And when the lictor would have laid hands on these two the
multitude brake his rods to pieces. Then Appius would have spoken to
the people, but they clamoured against him, so that at last, losing all
courage and fearing for his life, he covered his head and fled secretly
to his own house.

Meanwhile Virginius had made his way to the camp, which was now on Mount
Vecilius, and stirred up the army yet more than he had stirred the city.
"Lay not to my charge," he said, "that which is in truth the wickedness
of Appius; neither turn from me as from the murderer of my daughter. Her
indeed I slew, thinking that death was better than slavery and shame;
nor indeed had I survived her but that I hoped to avenge her death
by the help of my comrades." Others also that had come from the city
persuaded the soldiers; some saying that the power of the Ten was
overthrown, and others that Appius had gone of his own accord into
banishment. These words so prevailed with the soldiers that, without any
bidding from their generals, they took up their arms, and, with their
standards carried before them, came to Rome and pitched their camp on
the Aventine.

Nevertheless, the Ten were still obstinate, affirming that they would
not resign their authority till they had finished the work for which
they had been appointed, namely, the drawing up of the twelve tables
of the laws. And when the army perceived this they marched from the
Aventine and took up their abode on the Sacred Hill, all the Commons
following them, so that there was not left in the city a single man that
had ability to move; nor did the women and children stay behind, but
all, as many as could move, bare them company; for Duilius, that had
been tribune, said, "Unless the Senate see the city deserted, they will
take no heed of your complaints." And indeed, when these perceived what
had taken place, they were more urgent than before that the Ten should
resign their office. And these at last consented; "Only," said they, "do
not suffer us to perish from the rage of the Commons. It will be an
ill day for the nobles when the people shall learn to take vengeance on
them." And the Senate so wrought that though at the first the Commons in
their great fury demanded that the Ten should be burned alive, yet they
were persuaded to yield, it being agreed that each man should be judged
by the law according to his deserts. Appius, therefore, was accused
by Virginius, and being cast into prison, slew himself before the day
appointed for the trial. Oppius also, another of the Ten, whom the
Commons hated for his misdeeds next after Appius, was accused and died
in like manner. As for Claudius, that had claimed Virginia for his
slave, he was condemned to be banished. And thus at the last, the guilty
having been punished, the spirit of Virginia had rest.




CHAPTER XI. ~~ THE STORY OF VEII.

In the three hundred and forty-eighth year after the building of the
city, the truce that had been for now nearly twenty years with the men
of Veii being ended, ambassadors and heralds were sent thither to demand
satisfaction for injuries received. So coming to the border of the land
they encountered an embassy from Veii journeying to Rome. These
made request that the Romans should not go to Veii before that they
themselves had had audience of the Senate. Such audience they had,
and obtained their petition; to wit, that satisfaction should not be
demanded that year, because they were much troubled by strife among
themselves. But in the year following there was war. For when the
ambassadors came from Rome making the same demand for restitution as
before, the men of Veii made answer to them in these words: "Make haste
and depart from the land, else we will give you such answer as Lars
Tolumnius gave to your fellows."

Now the story of Lars Tolumnius is this. Fidenae, that was a colony of
Rome, revolted to Veii, of which city Lars Tolumnius was king in those
days. And when the Romans sent ambassadors enquiring of the men of the
city why they had done this thing, the ambassadors were put to death;
and this was done, it was said, at the bidding of Tolumnius. But some
have sought to excuse Tolumnius in this fashion. They say that he was
playing at dice, and that when the men of Fidenae came to him
asking, "Shall we do well to slay these ambassadors of Rome?" he
said, "Excellently," not hearing what they said, but thinking only of
the dice and of his game, for he had at the very moment thrown most
fortunately. But it cannot be believed that in so great a matter he
should have been so careless. This Lars Tolumnius was slain afterwards
by Cornelius Cossus in single combat, and his spoils were dedicated in
the temple of Jupiter, hard by the spoils which King Romulus won from
the King of Caere.

When this answer was brought back to Rome, the Senate would have war
declared against Veii without delay; but the people murmured, saying,
"We have enough to do already with the Volscians, and why will ye have
another war with the men of Veii, who will stir up all the Etrurians
against you?" The tribunes took occasion by this to hinder the matter,
and the war was delayed.

The next year there was war with the Volscians, and Anxur, one of their
chief cities, was taken, and the spoil was given to the soldiers. They
were greatly pleased with this bounty, and yet more when it was ordained
that thereafter the soldiers should have pay from the public treasury.
And now it was resolved, none opposing, that war should be declared
against Veii, for which war a great army was levied forthwith, the
greater part of the soldiers offering themselves of their own free will.
Thus it came to pass that in the three hundred and fiftieth year after
the building of the city, Veii was shut in.

In the third year of the siege the men of Veii, being weary of the
strife which troubled them year by year in the choosing of their
magistrates, made for themselves a king. But this thing was a grievous
offence to the other Etrurians, who hated not so much kingship as the
man who had been chosen to be king. The cause of which hatred was this,
that the man, being angry because, by the vote of the twelve nations of
the Etrurians, another had been preferred before him to be high priest,
had caused their yearly festival to be broken off in the midst, a thing
which the Etrurians, than whom was never a people more scrupulous in
matters of religion, judged to be most impious. This thing he did by
taking away the actors of plays, who were for the most part his own
slaves. And now the whole nation, being assembled in council, decreed
that no help should be given to the men of Veii so long as they should
be under the rule of a king. But of this decree no mention was made in
Veii, for the King gave out that if any man talked of such matters he
should be held guilty of sedition. Nevertheless the Romans, fearing
lest the purpose of the Etrurians might suffer a change, made the
fortifications wherewith they had shut in the city to be double, having
one face against such sallies as the townsmen might make, and the other
turned towards Etruria, if perchance help should come thence to the
city.

In this year also, because the Romans hoped to take the city by siege
rather than by assault, winter quarters, a wholly new thing in those
days, were begun to be built; and it was decreed that the army should
abide before the city continually, not departing, as the custom had
been, at the beginning of the winter. About this there was great debate
at Rome, the tribunes protesting that the nobles had invented this
device against liberty, contriving that the better part of the Commons
should thus be kept away perpetually from the city; while the nobles
on the other hand protested by the mouth of Appius Claudius, son of the
decemvir, that in no other way could this war be brought to an end, for
that it was a grievous waste of time and labour that the works which
had been made with so much toil in the summer should be destroyed or
suffered to perish in the winter. "The love of sport," said he, "takes
them that hunt to the mountains, where they suffer frost and rain
without complaint, and shall our soldiers be less enduring when they
fight for their country? And if the Greeks were content, for the sake of
a woman, to besiege the city of Troy for ten years without ceasing,
and that far from their country and beyond the sea, shall we refuse to
remain for the space of a year before a city which is not so much as
twenty miles distant?"

While this matter was debated at Rome, the people inclining, for the
most part, to Appius rather than to the tribunes, there came such
tidings from Veii as made all men agree that the city must be attacked
with all steadfastness and energy. The works of the besiegers were now
pushed forward well-nigh to the walls, and the minds of all being wholly
given to the finishing of them, it followed, that though they were
diligently advanced in the day, they were the less carefully watched by
night. The townsfolk perceiving this, a great multitude of men issued
forth from the gates carrying torches in their hands, and set fire to
the works, consuming in a very brief space of time that which had been
finished after many months. Not a few also of them that would have
stayed the burning perished either by fire or by the sword. When
these tidings were brought to them the city was greatly disturbed.
Nevertheless the matter turned to the public good. First they that had
the dignity of horsemen in the State, but were not called to serve, came
forward saying that they would serve, finding horses at their own cost;
likewise a great multitude of the people offered themselves to serve as
foot soldiers. Thus was there raised a great army, which, marching to
Veii, not only restored that which had been destroyed by fire, but also
made works that were larger and stronger by far.

In the fourth year of the siege the Romans suffered no small loss.
First Anxur was lost, the garrison being surprised by the Volscians, and
afterwards there followed great reverses at Veii. The men of Capena and
Falerii came to the help of Veii, judging that if this city should be
taken they themselves would be the next to perish. These fought against
a certain part of the Romans, and at the same time the townsfolk sallied
from the gates. And when help should have been given to them from the
other part of the camp, because there was a strife between the generals,
none such was sent; for the one said, "If my colleague be in need of
help he will ask for it," and the other, for pride and jealousy, had
rather be conquered by the enemy than conquer by aid of one whom he
loved not. So it came to pass that Sergius (for he it was whom the men
of Capena and Falerii had attacked) with his soldiers left the works
and fled, some escaping to the other camp, but the greater part making
escape to Rome.

In the seventh year of the siege there happened many marvels. Of these,
for the most part? men took little count; but one seemed especially
noteworthy, to wit, that the water of the lake of Alba rose to such a
height as had never been seen before, and this without great rains
or any other cause which might make the thing less to be wondered at.
Messengers therefore were sent to the oracle of Delphi to enquire of
the god what this might portend. But the Romans found, for so fate would
have it, an interpreter of the marvel that was nearer at hand than the
oracle of Apollo. As the Roman soldiers and the soldiers of Veii talked
together at the outposts, a certain old man, an Etrurian, chanted in the
fashion that prophets use this verse--

     "Ne'er till the depths of Alba's lake be drained
     Shall Veii's walls by Roman arms be gained."

Of these words none at first took any heed, but afterwards some began
to doubt what they might mean. A certain Roman therefore enquired of
the townsfolk (for the siege having now endured for many years there
had grown up acquaintance between them) who the man might be that had
chanted this prophecy. And when he heard he was a soothsayer, he spake
to him, saying that he would fain have some talk with him, for that
there had happened to himself a certain marvel, and he desired to know
how he might rightly deal with it. So the two went to a certain place by
themselves, neither of them carrying arms. Then the Roman (for he was a
young man and of great strength) caught up the Etrurian in his arms and
carried him away to the camp, the Etrurians not being able to hinder
him. So they brought the soothsayer to the general, and the general sent
him to the Senate; and when the Senate enquired of him what it was that
he had prophesied concerning the lake of Alba, the old man answered,
"Surely the Gods were wroth with Veii that day when they put it into my
mind to betray the thing which by the ordering of fate must bring about
the destruction of the city. Nevertheless I cannot recall that which I
once uttered by divine inspiration so that it should be as if it were
unsaid; and perchance there is no less wickedness in concealing that
which the immortal Gods would have revealed than in uttering that which
they would have concealed. Know therefore that in the books of fate and
in the lore of the Etrurians it is written that if ever the water of the
lake of Alba shall increase, the Romans, draining it off in due manner,
shall prevail over the men of Veii, but that before that shall have been
done, the Gods will not desert the walls of the city." And when he had
said this he expounded to them what the due manner of draining off
the water might be. Nevertheless because the man seemed to be of small
authority, upon whom it would not be well to trust in so great a matter,
the Senate determined that messengers should be sent to enquire of the
god at Delphi. In the ninth year of the war these messengers returned,
bringing back this answer from the god.

     "Let not imprisoned chafe the Alban Lake,
     Nor yet to sea its wilful passage take;
     Draw high its gates, but in the boundless plain
     Disperse its power, its pride of speed refrain;
     Then mount the breach, for then by Heaven's decree
     Long-leaguered Veii, Roman, yields to thee.
     Thy warfare done, throng thankful to the shrine,
     Repair thy great default, and pay me that is mine."

When this answer was had the Etrurian soothsayer was held in great
honour, and the magistrates sought his help that all things might be
done duly and in order. Especially they desired to know what rites had
been neglected, and what solemnity left unperformed. As to this they
discovered that magistrates not appointed according to due order had
kept profanely the yearly festival of the Latins on the hills of Alba.
It was commanded therefore that these should resign their office and
that all things should be done afresh.

In the meanwhile there was held a council of the tribes of the Etrurians
at the temple of Voltumna, and when the men of Capena and of Falerii
demanded that the whole nation should join their forces with one
consent, and deliver Veii from being besieged, they were thus answered:
"Before we denied our aid to the men of Veii because they had not asked
our counsel in a matter wherein such counsel was most needed. But now it
is not we but our necessities that deny it, and especially in this part
of Etruria, for there is come hither among us a strange people even the
Gauls, with whom we have neither sure peace nor open war."

And now in the tenth year the games and the great festival of the Latins
had been celebrated anew, and the water had been drained off from the
lake of Alba, and the day was drawing near when Veii should perish. And
because there seemed but one man whom the Gods were keeping to do this
work for Rome, Furius Camillus was chosen Dictator, and Camillus chose
Cornelius Scipio to be Master of the Horse. And now the general being
changed, all things beside seemed to be changed also. First Camillus
went to the camp that he might encourage the soldiers; and afterwards
he raised a new army in the city, neither did any man draw back from
the service. The warriors also of the Latins and of the Hernici came
offering help, to whom the Senate gave public thanks. Then the Dictator
vowed that he would celebrate the Great Games when Veii should have been
taken; also he vowed to build anew and dedicate the temple of Mother
Matuta, which temple King Servius Tullius dedicated at the first. And so
setting forth, and putting to flight on his way the men of Falerii and
of Capena, he came to Veii. There he strengthened the works, shutting up
the enemy more closely than before. Also he commanded that a mine should
be driven under the very citadel of the town. And that this might not be
interrupted on the one hand, nor they that did it spent with labour on
the other, he divided them that made the mine into six companies, and
commanded that each company should labour for six hours. So the work was
carried on without ceasing both by night and by day, till the mine was
driven into the citadel.

After this, seeing that victory was now in his hands, and considering
also that he was about to capture a very wealthy city, wherein was
such spoil as had never before been taken in all the wars of the Roman
people, he feared lest the soldiers should be provoked to anger if he
should seem to grudge them the booty, or the Senate blame him if he
should be too bountiful. Whereupon he wrote a letter in these words:
"The favour of the Gods and my own counsels and the valour of the
soldiers have brought it to pass that Veii will soon be in the
possession of the Roman people. What then, think ye, should be done with
the spoil?" On this matter there was great debate in the Senate; but at
the last it seemed good that proclamation should be made to the people:
"Whosoever will have a share in the spoil of Veii, let him go to the
camp to the Dictator."

This proclamation having been made, a vast multitude set forth, so that
the camp was filled from the one end to the other. Then the Dictator,
after duly performing sacrifice, commanded the soldiers that they should
arm themselves. Afterwards he prayed, speaking these words, "Apollo,
God of Delphi, by whose guidance and bidding I have come to destroy this
city of Veii, to thee I vow a tenth part of the spoil. And do thou also,
Queen Juno, that now dwellest in Veii, follow us, I pray thee, to Rome,
that is now our city and shall soon be thine, where also thou shalt have
a temple worthy of thy magnificence."

When he had thus prayed, seeing that he had an exceedingly great
multitude of men, he attacked the city on all sides at the same time,
because the inhabitants would be thus at less leisure to observe the
peril that was threatening them from the mine. As to the men of Veii,
they knew not that the oracles of the stranger, yea, that their own
prophets, had betrayed them, that the gods of their land were even now
looking to dwell in the temples of Rome, and that even now their
last day had come; neither did they think that their walls had been
undermined, and that their very citadel was full of enemies. With
good heart, therefore, they took up their arms and ran to the walls,
marvelling what strange fury was this that drave the Romans to attack
them thus suddenly, seeing that now for many days none had moved in the
outposts. And some tell this story: that as the king of Veii was doing
sacrifice, an augur that stood by cried aloud, "To him that shall cut in
pieces the inwards of this victim shall be given the victory;" and
that the Roman soldiers, being in the mine below, heard the words, and
breaking open the mine, laid hands on the victim, and carried it to the
Dictator. But whether this be true or no, no man can say; nevertheless
it is certain that at the time appointed a great company of men, chosen
for this end, suddenly came forth from the mine, in the temple of Juno,
which was in the citadel. Of these some took the enemy in the rereward
as they stood upon the walls, and some drew back the bolts of the gates;
and others, seeing that the women and slaves were casting stones and
tiles from the roofs of the houses, began to set fire to the city. And
now, the armed men being driven from off the wall and the gates being
thrown open, there ran in many from the host that was without. And now
there was fighting in all the streets and squares of the city, and
many were slain; till, the men of Veii growing feeble, the Dictator
proclaimed that all such as did not bear arms should be spared. After
this there was no more bloodshed; the inhabitants threw down their arms
and surrendered themselves; and the soldiers, the Dictator permitting
them, scattered to gather spoil. And when the Dictator saw how great
was the spoil and of how precious things, being far beyond all hope and
expectation, he lifted up his hands to heaven and prayed, saying, "If
the good fortune of the Roman people seem over great to any god or man,
I pray that such jealousy may be appeased by my own loss rather than by
