in the row. "Now, yer know," said Mrs. Ruggles impressively, "there
ain't enough decent hats to go round, 'n' if there was I don' know's I'd
let yer wear 'em, for the boys would never think to take 'em off when
they got inside, for they never do--but anyhow, there ain't enough good
ones. Now, look me in the eye. You're only goin' jest round the corner;
you needn't wear no hats, none of yer, 'n' when yer get int' the parlor,
'n' they ask yer ter lay off yer hats, Sarah Maud must speak up 'n' say
it was sech a pleasant evenin' 'n' sech a short walk that yer left yer
hats to home. Now, can yer remember?"

All the little Ruggleses shouted, "Yes, marm!" in chorus.

"What have _you_ got ter do with it?" demanded their mother; "did I
tell _you_ to say it? Warn't I talkin' ter Sarah Maud?"

The little Ruggleses hung their diminished heads. "Yes, marm," they
piped, more discreetly.

"Now we won't leave nothin' to chance; git up, all of ye, an' try
it.--Speak up, Sarah Maud."

Sarah Maud's tongue clove to the roof of her mouth.

"Quick!"

"Ma thought--it was--sech a pleasant hat that we'd--we'd better leave
our short walk to home," recited Sarah Maud, in an agony of mental
effort.

This was too much for the boys. An earthquake of suppressed giggles
swept all along the line.

"Oh, whatever shall I do with yer?" moaned the unhappy mother; "I s'pose
I've got to learn it to yer!"--which she did, word for word, until Sarah
Maud thought she could stand on her head and say it backwards.

"Now, Cornelius, what are _you_ goin' ter say ter make yerself good
comp'ny?"

"Do? Me? Dunno!" said Cornelius, turning pale, with unexpected
responsibility.

"Well, ye ain't goin' to set there like a bump on a log 'thout sayin' a
word ter pay for yer vittles, air ye? Ask Mis' Bird how she's feelin'
this evenin', or if Mr. Bird's hevin' a busy season, or how this kind
o' weather agrees with him, or somethin' like that.--Now we'll make
b'lieve we've got ter the dinner--that won't be so hard, 'cause yer'll
have somethin' to do--it's awful bothersome to stan' round an' act
stylish.--If they have napkins, Sarah Maud down to Peory may put 'em in
their laps, 'n' the rest of ye can tuck 'em in yer necks. Don't eat with
yer fingers--don't grab no vittles off one 'nother's plates; don't reach
out for nothin', but wait till yer asked, 'n' if you never _git_ asked
don't git up and grab it.--Don't spill nothin' on the tablecloth, or
like's not Mis' Bird'll send yer away from the table--'n' I hope she
will if yer do! (Susan! keep your handkerchief in your lap where Peory
can borry it if she needs it, 'n' I hope she'll know when she does need
it, though I don't expect it.) Now we'll try a few things ter see how
they'll go! Mr. Clement, do you eat cramb'ry sarse?"

"Bet yer life!" cried Clem, who in the excitement of the moment had not
taken in the idea exactly and had mistaken this for an ordinary
bosom-of-the-family question.

"Clement McGrill Ruggles, do you mean to tell me that you'd say that to
a dinner-party? I'll give ye one more chance. Mr. Clement, will you take
some of the cramb'ry?"

"Yes, marm, thank ye kindly, if you happen ter have any handy."

"Very good, indeed! But they won't give yer two tries to-night,--yer
just remember that!--Miss Peory, do you speak for white or dark meat?"

"I ain't perticler as ter color,--anything that nobody else wants will
suit me," answered Peory with her best air.

"First-rate! Nobody could speak more genteel than that. Miss Kitty, will
you have hard or soft sarse with your pudden?"

"Hard or soft? Oh! A little of both, if you please, an' I'm much
obliged," said Kitty, bowing with decided ease and grace; at which all
the other Ruggleses pointed the finger of shame at her, and Peter
_grunted_ expressively, that their meaning might not be mistaken.

"You just stop your gruntin', Peter Ruggles; that warn't greedy, that
was all right. I wish I could git it inter your heads that it ain't so
much what yer say, as the way you say it. And don't keep starin'
cross-eyed at your necktie pin, or I'll take it out 'n' sew it on to
Clem or Cornelius: Sarah Maud'll keep her eye on it, 'n' if it turns
broken side out she'll tell yer. Gracious! I shouldn't think you'd ever
seen nor worn no jool'ry in your life.--Eily, you an' Larry's too
little to train, so you just look at the rest an' do's they do, 'n' the
Lord have mercy on ye 'n' help ye to act decent! Now, is there anything
more ye'd like to practice?"

"If yer tell me one more thing, I can't set up an' eat," said Peter
gloomily; "I'm so cram full o' manners now I'm ready ter bust, 'thout no
dinner at all."

"Me too," chimed in Cornelius.

"Well, I'm sorry for yer both," rejoined Mrs. Ruggles sarcastically; "if
the 'mount o' manners yer've got on hand now troubles ye, you're
dreadful easy hurt! Now, Sarah Maud, after dinner, about once in so
often, you must git up 'n' say, 'I guess we'd better be goin';' 'n' if
they say, 'Oh, no, set a while longer,' yer can set; but if they don't
say nothin' you've got ter get up 'n' go.--Now hev yer got that int' yer
head?"

"_About once in so often!_" Could any words in the language be fraught
with more terrible and wearing uncertainty?

"Well," answered Sarah Maud mournfully, "seems as if this whole
dinner-party set right square on top o' me! Mebbe I could manage my own
manners, but to manage nine mannerses is worse 'n staying to home!"

"Oh, don't fret," said her mother, good-naturedly, now that the lesson
was over; "I guess you'll git along. I wouldn't mind if folks would only
say, 'Oh, childern will be childern;' but they won't. They'll say, 'Land
o' Goodness, who fetched them childern up?'--It's quarter past five, 'n'
yer can go now:--remember 'bout the hats,--don't all talk ter
once,--Susan, lend yer han'k'chief ter Peory,--Peter, don't keep
screwin' yer scarf-pin,--Cornelius, hold yer head up straight,--Sarah
Maud, don't take yer eyes off o' Larry, 'n' Larry you keep holt o' Sarah
Maud 'n' do jest as she says,--'n' whatever you do, all of yer, never
forget for one second that yer mother was a McGrill."




VI

"WHEN THE PIE WAS OPENED,
THE BIRDS BEGAN TO SING!"


The children went out of the back door quietly, and were presently
lost to sight, Sarah Maud slipping and stumbling along
absent-mindedly, as she recited rapidly under her breath,
"Itwassuchapleasantevenin'n'suchashortwalk, that
wethoughtwe'dleaveourhatstohome.--Itwassucha
pleasantevenin'n'suchashortwalk,thatwethoughtwe'd leaveourhatstohome."

Peter rang the door-bell, and presently a servant admitted them, and,
whispering something in Sarah's ear, drew her downstairs into the
kitchen. The other Ruggleses stood in horror-stricken groups as the door
closed behind their commanding officer; but there was no time for
reflection, for a voice from above was heard, saying, "Come right up
stairs, please!"

    "Theirs not to make reply,
    Theirs not to reason why,
    Theirs but to do or die."

Accordingly they walked upstairs, and Elfrida, the nurse, ushered them
into a room more splendid than anything they had ever seen. But, oh woe!
where was Sarah Maud! and was it Fate that Mrs. Bird should say, at
once, "Did you lay your hats in the hall?" Peter felt himself elected by
circumstance the head of the family, and, casting one imploring look at
tongue-tied Susan, standing next him, said huskily, "It was so very
pleasant--that--that"----"That we hadn't good hats enough to go 'round,"
put in little Susan, bravely, to help him out, and then froze with
horror that the ill-fated words had slipped off her tongue.

However, Mrs. Bird said, pleasantly, "Of course you wouldn't wear hats
such a short distance--I forgot when I asked. Now will you come right in
to Miss Carol's room? She is so anxious to see you."

Just then Sarah Maud came up the back stairs, so radiant with joy from
her secret interview with the cook that Peter could have pinched her
with a clear conscience; and Carol gave them a joyful welcome. "But
where is Baby Larry?" she cried, looking over the group with searching
eye. "Didn't he come?"

"Larry! Larry!" Good gracious, where was Larry? They were all sure that
he had come in with them, for Susan remembered scolding him for tripping
over the door-mat. Uncle Jack went into convulsions of laughter. "Are
you sure there were nine of you?" he asked, merrily.

"I think so, sir," said Peoria, timidly; "but anyhow, there was Larry;"
and she showed signs of weeping.

"Oh, well, cheer up!" cried Uncle Jack. "Probably he's not lost--only
mislaid. I'll go and find him before you can say Jack Robinson!"

"I'll go, too, if you please, sir," said Sarah Maud, "for it was my
place to mind him, an' if he's lost I can't relish my vittles!"

The other Ruggleses stood rooted to the floor. Was this a dinner-party,
forsooth; and if so, why were such things ever spoken of as festive
occasions?

Sarah Maud went out through the hall, calling, "Larry! Larry!" and
without any interval of suspense a thin voice piped up from below, "Here
I be!"

The truth was that Larry, being deserted by his natural guardian,
dropped behind the rest, and wriggled into the hat-tree to wait for her,
