There was a little joke between them that he was a magician, and so
could do anything he liked; and it was one of his pleasures to invent
plans to surprise her with enjoyments she had not thought of. Scarcely a
day passed in which he did not do something new for her. Sometimes she
found new flowers in her room; sometimes a fanciful little gift tucked
into some odd corner; sometimes a new book on her pillow;--once as they
sat together in the evening they heard the scratch of a heavy paw on the
door of the room, and when Sara went to find out what it was, there
stood a great dog--a splendid Russian boar-hound with a grand silver and
gold collar. Stooping to read the inscription upon the collar, Sara was
delighted to read the words: "I am Boris; I serve the Princess Sara."

Then there was a sort of fairy nursery arranged for the entertainment of
the juvenile members of the Large Family, who were always coming to see
Sara and the Lascar and the monkey. Sara was as fond of the Large Family
as they were of her. She soon felt as if she were a member of it, and
the companionship of the healthy, happy children was very good for her.
All the children rather looked up to her and regarded her as the
cleverest and most brilliant of creatures--particularly after it was
discovered that she not only knew stories of every kind, and could
invent new ones at a moment's notice, but that she could help with
lessons, and speak French and German, and discourse with the Lascar in
Hindustani.

It was rather a painful experience for Miss Minchin to watch her
ex-pupil's fortunes, as she had the daily opportunity to do, and to feel
that she had made a serious mistake, from a business point of view. She
had even tried to retrieve it by suggesting that Sara's education should
be continued under her care, and had gone to the length of making an
appeal to the child herself.

"I have always been very fond of you," she said.

Then Sara fixed her eyes upon her and gave her one of her odd looks.

"Have you?" she answered.

"Yes," said Miss Minchin. "Amelia and I have always said you were the
cleverest child we had with us, and I am sure we could make you
happy--as a parlor boarder."

Sara thought of the garret and the day her ears were boxed,--and of that
other day, that dreadful, desolate day when she had been told that she
belonged to nobody; that she had no home and no friends,--and she kept
her eyes fixed on Miss Minchin's face.

"You know why I would not stay with you," she said.

And it seems probable that Miss Minchin did, for after that simple
answer she had not the boldness to pursue the subject. She merely sent
in a bill for the expense of Sara's education and support, and she made
it quite large enough. And because Mr. Carrisford thought Sara would
wish it paid, it was paid. When Mr. Carmichael paid it he had a brief
interview with Miss Minchin in which he expressed his opinion with much
clearness and force; and it is quite certain that Miss Minchin did not
enjoy the conversation.

Sara had been about a month with Mr. Carrisford, and had begun to
realize that her happiness was not a dream, when one night the Indian
Gentleman saw that she sat a long time with her cheek on her hand
looking at the fire.

"What are you 'supposing,' Sara?" he asked. Sara looked up with a bright
color on her cheeks.

"I _was_ 'supposing,'" she said; "I was remembering that hungry day, and
a child I saw."

"But there were a great many hungry days," said the Indian Gentleman,
with a rather sad tone in his voice. "Which hungry day was it?"

"I forgot you didn't know," said Sara. "It was the day I found the
things in my garret."

And then she told him the story of the bun-shop, and the fourpence, and
the child who was hungrier than herself; and somehow as she told it,
though she told it very simply indeed, the Indian Gentleman found it
necessary to shade his eyes with his hand and look down at the floor.

"And I was 'supposing' a kind of plan," said Sara, when she had
finished; "I was thinking I would like to do something."

"What is it?" said her guardian in a low tone. "You may do anything you
like to do, Princess."

"I was wondering," said Sara,--"you know you say I have a great deal of
money--and I was wondering if I could go and see the bun-woman and tell
her that if, when hungry children--particularly on those dreadful
days--come and sit on the steps or look in at the window, she would just
call them in and give them something to eat, she might send the bills to
me and I would pay them--could I do that?"

"You shall do it to-morrow morning," said the Indian Gentleman.

"Thank you," said Sara; "you see I know what it is to be hungry, and it
is very hard when one can't even _pretend_ it away."

"Yes, yes, my dear," said the Indian Gentleman. "Yes, it must be. Try to
forget it. Come and sit on this footstool near my knee, and only
remember you are a princess."

"Yes," said Sara, "and I can give buns and bread to the Populace." And
she went and sat on the stool, and the Indian Gentleman (he used to like
her to call him that, too, sometimes,--in fact very often) drew her
small, dark head down upon his knee and stroked her hair.

[Illustration: "HE DREW HER SMALL DARK HEAD DOWN UPON HIS KNEE AND
STROKED HER HAIR."]

The next morning a carriage drew up before the door of the baker's shop,
and a gentleman and a little girl got out,--oddly enough, just as the
bun-woman was putting a tray of smoking hot buns into the window. When
Sara entered the shop the woman turned and looked at her and, leaving
the buns, came and stood behind the counter. For a moment she looked at
Sara very hard indeed, and then her good-natured face lighted up.

"I'm that sure I remember you, miss," she said. "And yet----"

"Yes," said Sara, "once you gave me six buns for fourpence, and----"

"And you gave five of 'em to a beggar-child," said the woman. "I've
always remembered it. I couldn't make it out at first. I beg pardon,
sir, but there's not many young people that notices a hungry face in
that way, and I've thought of it many a time. Excuse the liberty, miss,
but you look rosier and better than you did that day."

"I am better, thank you," said Sara, "and--and I am happier, and I have
come to ask you to do something for me."

"Me, miss!" exclaimed the woman, "why, bless you, yes, miss! What can I
do?"

And then Sara made her little proposal, and the woman listened to it
with an astonished face.

"Why, bless me!" she said, when she had heard it all. "Yes, miss, it'll
be a pleasure to me to do it. I am a working woman, myself, and can't
afford to do much on my own account, and there's sights of trouble on
every side; but if you'll excuse me, I'm bound to say I've given many a
bit of bread away since that wet afternoon, just along o' thinkin' of
you. An' how wet an' cold you was, an' how you looked,--an' yet you give
away your hot buns as if you was a princess."

The Indian Gentleman smiled involuntarily, and Sara smiled a little too.
"She looked so hungry," she said. "She was hungrier than I was."

"She was starving," said the woman. "Many's the time she's told me of it
since--how she sat there in the wet, and felt as if a wolf was a-tearing
at her poor young insides."

"Oh, have you seen her since then?" exclaimed Sara. "Do you know where
she is?"

"I know!" said the woman. "Why, she's in that there back room now, miss,
an' has been for a month, an' a decent, well-meaning girl she's going to
turn out, an' such a help to me in the day shop, an' in the kitchen, as
you'd scarce believe, knowing how she's lived."

She stepped to the door of the little back parlor and spoke; and the
next minute a girl came out and followed her behind the counter. And
actually it was the beggar-child, clean and neatly clothed, and looking
as if she had not been hungry for a long time. She looked shy, but she
had a nice face, now that she was no longer a savage; and the wild look
had gone from her eyes. And she knew Sara in an instant, and stood and
looked at her as if she could never look enough.

"You see," said the woman, "I told her to come here when she was hungry,
and when she'd come I'd give her odd jobs to do, an' I found she was
willing, an' somehow I got to like her; an' the end of it was I've given
her a place an' a home, an' she helps me, an' behaves as well, an' is as
thankful as a girl can be. Her name's Anne--she has no other."

The two children stood and looked at each other a few moments. In Sara's
eyes a new thought was growing.

"I'm glad you have such a good home," she said. "Perhaps Mrs. Brown will
let you give the buns and bread to the children--perhaps you would like
to do it--because you know what it is to be hungry, too."

"Yes, miss," said the girl.

And somehow Sara felt as if she understood her, though the girl said
nothing more, and only stood still and looked, and looked after her as
she went out of the shop and got into the carriage and drove away.


                               THE END.




                        _BY THE SAME AUTHOR._


                       LITTLE LORD FAUNTLEROY.

                          SQUARE 8vo, $2.00.

[Illustration]

"_In 'Little Lord Fauntleroy' we gain another charming child to add to
our gallery of juvenile heroes and heroines; one who teaches a great
lesson with such truth and sweetness, that we part with him with real
regret when the episode is over._"
--LOUISA M. ALCOTT.

                          *       *       *

                             SARA CREWE.

                          SQUARE 8vo, $1.00.

[Illustration]

"_Everybody was in love with 'Little Lord Fauntleroy,' and I think all
the world and the rest of mankind will be in love with 'Sara Crewe.' The
tale is so tender, so wise, so human, that I wish every girl in America
could read it, for I think every one would be made better by it._"
--LOUISE CHANDLER MOULTON.

                          *       *       *

              LITTLE SAINT ELIZABETH, AND OTHER STORIES.

                          SQUARE 8vo, $1.50.

"_The pretty tale has for its heroine a little French girl brought up in
an old chateau in Normandy by an aunt who is a recluse and devote. A
child of this type transplanted suddenly to the realistic atmosphere of
New York must inevitably have much to suffer. The quaint little figure
blindly trying to guess the riddle of duty under these unfamiliar
conditions is pathetic, and Mrs. Burnett touches it in with delicate
strokes._"
--SUSAN COOLIDGE.

_Illustrated by REGINALD B. BIRCH._





                  _SCRIBNER'S BOOKS FOR THE YOUNG._




                MRS. BURNETT'S THREE FAMOUS JUVENILES.

          =Uniform in style and Illustrated by R. B. Birch.=

                _A NEW BOOK FOR THE CHRISTMAS SEASON._

              LITTLE SAINT ELIZABETH AND OTHER STORIES.

                     BY FRANCES HODGSON BURNETT.

                            [Illustration]

        =With 12 new full-page Drawings by Reginald B. Birch.=

                 _One volume, square 8vo,     $1.50._

_FROM SUSAN COOLIDGE:_

"The pretty tale from which the book borrows its name has for its
heroine a little French girl brought up in an old chateau in Normandy,
by an aunt who is a recluse and _devote_. A child of this type,
transplanted suddenly while still in childhood to the realistic
atmosphere of prosperous New York, must inevitably have much to suffer.
She is puzzled; she is lonely; she has no one to direct her conscience.
The quaint little figure, blindly trying to guess the riddle of duty
under these unfamiliar conditions, is pathetic, and Mrs. Burnett touches
it in with delicate strokes. The stories are prettily illustrated by
Birch."

                  *       *       *       *       *

                       LITTLE LORD FAUNTLEROY.

                            [Illustration]

           =Beautifully Illustrated by Reginald B. Birch.=

                  _One volume, square 8vo,  $2.00._

                       _FROM LOUISA M. ALCOTT:_

"In 'Little Lord Fauntleroy' we gain another charming child to add to
our gallery of juvenile heroes and heroines; one who teaches a great
lesson with such truth and sweetness that we part with him with real
regret when the episode is over."

                  *       *       *       *       *

                             SARA CREWE;

                _OR, WHAT HAPPENED AT MISS MINCHIN'S._

                            [Illustration]

            =Richly and Fully Illustrated by R. B. Birch.=

                  _One volume, square 8vo,   $1.00._

                   _FROM LOUISE CHANDLER MOULTON:_

"Everybody was in love with 'Little Lord Fauntleroy,' and I think all
the world and the rest of mankind will be in love with 'Sara Crewe.' I
wish every girl in America could read it."

                  *       *       *       *       *

                    TWO BOOKS FOR BOYS AND GIRLS.

Mr. Beard has added sixty new drawings to his "American Boy's Handy
Book," to illustrate the new games, sports, and mechanical contrivances
which he has incorporated in this latest edition. The Misses Beard's
companion volume, "The American Girl's Handy Book," is reduced in price,
all the features being retained. Both are profusely illustrated with
hundreds of pictures and designs, and in their new dress will be prime
favorites with holiday buyers.

                          *       *       *

                    THE AMERICAN BOY'S HANDY BOOK;

                  _OR, WHAT TO DO AND HOW TO DO IT_.

                         BY DANIEL C. BEARD.

             =With over 360 Illustrations by the Author.=

                 _One volume, square 8vo,      $2.00_

[Illustration]

"The book has this great advantage over its predecessors, that most of
the games, tricks, and other amusements described in it are new. It
treats of sports adapted to all seasons of the year; it is practical,
and it is well illustrated."
--_The New York Tribune._

"It tells boys how to make all kinds of things--boats, traps, toys,
puzzles, aquariums, fishing tackle; how to tie knots, splice ropes, to
make bird-calls, sleds, blow-guns, balloons; how to rear wild birds, to
train dogs, and do the thousand and one things that boys take delight
in. The book is illustrated in such a way that no mistake can be made."
--_The Indianapolis Journal._

                          *       *       *

                   THE AMERICAN GIRL'S HANDY BOOK;

               _OR, HOW TO AMUSE YOURSELF AND OTHERS_.
