pigs--fat, roly-poly and cute--they scampered off a little distance and
sat down to think about their new condition.

Ozma drew a long breath and coming from behind the tree she said:

"That is much better, Wiz, for such pigs as these must be quite
harmless. No one need now fear the mischievous Imps."

"I intended to transform them into mice," replied the Wizard, "but in my
excitement I worked the wrong magic. However, unless the horrid
creatures behave themselves hereafter, they are liable to be killed and
eaten. They would make good chops, sausages or roasts."

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

But the Imps were now angry and had no intention of behaving. As Ozma
and the little Wizard turned to resume their journey, the three pigs
rushed forward, dashed between their legs, and tripped them up, so that
both lost their balance and toppled over, clinging to one another. As
the Wizard tried to get up he was tripped again and fell across the back
of the third pig, which carried him on a run far down the valley until
it dumped the little man in the river. Ozma had been sprawled upon the
ground but found she was not hurt, so she picked herself up and ran to
the assistance of the Wizard, reaching him just as he was crawling out
of the river, gasping for breath and dripping with water. The girl could
not help laughing at his woeful appearance. But he had no sooner wiped
the wet from his eyes than one of the impish pigs tripped him again and
sent him into the river for a second bath. The pigs tried to trip Ozma,
too, but she ran around a stump and so managed to keep out of their way.
So the Wizard scrambled out of the water again and picked up a sharp
stick to defend himself. Then he mumbled a magic mutter which instantly
dried his clothes, after which he hurried to assist Ozma. The pigs were
afraid of the sharp stick and kept away from it.

"This won't do," said the Princess. "We have accomplished nothing, for
the pig Imps would annoy travelers as much as the real Imps. Transform
them into something else, Wiz."

[Illustration]

The Wizard took time to think. Then he transformed the white pigs into
three blue doves.

"Doves," said he, "are the most harmless things in the world."

But scarcely had he spoken when the doves flew at them and tried to peck
out their eyes. When they endeavored to shield their eyes with their
hands, two of the doves bit the Wizard's fingers and another caught the
pretty pink ear of the Princess in its bill and gave it such a cruel
tweak that she cried out in pain and threw her skirt over her head.

"These birds are worse than pigs, Wizard," she called to her companion.
"Nothing is harmless that is animated by impudent anger or impertinent
mischief. You must transform the Imps into something that is not alive."

The Wizard was pretty busy, just then, driving off the birds, but he
managed to open his bag of magic and find a charm which instantly
transformed the doves into three buttons. As they fell to the ground he
picked them up and smiled with satisfaction. The tin button was Imp
Olite, the brass button was Imp Udent and the lead button was Imp
Ertinent. These buttons the Wizard placed in a little box which he put
in his jacket pocket.

[Illustration]

"Now," said he, "the Imps cannot annoy travelers, for we shall carry
them back with us to the Emerald City."

"But we dare not use the buttons," said Ozma, smiling _once more_ now
that the danger was over.

"Why not?" asked the Wizard. "I intend to sew them upon my coat and
watch them carefully. The spirits of the Imps are still in the buttons,
and after a time they will repent and be sorry for their naughtiness.
Then they will decide to be very good in the future. When they feel that
way, the tin button will turn to silver and the brass to gold, while the
lead button will become aluminum. I shall then restore them to their
proper forms, changing their names to pretty names instead of the ugly
ones they used to bear. Thereafter the three Imps will become good
citizens of the Land of Oz and I think you will find they will prove
faithful subjects of our beloved Princess Ozma."

[Illustration]

"Ah, that is magic well worthwhile," exclaimed Ozma, well pleased.
"There is no doubt, my friend, but that you are a very clever Wizard."

[Illustration]




JACK PUMPKINHEAD AND THE SAWHORSE


In a room of the Royal Palace of the Emerald City of Oz hangs a Magic
Picture, in which are shown all the important scenes that transpire in
those fairy dominions. The scenes shift constantly and by watching them,
Ozma, the girl Ruler, is able to discover events taking place in any
part of her kingdom.

One day she saw in her Magic Picture that a little girl and a little boy
had wandered together into a great, gloomy forest at the far west of Oz
and had become hopelessly lost. Their friends were seeking them in the
wrong direction and unless Ozma came to their rescue the little ones
would never be found in time to save them from starving.

So the Princess sent a message to Jack Pumpkinhead and asked him to come
to the palace. This personage, one of the queerest of the queer
inhabitants of Oz, was an old friend and companion of Ozma. His form was
made of rough sticks fitted together and dressed in ordinary clothes.
His head was a pumpkin with a face carved upon it, and was set on top a
sharp stake which formed his neck.

Jack was active, good-natured and a general favorite; but his pumpkin
head was likely to spoil with age, so in order to secure a good supply
of heads he grew a big field of pumpkins and lived in the middle of it,
his house being a huge pumpkin hollowed out. Whenever he needed a new
head he picked a pumpkin, carved a face on it and stuck it upon the
stake of his neck, throwing away the old head as of no further use.

The day Ozma sent for him Jack was in prime condition and was glad to be
of service in rescuing the lost children. Ozma made him a map, showing
just where the forest was and how to get to it and the paths he must
take to reach the little ones. Then she said:

[Illustration]

"You'd better ride the Sawhorse, for he is swift and intelligent and
will help you accomplish your task."

"All right," answered Jack, and went to the royal stable to tell the
Sawhorse to be ready for the trip.

This remarkable animal was not unlike Jack Pumpkinhead in form, although
so different in shape. Its body was a log, with four sticks stuck into
it for legs. A branch at one end of the log served as a tail, while in
the other end was chopped a gash that formed a mouth. Above this were
two small knots that did nicely for eyes. The Sawhorse was the favorite
steed of Ozma and to prevent its wooden legs from wearing out she had
them shod with plates of gold.

Jack said "Good morning" to the Sawhorse and placed upon the creature's
back a saddle of purple leather, studded with jewels.

"Where now?" asked the horse, blinking its knot eyes at Jack.

"We're going to rescue two babes in the wood," was the reply. Then he
climbed into the saddle and the wooden animal pranced out of the stable,
through the streets of the Emerald City and out upon the highway leading
to the western forest where the children were lost.

Small though he was, the Sawhorse was swift and untiring. By nightfall
they were in the far west and quite close to the forest they sought.
They passed the night standing quietly by the roadside. They needed no
food, for their wooden bodies never became hungry; nor did they sleep,
because they never tired. At daybreak they continued their journey and
soon reached the forest.

Jack now examined the map Ozma had given him and found the right path to
take, which the Sawhorse obediently followed. Underneath the trees all
was silent and gloomy and Jack beguiled the way by whistling gayly as
the Sawhorse trotted along.

[Illustration]

The paths branched so many times and in so many different ways that the
Pumpkinhead was often obliged to consult Ozma's map, and finally the
Sawhorse became suspicious.

"Are you sure you are right?" it asked.

"Of course," answered Jack. "Even a Pumpkinhead whose brains are seeds
can follow so clear a map as this. Every path is plainly marked, and
here is a cross where the children are."

Finally they reached a place, in the very heart of the forest, where
they came upon the lost boy and girl. But they found the two children
bound fast to the trunk of a big tree, at the foot of which they were
sitting.

When the rescuers arrived, the little girl was sobbing bitterly and the
