"You don't know that," that said, and twirled that's tail round.

"Well," says she, "that won't do no harm, if that don't do no good," and
she upped and told about the pies and the skeins and everything.

"This is what I'll do," says the little black thing, "I'll come to your
window every morning and take the flax and bring it spun at night."

"What's your pay?" says she.

That looked out of the corner of that's eyes, and that said, "I'll give
you three guesses every night to guess my name, and if you haven't
guessed it before the month's up you shalt be mine."

Well, she thought she'd be sure to guess that's name before the month
was up. "All right," says she, "I agree."

"All right," that says, and law! how that twirled that's tail.

Well, the next day her husband took her into the room, and there was the
flax and the day's food.

"Now, there's the flax," says he, "and if that ain't spun up this night,
off goes your head." And then he went out and locked the door.

He'd hardly gone when there was a knocking against the window. She upped
and she oped it, and there sure enough was the little old thing sitting
on the ledge.

"Where's the flax?" says he.

"Here it be," says she. And she gave it to him.

Well, come the evening a knocking came again to the window. She upped
and she oped it, and there was the little old thing with five skeins of
flax on his arm.

"Here it be," says he, and he gave it to her. "Now, what's my name?"
says he. "What, is that Bill?" says she. "Noo, that ain't," says he, and
he twirled his tail. "Is that Ned?" says she. "Noo, that ain't," says
he, and he twirled his tail. "Well, is that Mark?" says she. "Noo, that
ain't," says he, and he twirled his tail harder, and away he flew.

Well, when her husband came in, there were the five skeins ready for
him. "I see I shan't have to kill you to-night, my dear," says he;
"you'll have your food and your flax in the morning," says he, and away
he goes.

Well, every day the flax and the food were brought, and every day that
there little black impet used to come mornings and evenings. And all the
day the girl sat trying to think of names to say to it when it came at
night. But she never hit on the right one. And as it got towards the end
of the month, the impet began to look so maliceful, and that twirled
that's tail faster and faster each time she gave a guess.

At last it came to the last day but one. The impet came at night along
with the five skeins, and that said, "What, ain't you got my name yet?"
"Is that Nicodemus?" says she. "Noo, 't ain't," that says. "Is that
Sammle?" says she. "Noo, 't ain't," that says. "A-well, is that
Methusalem?" says she. "Noo, 't ain't that neither," that says.

Then that looks at her with that's eyes like a coal o' fire, and that
says, "Woman, there's only to-morrow night, and then you'll be mine!"
And away it flew.

Well, she felt that horrid. However she heard the king coming along the
passage. In he came, and when he sees the five skeins, says he, "Well,
my dear, I don't see but what you'll have your skeins ready to-morrow
night as well and as I reckon I shan't have to kill you, I'll have
supper in here to-night." So they brought supper and another stool for
him, and down the two sat.

Well, he hadn't eaten but a mouthful or so, when he stops and begins to
laugh.

"What is it?" says she.

"A-why," says he, "I was out a-hunting to-day, and I got away to a place
in the wood I'd never seen before. And there was an old chalk-pit. And I
heard a kind of a sort of humming. So I got off my hobby, and I went
right quiet to the pit, and I looked down. Well, what should there be
but the funniest little black thing you ever set eyes on. And what was
that doing, but that had a little spinning-wheel, and that was spinning
wonderful fast, and twirling that's tail. And as that span that sang:

        "Nimmy nimmy not
        My name's Tom Tit Tot."

Well, when the girl heard this, she felt as if she could have jumped out
of her skin for joy, but she didn't say a word.

Next day that there little thing looked so maliceful when he came for
the flax. And when night came she heard that knocking against the window
panes. She oped the window, and that come right in on the ledge. That
was grinning from ear to ear, and Oo! that's tail was twirling round so
fast.

"What's my name?" that says, as that gave her the skeins. "Is that
Solomon?" she says, pretending to be afeard. "Noo, 't ain't," that says,
and that came further into the room. "Well, is that Zebedee?" says she
again. "Noo, 't ain't," says the impet. And then that laughed and
twirled that's tail till you couldn't hardly see it.

"Take time, woman," that says; "next guess, and you're mine." And that
stretched out that's black hands at her.

Well, she backed a step or two, and she looked at it, and then she
laughed out and says she, pointing her finger at it:

        "Nimmy nimmy not
        Your name's Tom Tit Tot."

Well, when that heard her, that gave an awful shriek and away that flew
into the dark, and she never saw it any more.



161

        In 1697 the French author Charles Perrault
        (1628-1703) published a little collection of
        eight tales in prose familiarly known as _The
        Tales of Mother Goose_ (_Contes de Ma Mere
        l'Oye_). These tales were "The Fairies" ("Toads
        and Diamonds"), "The Sleeping Beauty in the
        Wood," "Bluebeard," "Little Red Riding Hood,"
        "Puss-in-Boots," "Cinderella," "Rique with the
        Tuft," and "Little Thumb." Perrault was
        prominent as a scholar and may have felt it
        beneath his dignity to write nursery tales. At
        any rate he declared the stories were copied
        from tellings by his eleven-year-old son. But
        Perrault's fairies have not only saved him from
        oblivion: in countless editions and
        translations they have won him immortality. The
        charming literary form of his versions,
        "Englished by R. S., Gent," about 1730, soon
        established them in place of the more somber
        English popular versions. It is practically
        certain that the name Mother Goose, as that of
        the genial old lady who presides over the light
        literature of the nursery, was established by
        the work of Perrault.

        "Little Red Riding Hood," a likely candidate
        for first place in the affections of childish
        story-lovers, is here given in its "correct"
        form. Many versions are so constructed as to
        have happy endings, either by having the
        woodmen appear in the nick of time to kill the
        wolf before any damage is done, or by having
        the grandmother and Little Red Riding Hood
        restored to life after recovering them from the
        "innards" of the wolf. Andrew Lang thinks that
        the tale as it stands is merely meant to waken
        a child's terror and pity, after the fashion of
        the old Greek tragedies, and that the narrator
        properly ends it by making a pounce, in the
        character of wolf, at the little listener. That
        this was the correct "business" in Scotch
        nurseries is borne out by a sentence in
        Chambers' _Popular Rhymes of Scotland_: "The
        old nurse's imitation of the _gnash, gnash_,
        which she played off upon the youngest urchin
        lying in her lap, was electric."


LITTLE RED RIDING-HOOD

Once upon a time there lived in a certain village a little country girl,
the prettiest creature that was ever seen. Her mother was excessively
fond of her; and her grandmother doted on her still more. This good
woman got made for her a little red riding-hood, which became the girl
so extremely well that everybody called her Little Red Riding-Hood.

One day her mother, having made some custards, said to her, "Go, my
dear, and see how thy grandmamma does, for I hear that she has been very
ill; carry her a custard and this little pot of butter."

Little Red Riding-Hood set out immediately to go to her grandmother, who
lived in another village.

As she was going through the wood, she met with Gaffer Wolf, who had a
very great mind to eat her up, but he durst not because of some
fagot-makers hard by in the forest. He asked her whither she was going.
The poor child, who did not know that it was dangerous to stay and hear
a wolf talk, said to him, "I am going to see my grandmamma and carry her
a custard and a little pot of butter from my mamma."

"Does she live far off?" said the wolf.

"Oh! aye," answered Little Red Riding-Hood, "it is beyond the mill you
see there at the first house in the village."

"Well," said the wolf, "and I'll go and see her too. I'll go this way
and you go that, and we shall see who will be there soonest."

The wolf began to run as fast as he could, taking the nearest way, and
the little girl went by that farthest about, diverting herself by
gathering nuts, running after butterflies, and making nosegays of such
little flowers as she met with. The wolf was not long before he got to
the old woman's house. He knocked at the door--tap, tap.

"Who's there?"

"Your grandchild, Little Red Riding-Hood," replied the wolf,
counterfeiting her voice, "who has brought you a custard and a pot of
butter sent you by mamma."

The good grandmother, who was in bed because she was somewhat ill, cried
out, "Pull the bobbin and the latch will go up."

The wolf pulled the bobbin and the door opened, and then presently he
fell upon the good woman and ate her up in a moment, for it was above
three days that he had not touched a bit. He then shut the door and went
into the grandmother's bed, expecting Little Red Riding-Hood, who came
some time afterward and knocked at the door--tap, tap.

"Who's there?"

Little Red Riding-Hood, hearing the big voice of the wolf, was at first
afraid, but believing her grandmother had got a cold and was hoarse,
answered, "'Tis your grandchild, Little Red Riding-Hood, who has brought
you a custard and a little pot of butter mamma sends you."

The wolf cried out to her, softening his voice as much as he could,
"Pull the bobbin and the latch will go up."

Little Red Riding-Hood pulled the bobbin and the door opened.

The wolf, seeing her come in, said to her, hiding himself under the
bedclothes, "Put the custard and the little pot of butter upon the stool
and come and lie down with me."

Little Red Riding-Hood undressed herself and went into bed, where, being
greatly amazed to see how her grandmother looked in her night-clothes,
she said to her, "Grandmamma, what great arms you have got!"

"That is the better to hug thee, my dear."

"Grandmamma, what great legs you have got!"

"That is to run the better, my child."

"Grandmamma, what great ears you have got!"

"That is to hear the better, my child."

"Grandmamma, what great eyes you have got!"

"It is to see the better, my child."

"Grandmamma, what great teeth you have got!"

"That is to eat thee up."

And saying these words, this wicked wolf fell upon Little Red
Riding-Hood and ate her all up.



162

        Because many modern teachers are distressed at
        the tragedy of the real story of "Little Red
        Riding Hood" as just given, they prefer some
        softened form of the tale. The Grimm version,
        "Little Red Cap," is generally used by those
        who insist on a happy ending. There Little Red
        Riding Hood and her grandmother are both
        recovered and the wicked wolf destroyed. The
        story that follows is from a modern French
        author, Charles Marelles, and is given in the
        translation found in Lang's _Red Fairy Book_.
        In it the events are dramatically imagined in
        detail, even if the writer does turn it all
        into a sunflower myth at the close.


TRUE HISTORY OF LITTLE GOLDEN HOOD

You know the tale of poor Little Red Riding-Hood, that the wolf deceived
and devoured, with her cake, her little butter can, and her grandmother.
Well, the true story happened quite differently, as we know now. And
first of all, the little girl was called and is still called Little
Golden Hood; secondly, it was not she, nor the good granddame, but the
wicked wolf who was, in the end, caught and devoured.

Only listen.

The story begins something like the tale.

There was once a little peasant girl, pretty and nice as a star in its
season. Her real name was Blanchette, but she was more often called
Little Golden Hood, on account of a wonderful little cloak with a hood,
gold and fire colored, which she always had on. This little hood was
given her by her grandmother, who was so old that she did not know her
age; it ought to bring her good luck, for it was made of a ray of
sunshine, she said. And as the good old woman was considered something
of a witch, every one thought the little hood rather bewitched too.

And so it was, as you will see.

One day the mother said to the child: "Let us see, my little Golden
Hood, if you know now how to find your way by yourself. You shall take
this good piece of cake to your grandmother for a Sunday treat
to-morrow. You will ask her how she is, and come back at once, without
stopping to chatter on the way with people you don't know. Do you quite
understand?"

"I quite understand," replied Blanchette gayly. And off she went with
the cake, quite proud of her errand.

But the grandmother lived in another village, and there was a big wood
to cross before getting there. At a turn of the road under the trees
suddenly, "Who goes there?"

"Friend Wolf."

He had seen the child start alone, and the villain was waiting to devour
her, when at the same moment he perceived some wood-cutters who might
observe him, and he changed his mind. Instead of falling upon Blanchette
he came frisking up to her like a good dog.

"'Tis you! my nice Little Golden Hood," said he. So the little girl
stops to talk with the wolf, whom, for all that, she did not know in the
least.

"You know me, then!" said she. "What is your name?"

"My name is friend Wolf. And where are you going thus, my pretty one,
with your little basket on your arm?"

"I am going to my grandmother to take her a good piece of cake for her
Sunday treat to-morrow."

"And where does she live, your grandmother?"

"She lives at the other side of the wood in the first house in the
village, near the windmill, you know."

"Ah! yes! I know now," said the wolf. "Well, that's just where I'm
going. I shall get there before you, no doubt, with your little bits of
legs, and I'll tell her you're coming to see her; then she'll wait for
you."

Thereupon the wolf cuts across the wood, and in five minutes arrives at
the grandmother's house.

He knocks at the door: toc, toc.

No answer.

He knocks louder.

Nobody.

Then he stands up on end, puts his two fore paws on the latch, and the
door opens.

Not a soul in the house.

The old woman had risen early to sell herbs in the town, and had gone
off in such haste that she had left her bed unmade, with her great
night-cap on the pillow.

"Good!" said the wolf to himself, "I know what I'll do."

He shuts the door, pulls on the grandmother's night-cap down to his
eyes; then he lies down all his length in the bed and draws the
curtains.

In the meantime the good Blanchette went quietly on her way, as little
girls do, amusing herself here and there by picking Easter daisies,
watching the little birds making their nests, and running after the
butterflies which fluttered in the sunshine.

At last she arrives at the door.

Knock, knock.

"Who is there?" says the wolf, softening his rough voice as best he can.

"It's me, granny, your Little Golden Hood. I'm bringing you a big piece
of cake for your Sunday treat to-morrow."

"Press your finger on the latch; then push and the door opens."

"Why, you've got a cold, granny," said she, coming in.

"Ahem! a little, my dear, a little," replies the wolf, pretending to
cough. "Shut the door well, my little lamb. Put your basket on the
table, and then take off your frock and come and lie down by me; you
shall rest a little."

The good child undresses, but observe this:--she kept her little hood
upon her head. When she saw what a figure her granny cut in bed, the
poor little thing was much surprised.

"Oh!" cries she, "how like you are to friend Wolf, grandmother!"

"That's on account of my night-cap, child," replies the wolf.

"Oh! what hairy arms you've got, grandmother!"

"All the better to hug you, my child."

"Oh! what a big tongue you've got, grandmother!"

"All the better for answering, child."

"Oh! what a mouthful of great white teeth you have, grandmother!"

"That's for crunching little children with!" And the wolf opened his
jaws wide to swallow Blanchette.

But she put down her head, crying, "Mamma! mamma!" and the wolf only
caught her little hood.

Thereupon, oh, dear! oh, dear! he draws back, crying and shaking his jaw
as if he had swallowed red-hot coals.

It was the little fire-colored hood that had burnt his tongue right down
his throat.

The little hood, you see, was one of those magic caps that they used to
have in former times, in the stories, for making one's self invisible or
invulnerable.

So there was the wolf with his throat burned, jumping off the bed and
trying to find the door, howling and howling as if all the dogs in the
country were at his heels.

Just at this moment the grandmother arrives, returning from the town
with her long sack empty on her shoulder.

"Ah, brigand!" she cries, "wait a bit!" Quickly she opens her sack wide
across the door, and the maddened wolf springs in head downward.

It is he now that is caught, swallowed like a letter in the post. For
the brave old dame shuts her sack, so; and she runs and empties it in
the well, where the vagabond, still howling, tumbles in and is drowned.

"Ah, scoundrel! you thought you would crunch my little grandchild! Well,
to-morrow we will make her a muff of your skin, and you yourself shall
be crunched, for we will give your carcass to the dogs."

Thereupon the grandmother hastened to dress poor Blanchette, who was
still trembling with fear in the bed.

"Well," she said to her, "without my little hood where would you be now,
darling?" And, to restore heart and legs to the child, she made her eat
a good piece of her cake, and drink a good draught of wine, after which
she took her by the hand and led her back to the house.

And then, who was it who scolded her when she knew all that had
happened?

It was the mother.

But Blanchette promised over and over again that she would never more
stop to listen to a wolf, so that at last the mother forgave her.

And Blanchette, the Little Golden Hood, kept her word. And in fine
weather she may still be seen in the fields with her pretty little hood,
the color of the sun.

But to see her you must rise early.



163

        The next Perrault story is given in the
        traditional English form made by "R. S., Gent."
        Perrault met the popular taste of his time for
        "morals" by adding more or less playful ones in
        verse to his stories. Here is a prose rendering
        of a portion of the _Moralite_ attached to
        "Puss-in-Boots": "However great may be the
        advantage of enjoying a rich inheritance coming
        down from father to son, industry and ingenuity
        are worth more to young people as a usual thing
        than goods acquired without personal effort."
        In relation to this moral, Ralston says, "the
        conclusion at which an ordinary reader would
        arrive, if he were not dazzled by fairy-land
        glamor, would probably be that far better than
        either tact and industry on a master's part is
        the loyalty of an unscrupulous retainer of an
        imaginative turn of mind. The impropriety of
        this teaching is not balanced by any other form
        of instruction. What the story openly
        inculcates is not edifying, and it does not
        secretly convey any improving doctrine." But on
        the other hand it may be argued that the
        "moral" passes over the child's head. Miss
        Kready, in her _Study of Fairy Tales_ (p. 275),
        makes a very elaborate and proper defense of
        "Puss-in-Boots" as a story for children. There
        is delight in its strong sense of adventure, it
        has a hero clever and quick, there is loyalty,
        love, and sacrifice in Puss's devotion to his
        master, the tricks are true to "cat-nature,"
        there are touches of nature beauty, a simple
        and pleasing plot, while we should not forget
        the delightful Ogre and his transformations
        into Lion and Mouse. The story is found in many
        forms among many different peoples. Perhaps the
        great stroke of genius which endears Perrault's
        version is in the splendid boots with which his
        tale provides the hero so that briers may not
        interfere with his doings. (Extended studies of
        this tale and its many parallels may be found
        in Lang's _Perrault's Popular Tales_; in
        McCulloch's _Childhood of Fiction_, chap. viii;
        in an article by Ralston in the _Nineteenth
        Century_, January, 1883, reprinted in _Living
        Age_, Vol. CLVI, p. 362.)


PUSS-IN-BOOTS

There was once a miller who left no more estate to the three sons he had
than his mill, his ass, and his cat. The partition was soon made.
Neither the clerk nor the attorney was sent for. They would soon have
eaten up all the poor patrimony. The eldest had the mill, the second the
ass, and the youngest nothing but the cat.

The poor young fellow was quite comfortless at having so poor a lot. "My
brothers," said he, "may get their living handsomely enough by joining
their stocks together; but for my part, when I have eaten up my cat and
made me a muff of his skin, I must die with hunger."

The cat, who heard all this, but made as if he did not, said to him with
a grave and serious air; "Do not thus afflict yourself, my good master;
you have nothing else to do but to give me a bag and get a pair of
boots made for me, that I may scamper through the dirt and the brambles,
and you shall see that you have not so bad a portion of me as you
imagine."

Though the cat's master did not build very much upon what he said, he
had, however, often seen him play a great many cunning tricks to catch
rats and mice; as when he used to hang by the heels, or hide himself in
the meal and make as if he were dead; so he did not altogether despair
of his affording him some help in his miserable condition.

When the cat had what he asked for, he booted himself very gallantly;
and putting his bag about his neck, he held the strings of it in his two
fore paws and went into a warren where was a great abundance of rabbits.
He put bran and sow-thistles into his bag, and, stretching himself out
at length as if he had been dead, he waited for some young rabbits, not
yet acquainted with the deceits of the world, to come and rummage his
bag for what he had just put into it.

Scarce was he lain down but he had what he wanted. A rash and foolish
young rabbit jumped into his bag, and master Puss, immediately drawing
close the strings, took and killed him without pity. Proud of his prey,
he went with it to the palace and asked to speak with his majesty. He
was shown upstairs into the king's apartment, and, making a low
reverence, said to him: "I have brought you, sir, a rabbit of the warren
which my noble lord, the Marquis of Carabas" (for that was the title
which Puss was pleased to give his master), "has commanded me to present
to your majesty from him."

"Tell thy master," said the king, "that I thank him and that he gives me
a great deal of pleasure."

Another time he went and hid himself among some standing corn, holding
still his bag open; and when a brace of partridges ran into it, he drew
the strings and so caught them both. He went and made a present of these
to the king, as he had done before of the rabbit which he took in the
warren. The king in like manner received the partridges with great
pleasure and ordered him some money.

The cat continued for two or three months thus to carry his majesty,
from time to time, game of his master's taking. One day in particular,
when he knew for certain that he was to take the air along the riverside
with his daughter, the most beautiful princess in the world, he said to
his master: "If you will follow my advice, your fortune is made. You
have nothing else to do but go and wash yourself in the river, in that
part I shall show you, and leave the rest to me." The Marquis of Carabas
did what the cat advised him to, without knowing why or wherefore.

While he was washing, the king passed by, and the cat began to cry out
as loud as he could, "Help, help! my lord Marquis of Carabas is going to
be drowned." At this noise the king put his head out of his
coach-window, and, finding it was the cat who had so often brought him
such good game, he commanded his guards to run immediately to the
assistance of his lordship, the Marquis of Carabas.

While they were drawing the poor marquis out of the river, the cat came
up to the coach and told the king that while his master was washing
there came by some rogues, who went off with his clothes though he had
cried out, "Thieves, thieves," as loud as he could. This cunning cat had
hidden them under a great stone. The king immediately commanded the
officers of his wardrobe to run and fetch one of his best suits for the
lord Marquis of Carabas.

The king caressed him after a very extraordinary manner; and as the fine
clothes he had given him extremely set off his good mien (for he was
well made and very handsome in his person), the king's daughter took a
secret inclination to him, and the Marquis of Carabas had no sooner cast
two or three respectful and somewhat tender glances, but she fell in
love with him to distraction. The king would needs have him come into
his coach and take part of the airing. The cat, quite overjoyed to see
his project begin to succeed, marched on before, and meeting with some
countrymen who were mowing a meadow, he said to them, "Good people, you
who are mowing, if you do not tell the king, who will soon pass this
way, that the meadow you mow belongs to my lord Marquis of Carabas, you
shall be chopped as small as herbs for the pot."

The king did not fail asking of the mowers to whom the meadow they were
mowing belonged: "To my lord Marquis of Carabas," answered they, all
together, for the cat's threats had made them terribly afraid.

"You see, sir," said the marquis, "this is a meadow which never fails to
yield a plentiful harvest every year."

The master-cat, who went still on before, met with some reapers, and
said to them, "Good people, you who are reaping, if you do not tell the
king, who will presently go by, that all this corn belongs to the
Marquis of Carabas, you shall be chopped as small as herbs for the pot."

The king, who passed by a moment after, would needs know to whom all
that corn, which he then saw, did belong. "To my lord Marquis of
Carabas," replied the reapers; and the king was very well pleased with
it, as well as the marquis, whom he congratulated thereupon. The
master-cat, who went always before, said the same words to all he met;
and the king was astonished at the vast estates of my lord Marquis of
Carabas.

Master Puss came at last to a stately castle, the owner of which was an
ogre, the richest that had ever been known, for all the lands which the
king had then gone over belonged to this castle. The cat, who had taken
care to inform himself who the ogre was and what he could do, asked to
speak with him, saying he could not pass so near his castle without
having the honor of paying his respects to him.

The ogre received him as civilly as an ogre could do and made him sit
down. "I have been assured," said the cat, "that you have the gift of
being able to change yourself into all sorts of creatures you have a
mind to. You can, for example, transform yourself into a lion, or
elephant, and the like."

"This is true," answered the ogre very briskly, "and to convince you,
you shall see me now become a lion."

Puss was so sadly terrified at the sight of a lion so near him that he
immediately got into the gutter, not without abundance of trouble and
danger, because of his boots, which were of no use at all to him in
walking upon the tiles. A little while after, when Puss saw that the
ogre had resumed his natural form, he came down and owned he had been
very much frightened.

"I have been, moreover, informed," said the cat, "but I know not how to
believe it, that you have also the power to take on you the shape of the
smallest animals; for example, to change yourself into a rat or a mouse;
but I must own to you, I take this to be impossible."

"Impossible!" cried the ogre, "you shall see that presently," and at the
same time changed himself into a mouse, and began to run about the
floor. Puss no sooner perceived this but he fell upon him and ate him
up.

Meanwhile, the king, who saw, as he passed, this fine castle of the
ogre's, had a mind to go into it. Puss, who heard the noise of his
majesty's coach running over the drawbridge, ran out and said to the
king, "Your Majesty is welcome to this castle of my lord Marquis of
Carabas."

"What! my lord Marquis!" cried the king, "and does this castle also
belong to you? There can be nothing finer than this court and all the
stately buildings which surround it; let us go into it, if you please."
They passed into a spacious hall, where they found a magnificent
collation which the ogre had prepared for his friends, who were that
very day to visit him, but dared not to enter, knowing the king was
there. His majesty was perfectly charmed with the good qualities of my
lord Marquis of Carabas, as was his daughter, who had fallen in love
with him; and seeing the vast estate he possessed, said to him while
they sat at the feast, "It will be owing to yourself only, my lord
Marquis, if you are not my son-in-law." The marquis, making several low
bows, accepted the honor which his majesty conferred upon him, and
forthwith, that very same day, married the princess.

Puss became a great lord, and never ran after mice any more, but only
for his diversion.



164

        Perrault attached to the next story this moral:
        "Diamonds and dollars influence minds, and yet
        gentle words have more effect and are more to
        be esteemed. . . . It is a lot of trouble to be
        upright and it requires some effort, but sooner
        or later it finds its reward, and generally
        when one is least expecting it." English
        versions are usually given the title "Toads and
        Diamonds," though Perrault's title was simply
        "The Fairies" ("Les Fees"). Lang calls
        attention to the fact that the origin of the
        story is "manifestly moral." He thinks "it is
        an obvious criticism that the elder girl should
        have met the fairy first; she was not likely to
        behave so rudely when she knew that politeness
        would be rewarded." It would be interesting for
        a story-teller to test the effect of relating
        the incidents in the order suggested by Lang.


TOADS AND DIAMONDS

There was once upon a time a widow who had two daughters. The oldest was
so much like her in face and humor that whoever looked upon the daughter
saw the mother. They were both so disagreeable and so proud that there
was no living with them. The youngest, who was the very picture of her
father for courtesy and sweetness of temper, was withal one of the most
beautiful girls that was ever seen. As people naturally love their own
likenesses, this mother ever doted on her eldest daughter and at the
same time had a sad aversion for the youngest. She made her eat in the
kitchen and work continually.

Among other things, this poor child was forced twice a day to draw water
above a mile and a half from the house, and bring home a pitcher full of
it. One day as she was at this fountain there came to her a poor woman,
who begged of her to let her drink. "Oh, yes, with all my heart,
Goody," said this pretty little girl; and rinsing the pitcher, she took
up some water from the clearest place of the fountain and gave it to
her, holding up the pitcher all the while that she might drink the
easier.

The good woman having drunk, said to her, "You are so very pretty, my
dear, so good and so mannerly, that I cannot help giving you a
gift"--for this was a fairy, who had taken the form of a poor country
woman to see how far the civility and good manners of this pretty girl
would go. "I will give you for gift," continued the fairy, "that at
every word you speak, there shall come out of your mouth either a flower
or a jewel."

When this pretty girl came home, her mother scolded at her for staying
so long at the fountain. "I beg your pardon, mamma," said the poor girl,
"for not making more haste"; and, in speaking these words, there came
out of her mouth two roses, two pearls, and two large diamonds.

"What is it I see there?" said her mother quite astonished. "I think I
see pearls and diamonds come out of the girl's mouth! How happens this,
my child?"--This was the first time she ever called her her child.

The poor creature told her frankly all the matter, not without dropping
out infinite numbers of diamonds. "In good faith," cried the mother, "I
must send my child thither. Come hither, Fanny. Look what comes out of
your sister's mouth when she speaks! Would you not be glad, my dear, to
have the same gift given to you? You have nothing else to do but go draw
water out of the fountain, and when a certain poor woman asks you to let
her drink, to give it her very civilly."

"It would be a very fine sight, indeed," said this ill-bred minx, "to
see me go draw water!"

"You shall go, hussy," said the mother, "and this minute." So away she
went, but grumbling all the way and taking with her the best silver
tankard in the house.

She was no sooner at the fountain than she saw coming out of the wood a
lady most gloriously dressed, who came up to her and asked to drink.
This was, you must know, the very fairy who appeared to her sister, but
who had now taken the air and dress of a princess to see how far this
girl's rudeness would go. "Am I come hither," said the proud, saucy
maid, "to serve you with water, pray? I suppose the silver tankard was
brought purely for your ladyship, was it? However, you may drink out of
it, if you have a fancy."

"You are not over and above mannerly," answered the fairy, without
putting herself in a passion. "Well, then, since you have so little
breeding and are so disobliging, I give you for gift, that at every word
you speak there shall come out of your mouth a snake or a toad."

So soon as her mother saw her coming, she cried out, "Well, daughter."

"Well, mother," answered the pert hussy, throwing out of her mouth two
vipers and two toads.

"Oh, mercy!" cried the mother, "what is it I see? Oh, it is that wretch,
her sister, who has occasioned all this; but she shall pay for it"; and
immediately she ran to beat her. The poor child fled away from her and
went to hide herself in the forest, not far from thence.

The king's son, then on his return from hunting, met her, and seeing her
so very pretty, asked her what she did there alone, and why she cried.
"Alas, sir! my mamma has turned me out of doors." The king's son, who
saw five or six pearls, and as many diamonds, come out of her mouth,
desired her to tell him how that happened. She thereupon told him the
whole story; and so the king's son fell in love with her; and,
considering with himself that such a gift was worth more than any
marriage-portion whatsoever in another, he conducted her to the palace
of the king his father and there married her.

As for her sister, she made herself so much hated that her own mother
turned her off; and the miserable girl, having wandered about a good
while without finding anybody to take her in, went to a corner in the
wood and there died.



165

        "Cinderella" is one of the world's greatest
        romantic stories. Its theme is a favorite in
        all folk literature. Young and old alike have
        never tired of hearing of the victories won by
        the deserving in the face of all sorts of
        obstacles. Perrault in his verse moral observes
        that "while beauty is a rare treasure for a
        woman, yet a winning manner, or personality, is
        worth even more." Still further, as if
        conscious of the part influence plays in the
        world, he says that "while it is doubtless a
        great advantage to have wit and courage,
        breeding and good sense, and other such natural
        endowments, still they will be of no earthly
        use for our advancement unless we have, to
        bring them into play, either godfathers or
        godmothers." One should not, however, take too
        seriously any moralizing over a fairy story
        whether by Perrault or another.

        In one of the most thorough studies of a single
        folk tale, Miss Roalfe Cox's _Cinderella_, with
        an introduction by Andrew Lang, some three
        hundred and fifty variants of the story have
        been analyzed. The thing that marks a
        Cinderella story is the presence in it of the
        "slipper test." The finest versions are those
        by Perrault and the Grimms, and they are almost
        equally favorites with children. The Perrault
        form as found in the old English translation is
        given here for reasons stated by Ralston in his
        study of the Cinderella type: "But Perrault's
        rendering of the tale naturalised it in the
        polite world, gave it for cultured circles an
        attraction which it is never likely to lose. . . .
        It is with human more than with mythological
        interest that the story is replete, and
        therefore it appeals to human hearts with a
        force which no lapse of time can diminish. Such
        supernatural machinery as is introduced,
        moreover, has a charm for children which older
        versions of the tale do not possess. The
        pumpkin carriage, the rat coachman, the lizard
        lacqueys, and all the other properties of the
        transformation scene, appeal at once to the
        imagination and the sense of humor of every
        beholder." (_Nineteenth Century_, November,
        1879.)


CINDERELLA, OR THE LITTLE GLASS SLIPPER

Once there was a gentleman who married, for his second wife, the
proudest and most haughty woman that was ever seen. She had, by a former
husband, two daughters of her own humor, who were indeed exactly like
her in all things. He had likewise, by another wife, a young daughter,
but of unparalleled goodness and sweetness of temper, which she took
from her mother, who was the best creature in the world.

No sooner were the ceremonies of the wedding over but the step-mother
began to show herself in her colors. She could not bear the good
qualities of this pretty girl; and the less because they made her own
daughters appear the more odious. She employed her in the meanest work
of the house; she scoured the dishes and tables, and cleaned madam's
room and the rooms of misses, her daughters; she lay up in a sorry
garret, upon a wretched straw-bed, while her sisters lay in fine rooms,
with floors all inlaid, upon beds of the very newest fashion, and where
they had looking-glasses so large that they might see themselves at
their full length, from head to foot.

The poor girl bore all patiently, and dared not tell her father, who
would have rattled her off, for his wife governed him entirely. When she
had done her work, she used to go into the chimney corner and sit down
among cinders and ashes, which made her commonly called Cinder-wench;
but the youngest, who was not so rude and uncivil as the eldest, called
her Cinderella. However, Cinderella, notwithstanding her mean apparel,
was a hundred times handsomer than her sisters, though they were always
dressed very richly.

It happened that the king's son gave a ball, and invited all persons of
fashion to it. Our young misses were also invited, for they cut a very
grand figure among the quality. They were mightily delighted at this
invitation, and wonderfully busy in choosing out such gowns, petticoats,
and head-clothes as might best become them. This was a new trouble to
Cinderella, for it was she who ironed her sisters' linen and plaited
their ruffles. They talked all day long of nothing but how they should
be dressed. "For my part," said the eldest, "I will wear my red velvet
suit with French trimmings."

"And I," said the youngest, "shall only have my usual petticoat; but
then, to make amends for that, I will put on my gold flowered manteau
and my diamond stomacher, which is far from being the most ordinary one
in the world." They sent for the best tire-woman they could get to make
up their head-dresses, and they had their patches from the very best
maker.

Cinderella was likewise called up to them to be consulted in all these
matters, for she had excellent notions and advised them always for the
best; nay, and offered her service to dress their heads, which they were
very willing she should do. As she was doing this, they said to her,
"Cinderella, would you not be glad to go to the ball?"

"Ah!" said she, "you only jeer at me; it is not for such as I am to go
thither."

"Thou art in the right of it," replied they; "it would make the people
laugh to see a cinder-wench at a ball."

Any one but Cinderella would have dressed their heads awry, but she was
very good, and dressed them perfectly well. They were almost two days
without eating, so much they were transported with joy. They broke above
a dozen of laces in trying to be laced up close, that they might have a
fine slender shape, and they were continually at their looking-glass. At
last the happy day came. They went to court, and Cinderella followed
them with her eyes as long as she could, and when she had lost sight of
them, she fell a-crying.

Her godmother, who saw her all in tears, asked her what was the matter.
"I wish I could--I wish I could--"; she was not able to speak the rest,
being interrupted by her tears and sobbing.

This godmother of hers, who was a fairy, said to her, "Thou wishest thou
couldest go to the ball. Is it not so?"

"Y--es," cried Cinderella with a great sigh.

"Well," said her godmother, "be but a good girl, and I will contrive
that thou shalt go."

Then she took her into her chamber and said to her, "Run into the garden
and bring me a pumpkin." Cinderella went immediately to gather the
finest she could get, and brought it to her godmother, not being able to
imagine how this pumpkin could make her go to the ball. Her godmother
scooped out all the inside of it, having left nothing but the rind;
which done, she struck it with her wand, and the pumpkin was instantly
turned into a fine coach, gilded all over with gold.

She then went to look into her mouse-trap, where she found six mice, all
alive, and ordered Cinderella to lift up a little the trap-door. Then
she gave each mouse, as it went out, a little tap with her wand, and the
mouse was that moment turned into a fair horse. All together the mice
made a very fine set of six horses of a beautiful mouse-colored
dapple-gray. Being at a loss for a coachman, "I will go and see," said
Cinderella, "if there be never a rat in the rat-trap, that we may make a
coachman of him."

"Thou art in the right," replied her godmother; "go and look."

Cinderella brought the trap to her, and in it there were three huge
rats. The fairy made choice of one of the three, which had the largest
beard, and, having touched him with her wand, he was turned into a fat,
jolly coachman, who had the smartest whiskers that eyes ever beheld.

After that her godmother said to her, "Go again into the garden and you
will find six lizards behind the watering pot; bring them to me." She
had no sooner done so, than the fairy turned them into six footmen, who
skipped up immediately behind the coach, with their liveries all
bedecked with gold and silver, and clung as close behind each other as
if they had done nothing else their whole lives. The fairy then said to
Cinderella, "Well, you see here an equipage fit to go to the ball with.
Are you not pleased with it?"

"Oh, yes," cried she, "but must I go thither as I am, in these filthy
rags?" Her godmother only just touched her with her wand, and at the
same instant her clothes were turned into cloth of gold and silver, all
beset with jewels. This done, she gave her a pair of glass slippers, the
prettiest in the whole world.

Being thus decked out, she got up into her coach; but her godmother,
above all things, commanded her not to stay till after midnight, telling
her that if she stayed at the ball one moment longer, her coach would be
a pumpkin again, her horses mice, her coachman a rat, her footmen
lizards, and her clothes just as they were before.

She promised her godmother she would not fail of leaving the ball before
midnight; and then away she drives, scarce able to contain herself for
joy. The king's son, who was told that a great princess, whom nobody
knew, was come, ran out to receive her. He gave her his hand as she
alighted from the coach, and led her into the hall among all the
company. There was immediately a profound silence. They left off
dancing, and the violins ceased to play, so attentive was every one to
contemplate the singular beauties of this unknown new-comer. Nothing was
then heard but a confused noise of, "Ha! how handsome she is! Ha! how
handsome she is!" The king himself, old as he was, could not help ogling
her and telling the queen softly that it was a long time since he had
seen so beautiful and lovely a creature. All the ladies were busied in
considering her clothes and head-dress, that they might have some made
next day after the same pattern, provided they could meet with such fine
materials and as able hands to make them.

The king's son conducted her to the most honorable seat and afterwards
took her out to dance with him. She danced so very gracefully that they
all more and more admired her. A fine collation was served up, whereof
the young prince ate not a morsel, so intently was he busied in gazing
on her. She went and sat down by her sisters, showing them a thousand
civilities, giving them part of the oranges and citrons which the prince
had presented her with; which very much surprised them, for they did not
know her. While Cinderella was thus amusing her sisters, she heard the
clock strike eleven and three quarters, whereupon she immediately made a
courtesy to the company and hasted away as fast as she could.

Being got home, she ran to seek out her godmother; and having thanked
her, she said she could not but heartily wish she might go next day to
the ball, because the king's son had desired her. As she was eagerly
telling her godmother whatever had passed at the ball, her two sisters
knocked at the door, which Cinderella ran and opened. "How long you have
stayed!" cried she, gaping, rubbing her eyes, and stretching herself as
if she had been just awakened out of her sleep; she had not, however,
any manner of inclination to sleep since they went from home.

"If thou hadst been at the ball," said one of her sisters, "thou
wouldest not have been tired with it. There came thither the finest
princess, the most beautiful ever seen with mortal eyes. She showed us a
thousand civilities and gave us oranges and citrons." Cinderella seemed
very indifferent in the matter; indeed, she asked them the name of the
princess, but they told her they did not know it and that the king's son
was very uneasy on her account and would give all the world to know who
she was.

At this Cinderella, smiling, replied, "She must then be very beautiful
indeed! How happy have you been! Could not I see her? Ah! dear Miss
Charlotte, do lend me your yellow suit of clothes, which you wear every
day."

"Ay, to be sure," cried Miss Charlotte, "lend my clothes to such a dirty
cinder-wench as thou art! Who's the fool then?" Cinderella indeed
expected some such answer and was very glad of the refusal, for she
would have been sadly put to it if her sister had lent her what she
asked for jestingly.

The next day the two sisters were at the ball, and so was Cinderella,
but dressed more magnificently than before. The king's son was always by
her side and never ceased his compliments and amorous speeches to her;
to whom all this was so far from being tiresome that she quite forgot
what her godmother had recommended to her, so that she at last counted
the clock striking twelve when she took it to be no more than eleven.
She then rose up and fled as nimble as a deer. The prince followed, but
could not overtake her. She left behind one of her glass slippers, which
the prince took up most carefully. She got home, but quite out of
breath, without coach or footmen, and in her old cinder clothes, having
nothing left of all her finery but one of the little slippers, fellow to
that she dropped. The guards at the palace gate were asked if they had
not seen a princess go out. They said they had seen nobody go out but a
young girl very meanly dressed, who had more the air of a poor country
wench than a gentlewoman.

When the two sisters returned from the ball, Cinderella asked them if
they had been well diverted and if the fine lady had been there. They
told her yes, but that she hurried away immediately when it struck
twelve and with so much haste that she dropped one of her little glass
slippers, the prettiest in the world, which the king's son had taken up;
that he had done nothing but look at her all the time of the ball, and
that most certainly he was very much in love with the beautiful person
who owned the little glass slipper.

What they said was very true, for a few days after, the king's son
caused to be proclaimed by sound of trumpets that he would marry her
whose foot this slipper would just fit. They whom he employed began to
try it on upon the princesses, then the duchesses, and all the court,
but in vain. It was brought to the two sisters, who did all they
possibly could to thrust their foot into the slipper, but they could not
effect it. Cinderella, who saw all this and knew her slipper, said to
them, laughing, "Let me see if it will not fit me!"

Her sisters burst out laughing and began to banter her. The gentleman
who was sent to try the slipper looked earnestly at Cinderella, and
finding her very handsome, said it was but just that she should try, and
that he had orders to let every one make trial. He obliged Cinderella to
sit down, and putting the slipper to her foot, he found it went in very
easily and fitted her as if it had been made of wax. The astonishment
her two sisters were in was excessively great, but still abundantly
greater when Cinderella pulled out of her pocket the other slipper and
put it on her foot. Thereupon in came her godmother, who having touched,
with her wand, Cinderella's clothes, made them richer and more
magnificent than any of those she had before.

And now her two sisters found her to be that fine beautiful lady whom
they had seen at the ball. They threw themselves at her feet to beg
pardon for all the ill treatment they had made her undergo. Cinderella
took them up, and as she embraced them, cried that she forgave them with
all her heart and desired them always to love her. She was conducted to
the young prince, dressed as she was. He thought her more charming than
ever, and a few days after, married her. Cinderella, who was no less
good than beautiful, gave her two sisters lodgings in the palace, and
that very same day matched them with two great lords of the court.



166

        The hero of the next story is often known as
        Drakesbill, which easily becomes Bill Drake.
        The version that follows is a translation from
        the French of Charles Marelles as given by Lang
        in his _Red Fairy Book_. It has a raciness not
        in those softened versions in which one friend
        gets into a pocket, another under a wing, and
        so on. The persistent energy of the little
        hero, his resourcefulness in difficulty, his
        loyal friends, the unexpected honor that comes
        as recognition of his success, the humor that
        pervades every character and incident, make
        this one of the most delightful of children's
        stories.


DRAKESTAIL

Drakestail was very little, that is why he was called Drakestail; but
tiny as he was he had brains, and he knew what he was about, for having
begun with nothing he ended by amassing a hundred crowns. Now the king
of the country, who was very extravagant and never kept any money,
having heard that Drakestail had some, went one day in his own person to
borrow his hoard, and, my word, in those days Drakestail was not a
little proud of having lent money to the king. But after the first and
second year, seeing that he never even dreamed of paying the interest,
he became uneasy, so much so that at last he resolved to go and see his
majesty himself, and get repaid. So one fine morning Drakestail, very
spruce and fresh, takes the road, singing: "Quack, quack, quack, when
shall I get my money back?"

He had not gone far when he met friend Fox, on his rounds that way.

"Good-morning, neighbor," says the friend; "where are you off to so
early?"

"I am going to the king for what he owes me."

"Oh! take me with thee!"

Drakestail said to himself: "One can't have too many friends." Aloud
says he, "I will, but going on all fours you will soon be tired. Make
yourself quite small, get into my throat--go into my gizzard, and I will
carry you."

"Happy thought!" says friend Fox.

He takes bag and baggage, and, presto! is gone like a letter into the
post.

And Drakestail is off again, all spruce and fresh, still singing:
"Quack, quack, quack, when shall I have my money back?"

He had not gone far when he met his lady friend, Ladder, leaning on her
wall.

"Good-morning, my duckling," says the lady friend, "whither away so
bold?"

"I am going to the king for what he owes me."

"Oh! take me with thee!"

Drakestail said to himself: "One can't have too many friends." Aloud
says he: "I will, but then with your wooden legs you will soon be tired.
Make yourself quite small, get into my throat--go into my gizzard, and I
will carry you."

"Happy thought!" says my friend Ladder, and nimble, bag and baggage,
goes to keep company with friend Fox.

And "Quack, quack, quack," Drakestail is off again, singing and spruce
as before. A little further he meets his sweetheart, my friend River,
wandering quietly in the sunshine.

"Thou, my cherub," says she, "whither so lonesome, with arching tail, on
this muddy road?"

"I am going to the king, you know, for what he owes me."

"Oh! take me with thee!"

Drakestail said to himself: "One can't have too many friends." Aloud
says he: "I will, but you who sleep while you walk will soon get tired.
Make yourself quite small, get into my throat--go into my gizzard, and I
will carry you."

"Ah! happy thought!" says my friend River.

She takes bag and baggage, and glou, glou, glou she takes her place
between friend Fox and my friend Ladder.

And "Quack, quack, quack," Drakestail is off again singing.

A little further on he meets comrade Wasp's-nest, maneuvering his wasps.

"Well, good-morning, friend Drakestail," said comrade Wasp's-nest,
"where are we bound for, so spruce and fresh?"

"I am going to the king for what he owes me."

"Oh! take me with thee!"

Drakestail said to himself, "One can't have too many friends." Aloud
says he: "I will, but then with your battalion to drag along, you will
soon be tired. Make yourself quite small, go into my throat--get into my
gizzard, and I will carry you."

"By Jove! that's a good idea!" says comrade Wasp's-nest.

And left file! he takes the same road to join the others with all his
party. There was not much room, but by closing up a bit they managed.
And Drakestail is off again singing.

He arrived thus at the capital, and threaded his way straight up the
High Street, still running and singing, "Quack, quack, quack, when shall
I get my money back?" to the great astonishment of the good folks, till
he came to the king's palace.

He strikes with the knocker: "Toc! toc!"

"Who is there?" asks the porter, putting his head out of the wicket.

"'Tis I, Drakestail. I wish to speak to the king."

"Speak to the king! That's easily said. The king is dining, and will not
be disturbed."

"Tell him that it is I, and I have come he well knows why."

The porter shuts his wicket and goes up to say it to the king, who was
just sitting down to dinner with a napkin round his neck, and all his
ministers.

"Good, good!" said the king, laughing. "I know what it is! Make him come
in, and put him with the turkeys and chickens."

The porter descends.

"Have the goodness to enter."

"Good!" says Drakestail to himself, "I shall now see how they eat at
court."

"This way, this way," says the porter. "One step further. There, there
you are."

"How? what? in the poultry-yard?"

Fancy how vexed Drakestail was!

"Ah! so that's it," says he. "Wait! I will compel you to receive me.
Quack, quack, quack, when shall I get my money back?" But turkeys and
chickens are creatures who don't like people that are not as themselves.
When they saw the new-comer and how he was made, and when they heard him
crying too, they began to look black at him.

"What is it? What does he want?"

Finally they rushed at him all together, to overwhelm him with pecks.

"I am lost!" said Drakestail to himself, when by good luck he remembers
his comrade friend Fox, and he cries:

        "Reynard, Reynard, come out of your earth,
         Or Drakestail's life is of little worth."

Then friend Fox, who was only waiting for these words, hastens out,
throws himself on the wicked fowls, and quick! quack! he tears them to
pieces; so much so that at the end of five minutes there was not one
left alive. And Drakestail, quite content, began to sing again, "Quack,
quack, quack, when shall I get my money back?"

When the king, who was still at table, heard this refrain, and the
poultry-woman came to tell him what had been going on in the yard, he
was terribly annoyed.

He ordered them to throw this tail of a drake into the well, to make an
end of him.

And it was done as he commanded. Drakestail was in despair of getting
himself out of such a deep hole, when he remembered his lady friend
Ladder.

        "Ladder, Ladder, come out of thy hold,
         Or Drakestail's days will soon be told."

My friend Ladder, who was only waiting for these words, hastens out,
leans her two arms on the edge of the well; then Drakestail climbs
nimbly on her back, and hop! he is in the yard, where he begins to sing
louder than ever.

When the king, who was still at table and laughing at the good trick he
had played his creditor, heard him again reclaiming his money, he became
livid with rage.

He commanded that the furnace should be heated, and this tail of a drake
thrown into it, because he must be a sorcerer.

The furnace was soon hot, but this time Drakestail was not so afraid; he
counted on his sweetheart, my friend River.

        "River, River, outward flow,
         Or to death Drakestail must go."

My friend River hastens out, and errouf! throws herself into the
furnace, which she floods, with all the people who had lighted it; after
which she flowed growling into the hall of the palace to the height of
more than four feet.

And Drakestail, quite content, begins to swim, singing deafeningly,
"Quack, quack, quack, when shall I get my money back?"

The king was still at table, and thought himself quite sure of his game;
but when he heard Drakestail singing again, and when they told him all
that had passed, he became furious and got up from the table brandishing
his fists.

"Bring him here, and I'll cut his throat! Bring him here quick!" cried
he.

And quickly two footmen ran to fetch Drakestail.

"At last," said the poor chap, going up the great stairs, "they have
decided to receive me."

Imagine his terror when on entering he sees the king as red as a turkey
cock, and all his ministers attending him standing sword in hand. He
thought this time it was all up with him. Happily he remembered that
there was still one remaining friend, and he cried with dying accents:

        "Wasp's nest, Wasp's nest, make a sally,
         Or Drakestail nevermore may rally."

Hereupon the scene changes.

"Bs, bs, bayonet them!" The brave Wasp's-nest rushes out with all his
wasps. They threw themselves on the infuriated king and his ministers,
and stung them so fiercely in the face that they lost their heads, and
not knowing where to hide themselves they all jumped pell-mell from the
window and broke their necks on the pavement.

Behold Drakestail much astonished, all alone in the big saloon and
master of the field. He could not get over it.

Nevertheless, he remembered shortly what he had come for to the palace,
and improving the occasion, he set to work to hunt for his dear money.
But in vain he rummaged in all the drawers; he found nothing; all had
been spent.

And ferreting thus from room to room he came at last to the one with the
throne in it, and feeling fatigued, he sat himself down on it to think
over his adventure. In the meanwhile the people had found their king and
his ministers with their feet in the air on the pavement, and they had
gone into the palace to know how it had occurred. On entering the
throne-room, when the crowd saw that there was already someone on the
royal seat, they broke out in cries of surprise and joy:

        "The King is dead, long live the King!
         Heaven has sent us down this thing."

Drakestail, who was no longer surprised at anything, received the
acclamations of the people as if he had never done anything else all his
life.

A few of them certainly murmured that a Drakestail would make a fine
king; those who knew him replied that a knowing Drakestail was a more
worthy king than a spendthrift like him who was lying on the pavement.
In short, they ran and took the crown off the head of the deceased, and
placed it on that of Drakestail, whom it fitted like wax.

Thus he became king.

"And now," said he after the ceremony, "ladies and gentlemen, let's go
to supper. I am so hungry!"



167

        The story of "Beauty and the Beast," while very
        old in its ruder forms, is known to us in a
        fine version which comes from the middle of the
        eighteenth century. Madame de Villeneuve, a
        French writer of some note and a follower of
        Perrault in the field of the fairy tale,
        published in 1740 a collection of stories
        (_Contes Marins_) supposed to be told by an old
        woman during a voyage to St. Domingo. Among
        these was "Beauty and the Beast" in a
        long-winded style extending to more than 250
        pages. In 1757, a greatly abridged form of this
        version was published by Madame de Beaumont,
        who was then living in England and who wrote
        many spirited tales designed for children. Her
        stories are full of the didactic element, and
        "Beauty and the Beast" is no exception to the
        rule. These "edifying commonplaces," however,
        are so sound and fit into the story so
        naturally that the reader does not suffer from
        their presence. The artificial character of the
        story is easily felt in contrast to the natural
        qualities of a folk version. The plot has all
        the perfection of a finished piece of literary
        art, and for this quality especially Madame de
        Beaumont's abridgement has always been heartily
        and rightly admired.


BEAUTY AND THE BEAST

Once upon a time, in a far-off country, there lived a merchant who had
been so fortunate in all his undertakings that he was enormously rich.
As he had, however, six sons and six daughters, he found that his money
was not too much to let them have everything they fancied, as they were
accustomed to do.

But one day a most unexpected misfortune befell them. Their house caught
fire and was speedily burned to the ground, with all the splendid
furniture, the books, pictures, gold, silver, and precious goods it
contained; and this was only the beginning of their troubles. Their
father, who had until this moment prospered in all ways, suddenly lost
every ship he had upon the sea, either by dint of pirates, shipwreck, or
fire. Then he heard that his clerks in distant countries, whom he had
trusted entirely, had proved unfaithful, and at last from great wealth
he fell into direst poverty.

All that he had left was a little house in a desolate place at least a
hundred leagues from the town in which he had lived, and to this he was
forced to retreat with his children, who were in despair at the idea of
leading such a different life. Indeed, the daughters at first hoped that
their friends, who had been so numerous while they were rich, would
insist on their staying in their houses now they no longer possessed
one. But they soon found that they were left alone, and that their
former friends even attributed their misfortunes to their own
extravagance, and showed no intention of offering them any help. So
nothing was left for them but to take their departure to the cottage,
which stood in the midst of a dark forest, and seemed to be the most
dismal place upon the face of the earth.

As they were too poor to have any servants, the girls had to work hard,
like peasants, and the sons, for their part, cultivated the fields to
earn their living. Roughly clothed, and living in the simplest way, the
girls regretted unceasingly the luxuries and amusements of their former
life; only the youngest tried to be brave and cheerful. She had been as
sad as anyone when the misfortune first overtook her father, but, soon
recovering her natural gayety, she set to work to make the best of
things, to amuse her father and brothers as well as she could, and to
try to persuade her sisters to join her in dancing and singing. But they
would do nothing of the sort, and because she was not as doleful as
themselves they declared that this miserable life was all she was fit
for. But she was really far prettier and cleverer than they were;
indeed, she was so lovely that she was always called Beauty. After two
years, when they were all beginning to get used to their new life,
something happened to disturb their tranquillity. Their father received
the news that one of his ships, which he had believed to be lost, had
come safely into port with a rich cargo.

All the sons and daughters at once thought that their poverty was at an
end and wanted to set out directly for the town, but their father, who
was more prudent, begged them to wait a little, and though it was
harvest-time and he could ill be spared, determined to go himself first
to make inquiries. Only the youngest daughter had any doubt but that
they would soon be as rich as they were before, or at least rich enough
to live comfortably in some town where they would find amusement and gay
companions once more. So they all loaded their father with commissions
for jewels and dresses which it would have taken a fortune to buy; only
Beauty, feeling sure that it was of no use, did not ask for anything.
Her father, noticing her silence, said: "And what shall I bring for you,
Beauty?"

"The only thing I wish for is to see you come home safely," she
answered.

But this reply vexed her sisters, who fancied she was blaming them for
having asked for such costly things. Her father was pleased, but as he
thought that at her age she certainly ought to like pretty presents, he
told her to choose something.

"Well, dear father," said she, "as you insist upon it, I beg that you
will bring me a rose. I have not seen one since we came here, and I love
them so much."

So the merchant set out and reached the town as quickly as possible, but
only to find that his former companions, believing him to be dead, had
divided between them the goods which the ship had brought; and after six
months of trouble and expense he found himself as poor as when he
started, having been able to recover only just enough to pay the cost
of the journey. To make matters worse, he was obliged to leave the town
in terrible weather, so that by the time he was within a few leagues of
his home he was almost exhausted with cold and fatigue. Though he knew
it would take some hours to get through the forest, he was so anxious to
be at his journey's end that he resolved to go on; but night overtook
him, and the deep snow and bitter frost made it impossible for his horse
to carry him any further. Not a house was to be seen. The only shelter
he could get was the hollow trunk of a great tree, and there he crouched
all the night, which seemed to him the longest he had ever known. In
spite of his weariness the howling of the wolves kept him awake, and
even when at last the day broke he was not much better off, for the
falling snow had covered up every path and he did not know which way to
turn.

At length he made out some sort of track, and though at the beginning it
was so rough and slippery that he fell down more than once, it presently
became easier and led him into an avenue of trees which ended in a
splendid castle. It seemed to the merchant very strange that no snow had
fallen in the avenue, which was entirely composed of orange-trees,
covered with flowers and fruit. When he reached the first court of the
castle he saw before him a flight of agate steps, and went up them and
passed through several splendidly furnished rooms. The pleasant warmth
of the air revived him and he felt very hungry; but there seemed to be
nobody in all this vast and splendid palace whom he could ask to give
him something to eat. Deep silence reigned everywhere, and at last,
tired of roaming through empty rooms and galleries, he stopped in a room
smaller than the rest, where a clear fire was burning and a couch was
drawn up cozily, close to it. Thinking that this must be prepared for
some one who was expected, he sat down to wait till he should come and
very soon fell into a sweet sleep.

When his extreme hunger wakened him after several hours he was still
alone, but a little table, upon which was a good dinner, had been drawn
up close to him, and as he had eaten nothing for twenty-four hours he
lost no time in beginning his meal, hoping that he might soon have an
opportunity of thanking his considerate entertainer, whoever it might
be. But no one appeared, and even after another long sleep, from which
he awoke completely refreshed, there was no sign of anybody, though a
fresh meal of dainty cakes and fruit was prepared upon a little table at
his elbow. Being naturally timid, the silence began to terrify him, and
he resolved to search once more through all the rooms; but it was of no
use. Not even a servant was to be seen; there was no sign of life in the
palace! He began to wonder what he should do, and to amuse himself by
pretending that all the treasures he saw were his own, and considering
how he would divide them among his children. Then he went down into the
garden, and though it was winter everywhere else, here the sun shone,
and the birds sang, and the flowers bloomed, and the air was soft and
sweet. The merchant, in ecstasies with all he saw and heard, said to
himself:

"All this must be meant for me. I will go this minute and bring my
children to share all these delights."

In spite of being so cold and weary when he reached the castle, he had
taken his horse to the stable and fed it. Now he thought he would saddle
it for his homeward journey, and he turned down the path which led to
the stable. This path had a hedge of roses on each side of it, and the
merchant thought he had never seen or smelled such exquisite flowers.
They reminded him of his promise to Beauty, and he stopped and had just
gathered one to take to her when he was startled by a strange noise
behind him. Turning round he saw a frightful beast, which seemed to be
very angry and said in a terrible voice: "Who told you that you might
gather my roses? Was it not enough that I allowed you to be in my palace
and was kind to you? This is the way you show your gratitude, by
stealing my flowers! But your insolence shall not go unpunished."

The merchant, terrified by these furious words, dropped the fatal rose,
and throwing himself on his knees cried: "Pardon me, noble sir. I am
truly grateful to you for your hospitality, which was so magnificent
that I could not imagine that you would be offended by my taking such a
little thing as a rose." But the beast's anger was not lessened by this
speech.

"You are very ready with excuses and flattery," he cried; "but that will
not save you from the death you deserve."

"Alas!" thought the merchant, "if my daughter Beauty could only know
what danger her rose has brought me into!"

And in despair be began to tell the beast all his misfortunes and the
reason of his journey, not forgetting to mention Beauty's request.

"A king's ransom would hardly have procured all that my other daughters
asked," he said, "but I thought that I might at least take Beauty her
rose. I beg you to forgive me, for you see I meant no harm."

The beast considered for a moment, and then he said in a less furious
tone:

"I will forgive you on one condition--that is, that you will give me one
of your daughters."

"Ah!" cried the merchant, "if I were cruel enough to buy my own life at
the expense of one of my children's, what excuse could I invent to bring
her here?"

"No excuse would be necessary," answered the beast. "If she comes at all
she must come willingly. On no other condition will I have her. See if
any one of them is courageous enough and loves you well enough to come
and save your life. You seem to be an honest man, so I will trust you to
go home. I give you a month to see if either of your daughters will come
back with you and stay here, to let you go free. If neither of them is
willing you must come alone, after bidding them good-by forever, for
then you will belong to me. And do not imagine that you can hide from
me, for if you fail to keep your word I will come and fetch you!" added
the beast grimly.

The merchant accepted this proposal, though he did not really think any
of his daughters would be persuaded to come. He promised to return at
the time appointed, and then, anxious to escape from the presence of the
beast, he asked permission to set off at once. But the beast answered
that he could not go until the next day.

"Then you will find a horse ready for you," he said. "Now go and eat
your supper and await my orders."

The poor merchant, more dead than alive, went back to his room, where
the most delicious supper was already served on the little table which
was drawn up before a blazing fire. But he was too terrified to eat, and
only tasted a few of the dishes, for fear the beast should be angry if
he did not obey his orders. When he had finished he heard a great noise
in the next room, which he knew meant that the beast was coming. As he
could do nothing to escape his visit, the only thing that remained was
to seem as little afraid as possible; so when the beast appeared and
asked roughly if he had supped well, the merchant answered humbly that
he had, thanks to his host's kindness. Then the beast warned him to
remember their agreement and to prepare his daughter exactly for what
she had to expect.

"Do not get up to-morrow," he added, "until you see the sun and hear a
golden bell ring. Then you will find your breakfast waiting for you
here, and the horse you are to ride will be ready in the court-yard. He
will also bring you back again when you come with your daughter a month
hence. Farewell. Take a rose to Beauty, and remember your promise."

The merchant was only too glad when the beast went away, and though he
could not sleep for sadness, he lay down until the sun rose. Then, after
a hasty breakfast, he went to gather Beauty's rose and mounted his
horse, which carried him off so swiftly that in an instant he had lost
sight of the palace, and he was still wrapped in gloomy thoughts when it
stopped before the door of the cottage.

His sons and daughters, who had been very uneasy at his long absence,
rushed to meet him, eager to know the result of his journey, which,
seeing him mounted upon a splendid horse and wrapped in a rich mantle,
they supposed to be favorable. But he hid the truth from them at first,
only saying sadly to Beauty as he gave her the rose:

"Here is what you asked me to bring you. You little know what it has
cost."

But this excited their curiosity so greatly that presently he told them
his adventures from beginning to end, and then they were all very
unhappy. The girls lamented loudly over their lost hopes, and the sons
declared that their father should not return to this terrible castle,
and began to make plans for killing the beast if it should come to fetch
him. But he reminded them that he had promised to go back. Then the
girls were very angry with Beauty and said it was all her fault, and
that if she had asked for something sensible this would never have
happened, and complained bitterly that they should have to suffer for
her folly.

Poor Beauty, much distressed, said to them:

"I have indeed caused this misfortune, but I assure you I did it
innocently. Who could have guessed that to ask for a rose in the middle
of summer would cause so much misery? But as I did the mischief it is
only just that I should suffer for it. I will therefore go back with my
father to keep his promise."

At first nobody would hear of this arrangement, and her father and
brothers, who loved her dearly, declared that nothing should make them
let her go; but Beauty was firm. As the time drew near she divided all
her little possessions between her sisters and said good-by to
everything she loved, and when the fatal day came she encouraged and
cheered her father as they mounted together the horse which had brought
him back. It seemed to fly rather than gallop, but so smoothly that
Beauty was not frightened; indeed, she would have enjoyed the journey if
she had not feared what might happen to her at the end of it. Her father
still tried to persuade her to go back, but in vain. While they were
talking the night fell, and then, to their surprise, wonderful colored
lights began to shine in all directions, and splendid fireworks blazed
out before them. All the forest was illuminated by them, and even felt
pleasantly warm, though it had been bitterly cold before. This lasted
until they reached the avenue of orange-trees, where were statues
holding flaming torches, and when they got nearer to the palace they saw
that it was illuminated from the roof to the ground, and music sounded
softly from the court-yard. "The beast must be very hungry," said
Beauty, trying to laugh, "if he makes all this rejoicing over the
arrival of his prey."

But in spite of her anxiety she could not help admiring all the
wonderful things she saw.

The horse stopped at the foot of the flight of steps leading to the
terrace, and when they had dismounted her father led her to the little
room he had been in before, where they found a splendid fire burning and
the table daintily spread with a delicious supper.
