    Our faces painted as we pass,
    Like pictures, on the window-glass.

    Must we to bed indeed? Well then,
    Let us arise and go like men,
    And face with an undaunted tread
    The long black passage up to bed.

    Farewell, O brother, sister, sire!
    O pleasant party round the fire!
    The songs you sing, the tales you tell,
    Till far to-morrow, fare ye well!

[Illustration]


2. SHADOW MARCH.

    All round the house is the jet-black night;
      It stares through the window-pane;
    It crawls in the corners, hiding from the light,
      And it moves with the moving flame.

    Now my little heart goes a-beating like a drum,
      With the breath of the Bogie in my hair;
    And all round the candle the crooked shadows come
      And go marching along up the stair.

    The shadow of the balusters, the shadow of the lamp,
      The shadow of the child that goes to bed--
    All the wicked shadows coming, tramp, tramp, tramp,
      With the black night overhead.

    [Illustration:
    "... Come from out the cold and gloom
    Into my warm and cheerful room."]

[Illustration]


3. IN PORT.

    Last, to the chamber where I lie
    My fearful footsteps patter nigh,
    And come from out the cold and gloom
    Into my warm and cheerful room.

    There, safe arrived, we turn about
    To keep the coming shadows out,
    And close the happy door at last
    On all the perils that we past.

    Then, when mamma goes by to bed,
    She shall come in with tip-toe tread,
    And see me lying warm and fast
    And in the Land of Nod at last.




THE CHILD ALONE




THE CHILD ALONE

I

THE UNSEEN PLAYMATE


    When children are playing alone on the green,
    In comes the playmate that never was seen.
    When children are happy and lonely and good,
    The Friend of the Children comes out of the wood.

    Nobody heard him and nobody saw,
    His is a picture you never could draw,
    But he's sure to be present, abroad or at home,
    When children are happy and playing alone.

    He lies in the laurels, he runs on the grass,
    He sings when you tinkle the musical glass;
    Whene'er you are happy and cannot tell why,
    The Friend of the Children is sure to be by!

    He loves to be little, he hates to be big,
    'T is he that inhabits the caves that you dig;
    'T is he when you play with your soldiers of tin
    That sides with the Frenchmen and never can win.

    'T is he, when at night you go off to your bed,
    Bids you go to your sleep and not trouble your head;
    For wherever they're lying, in cupboard or shelf,
    'T is he will take care of your playthings himself!

[Illustration]




II

MY SHIP AND I


    O it's I that am the captain of a tidy little ship,
      Of a ship that goes a-sailing on the pond;
    And my ship it keeps a-turning all around and all about;
    But when I'm a little older, I shall find the secret out
      How to send my vessel sailing on beyond.

    For I mean to grow as little as the dolly at the helm,
      And the dolly I intend to come alive;
    And with him beside to help me, it's a-sailing I shall go,
    It's a-sailing on the water, when the jolly breezes blow
      And the vessel goes a divie-divie dive.

    O it's then you'll see me sailing through the rushes and the reeds,
      And you'll hear the water singing at the prow;
    For beside the dolly sailor, I'm to voyage and explore,
    To land upon the island where no dolly was before,
      And to fire the penny cannon in the bow.

[Illustration]




III

MY KINGDOM


    Down by a shining water well
    I found a very little dell,
        No higher than my head.
    The heather and the gorse about
    In summer bloom were coming out,
        Some yellow and some red.

    I called the little pool a sea;
    The little hills were big to me;
        For I am very small.
    I made a boat, I made a town,
    I searched the caverns up and down,
        And named them one and all.

    And all about was mine, I said,
    The little sparrows overhead,
        The little minnows too.
    This was the world and I was king;
    For me the bees came by to sing,
        For me the swallows flew.

    I played there were no deeper seas,
    Nor any wider plains than these,
        Nor other kings than me.
    At last I heard my mother call
    Out from the house at evenfall,
        To call me home to tea.

    And I must rise and leave my dell,
    And leave my dimpled water well,
        And leave my heather blooms.
    Alas! and as my home I neared,
    How very big my nurse appeared,
        How great and cool the rooms!

[Illustration: "This was the world and I was king."]

[Illustration]




IV

PICTURE-BOOKS IN WINTER


    Summer fading, winter comes--
    Frosty mornings, tingling thumbs,
    Window robins, winter rooks,
    And the picture story-books.

    Water now is turned to stone
    Nurse and I can walk upon;
    Still we find the flowing brooks
    In the picture story-books.

    All the pretty things put by,
    Wait upon the children's eye,
    Sheep and shepherds, trees and crooks,
    In the picture story-books.

    We may see how all things are,
    Seas and cities, near and far,
    And the flying fairies' looks,
    In the picture story-books.

    How am I to sing your praise,
    Happy chimney-corner days,
    Sitting safe in nursery nooks,
    Reading picture story-books?

[Illustration]




V

MY TREASURES


    These nuts, that I keep in the back of the nest
    Where all my lead soldiers are lying at rest,
    Were gathered in autumn by nursie and me
    In a wood with a well by the side of the sea.

    This whistle we made (and how clearly it sounds!)
    By the side of a field at the end of the grounds.
    Of a branch of a plane, with a knife of my own,
    It was nursie who made it, and nursie alone!

    The stone, with the white and the yellow and grey,
    We discovered I cannot tell _how_ far away;
    And I carried it back although weary and cold,
    For though father denies it, I'm sure it is gold.

    But of all of my treasures the last is the king,
    For there's very few children possess such a thing;
    And that is a chisel, both handle and blade,
    Which a man who was really a carpenter made.

[Illustration]




VI

BLOCK CITY


    What are you able to build with your blocks?
    Castles and palaces, temples and docks.
    Rain may keep raining, and others go roam,
    But I can be happy and building at home.

    Let the sofa be mountains, the carpet be sea,
    There I'll establish a city for me:
    A kirk and a mill and a palace beside,
    And a harbour as well where my vessels may ride.

    Great is the palace with pillar and wall,
    A sort of a tower on the top of it all,
    And steps coming down in an orderly way
    To where my toy vessels lie safe in the bay.

    This one is sailing and that one is moored:
    Hark to the song of the sailors on board!
    And see on the steps of my palace, the kings
    Coming and going with presents and things!

    Now I have done with it, down let it go!
    All in a moment the town is laid low.
    Block upon block lying scattered and free,
    What is there left of my town by the sea?

