from my brother-in-law, Sir Clifford Williams, of Clifford Hall.
He wants me to find him a trustworthy young groom, about twenty or
twenty-one, who knows his business. His old coachman, who has lived with
him thirty years, is getting feeble, and he wants a man to work with him
and get into his ways, who would be able, when the old man was pensioned
off, to step into his place. He would have eighteen shillings a week at
first, a stable suit, a driving suit, a bedroom over the coachhouse, and
a boy under him. Sir Clifford is a good master, and if you could get the
place it would be a good start for you. I don't want to part with you,
and if you left us I know John would lose his right hand."

"That I should, sir," said John, "but I would not stand in his light for
the world."

"How old are you, James?" said master.

"Nineteen next May, sir."

"That's young; what do you think, John?"

"Well, sir, it is young; but he is as steady as a man, and is strong,
and well grown, and though he has not had much experience in driving, he
has a light firm hand and a quick eye, and he is very careful, and I am
quite sure no horse of his will be ruined for want of having his feet
and shoes looked after."

"Your word will go the furthest, John," said the master, "for Sir
Clifford adds in a postscript, 'If I could find a man trained by your
John I should like him better than any other;' so, James, lad, think it
over, talk to your mother at dinner-time, and then let me know what you
wish."

In a few days after this conversation it was fully settled that James
should go to Clifford Hall, in a month or six weeks, as it suited his
master, and in the meantime he was to get all the practice in driving
that could be given to him. I never knew the carriage to go out so often
before; when the mistress did not go out the master drove himself in the
two-wheeled chaise; but now, whether it was master or the young ladies,
or only an errand, Ginger and I were put in the carriage and James drove
us. At the first John rode with him on the box, telling him this and
that, and after that James drove alone.

Then it was wonderful what a number of places the master would go to in
the city on Saturday, and what queer streets we were driven through. He
was sure to go to the railway station just as the train was coming in,
and cabs and carriages, carts and omnibuses were all trying to get over
the bridge together; that bridge wanted good horses and good drivers
when the railway bell was ringing, for it was narrow, and there was a
very sharp turn up to the station, where it would not have been at all
difficult for people to run into each other, if they did not look sharp
and keep their wits about them.




15 The Old Hostler


After this it was decided by my master and mistress to pay a visit to
some friends who lived about forty-six miles from our home, and James
was to drive them. The first day we traveled thirty-two miles.
There were some long, heavy hills, but James drove so carefully and
thoughtfully that we were not at all harassed. He never forgot to put on
the brake as we went downhill, nor to take it off at the right place. He
kept our feet on the smoothest part of the road, and if the uphill was
very long, he set the carriage wheels a little across the road, so as
not to run back, and gave us a breathing. All these little things help a
horse very much, particularly if he gets kind words into the bargain.

We stopped once or twice on the road, and just as the sun was going down
we reached the town where we were to spend the night. We stopped at the
principal hotel, which was in the market-place; it was a very large one;
we drove under an archway into a long yard, at the further end of which
were the stables and coachhouses. Two hostlers came to take us out. The
head hostler was a pleasant, active little man, with a crooked leg,
and a yellow striped waistcoat. I never saw a man unbuckle harness so
quickly as he did, and with a pat and a good word he led me to a long
stable, with six or eight stalls in it, and two or three horses. The
other man brought Ginger; James stood by while we were rubbed down and
cleaned.

I never was cleaned so lightly and quickly as by that little old man.
When he had done James stepped up and felt me over, as if he thought I
could not be thoroughly done, but he found my coat as clean and smooth
as silk.

"Well," he said, "I thought I was pretty quick, and our John quicker
still, but you do beat all I ever saw for being quick and thorough at
the same time."

"Practice makes perfect," said the crooked little hostler, "and 'twould
be a pity if it didn't; forty years' practice, and not perfect! ha, ha!
that would be a pity; and as to being quick, why, bless you! that is
only a matter of habit; if you get into the habit of being quick it is
just as easy as being slow; easier, I should say; in fact it don't agree
with my health to be hulking about over a job twice as long as it need
take. Bless you! I couldn't whistle if I crawled over my work as some
folks do! You see, I have been about horses ever since I was twelve
years old, in hunting stables, and racing stables; and being small, ye
see, I was jockey for several years; but at the Goodwood, ye see, the
turf was very slippery and my poor Larkspur got a fall, and I broke my
knee, and so of course I was of no more use there. But I could not live
without horses, of course I couldn't, so I took to the hotels. And I
can tell ye it is a downright pleasure to handle an animal like this,
well-bred, well-mannered, well-cared-for; bless ye! I can tell how a
horse is treated. Give me the handling of a horse for twenty minutes,
and I'll tell you what sort of a groom he has had. Look at this one,
pleasant, quiet, turns about just as you want him, holds up his feet to
be cleaned out, or anything else you please to wish; then you'll find
another fidgety, fretty, won't move the right way, or starts across the
stall, tosses up his head as soon as you come near him, lays his ears,
and seems afraid of you; or else squares about at you with his heels.
Poor things! I know what sort of treatment they have had. If they are
timid it makes them start or shy; if they are high-mettled it makes them
vicious or dangerous; their tempers are mostly made when they are young.
Bless you! they are like children, train 'em up in the way they should
go, as the good book says, and when they are old they will not depart
from it, if they have a chance."

"I like to hear you talk," said James, "that's the way we lay it down at
home, at our master's."

"Who is your master, young man? if it be a proper question. I should
judge he is a good one, from what I see."

"He is Squire Gordon, of Birtwick Park, the other side the Beacon
Hills," said James.

"Ah! so, so, I have heard tell of him; fine judge of horses, ain't he?
the best rider in the county."

"I believe he is," said James, "but he rides very little now, since the
poor young master was killed."

"Ah! poor gentleman; I read all about it in the paper at the time. A
fine horse killed, too, wasn't there?"

"Yes," said James; "he was a splendid creature, brother to this one, and
just like him."

"Pity! pity!" said the old man; "'twas a bad place to leap, if I
remember; a thin fence at top, a steep bank down to the stream, wasn't
it? No chance for a horse to see where he is going. Now, I am for bold
riding as much as any man, but still there are some leaps that only
a very knowing old huntsman has any right to take. A man's life and a
horse's life are worth more than a fox's tail; at least, I should say
they ought to be."

During this time the other man had finished Ginger and had brought our
corn, and James and the old man left the stable together.




16 The Fire


Later on in the evening a traveler's horse was brought in by the second
hostler, and while he was cleaning him a young man with a pipe in his
mouth lounged into the stable to gossip.

"I say, Towler," said the hostler, "just run up the ladder into the loft
and put some hay down into this horse's rack, will you? only lay down
your pipe."

"All right," said the other, and went up through the trapdoor; and I
heard him step across the floor overhead and put down the hay. James
came in to look at us the last thing, and then the door was locked.

I cannot say how long I had slept, nor what time in the night it was,
but I woke up very uncomfortable, though I hardly knew why. I got up;
the air seemed all thick and choking. I heard Ginger coughing and one
of the other horses seemed very restless; it was quite dark, and I could
see nothing, but the stable seemed full of smoke, and I hardly knew how
to breathe.

The trapdoor had been left open, and I thought that was the place it
came through. I listened, and heard a soft rushing sort of noise and a
low crackling and snapping. I did not know what it was, but there was
something in the sound so strange that it made me tremble all over. The
other horses were all awake; some were pulling at their halters, others
stamping.

At last I heard steps outside, and the hostler who had put up the
traveler's horse burst into the stable with a lantern, and began to
untie the horses, and try to lead them out; but he seemed in such a
hurry and so frightened himself that he frightened me still more. The
first horse would not go with him; he tried the second and third, and
they too would not stir. He came to me next and tried to drag me out of
the stall by force; of course that was no use. He tried us all by turns
and then left the stable.

No doubt we were very foolish, but danger seemed to be all round, and
there was nobody we knew to trust in, and all was strange and uncertain.
The fresh air that had come in through the open door made it easier to
breathe, but the rushing sound overhead grew louder, and as I looked
upward through the bars of my empty rack I saw a red light flickering
on the wall. Then I heard a cry of "Fire!" outside, and the old hostler
quietly and quickly came in; he got one horse out, and went to another,
but the flames were playing round the trapdoor, and the roaring overhead
was dreadful.

The next thing I heard was James' voice, quiet and cheery, as it always
was.

"Come, my beauties, it is time for us to be off, so wake up and come
along." I stood nearest the door, so he came to me first, patting me as
he came in.

"Come, Beauty, on with your bridle, my boy, we'll soon be out of this
smother." It was on in no time; then he took the scarf off his neck, and
tied it lightly over my eyes, and patting and coaxing he led me out
of the stable. Safe in the yard, he slipped the scarf off my eyes, and
shouted, "Here somebody! take this horse while I go back for the other."

A tall, broad man stepped forward and took me, and James darted back
into the stable. I set up a shrill whinny as I saw him go. Ginger told
me afterward that whinny was the best thing I could have done for her,
for had she not heard me outside she would never have had courage to
come out.

There was much confusion in the yard; the horses being got out of other
stables, and the carriages and gigs being pulled out of houses and
sheds, lest the flames should spread further. On the other side the yard
windows were thrown up, and people were shouting all sorts of things;
but I kept my eye fixed on the stable door, where the smoke poured out
thicker than ever, and I could see flashes of red light; presently I
heard above all the stir and din a loud, clear voice, which I knew was
master's:

"James Howard! James Howard! Are you there?" There was no answer, but I
heard a crash of something falling in the stable, and the next moment
I gave a loud, joyful neigh, for I saw James coming through the smoke
leading Ginger with him; she was coughing violently, and he was not able
to speak.

"My brave lad!" said master, laying his hand on his shoulder, "are you
hurt?"

James shook his head, for he could not yet speak.

"Ay," said the big man who held me; "he is a brave lad, and no mistake."

"And now," said master, "when you have got your breath, James, we'll get
out of this place as quickly as we can," and we were moving toward the
entry, when from the market-place there came a sound of galloping feet
and loud rumbling wheels.

"'Tis the fire-engine! the fire-engine!" shouted two or three voices,
"stand back, make way!" and clattering and thundering over the stones
two horses dashed into the yard with a heavy engine behind them. The
firemen leaped to the ground; there was no need to ask where the fire
was--it was rolling up in a great blaze from the roof.

We got out as fast as we could into the broad quiet market-place; the
stars were shining, and except the noise behind us, all was still.
Master led the way to a large hotel on the other side, and as soon as
the hostler came, he said, "James, I must now hasten to your mistress;
I trust the horses entirely to you, order whatever you think is needed,"
and with that he was gone. The master did not run, but I never saw
mortal man walk so fast as he did that night.

There was a dreadful sound before we got into our stalls--the shrieks of
those poor horses that were left burning to death in the stable--it was
very terrible! and made both Ginger and me feel very bad. We, however,
were taken in and well done by.

The next morning the master came to see how we were and to speak to
James. I did not hear much, for the hostler was rubbing me down, but
I could see that James looked very happy, and I thought the master was
proud of him. Our mistress had been so much alarmed in the night that
the journey was put off till the afternoon, so James had the morning
on hand, and went first to the inn to see about our harness and the
carriage, and then to hear more about the fire. When he came back we
heard him tell the hostler about it. At first no one could guess how the
fire had been caused, but at last a man said he saw Dick Towler go into
the stable with a pipe in his mouth, and when he came out he had not
one, and went to the tap for another. Then the under hostler said he had
asked Dick to go up the ladder to put down some hay, but told him to lay
down his pipe first. Dick denied taking the pipe with him, but no one
believed him. I remember our John Manly's rule, never to allow a pipe in
the stable, and thought it ought to be the rule everywhere.

James said the roof and floor had all fallen in, and that only the black
walls were standing; the two poor horses that could not be got out were
buried under the burnt rafters and tiles.




17 John Manly's Talk


The rest of our journey was very easy, and a little after sunset we
reached the house of my master's friend. We were taken into a clean,
snug stable; there was a kind coachman, who made us very comfortable,
and who seemed to think a good deal of James when he heard about the
fire.

"There is one thing quite clear, young man," he said, "your horses know
who they can trust; it is one of the hardest things in the world to get
horses out of a stable when there is either fire or flood. I don't know
why they won't come out, but they won't--not one in twenty."

We stopped two or three days at this place and then returned home. All
went well on the journey; we were glad to be in our own stable again,
and John was equally glad to see us.

Before he and James left us for the night James said, "I wonder who is
coming in my place."

"Little Joe Green at the lodge," said John.

"Little Joe Green! why, he's a child!"

"He is fourteen and a half," said John.

"But he is such a little chap!"

