you may rely upon it."

"What's his name?"

"Frank Fowler."

"Fowler! Is his name Fowler?" he repeated, with a startled expression.

"Yes, sir," answered the housekeeper, rather surprised at his manner.
"You don't know anything about him, do you?"

"Oh, no," said John Wade, recovering his composure. "He is a perfect
stranger to me; but I once knew a man of that name, and a precious
rascal he was. When you mentioned his name, I thought he might be a son
of this man. Does he say his father is alive?"

"No; he is dead, and his mother, too, so the boy says."

"You haven't told me how my uncle fell in with him?"

"It was an accident. Your uncle fell in getting out of a Broadway stage,
and this boy happened to be near, and seeing Mr. Wharton was a rich
gentleman, he helped him home, and was invited in. Then he told some
story about his poverty, and so worked upon your uncle's feelings that
he hired him to read to him at five dollars a week."

"Is this all the boy does?"

"No; he is cash-boy in a large store on Broadway. He is employed there
all day, and he is here only in the evenings."

"Does my uncle seem attached to him?" asked John.

"He's getting fond of him, I should say. The other day he asked me if
I didn't think it would be a good thing to take him into the house and
give him a room. I suppose the boy put it into his head."

"No doubt. What did you say?"

"I opposed it. I told him that a boy would be a great deal of trouble in
the family."

"You did right, Mrs. Bradley. What did my uncle say?"

"He hinted about taking him from the store and letting him go to school.
The next thing would be his adopting him. The fact is, Mr. John, the boy
is so artful that he knows just how to manage your uncle. No doubt he
put the idea into Mr. Wharton's head, and he may do it yet."

"Does my uncle give any reason for the fancy he has taken to the boy?"
demanded John.

"Yes," said the housekeeper. "He has taken it into his head that the
boy resembles your cousin, George, who died abroad. You were with him, I
believe?"

"Yes, I was with him. Is the resemblance strong? I took very little
notice of him."

"You can look for yourself when you go back," answered the housekeeper.

"What else did my uncle say? Tell me all."

"He said: 'What would I give, Mrs. Bradley, if I had such a grandson?
If George's boy had lived, he would have been about Frank's age. And,"
continued the housekeeper, "I might as well speak plainly. You're my
master's heir, or ought to be; but if this artful boy stays here long,
there's no knowing what your uncle may be influenced to do. If he gets
into his dotage, he may come to adopt him, and leave the property away
from you."

"I believe you are quite right. The danger exists, and we must guard
against it. I see you don't like the boy," said John Wade.

"No, I don't. He's separated your uncle and me. Before he came, I used
to spend my evenings in the library, and read to your uncle. Besides,
when I found your uncle wanted a reader, I asked him to take my nephew,
who is a salesman in the very same store where that boy is a cash-boy,
but although I've been twenty years in this house I could not get him to
grant the favor, which he granted to that boy, whom he never met till a
few weeks ago."

"Mrs. Bradley, I sympathize with you," said her companion. "The boy
is evidently working against us both. You have been twenty years in my
uncle's service. He ought to remember you handsomely in his will. If
I inherit the property, as is my right, your services shall be
remembered," said John Wade.

"Thank you, Mr. John," said the gratified housekeeper.

"That secures her help," thought John, in his turn.

"She will now work hard for me. When the time comes, I can do as much or
as little for her as I please."

"Of course, we must work together against this interloper, who appears
to have gained a dangerous influence over my uncle."

"You can depend upon me, Mr. John," said Mrs. Bradley.

"I will think it over, and tell you my plan," said John Wade. "But my
uncle will wonder at my appetite. I must go back to the library. We will
speak of this subject again."



CHAPTER XII

A FALSE FRIEND


When John Wade re-entered the library, Frank was reading, but Mr.
Wharton stopped him.

"That will do, Frank," he said. "As I have not seen my nephew for a long
time, I shall not require you to read any longer. You can go, if you
like."

Frank bowed, and bidding the two good-evening, left the room.

"That is an excellent boy, John." said the old gentleman, as the door
closed upon our hero.

"How did you fall in with him?" asked John. Mr. Wharton told the story
with which the reader is already familiar.

"You don't know anything of his antecedents, I suppose?" said John,
carelessly.

"Only what he told me. His father and mother are dead, and he is obliged
to support himself and his sister. Did you notice anything familiar in
Frank's expression?" asked Mr. Wharton.

"I don't know. I didn't observe him very closely."

"Whenever I look at Frank, I think of George. I suppose that is why I
have felt more closely drawn to the boy. I proposed to Mrs. Bradley that
the boy should have a room here, but she did not favor it. I think she
is prejudiced against him."

"Probably she is afraid he would be some trouble," replied John.

"If George's boy had lived he would be about Frank's age. It would have
been a great comfort to me to superintend his education, and watch him
grow up. I could not have wished him to be more gentlemanly or promising
than my young reader."

"Decidedly, that boy is in my way," said John Wade to himself. "I must
manage to get rid of him, and that speedily, or my infatuated uncle will
be adopting him."

"Of what disease did George's boy die, John?" asked Mr. Wharton.

"A sudden fever."

"I wish I could have seen him before he died. But I returned only to
find both son and grandson gone. I had only the sad satisfaction of
seeing his grave."

"Yes, he was buried in the family lot at Greenwood, five days before you
reached home."

"When I see men of my own age, surrounded by children and grandchildren,
it makes me almost envious," said Mr. Wharton, sadly. "I declare to
you, John, since that boy has been with me, I have felt happier and more
cheerful than for years."

"That boy again!" muttered John to himself. "I begin to hate the young
cub, but I mustn't show it. My first work will be to separate him from
my uncle. That will require consideration. I wonder whether the boy
knows that he is not Fowler's son? I must find out. If he does, and
should happen to mention it in my uncle's presence, it might awaken
suspicions in his mind. I must interview the boy, and find out what I
can. To enlist his confidence, I must assume a friendly manner."

In furtherance of this determination, John Wade greeted our hero very
cordially the next evening, when they met, a little to Frank's surprise.

When the reading terminated, John Wade said, carelessly:

"I believe, uncle, I will go out for a walk. I think I shall be better
for it. In what direction are you going, Frank?"

"Down Sixth Avenue, sir."

"Very good; I will walk along with you."

Frank and his companion walked toward Sixth Avenue.

"My uncle tells me you have a sister to support," said Wade, opening the
conversation.

"Yes, sir."

"Does your sister resemble you?" asked John Wade.

"No, sir! but that is not surprising, for----"

"Why is it not surprising?"

Frank hesitated.

"You were about to assign some reason."

"It is a secret," said our hero, slowly; "that is, has been a secret,
but I don't know why I should conceal it. Grace is not my sister. She
is Mrs. Fowler's daughter, but I am not her son. I will tell you the
story."

That story Frank told as briefly as possible. John Wade listened to it
with secret alarm.

"It is a strange story," he said. "Do you not feel a strong desire to
learn your true parentage?"

"Yes, sir. I don't know, but I feel as if I should some day meet the man
who gave me into Mrs. Fowler's charge."

"You have met him, but it is lucky you don't suspect it," thought John
Wade.

"I am glad you told me this story," said he, aloud.

"It is quite romantic. I may be able to help you in your search. But let
me advise you to tell no one else at present. No doubt there are parties
interested in keeping the secret of your birth from you. You must move
cautiously, and your chance of solving the mystery will be improved."

"Thank you, sir. I will follow your advice."

"I was mistaken in him," thought Frank. "I disliked him at first, but he
seems inclined to be my friend."

When Frank reached his lodging he found Jasper waiting up for him. He
looked thoughtful, so much so that Frank noticed it.

"You look as if you had something on your mind," Jasper.

"You have guessed right. I have read that letter."

He drew from his pocket a letter, which Frank took from his hands.

"It is from an uncle of mine in Ohio, who is proprietor of a weekly
newspaper. He is getting old, and finds the work too much for him. He
offers me a thousand dollars a year if I will come out and relieve him."

"That's a good offer, Jasper. I suppose you will accept it?"

"It is for my interest to do so. Probably my uncle will, after a while,
surrender the whole establishment to me."

"I shall be sorry to part with you, Jasper. It will seem very lonely,
but I think you ought to go. It is a good chance, and if you refuse it
you may not get such another."

"My uncle wants me to come on at once. I think I will start Monday."

Jasper saw no reason to change his determination, and on Monday morning
he started on his journey to Ohio.

Thus, at a critical moment in his fortunes, when two persons were
planning to injure him, he lost the presence and help of a valued
friend.



CHAPTER XIII

THE SPIDER AND THE FLY


"Uncle," said John Wade, "you spoke of inviting Frank Fowler to occupy
a room in the house. Why don't you do it? It would be more convenient to
you and a very good chance for him."

"I should like it," said Mr. Wharton, "but Mrs. Bradley did not seem to
regard it favorably when I suggested it."

"Oh, Mrs. Bradley is unused to boys, and she is afraid he would give her
trouble. I'll undertake to bring her around."

"I wish you would, John. I don't think Frank would give any trouble, and
it would enliven the house to have a boy here. Besides, he reminds me of
George, as I told you the other day."

"I agree with you, uncle," he said. "He does remind me a little of
George."

"Well, Mrs. Bradley, what do you think I have done?" asked John,
entering the housekeeper's room directly after his interview with his
uncle.

"I don't know, Mr. John," she answered.

"I have asked him to give that boy a room in the house."

"Are you carried away with him as well as your uncle?"

"Not quite. The fact is, I have a motive in what I am doing. I'll tell
you."

He bent over and whispered in her ear.

"I never should have thought of that."

"You see, our purpose is to convince my uncle that he is unworthy of his
favor. At present that would be rather difficult, but once get him into
the house and we shall have no trouble."

"I understand."

In due time John Wade announced to his uncle that the housekeeper had
withdrawn her objections to his plan.

"Then I'll tell him to-night," said Mr. Wharton, brightening up.

Shortly after Frank entered the library that evening Mr. Wharton made
the proposal.

"You are very kind, Mr. Wharton," he said. "I never thought of such a
thing."

"Then it is settled that you are to come. You can choose your own time
for coming."

"I will come to-morrow, sir."

"Very well," said Mr. Wharton, with satisfaction.

The next day, by special favor, Frank got off from the store two hours
earlier than usual. He bought at a Sixth Avenue basement store, a small,
second hand trunk for two dollars. He packed his scanty wardrobe into
the trunk, which, small as it was he was unable to fill, and had it
carried to Mr. Wharton's house.

He asked to see Mrs. Bradley, and she came to the door.

"I am glad to see you," she said graciously. "You may leave your trunk
in the hall and I will have it carried up by the servants."

"Thank you," said Frank, and he followed the housekeeper up the handsome
staircase.

"This is to be your room," said the housekeeper, opening the door of a
small chamber on the third floor.

"It looks very nice and comfortable," said Frank, looking about him with
satisfaction.

She left the room, and five minutes later our hero's modest trunk was
brought up and deposited in the room.

That evening Frank read to Mr. Wharton as usual.

When nine o'clock came he said:

"You need not read aloud any more, but if you see any books in my
library which you would like to read to yourself you may do so. In fact,
Frank, you must consider yourself one of the family, and act as freely
as if you were at home."

"How kind you are to me, Mr. Wharton," said Frank.

The next morning after Frank had left the house for his daily task, John
Wade entered the housekeeper's room.

"The boy is out of the way now, Mrs. Bradley," he said. "You had better
see if you have a key that will unlock his trunk."

The two conspirators went upstairs, and together entered Frank's room.

Mrs. Bradley brought out a large bunch of keys, and successively tried
them, but one after another failed to open it.

"That's awkward," said John Wade. "I have a few keys in my pocket. One
may possibly answer."

The housekeeper kneeled down, and made a trial of John Wade's keys. The
last one was successful. The cover was lifted, and the contents were
disclosed. However, neither John nor Mrs. Bradley seemed particularly
interested in the articles for after turning them over they locked the
trunk once more.

"So far so good," said John Wade. "We have found the means of opening
the trunk when we please."

"When do you expect to carry out your plan, Mr. John?"

"Two weeks from this time my uncle is obliged to go to Washington for a
few days on business. While he is gone we will spring the trap, and when
he comes back he will find the boy gone in disgrace. We'll make short
work of him."



CHAPTER XIV

SPRINGING THE TRAP


"I am going to give you a few days' vacation, Frank," said Mr. Wharton,
a fortnight later. "I am called to Washington on business. However, you
have got to feel at home here now."

"Oh, yes, sir."

"And Mrs. Bradley will see that you are comfortable."

"I am sure of that, sir," said Frank, politely.

When Frank returned at night, Mr. Wharton was already gone. John Wade
and the housekeeper seated themselves in the library after dinner, and
by their invitation our hero joined them.

"By the way, Frank," said John Wade, "did I ever show you this Russia
leather pocketbook?" producing one from his pocket.

"No, sir, I believe not."

"I bought it at Vienna, which is noted for its articles of Russia
leather."

"It is very handsome, sir."

"So I think. By the way, you may like to look at my sleeve-buttons. They
are of Venetian mosaic. I got them myself in Venice last year."

"They are very elegant. You must have enjoyed visiting so many famous
cities."

"Yes; it is very interesting."

John Wade took up the evening paper, and Frank occupied himself with a
book from his patron's library. After a while John threw down the paper
yawning, and said that he had an engagement. Nothing else occurred that
evening which merits record.

Two days later Frank returned home in his usual spirits. But at the
table he was struck by a singular change in the manner of Mrs. Bradley
and John Wade. They spoke to him only on what it was absolutely
necessary, and answered his questions in monosyllables.

"Will you step into the library a moment?" said John Wade, as they arose
from the table.

Frank followed John into the library, and Mrs. Bradley entered also.

"Frank Fowler," the enemy began, "do you remember my showing you two
evenings since a pocketbook, also some sleeve-buttons of Venetian
mosaic, expensively mounted in gold?"

"Certainly, sir."

"That pocketbook contained a considerable sum of money," pursued his
questioner.

"I don't know anything about that."

"You probably supposed so."

"Will you tell me what you mean, Mr. Wade?" demanded Frank, impatiently.
"I have answered your questions, but I can't understand why you ask
them."

"Perhaps you may suspect," said Wade, sarcastically.

"It looks as if you had lost them and suspected me of taking them."

"So it appears."
