parents was clear.

Here are some that foxes taught me, without saying a word:--

Never sleep on your straight track.

Your nose is before your eyes, then trust it first.

A fool runs down the wind.

Running rills cure many ills.

Never take the open if you can keep the cover.

Never leave a straight trail if a crooked one will do.

If it's strange, it's hostile.

Dust and water burn the scent.

Never hunt mice in a rabbit-woods, or rabbits in a henyard.

Keep off the grass.

Inklings of the meanings of these were already entering the little ones'
minds--thus, 'Never follow what you can't smell,' was wise, they could
see, because if you can't smell it, then the wind is so that it must
smell you.

One by one they learned the birds and beasts of their home woods, and
then as they were able to go abroad with their parents they learned new
animals. They were beginning to think they knew the scent of everything
that moved. But one night the mother took them to a field where there
was a strange black flat thing on the ground. She brought them on
purpose to smell it, but at the first whiff their every hair stood on
end, they trembled, they knew not why--it seemed to tingle through their
blood and fill them with instinctive hate and fear.

And when she saw its full effect she told them--

"That is man-scent."

III

Meanwhile the hens continued to disappear. I had not betrayed the den
of cubs. Indeed, I thought a good deal more of the little rascals than
I did of the hens; but uncle was dreadfully wrought up and made most
disparaging remarks about my woodcraft. To please him I one day took
the hound across to the woods and seating myself on a stump on the open
hillside, I bade the dog go on. Within three minutes he sang out in the
tongue all hunters know so well, "Fox! fox! fox! straight away down the
valley."

After awhile I heard them coming back. There I saw the
fox--Scarface--loping lightly across the river-bottom to the stream. In
he went and trotted along in the shallow water near the margin for two
hundred yards, then came out straight toward me. Though in full view,
he saw me not but came up the hill watching over his shoulder for the
hound. Within ten feet of me he turned and sat with his back to me
while he craned his neck and showed an eager interest in the doings
of the hound. Ranger came bawling along the trail till he came to the
running water, the killer of scent, and here he was puzzled; but there
was only one thing to do; that was by going up and down both banks find
where the fox had left the river.

The fox before me shifted his position a little to get a better view and
watched with a most human interest all the circling of the hound. He was
so close that I saw the hair of his shoulder bristle a little when the
dog came in sight. I could see the jumping of his heart on his ribs,
and the gleam of his yellow eye. When the dog was wholly baulked by the
water trick, it was comical to see:--he could not sit still, but rocked
up and down in glee, and reared on his hind feet to get a better view
of the slow-plodding hound. With mouth opened nearly to his ears, though
not at all winded, he panted noisily for a moment, or rather he laughed
gleefully, just as a dog laughs by grinning and panting.

Old Scarface wriggled in huge enjoyment as the hound puzzled over the
trail so long that when he did find it, it was so stale he could barely
follow it, and did not feel justified in tonguing on it at all.

As soon as the hound was working up the hill, the fox quietly went into
the woods. I had been sitting in plain view only ten feet away, but I
had the wind and kept still and the fox never knew that his life had for
twenty minutes been in the power of the foe he most feared.

Ranger also would have passed me as near as the fox, but I spoke to him,
and with a little nervous start he quit the trail and looking sheepish
lay down by my feet.

This little comedy was played with variations for several days, but
it was all in plain view from the house across the river. My uncle,
impatient at the daily loss of hens, went out himself, sat on the open
knoll, and when old Scarface trotted to his lookout to watch the dull
hound on the river flat below, my uncle remorselessly shot him in the
back, at the very moment when he was grinning over a new triumph.

IV

But still the hens were disappearing. My uncle was wrathy. He determined
to conduct the war himself, and sowed the woods with poison baits,
trusting to luck that our own dogs would not get them. He indulged in
contemptuous remarks on my by-gone woodcraft, and went out evenings with
a gun and the two dogs, to see what he could destroy.

Vix knew right well what a poisoned bait was; she passed them by or else
treated them with active contempt, but one she dropped down the hole
of an old enemy, a skunk, who was never afterward seen. Formerly old
Scarface was always ready to take charge of the dogs, and keep them out
of mischief. But now that Vix had the whole burden of the brood, she
could no longer spend time in breaking every track to the den, and was
not always at hand to meet and mislead the foes that might be coming too
near.

The end is easily foreseen. Ranger followed a hot trail to the den, and
Spot, the fox-terrier, announced that the family was at home, and then
did his best to go in after them.

The whole secret was now out, and the whole family doomed. The hired man
came around with pick and shovel to dig them out, while we and the dogs
stood by. Old Vix soon showed herself in the near woods, and led the
dogs away off down the river, where she shook them off when she thought
proper, by the simple device of springing on a sheep's back. The
frightened animal ran for several hundred yards, then Vix got off,
knowing that there was now a hopeless gap in the scent, and returned to
the den. But the dogs, baffled by the break in the trail, soon did the
same, to find Vix hanging about in despair, vainly trying to decoy us
away from her treasures.

Meanwhile Paddy plied both pick and shovel with vigor and effect. The
yellow, gravelly sand was heaping on both sides, and the shoulders of
the sturdy digger were sinking below the level. After an hour's digging,
enlivened by frantic rushes of the dogs after the old fox, who hovered
near in the woods, Pat called:

"Here they are, sot!"

It was the den at the end of the burrow, and cowering as far back as
they could, were the four little woolly cubs.

Before I could interfere, a murderous blow from the shovel, and a sudden
rush for the fierce little terrier, ended the lives of three. The fourth
and smallest was barely saved by holding him by his tail high out of
reach of the excited dogs.

He gave one short squeal, and his poor mother came at the cry, and
circled so near that she would have been shot but for the accidental
protection of the dogs, who somehow always seemed to get between, and
whom she once more led away on a fruitless chase.

The little one saved alive was dropped into a bag, where he lay quite
still. His unfortunate brothers were thrown back into their nursery bed,
and buried under a few shovelfuls of earth.

We guilty ones then went back into the house, and the little fox was
soon chained in the yard. No one knew just why he was kept alive, but
in all a change of feeling had set in, and the idea of killing him was
without a supporter.

He was a pretty little fellow, like a cross between a fox and a lamb.
His woolly visage and form were strangely lamb-like and innocent, but
one could find in his yellow eyes a gleam of cunning and savageness as
unlamb-like as it possibly could be.

As long as anyone was near he crouched sullen and cowed in his
shelter-box, and it was a full hour after being left alone before he
ventured to look out.

My window now took the place of the hollow bass wood. A number of hens
of the breed he knew so well were about the cub in the yard. Late that
afternoon as they strayed near the captive there was a sudden rattle of
the chain, and the youngster dashed at the nearest one and would have
caught him but for the chain which brought him up with a jerk. He got on
his feet and slunk back to his box, and though he afterward made several
rushes he so gauged his leap as to win or fail within the length of the
chain and never again was brought up by its cruel jerk.

As night came down the little fellow became very uneasy, sneaking out of
his box, but going back at each slight alarm, tugging at his chain, or
at times biting it in fury while he held it down with his fore paws.
Suddenly he paused as though listening, then raising his little black
nose he poured out a short quavering cry. Once or twice this was
repeated, the time between being occupied in worrying the chain and
running about. Then an answer came. The far-away Yap-yurrr of the old
fox. A few minutes later a shadowy form appeared on the wood-pile. The
little one slunk into his box, but at once returned and ran to meet his
mother with all the gladness that a fox could show. Quick as a flash
she seized him and turned to bear him away by the road she came. But the
moment the end of the chain was reached the cub was rudely jerked from
the old one's mouth, and she, scared by the opening of a window, fled
over the wood-pile.

An hour afterward the cub had ceased to run about or cry. I peeped out,
and by the light of the moon saw the form of the mother at full length
on the ground by the little one, gnawing at something--the clank of iron
told what, it was that cruel chain. And Tip, the little one, meanwhile
was helping himself to a warm drink.

On my going out the fled into the dark woods, but there by the
shelter-box were two little mice, bloody and still warm, food for the
cub brought by the devoted mother. And in the morning I found the chain
was very bright for a foot or two next the little one's collar.

On walking across the woods to the ruined den, I again found signs of
Vixen. The poor heart-broken mother had come and dug out the bedraggled
bodies of her little ones.

There lay the three little baby foxes all licked smooth now, and by them
were two of our hens fresh killed. The newly heaved earth was printed
all over with telltale signs--signs that told me that here by the side
of her dead she had watched like Rizpah. Here she had brought their
usual meal, the spoil of her nightly hunt. Here she had stretched
herself beside them and vainly offered them their natural drink and
yearned to feed and warm them as of old, but only stiff little bodies
under their soft wool she found, and little cold noses still and
unresponsive.

A deep impress of elbows, breasts, and hocks showed where she had laid
in silent grief and watched them for long and mourned as a wild mother
can mourn for its young. But from that time she came no more to the
ruined den, for now she surely knew that her little ones were dead.
Tip the captive, the weakling of the brood, was now the heir to all her
love. The dogs were loosed to guard the hens. The hired man had orders
to shoot the old fox on sight--so had I but was resolved never to see
her. Chicken-heads, that a fox loves and a dog will not touch, had been
poisoned and scattered through the woods; and the only way to the yard
where Tip was tied, was by climbing the wood-pile after braving all
other dangers.

And yet each night old Vix was there to nurse her baby and bring it
fresh-killed hens and game. Again and again I saw her, although she came
now without awaiting the querulous cry of the captive.

The second night of the captivity I heard the rattle of the chain, and
then made out that the old fox was there, hard at work digging a hole by
the little one's kennel. When it was deep enough to half bury her, she
gathered into it all the slack of the chain, and filled it again with
earth. Then in triumph thinking she had gotten rid of the chain, she
seized little Tip by the neck and turned to dash off up the wood-pile,
but alas! only to have him jerked roughly from her grasp.

Poor little fellow, he whimpered sadly as he crawled into his box. After
half an hour there was a great out cry among the dogs, and by their
straight-away tonguing through the far wood I knew they were chasing
Vix. Away up north they went in the direction of the railway and their
noise faded from hearing. Next morning the hound had not come back.
We soon knew why. Foxes long ago learned what a railroad is; they soon
devised several ways of turning it to account. One way is when hunted to
walk the rails for a long distance just before a train comes. The scent,
always poor on iron, is destroyed by the train and there is always a
chance of hounds being killed by the engine. But another way more sure,
but harder to play, is to lead the hounds straight to a high trestle
just ahead of the train, so that the engine overtakes them on it and
they are surely dashed to destruction.

This trick was skilfully played, and down below we found the mangled
remains of old Ranger and learned that Vix was already wreaking her
revenge.

That same night she returned to the yard before Spot's weary limbs
could bring him back and killed another hen and brought it to Tip, and
stretched her panting length beside him that he might quench his thirst.
For she seemed to think he had no food but what she brought.

It was that hen that betrayed to my uncle the nightly visits.

My own sympathies were all turning to Vix, and I would have no hand in
planning further murders. Next night my uncle himself watched, gun in
hand, for an hour. Then when it became cold and the moon clouded over
he remembered other important business elsewhere, and left Paddy in his
place.

But Paddy was "onaisy" as the stillness and anxiety of watching worked
on his nerves. And the loud bang! bang! an hour later left us sure only
that powder had been burned.

In the morning we found Vix had not failed her young one. Again next
night found my uncle on guard for another hen had been taken. Soon
after dark a single shot was heard, but Vix dropped the game she was
bringing and escaped. Another attempt made that night called forth
another gunshot. Yet next day it was seen by the brightness of the chain
that she had come again and vainly tried for hours to cut that hateful
bond.

Such courage and stanch fidelity were bound to win respect, if not
toleration. At any rate, there was no gunner in wait next night, when
all was still. Could it be of any use? Driven off thrice with gunshots,
would she make another try to feed or free her captive young one? Would
she? Hers was a mother's love. There was but one to watch them this
time, the fourth night, when the quavering whine of the little one was
followed by that shadowy form above the wood pile.

But carrying no fowl or food that could be seen. Had the keen huntress
failed at last? Had she no head of game for this her only charge, or had
she learned to trust his captors for his food?

No, far from all this. The wild-wood mother's heart and hate were true.
Her only thought had been to set him free. All means she knew she tried,
and every danger braved to tend him well and help him to be free. But
all had failed.

Like a shadow she came and in a moment was gone, and Tip seized on
something dropped, and crunched and chewed with relish what she brought.
But even as he ate, a knife-like pang shot through and a scream of pain
escaped him. Then there was a momentary struggle and the little fox was
dead.

The mother's love was strong in Vix, but a higher thought was stronger.
She knew right well the poison's power; she knew the poison bait, and
would have taught him had he lived to know and shun it too. But now at
last when she must choose for him a wretched prisoner's life or sudden
death, she quenched the mother in her breast and freed him by the one
remaining door.

It is when the snow is on the ground that we take the census of the
woods, and when the winter came it told me that Vix no longer roamed the
woods of Erindale. Where she went it never told, but only this, that she
was gone.

Gone, perhaps, to some other far-off haunt to leave behind the sad
remembrance of her murdered little ones and mate. Or gone, may be,
deliberately, from the scene of a sorrowful life, as many a wild-wood
mother has gone, by the means that she herself had used to free her
young one, the last of all her brood.




THE PACING MUSTANG

I

JO CALONE threw down his saddle on the dusty ground, turned his horses
loose, and went clanking into the ranchhouse.

"Nigh about chuck time?" he asked.

"Seventeen minutes," said the cook glancing at the Waterbury, with the
air of a train starter, though this show of precision had never yet been
justified by events.

"How's things on the Perico?" said Jo's pard.

"Hotter'n hinges," said Jo. "Cattle seem O.K.; lots of calves."

"I seen that bunch o' mustangs that waters at Antelope Springs; couple
o' colts along; one little dark one, a fair dandy; a born pacer. I run
them a mile or two, and he led the bunch, an' never broke his pace.
Cut loose, an' pushed them jest for fun, an' darned if I could make him
break."

"You didn't have no reefreshments along?" said Scarth, incredulously.

"That's all right, Scarth. You had to crawl on our last bet, an' you'll
get another chance soon as you're man enough."

"Chuck," shouted the cook, and the subject was dropped. Next day the
scene of the roundup was changed, and the mustangs were forgotten.

A year later the same corner of New Mexico was worked over by the
roundup, and again the mustang bunch was seen. The dark colt was now a
black yearling, with thin, clean legs and glossy flanks; and more than
one of the boys saw with his own eyes this oddity--the mustang was a
born pacer. Jo was along, and the idea now struck him that that colt
was worth having. To an Easterner this thought may not seem startling
or original, but in the West, where an unbroken horse is worth $5, and
where an ordinary saddlehorse is worth $15 or $20, the idea of a wild
mustang being desirable property does not occur to the average cowboy,
for mustangs are hard to catch, and when caught are merely wild animal
prisoners, perfectly useless and untamable to the last. Not a few of the
cattle-owners make a point of shooting all mustangs at sight, they are
not only useless cumberers of the feeding-grounds, but commonly lead
away domestic horses, which soon take to wild life and are thenceforth
lost.

Wild Jo Calone knew a 'bronk right down to subsoil.' "I never seen a
white that wasn't soft, nor a chestnut that wasn't nervous, nor a bay
that wasn't good if broke right, nor a black that wasn't hard as nails,
an' full of the old Harry. All a black bronk wants is claws to be wus'n
Daniel's hull outfit of lions."

Since, then, a mustang is worthless vermin, and a black mustang ten
times worse than worthless, Jo's pard "didn't see no sense in Jo's
wantin' to corral the yearling," as he now seemed intent on doing. But
Jo got no chance to try that year.

He was only a cow-puncher on $25 a month, and tied to hours. Like most
of the boys, he always looked forward to having a ranch and an outfit
of his own. His brand, the hogpen, of sinister suggestion, was already
registered at Santa Fe, but of horned stock it was borne by a single old
cow, so as to give him a legal right to put his brand on any maverick
(or unbranded animal) he might chance to find.

Yet each fall, when paid off, Jo could not resist the temptation to go
to town with the boys and have a good time 'while the stuff held out.'
So that his property consisted of little more than his saddle, his bed,
and his old cow. He kept on hoping to make a strike that would leave him
well fixed with a fair start, and when the thought came that the Black
Mustang was his mascot, he only needed a chance to 'make the try.'

The roundup circled down to the Canadian River, and back in the fall by
the Don Carlos Hills, and Jo saw no more of the Pacer, though he heard
of him from many quarters, for the colt, now a vigorous, young horse,
rising three, was beginning to be talked of.

Antelope Springs is in the middle of a great level plain. When the water
is high it spreads into a small lake with a belt of sedge around it;
when it is low there is a wide flat of black mud, glistening white with
alkali in places, and the spring a water-hole in the middle. It has no
flow or outlet and is fairly good water, the only drinking-place for
many miles.

This flat, or prairie as it would be called farther north, was the
favorite feeding-ground of the Black Stallion, but it was also the
pasture of many herds of range horses and cattle. Chiefly interested was
the 'L cross F' outfit. Foster, the manager and part owner, was a man of
enterprise. He believed it would pay to handle a better class of cattle
and horses on the range, and one of his ventures was ten half-blooded
mares, tall, clean-limbed, deer-eyed creatures that made the scrub
cow-ponies look like pitiful starvelings of some degenerate and quite
different species.

One of these was kept stabled for use, but the nine, after the weaning
of their colts, managed to get away and wandered off on the range.

A horse has a fine instinct for the road to the best feed, and the nine
mares drifted, of course, to the prairie of Antelope Springs, twenty
miles to the southward. And when, later that summer Foster went to round
them up, he found the nine indeed, but with them and guarding them with
an air of more than mere comradeship was a coal-black stallion, prancing
around and rounding up the bunch like an expert, his jet-black coat a
vivid contrast to the golden hides of his harem.

The mares were gentle, and would have been easily driven homeward
but for a new and unexpected thing. The Black Stallion became greatly
aroused. He seemed to inspire them too with his wildness, and flying
this way and that way drove the whole band at full gallop where he
would. Away they went, and the little cow-ponies that carried the men
were easily left behind.

This was maddening, and both men at last drew their guns and sought a
chance to drop that 'blasted stallion.' But no chance came that was not
9 to 1 of dropping one of the mares. A long day of manoeuvring made
no change. The Pacer, for it was he, kept his family together and
disappeared among the southern sand-hills. The cattlemen on their jaded
ponies set out for home with the poor satisfaction of vowing vengeance
for their failure on the superb cause of it.

One of the most aggravating parts of it was that one or two experiences
like this would surely make the mares as wild as the Mustang, and there
seemed to be no way of saving them from it.

Scientists differ on the power of beauty and prowess to attract female
admiration among the lower animals, but whether it is admiration or the
prowess itself, it is certain that a wild animal of uncommon gifts soon
wins a large following from the harems of his rivals. And the great
Black Horse, with his inky mane and tail and his green-lighted eyes,
ranged through all that region and added to his following from many
bands till not less than a score of mares were in his 'bunch.' Most were
merely humble cow-ponies turned out to range, but the nine great mares
were there, a striking group by themselves. According to all reports,
this bunch was always kept rounded up and guarded with such energy and
jealously that a mare, once in it, was a lost animal so far as man was
concerned, and the ranchmen realized soon that they had gotten on the
range a mustang that was doing them more harm than all other sources of
loss put together.

II

It was December, 1893. I was new in the country, and was setting out
from the ranch-house on the Pinavetitos, to go with a wagon to the
Canadian River. As I was leaving, Foster finished his remark by: "And if
you get a chance to draw a bead on that accursed mustang, don't fail to
drop him in his tracks."

This was the first I had heard of him, and as I rode along I gathered
from Burns, my guide, the history that has been given. I was full
of curiosity to see the famous three-year-old, and was not a little
disappointed on the second day when we came to the prairie on Antelope
Springs and saw no sign of the Pacer or his band.

But on the next day, as we crossed the Alamosa Arroyo, and were rising
to the rolling prairie again, Jack Burns, who was riding on ahead,
suddenly dropped flat on the neck of his horse, and swung back to me in
the wagon, saying:

"Get out your rifle, here's that--stallion."

I seized my rifle, and hurried forward to a view over the prairie ridge.
In the hollow below was a band of horses, and there at one end was the
Great Black Mustang. He had heard some sound of our approach, and was
not unsuspicious of danger. There he stood with head and tail erect,
and nostrils wide, an image of horse perfection and beauty, as noble an
animal as ever ranged the plains, and the mere notion of turning that
magnificent creature into a mass of carrion was horrible. In spite
of Jack's exhortation to 'shoot quick,' I delayed, and threw open
the breach, whereupon he, always hot and hasty, swore at my slowness,
growled, 'Gi' me that gun,' and as he seized it I turned the muzzle up,
and accidentally the gun went off.

Instantly the herd below was all alarm, the great black leader snorted
and neighed and dashed about. And the mares bunched, and away all went
in a rumble of hoofs, and a cloud of dust.

The Stallion careered now on this side, now on that, and kept his eye on
all and led and drove them far away. As long as I could see I watched,
and never once did he break his pace.

Jack made Western remarks about me and my gun, as well as that mustang,
but I rejoiced in the Pacer's strength and beauty, and not for all the
mares in the bunch would I have harmed his glossy hide.

III

There are several ways of capturing wild horses. One is by
creasing--that is, grazing the animal's nape with a rifle-ball so that
he is stunned long enough for hobbling.

"Yes! I seen about a hundred necks broke trying it, but I never seen a
mustang creased yet," was Wild Jo's critical remark.

Sometimes, if the shape of the country abets it, the herd can be driven
into a corral; sometimes with extra fine mounts they can be run down,
but by far the commonest way, paradoxical as it may seem, is to walk
them down.

The fame of the Stallion that never was known to gallop was spreading.
Extraordinary stories were told of his gait, his speed, and his wind,
and when old Montgomery of the 'triangle-bar' outfit came out plump at
Well's Hotel in Clayton, and in presence of witnesses said he'd give one
thousand dollars cash for him safe in a box-car, providing the stories
were true, a dozen young cow-punchers were eager to cut loose and win
the purse, as soon as present engagements were up. But Wild Jo had had
his eye on this very deal for quite a while; there was no time to
lose, so ignoring present contracts he rustled all night to raise the
necessary equipment for the game.

By straining his already overstrained credit, and taxing the already
overtaxed generosity of his friends, he got together an expedition
consisting of twenty good saddle-horses, a mess-wagon, and a fortnight's
stuff for three men--himself, his 'pard,' Charley, and the cook.

Then they set out from Clayton, with the avowed intention of walking
down the wonderfully swift wild horse. The third day they arrived at
Antelope Springs, and as it was about noon they were not surprised to
see the black Pacer marching down to drink with all his band behind him.
