
By-and-by some travellers came past, and the chief among them asked
leave to marry Ball-Carrier's daughter. The mother said she must have a
little time to think over it, as her daughter was still very young; so
it was settled that the man should go away for a month with his friends,
and then come back to see if the girl was willing.

Now ever since Ball-Carrier's death the family had been very poor, and
often could not get enough to eat. One morning the girl, who had had
no supper and no breakfast, wandered off to look for cranberries, and
though she was quite near home was astonished at noticing a large hut,
which certainly had not been there when last she had come that way.
No one was about, so she ventured to peep in, and her surprise was
increased at seeing, heaped up in one corner, a quantity of food of all
sorts, while a little robin redbreast stood perched on a beam looking
down upon her.

'It is my father, I am sure,' she cried; and the bird piped in answer.

From that day, whenever they wanted food they went to the hut, and
though the robin could not speak, he would hop on their shoulders and
let them feed him with the food they knew he liked best.

When the man came back he found the girl looking so much prettier and
fatter than when he had left her, that he insisted that they should be
married on the spot. And the mother, who did not know how to get rid of
him, gave in.

The husband spent all his time in hunting, and the family had never had
so much meat before; but the man, who had seen for himself how poor they
were, noticed with amazement that they did not seem to care about it, or
to be hungry. 'They must get food from somewhere,' he thought, and one
morning, when he pretended to be going out to hunt, he hid in a thicket
to watch. Very soon they all left the house together, and walked to the
other hut, which the girl's husband saw for the first time, as it was
hid in a hollow. He followed, and noticed that each one went up to the
redbreast, and shook him by the claw; and he then entered boldly and
shook the bird's claw too. The whole party afterwards sat down to
dinner, after which they all returned to their own hut.

The next day the husband declared that he was very ill, and could not
eat anything; but this was only a presence so that he might get what he
wanted. The family were all much distressed, and begged him to tell them
what food he fancied.

'Oh! I could not eat any food,' he answered every time, and at each
answer his voice grew fainter and fainter, till they thought he would
die from weakness before their eyes.

'There must be some thing you could take, if you would only say what it
is,' implored his wife.

'No, nothing, nothing; except, perhaps--but of course that is
impossible!'

'No, I am sure it is not,' replied she; 'you shall have it, I
promise--only tell me what it is.'

'I think--but I could not ask you to do such a thing. Leave me alone,
and let me die quietly.'

'You shall not die,' cried the girl, who was very fond of her husband,
for he did not beat her as most girls' husbands did. 'Whatever it is, I
will manage to get it for you.'

'Well, then, I think, if I had that--redbreast, nicely roasted, I could
eat a little bit of his wing!'

The wife started back in horror at such a request; but the man turned
his face to the wall, and took no notice, as he thought it was better to
leave her to herself for a little.

Weeping and wringing her hands, the girl went down to her mother. The
brothers were very angry when they heard the story, and declared that,
if any one were to die, it certainly should not be the robin. But all
that night the man seemed getting weaker and weaker, and at last, quite
early, the wife crept out, and stealing to the hut, killed the bird, and
brought him home to her husband.

Just as she was going to cook it her two brothers came in. They cried
out in horror at the sight, and, rushing out of the hut, declared they
would never see her any more. And the poor girl, with a heavy heart,
took the body of the redbreast up to her husband.

But directly she entered the room the man told her that he felt a great
deal better, and that he would rather have a piece of bear's flesh, well
boiled, than any bird, however tender. His wife felt very miserable to
think that their beloved redbreast had been sacrificed for nothing, and
begged him to try a little bit.

'You felt so sure that it would do you good before,' said she, 'that I
can't help thinking it would quite cure you now.' But the man only flew
into a rage, and flung the bird out of the window. Then he got up and
went out.

Now all this while the ball had been rolling, rolling, rolling to the
old grandmother's hut on the other side of the world, and directly it
rolled into her hut she knew that her grandson must be dead. Without
wasting any time she took a fox skin and tied it round her forehead, and
fastened another round her waist, as witches always do when they leave
their own homes. When she was ready she said to the ball: 'Go back the
way you came, and lead me to my grandson.' And the ball started with the
old woman following.

It was a long journey, even for a witch, but, like other things, it
ended at last; and the old woman stood before the platform of stakes,
where the body of Ball-Carrier lay.

'Wake up, my grandson, it is time to go home,' the witch said. And
Ball-Carrier stepped down oft the platform, and brought his club and bow
and arrows out of the hut, and set out, for the other side of the world,
behind the old woman.

When they reached the hut where Ball-Carrier had fasted so many years
ago, the old woman spoke for the first time since they had started on
their way.

'My grandson, did you ever manage to get that gold from the Bad One?'

'Yes, grandmother, I got it.'

'Where is it?' she asked.

'Here, in my left arm-pit,' answered he.

So she picked up a knife and scraped away all the gold which had stuck
to his skin, and which had been sticking there ever since he first stole
it. After she had finished she asked again:

'My grandson, did you manage to get that bridge from the Bad One?'

'Yes, grandmother, I got that too,' answered he.

'Where is it?' she asked, and Ball-Carrier lifted his right arm, and
pointed to his arm-pit.

'Here is the bridge, grandmother,' said he.

Then the witch did something that nobody in the world could have guessed
that she would do. First, she took the gold and said to Ball-carrier:

'My grandson, this gold must be hidden in the earth, for if people think
they can get it when they choose, they will become lazy and stupid. But
if we take it and bury it in different parts of the world they will have
to work for it if they want it, and then will only find a little at a
time.' And as she spoke, she pulled up one of the poles of the hut, and
Ball-Carrier saw that underneath was a deep, deep hole, which seemed to
have no bottom. Down this hole she poured all the gold, and when it was
out of sight it ran about all over the world, where people that dig hard
sometimes find it. And after that was done she put the pole back again.

Next she lifted down a spade from a high shelf, where it had grown quite
rusty, and dug a very small hole on the opposite side of the hut--very
small, but very deep.

'Give me the bridge,' said she, 'for I am going to bury it here. If
anyone was to get hold of it, and find that they could cross rivers and
seas without any trouble, they would never discover how to cross them
for themselves. I am a witch, and if I had chosen I could easily have
cast my spells over the Bad One, and have made him deliver them to
you the first day you came into my hut. But then you would never have
fasted, and never have planned how to get what you wanted, and never
have known the good spirits, and would have been fat and idle to the end
of your days. And now go; in that hut, which you can just see far away,
live your father and mother, who are old people now, and need a son to
hunt for them. You have done what you were set to do, and I need you no
more.'

Then Ball-Carrier remembered his parents and went back to them.

[From Bureau of Ethnology. 'Indian Folklore.']




The Bunyip


Long, long ago, far, far away on the other side of the world, some young
men left the camp where they lived to get some food for their wives and
children. The sun was hot, but they liked heat, and as they went they
ran races and tried who could hurl his spear the farthest, or was
cleverest in throwing a strange weapon called a boomerang, which always
returns to the thrower. They did not get on very fast at this rate, but
presently they reached a flat place that in time of flood was full of
water, but was now, in the height of summer, only a set of pools, each
surrounded with a fringe of plants, with bulrushes standing in the
inside of all. In that country the people are fond of the roots of
bulrushes, which they think as good as onions, and one of the young men
said that they had better collect some of the roots and carry them back
to the camp. It did not take them long to weave the tops of the willows
into a basket, and they were just going to wade into the water and pull
up the bulrush roots when a youth suddenly called out: 'After all, why
should we waste our time in doing work that is only fit for women and
children? Let them come and get the roots for themselves; but we will
fish for eels and anything else we can get.'

This delighted the rest of the party, and they all began to arrange
their fishing lines, made from the bark of the yellow mimosa, and to
search for bait for their hooks. Most of them used worms, but one, who
had put a piece of raw meat for dinner into his skin wallet, cut off a
little bit and baited his line with it, unseen by his companions.

For a long time they cast patiently, without receiving a single bite;
the sun had grown low in the sky, and it seemed as if they would have to
go home empty-handed, not even with a basket of roots to show; when
the youth, who had baited his hook with raw meat, suddenly saw his line
disappear under the water. Something, a very heavy fish he supposed,
was pulling so hard that he could hardly keep his feet, and for a few
minutes it seemed either as if he must let go or be dragged into the
pool. He cried to his friends to help him, and at last, trembling with
fright at what they were going to see, they managed between them to land
on the bank a creature that was neither a calf nor a seal, but something
of both, with a long, broad tail. They looked at each other with horror,
cold shivers running down their spines; for though they had never beheld
it, there was not a man amongst them who did not know what it was--the
cub of the awful Bunyip!

All of a sudden the silence was broken by a low wail, answered by
another from the other side of the pool, as the mother rose up from her
den and came towards them, rage flashing from her horrible yellow eyes.
'Let it go! let it go!' whispered the young men to each other; but the
captor declared that he had caught it, and was going to keep it. 'He had
promised his sweetheart,' he said, 'that he would bring back enough meat
for her father's house to feast on for three days, and though they could
not eat the little Bunyip, her brothers and sisters should have it to
play with.' So, flinging his spear at the mother to keep her back, he
threw the little Bunyip on to his shoulders, and set out for the camp,
never heeding the poor mother's cries of distress.

By this time it was getting near sunset, and the plain was in shadow,
though the tops of the mountains were still quite bright. The youths had
all ceased to be afraid, when they were startled by a low rushing sound
behind them, and, looking round, saw that the pool was slowly rising,
and the spot where they had landed the Bunyip was quite covered. 'What
could it be?' they asked one of another; 'there was not a cloud in the
sky, yet the water had risen higher already than they had ever known it
do before.' For an instant they stood watching as if they were frozen,
then they turned and ran with all their might, the man with the Bunyip
running faster than all. When he reached a high peak over-looking all
the plain he stopped to take breath, and turned to see if he was safe
yet. Safe! why only the tops of the trees remained above that sea of
water, and these were fast disappearing. They must run fast indeed if
they were to escape. So on they flew, scarcely feeling the ground as
they went, till they flung themselves on the ground before the holes
scooped out of the earth where they had all been born. The old men were
sitting in front, the children were playing, and the women chattering
together, when the little Bunyip fell into their midst, and there was
scarcely a child among them who did not know that something terrible
was upon them. 'The water! the water!' gasped one of the young men; and
there it was, slowly but steadily mounting the ridge itself. Parents and
children clung together, as if by that means they could drive back
the advancing flood; and the youth who had caused all this terrible
catastrophe, seized his sweetheart, and cried: 'I will climb with you
to the top of that tree, and there no waters can reach us.' But, as he
spoke, something cold touched him, and quickly he glanced down at his
feet. Then with a shudder he saw that they were feet no longer, but
bird's claws. He looked at the girl he was clasping, and beheld a great
black bird standing at his side; he turned to his friends, but a flock
of great awkward flapping creatures stood in their place He put up his
hands to cover his face, but they were no more hands, only the ends of
wings; and when he tried to speak, a noise such as he had never heard
before seemed to come from his throat, which had suddenly become narrow
and slender. Already the water had risen to his waist, and he found
himself sitting easily upon it, while its surface reflected back the
image of a black swan, one of many.

Never again did the swans become men; but they are still different from
other swans, for in the night-time those who listen can hear them talk
in a language that is certainly not swan's language; and there are even
sounds of laughing and talking, unlike any noise made by the swans whom
we know.

The little Bunyip was carried home by its mother, and after that the
waters sank back to their own channels. The side of the pool where
she lives is always shunned by everyone, as nobody knows when she may
suddenly put out her head and draw him into her mighty jaws. But people
say that underneath the black waters of the pool she has a house filled
with beautiful things, such as mortals who dwell on the earth have no
idea of. Though how they know I cannot tell you, as nobody has ever seen
it.

[From Journal of Anthropological-Institute.]




Father Grumbler



Once upon a time there lived a man who had nearly as many children as
there were sparrows in the garden. He had to work very hard all day
to get them enough to eat, and was often tired and cross, and abused
everything and everybody, so that people called him 'Father Grumbler.'

By-and-by he grew weary of always working, and on Sundays he lay a long
while in bed, instead of going to church. Then after a time he found it
dull to sit so many hours by himself, thinking of nothing but how to pay
the rent that was owing, and as the tavern across the road looked bright
and cheerful, he walked in one day and sat down with his friends. 'It
was just to chase away Care,' he said; but when he came out, hours and
hours after, Care came out with him.

Father Grumbler entered his house feeling more dismal than when he left
it, for he knew that he had wasted both his time and his money.

'I will go and see the Holy Man in the cave near the well,' he said
to himself, 'and perhaps he can tell me why all the luck is for other
people, and only misfortunes happen to me.' And he set out at once for
the cave.

It was a long way off, and the road led over mountains and through
valleys; but at last he reached the cave where the Holy Man dwelt, and
knocked at the door.

'Who is there?' asked a voice from within.

'It is I, Holy Man, Father Grumbler, you know, who has as many children
as sparrows in the garden.'

'Well, and what is it that you want?'

'I want to know why other people have all the luck, and only misfortunes
happen to me!'

The Holy Man did not answer, but went into an inner cave, from which he
came out bearing something in his hand. 'Do you see this basket?' said
he. 'It is a magical basket, and if you are hungry you have only got to
say: "Little basket, little basket, do your duty," and you will eat the
best dinner you ever had in your life. But when you have had enough, be
sure you don't forget to cry out: "That will do for to-day." Oh!--and
one thing more--you need not show it to everybody and declare that I
have give it to you. Do you understand?'

Father Grumbler was always accustomed to think of himself as so unlucky
that he did not know whether the Holy Man was not playing a trick upon
him; but he took the basket without being polite enough to say either
'Thank you,' or 'Good-morning,' and went away. However, he only
waited till he was out of sight of the cave before he stooped down and
whispered: 'Little basket, little basket, do your duty.'

Now the basket had a lid, so that he could not see what was inside, but
he heard quite clearly strange noises, as if a sort of scuffling was
going on. Then the lid burst open, and a quantity of delicious little
