looked out for another mate, for that the vassal of Westerham and Hyde
needed a lord to lead them in the field. However, I hope that my answer
that they were always at his service under the leading of my cousin
James will suffice for him. Now, what am I to do in that matter? Who
would have thought that he so coveted my lands that he would have slain
me and Edith to possess himself of them? His own lands a thrice as broad
as mine, though men say that he has dipped deeply into them and owes
much money to the Jews. He is powerful and has many friends, and
although Earl Talbot would stand by me, yet the unsupported word of
an apprentice boy were but poor evidence on which to charge a powerful
baron of such a crime as this. It were best, methinks, to say nought
about it, but to bury the thought in my own heart. Nevertheless, I will
not fail to take the precaution which the lad advised, and to let Sir
James know that there are some who have knowledge of his handiwork. I
hear he crosses the seas tomorrow to join the army, and it may be long
ere he return. I shall have plenty of time to consider how I had best
shape my conduct towards him on his return; but assuredly he shall never
be friendly with me again, or frighten Edith with his kisses."

"Well, Walter, has it been such a dreadful business as you expected?"
the armourer asked the lad when he re-entered the shop. "The great folks
have not eaten you at any rate."

"It has not been dreadful," Walter replied with a smile, "though I own
that it was not pleasant when I first arrived at the great mansion; but
the lady put me quite at my ease, and she talked to me for some time,
and finally she bestowed on me this chain, which our lady, the queen,
had herself given her."

"It is a knight's chain and a heavy one," Geoffrey said, examining
it, "of Genoese work, I reckon, and worth a large sum. It will buy you
harness when you go to the wars."

"I would rather fight in the thickest melee in a cloth doublet," Walter
said indignantly, "than part with a single link of it."

"I did but jest, Walter," Geoffrey said laughing; "but as you will not
sell it, and you cannot wear it, you had best give it me to put aside in
my strong coffer until you get of knightly rank."

"Lady Vernon said," the lad replied, "that she hoped one day it might
again belong to a knight; and if I live," he added firmly, "it shall."

"Oh! she has been putting these ideas into your head; nice notions truly
for a London apprentice! I shall be laying a complaint before the lord
mayor against Dame Vernon, for unsettling the mind of my apprentice, and
setting him above his work. And the little lady, what said she? Did she
give you her colours and bid you wear them at a tourney?"

Walter coloured hotly.

"Ah! I have touched you," laughed the armourer; "come now, out with the
truth. My lad," he added more gravely, "there is no shame in it; you
know that I have always encouraged your wishes to be a soldier, and have
done my best to render you as good a one as any who draws sword 'neath
the king's banner, and assuredly I would not have taken all these pains
with you did I think that you were always to wear an iron cap and trail
a pike. I too, lad, hope some day to see you a valiant knight, and have
reasons that you wot not of, for my belief that it will be so. No man
rises to rank and fame any the less quickly because he thinks that
bright eyes will grow brighter at his success."

"But, Geoffrey, you are talking surely at random. The Lady Edith Vernon
is but a child; a very beautiful child," he added reverently, "and such
that when she grows up, the bravest knight in England might be proud
to win. What folly for me, the son of a city bowyer, and as yet but an
apprentice, to raise mine eyes so high!"

"The higher one looks the higher one goes," the armourer said
sententiously. "You aspire some day to become a knight, you may well
aspire also to win the hand of Mistress Edith Vernon. She is five years
younger than yourself, and you will be twenty-two when she is seventeen.
You have time to make your way yet, and I tell you, though why it
matters not, that I would rather you set your heart on winning Mistress
Edith Vernon than any other heiress of broad lands in merry England. You
have saved her life, and so have made the first step and a long one.
Be ever brave, gentle, and honourable, and, I tell you, you need not
despair; and now, lad, we have already lost too much time in talking;
let us to our work."

That evening Walter recalled to Geoffrey his promise to tell him the
causes which had involved England in so long and bloody a war with
France.

"It is a tangled skein," Geoffrey said, "and you must follow me
carefully. First, with a piece of chalk I will draw upon the wall the
pedigree of the royal line of France from Phillip downwards, and then
you will see how it is that our King Edward and Phillip of Valois came
to be rival claimants to the throne of France.

"Now, you see that our King Edward is nephew of Charles le Bel, the last
King of France, while Phillip of Valois is only nephew of Phillip le
Bel, the father of Charles. Edward is consequently in the direct line,
and had Isabella been a man instead of a woman his right to the throne
would be unquestionable. In France, however, there is a law called
the 'Salic' law, which excludes females from the throne; but it is
maintained by many learned in the law, that although a female is held to
be incompetent to reign because from her sex she cannot lead her armies
to battle, yet she no ways forfeits otherwise her rights, and that her
son is therefore the heir to the throne. If this contention, which
is held by all English jurists, and by many in France also, be well
founded, Edward is the rightful King of France. Phillip of Valois
contends that the 'Salic law' not only bars a female from ascending the
throne, but also destroys all her rights, and that the succession goes
not to her sons but to the next heir male; in which case, of course,
Phillip is rightful king. It is not for me to say which view is the
right one, but certainly the great majority of those who have been
consulted have decided that, according to ancient law and usage, the
right lies with Edward. But in these matters 'right is not always
might.' Had Isabella married a French noble instead of an English
king it is probable that her son's claim to the throne would have been
allowed without dispute, but her son is King of England, and the French
nobles prefer being ruled by one of themselves to becoming united with
England under one king.

"At the time of the death of the last king, Edward was still but a boy
under the tuition of his mother, Phillip was a man, and upon the spot,
therefore he was able to win support by presence and promises, and so
it came that the peers of France declared Phillip of Valois to be their
rightful monarch. Here in England, at parliament held at Northampton,
the rights of Edward were discussed and asserted, and the Bishops of
Worcester and Coventry were despatched to Paris to protest against the
validity of Phillip's nomination. As, however, the country was not in
a position to enforce the claim of their young king by arms, Phillip
became firmly seated as King of France, and having shown great energy in
at once marching against and repressing the people of Flanders, who were
in a state of rebellion against their count, one of the feudatories of
the French crown, the nobles were well satisfied with their choice, and
no question as to his right was ever henceforth raised in France. As
soon as the rebellion in Flanders was crushed, Phillip summoned the King
of England to do homage for Aquitaine, Ponthieu and Montreuil, fiefs
held absolutely from the crown of France. Such a proceeding placed
Edward and his council in a great embarrassment. In case of a refusal
the whole of the possessions of the crown in France might be declared
forfeited and be seized, while England was in no condition to defend
them; on the other hand, the fact of doing homage to Phillip of Valois
would be a sort of recognition of his right to the throne he had
assumed. Had Edward then held the reins of power in his hands, there
can be little doubt that he would at once have refused, and would have
called out the whole strength of England to enforce his claim. The
influence of Isabella and Mortimer was, however, all powerful, and
it was agreed that Edward should do homage as a public act, making a
private reservation in secret to his own councillors, taking exception
to the right of Phillip.

"Edward crossed to France and journeyed to Amiens, where Phillip with
a brilliant court awaited him, and on the appointed day they appeared
together in the cathedral. Here Edward, under certain protestations, did
homage for his French estates, leaving certain terms and questions open
for the consideration of his council. For some time the matter remained
in this shape; but honest men cannot but admit that King Edward did, by
his action at the time, acknowledge Phillip to be King of France, and
that he became his vassal for his estates there; but, as has happened
scores of times before, and will no doubt happen scores of times again,
vassals, when they become powerful enough, throw off their allegiance to
their feudal superiors, and so the time came to King Edward.

"After the death of Mortimer and the imprisonment of Isabella, the king
gave rein to his taste for military sports. Tournaments were held at
Dartford and other places, one in Westcheape. What a sight was that, to
be sure! For three days the king, with fourteen of his knights, held the
list against all comers, and in the sight of the citizens and the ladies
of the court, jousted with knights who came hither from all parts of
Europe. I was there each day and the sight was a grand one, though
England was well-nigh thrown into mourning by an accident which took
place. The gallery in which the queen and her attendants were viewing
the sports had been badly erected, and in the height of the contests
it gave way. The queen and her ladies were in great peril, being thrown
from a considerable height, and a number of persons were severely
injured. The king, who was furious at the danger to which the queen had
been exposed, would have hung upon the spot the master workman whose
negligence had caused the accident, but the queen went on her knees
before him and begged his life of the king. The love of Edward for
warlike exercises caused England to be regarded as the most chivalrous
court in Europe, and the frequent tournaments aroused to the utmost the
spirits of the people and prepared them for the war with France. But of
the events of that war I will tell you some other night. It is time now
for us to betake us to our beds."



CHAPTER V: THE CITY GAMES



The next evening the armourer, at Walter's request, continued his
narrative.

"Soon after the tournament we began to fight again with Scotland. For
some years we had had peace with that country, and under the regency
a marriage was made between David, King of Scotland, son of Robert the
Bruce, and the Princess Joan, sister to our king, and a four years'
truce was agreed to."

"But why should we always be fighting with Scotland?" Walter asked.

"That is more than I can tell you, Walter. We were peaceful enough with
them until the days of Edward I; but he set up some claim to the throne
of Scotland, the rights of which neither I nor anyone else, so far as I
know, have ever been able to make out. The fact was he was strong,
and thought that he could conquer Scotland. The quarrels between
her nobles--most of them were allied by blood with our own and held
possessions in both kingdoms--gave Edward an excuse to interfere.
Scotland was conquered easily enough, but it was a hard task to hold it.
Sir William Wallace kept the country in a turmoil for many years, being
joined by all the common people. He inflicted one heavy defeat upon us
at Stirling, but receiving no support from the nobles he was defeated at
Falkirk, and some years afterwards was captured and executed here. His
head you may see any day over London Bridge. As he fought only for his
country and had ever refused allegiance to our king, it seems to me that
his fate was a cruel one. Then when all appeared quiet, Robert Bruce
raised Scotland again, and was crowned king. There was war for many
years, but at last, at Bannockburn he inflicted such a defeat upon us
as we have never had before. After that there were skirmishes and
excursions, but Edward II was a weak prince, and it seemed that the
marriage of David and the Princess Joan would bring about a permanent
peace between the two countries; but it was not to be so."

"Many of the English nobles held claims by marriage or grants upon
lands in Scotland. They had, of course, been driven from these when the
English were turned out by Bruce. By the terms of the marriage treaty
in 1328 it was agreed that they should be reinstated. It was a foolish
clause, because it was plain that the King of Scotland could not take
these lands again from the Scotch nobles who had possession of them,
many of them being well-nigh as powerful as himself. At this time Edward
Baliol, son of the great rival of Robert Bruce, was in England. He still
claimed the throne of Scotland as his right. Round him gathered a number
of the English nobles who claimed lands in Scotland. The king offered
no hindrance to the gathering of this force, for I doubt not that he
was glad to see dissension in Scotland, which might give him some such
pretext for interference as that which Edward I had seized to possess
himself of that country. At first Baliol was successful, and was crowned
at Scone, but he was presently defeated and driven out of Scotland.
The Scots now made an eruption across the frontier as a retaliation
for Edward's having permitted Baliol to gather a force here for his war
against Bruce. King Edward was on the point of starting for Ireland,
and he at once hastened north. He defeated the Scots at Halidon Hill,
captured Berwick, and placed Baliol upon the throne. Bruce fled to
France, where he was supported and encouraged by the French king."

"The ill feeling between Edward and Phillip of Valois had gone on
increasing ever since the former had been compelled to take the oath of
allegiance to the latter, but outwardly the guise of friendship was
kept up, and negotiations went on between the two courts for a marriage
between the little Prince of Wales and Joanna, daughter of the French
king."

"The aid which Phillip gave to Bruce increased the bad feeling, and
Edward retaliated for Phillip's patronage of Bruce by receiving with
the greatest honour and courtesy Robert of Artois, a great feudatory of
France, who had been banished by King Phillip. For a time, although
both countries were preparing for war, peace was not broken, as Edward's
hands were full in Scotland, where Baliol having bestowed immense
possessions upon the English nobles who had assisted him, the country
again rose in favour of Bruce. During the three years that followed King
Edward was obliged several times to go to Scotland to support Baliol,
who held the crown as his feudal vassal. He was always successful in
the field, but directly his army recrossed the frontier the Scotch rose
again. In 1330 a new crusade was preached, and in October of that year
King Phillip solemnly received the cross and collected an immense army
nominally for the recovery of Jerusalem. Whether his intentions were
honest or not I cannot say, but certainly King Edward considered that
Phillip's real aim in creating so great an army was to attack England.
Whether this was so or not would need a wiser head than mine, Walter, to
tell. Certainly Phillip of Valois invited Edward to cooperate with
him in the crusade. The king in reply stated his belief that the
preparations were intended for war in Europe rather than in Asia; but
that if the King of France would agree to conclude a firm league of
amity between the two countries, to restore the castles and towns
of Aquitaine, whose surrender had been frequently promised but never
carried out, and would bind himself by oath to give no assistance,
direct or indirect, to Scotland, he would join him in his war for the
delivery of the Holy Land."

"I must say that King Edward's demands were reasonable, for it was clear
that he could not march away from England with his whole force and leave
Baliol unsupported against the assaults of his Scotch enemies, aided by
France. Phillip was willing to accede to the first two conditions; but
in regard to the third positively declined treating until David Bruce
should be restored to the throne of his father. Now, had the French king
openly supported Bruce from the first, none could have said that his
conduct in befriending a dethroned monarch was aught but noble and
generous; but he had all along answered Edward's complaints of the aid
afforded by Frenchmen to the Bruce by denials that he himself supported
him; and this declaration in his favour now certainly seemed to show
that he had at last determined openly to throw off the veil, and that
his great army was really collected against England. Robert of Artois
craftily seized a moment when the king's indignation against Phillip was
at the highest. At a great banquet held by King Edward, at which all
his warlike nobles were present, Robert entered, preceded by two noble
maidens carrying a heron, which, as you know, Walter, is considered the
most cowardly of birds. Then in loud tones he called upon the knights
present each to swear on the bird to perform some deed of chivalrous
daring. First he presented it to King Edward himself, giving him to
understand that he regarded him but as little braver than the heron for
resigning without a blow the fair heritage of France."

"The moment was well chosen, for Edward was smarting under the answer
he had just received from Phillip. He at once rose and took an oath to
enter France in arms; to wait there a month in order to give Phillip
time to offer him battle, and to accept the combat, even should the
French outnumber him ten to one. Every knight present followed the
example of the king, and so the war with France, which had been for
years a mere question of time, was at last suddenly decided upon.
You yourself, Walter, can remember the preparations which were made
throughout England: men were enrolled and arms prepared. We armourers
were busy night and day, and every man felt that his own honour, as well
as that of the country, was concerned in winning for King Edward the
heritage of which he had been unlawfully robbed by the King of France."

"On the 17th of March, 1337, at the parliament at Westminster, the king
created the little prince, then seven years of age, Duke of Cornwall;
and the prince immediately, in exercise of his new dignity, bestowed
upon twenty of the most distinguished aspirants the honour of
knighthood. Immense supplies were voted by the parliaments held at
Nottingham, Westminster, and Northamton. Half the wool shorn in the
summer following was granted to the king, with a variety of other
taxes, customs, and duties. The revenues of all the foreign priories in
England, a hundred and ten in number, were appropriated to the crown.
Provisions of bacon, wheat, and oats were granted, and the king pawned
his own jewels, and even the crown itself, to hire soldiers, and
purchase him allies on the Continent. So great did the scarcity of money
become in the country that all goods fell to less than half their value.
Thus a vast army was raised, and with this King Edward prepared to try
his strength with France."

"Phillip on his part was making great preparations. While Edward had
purchased the assistance of many of the German nobles Phillip raised
large armaments in the maritime states of Italy. Spain also contributed
a number of naval adventurers, and squadrons were fitted out by his
vassals on the sea coasts of Normandy, Brittany, and Picardy. King
Edward had crossed over into Belgium, and after vast delays in
consequence of the slowness of the German allies, at last prepared to
