her allegiance to Stephen. His eyes had always looked unspeakable
things; his voice had seemed to breathe feelings that he had never dared
put in words; but today he had really stirred her, for although he had
still been vague, it was easy to see that his love for her had passed
all bounds of discretion. She remembered his impassioned farewells, his
despair, his doubt as to whether he could forget her by plunging into
the vortex of business, or whether he had better end it all in the
river, as so many other broken-hearted fellows had done. She had been
touched by his misery, even against her better judgment; and she had
intended to confess it all to Stephen sometime, telling him that she
should never again accept attentions from a stranger, lest a tragedy
like this should happen twice in a lifetime.

She had imagined that Stephen would be his large-minded,
great-hearted, magnanimous self, and beg her to forget this fascinating
will-o'-the-wisp by resting in his deeper, serener love. She had meant
to be contrite and faithful, praying nightly that poor Claude might live
down his present anguish, of which she had been the innocent cause.

Instead, what had happened? She had been put altogether in the wrong.
Stephen had almost cast her off, and that, too, without argument. He
had given her her liberty before she had asked for it, taking it for
granted, without question, that she desired to be rid of him. Instead
of comforting her in her remorse, or sympathizing with her for so
nobly refusing to shine in Claude's larger world of Boston, Stephen had
assumed that she was disloyal in every particular.

And pray how was she to cope with such a disagreeable and complicated
situation?

It would not be long before the gossips rolled under their tongues the
delicious morsel of a broken engagement, and sooner or later she must
brave the displeasure of her grandmother.

And the little house--that was worse than anything. Her tears flowed
faster as she thought of Stephen's joy in it, of his faithful labor, of
the savings he had invested in it. She hated and despised herself
when she thought of the house, and for the first time in her life she
realized the limitations of her nature, the poverty of her ideals.

What should she do? She had lost Stephen and ruined his life. Now, in
order that she need not blight a second career, must she contrive to
return Claude's love? To be sure, she thought, it seemed indecent to
marry any other man than Stephen, when they had built a house together,
and chosen wallpapers, and a kitchen stove, and dining-room chairs; but
was it not the only way to evade the difficulties?

Suppose that Stephen, in a fit of pique, should ask somebody else to
share the new cottage?

As this dreadful possibility came into view, Rose's sobs actually
frightened the birds and the squirrels. She paced back and forth under
the trees, wondering how she could have been engaged to a man for eight
months and know so little about him as she seemed to know about Stephen
Waterman today. Who would have believed he could be so autocratic, so
severe, SS so unapproachable? Who could have foreseen that she, Rose
Wiley, would ever be given up to another man,--handed over as coolly as
if she had been a bale of cotton? She wanted to return Claude Merrill's
love because it was the only way out of the tangle; but at the moment
she almost hated him for making so much trouble, for hurting Stephen,
for abasing her in her own eyes, and, above all, for giving her rustic
lover the chance of impersonating an injured emperor.

It did not simplify the situation to have Mite Shapley come in during
the evening and run upstairs, uninvited, to sit on the foot of her bed
and chatter.

Rose had closed her blinds and lay in the dark, pleading a headache.
Mite was in high feather. She had met Claude Merrill going to the
station that afternoon. He was much too early for the train, which the
station agent reported to be behind time, so he had asked her to take
a drive. She did n't know how it happened, for he looked at his watch
every now and then; but, anyway, they got to laughing and "carrying on,"
and when they came back to the station the train had gone. Was n't that
the greatest joke of the season? What did Rose suppose they did next?

Rose did n't know and did n't care; her head ached too badly.

Well, they had driven to Wareham, and Claude had hired a livery team
there, and had been taken into Portland with his trunk, and she had
brought Mrs. Brooks's horse back to Edgewood. Was n't that ridiculous?
And had n't she cut out Rose where she least expected?

Rose was distinctly apathetic, and Mite Shapley departed after a very
brief call, leaving behind her an entirely new train of thought.

If Claude Merrill were so love-blighted that he could only by the
greatest self-control keep from flinging himself into the river, how
could he conceal his sufferings so completely from Mite Shapley,--little
shallow-pated, scheming coquette?


"So that pretty Merrill feller has gone, has he, mother?" inquired Old
Kennebec that night, as he took off his wet shoes and warmed his feet
at the kitchen oven. "Well, it ain't a mite too soon. I allers distrust
that pink-an'-white, rosy-posy kind of a man. One of the most turrible
things that ever happened in Gard'ner was brought about by jest sech
a feller. Mothers hed n't hardly ought to name their boy babies Claude
without they expect 'em to play the dickens with the girls. I don' know
nothin' 'bout the fust Claude, there ain't none of 'em in the Bible, air
they, but whoever he was, I bate ye he hed a deceivin' tongue. If it
hed n't be'n for me, that Claude in Gard'ner would 'a' run away with
my brother's fust wife; an' I'll tell ye jest how I contrived to put a
spoke in his wheel."

But Mrs. Wiley, being already somewhat familiar with the circumstances,
had taken her candle and retired to her virtuous couch.




XI. Rose Sees the World


Was this the world, after all? Rose asked herself; and, if so, what
was amiss with it, and where was the charm, the bewilderment, the
intoxication, the glamour?

She had been glad to come to Boston, for the last two weeks in Edgewood
had proved intolerable. She had always been a favorite heretofore, from
the days when the boys fought for the privilege of dragging her sled
up the hills, and filling her tiny mitten with peppermints, down to
the year when she came home from the Wareham Female Seminary, an
acknowledged belle and beauty. Suddenly she had felt her popularity
dwindling. There was no real change in the demeanor of her
acquaintances, but there was a certain subtle difference of atmosphere.
Everybody sympathized tacitly with Stephen, and she did not wonder, for
there were times when she secretly took his part against herself. Only
a few candid friends had referred to the rupture openly in conversation,
but these had been blunt in their disapproval.

It seemed part of her ill fortune that just at this time Rufus should
be threatened with partial blindness, and that Stephen's heart, already
sore, should be torn with new anxieties. She could hardly bear to see
the doctor's carriage drive by day after day, and hear night after night
that Rufus was unresigned, melancholy, half mad; while Stephen, as the
doctor said, was brother, mother, and father in one, as gentle as a
woman, as firm as Gibraltar.

These foes to her peace of mind all came from within; but without was
the hourly reproach of her grandmother, whose scorching tongue touched
every sensitive spot in the girl's nature and burned it like fire.

Finally a way of escape opened. Mrs. Wealthy Brooks, who had always been
rheumatic, grew suddenly worse. She had heard of a "magnetic" physician
in Boston, also of one who used electricity with wonderful effect, and
she announced her intention of taking both treatments impartially and
alternately. The neighbors were quite willing that Wealthy Ann Brooks
should spend the deceased Ezra's money in any way she pleased,--she
had earned it, goodness knows, by living with him for twenty-five
years,--but before the day for her departure arrived her right arm
and knee became so much more painful that it was impossible for her to
travel alone.

At this juncture Rose was called upon to act as nurse and companion in
a friendly way. She seized the opportunity hungrily as a way out of her
present trouble; but, knowing what Mrs. Brooks's temper was in time of
health, she could see clearly what it was likely to prove when pain and
anguish wrung the brow.

Rose had been in Boston now for some weeks, and she was sitting in the
Joy Street boarding-house,--Joy Street, forsooth! It was nearly bedtime,
and she was looking out upon a huddle of roofs and back yards, upon
a landscape filled with clothes-lines, ash-barrels, and ill-fed cats.
There were no sleek country tabbies, with the memory in their eyes of
tasted cream, nothing but city-born, city-bred, thin, despairing cats of
the pavement, cats no more forlorn than Rose herself.

She had "seen Boston," for she had accompanied Mrs. Brooks in the
horse-cars daily to the two different temples of healing where that
lady worshiped and offered sacrifices. She had also gone with Maude
Arthurlena to Claude Merrill's store to buy a pair of gloves, and had
overheard Miss Dix (the fashionable "lady assistant" before mentioned)
say to Miss Brackett of the ribbon department, that she thought Mr.
Merrill must have worn his blinders that time he stayed so long in
Edgewood. This bit of polished irony was unintelligible to Rose at
first, but she mastered it after an hour's reflection. She was n't
looking her best that day, she knew; the cotton dresses that seemed
so pretty at home were common and countrified here, and her best black
cashmere looked cheap and shapeless beside Miss Dix's brilliantine. Miss
Dix's figure was her strong point, and her dressmaker was particularly
skillful in the arts of suggestion, concealment, and revelation. Beauty
has its chosen backgrounds. Rose in white dimity, standing knee deep in
her blossoming brier bushes, the river running at her feet, dark pine
trees behind her graceful head, sounded depths and touched heights of
harmony forever beyond the reach of the modish Miss Dix, but she was out
of her element and suffered accordingly.

Rose had gone to walk with Claude one evening when she first arrived. He
had shown her the State House and the Park Street Church, and sat with
her on one of the benches in the Common until nearly ten. She knew that
Mrs. Brooks had told her nephew of the broken engagement, but he made no
reference to the matter, save to congratulate her that she was rid of
a man who was so clumsy, so dull and behind the times, as Stephen
Waterman, saying that he had always marveled she could engage herself to
anybody who could insult her by offering her a turquoise ring.

Claude was very interesting that evening, Rose thought, but
rather gloomy and unlike his former self. He referred to his grave
responsibilities, to the frail health of Maude Arthurlena, and to the
vicissitudes of business. He vaguely intimated that his daily life in
the store was not so pleasant as it had been formerly; that there
were "those" (he would speak no more plainly) who embarrassed him with
undesired attentions, "those" who, without the smallest shadow of right,
vexed him with petty jealousies.

Rose dared not ask questions on so delicate a topic, but she remembered
in a flash Miss Dix's heavy eyebrows, snapping eyes, and high color.
Claude seemed very happy that Rose had come to Boston, though he was
surprised, knowing what a trial his aunt must be, now that she was so
helpless. It was unfortunate, also, that Rose could not go on excursions
without leaving his aunt alone, or he should have been glad to offer his
escort. He pressed her hand when he left her at her door, telling her
she could never realize what a comfort her friendship was to him;
could never imagine how thankful he was that she had courageously freed
herself from ties that in time would have made her wretched. His heart
was full, he said, of feelings he dared not utter; but in the near
future, when certain clouds had rolled by, he would unlock its
treasures, and then--but no more tonight: he could not trust himself.

Rose felt as if she were assuming one of the characters in a mysterious
romance, such as unfolded itself only in books or in Boston; but
thrilling as it was, it was nevertheless extremely unsatisfactory.

Convinced that Claude Merrill was passionately in love with her, one of
her reasons for coming to Boston had been to fall more deeply in love
with him, and thus heal some, at least, of the wounds she had inflicted.
It may have been a foolish idea, but after three weeks it seemed still
worse,--a useless one; for after several interviews she felt herself
drifting farther and farther from Claude; and if he felt any burning
ambition to make her his own, he certainly concealed it with admirable
art. Given up, with the most offensive magnanimity, by Stephen, and not
greatly desired by Claude,--that seemed the present status of proud Rose
Wiley of the Brier Neighborhood.

It was June, she remembered, as she leaned out of the open window; at
least it was June in Edgewood, and she supposed for convenience' sake
they called it June in Boston. Not that it mattered much what the poor
city prisoners called it. How beautiful the river would be at home, with
the trees along the banks in full leaf! How she hungered and thirsted
for the river,--to see it sparkle in the sunlight; to watch the
moonglade stretching from one bank to the other; to hear the soft lap
of the water on the shore, and the distant murmur of the falls at the
bridge! And the Brier Neighborhood would be at its loveliest, for the
wild roses were in blossom by now. And the little house! How sweet it
must look under the shade of the elms, with the Saco rippling at the
back! Was poor Rufus still lying in a darkened room, and was Stephen
nursing him,--disappointed Stephen, dear, noble old Stephen?




XII. Gold and Pinchbeck


Just then Mrs. Brooks groaned in the next room and called Rose, who went
in to minister to her real needs, or to condole with her fancied ones,
whichever course of action appeared to be the more agreeable at the
moment.

Mrs. Brooks desired conversation, it seemed, or at least she desired an
audience for a monologue, for she recognized no antiphonal obligations
on the part of her listeners. The doctors were not doing her a speck of
good, and she was just squandering money in a miserable boarding-house,
when she might be enjoying poor health in her own home; and she did n't
believe her hens were receiving proper care, and she had forgotten
to pull down the shades in the spare room, and the sun would fade the
carpet out all white before she got back, and she did n't believe Dr.
Smith's magnetism was any more use than a cat's foot, nor Dr. Robinson's
electricity any better than a bumblebee's buzz, and she had a great mind
to go home and try Dr. Lord from Bonnie Eagle; and there was a letter
for Rose on the bureau, which had come before supper, but the shiftless,
lazy, worthless landlady had forgotten to send it up till just now.

The letter was from Mite Shapley, but Rose could read only half of it to
Mrs. Brooks, little beside the news that the Waterman barn, the finest
barn in the whole township, had been struck by lightning and burned
to the ground. Stephen was away at the time, having taken Rufus to
Portland, where an operation on his eyes would shortly be performed at
the hospital, and one of the neighbors was sleeping at the River Farm
and taking care of the cattle; still the house might not have been saved
but for one of Alcestis Crambry's sudden bursts of common sense, which
occurred now quite regularly. He succeeded not only in getting the
horses out of the stalls, but gave the alarm so promptly that the whole
neighborhood was soon on the scene of action. Stephen was the only man,
Mite reminded Rose, who ever had any patience with, or took any pains to
teach, Alcestis, but he never could have expected to be rewarded in this
practical way. The barn was only partly insured; and when she had met
Stephen at the station next day, and condoled with him on his loss,
he had said: "Oh, well, Mite, a little more or less does n't make much
difference just now."

"The rest would n't interest you, Mrs. Brooks," said Rose, precipitately
preparing to leave the room.

"Something about Claude, I suppose," ventured that astute lady. "I think
Mite kind of fancied him. I don't believe he ever gave her any real
encouragement; but he'd make love to a pump, Claude Merrill would, and
so would his father before him. How my sister Abby made out to land him
we never knew, for they said he'd proposed to every woman in the town
of Bingham, not excepting the wooden Indian girl in front of the
cigar-store, and not one of 'em but our Abby ever got a chance to name
the day. Abby was as set as the everlastin' hills, and if she'd made up
her mind to have a man he could n't wriggle away from her nohow in
the world. It beats all how girls do run after these slick-haired,
sweet-tongued, Miss Nancy kind o' fellers, that ain't but little good as
beaux an' worth less than nothing as husbands."

Rose scarcely noticed what Mrs. Brooks said, she was too anxious to read
the rest of Mite Shapley's letter in the quiet of her own room.

   Stephen looks thin and pale [so it ran on], but he does not allow anybody
   to sympathize with him. I think you ought to know something that I have n't
   told before for fear of hurting your feelings; but if I were in your place
   I'd like to hear everything, and then you'll know how to act when you come
   home. Just after you left, Stephen ploughed up all the land in front of
   your new house,--every inch of it, all up and down the road, between the
   fence and the front doorstep,--and then he planted corn where you were
   going to have your flower-beds. He has closed all the blinds and hung a "To
   Let" sign on the large elm at the gate. Stephen never was spiteful in his
   life, but this looks a little like spite. Perhaps he only wanted to save
   his self-respect and let people know that everything between you was over
   forever. Perhaps he thought it would stop talk once and for all. But you
   won't mind, you lucky girl, staying nearly three months in Boston! [So
   Almira purled on in violet ink, with shaded letters.] How I wish it had
   come my way, though I'm not good at rubbing rheumatic patients, even when
   they are _his_ aunt. Is _he_ as devoted as ever? And when will _it_ be? How
   do you like the theater? Mother thinks you won't attend; but, by what he
   used to say, I am sure church members in Boston always go to amusements.

       Your loving friend,
              Almira Shapley.

   P.S. They say Rufus's doctor's bills here, and the operation and hospital
   expenses in Portland, will mount up to five hundred dollars. Of course
   Stephen will be dreadfully hampered by the toss of his barn, and maybe he
   wants to let your house that was to be, because he really needs money. In
   that case the dooryard won't be very attractive to tenants, with corn
   planted right up to the steps and no path left! It's two feet tall now, and
   by August (just when you were intending to move in) it will hide the front
   windows. Not that you'll care, with a diamond on your engagement finger!


The letter was more than flesh and blood could stand, and Rose flung
herself on her bed to think and regret and repent, and, if possible, to
sob herself to sleep.

She knew now that she had never admired and respected Stephen so much
as at the moment when, under the reproach of his eyes, she had given him
back his ring. When she left Edgewood and parted with him forever she
had really loved him better than when she had promised to marry him.

Claude Merrill, on his native Boston heath, did not appear the romantic,
inspiring figure he had once been in her eyes. A week ago she distrusted
him; tonight she despised him.

What had happened to Rose was the dilation of her vision. She saw things
under a wider sky and in a clearer light. Above all, her heart was wrung
with pity for Stephen--Stephen, with no comforting woman's hand to help
him in his sore trouble; Stephen, bearing his losses alone, his burdens
and anxieties alone, his nursing and daily work alone. Oh, how she felt
herself needed! Needed! that was the magic word that unlocked her better
nature. "Darkness is the time for making roots and establishing plants,
whether of the soil or of the soul," and all at once Rose had become a
woman: a little one, perhaps, but a whole woman--and a bit of an angel,
too, with healing in her wings. When and how had this metamorphosis come
about? Last summer the fragile brier-rose had hung over the river and
looked at its pretty reflection in the placid surface of the water. Its
few buds and blossoms were so lovely, it sighed for nothing more. The
changes in the plant had been wrought secretly and silently. In some
mysterious way, as common to soul as to plant life, the roots had
gathered in more nourishment from the earth, they had stored up strength
and force, and all at once there was a marvelous fructifying of the
plant, hardiness of stalk, new shoots everywhere, vigorous leafage, and
a shower of blossoms.

But everything was awry: Boston was a failure; Claude was a weakling and
a flirt; her turquoise ring was lying on the river-bank; Stephen did
not love her any longer; her flower-beds were ploughed up and planted in
corn; and the cottage that Stephen had built and she had furnished, that
beloved cottage, was to let.

She was in Boston; but what did that amount to, after all? What was
the State House to a bleeding heart, or the Old South Church to a pride
wounded like hers?

At last she fell asleep, but it was only by stopping her ears to the
noises of the city streets and making herself imagine the sound of
the river rippling under her bedroom windows at home. The backyards of
Boston faded, and in their place came the banks of the Saco, strewn
with pine-needles, fragrant with wild flowers. Then there was the bit of
sunny beach, where Stephen moored his boat. She could hear the sound of
his paddle. Boston lovers came a-courting in the horse-cars, but hers
had floated downstream to her just at dusk in a birch-bark canoe, or
sometimes, in the moonlight, on a couple of logs rafted together.

But it was all over now, and she could see only Stephen's stern face as
he flung the despised turquoise ring down the river-bank.




XIII. A Country Chevalier

