
"You must ride," he said, briskly.

"What in?" asked the shaggy man.

"In a sand-boat, which has runners like a sled and sails like a ship.
The wind will blow you swiftly across the desert and the sand cannot
touch your flesh to turn it into dust."

"Good!" cried Dorothy, clapping her hands delightedly.  "That was the
way the Magic Carpet took us across.  We didn't have to touch the
horrid sand at all."

"But where is the sand-boat?" asked the shaggy man, looking all around
him.

"I'll make you one," said Johnny Dooit.

As he spoke, he knocked the ashes from his pipe and put it in his
pocket.  Then he unlocked the copper chest and lifted the lid, and
Dorothy saw it was full of shining tools of all sorts and shapes.

Johnny Dooit moved quickly now--so quickly that they were astonished at
the work he was able to accomplish.  He had in his chest a tool for
everything he wanted to do, and these must have been magic tools
because they did their work so fast and so well.

The man hummed a little song as he worked, and Dorothy tried to listen
to it.  She thought the words were something like these:

  The only way to do a thing
  Is do it when you can,
  And do it cheerfully, and sing
  And work and think and plan.
  The only real unhappy one
  Is he who dares to shirk;
  The only really happy one
  Is he who cares to work.


Whatever Johnny Dooit was singing he was certainly doing things, and
they all stood by and watched him in amazement.

He seized an axe and in a couple of chops felled a tree.  Next he took
a saw and in a few minutes sawed the tree-trunk into broad, long
boards.  He then nailed the boards together into the shape of a boat,
about twelve feet long and four feet wide.  He cut from another tree a
long, slender pole which, when trimmed of its branches and fastened
upright in the center of the boat, served as a mast.  From the chest he
drew a coil of rope and a big bundle of canvas, and with these--still
humming his song--he rigged up a sail, arranging it so it could be
raised or lowered upon the mast.

Dorothy fairly gasped with wonder to see the thing grow so speedily
before her eyes, and both Button-Bright and Polly looked on with the
same absorbed interest.

"It ought to be painted," said Johnny Dooit, tossing his tools back
into the chest, "for that would make it look prettier.  But 'though I
can paint it for you in three seconds it would take an hour to dry, and
that's a waste of time."

"We don't care how it looks," said the shaggy man, "if only it will
take us across the desert."

"It will do that," declared Johnny Dooit.  "All you need worry about is
tipping over.  Did you ever sail a ship?"

"I've seen one sailed," said the shaggy man.

"Good.  Sail this boat the way you've seen a ship sailed, and you'll be
across the sands before you know it."

With this he slammed down the lid of the chest, and the noise made them
all wink.  While they were winking the workman disappeared, tools and
all.




12.  The Deadly Desert Crossed


"Oh, that's too bad!" cried Dorothy; "I wanted to thank Johnny Dooit
for all his kindness to us."

"He hasn't time to listen to thanks," replied the shaggy man; "but I'm
sure he knows we are grateful.  I suppose he is already at work in some
other part of the world."

They now looked more carefully at the sand-boat, and saw that the
bottom was modeled with two sharp runners which would glide through the
sand.  The front of the sand-boat was pointed like the bow of a ship,
and there was a rudder at the stern to steer by.

It had been built just at the edge of the desert, so that all its
length lay upon the gray sand except the after part, which still rested
on the strip of grass.

"Get in, my dears," said the shaggy man; "I'm sure I can manage this
boat as well as any sailor.  All you need do is sit still in your
places."

Dorothy got in, Toto in her arms, and sat on the bottom of the boat
just in front of the mast.  Button-Bright sat in front of Dorothy,
while Polly leaned over the bow.  The shaggy man knelt behind the mast.
When all were ready he raised the sail half-way.  The wind caught it.
At once the sand-boat started forward--slowly at first, then with added
speed.  The shaggy man pulled the sail way up, and they flew so fast
over the Deadly Desert that every one held fast to the sides of the
boat and scarcely dared to breathe.

The sand lay in billows, and was in places very uneven, so that the
boat rocked dangerously from side to side; but it never quite tipped
over, and the speed was so great that the shaggy man himself became
frightened and began to wonder how he could make the ship go slower.

"It we're spilled in this sand, in the middle of the desert," Dorothy
thought to herself, "we'll be nothing but dust in a few minutes, and
that will be the end of us."

But they were not spilled, and by-and-by Polychrome, who was clinging
to the bow and looking straight ahead, saw a dark line before them and
wondered what it was.  It grew plainer every second, until she
discovered it to be a row of jagged rocks at the end of the desert,
while high above these rocks she could see a tableland of green grass
and beautiful trees.

"Look out!" she screamed to the shaggy man.  "Go slowly, or we shall
smash into the rocks."

He heard her, and tried to pull down the sail; but the wind would not
let go of the broad canvas and the ropes had become tangled.

Nearer and nearer they drew to the great rocks, and the shaggy man was
in despair because he could do nothing to stop the wild rush of the
sand-boat.

They reached the edge of the desert and bumped squarely into the rocks.
There was a crash as Dorothy, Button-Bright, Toto and Polly flew up in
the air in a curve like a skyrocket's, one after another landing high
upon the grass, where they rolled and tumbled for a time before they
could stop themselves.

The shaggy man flew after them, head first, and lighted in a heap
beside Toto, who, being much excited at the time, seized one of the
donkey ears between his teeth and shook and worried it as hard as he
could, growling angrily.  The shaggy man made the little dog let go,
and sat up to look around him.

Dorothy was feeling one of her front teeth, which was loosened by
knocking against her knee as she fell.  Polly was looking sorrowfully
at a rent in her pretty gauze gown, and Button-Bright's fox head had
stuck fast in a gopher hole and he was wiggling his little fat legs
frantically in an effort to get free.

Otherwise they were unhurt by the adventure; so the shaggy man stood up
and pulled Button-Bright out of the hole and went to the edge of the
desert to look at the sand-boat.  It was a mere mass of splinters now,
crushed out of shape against the rocks.  The wind had torn away the
sail and carried it to the top of a tall tree, where the fragments of
it fluttered like a white flag.

"Well," he said, cheerfully, "we're here; but where the here is I don't
know."

"It must be some part of the Land of Oz," observed Dorothy, coming to
his side.

"Must it?"

"'Course it must.  We're across the desert, aren't we?  And somewhere
in the middle of Oz is the Emerald City."

"To be sure," said the shaggy man, nodding.  "Let's go there."

"But I don't see any people about, to show us the way," she continued.

"Let's hunt for them," he suggested.  "There must be people somewhere;
but perhaps they did not expect us, and so are not at hand to give us a
welcome."




13.  The Truth Pond


They now made a more careful examination of the country around them.
All was fresh and beautiful after the sultriness of the desert, and the
sunshine and sweet, crisp air were delightful to the wanderers.  Little
mounds of yellowish green were away at the right, while on the left
waved a group of tall leafy trees bearing yellow blossoms that looked
like tassels and pompoms.  Among the grasses carpeting the ground were
pretty buttercups and cowslips and marigolds.  After looking at these a
moment Dorothy said reflectively:

"We must be in the Country of the Winkies, for the color of that
country is yellow, and you will notice that 'most everything here is
yellow that has any color at all."

"But I thought this was the Land of Oz," replied the shaggy man, as if
greatly disappointed.

"So it is," she declared; "but there are four parts to the Land of Oz.
The North Country is purple, and it's the Country of the Gillikins.
The East Country is blue, and that's the Country of the Munchkins.
Down at the South is the red Country of the Quadlings, and here, in the
West, the yellow Country of the Winkies.  This is the part that is
ruled by the Tin Woodman, you know."

"Who's he?" asked Button-Bright.

"Why, he's the tin man I told you about.  His name is Nick Chopper, and
he has a lovely heart given him by the wonderful Wizard."

"Where does HE live?" asked the boy.

"The Wizard?  Oh, he lives in the Emerald City, which is just in the
middle of Oz, where the corners of the four countries meet."

"Oh," said Button-Bright, puzzled by this explanation.

"We must be some distance from the Emerald City," remarked the shaggy
man.

"That's true," she replied; "so we'd better start on and see if we can
find any of the Winkies.  They're nice people," she continued, as the
little party began walking toward the group of trees, "and I came here
once with my friends the Scarecrow, and the Tin Woodman, and the
Cowardly Lion, to fight a wicked witch who had made all the Winkies her
slaves."

"Did you conquer her?" asked Polly.

"Why, I melted her with a bucket of water, and that was the end of
her," replied Dorothy.  "After that the people were free, you know, and
they made Nick Chopper--that's the Tin Woodman--their Emp'ror."

"What's that?" asked Button-Bright.

"Emp'ror?  Oh, it's something like an alderman, I guess."

"Oh," said the boy.

"But I thought Princess Ozma ruled Oz," said the shaggy man.

"So she does; she rules the Emerald City and all the four countries of
Oz; but each country has another little ruler, not so big as Ozma.
It's like the officers of an army, you see; the little rulers are all
captains, and Ozma's the general."

By this time they had reached the trees, which stood in a perfect
circle and just far enough apart so that their thick branches
touched--or "shook hands," as Button-Bright remarked.  Under the shade
of the trees they found, in the center of the circle, a crystal pool,
its water as still as glass.  It must have been deep, too, for when
Polychrome bent over it she gave a little sigh of pleasure.

"Why, it's a mirror!" she cried; for she could see all her pretty face
and fluffy, rainbow-tinted gown reflected in the pool, as natural as
life.

Dorothy bent over, too, and began to arrange her hair, blown by the
desert wind into straggling tangles.  Button-Bright leaned over the
edge next, and then began to cry, for the sight of his fox head
frightened the poor little fellow.

"I guess I won't look," remarked the shaggy man, sadly, for he didn't
like his donkey head, either.  While Polly and Dorothy tried to comfort
Button-Bright, the shaggy man sat down near the edge of the pool, where
his image could not be reflected, and stared at the water thoughtfully.
As he did this he noticed a silver plate fastened to a rock just under
the surface of the water, and on the silver plate was engraved these
words:

  THE TRUTH POND


"Ah!" cried the shaggy man, springing to his feet with eager joy;
"we've found it at last."

"Found what?" asked Dorothy, running to him.

"The Truth Pond.  Now, at last, I may get rid of this frightful head;
for we were told, you remember, that only the Truth Pond could restore
to me my proper face."

"Me, too!" shouted Button-Bright, trotting up to them.

"Of course," said Dorothy.  "It will cure you both of your bad heads, I
guess.  Isn't it lucky we found it?"

"It is, indeed," replied the shaggy man.  "I hated dreadfully to go to
Princess Ozma looking like this; and she's to have a birthday
celebration, too."

Just then a splash startled them, for Button-Bright, in his anxiety to
see the pool that would "cure" him, had stepped too near the edge and
tumbled heels over head into the water.  Down he went, out of sight
entirely, so that only his sailor hat floated on the top of the Truth
Pond.

He soon bobbed up, and the shaggy man seized him by his sailor collar
and dragged him to the shore, dripping and gasping for breath.  They
all looked upon the boy wonderingly, for the fox head with its sharp
nose and pointed ears was gone, and in its place appeared the chubby
round face and blue eyes and pretty curls that had belonged to
Button-Bright before King Dox of Foxville transformed him.

"Oh, what a darling!" cried Polly, and would have hugged the little one
had he not been so wet.

Their joyful exclamations made the child rub the water out of his eyes
and look at his friends questioningly.

"You're all right now, dear," said Dorothy.  "Come and look at
yourself." She led him to the pool, and although there were still a few
ripples on the surface of the water he could see his reflection plainly.

"It's me!" he said, in a pleased yet awed whisper.

"'Course it is," replied the girl, "and we're all as glad as you are,
Button-Bright."

"Well," announced the shaggy man, "it's my turn next."  He took off his
shaggy coat and laid it on the grass and dived head first into the
Truth Pond.

When he came up the donkey head had disappeared, and the shaggy man's
own shaggy head was in its place, with the water dripping in little
streams from his shaggy whiskers.  He scrambled ashore and shook
himself to get off some of the wet, and then leaned over the pool to
look admiringly at his reflected face.

"I may not be strictly beautiful, even now," he said to his companions,
who watched him with smiling faces; "but I'm so much handsomer than any
donkey that I feel as proud as I can be."

"You're all right, Shaggy Man," declared Dorothy.  "And Button-Bright
is all right, too.  So let's thank the Truth Pond for being so nice,
and start on our journey to the Emerald City."

"I hate to leave it," murmured the shaggy man, with a sigh.  "A truth
pond wouldn't be a bad thing to carry around with us."  But he put on
his coat and started with the others in search of some one to direct
them on their way.




14.  Tik-Tok and Billina


They had not walked far across the flower-strewn meadows when they came
upon a fine road leading toward the northwest and winding gracefully
among the pretty yellow hills.

"That way," said Dorothy, "must be the direction of the Emerald City.
We'd better follow the road until we meet some one or come to a house."

The sun soon dried Button-Bright's sailor suit and the shaggy man's
shaggy clothes, and so pleased were they at regaining their own heads
that they did not mind at all the brief discomfort of getting wet.

"It's good to be able to whistle again," remarked the shaggy man, "for
those donkey lips were so thick I could not whistle a note with them."
He warbled a tune as merrily as any bird.

"You'll look more natural at the birthday celebration, too," said
Dorothy, happy in seeing her friends so happy.

Polychrome was dancing ahead in her usual sprightly manner, whirling
gaily along the smooth, level road, until she passed from sight around
the curve of one of the mounds.  Suddenly they heard her exclaim "Oh!"
and she appeared again, running toward them at full speed.

"What's the matter, Polly?" asked Dorothy, perplexed.

There was no need for the Rainbow's Daughter to answer, for turning the
bend in the road there came advancing slowly toward them a funny round
man made of burnished copper, gleaming brightly in the sun.  Perched on
the copper man's shoulder sat a yellow hen, with fluffy feathers and a
pearl necklace around her throat.

"Oh, Tik-tok!" cried Dorothy, running forward.  When she came to him,
the copper man lifted the little girl in his copper arms and kissed her
cheek with his copper lips.

"Oh, Billina!" cried Dorothy, in a glad voice, and the yellow hen flew
to her arms, to be hugged and petted by turns.

The others were curiously crowding around the group, and the girl said
to them:

"It's Tik-tok and Billina; and oh! I'm so glad to see them again."

"Wel-come to Oz," said the copper man in a monotonous voice.

Dorothy sat right down in the road, the yellow hen in her arms, and
began to stroke Billina's back.  Said the hen:

"Dorothy, dear, I've got some wonderful news to tell you."

"Tell it quick, Billina!" said the girl.

Just then Toto, who had been growling to himself in a cross way, gave a
sharp bark and flew at the yellow hen, who ruffled her feathers and let
out such an angry screech that Dorothy was startled.

"Stop, Toto! Stop that this minute!" she commanded.  "Can't you see
that Billina is my friend?"  In spite of this warning had she not
grabbed Toto quickly by the neck the little dog would have done the
yellow hen a mischief, and even now he struggled madly to escape
Dorothy's grasp.  She slapped his ears once or twice and told him to
behave, and the yellow hen flew to Tik-tok's shoulder again, where she
was safe.

"What a brute!" croaked Billina, glaring down at the little dog.

"Toto isn't a brute," replied Dorothy, "but at home Uncle Henry has to
whip him sometimes for chasing the chickens.  Now look here, Toto," she
added, holding up her finger and speaking sternly to him, "you've got
to understand that Billina is one of my dearest friends, and musn't be
hurt--now or ever."

Toto wagged his tail as if he understood.

"The miserable thing can't talk," said Billina, with a sneer.

"Yes, he can," replied Dorothy; "he talks with his tail, and I know
everything he says.  If you could wag your tail, Billina, you wouldn't
need words to talk with."

"Nonsense!" said Billina.

"It isn't nonsense at all.  Just now Toto says he's sorry, and that
he'll try to love you for my sake.  Don't you, Toto?"

"Bow-wow!" said Toto, wagging his tail again.

"But I've such wonderful news for you, Dorothy," cried the yellow hen;
"I've--"

"Wait a minute, dear," interrupted the little girl; "I've got to
introduce you all, first.  That's manners, Billina.  This," turning to
her traveling companions, "is Mr. Tik-tok, who works by machinery
'cause his thoughts wind up, and his talk winds up, and his action
winds up--like a clock."

"Do they all wind up together?" asked the shaggy man.

"No; each one separate.  But he works just lovely, and Tik-tok was a
good friend to me once, and saved my life--and Billina's life, too."

"Is he alive?" asked Button-Bright, looking hard at the copper man.

"Oh, no, but his machinery makes him just as good as alive."  She
turned to the copper man and said politely: "Mr. Tik-tok, these are my
new friends: the shaggy man, and Polly the Rainbow's Daughter, and
Button-Bright, and Toto.  Only Toto isn't a new friend, 'cause he's
been to Oz before."

The copper man bowed low, removing his copper hat as he did so.

"I'm ve-ry pleased to meet Dor-o-thy's fr-r-r-r---"  Here he stopped
short.

"Oh, I guess his speech needs winding!" said the little girl, running
behind the copper man to get the key off a hook at his back.  She wound
him up at a place under his right arm and he went on to say:

"Par-don me for run-ning down.  I was a-bout to say I am pleased to
meet Dor-o-thy's friends, who must be my friends."  The words were
somewhat jerky, but plain to understand.

"And this is Billina," continued Dorothy, introducing the yellow hen,
and they all bowed to her in turn.

"I've such wonderful news," said the hen, turning her head so that one
bright eye looked full at Dorothy.

"What is it, dear?" asked the girl.

"I've hatched out ten of the loveliest chicks you ever saw."

"Oh, how nice!  And where are they, Billina?"

"I left them at home.  But they're beauties, I assure you, and all
wonderfully clever.  I've named them Dorothy."

"Which one?" asked the girl.

"All of them," replied Billina.

"That's funny.  Why did you name them all with the same name?"

"It was so hard to tell them apart," explained the hen.  "Now, when I
call 'Dorothy,' they all come running to me in a bunch; it's much
easier, after all, than having a separate name for each."

"I'm just dying to see 'em, Billina," said Dorothy, eagerly.  "But tell
me, my friends, how did you happen to be here, in the Country of the
Winkies, the first of all to meet us?"

"I'll tell you," answered Tik-tok, in his monotonous voice, all the
sounds of his words being on one level--"Prin-cess Oz-ma saw you in her
mag-ic pic-ture, and knew you were com-ing here; so she sent Bil-lin-a
and me to wel-come you as she could not come her-self; so
that--fiz-i-dig-le cum-so-lut-ing hy-ber-gob-ble in-tu-zib-ick--"

"Good gracious!  Whatever's the matter now?" cried Dorothy, as the
copper man continued to babble these unmeaning words, which no one
could understand at all because they had no sense.

"Don't know," said Button-Bright, who was half scared.  Polly whirled
away to a distance and turned to look at the copper man in a fright.

"His thoughts have run down, this time," remarked Billina composedly,
as she sat on Tik-tok's shoulder and pruned her sleek feathers.  "When
he can't think, he can't talk properly, any more than you can.  You'll
have to wind up his thoughts, Dorothy, or else I'll have to finish his
story myself."

Dorothy ran around and got the key again and wound up Tik-tok under his
left arm, after which he could speak plainly again.

"Par-don me," he said, "but when my thoughts run down, my speech has no
mean-ing, for words are formed on-ly by thought.  I was a-bout to say
that Oz-ma sent us to wel-come you and in-vite you to come straight to
the Em-er-ald Ci-ty.  She was too bus-y to come her-self, for she is
pre-par-ing for her birth-day cel-e-bra-tion, which is to be a grand
af-fair."

"I've heard of it," said Dorothy, "and I'm glad we've come in time to
attend.  Is it far from here to the Emerald City?"

"Not ve-ry far," answered Tik-tok, "and we have plen-ty of time.
To-night we will stop at the pal-ace of the Tin Wood-man, and
to-mor-row night we will ar-rive at the Em-er-ald Ci-ty."

"Goody!" cried Dorothy.  "I'd like to see dear Nick Chopper again.
How's his heart?"

"It's fine," said Billina; "the Tin Woodman says it gets softer and
kindlier every day.  He's waiting at his castle to welcome you,
Dorothy; but he couldn't come with us because he's getting polished as
bright as possible for Ozma's party."

"Well then," said Dorothy, "let's start on, and we can talk more as we
go."

They proceeded on their journey in a friendly group, for Polychrome had
discovered that the copper man was harmless and was no longer afraid of
him.  Button-Bright was also reassured, and took quite a fancy to
Tik-tok.  He wanted the clockwork man to open himself, so that he might
