


CHAPTER VII

A THIEF IN THE NIGHT


"Ladies and gentlemen," cried Hippy. "We have a noble animal for sale
here. He is tame and gentle. A lady could ride him without fear. He sees
equally well out of both eyes and is neither lame nor spavined. If you
will just stand back a little we will let you see his paces."

The crowd drew back on either side of the lane between the rows of tents
and booths and from somewhere in the back there was heard a great pawing
and trampling, with cries of "Whoa, there! Whoa, there, Lightning!"

Then down the aisle there dashed the most absurd comic animal that had
ever been seen in Oakdale. A dilapidated old horse, with crooked legs
and sunken sides through which its ribs protruded. He had widely
distended nostrils and his mouth drawn back over huge teeth. One ear lay
flat, while the other stood up straight and wiggled, and his glazed eyes
stared wildly. On his wobbly back sat David, dressed like a jockey and
flourishing a whip.

"Gentlemen," went on Hippy, "you here behold an animal of splendid
parts. He is pasture-fed and as gentle as a lamb, never kicks--"

The strange animal here kicked out one of his hind legs so wildly that
David was obliged to hold on with both arms to keep from falling off.

"He has a happy, sunny nature, ladies. Is there any one present who
would like to try his gait? Ten cents a ride."

The horse crossed his front legs and sat down on his haunches with an
air of patient endurance. There were roars of laughter and no one
enjoyed the fun more than Miss Thompson.

"I declare, Hippy, I should like to have a ride on the back of that
animal!" she exclaimed, producing ten cents.

David leaped to the ground and gallantly assisted the principal to
mount, while Hippy whispered something into the ear of the horse.

The animal trotted gently up to one end of the room and back, depositing
Miss Thompson safely on her feet.

Miriam Nesbit then took a trial ride and no bucking bronco ever
exhibited such traits of character as did that battered-looking
quadruped. Miriam was obliged to jump down amid the cheers of the
company. Many people rode that night, and rides went up to twenty-five
and even fifty cents, until finally the poor, tired animal lay flat on
the floor in an attitude of complete exhaustion. Then Hippy undid
several hooks and eyes along the imaginary line which divided Lightning
in half, and there came forth, very warm and fatigued, Tom Gray and
Reddy Brooks.

On the whole the bazaar was proving an unqualified success. People
entered into the spirit of the thing and spent their money without a
murmur.

Eleanor's confetti proved a drawing card, and young people and old
wandered about, bestowing handfuls of it upon their friends whenever a
good opportunity presented itself.

Long before the fair was over Grace and Anne retired to one end of the
gypsy encampment to begin counting the proceeds of their labors. The
girls in charge of the various booths turned in their money almost as
rapidly as they made it, and by the time the crowd had begun to thin the
girls had arrived at a tolerably correct estimate of what the bazaar had
netted them.

"Is it possible that I have counted correctly, Anne!" exclaimed Grace to
her friend, who was helping to sort small silver into various piles.

"I don't know," said Anne, "it looks like a lot of money. How much does
it all come to?"

"Roughly speaking, nearly five hundred dollars. Just think of that."

"Splendid!" cried Anne, clasping her hands joyfully. "But what shall we
put it in?"

"I shall put it in this iron box of father's. You see, it has a
combination lock and he loaned it to me to-night just for this purpose.
As soon as the rest of the money is in I'll lock it and he will take
charge of it. Will you go and find him?"

Anne departed and Grace began to deposit the money in the box, smiling
to herself at the success of their undertaking.

The few remaining people who were now taking leave of each other had
concentrated in one spot. There was a loud buzz of conversation and
laughter, when suddenly, without a moment's warning, the electric lights
went out. The gasoline torches had burned down by now and the place was
in utter darkness.

Somewhere in the hall there was a cry, the sound of scuffling and then
absolute silence.

Many of the men began to strike matches and peer into the darkness, and
at last David groped his way over to a corner of the hall where he
remembered he had seen the switch. As he felt for the electric button
his hand encountered another hand, that grasped his with an iron grip,
gave his wrist a vicious twist, pushed him violently away and was gone.
David gave an involuntary cry of pain as he felt for the switch again.
In another moment he had found it and the hall was again flooded with
light. Instantly he looked about for the vicious person who had twisted
his wrist, but he was alone in that part of the hall.

The excitements of that evening, however, were not yet at an end. People
began running toward the last booth. There were cries and exclamations,
and David, who had followed quickly after them, arrived there just in
time to meet Mr. Harlowe carrying the limp figure of his daughter Grace
in his arms. He deposited her on four chairs placed in a row, a bottle
of smelling salts was put to her nose, while Hippy and Reddy ran for
water.

Grace opened her eyes almost immediately and sat up.

"I'm not hurt," she said. "I was only stunned. Some one hit me on the
head from behind, but my cap softened the blow. They were trying to get
the box of money. Oh, is it gone?" she cried anxiously.

David and Tom examined the booth.

The money was gone.




CHAPTER VIII

MARIAN ASSERTS HER INDEPENDENCE


There was not the slightest clue to the thief who had stolen the iron
box containing a little over five hundred dollars, for which the girls
had worked so hard, but the loss was made good by Judge Putnam who,
though on the bench at the state capital at the time the robbery
occurred, had promptly sent Grace his check for the amount when Grace
wrote him an account of it. For which generous act he became the idol of
Oakdale High School.

"As for the thief," observed Mr. Harlowe, several mornings later at the
breakfast table, after Grace had opened the letter and joyfully
exhibited the check to her mother and father; "he'll have some trouble
opening that box. It was the strongest box I have ever seen of the kind,
made of iron reinforced with steel bands, with a combination lock that
would baffle even your friend, Richards, Grace, who appeared to be a
pretty sharp crook."

"How will the thief get at the money, then, father?" asked Grace.

"I can't imagine," answered Mr. Harlowe. "If he tries to blow up the box
he runs the chance of blowing up all the money at the same time, and I
don't believe there is an instrument made that would pry it open. He
can't melt it and he can't knock a hole in it. Therefore, I don't just
see what he can do, unless he finds some way to work the combination."

"It would be the irony of fate if the thief couldn't spend the money
after all his trouble," observed Mrs. Harlowe.

"I hope he never, never can," cried Grace. "I hope he'll bruise all his
knuckles and break all his finger nails trying to open the box, and
still not make the slightest impression!"

"He certainly will if he tries to open the box with his finger nails and
knuckles," replied her father, as he bestowed two kisses upon his wife
and daughter, respectively, and departed to his business.

"Who is to be custodian of the fund, Grace? Are you to have charge of
it?" asked Mrs. Harlowe.

"No, mother; Marian Barber was formally elected class treasurer last
year. She likes to keep books and add up accounts and all those things.
So I shall just turn the check over to her to put in the bank until we
give our next entertainment. Then, when we have about a thousand
dollars, we'll give it all to Miss Thompson as our contribution toward
rebuilding the gymnasium. I hear that the juniors are going to give a
dance, but I don't think they will make any large amount like this,
because they will have to pay for music and refreshments."

Grace could not help feeling proud of the success of the bazaar now that
the judge's check had arrived, although at first she had demurred about
accepting it. However, as the judge absolutely refused to take it back,
it was therefore duly presented to Marian Barber, who, with a feeling of
extreme importance at handling so much money in her own name, deposited
it in the Upton Bank, and was the recipient, for the first time in her
life, of a small, neat-looking check book. Later she showed it with
great glee to the Phi Sigma Tau, who were drinking hot chocolate in the
Harlowe's sitting room, the day after school began.

"I feel just like a millionaire," she exclaimed, "even though the money
isn't mine. I'd just like to write one check to see how my name would
look signed at the bottom here."

"It does seem like a lot of money," observed Anne thoughtfully, "but I'm
afraid the check book won't be of much use to you, Marian, as you will
probably draw it all out in a lump when the time comes to hand it over
to Miss Thompson."

"Oh, I don't know," answered Marian, "we may have to give a few checks
for expenses and things, the next entertainment we get up, and then I'll
have an opportunity."

The girls laughed good-naturedly at Marian's evident eagerness to draw a
check.

"We'll certainly have to incur some kind of expense for the express
purpose of allowing Marian to draw a check," said Nora. "By the way,
Grace, which booth made the most money, outside the auction, of course?"

"Eleanor Savelli's," replied Grace promptly. "They made most of it on
confetti, too, although they sold quantities of flowers. They turned in
seventy-five dollars."

"Eleanor certainly did work," observed Anne. "One feels as though one
could forgive her all her sins after the success she made of her booth.
It is a shame that so much ability and cleverness is choked and crowded
out by wilfulness and temper."

"Did you hear about the quarrel that she and Edna Wright had, after she
attacked us?" asked Eva Allen.

"Yes," answered Grace. "I understand, too, that it has completely broken
up their sorority. They carried their part of the bazaar through
together and then Eleanor told Edna that she was practically done with
her."

"You don't mean it! I hadn't heard that! Who told you so?" were the
exclamations that followed this information.

"Daisy Culver told Ruth Deane, and Ruth told me," said Grace. "Ruth says
that Edna feels dreadfully over it. She was really fond of Eleanor."

"Now I suppose that Miss Eleanor Vendetta de Savelli will be more
impossible than ever," giggled Nora.

"Perhaps not," said Anne quietly. "I think it a very good thing that
Edna and Eleanor have separated, for Eleanor Savelli is a far better
girl at heart than Edna Wright. Eleanor is better off without her."

"I believe you are right, Anne," said Grace with conviction. "Although
Eleanor's reformation is not for us. We've had experience."

"'Never too late to mend,'" quoted Jessica.

"True," retorted Nora, "but for my part I think the Phi Sigma Tau have
done their share toward the mending process."

"Marian Barber!" exclaimed Grace. "Where in the world did you unearth
that man you introduced us to, at the bazaar?"

"Yes, I should say so," echoed Nora. "I didn't like him one bit."

A flush overspread Marian Barber's plain face. She frowned, then said
very stiffly:

"Really, girls, I can't see why any one should dislike Mr. Hammond. I
think he is a remarkably nice young man. Father and mother like him,
too. He has called to see me twice since the bazaar, and I am going to
the theatre with him to-morrow night. I like him very much better than
any of these silly Oakdale schoolboys," she added a trifle maliciously.

The girls listened, thunderstruck. Was this good-natured, easy going
Marian Barber who had spoken? To their knowledge Marian had never before
received attentions from even "silly schoolboys." She was well liked
among girls, but had always fought shy of young men.

"Forgive me, Marian," cried Nora impulsively. "I didn't dream that you
were interested in Mr. Hammond."

"I am not half as much interested in him as he is interested in me,"
retorted Marian, bridling. "He prefers me to any Oakdale girl he has
met."

The girls exchanged astonished glances at Marian's complacent statement.

"Where did you first meet him, Marian?" asked Anne gently.

"At the bazaar," replied Marian promptly.

"Who introduced him to you?" asked Grace curiously.

Marian hesitated a moment, then burst forth defiantly. "I suppose you
girls will think it perfectly dreadful when I tell you that he
introduced himself. He came up and asked me to tell him about some of
the features of the bazaar. I did, then he went away, and after a while
he came back and talked to me a long time. He is in the real estate
business, and is going to have an office here in Oakdale. He was very
much interested in the things I said to him, and when I told him about
our Phi Sigma Tau he asked to be introduced to you girls. I never
supposed you'd take such a dislike to him. I think he is perfectly
splendid," she added with emphasis.

"Well, I don't agree with you," said hot-headed Nora. "And I don't think
you should have noticed him, beyond being merely civil, without an
introduction. Do you, Grace?"

"I don't know," said Grace slowly. "That is a question that no one save
Marian can settle. I don't wish to seem hateful, Marian, but to tell you
the truth, I wasn't favorably impressed with Mr. Hammond. Besides, he is
ever so much older than you are. He must be at least twenty-five years
old."

"He is twenty-nine," replied Marian coldly. "And I am glad that he isn't
as young and foolish as most of the boys I have met."

"Does your mother know how you happened to meet him?" asked Jessica
unthinkingly.

But this was a little too much. Marian rose to her feet, her voice
choking with anger. "I don't blame Eleanor Savelli for calling you
busy-bodies," she said. "And I shall be infinitely obliged to you if you
will in future look to your own affairs and stop criticizing me."

With these words she rushed from the room, seized her wraps and was out
on the street before any of the remaining girls had fully comprehended
what had happened.




CHAPTER IX

THE JUDGE'S HOUSE PARTY


"There is nothing like congenial company when one travels," remarked
Hippy Wingate, favoring his friends with a patronizing smile. "Now, when
I came home from college I was obliged to consort with such grouches as
David Nesbit and Reddy Brooks, who made me keep quiet when I wished to
speak, and speak when I fain would have slept. But, observe the
difference, all these fresh and charming damsels--"

"Charming we are, beyond a doubt," interrupted Nora O'Malley, "but
