
Her purse was restored to her on the morning after her arrival, and
neither Maggie Oliphant nor Nancy Banister ever guessed that she had
overheard some words of theirs on the night of her arrival, and that
these had put bitterness into her heart and nearly destroyed her faith
in her fellow-students. Both Maggie and Nance made several overtures
of kindness to Prissie, but the cold manner which was more or less
habitual to her never thawed, and, after a time, they left her alone.
There is no saying what might have happened to Prissie had she never
overheard this conversation. As it was, however, after the first shock
it gave her courage.

She said to herself:

"I should think very little of myself if I did not despise a girl like
Miss Oliphant. Is it likely I should care to imitate one whom I
despise? There was a brief, dreadful hour when I absolutely pined to
have pretty things in my room as she has in hers; now I can do without
them. My room shall remain bare and unadorned. In this state it will
at least look unique."

It did. The other students who lived in the same corridor came to
visit Priscilla in the free and easy manner which characterized them
and made remarks the reverse of flattering. When was she going to put
her pictures up? Miss Day would be delighted to help her whenever she
chose to do it. When did she intend to go down to Kingsdene to order
her easy-chairs and little Japanese tables, and rugs, and the other
small but necessary articles which would be required to make her room
habitable?

For several days Priscilla turned these inquiries aside. She blushed,
stammered, looked awkward and spoke of something else. At last,
however, she summoned up courage, and, once for all, delivered herself
from her tormentors. She did that remarkably brave thing which
sometimes very nervous people can brace themselves to do.

It was evening and Miss Day, Miss Marsh and Nancy Banister had all
come in for a few minutes to see Priscilla on their way to their own
rooms.

"Do come and cocoa with me to-night, Miss Peel," said Miss Day.
"You're so dreadfully unsociable, not a bit like an ordinary St.
Benet's girl. If you go on in this fashion, you'll be moped to death
before your first term is over."

"I am accustomed to a very quiet life," responded Priscilla, "and I
want to work; I have come here to work."

"Dear, dear! any one would suppose you were going in for a tripos. If
this were your last term I could understand it-- but your first!"

It was Miss Marsh who said these words. She was a bright-eyed,
merry-looking girl, the reverse of over-studious herself.

"Oh, come along, dear; I'll give you such a delicious cup of cocoa,"
said Miss Day.

She crossed the room and tried to link her hand affectionately in
Prissie's arm. Miss Peel drew back a step.

"Thank you," she said, "but I-- I-- cannot come."

"I must say you have a blunt way of refusing," said Miss Day. She felt
inclined to be offended, but Nancy Banister, who was standing by and
had not hitherto spoken, bestowed a quick glance of approval on
Priscilla and then said something soothing to Miss Day.

"May I cocoa with you instead, Annie?" she said. "I am afraid no one
can accuse me of killing myself with work, but we all respect earnest
workers-- we must. It is for them St. Benet's is really meant. It was
endowed for them, and built for them, and we poor drones must not
throw disparaging remarks on the busy bees."

"Oh, nonsense!" said Miss Marsh; "St. Benet's was made for sociability
as well as study, and I have no patience with the students who don't
try to combine the two. By the way," she added, turning round and
speaking in a rather impertinent voice to Priscilla, "I sent you a
message to say I was going down to Kingsdene this afternoon and would
be happy to take you with me if you would care to visit Spilman's."

"Thank you," said Priscilla, "I got your note just too late to answer
it. I was going to speak to you about it," she added.

"Then you would have come?"

Priscilla's face grew very red.

"No, I should not have come."

It was Miss Marsh's turn to get red.

"Come! Annie," she exclaimed, turning to Miss Day, "we had better
waste no more time here. Miss Banister, we'll see you presently, won't
we? Good night, Miss Peel. Perhaps you don't mind my saying something
very frank?"

"I do," said Priscilla, "but that won't prevent your saying it, will
it?"

"I don't think it will. After you have been at St. Benet's a little
longer you will know that we not only appreciate cleverness and
studious ways, but also obliging and sociable and friendly manners;
and-- and-- pretty rooms-- rooms with easy-chairs, and comfortable
lounges, and the thousand and one things which give one a feeling of
home. Take my advice, Miss Peel, there's no use fighting against the
tide. You'll have to do as others do in the long run, and you may as
well do it at once. That is my plain opinion, and I should not have
given it to you if I had not thought you needed it. Good night."

"No, stop a minute," said Priscilla. Every scrap of color had left her
face, every trace of nervousness her manner. She walked before the two
girls to the door and closed it. "Please stay just for a minute
longer, Miss Day and Miss Marsh, and you too, Miss Banister, if you
will."

She went across the room again, and, opening the top drawer of her
bureau, took out her purse. Out of the purse she took a key. The key
fitted a small padlock and the padlock belonged to her trunk. She
unlocked her empty trunk and opened it.

"There," she said, turning to the girls-- "there," she continued, "you
will be good enough to notice that there are no photographs concealed
in this trunk, no pictures, no prints." She lifted the tray. "Empty,
you see," she added, pointing with her hand to the lower portion of
the trunk-- "nothing here to make my room pretty, and cozy, and
home-like." Then she shut the trunk again and locked it, and going up
to where the three girls stood, gazing at her in bewilderment and some
alarm, she unfastened her purse and turned all its contents into the
palm of her hand.

"Look, Miss Marsh," she said, turning to the girl who had spoken last.
"You may count what is here. One sovereign, one half-sovereign, two or
three shillings, some pence. Would this money go far at Spilman's, do
you think?"

Priscilla put it all slowly back again into her purse. Her face was
still absolutely colorless. She laid the purse on the top of her
bureau.

"I do not suppose," she said in a low, sad voice, "that I am the sort
of girl who often comes to a place of this sort. I am poor, and I have
got to work hard, and I have no time for pleasure. Nevertheless," she
added-- and now a great wave of color swept over her face, and her
eyes were lit up, and she had a sensation of feeling quite glad, and
strong, and happy-- "I am not going away because I am poor, and I am
not going to mind what any one thinks of me as long as I do right. My
room must stay empty and bare, because I have no money to make it full
and beautiful. And do you think that I would ask those-- those who
sent me here-- to add one feather's weight to their cares and
expenses, to give me money to buy beautiful things because I am afraid
of you? No, I should be awfully afraid to do that; but I am not afraid
of you."

Priscilla opened the drawer of her bureau and put her little light
purse back again in its hiding-place.

"Good night, Miss Peel," said Miss Day in a thin, small kind of voice.

"Good night, Miss Peel," said Miss Marsh. The girls went gently out of
the room. They closed the door behind them, without making any noise.
Nancy Banister remained behind. She came up to Priscilla and kissed
her.

"You are brave," she said. "I admire you. I-- I-- am proud of you. I
am glad to know that a girl like you has come to live here."

"Don't-- don't," said poor Prissie. Her little burst of courage had
deserted her. She covered her face with her trembling hands. She did
not want Nancy Banister to see that her eyes were full of tears.

  CHAPTER VII

 IN MISS OLIPHANT'S ROOM

"MY dear," said Nancy Banister that same evening-- "my dear and
beloved Maggie, we have both been guilty of a huge mistake."

"What is that?" asked Miss Oliphant. She was leaning back in a deep
easy-chair, and Nancy, who did not care for luxurious seats, had
perched herself on a little stool at her feet. Nancy was a small,
nervous-looking person; she had a zealous face and eager, almost too
active movements. Nancy was the soul of bustling good nature, of
brightness and kindness. She often said that Maggie Oliphant's
laziness rested her.

"What is it?" said Maggie again. "How are we in the wrong, Nance?"

She lifted her dimpled hand as she spoke and contemplated it with a
slow, satisfied sort of smile.

"We have made a mistake about Miss Peel, that is all; she is a very
noble girl."

"Oh, my dear Nance! Poor little Puritan Prissie! What next?"

"It is all very fine to call her names," replied Nancy-- here she
sprang to her feet-- "but I couldn't do what she did. Do you know that
she absolutely and completely turned the tables on that vulgar Annie
Day and that pushing, silly little Lucy Marsh. I never saw any two
look smaller or poorer than those two when they skedaddled out of her
room. Yes, that's the word-- they skedaddled to the door, both of
them, looking as limp as a cotton dress when it has been worn for a
week, and one almost treading on the other's heels; and I do not think
Prissie will be worried by them any more."

"Really, Nancy, you look quite pretty when you are excited! Now, what
did this wonderful Miss Peel do? Did she box the ears of those two
detestable girls? If so, she has my hearty congratulations."

"More than that, Maggie-- that poor, little, meek, awkward, slim
creature absolutely demolished them. Oh! she did it in such a fine,
simple, unworldly sort of way. I only wish you had seen her! They were
twitting her about not going in for all the fun here, and, above
everything, for keeping her room so bare and unattractive. You know
she has been a fortnight here to-day, and she has not got an extra
thing-- not one. There isn't a room in the hall like hers-- it's so
bare and unhomelike. What's the matter, Maggie?"

"You needn't go on, Nancy; if it's about the room, I don't want to
hear it. You know I can't-- I can't bear it."

Maggie's lips were trembling, her face was white. She shaded her eyes
with her hand.

"Oh, my darling, I am so sorry. I forgot-- I really did! There, you
must try and think it was any room. What she did was all the same.
Well, those girls had been twitting her. I expect she's had a nice
fortnight of it! She turned very white, and at last her blood was up,
and she just gave it to them. She opened her little trunk. I really
could have cried. It was such a poor, pathetic sort of receptacle to
be capable of holding all one's worldly goods, and she showed it to
them-- empty! 'You see,' she said, 'that I have no pictures nor
ornaments here!' Then she turned the contents of her purse into her
hand. I think, Maggie, she had about thirty shillings in the world,
and she asked Lucy Marsh to count her money, and inquired how many
things she thought it would purchase at Spilman's. Then, Maggie,
Priscilla turned on them. Oh, she did not look plain then, nor awkward
either. Her eyes had such a splendid good, brave sort of light in
them. And she said she had come here to work, and she meant to work,
and her room must stay bare, for she had no money to make it anything
else. 'But,' she said, 'I am not afraid of you, but I am afraid of
hurting those'-- whoever 'those' are-- 'those'-- oh, with such a ring
on the word-- 'who have sent me here!'

"After that the two girls skedaddled; they had had enough of her, and
I expect, Maggie, your little Puritan Prissie will be left in peace in
the future."

"Don't call her my little Puritan," said Maggie. "I have nothing to
say to her."

Maggie was leaning back again in her chair now; her face was still
pale and her soft eyes looked troubled.

"I wish you wouldn't tell me heroic stories, Nancy," she remarked
after a pause. "They make me feel so uncomfortable. If Priscilla Peel
is going to be turned into a sort of heroine, she'll be much more
unbearable than in her former character."

"Oh, Maggie, I wish you wouldn't talk in that reckless way nor pretend
that you hate goodness. You know you adore it-- you know you do! You
know you are far and away the most lovable and bewitching, and the--
the very best girl at St. Benet's."

"No, dear little Nance, you are quite mistaken. Perhaps I'm
bewitching-- I suppose to a certain extent I am, for people always
tell me so-- but I'm not lovable and I'm not good. There, my dear, do
let us turn from that uninteresting person-- Maggie Oliphant. And so,
Nancy, you are going to worship Priscilla Peel in future?"

"Oh, dear no! that's not my way. But I'm going to respect her very
much. I think we have both rather shunned her lately, and I did feel
sure at first that you meant to be very kind to her, Maggie."

Miss Oliphant yawned. It was her way to get over emotion very quickly.
A moment before her face had been all eloquent with feeling; now its
expression was distinctly bored, and her lazy eyes were not even open
to their full extent.

"Perhaps I found her stupid," she said, "and so for that reason
dropped her. Perhaps I would have continued to be kind if she had
reciprocated attentions, but she did not. I am glad now, very glad,
that we are unlikely to be friends, for, after what you have just told
me, I should probably find her insupportable. Are you going, Nancy?"

"Yes, I promised to have cocoa with Annie Day. I had almost forgotten.
Good night, Maggie."

Nancy shut the door softly behind her, and Maggie closed her eyes for
a moment with a sigh of relief.

"It's nice to be alone," she said softly under her breath, "it's nice
and yet it isn't nice. Nancy irritated me dreadfully this evening. I
don't like stories about good people. I don't wish to think about good
people. I am determined that I will not allow my thoughts to dwell on
that unpleasant Priscilla Peel, and her pathetic poverty, and her
burst of heroics. It is too trying to hear footsteps in that room. No,
I will not think of that room nor of its inmate. Now, if I could only
go to sleep!"

Maggie curled herself up in her luxurious chair, arranged a soft
pillow under her head and shut her eyes. In this attitude she made a
charming picture: her thick black lashes lay heavily on her pale
cheeks; her red lips were slightly parted; her breathing came quietly.
By and by repose took the place of tension-- her face looked as if it
were cut out of marble. The excitement and unrest, which her words had
betrayed, vanished utterly; her features were beautiful, but almost
expressionless.

This lasted for a short time, perhaps ten minutes; then a trivial
circumstance, the falling of a coal in the grate, disturbed the light
slumber of the sleeper. Maggie stirred restlessly and turned her head.
She was not awake, but she was dreaming. A faint rose tint visited
