plenty of medicines left in the bag. He'll do anything for you if you
change his color.  It is your only chance to get out of prison."

"Well, I suppose it MIGHT be possible," said the Doctor.  "Let me
see--," and he went over to his medicine-bag, murmuring something about
"liberated chlorine on animal-pigment--perhaps zinc-ointment, as a
temporary measure, spread thick--"

Well, that night Prince Bumpo came secretly to the Doctor in prison and
said to him,

"White Man, I am an unhappy prince. Years ago I went in search of The
Sleeping Beauty, whom I had read of in a book.  And having traveled
through the world many days, I at last found her and kissed the lady
very gently to awaken her--as the book said I should. 'Tis true indeed
that she awoke.  But when she saw my face she cried out, 'Oh, he's
black!' And she ran away and wouldn't marry me--but went to sleep again
somewhere else.  So I came back, full of sadness, to my father's
kingdom. Now I hear that you are a wonderful magician and have many
powerful potions.  So I come to you for help.  If you will turn me
white, so that I may go back to The Sleeping Beauty, I will give you
half my kingdom and anything besides you ask."

"Prince Bumpo," said the Doctor, looking thoughtfully at the bottles in
his medicine-bag, "supposing I made your hair a nice blonde
color--would not that do instead to make you happy?"

"No," said Bumpo.  "Nothing else will satisfy me.  I must be a white
prince."

"You know it is very hard to change the color of a prince," said the
Doctor--"one of the hardest things a magician can do.  You only want
your face white, do you not?"

"Yes, that is all," said Bumpo.  "Because I shall wear shining armor
and gauntlets of steel, like the other white princes, and ride on a
horse."

"Must your face be white all over?" asked the Doctor.

"Yes, all over," said Bumpo--"and I would like my eyes blue too, but I
suppose that would be very hard to do."

"Yes, it would," said the Doctor quickly. "Well, I will do what I can
for you.  You will have to be very patient though--you know with some
medicines you can never be very sure.  I might have to try two or three
times.  You have a strong skin--yes?  Well that's all right. Now come
over here by the light--Oh, but before I do anything, you must first go
down to the beach and get a ship ready, with food in it, to take me
across the sea.  Do not speak a word of this to any one.  And when I
have done as you ask, you must let me and all my animals out of prison.
Promise--by the crown of Jolliginki!"

So the Prince promised and went away to get a ship ready at the
seashore.

When he came back and said that it was done, the Doctor asked Dab-Dab
to bring a basin. Then he mixed a lot of medicines in the basin and
told Bumpo to dip his face in it.

The Prince leaned down and put his face in--right up to the ears.

He held it there a long time--so long that the Doctor seemed to get
dreadfully anxious and fidgety, standing first on one leg and then on
the other, looking at all the bottles he had used for the mixture, and
reading the labels on them again and again.  A strong smell filled the
prison, like the smell of brown paper burning.

At last the Prince lifted his face up out of the basin, breathing very
hard.  And all the animals cried out in surprise.

For the Prince's face had turned as white as snow, and his eyes, which
had been mud-colored, were a manly gray!

When John Dolittle lent him a little looking-glass to see himself in,
he sang for joy and began dancing around the prison.  But the Doctor
asked him not to make so much noise about it; and when he had closed
his medicine-bag in a hurry he told him to open the prison-door.

Bumpo begged that he might keep the looking-glass, as it was the only
one in the Kingdom of Jolliginki, and he wanted to look at himself all
day long.  But the Doctor said he needed it to shave with.

Then the Prince, taking a bunch of copper keys from his pocket, undid
the great double locks.  And the Doctor with all his animals ran as
fast as they could down to the seashore; while Bumpo leaned against the
wall of the empty dungeon, smiling after them happily, his big face
shining like polished ivory in the light of the moon.

When they came to the beach they saw Polynesia and Chee-Chee waiting
for them on the rocks near the ship.

"I feel sorry about Bumpo," said the Doctor.

"I am afraid that medicine I used will never last.  Most likely he will
be as black as ever when he wakes up in the morning--that's one reason
why I didn't like to leave the mirror with him.  But then again, he
MIGHT stay white--I had never used that mixture before.  To tell the
truth, I was surprised, myself, that it worked so well.  But I had to
do something, didn't I?--I couldn't possibly scrub the King's kitchen
for the rest of my life.  It was such a dirty kitchen!--I could see it
from the prison-window.--Well, well!--Poor Bumpo!"

"Oh, of course he will know we were just joking with him," said the
parrot.

"They had no business to lock us up," said Dab-Dab, waggling her tail
angrily.  "We never did them any harm. Serve him right, if he does turn
black again! I hope it's a dark black."

"But HE didn't have anything to do with it," said the Doctor.  "It was
the King, his father, who had us locked up--it wasn't Bumpo's fault....
I wonder if I ought to go back and apologize--Oh, well--I'll send him
some candy when I get to Puddleby.  And who knows?--he may stay white
after all."

"The Sleeping Beauty would never have him, even if he did," said
Dab-Dab.  "He looked better the way he was, I thought.  But he'd never
be anything but ugly, no matter what color he was made."

"Still, he had a good heart," said the Doctor--"romantic, of
course--but a good heart. After all, 'handsome is as handsome does.'"

"I don't believe the poor booby found The Sleeping Beauty at all," said
Jip, the dog. "Most likely he kissed some farmer's fat wife who was
taking a snooze under an apple-tree. Can't blame her for getting
scared!  I wonder who he'll go and kiss this time.  Silly business!"

Then the pushmi-pullyu, the white mouse, Gub-Gub, Dab-Dab, Jip and the
owl, Too-Too, went on to the ship with the Doctor.  But Chee-Chee,
Polynesia and the crocodile stayed behind, because Africa was their
proper home, the land where they were born.

And when the Doctor stood upon the boat, he looked over the side across
the water.  And then he remembered that they had no one with them to
guide them back to Puddleby.

The wide, wide sea looked terribly big and lonesome in the moonlight;
and he began to wonder if they would lose their way when they passed
out of sight of land.

But even while he was wondering, they heard a strange whispering noise,
high in the air, coming through the night.  And the animals all stopped
saying Good-by and listened.

The noise grew louder and bigger.  It seemed to be coming nearer to
them--a sound like the Autumn wind blowing through the leaves of a
poplar-tree, or a great, great rain beating down upon a roof.

And Jip, with his nose pointing and his tail quite straight, said,

"Birds!--millions of them--flying fast--that's it!"

And then they all looked up.  And there, streaming across the face of
the moon, like a huge swarm of tiny ants, they could see thousands and
thousands of little birds.  Soon the whole sky seemed full of them, and
still more kept coming--more and more.  There were so many that for a
little they covered the whole moon so it could not shine, and the sea
grew dark and black--like when a storm-cloud passes over the sun.

And presently all these birds came down close, skimming over the water
and the land; and the night-sky was left clear above, and the moon
shone as before.  Still never a call nor a cry nor a song they made--no
sound but this great rustling of feathers which grew greater now than
ever.  When they began to settle on the sands, along the ropes of the
ship--anywhere and everywhere except the trees--the Doctor could see
that they had blue wings and white breasts and very short, feathered
legs.  As soon as they had all found a place to sit, suddenly, there
was no noise left anywhere--all was quiet; all was still.

And in the silent moonlight John Dolittle spoke:

"I had no idea that we had been in Africa so long.  It will be nearly
Summer when we get home.  For these are the swallows going back.
Swallows, I thank you for waiting for us.  It is very thoughtful of
you.  Now we need not be afraid that we will lose our way upon the
sea....  Pull up the anchor and set the sail!"

When the ship moved out upon the water, those who stayed behind,
Chee-Chee, Polynesia and the crocodile, grew terribly sad.  For never
in their lives had they known any one they liked so well as Doctor John
Dolittle of Puddleby-on-the-Marsh.

And after they had called Good-by to him again and again and again,
they still stood there upon the rocks, crying bitterly and waving till
the ship was out of sight.



THE THIRTEENTH CHAPTER

RED SAILS AND BLUE WINGS

SAILING homeward, the Doctor's ship had to pass the coast of Barbary.
This coast is the seashore of the Great Desert. It is a wild, lonely
place--all sand and stones.  And it was here that the Barbary pirates
lived.

These pirates, a bad lot of men, used to wait for sailors to be
shipwrecked on their shores. And often, if they saw a boat passing,
they would come out in their fast sailing-ships and chase it. When they
caught a boat like this at sea, they would steal everything on it; and
after they had taken the people off they would sink the ship and sail
back to Barbary singing songs and feeling proud of the mischief they
had done.  Then they used to make the people they had caught write home
to their friends for money.  And if the friends sent no money, the
pirates often threw the people into the sea.

Now one sunshiny day the Doctor and Dab-Dab were walking up and down on
the ship for exercise; a nice fresh wind was blowing the boat along,
and everybody was happy.  Presently Dab-Dab saw the sail of another
ship a long way behind them on the edge of the sea. It was a red sail.

"I don't like the look of that sail," said Dab-Dab.  "I have a feeling
it isn't a friendly ship. I am afraid there is more trouble coming to
us."

Jip, who was lying near taking a nap in the sun, began to growl and
talk in his sleep.

"I smell roast beef cooking," he mumbled--"underdone roast beef--with
brown gravy over it."

"Good gracious!" cried the Doctor.  "What's the matter with the dog?
Is he SMELLING in his sleep--as well as talking?"

"I suppose he is," said Dab-Dab.  "All dogs can smell in their sleep."

"But what is he smelling?" asked the Doctor.

"There is no roast beef cooking on our ship." "No," said Dab-Dab.  "The
roast beef must be on that other ship over there."

"But that's ten miles away," said the Doctor. "He couldn't smell that
far surely!"

"Oh, yes, he could," said Dab-Dab.  "You ask him."

Then Jip, still fast asleep, began to growl again and his lip curled up
angrily, showing his clean, white teeth.

"I smell bad men," he growled--"the worst men I ever smelt.  I smell
trouble.  I smell a fight--six bad scoundrels fighting against one
brave man.  I want to help him.  Woof--oo--WOOF!" Then he barked, loud,
and woke himself up with a surprised look on his face.

"See!" cried Dab-Dab.  "That boat is nearer now. You can count its
three big sails--all red. Whoever it is, they are coming after us.... I
wonder who they are."

"They are bad sailors," said Jip; "and their ship is very swift.  They
are surely the pirates of Barbary."

"Well, we must put up more sails on our boat," said the Doctor, "so we
can go faster and get away from them.  Run downstairs, Jip, and fetch
me all the sails you see."

The dog hurried downstairs and dragged up every sail he could find.

But even when all these were put up on the masts to catch the wind, the
boat did not go nearly as fast as the pirates'--which kept coming on
behind, closer and closer.

"This is a poor ship the Prince gave us," said Gub-Gub, the pig--"the
slowest he could find, I should think.  Might as well try to win a race
in a soup-tureen as hope to get away from them in this old barge.  Look
how near they are now!--  You can see the mustaches on the faces of the
men--six of them.  What are we going to do?"

Then the Doctor asked Dab-Dab to fly up and tell the swallows that
pirates were coming after them in a swift ship, and what should he do
about it.

When the swallows heard this, they all came down on to the Doctor's
ship; and they told him to unravel some pieces of long rope and make
them into a lot of thin strings as quickly as he could.  Then the ends
of these strings were tied on to the front of the ship; and the
swallows took hold of the strings with their feet and flew off, pulling
the boat along.

And although swallows are not very strong when only one or two are by
themselves, it is different when there are a great lot of them
together.  And there, tied to the Doctor's ship, were a thousand
strings; and two thousand swallows were pulling on each string--all
terribly swift fliers.

And in a moment the Doctor found himself traveling so fast he had to
hold his hat on with both hands; for he felt as though the ship itself
were flying through waves that frothed and boiled with speed.

And all the animals on the ship began to laugh and dance about in the
rushing air, for when they looked back at the pirates' ship, they could
see that it was growing smaller now, instead of bigger.  The red sails
were being left far, far behind.



THE FOURTEENTH CHAPTER

THE RATS' WARNING

DRAGGING a ship through the sea is hard work.  And after two or three
hours the swallows began to get tired in the wings and short of breath.
Then they sent a message down to the Doctor to say that they would have
to take a rest soon; and that they would pull the boat over to an
island not far off, and hide it in a deep bay till they had got breath
enough to go on.

And presently the Doctor saw the island they had spoken of.  It had a
very beautiful, high, green mountain in the middle of it.

When the ship had sailed safely into the bay where it could not be seen
from the open sea, the Doctor said he would get off on to the island to
look for water--because there was none left to drink on his ship.  And
he told all the animals to get out too and romp on the grass to stretch
their legs.

Now as they were getting off, the Doctor noticed that a whole lot of
rats were coming up from downstairs and leaving the ship as well. Jip
started to run after them, because chasing rats had always been his
favorite game.  But the Doctor told him to stop.

And one big black rat, who seemed to want to say something to the
Doctor, now crept forward timidly along the rail, watching the dog out
of the corner of his eye.  And after he had coughed nervously two or
three times, and cleaned his whiskers and wiped his mouth, he said,

"Ahem--er--you know of course that all ships have rats in them, Doctor,
do you not?"

And the Doctor said, "Yes."

"And you have heard that rats always leave a sinking ship?"

"Yes," said the Doctor--"so I've been told."

"People," said the rat, "always speak of it with a sneer--as though it
were something disgraceful.  But you can't blame us, can you? After
all, who WOULD stay on a sinking ship, if he could get off it?"

"It's very natural," said the Doctor--"very natural.  I quite
understand....  Was there--  Was there anything else you wished to say?"

"Yes," said the rat.  "I've come to tell you that we are leaving this
one.  But we wanted to warn you before we go.  This is a bad ship you
have here.  It isn't safe.  The sides aren't strong enough.  Its boards
are rotten.  Before to-morrow night it will sink to the bottom of the
sea."

"But how do you know?" asked the Doctor.

"We always know," answered the rat.  "The tips of our tails get that
tingly feeling--like when your foot's asleep.  This morning, at six
o'clock, while I was getting breakfast, my tail suddenly began to
tingle.  At first I thought it was my rheumatism coming back.  So I
went and asked my aunt how she felt--you remember her?--the long,
piebald rat, rather skinny, who came to see you in Puddleby last Spring
with jaundice?  Well--and she said HER tail was tingling like
everything!  Then we knew, for sure, that this boat was going to sink
in less than two days; and we all made up our minds to leave it as soon
as we got near enough to any land.  It's a bad ship, Doctor.  Don't
sail in it any more, or you'll be surely drowned.... Good-by!  We are
