
"I rather wonder you are not afraid of drawing attention by riding on
horseback to a house in such a quarter," Malchus said.

"We dare not meet secretly, you know. The city is full of spies, and
doubtless the movements of all known to be hostile to Hanno and his
party are watched, therefore we thought it best to meet here. We have
caused it to be whispered as a secret in the neighbourhood, that the
house has been taken as a place where we can gamble free from the
presence of our elders. Therefore the only comments we excite is, 'There
go those young fools who are ruining themselves.' It is only because you
are on horseback that I have come round to this gate; had you come on
foot we should have entered by the front. Fortunately there are among us
many who are deemed to be mere pleasure seekers--men who wager fortunes
on their horses, who are given to banquets, or whose lives seem to be
passed in luxury and indolence, but who at heart are as earnest in the
cause of Carthage as I am. The presence of such men among us gives a
probability to the tale that this is a gambling house. Were we all of my
stamp, men known to be utterly hostile to Hanno and his party, suspicion
would fall upon our meetings at once. But here we are."

As he spoke he drew aside some heavy curtains and entered a large room.
Some ten or twelve young men were assembled there. They looked up in
surprise as Giscon entered followed by his companion.

"I have brought a recruit," Giscon said, "one whom all of you know by
repute if not personally; it is Malchus, the son of General Hamilcar. He
is young to be engaged in a business like ours, but I have been with him
in a campaign and can answer for him. He is brave, ready, thoughtful and
trustworthy. He loves his country and hates her tyrants. I can guarantee
that he will do nothing imprudent, but can be trusted as one of
ourselves. Being young he will have the advantage of being less likely
to be watched, and may be doubly useful. He is ready to take the oath of
our society."

As Giscon was the leading spirit of the band his recommendation was
taken as amply sufficient. The young men rose and formed in a circle
round Malchus. All drew their daggers, and one, whom Malchus recognized
with a momentary feeling of surprise as Carthalon, whom Adherbal had
pointed out at the Barcine Club as one who thought only of horse racing,
said:

"Do you swear by Moloch and Astarte to be true to this society, to
devote yourself to the destruction of the oppressors of Carthage, to
carry out all measures which may be determined upon, even at the certain
risk of your life, and to suffer yourself to be torn to pieces by the
torture rather than reveal aught that passes within these walls?"

"That I swear solemnly," Malchus said.

"I need not say," Carthalon said carelessly, "that the punishment of the
violation of the oath is death. It is so put in our rules. But we are
all nobles of Carthage, and nobles do not break their oaths, so we
can let that pass. When a man's word is good enough to make him beggar
himself in order to discharge a wager, he can be trusted to keep his
word in a matter which concerns the lives of a score of his fellows. And
now that this business is arranged we can go on with our talk; but first
let us have some wine, for all this talking is thirsty work at best."

The young men threw themselves upon the couches around the room and,
while slaves brought round wine, chatted lightly with each other about
horses, the play presented the day before, the respective merits of the
reigning beauties of Carthage, and other similar topics, and Malchus,
who was impressed with the serious nature of the secret conspiracy which
he had just sworn to aid, could not help being surprised at the careless
gaiety of the young men, although engaged in a conspiracy in which they
risked their lives.

It was not until some minutes after the slaves had left the apartment
that the light talk and banter ceased, as Giscon rose and said:

"Now to business. Malchus has told me that an old fisherman, who took
a lead in stirring up his fellows to declare for Hannibal, has been
decoyed away from his home and murdered; his body has been found
floating in the lake, strangled. This is the nineteenth in the course of
a week. These acts are spreading terror among the working classes, and
unless they are put a stop to we can no longer expect assistance from
them.

"That these deeds are the work of the officials of the tribunals we have
no doubt. The sooner we strike the better. Matters are getting ripe. I
have eight men sworn into my section among the weavers, and need but
two more to complete it. We will instruct our latest recruit to raise
a section among the fishermen. The sons of the man just murdered should
form a nucleus. We agreed from the first that three hundred resolute
men besides ourselves were required, and that each of us should raise
a section of ten. Malchus brings up our number here to thirty, and when
all the sections are filled up we shall be ready for action.

"Failure ought to be impossible. The houses of Hanno and thirty of his
party will be attacked, and the tyrants slain before any alarm can be
given. Another thirty at least should be slain before the town is fairly
aroused. Maybe each section can undertake three if our plans are well
laid, and each chooses for attack three living near each other. We have
not yet settled whether it will be better to separate when this is
done, content with the first blow against our tyrants, or to prepare
beforehand for a popular rising, to place ourselves at the head of the
populace, and to make a clean sweep of the judges and the leaders of
Hanno's party."

Giscon spoke in an ordinary matter-of-fact tone, as if he were
discussing the arrangements of a party of pleasure; but Malchus could
scarcely repress a movement of anxiety as he heard this proposal for the
wholesale destruction of the leading men of Carthage. The council thus
opened was continued for three hours. Most of those present spoke, but,
to the surprise of Malchus, there was an entire absence of that gloom
and mystery with which the idea of a state conspiracy was associated in
his mind.

The young men discussed it earnestly, indeed, but in the same spirit
in which they would have agreed over a disputed question as to the
respective merits of two horses. They laughed, joked, offered and
accepted wagers and took the whole matter with a lightness of heart
which Malchus imitated to the best of his power, but which he was very
far from feeling; and yet he felt that beneath all this levity his
companions were perfectly in earnest in their plans, but they joked now
as they would have joked before the commencement of a battle in which
the odds against them were overwhelming and great.

Even Giscon, generally grave and gloomy, was as light hearted as the
rest. The aristocracy of Carthage were, like the aristocracy of all
other countries, from tradition, training, and habit, brave to excess.
Just as centuries later the noblesse of France chatted gaily on the
tumbril on their way to execution, and offered each other their snuff
boxes on the scaffold, so these young aristocrats of Carthage smiled and
jested, though well aware that they were risking their lives.

No decision was arrived at, for this could only be decided upon at
a special meeting, at which all the members of the society would
be present. Among those now in council opinions were nearly equally
divided. The one party urged that, did they take steps to prepare the
populace for a rising, a rumour would be sure to meet the ears of their
opponents and they would be on their guard; whereas, if they scattered
quickly after each section had slain two of their tyrants, the operation
might be repeated until all the influential men of Hanno's faction had
been removed.

In reply to these arguments the other party urged that delays were
always dangerous, that huge rewards would be offered after the first
attempts, that some of the men of the sections might turn traitors, that
Hanno's party would be on their guard in future, and that the judges
would effect wholesale arrests and executions; whereas, were the
populace appealed to in the midst of the excitement which would be
caused by the death of Hanno and his principal adherents, the people
would rise and finish with their tyrants.

After all who wished to speak on the subject had given their opinions,
they proceeded to details; each gave a statement of the number of men
enrolled in his section, with a few words as to the disposition of each.
Almost without an exception each of these men was animated with a
sense of private wrong. Some had lost near relatives, executed for some
trifling offence by the tribunals, some had been ruined by the extortion
of the tax gatherers. All were stated to be ready to give their lives
for vengeance.

"These agents of ours, you see, Malchus, are not for the most part
animated by any feeling of pure patriotism, it is their own wrongs and
not the injuries of Carthage which they would avenge. But we must take
them as we find them; one cannot expect any deep feeling of patriotism
on the part of the masses, who, it must be owned, have no very great
reason to feel any lively interest in the glories of the republic. So
that they eat and drink sufficiently, and can earn their living, it
matters not very greatly to them whether Carthage is great and glorious,
or humbled and defeated. But this will not always be so. When we have
succeeded in ridding Carthage of her tyrants we must next do all we can
so to raise the condition of the common people that they may feel that
they too have a common interest in the fate of our country. I should
not, of course, propose giving to them a vote; to bestow the suffrage
upon the ignorant, who would simply follow the demagogues who would use
them as tools, would be the height of madness. The affairs of state, the
government of the country, the making of the laws, must be solely in
the hands of those fitted for the task--of the men who, by education,
by birth, by position, by study and by leisure have prepared their minds
for such a charge. But the people should share in the advantages of
a good government; they should not be taxed more than they could
reasonably pay, and any tax gatherers who should extort a penny beyond
the legal amount should be disgraced and punished.

"The courts should be open to all, the judges should be impartial and
incorruptible; every man should have his rights and his privileges, then
each man, feeling an interest in the stability of the state, would
be ready to bear arms in its defence, and Carthage, instead of being
dependent entirely upon her tributaries and mercenaries, would be able
to place a great army in the field by her own unaided exertions.

"The barbarian tribes would cease to revolt, knowing that success would
be hopeless. And as we should be strong at home we should be respected
abroad, and might view without apprehension the rising power of Rome.
There is plenty of room for both of us. For us, Africa and Spain; for
her all the rest of Europe and as much of Asia as she cares to take. We
could look without jealousy at each other's greatness, each secure in
his own strength and power. Yes, there may be a grand future before
Carthage yet."

The meeting now broke up.

"Where are you going, Malchus?" Giscon asked the lad as they went out
into the courtyard; "to see the sacrifices? You know there is a grand
function today to propitiate Moloch and to pray for victory for our
arms."

"No," Malchus said with a shudder. "I don't think I am a coward, Giscon,
but these terrible rites frighten me. I was taken once by my father, and
I then swore that never again, unless it be absolutely necessary for me
in the performance of public office, will I be present at such a scene.
For weeks afterwards I scarcely slept; day and night there was before
me that terrible brazen image of Moloch. If I fell off to sleep, I woke
bathed in perspiration as I heard the screams of the infants as they
were dropped into those huge hands, heated to redness, stretched out to
receive them. I cannot believe, Giscon, that the gods are so cruel.

"Then there was the slaughter of a score of captives taken in war. I
see them now, standing pale and stern, with their eyes directed to the
brazen image which was soon to be sprinkled with their blood, while the
priests in their scarlet robes, with the sacrificial knives in hand,
approached them. I saw no more, for I shut my eyes till all was over.
I tell you again, Giscon, I do not believe the gods are so cruel. Why
should the gods of Phoenicia and Carthage alone demand blood? Those
of Greece and Rome are not so bloodthirsty, and yet Mars gives as many
victories to the Roman arms as Moloch does to ours."

"Blaspheme not the gods, Malchus," Giscon said gloomily; "you may be
sure that the wreath of a conquering general will never be placed around
your brow if you honour them not."

"If honouring them means approval of shedding the blood of infants and
captives, I will renounce all hopes of obtaining victory by their aid."

"I would you had spoken so before, Malchus; had I known that you were
a scorner of the gods I would not have asked you to join in our
enterprise. No good fortune can be expected to attend our efforts unless
we have the help of the gods."

"The matter is easily mended, Giscon," Malchus said calmly. "So far
I have taken no step towards carrying out your plans, and have but
listened to what you said, therefore, no harm can yet have been done.
Strike my name off the list, and forget that I have been with you. You
have my oath that I will say nought of anything that I have heard. You
can well make some excuse to your comrades. Tell them, for example, that
though I fear not for myself, I thought that, being the son of Hamilcar,
I had no right to involve his name and family in such an enterprise,
unless by his orders."

"Yes, it were better so," Giscon said after a pause; "I dare not
continue the enterprise with one who condemns the gods among us; it
would be to court failure. I did not dream of this; who could have
thought that a lad of your age would have been a spurner of the gods?"

"I am neither a condemner nor a spurner," Malchus said indignantly; "I
say only that I believe you worship them wrongfully, that you do them
injustice. I say it is impossible that the gods who rule the world
can have pleasure in the screams of dying infants or the groans of
slaughtered men."

Giscon placed his hand to his ears as if to shut out such blasphemy,
and hurried away, while Malchus, mounting his horse, rode out slowly and
thoughtfully to his father's villa. He was not at heart sorry that he
was freed from this association into which, without knowing the measures
by which it intended to carry out its aims, he had rashly entered. He
was ready for armed insurrection against the tyrants of Carthage, but he
revolted from the thought of this plan for a midnight massacre--it was
not by such means that he would have achieved the regeneration of his
country. He felt, too, that the reason which he had given Giscon was a
valid one. He had no right, at his age, to involve his family in such a
conspiracy. Did it fail, and were he found to be among the conspirators,
Hanno and his associates would be sure to seize the fact as a pretext
for assailing Hamilcar. They would say that Malchus would never have
joined in such a plot had he not known that it had the approval of his
father, and that he was in fact but the representative of his family in
the design for overthrowing the constitution of the republic.

Fortunately for Malchus, a few days later orders were given for the
instant embarkation of a portion of the reinforcements destined for
Hannibal. Hamilcar was to proceed in command of them, and, busied
with his preparation for the start, Malchus thought little more of the
conspiracy which was brewing. Thirty large merchant ships were hired
to convey the troops, who numbered six thousand. These were principally
Libyan footmen. The main body, with the Numidian horse, were to follow
shortly. At last the day for embarkation arrived, and the troops defiled
through the temple of Moloch, where sacrifices were offered up for the
success of the enterprise.

Malchus, under the pretense that something was not ready, at the last
moment lingered at home, and only joined his comrades, a hundred young
men of the Carthaginian horse, on the quays. This body, all composed
of young men of the best families of Carthage, were to sail in the same
ship which carried Hamilcar. The scene was a busy one--the docks
of Carthage were extensive, and the ships which were to convey the
expedition lay in deep water by the quays, so that the troops could
march on board. A great crowd of the populace had assembled to view the
embarkation. These were with difficulty kept from crowding the troops
and impeding their movement by a cordon of soldiers.

As the troops marched on to the quay they were formed up in parties by
the side of the ships which were to convey them. Very different was the
demeanour of the men of the different nationalities. The Libyans were
stern and silent, they were part of the contingent which their state
was bound to furnish to Carthage, and went unwillingly, cursing in their
hearts the power which tore them from their homes to fight in a war in
which they had neither concern nor interest.

Near them were a body of Garamantes, wrapped in the long bernous which
then as now was the garb of the children of the desert. Tall, swarthy
figures these, lissome and agile, with every muscle standing out clear
through the brown skin. Strange as must have been the scene to them,
there was no wonder expressed in the keen glances which they shot around
them from underneath their dark eyebrows. Silent and taciturn, scarce
a word was to be heard among them as they stood awaiting the orders to
embark; they were there unwillingly, and their hearts were far away in
the distant desert, but none the less would they be willing to fight
when the time came. Terrible foes these would be in a night attack,
with their stealthy tiger-like tread, their gleaming, vengeful eyes, and
their cruel mouths.

Very different were the band of Ethiopians from the distant Soudan, with
their cloaks of lion skin, and the gaudy feathers fastened in a fillet
round their heads. Their black faces were alive with merriment and
wonder--everything was new and extraordinary to them. The sea,
the ships, the mighty city, the gathered crowd, all excited their
astonishment, and their white teeth glistened as they chatted
incessantly with a very babel of laughter and noise.

Not less light hearted were the chosen band of young nobles grouped by
the general's ship. Their horses were held in ranks behind them for the
last time by their slaves, for in future they would have to attend to
them themselves, and as they gathered in groups they laughed and jested
over the last scandal in Carthage, the play which had been produced the
night before at the theatre, or the horse race which was to be run on
the following day. As to the desperate work on which they were to be
engaged--for it was whispered that Hannibal had in preparation some
mighty enterprise--it troubled them not at all, nor the thought that
many of them might never look on Carthage again. In their hearts perhaps
some of them, like Malchus, were thinking sadly of the partings they had
just gone through with those they loved, but no signs of such thoughts
were apparent in their faces or conversation.

Presently a blast of trumpets sounded, and the babel of voices was
hushed as if by magic. The soldiers fell into military order, and stood
motionless. Then Hamilcar walked along the quays inspecting carefully
each group, asking questions of the captains of the ships as to their
store of provisions and water, receiving from the officers charged with
that duty the lists of the war machines and stores which were stored
away in the hulls; and, having assured himself that everything was in
order, he gave the signal to his trumpeter, who again blew a long and
piercing blast.

The work of embarkation at once commenced. The infantry were soon on
board, but the operation of shipping the horses of the cavalry took
longer. Half of these were stored away in the hold of the general's
ship, the rest in another vessel. When the troops were all on board
the soldiers who had kept back the crowd were withdrawn, and the
Carthaginians thronged down on to the quay. A small space was still kept
clear on the wharf by whose side the admiral's ship was lying, and here
was gathered a throng of the aristocracy of the city to see the last of
their sons and relatives of the guard.

Having seen their horses safely stowed below the young men crowded to
the side of the ship to exchange adieus with their friends. The parting
was a brief one, for the wind was fair, and the general anxious to be
well out of the bay before nightfall. Therefore the signal was hoisted.
Numbers of slaves seized the hawsers of the ships and towed them along
through the narrow passage which connected the docks with the sea. A
shout of adieu rose from the crowd, the sails were hoisted, and the
fleet proceeded on its way.

The arrangements for the comfort of the troops at sea were simple and
primitive. Each man shifted for himself. The whole space below was
occupied by cargo or horses. The troops lived and slept on deck. Here,
on wide flat stones, they cooked their meals, whiled away the day by
games of chance, and slept at night on skins or thick rugs. Fortunately
the weather was fair. It was early in March, but the nights were not
cold.

The fleet hugged the coast, anchoring at night, until the northern
shores stood out clear and well defined as Spain stretched down towards
Africa. Then they crossed and cruised along until they arrived at
Carthagena. Short as was the time which had elapsed since the foundation
of that city, its aspect was already imposing and extensive. It lay at
the head of a gulf facing south, about a mile in depth and nearly double
that width. Across the mouth of this bay was an island, with but a
narrow passage on each side, protecting it from the southern winds, and
forming with it a magnificent harbour.

On a bold hill at the head of the harbour stood the town. This hill rose
from a wide lagoon, which communicated on one side with the sea, and
was on the other separated from it only by a strip of land, four hundred
yards wide. Through this a wide channel had been dug. Thus the hill,
which was of considerable extent, rugged and precipitous, was isolated,
and could only be attacked by sea.

The town was built in a sort of amphitheatre facing the sea, and
was surrounded by a strong fortification two miles and a half in
circumference, so that even should an assailant cross the lagoon, which
in summer was nearly dry, he would have before him an almost impregnable
defence to carry. Here, in buildings whose magnitude surprised the
newcomers, acquainted as they were with the buildings of Carthage,
were stored the treasures, the baggage, the ammunition of war, and the
provisions of the army.

It had been the aim of the great Hamilcar, and of Hasdrubal after him,
