between Molly's sobs that her mother had been taken suddenly sick and
had to go away to a hospital, and that left nobody at home to take care
of Molly, and she was to be sent away to some strange relatives in the
city who didn't want her at all and who said so right out....

Oh, Elizabeth Ann knew all about that! and her heart swelled big with
sympathy. For a moment she stood again out on the sidewalk in front of
the Lathrop house with old Mrs. Lathrop's ungracious white head bobbing
from a window, and knew again that ghastly feeling of being unwanted.
Oh, she knew why little Molly was crying! And she shut her hands
together hard and made up her mind that she WOULD help her out!

[Illustration: "What's the matter, Molly? What's the matter?"]

Do you know what she did, right off, without thinking about it? She
didn't go and look up Aunt Abigail. She didn't wait till Uncle Henry
came back from his round of emptying sap buckets into the big tub on his
sled. As fast as her feet could carry her she flew back to Cousin Ann in
the sap-house. I can't tell you (except again that Cousin Ann was Cousin
Ann) why it was that Betsy ran so fast to her and was so sure that
everything would be all right as soon as Cousin Ann knew about it; but
whatever the reason was it was a good one, for, though Cousin Ann did
not stop to kiss Molly or even to look at her more than one sharp first
glance, she said after a moment's pause, during which she filled a syrup
can and screwed the cover down very tight: "Well, if her folks will let
her stay, how would you like to have Molly come and stay with us till
her mother gets back from the hospital? Now you've got a room of your
own, I guess if you wanted to you could have her sleep with you."

"Oh, Molly, Molly, Molly!" shouted Betsy, jumping up and down, and then
hugging the little girl with all her might. "Oh, it will be like having
a little sister!"

Cousin Ann sounded a dry, warning note: "Don't be too sure her folks
will let her. We don't know about them yet."

Betsy ran to her, and caught her hand, looking up at her with shining
eyes. "Cousin Ann, if YOU go to see them and ask them, they will!"

This made even Cousin Ann give a little abashed smile of pleasure,
although she made her face grave again at once and said: "You'd better
go along back to the house now, Betsy. It's time for you to help Mother
with the supper."

The two children trotted back along the darkening wood road, Shep
running before them, little Molly clinging fast to the older child's
hand. "Aren't you ever afraid, Betsy, in the woods this way?" she asked
admiringly, looking about her with timid eyes.

"Oh, no!" said Betsy, protectingly; "there's nothing to be afraid of,
except getting off on the wrong fork of the road, near the Wolf Pit."

"Oh, OW!" said Molly, cringing. "What's the Wolf Pit? What an awful
name!"

Betsy laughed. She tried to make her laugh sound brave like Cousin
Ann's, which always seemed so scornful of being afraid. As a matter of
fact, she was beginning to fear that they HAD made the wrong turn, and
she was not quite sure that she could find the way home. But she put
this out of her mind and walked along very fast, peering ahead into the
dusk. "Oh, it hasn't anything to do with wolves," she said in answer to
Molly's question; "anyhow, not now. It's just a big, deep hole in the
ground where a brook had dug out a cave. ... Uncle Henry told me all
about it when he showed it to me ... and then part of the roof caved in;
sometimes there's ice in the corner of the covered part all the summer,
Aunt Abigail says."

"Why do you call it the Wolf Pit?" asked Molly, walking very close to
Betsy and holding very tightly to her hand.

"Oh, long, ever so long ago, when the first settlers came up here, they
heard a wolf howling all night, and when it didn't stop in the morning,
they came up here on the mountain and found a wolf had fallen in and
couldn't get out."

"My! I hope they killed him!" said Molly.

"Oh, gracious! that was more than a hundred years ago," said Betsy. She
was not thinking of what she was saying. She was thinking that if they
WERE on the right road they ought to be home by this time. She was
thinking that the right road ran down hill to the house all the way, and
that this certainly seemed to be going up a little. She was wondering
what had become of Shep. "Stand here just a minute, Molly," she said. "I
want ... I just want to go ahead a little bit and see ... and see ..." She
darted on around a curve of the road and stood still, her heart sinking.
The road turned there and led straight up the mountain!

For just a moment the little girl felt a wild impulse to burst out in a
shriek for Aunt Frances, and to run crazily away, anywhere so long as
she was running. But the thought of Molly standing back there,
trustfully waiting to be taken care of, shut Betsy's lips together hard
before her scream of fright got out. She stood still, thinking. Now she
mustn't get frightened. All they had to do was to walk back along the
road till they came to the fork and then make the right turn. But what
if they didn't get back to the turn till it was so dark they couldn't
see it...? Well, she mustn't think of that. She ran back, calling, "Come
on, Molly," in a tone she tried to make as firm as Cousin Ann's. "I
guess we have made the wrong turn after all. We'd better ..."

But there was no Molly there. In the brief moment Betsy had stood
thinking, Molly had disappeared. The long, shadowy wood road held not a
trace of her.

Then Betsy WAS frightened and then she DID begin to scream, at the top
of her voice, "Molly! Molly!" She was beside herself with terror, and
started back hastily to hear Molly's voice, very faint, apparently
coming from the ground under her feet.

"Ow! Ow! Betsy! Get me out! Get me out!"

"Where ARE you?" shrieked Betsy.

"I don't know!" came Molly's sobbing voice. "I just moved the least
little bit out of the road, and slipped on the ice and began to slide
and I couldn't stop myself and I fell down into a deep hole!"

Betsy's head felt as though her hair were standing up straight on end
with horror. Molly must have fallen down into the Wolf Pit! Yes, they
were quite near it. She remembered now that big white-birch tree stood
right at the place where the brook tumbled over the edge and fell into
it. Although she was dreadfully afraid of falling in herself, she went
cautiously over to this tree, feeling her way with her foot to make sure
she did not slip, and peered down into the cavernous gloom below. Yes,
there was Molly's little face, just a white speck. The child was crying,
sobbing, and holding up her arms to Betsy.

"Are you hurt, Molly?"

"No. I fell into a big snow-bank, but I'm all wet and frozen and I want
to get out! I want to get out!"

Betsy held on to the birch-tree. Her head whirled. What SHOULD she do!
"Look here, Molly," she called down, "I'm going to run back along to the
right road and back to the house and get Uncle Henry. He'll come with a
rope and get you out!"

At this Molly's crying rose to a frantic scream. "Oh, Betsy, don't leave
me here alone! Don't! Don't! The wolves will get me! Betsy, DON'T leave
me alone!" The child was wild with terror.

"But I CAN'T get you out myself!" screamed back Betsy, crying herself.
Her teeth were chattering with the cold.

"Don't go! Don't go!" came up from the darkness of the pit in a piteous
howl. Betsy made a great effort and stopped crying. She sat down on a
stone and tried to think. And this is what came into her mind as a
guide: "What would Cousin Ann do if she were here? She wouldn't cry. She
would THINK of something."

Betsy looked around her desperately. The first thing she saw was the big
limb of a pine-tree, broken off by the wind, which half lay and half
slantingly stood up against a tree a little distance above the mouth of
the pit. It had been there so long that the needles had all dried and
fallen off, and the skeleton of the branch with the broken stubs looked
like ... yes, it looked like a ladder! THAT was what Cousin Ann would have
done!

"Wait a minute! Wait a minute, Molly!" she called wildly down the pit,
warm all over in excitement. "Now listen. You go off there in a corner,
where the ground makes a sort of roof. I'm going to throw down something
you can climb up on, maybe."

"Ow! Ow, it'll hit me!" cried poor little Molly, more and more
frightened. But she scrambled off under her shelter obediently, while
Betsy struggled with the branch. It was so firmly imbedded in the snow
that at first she could not budge it at all. But after she cleared that
away and pried hard with the stick she was using as a lever she felt it
give a little. She bore down with all her might, throwing her weight
again and again on her lever, and finally felt the big branch
perceptibly move. After that it was easier, as its course was down hill
over the snow to the mouth of the pit. Glowing, and pushing, wet with
perspiration, she slowly maneuvered it along to the edge, turned it
squarely, gave it a great shove, and leaned over anxiously. Then she
gave a great sigh of relief! Just as she had hoped, it went down sharp
end first and stuck fast in the snow which had saved Molly from broken
bones. She was so out of breath with her work that for a moment she
could not speak. Then, "Molly, there! Now I guess you can climb up to
where I can reach you."

Molly made a rush for any way out of her prison, and climbed, like the
little practiced squirrel that she was, up from one stub to another to
the top of the branch. She was still below the edge of the pit there,
but Betsy lay flat down on the snow and held out her hands. Molly took
hold hard, and, digging her toes into the snow, slowly wormed her way up
to the surface of the ground.

It was then, at that very moment, that Shep came bounding up to them,
barking loudly, and after him Cousin Ann striding along in her rubber
boots, with a lantern in her hand and a rather anxious look on her face.

She stopped short and looked at the two little girls, covered with snow,
their faces flaming with excitement, and at the black hole gaping behind
them. "I always TOLD Father we ought to put a fence around that pit,"
she said in a matter-of-fact voice. "Some day a sheep's going to fall
down there. Shep came along to the house without you, and we thought
most likely you'd taken the wrong turn."

Betsy felt terribly aggrieved. She wanted to be petted and praised for
her heroism. She wanted Cousin Ann to REALIZE ... oh, if Aunt Frances were
only there, SHE would realize...!

"I fell down in the hole, and Betsy wanted to go and get Mr. Putney, but
I wouldn't let her, and so she threw down a big branch and I climbed
out," explained Molly, who, now that her danger was past, took Betsy's
action quite as a matter of course.

"Oh, that was how it happened," said Cousin Ann. She looked down the
hole and saw the big branch, and looked back and saw the long trail of
crushed snow where Betsy had dragged it. "Well, now, that was quite a
good idea for a little girl to have," she said briefly. "I guess you'll
do to take care of Molly all right!"

She spoke in her usual voice and immediately drew the children after
her, but Betsy's heart was singing joyfully as she trotted along
clasping Cousin Ann's strong hand. Now she knew that Cousin Ann
realized. ... She trotted fast, smiling to herself in the darkness.

"What made you think of doing that?" asked Cousin Ann presently, as they
approached the house.

"Why, I tried to think what YOU would have done if you'd been there,"
said Betsy.

"Oh!" said Cousin Ann. "Well ..."

She didn't say another word, but Betsy, glancing up into her face as
they stepped into the lighted room, saw an expression that made her give
a little skip and hop of joy. She had PLEASED Cousin Ann.

That night, as she lay in her bed, her arm over Molly cuddled up warm
beside her, she remembered, oh, ever so faintly, as something of no
importance, that she had failed in an examination that afternoon.





CHAPTER VIII

BETSY STARTS A SEWING SOCIETY

Betsy and Molly had taken Deborah to school with them. Deborah was the
old wooden doll with brown, painted curls. She had lain in a trunk
almost ever since Aunt Abigail's childhood, because Cousin Ann had never
cared for dolls when she was a little girl. At first Betsy had not dared
to ask to see her, much less to play with her, but when Ellen, as she
had promised, came over to Putney Farm that first Saturday she had said
right out, as soon as she landed in the house, "Oh, Mrs. Putney, can't
we play with Deborah?" And Aunt Abigail had answered: "Why YES, of
course! I KNEW there was something I've kept forgetting!" She went up
with them herself to the cold attic and opened the little hair-trunk
under the eaves.

There lay a doll, flat on her back, looking up at them brightly out of
her blue eyes.

"Well, Debby dear," said Aunt Abigail, taking her up gently. "It's a
good long time since you and I played under the lilac bushes, isn't it?
I expect you've been pretty lonesome up here all these years. Never you
mind, you'll have some good times again, now." She pulled down the
doll's full, ruffled skirt, straightened the lace at the neck of her
dress, and held her for a moment, looking down at her silently. You
could tell by the way she spoke, by the way she touched Deborah, by the
way she looked at her, that she had loved the doll very dearly, and
maybe still did, a little.

When she put Deborah into Betsy's arms, the child felt that she was
receiving something very precious, almost something alive. She and Ellen
looked with delight at the yards and yards of picot-edged ribbon, sewed
on by hand to the ruffles of the skirt, and lifted up the silk folds to
admire the carefully made, full petticoats and frilly drawers, the
pretty, soft old kid shoes and white stockings. Aunt Abigail looked at
them with an absent smile on her lips, as though she were living over
old scenes.

[Illustration: Betsy and Ellen and the old doll.]

Finally, "It's too cold to play up here," she said, coming to herself
with a long breath. "You'd better bring Deborah and the trunk down into
the south room." She carried the doll, and Betsy and Ellen each took an
end of the old trunk, no larger than a modern suitcase. They settled
themselves on the big couch, back of the table with the lamp. Old Shep
was on it, but Betsy coaxed him off by putting down some bones Cousin
Ann had been saving for him. When he finished those and came back for
the rest of his snooze, he found his place occupied by the little girls,
sitting cross-legged, examining the contents of the trunk, all spread
out around them. Shep sighed deeply and sat down with his nose resting
on the couch near Betsy's knee, following all their movements with his
kind, dark eyes. Once in a while Betsy stopped hugging Deborah or
exclaiming over a new dress long enough to pat Shep's head and fondle
his ears. This was what he was waiting for, and every time she did it he
wagged his tail thumpingly against the floor.

After that Deborah and her trunk were kept downstairs where Betsy could
play with her. And often she was taken to school. You never heard of
such a thing as taking a doll to school, did you? Well, I told you this
was a queer, old-fashioned school that any modern School Superintendent
would sniff at. As a matter of fact, it was not only Betsy who took her
doll to school; all the little girls did, whenever they felt like it.
Miss Benton, the teacher, had a shelf for them in the entry-way where
the wraps were hung, and the dolls sat on it and waited patiently all
through lessons. At recess time or nooning each little mother snatched
her own child and began to play. As soon as it grew warm enough to play
outdoors without just racing around every minute to keep from freezing
to death, the dolls and their mothers went out to a great pile of rocks
at one end of the bare, stony field which was the playground.

There they sat and played in the spring sunshine, warmer from day to
day. There were a great many holes and shelves and pockets and little
caves in the rocks which made lovely places for playing keep-house. Each
little girl had her own particular cubby-holes and "rooms," and they
"visited" their dolls back and forth all around the pile. And as they
played they talked very fast about all sorts of things, being little
girls and not boys who just yelled and howled inarticulately as they
played ball or duck-on-a-rock or prisoner's goal, racing and running and
wrestling noisily all around the rocks.

There was one child who neither played with the girls nor ran and
whooped with the boys. This was little six-year-old 'Lias, one of the
two boys in Molly's first grade. At recess time he generally hung about
the school door by himself, looking moodily down and knocking the toe of
his ragged, muddy shoe against a stone. The little girls were talking
about him one day as they played. "My! Isn't that 'Lias Brewster the
horridest-looking child!" said Eliza, who had the second grade all to
herself, although Molly now read out of the second reader with her.

"Mercy, yes! So ragged!" said Anastasia Monahan, called Stashie for
short. She was a big girl, fourteen years old, who was in the seventh
grade.

"He doesn't look as if he EVER combed his hair!" said Betsy. "It looks
just like a wisp of old hay."

"And sometimes," little Molly proudly added her bit to the talk of the
older girls, "he forgets to put on any stockings and just has his
dreadful old shoes on over his dirty, bare feet."

"I guess he hasn't GOT any stockings half the time," said big Stashie
scornfully. "I guess his stepfather drinks 'em up."

"How CAN he drink up stockings!" asked Molly, opening her round eyes
very wide.

"Sh! You mustn't ask. Little girls shouldn't know about such things,
should they, Betsy?"

"No INDEED," said Betsy, looking mysterious. As a matter of fact, she
herself had no idea what Stashie meant, but she looked wise and said
nothing.

Some of the boys had squatted down near the rocks for a game of marbles
now.

"Well, anyhow," said Molly resentfully, "I don't care what his
stepfather does to his stockings. I wish 'Lias would wear 'em to school.
And lots of times he hasn't anything on under those horrid old overalls
either! I can see his bare skin through the torn places."

"I wish he didn't have to sit so near me," said Betsy complainingly.
"He's SO dirty."

"Well, I don't want him near ME, either!" cried all the other little
girls at once. Ralph glanced up at them frowning, from where he knelt
with his middle finger crooked behind a marble ready for a shot. He
looked as he always did, very rough and half-threatening. "Oh, you girls
make me sick!" he said. He sent his marble straight to the mark,
pocketed his opponent's, and stood up, scowling at the little mothers.
"I guess if you had to live the way he does you'd be dirty! Half the
time he don't get anything to eat before he comes to school, and if my
mother didn't put up some extra for him in my box he wouldn't get any
lunch either. And then you go and jump on him!"

"Why doesn't his own mother put up his lunch?" Betsy challenged their
critic.

"He hasn't got any mother. She's dead," said Ralph, turning away with
his hands in his pockets. He yelled to the boys, "Come on, fellers,
beat-che to the bridge and back!" and was off, with the others racing at
his heels.

"Well, anyhow, I don't care; he IS dirty and horrid!" said Stashie
emphatically, looking over at the drooping, battered little figure,
leaning against the school door, listlessly kicking at a stone.

But Betsy did not say anything more just then.

The teacher, who "boarded 'round," was staying at Putney Farm at that
time, and that evening, as they all sat around the lamp in the south
room, Betsy looked up from her game of checkers with Uncle Henry and
asked, "How can anybody drink up stockings?"

"Mercy, child! what are you talking about?" asked Aunt Abigail.

Betsy repeated what Anastasia Monahan had said, and was flattered by the
instant, rather startled attention given her by the grown-ups. "Why, I
didn't know that Bud Walker had taken to drinking again!" said Uncle
Henry. "My! That's too bad!"

"Who takes care of that child anyhow, now that poor Susie is dead?" Aunt
Abigail asked of everybody in general.

"Is he just living there ALONE, with that good-for-nothing stepfather?
How do they get enough to EAT?" said Cousin Ann, looking troubled.

Apparently Betsy's question had brought something half forgotten and
altogether neglected into their minds. They talked for some time after
that about 'Lias, the teacher confirming what Betsy and Stashie had
said.

"And we sitting right here with plenty to eat and never raising a hand!"
cried Aunt Abigail.

"How you WILL let things slip out of your mind!" said Cousin Ann
remorsefully.

It struck Betsy vividly that 'Lias was not at all the one they blamed
for his objectionable appearance. She felt quite ashamed to go on with
the other things she and the little girls had said, and fell silent,
pretending to be very much absorbed in her game of checkers.

"Do you know," said Aunt Abigail suddenly, as though an inspiration had
just struck her, "I wouldn't be a bit surprised if that Elmore Pond
might adopt 'Lias if he was gone at the right way."

"Who's Elmore Pond?" asked the schoolteacher.

"Why, you must have seen him--that great, big, red-faced,
good-natured-looking man that comes through here twice a year, buying
stock. He lives over Bigby way, but his wife was a Hillsboro girl, Matey
Pelham--an awfully nice girl she was, too. They never had any children,
and Matey told me the last time she was back for a visit that she and
her husband talked quite often about adopting a little boy. Seems that
Mr. Pond has always wanted a little boy. He's such a nice man! 'Twould
be a lovely home for a child."

"But goodness!" said the teacher. "Nobody would want to adopt such an
awful-looking little ragamuffin as that 'Lias. He looks so meeching,
too. I guess his stepfather is real mean to him, when he's been
drinking, and it's got 'Lias so he hardly dares hold his head up."

The clock struck loudly. "Well, hear that!" said Cousin Ann. "Nine
o'clock and the children not in bed! Molly's most asleep this minute.
Trot along with you, Betsy! Trot along, Molly. And, Betsy, be sure
Molly's nightgown is buttoned up all the way."

So it happened that, although the grown-ups were evidently going on to
talk about 'Lias Brewster, Betsy heard no more of what they said.

She herself went on thinking about 'Lias while she was undressing and
answering absently little Molly's chatter. She was thinking about him
even after they had gone to bed, had put the light out, and were lying
snuggled up to each other, back to front, their four legs, crooked at
the same angle, fitting in together neatly like two spoons in a drawer.
She was thinking about him when she woke up, and as soon as she could
get hold of Cousin Ann she poured out a new plan. She had never been
afraid of Cousin Ann since the evening Molly had fallen into the Wolf
Pit and Betsy had seen that pleased smile on Cousin Ann's firm lips.
"Cousin Ann, couldn't we girls at school get together and sew--you'd
have to help us some--and make some nice, new clothes for little 'Lias
Brewster, and fix him up so he'll look better, and maybe that Mr. Pond
will like him and adopt him?"

Cousin Ann listened attentively and nodded her head. "Yes, I think that
would be a good idea," she said. "We were thinking last night we ought
to do something for him. If you'll make the clothes, Mother'll knit him
some stockings and Father will get him some shoes. Mr. Pond never makes
his spring trip till late May, so we'll have plenty of time."

Betsy was full of importance that day at school and at recess time got
the girls together on the rocks and told them all about the plan.
"Cousin Ann says she'll help us, and we can meet at our house every
Saturday afternoon till we get them done. It'll be fun! Aunt Abigail
telephoned down to the store right away, and Mr. Wilkins says he'll give
the cloth if we'll make it up."

Betsy spoke very grandly of "making it up," although she had hardly held
a needle in her life, and when the Saturday afternoon meetings began she
was ashamed to see how much better Ellen and even Eliza could sew than
she. To keep her end up, she was driven to practising her stitches
around the lamp in the evenings, with Aunt Abigail keeping an eye on
her.

Cousin Ann supervised the sewing on Saturday afternoons and taught those
of the little girls whose legs were long enough how to use the sewing
machine. First they made a little pair of trousers out of an old gray
woolen skirt of Aunt Abigail's. This was for practice, before they cut
into the piece of new blue serge that the storekeeper had sent up.
Cousin Ann showed them how to pin the pattern on the goods and they each
cut out one piece. Those flat, queer-shaped pieces of cloth certainly
did look less like a pair of trousers to Betsy than anything she had
ever seen. Then one of the girls read aloud very slowly the
mysterious-sounding directions from the wrapper of the pattern about how
to put the pieces together, Cousin Ann helped here a little,
particularly just as they were about to put the sections together
wrong-side-up. Stashie, as the oldest, did the first basting, putting
the notches together carefully, just as they read the instructions
aloud, and there, all of a sudden, was a rough little sketch of a pair
of knee trousers, without any hem or any waist-band, of course, but just
the two-legged, complicated shape they ought to be! It was like a
miracle to Betsy! Then Cousin Ann helped them sew the seams on the
machine, and they all turned to for the basting of the facings and the
finishing. They each made one buttonhole. It was the first one Betsy had
ever made, and when she got through she was as tired as though she had
run all the way to school and back. Tired, but very proud; although when
Cousin Ann inspected that buttonhole, she covered her face with her
handkerchief for a minute, as though she were going to sneeze, although
she didn't sneeze at all.

It took them two Saturdays to finish up that trial pair of trousers, and
when they showed the result to Aunt Abigail she was delighted. "Well, to
think of that being my old skirt!" she said, putting on her spectacles
to examine the work. She did not laugh, either, when she saw those
buttonholes, but she got up hastily and went into the next room, where
they soon heard her coughing.

Then they made a little blouse out of some new blue gingham. Cousin Ann
happened to have enough left over from a dress she was making. This thin
material was ever so much easier to manage than the gray flannel, and
they had the little garment done in no time, even to the buttons and
buttonholes. When it came to making the buttonholes, Cousin Ann sat
right down with each one and supervised every stitch. You may not be
surprised to know that they were a great improvement over the first
batch.

Then, making a great ceremony of it, they began on the store material,
working twice a week now, because May was slipping along very fast, and
Mr. Pond might be there at any time. They knew pretty well how to go
ahead on this one, after the experience of their first pair, and Cousin
Ann was not much needed, except as adviser in hard places. She sat there
