
"Won't you take a chair while we are waiting?"

"Your Majesty forgets that I cannot understand you," replied the
Pumpkinhead. "If you wish me to sit down you must make a sign for me to do
so." The Scarecrow came down from his throne and rolled an armchair to a
position behind the Pumpkinhead. Then he gave Jack a sudden push that sent
him sprawling upon the cushions in so awkward a fashion that he doubled up
like a jackknife, and had hard work to untangle himself.

"Did you understand that sign?" asked His Majesty, politely.

"Perfectly," declared Jack, reaching up his arms to turn his head to the
front, the pumpkin having twisted around upon the stick that supported it.

"You seem hastily made," remarked the Scarecrow, watching Jack's efforts to
straighten himself.

"Not more so than your Majesty," was the frank reply.

"There is this difference between us," said the Scarecrow, "that whereas I
will bend, but not break, you will break, but not bend."



76               Full page line-art drawing.

               "HE GAVE JACK A SUDDEN PUSH"



77

At this moment the soldier returned leading a young girl by the hand. She
seemed very sweet and modest, having a pretty face and beautiful green eyes
and hair. A dainty green silk skirt reached to her knees, showing silk
stockings embroidered with pea-pods, and green satin slippers with bunches
of lettuce for decorations instead of bows or buckles. Upon her silken waist
clover leaves were embroidered, and she wore a jaunty little jacket trimmed
with sparkling emeralds of a uniform size.

"Why, it's little Jellia Jamb!" exclaimed the Scarecrow, as the green maiden
bowed her pretty head before him. "Do you understand the language of the
Gillikins, my dear?"

"Yes, your Majesty," she answered, "for I was born in the North Country."

"Then you shall be our interpreter," said the Scarecrow, "and explain to
this Pumpkinhead all that I say, and also explain to me all that he says. Is
this arrangement satisfactory?" he asked, turning toward his guest.

"Very satisfactory indeed," was the reply.

"Then ask him, to begin with," resumed the Scarecrow, turning to Jellia,
"what brought him to the Emerald City."

But instead of this the girl, who had been staring at Jack, said to him:



78

"You are certainly a wonderful creature. Who made you?"

"A boy named Tip," answered Jack.

"What does he say?" inquired the Scarecrow. "My ears must have deceived me.
What did he say?"

"He says that your Majesty's brains seem to have come loose," replied the
girl, demurely.

The Scarecrow moved uneasily upon his throne, and felt of his head with his
left hand.

"What a fine thing it is to understand two different languages," he said,
with a perplexed sigh. "Ask him, my dear, if he has any objection to being
put in jail for insulting the ruler of the Emerald City."

"I didn't insult you!" protested Jack, indignantly.

"Tut--tut!" cautioned the Scarecrow "wait, until Jellia translates my
speech. What have we got an interpreter for, if you break out in this rash
way?"

"All right, I'll wait," replied the Pumpkinhead, in a surly tone--although
his face smiled as genially as ever. "Translate the speech, young woman."

"His Majesty inquires if you are hungry, said Jellia.

"Oh, not at all!" answered Jack, more pleasantly, "for it is impossible for
me to eat."

"It's the same way with me," remarked the Scarecrow. "What did he say,
Jellia, my dear?"



79

"He asked if you were aware that one of your eyes is painted larger than the
other," said the girl, mischievously.

"Don't you believe her, your Majesty, cried Jack.

"Oh, I don't," answered the Scarecrow, calmly. Then, casting a sharp look at
the girl, he asked:

"Are you quite certain you understand the languages of both the Gillikins
and the Munchkins?"

"Quite certain, your Majesty," said Jellia Jamb, trying hard not to laugh in
the face of royalty.

"Then how is it that I seem to understand them myself?" inquired the
Scarecrow.

"Because they are one and the same!" declared the girl, now laughing
merrily. "Does not your Majesty know that in all the land of Oz but one
language is spoken?"

"Is it indeed so?" cried the Scarecrow, much relieved to hear this; "then I
might easily have been my own interpreter!"

"It was all my fault, your Majesty," said Jack, looking rather foolish, "I
thought we must surely speak different languages, since we came from
different countries."

"This should be a warning to you never to think," returned the Scarecrow,
severely. "For



80
unless one can think wisely it is better to remain a dummy--which you most
certainly are."

"I am!--I surely am!" agreed the Pumpkinhead.

"It seems to me," continued the Scarecrow, more mildly, "that your
manufacturer spoiled some good pies to create an indifferent man."

"I assure your Majesty that I did not ask to be created," answered Jack.

"Ah! It was the same in my case," said the King, pleasantly. "And so, as we
differ from all ordinary people, let us become friends."

"With all my heart!" exclaimed Jack.

"What! Have you a heart?" asked the Scarecrow, surprised.

"No; that was only imaginative--I might say, a figure of speech," said the
other.

"Well, your most prominent figure seems to be a figure of wood; so I must
beg you to restrain an imagination which, having no brains, you have no
right to exercise," suggested the Scarecrow, warningly.

"To be sure!" said Jack, without in the least comprehending.

His Majesty then dismissed Jellia Jamb and the Soldier with the Green
Whiskers, and when they were gone he took his new friend by the arm and led
him into the courtyard to play a game of quoits.



81               Full page line-art drawing.



82               Full page line-art drawing.



83               Gen. Jinjur's Army of Revolt


Tip was so anxious to rejoin his man Jack and the Saw-Horse that he walked a
full half the distance to the Emerald City without stopping to rest. Then he
discovered that he was hungry and the crackers and cheese he had provided
for the Journey had all been eaten.

While wondering what he should do in this emergency he came upon a girl
sitting by the roadside. She wore a costume that struck the boy as being
remarkably brilliant: her silken waist being of emerald green and her skirt
of four distinct colors--blue in front, yellow at the left side, red at
the back and purple at the right side. Fastening



84
the waist in front were four buttons--the top one blue, the next yellow, a
third red and the last purple.


               Line-Art Drawing



The splendor of this dress was almost barbaric; so Tip was fully justified
in staring at the gown for some moments before his eyes were attracted by
the



85
pretty face above it. Yes, the face was pretty enough, he decided; but it
wore an expression of discontent coupled to a shade of defiance or audacity.

While the boy stared the girl looked upon him calmly. A lunch basket stood
beside her, and she held a dainty sandwich in one hand and a hard-boiled egg
in the other, eating with an evident appetite that aroused Tip's sympathy.

He was just about to ask a share of the luncheon when the girl stood up and
brushed the crumbs from her lap.

"There!" said she; "it is time for me to go. Carry that basket for me and
help yourself to its contents if you are hungry."

Tip seized the basket eagerly and began to eat, following for a time the
strange girl without bothering to ask questions. She walked along before him
with swift strides, and there was about her an air of decision and
importance that led him to suspect she was some great personage.

Finally, when he had satisfied his hunger, he ran up beside her and tried to
keep pace with her swift footsteps--a very difficult feat, for she was
much taller than he, and evidently in a hurry.

"Thank you very much for the sandwiches," said Tip, as he trotted along.
"May I ask your name?"



86

"I am General Jinjur," was the brief reply.

"Oh!" said the boy surprised. "What sort of a General?"

"I command the Army of Revolt in this war," answered the General, with
unnecessary sharpness.

"Oh!" he again exclaimed. "I didn't know there was a war."

"You were not supposed to know it," she returned, "for we have kept it a
secret; and considering that our army is composed entirely of girls," she
added, with some pride, "it is surely a remarkable thing that our Revolt is
not yet discovered."

"It is, indeed," acknowledged Tip. "But where is your army?"

"About a mile from here," said General Jinjur. "The forces have assembled
from all parts of the Land of Oz, at my express command. For this is the day
we are to conquer His Majesty the Scarecrow, and wrest from him the throne.
The Army of Revolt only awaits my coming to march upon the Emerald City."

"Well!" declared Tip, drawing a long breath, "this is certainly a surprising
thing! May I ask why you wish to conquer His Majesty the Scarecrow?"

"Because the Emerald City has been ruled by men long enough, for one
reason," said the girl.



87
"Moreover, the City glitters with beautiful gems, which might far better be
used for rings, bracelets and necklaces; and there is enough money in the
King's treasury to buy every girl in our Army a dozen new gowns. So we
intend to conquer the City and run the government to suit ourselves."

Jinjur spoke these words with an eagerness and decision that proved she was
in earnest.

"But war is a terrible thing," said Tip, thoughtfully.

"This war will be pleasant," replied the girl, cheerfully.

"Many of you will be slain!" continued the boy, in an awed voice.

"Oh, no", said Jinjur. "What man would oppose a girl, or dare to harm her?
And there is not an ugly face in my entire Army."

Tip laughed.

"Perhaps you are right," said he. "But the Guardian of the Gate is
considered a faithful Guardian, and the King's Army will not let the City be
conquered without a struggle."

"The Army is old and feeble," replied General Jinjur, scornfully. "His
strength has all been used to grow whiskers, and his wife has such a temper
that she has already pulled more than half of them



88
out by the roots. When the Wonderful Wizard reigned the Soldier with the
Green Whiskers was a very good Royal Army, for people feared the Wizard. But
no one is afraid of the Scarecrow, so his Royal Army don't count for much in
time of war."

After this conversation they proceeded some distance in silence, and before
long reached a large clearing in the forest where fully four hundred young
women were assembled. These were laughing and talking together as gaily as
if they had gathered for a picnic instead of a war of conquest.

They were divided into four companies, and Tip noticed that all were dressed
in costumes similar to that worn by General Jinjur. The only real difference
was that while those girls from the Munchkin country had the blue strip in
front of their skirts, those from the country of the Quadlings had the red
strip in front; and those from the country of the Winkies had the yellow
strip in front, and the Gillikin girls wore the purple strip in front. All
had green waists, representing the Emerald City they intended to conquer,
and the top button on each waist indicated by its color which country the
wearer came from. The uniforms were Jaunty and becoming, and quite effective
when massed together.

Tip thought this strange Army bore no weapons



89
whatever; but in this he was wrong. For each girl had stuck through the knot
of her back hair two long, glittering knitting-needles.

General Jinjur immediately mounted the stump of a tree and addressed her
army.

"Friends, fellow-citizens, and girls!" she said; "we are about to begin our
great Revolt against the men of Oz! We march to conquer the Emerald City--to
dethrone the Scarecrow King--to acquire thousands of gorgeous gems--to
rifle the royal treasury--and to obtain power over our former
oppressors!"

"Hurrah!" said those who had listened; but Tip thought most of the Army was
too much engaged in chattering to pay attention to the words of the General.

The command to march was now given, and the girls formed themselves into
four bands, or companies, and set off with eager strides toward the Emerald
City.

               Line-Art Drawing on the right of this page.



90               Line-Art Drawing


The boy followed after them, carrying several baskets and wraps and packages
which various members of the Army of Revolt had placed in his care. It was
not long before they came to the green granite walls of the City and halted
before the gateway.

