
'But,' says the Black Thief, 'I was within one moment of my death, and I
am here yet.'

'How was that?' says the knight; 'I would be glad to hear it, for it
seems impossible.'

'If you think, sir knight,' says the Black Thief, 'that the danger I was
in surpasses that of this young man, will you pardon him his crime?'

'I will,' says the knight, 'so go on with your story.'

'I was, sir,' says he, 'a very wild boy in my youth, and came through
many distresses; once in particular, as I was on my rambling, I was
benighted and could find no lodging. At length I came to an old kiln,
and being much fatigued I went up and lay on the ribs. I had not been
long there when I saw three witches coming in with three bags of gold.
Each put their bags of gold under their heads, as if to sleep. I heard
one of them say to the other that if the Black Thief came on them while
they slept, he would not leave them a penny. I found by their discourse
that everybody had got my name into their mouth, though I kept silent as
death during their discourse. At length they fell fast asleep, and then
I stole softly down, and seeing some turf convenient, I placed one
under each of their heads, and off I went, with their gold, as fast as I
could.

'I had not gone far,' continued the Thief of Sloan, 'until I saw a
grey-hound, a hare, and a hawk in pursuit of me, and began to think it
must be the witches that had taken the shapes in order that I might not
escape them unseen either by land or water. Seeing they did not appear
in any formidable shape, I was more than once resolved to attack them,
thinking that with my broad sword I could easily destroy them. But
considering again that it was perhaps still in their power to become
alive again, I gave over the attempt and climbed with difficulty up
a tree, bringing my sword in my hand and all the gold along with me.
However, when they came to the tree they found what I had done, and
making further use of their hellish art, one of them was changed into a
smith's anvil and another into a piece of iron, of which the third soon
made a hatchet. Having the hatchet made, she fell to cutting down the
tree, and in the course of an hour it began to shake with me. At length
it began to bend, and I found that one or two blows at the most would
put it down. I then began to think that my death was inevitable,
considering that those who were capable of doing so much would soon end
my life; but just as she had the stroke drawn that would terminate my
fate, the cock crew, and the witches disappeared, having resumed their
natural shapes for fear of being known, and I got safe off with my bags
of gold.

'Now, sir,' says he to the Knight of the Glen, 'if that be not as great
an adventure as ever you heard, to be within one blow of a hatchet of
my end, and that blow even drawn, and after all to escape, I leave it to
yourself.'

'Well, I cannot say but it is very extraordinary,' says the Knight of
the Glen, 'and on that account pardon this young man his crime; so stir
up the fire, till I boil this second one.'

'Indeed,' says the Black Thief, 'I would fain think he would not die
this time either.'

'How so?' says the knight; 'it is impossible for him to escape.'

'I escaped death more wonderfully myself,' says the Thief of Sloan,
'than if you had him ready to throw into the furnace, and I hope it will
be the case with him likewise.'

'Why, have you been in another great danger?' says the knight. 'I would
be glad to hear the story too, and if it be as wonderful as the last, I
will pardon this young man as I did the other.'

'My way of living, sir,' says the Black Thief, 'was not good, as I told
you before; and being at a certain time fairly run out of cash, and
meeting with no enterprise worthy of notice, I was reduced to great
straits. At length a rich bishop died in the neighbourhood I was then
in, and I heard he was interred with a great deal of jewels and rich
robes upon him, all which I intended in a short time to be master of.
Accordingly that very night I set about it, and coming to the place, I
understood he was placed at the further end of a long dark vault, which
I slowly entered. I had not gone in far until I heard a foot coming
towards me with a quick pace, and although naturally bold and daring,
yet, thinking of the deceased bishop and the crime I was engaged in, I
lost courage, and ran towards the entrance of the vault. I had retreated
but a few paces when I observed, between me and the light, the figure of
a tall black man standing in the entrance. Being in great fear and not
knowing how to pass, I fired a pistol at him, and he immediately fell
across the entrance. Perceiving he still retained the figure of a
mortal man, I began to imagine that it could not be the bishop's ghost;
recovering myself therefore from the fear I was in, I ventured to the
upper end of the vault, where I found a large bundle, and upon further
examination I found that the corpse was already rifled, and that which
I had taken to be a ghost was no more than one of his own clergy. I was
then very sorry that I had the misfortune to kill him, but it then could
not be helped. I took up the bundle that contained everything belonging
to the corpse that was valuable, intending to take my departure from
this melancholy abode; but just as I came to the mouth of the entrance I
saw the guards of the place coming towards me, and distinctly heard them
saying that they would look in the vault, for that the Black Thief would
think little of robbing the corpse if he was anywhere in the place.
I did not then know in what manner to act, for if I was seen I would
surely lose my life, as everybody had a look-out at that time, and
because there was no person bold enough to come in on me. I knew very
well on the first sight of me that could be got, I would be shot like a
dog. However, I had not time to lose. I took and raised up the man which
I had killed, as if he was standing on his feet, and I, crouching behind
him, bore him up as well as I could, so that the guards readily saw him
as they came up to the vault. Seeing the man in black, one of the men
cried that was the Black Thief, and, presenting his piece, fired at
the man, at which I let him fall, and crept into a little dark corner
myself, that was at the entrance of the place. When they saw the man
fall, they ran all into the vault, and never stopped until they were at
the end of it, for fear, as I thought, that there might be some others
along with him that was killed. But while they were busy inspecting the
corpse and the vault to see what they could miss, I slipped out, and,
once away, and still away; but they never had the Black Thief in their
power since.'

'Well, my brave fellow,' says the Knight of the Glen, 'I see you have
come through many dangers: you have freed these two princes by your
stories; but I am sorry myself that this young prince has to suffer for
all. Now, if you could tell me something as wonderful as you have told
already, I would pardon him likewise; I pity this youth and do not want
to put him to death if I could help it.'

'That happens well,' says the Thief of Sloan, 'for I like him best
myself, and have reserved the most curious passage for the last on his
account.'

'Well, then,' says the knight, 'let us hear it.'

'I was one day on my travels,' says the Black Thief, 'and I came into a
large forest, where I wandered a long time, and could not get out of it.
At length I came to a large castle, and fatigue obliged me to call in
the same, where I found a young woman and a child sitting on her knee,
and she crying. I asked her what made her cry, and where the lord of the
castle was, for I wondered greatly that I saw no stir of servants or any
person about the place.

'"It is well for you," says the young woman, "that the lord of this
castle is not at home at present; for he is a monstrous giant, with but
one eye on his forehead, who lives on human flesh. He brought me this
child," says she, "I do not know where he got it, and ordered me to
make it into a pie, and I cannot help crying at the command."

'I told her that if she knew of any place convenient that I could leave
the child safely I would do it, rather than it should be killed by such
a monster.

'She told me of a house a distance off where I would get a woman who
would take care of it. "But what will I do in regard of the pie?"

'"Cut a finger off it," said I, "and I will bring you in a young
wild pig out of the forest, which you may dress as if it was the child,
and put the finger in a certain place, that if the giant doubts anything
about it you may know where to turn it over at the first, and when he
sees it he will be fully satisfied that the pie is made of the child."

'She agreed to the scheme I proposed, and, cutting off the child's
finger, by her direction I soon had it at the house she told me of, and
brought her the little pig in the place of it. She then made ready the
pie, and after eating and drinking heartily myself, I was just taking my
leave of the young woman when we observed the giant coming through the
castle gates.

'"Bless me," said she, "what will you do now? Run away and lie down
among the dead bodies that he has in the room (showing me the place),
and strip off your clothes that he may not know you from the rest if he
has occasion to go that way."

'I took her advice, and laid myself down among the rest, as if dead, to
see how he would behave. The first thing I heard was him calling for his
pie. When she set it down before him he swore it smelled like swine's
flesh, but knowing where to find the finger, she immediately turned it
up, which fairly convinced him of the contrary. The pie only served to
sharpen his appetite, and I heard him sharpening his knife and saying he
must have a collop or two, for he was not near satisfied. But what was
my terror when I heard the giant groping among the bodies, and, fancying
myself, cut the half of my hip off, and took it with him to be roasted.
You may be certain I was in great pain, but the fear of being killed
prevented me from making any complaint. However, when he had eaten all
he began to drink hot liquors in great abundance, so that in a short
time he could not hold up his head, but threw himself on a large creel
he had made for the purpose, and fell fast asleep. When I heard him
snoring, as I was I went up and caused the woman to bind my wound with a
handkerchief; and, taking the giant's spit, reddened it in the fire, and
ran it through the eye, but was not able to kill him.

'However, I left the spit sticking in his head, and took to my heels;
but I soon found he was in pursuit of me, although blind; and having an
enchanted ring he threw it at me, and it fell on my big toe and remained
fastened to it.

'The giant then called to the ring, where it was, and to my great
surprise it made him answer on my foot; and he, guided by the same,
made a leap at me which I had the good luck to observe, and fortunately
escaped the danger. However, I found running was of no use in saving me,
as long as I had the ring on my foot; so I took my sword and cut off the
toe it was fastened on, and threw both into a large fish-pond that was
convenient. The giant called again to the ring, which by the power of
enchantment always made him answer; but he, not knowing what I had done,
imagined it was still on some part of me, and made a violent leap
to seize me, when he went into the pond, over head and ears, and was
drowned. Now, sir knight,' says the Thief of Sloan, 'you see what
dangers I came through and always escaped; but, indeed, I am lame for
the want of my toe ever since.'

'My lord and master,' says an old woman that was listening all the time,
'that story is but too true, as I well know, for I am the very woman
that was in the giant's castle, and you, my lord, the child that I was
to make into a pie; and this is the very man that saved your life, which
you may know by the want of your finger that was taken off, as you have
heard, to deceive the giant.'

The Knight of the Glen, greatly surprised at what he had heard the old
woman tell, and knowing he wanted his finger from his childhood, began
to understand that the story was true enough.

'And is this my deliverer?' says he. 'O brave fellow, I not only pardon
you all, but will keep you with myself while you live, where you shall
feast like princes, and have every attendance that I have myself.'

They all returned thanks on their knees, and the Black Thief told him
the reason they attempted to steal the Steed of Bells, and the necessity
they were under in going home.

'Well,' says the Knight of the Glen, 'if that's the case I bestow you my
steed rather than this brave fellow should die; so you may go when you
please, only remember to call and see me betimes, that we may know each
other well.'

They promised they would, and with great joy they set off for the King
their father's palace, and the Black Thief along with them.

The wicked Queen was standing all this time on the tower, and, hearing
the bells ringing at a great distance off, knew very well it was the
princes coming home, and the steed with them, and through spite and
vexation precipitated herself from the tower and was shattered to
pieces.

The three princes lived happy and well during their father's reign, and
always keeping the Black Thief along with them; but how they did after
the old King's death is not known.(4)


(4) The Hibernian Tales.




THE MASTER THIEF

THERE was once upon a time a husbandman who had three sons. He had no
property to bequeath to them, and no means of putting them in the way of
getting a living, and did not know what to do, so he said that they had
his leave to take to anything they most fancied, and go to any place
they best liked. He would gladly accompany them for some part of their
way, he said, and that he did. He went with them till they came to a
place where three roads met, and there each of them took his own way,
and the father bade them farewell and returned to his own home again.
What became of the two elder I have never been able to discover, but the
youngest went both far and wide.

It came to pass, one night, as he was going through a great wood, that
a terrible storm came on. It blew so hard and rained so heavily that he
could scarcely keep his eyes open, and before he was aware of it he had
got quite out of the track, and could neither find road nor path. But
he went on, and at last he saw a light far away in the wood. Then he
thought he must try and get to it, and after a long, long time he did
reach it. There was a large house, and the fire was burning so brightly
inside that he could tell that the people were not in bed. So he went
in, and inside there was an old woman who was busy about some work.

'Good evening, mother!' said the youth.

'Good evening!' said the old woman.

'Hutetu! it is terrible weather outside to-night,' said the young
fellow.

'Indeed it is,' said the old woman.

'Can I sleep here, and have shelter for the night?' asked the youth.

'It wouldn't be good for you to sleep here,' said the old hag, 'for if
the people of the house come home and find you, they will kill both you
and me.'

'What kind of people are they then, who dwell here?' said the youth.

'Oh! robbers, and rabble of that sort,' said the old woman; 'they stole
me away when I was little, and I have had to keep house for them ever
since.'

'I still think I will go to bed, all the same,' said the youth. 'No
matter what happens, I'll not go out to-night in such weather as this.'

'Well, then, it will be the worse for yourself,' said the old woman.

The young man lay down in a bed which stood near, but he dared not go to
sleep: and it was better that he didn't, for the robbers came, and the
old woman said that a young fellow who was a stranger had come there,
and she had not been able to get him to go away again.

'Did you see if he had any money?' said the robbers.

'He's not one to have money, he is a tramp! If he has a few clothes to
his back, that is all.'

Then the robbers began to mutter to each other apart about what they
should do with him, whether they should murder him, or what else they
should do. In the meantime the boy got up and began to talk to them, and
ask them if they did not want a man-servant, for he could find pleasure
enough in serving them.

'Yes,' said they, 'if you have a mind to take to the trade that we
follow, you may have a place here.'

'It's all the same to me what trade I follow,' said the youth, 'for when
I came away from home my father gave me leave to take to any trade I
fancied.'

'Have you a fancy for stealing, then?' said the robbers.

'Yes,' said the boy, for he thought that was a trade which would not
take long to learn.

Not very far off there dwelt a man who had three oxen, one of which he
was to take to the town to sell. The robbers had heard of this, so they
told the youth that if he were able to steal the ox from him on the
way, without his knowing, and without doing him any harm, he should have
leave to be their servant-man. So the youth set off, taking with him a
pretty shoe with a silver buckle that was lying about in the house. He
put this in the road by which the man must go with his ox, and then went
into the wood and hid himself under a bush. When the man came up he at
once saw the shoe.

'That's a brave shoe,' said he. 'If I had but the fellow to it, I would
carry it home with me, and then I should put my old woman into a good
humour for once.'

For he had a wife who was so cross and ill-tempered that the time
between the beatings she gave him was very short. But then he bethought
himself that he could do nothing with one shoe if he had not the fellow
to it, so he journeyed onwards and let it lie where it was. Then the
youth picked up the shoe and hurried off away through the wood as fast
as he was able, to get in front of the man, and then put the shoe in the
road before him again.

When the man came with the ox and saw the shoe, he was quite vexed at
having been so stupid as to leave the fellow to it lying where it was,
instead of bringing it on with him.

'I will just run back again and fetch it now,' he said to himself, 'and
then I shall take back a pair of good shoes to the old woman, and she
may perhaps throw a kind word to me for once.'

So he went and searched and searched for the other shoe for a long, long
time, but no shoe was to be found, and at last he was forced to go back
with the one which he had.

In the meantime the youth had taken the ox and gone off with it. When
the man got there and found that his ox was gone, he began to weep and
wail, for he was afraid that when his old woman got to know she would be
the death of him. But all at once it came into his head to go home and
get the other ox, and drive it to the town, and take good care that his
old wife knew nothing about it. So he did this; he went home and took
the ox without his wife's knowing about it, and went on his way to the
town with it. But the robbers they knew it well, because they got out
their magic. So they told the youth that if he could take this ox also
without the man knowing anything about it, and without doing him any
hurt, he should then be on an equality with them.

'Well, that will not be a very hard thing to do,' thought the youth.

This time he took with him a rope and put it under his arms and tied
himself up to a tree, which hung over the road that the man would have
to take. So the man came with his ox, and when he saw the body hanging
there he felt a little queer.

'What a hard lot yours must have been to make you hang yourself!' said
he. 'Ah, well! you may hang there for me; I can't breathe life into you
again.'

So on he went with his ox. Then the youth sprang down from the tree, ran
by a short cut and got before him, and once more hung himself up on a
tree in the road before the man.

'How I should like to know if you really were so sick at heart that you
hanged yourself there, or if it is only a hobgoblin that's before me!'
said the man. 'Ah, well! you may hang there for me, whether you are a
hobgoblin or not,' and on he went with his ox.

Once more the youth did just as he had done twice already; jumped down
from the tree, ran by a short cut through the wood, and again hanged
himself in the very middle of the road before him.

But when the man once more saw this he said to himself, 'What a bad
business this is! Can they all have been so heavy-hearted that they
have all three hanged themselves? No, I can't believe that it is
anything but witchcraft! But I will know the truth,' he said; 'if the
two others are still hanging there it is true but if they are not it's
nothing else but witchcraft.'

So he tied up his ox and ran back to see if they really were hanging
there. While he was going, and looking up at every tree as he went,
the youth leapt down and took his ox and went off with it. Any one may
easily imagine what a fury the man fell into when he came back and saw
that his ox was gone. He wept and he raged, but at last he took comfort
and told himself that the best thing to do was to go home and take the
third ox, without letting his wife know anything about it, and then try
to sell it so well that he got a good sum of money for it. So he went
home and took the third ox, and drove it off without his wife knowing
anything about it. But the robbers knew all about it, and they told the
youth that if he could steal this as he had stolen the two others, he
should be master of the whole troop. So the youth set out and went to
the wood, and when the man was coming along with the ox he began to
bellow loudly, just like a great ox somewhere inside the wood. When the
man heard that he was right glad, for he fancied he recognised the voice
of his big bullock, and thought that now he should find both of them
again. So he tied up the third, and ran away off the road to look for
them in the wood. In the meantime the youth went away with the third ox.
When the man returned and found that he had lost that too, he fell into
such a rage that there was no bounds to it. He wept and lamented, and
for many days he did not dare to go home again, for he was afraid that
the old woman would slay him outright. The robbers, also, were not very
well pleased at this, for they were forced to own that the youth was at
the head of them all. So one day they made up their minds to set to work
to do something which it was not in his power to accomplish, and they
all took to the road together, and left him at home alone. When they
were well out of the house, the first thing that he did was to drive the
oxen out on the road, whereupon they all ran home again to the man from
whom he had stolen them, and right glad was the husbandman to see them.
Then he brought out all the horses the robbers had, and loaded them with
the most valuable things which he could find--vessels of gold and of
silver, and clothes and other magnificent things--and then he told the
old woman to greet the robbers from him and thank them from him, and
say that he had gone away, and that they would have a great deal of
difficulty in finding him again, and with that he drove the horses out
of the courtyard. After a long, long time he came to the road on which
he was travelling when he came to the robbers. And when he had got very
near home, and was in sight of the house where his father lived, he put
on a uniform which he had found among the things he had taken from the
robbers, and which was made just like a general's, and drove into the
yard just as if he were a great man. Then he entered the house and asked
if he could find a lodging there.

'No, indeed you can't!' said his father. 'How could I possibly be able
to lodge such a great gentleman as you? It is all that I can do to find
clothes and bedding for myself, and wretched they are.'

'You were always a hard man,' said the youth, 'and hard you are still if
you refuse to let your own son come into your house.'

'Are you my son?' said the man.

'Do you not know me again then?' said the youth.

Then he recognised him and said, 'But what trade have you taken to that
has made you such a great man in so short a time?'

'Oh, that I will tell you,' answered the youth. 'You said that I might
take to anything I liked, so I apprenticed myself to some thieves and
robbers, and now I have served my time and have become Master Thief.'

Now the Governor of the province lived by his father's cottage, and this
Governor had such a large house and so much money that he did not even
know how much it was, and he had a daughter too who was both pretty and
dainty, and good and wise. So the Master Thief was determined to have
her to wife, and told his father that he was to go to the Governor, and
ask for his daughter for him. 'If he asks what trade I follow, you may
say that I am a Master Thief,' said he.

'I think you must be crazy,' said the man, 'for you can't be in your
senses if you think of anything so foolish.'

'You must go to the Governor and beg for his daughter--there is no
help,' said the youth.

'But I dare not go to the Governor and say this. He is so rich and has
so much wealth of all kinds,' said the man.

'There is no help for it,' said the Master Thief; 'go you must, whether
you like it or not. If I can't get you to go by using good words, I will
soon make you go with bad ones.'

But the man was still unwilling, so the Master Thief followed him,
threatening him with a great birch stick, till he went weeping and
wailing through the door to the Governor of the province.

