creeping out of the house at that hour?

But she reached the lower floor safely, and now came the danger of
making a noise when opening the door. Sylvia grasped the big key and
turned it slowly. Then she pulled at the heavy door, and it swung back
easily. She gave a long breath of relief as she stepped out on the
piazza. She left the door ajar, so that she could slip in easily on her
return. Keeping in the shadow of the trees she reached the street, and
now she felt sure that nothing could prevent her from delivering the
letter.

She ran swiftly along, now and then meeting someone who glanced
wonderingly at the flying little figure. She had reached King Street
and was nearly at the street where she was to turn, when suddenly a
heavy hand grasped her arm and nearly swung her from her feet.

"Running off, are you? And wearing your mistress's clothes at that,
I'll warrant," said a gruff voice. "Wall, now, whose darky are you?"

Sylvia pulled the silken scarf from her face, and even in the glimmer
of the dull street-lamp under which the man had drawn her he could see
the auburn hair and blue eyes. But he still kept his grasp on her arm.
There were slaves who were not black, he knew, and "quality white"
girls were not running about Charleston streets alone at night.

"What is your name?" he demanded.

Sylvia looked at him resentfully. "How dare you grab me like this?" she
demanded. "Let me go."

The man released his grasp instantly. No darky girl or slave would have
spoken like that. He vanished as suddenly as he had appeared, more
frightened now than Sylvia herself.

For an instant Sylvia stood quite still. She felt ready to cry, and now
walked more slowly. For the first time she realized something of what
it must be to be a colored girl.

"If I had been Estralla he could have dragged me off and had me
whipped," she thought. "Oh, I must get Mr. Robert Waite to let Estralla
stay safe with us."

She was now near her destination, which proved to be a large house
right on the street. She knocked at the door several times before it
was opened. Then she found herself looking up at a tall man whose white
hair and kindly smile gave her confidence.

"Well, little girl, whom do you wish to see?" he asked pleasantly.

"I have a message, I--" began Sylvia, her voice trembling a little.
"Are you Mr. Doane?"

"Yes; come in," and he held the door open for her to enter, and then
closed and fastened it behind them.

Sylvia drew the letter from its hiding-place and handed it to him, and
Mr. Doane slipped it into his pocket.

"Come in, my child, and rest a moment; you are out of breath," he said,
leading the way to a small room at the end of the narrow hall.

Sylvia was glad to sit down in a low chair near the table, while Mr.
Doane opened the envelope. She could see that there was another letter
enclosed, as well as the one which the tall man was reading with such
interest.

When he had finished reading the letter he tore it into a great many
small pieces. Then he put the enclosed envelope carefully in an inner
pocket.

"So you brought me this letter from the fort. Well, you have done what
I hope may prove a great service to the Stars and Stripes. I thank
you," he said, looking with smiling eyes at the tired little figure in
the brown cape.

Then he asked Sylvia her name, and she told him that no one, not even
her dear mother, knew that she had brought the message. Before they had
finished their talk he had heard all about the blue cockades that the
girls had worn at Miss Patten's school, and of Sylvia's refusal to
salute the palmetto flag.

"You see I couldn't do that, because it would mean that I believed that
Estralla ought to be a slave, and of course I don't believe such a
dreadful thing," she explained. So then Mr. Doane heard all about
Estralla and Aunt Connie.

Sylvia decided that she liked Mr. Doane even better than Captain
Carleton. And when he told her again that by her courage in bringing
him the message from the fort, and by her silence in regard to it, that
she had done him a great service, as well as a service to those whose
only wish for South Carolina was that the State should free herself
from slavery, Sylvia forgot all about the long walk through the shadowy
streets.

"I wish I had someone to send with you to see you home safely," Mr.
Doane said, a little anxiously, as they stood together in the little
hallway. "But I am known here, and I fear everything I do is watched.
So I must trust that you will be safely cared for."

Before Sylvia could reply, and say that she was not at all afraid to go
alone, the outer door rattled as if someone were trying to push it open.

"You have been followed. Run back to the sitting-room," whispered Mr.
Doane. "I will open the door."




CHAPTER XII

ESTRALLA HELPS


Sylvia, standing just inside the door of the small room, heard the
outer door swing open. She heard Mr. Doane's sharp question, and then a
familiar wail.

"Oh! It's Estralla!" she exclaimed, and ran back to the entry.

"It's Estralla! Oh! I'm so glad!" she said.

"Don' you be skeered, Missy Sylvia," said Estralla valiantly. "Dis yere
man cyan't take you off'n sell you."

"All Estralla can think of is that somebody is going to be carried off
and sold," Sylvia said, turning to Mr. Doane, who stood by looking very
serious.

"How did you know where your little mistress was?" he questioned
gravely. For if this little darky knew of Sylvia's errand he feared
that she might tell others, and so Sylvia would have brought the
message from the fort to little purpose. The letter, which was now in
Mr. Doane's pocket, was to the Secretary of War in Washington, asking
for permission for Major Anderson to take men to Fort Sumter, before
the secessionists could occupy it.

"I follers Missy," explained Bstralla. "An' when that man grabs her on
King Street, I was gwine to chase right home an' get Massa Fulton, but
Missy talks brave at him, an' he lets go of her. Oh, Missy! What you
doin' of way off here?"

At this question Mr. Doane smiled, realizing that the little negro girl
had no knowledge of the message which Sylvia had delivered.

"Well, Estralla, suppose Miss Sylvia came to try and help give you your
freedom?" he asked.

"An' my mammy?" demanded Estralla eagerly.

"Why, of course," Mr. Doane replied. "For anything that helps to
convince South Carolina that she is wrong will help to free the
slaves," he added, turning to Sylvia.

"Now, Estralla, if you love Miss Sylvia, if you want to stay with your
mammy, you must never tell of her visit here to-night. Remember!" and
Mr. Doane's voice was very stern.

"Estralla won't tell," Sylvia declared confidently; "and I am glad she
came to go home with me."

"Shuah I'll do jes' what Missy wants me to," said the little darky.

"Try to let Mrs. Carleton know that I received the letter, and that I
hope to reach Washington safely," said Mr. Doane, as he bade Sylvia
good-night.

As the door closed behind them Estralla clasped Sylvia's hand.

"Wat dat clock say?" she asked; for one of the city clocks was striking
the hour.

"It's twelve o'clock," answered Sylvia.

"Oh! My lan', Missy! Dat's a terrible onlucky time fer us to be out,"
whispered Estralla. "Dat's de time w'en witch folks comes a-dancin' an'
a-prancin' 'roun' and takes off chilluns."

Sylvia knew that all the negroes believed in witches and all sorts of
impossible tales, so Estralla's words did not at all frighten her, but
she did wish that she was safe in her own home. The streets were now
dark and silent, and black shadows seemed to lurk at every corner as,
hand in hand, Estralla and Sylvia ran swiftly along.

"I tells you, Missy, dat it's jes' lucky I comes after you, cos'
witch-folks, w'at comes floatin' 'roun' 'bout dis hour of de night, dey
ain't gwine to tech us; cos' when dey's two folks holdin' each other
hands tight, jes' like we is, dey don't dast to tech us," said Estralla.

"Where were you, Estralla, when I came down-stairs?" Sylvia asked.

"I was jes' a-takin' a little sleep on de big rug side of your door,
Missy. I'se been a-sleepin' dere dis long time. My mammy lets me. An'
when you opens de door I mos' calls out, but didn't. I jes' stan's up
quick, so's you nebber know I was thar," and Estralla chuckled happily.

Sylvia wondered to herself why Estralla should choose such a hard bed.
Then, suddenly, she realized all Estralla's devotion. That the little
negro girl had slept there to be near her "fr'en'." She remembered the
first time that she had ever seen Estralla, on the morning when she had
tumbled in to Sylvia's room and broken the big pitcher, and that even
then Estralla had been ready to confess and take the whipping that she
was sure would follow, rather than let Sylvia be blamed. She recalled
Estralla's effort to rescue her at Fort Sumter on the day Sylvia had
run away from Miss Patten's school; and she remembered that it was
Estralla who had told Miss Patten the real reason, and so saved her
from further trouble.

"Estralla, you have been my true friend," she declared, "and I am going
to remember it always. I am going to ask my mother to put a nice little
bed for you in your mammy's cabin."

"Don' yo' do that, Missy. I likes sleepin' on de rug," pleaded Estralla.

"Hush, we must creep in without making any noise," responded Sylvia, in
a whisper, for they were now directly in front of Sylvia's home.

Noiselessly Estralla led the way.

"Oh, Missy! de door is shut fas'," she whispered, as she endeavored to
push it open.

"But it can't be shut," Sylvia answered.

Both the little girls pushed against it, but the door stood fast.

"Oh! What will we do?" half sobbed Sylvia, who was now very tired, and
almost too sleepy to think of anything.

"We cyan't get in de back door. My mammy she'd wake up if a rabbit run
twixt her cabin an' de kitchen," Estralla whispered back. "I 'spec's
I'll hev' to climb up to de winder ober de porch, and comes down and
let you in."

"Oh! Can you, Estralla?"

Sylvia's voice was very near to tears. She had forgotten all about the
importance of the message she had safely delivered. All she wanted now
was to be inside this dear safe house where her mother and father were
sleeping, not knowing that their little girl, cold and sleepy, was shut
out.

"I 'spec's I can," Estralla answered. "You jes' stay quiet, an' in
'bout four shakes of a lamb's tail I'se gwine to open de door, an' in
yo' walks."

There was a little scrambling noise among the stout vines which ran up
the pillars of the porch as Estralla started to carry out her plan. A
cat, or a fluttering bird, would have hardly made more commotion.
Sylvia listened eagerly. Suppose the porch window was fastened? she
thought fearfully. It seemed a very long time before the front door
opened, and Estralla reached out and clutched at the brown cape.

Noiselessly they crept up the stairs, Estralla leading the way. It was
she who opened the door of Sylvia's room, and then with a whispered
"Yo'se all right now, Missy," closed it behind her.

Sylvia hung up the brown cape in the closet, and slipped off her dress.
She was soon in bed and fast asleep, and it was late the next morning
before she awoke--so late that her father had breakfasted and gone to
his warehouse; Estralla had been sent on an errand, and Mrs. Fulton
decided that Sylvia should have a holiday.

"You seem tired, dear child," she said a little anxiously, as Sylvia
said that she did not want to go to walk; that she had rather sit still.

"I guess I am tired," acknowledged the little girl, and was quite
content to sit by the window with a story-book, instead of giving
Estralla a lesson.

"If it had not been for Estralla I don't know what would have happened
to me last night," she thought. She wondered who had closed and
fastened the front door, but dared not ask.

Grace and Flora were to come early that afternoon, as soon after school
as possible, and Flora had sent Sylvia a note that she would bring her
lace-work and give her a lesson. By noon Sylvia felt rested, and was
looking eagerly forward to her friends' visit. She began to feel that
she was a very fortunate little girl to have had the chance to do
something that might help, as Mr. Doane had said, to give the black
people their freedom. She only wished that she could tell her mother
and father of the midnight journey.

"But I will ask Mrs. Carleton the next time I go to the fort to let me
tell Mother," she resolved.




CHAPTER XIII

A HAPPY AFTERNOON


Grace was the first to arrive, and she declared that she wished that
she was in Sylvia's place and need not go to school another day.

The two little friends stood at the window watching for Flora, and it
was not long before they saw her coming up the walk, closely followed
by her black "Mammy," who was carrying two baskets. One of these seemed
very heavy.

"What can be in Mammy's basket, I wonder?" said Grace. "And, look,
Sylvia! Flora isn't wearing the blue cockade! That's because she is
coming to visit you. She had it on at school this morning."

Flora wore the same pretty velvet turban which she had worn on Sylvia's
last day at school. She had on a cape of garnet-colored velvet, and as
she came running into the room Sylvia looked at her with admiring eyes.

"You do look so pretty, Flora! And I am so glad to see you. Come
up-stairs to my room and take off your things."

"It isn't half the fun going to school now that you don't come,
Sylvia," responded Flora, as the three friends went up the broad
staircase together. "Mammy," with her baskets, followed them, and when
she had helped her little mistress lay aside her cape and hat, Flora
said:

"You can go home now, Mammy, And my mother will tell you when to come
after me."

"Yas, Missy," responded the old colored woman, and with a curtsey to
each of the little girls she left the room.

"What makes your mammy look so sober, Flora?" questioned Grace. "She is
usually all smiles; but to-day she hasn't a word to say for herself."

"Oh, the darkies are all stirred up over all this talk about their
being set free," Flora answered, "and even Mammy, who was Mother's
nurse, and has always been well taken care of, thinks it would be a
fine thing for her children and grandchildren to be 'jes' like white
folks,'" and Flora laughed scornfully.

"But that needn't make her look sober!" insisted Grace.

"I reckon she's upset because my mother sold two or three little slaves
yesterday--Mammy's grandchildren," Flora answered carelessly.

Sylvia could feel her face flushing, and she said over to herself that
no matter what Flora said that she, Sylvia, must remember that Flora
was her guest. Beside that, had not Flora taken off the blue cockade so
that Sylvia would not be reminded of the trouble at school?

But Grace felt no such restraints. She was a southern girl as well as
Flora, but she was sorry for the old colored woman.

"Well, I do wish we could keep the pickaninnies until they grow up. It
seems a shame when they feel so bad to be sold off to strangers. And
some of them are abused too," she said.

"You talk as if they felt just the same as we do, and that's silly,"
Flora declared; "but Philip talks just the same. He says he is going to
give Dinkie her freedom," and she turned toward the two baskets which
Mammy had set down with such care near Molly and Polly.

"I brought my lace-work, and Mother has fixed a cushion for you,
Sylvia, and one for Grace, too. See! The pattern is begun on each one,
and I will give you both lessons until you know as much as I do." As
Flora talked she had opened the smaller basket and taken out two square
boxes and handed one to each of her friends.

"Open them," she said, nodding smilingly.

The box which she handed to Sylvia was covered with plaited blue silk.
It had a narrow edge of gilt braid around the cover. Grace's box was
covered with yellow silk, but the boxes were of the same size.

As Sylvia and Grace lifted the covers they smiled and exclaimed
happily. The lace cushion lay inside, and in dainty little pockets on
each side of the boxes were the delicate threads and materials for the
lace. A thimble of gold, with "Sylvia from Flora" engraved around its
rim, was in Sylvia's box, and one exactly like it was in Grace's box.

"Oh, Flora Hayes! This is the most beautiful present that ever was!"
declared Sylvia; and Grace, holding the box with both hands, was
hopping up and down saying over and over: "Flora! You are just like the
Golden Princess in a fairy story who gives people what they want most."

"My mother made the boxes herself," Flora explained proudly. "I wanted
to give you girls something, and I'm awfully glad you like them." Then
Flora stood up quickly.

"Girls! I dressed up in Mother's hat and skirt, that night at the
plantation. It wasn't Lady Caroline."

She spoke very rapidly as if she wished to finish as quickly as
possible. It was not easy to think of Flora Hayes as being ashamed, but
Sylvia felt quite sure that Flora felt sorry that she had attempted to
deceive her friends.

"I knew it all the time," said Grace slowly, "and I told Sylvia it was
you; didn't I, Sylvia?"

"Yes," said Sylvia, "and we knew you were sure to tell us about it,
Flora. But you did look just like the picture of Lady Caroline."

Flora sat down. It had been so much easier to confess than she had
expected. Neither Grace nor Sylvia had seemed resentful or surprised.

"You didn't tell me that you knew," she said, a little accusingly.

"Oh, well, we couldn't do that, Flora. You see we were your guests,"
Grace explained.

"And we knew you were sure to tell us," Sylvia added.

Flora was silent for a moment. She was thinking that both her friends
had been rather fine about the whole affair. They had not run screaming
from their room on the appearance of the "ghost," and alarmed the
house, and so brought discovery and punishment and shame upon her;
neither had they resented her not confessing.

"Well, I do think you two girls are the nicest girls in this town," she
declared, "and I am mighty proud that you are my friends. I can tell
you one thing: I'll never try to make anyone believe in ghosts again. I
was half frightened to death myself when I crept up those stairs, and
my shoulder has been lame ever since."

Grace and Sylvia had wondered what the large basket contained, but in
their interest over Flora's beautiful gifts, and their delight in her
"owning up" to being the "ghost," they had quite forgotten about it. It
was Flora who now pointed at it and said laughingly: "I've brought my
dolls in that basket."

"Molly and Polly will be glad enough to have company," Sylvia assured
her.

Flora opened the basket and took out a large black "mammy" in a purple
dress, white apron, and a yellow handkerchief twisted turban-fashion
about her head.

"Mammy Jane always goes with the young ladies," she explained
laughingly, and took out two fine china dolls dressed in white muslin
with broad crimson silk sashes. Each of these fine ladies had a tiny
parasol of crimson silk.

"I'm going home after my dolls," exclaimed Grace, and while Sylvia
brought cushions for these unexpected visitors, and introduced them to
Molly and Polly, Grace hurried home and was soon back again with her
own treasured dolls, which she introduced as "Mr. and Mrs. and Miss
Delaney."

The lesson in lace-making was quite forgotten as the three girls played
with the array of dolls.

Sylvia ran to the door and called Estralla, who appeared so quickly
that Sylvia wondered where she could have been. Estralla was told that
she must help "Mammy Jane" take care of the doll visitors, and the
little negro's face beamed with pleasure. Not one of the little girls
in the pleasant room was as happy as Estralla; and when supper was
ready and Sylvia and her friends went down-stairs, leaving Estralla in
charge of all the dolls, she could hardly believe in her good fortune,
and, as usual, was sure it was all due to her beloved Missy Sylvia.

After supper the dolls were all invited downstairs to be introduced to
Sylvia's father and mother; and Estralla, smiling and delighted, was
entrusted with bringing "Mammy Jane."

The three friends often looked back on that happy afternoon, for on the
very next day Mr. Hayes decided to move his family to the plantation,
and it was many days before Sylvia, Grace and Flora were to be together
again. The citizens of Charleston, in December, 1860, were becoming
anxious as to what might befall them. Very soon it might be possible
that South Carolina would secede from the Union, and war with the
northern states might follow. In such a case the guns of Fort Sumter
and Fort Moultrie might fire on Charleston, and many planters who had
homes in Charleston were sending their families to their country homes.
Northern men who had business in Charleston were also anxious, and
Sylvia did not know that her own father was seriously considering a
return to Boston.

But the little girls bade each other good-night with happy smiles and
laughter, and without a thought but that they would have many more
pleasant times together.

Sylvia did not even think of the lace-making until she brought down her
pretty box to show to her mother and father.

"The Charleston people have been so kind to us," Mrs. Fulton said, a
little sadly.

"They are the most courteous and kindly people in the world," declared
Mr. Fulton.

Sylvia went up to her room wondering why her mother and father seemed
so serious, when everything was so lovely. She had almost forgotten her
adventure of the previous night, and went happily to bed with Flora's
pretty gift on the light-stand beside her bed.




CHAPTER XIV

MR. ROBERT WAITE


It was a very sober little darky who came up to Sylvia's room the next
morning. She set down the pitcher of water and moved silently toward
the door.

"What's the matter, Estralla?" Sylvia called; for usually Estralla was
all smiles, and had a good deal to say.

Estralla shook her head. "Nuffin', Missy. I knowed you couldn't do
nuffin' 'bout it. My mammy says how nobody can."

"Wait, Estralla! What do you mean?" exclaimed Sylvia, sitting up in bed.

"I'se gwine to be sold! Jes' like I tells you. My mammy was over to
Massa Waite's house las' night, and she hears ober dar dat Massa
Robert's gwine to sell off every nigger what ain't workin'--this week!"
Estralla's voice had drifted into her old-time wail.

"Oh, Estralla! What can I do?" and Sylvia was out of bed in a second,
standing close beside the little colored girl.

"I dunno, Missy Sylvia. I 'spec' dar ain't nuffin' you kin do. But you
has been mighty good to me," Estralla replied. "It's mighty hard to go
off and leave my mammy an' never see you-all no more, Missy Sylvia. I
dunno whar I'll be sent."

"Estralla, if you were earning wages for Mr. Robert Waite would he let
you stay here?" Sylvia asked eagerly.

"I reckon he would, Missy. But who's a-gwine to pay wages for a
pickaninny like me? Nobuddy! Missy, I'se a-gwine to run off an' hide
myself 'til the Yankee soldiers comes and sets us free," said Estralla.
