If they had not taken care of her when she was ill, she would not have
seen her brother again.
Her brother said he was glad that the white men had been kind to her.
He would help them over the mountains.
He would talk to his men about it.
He said to Captain Clark: "You have been kind to Sacajawea.
I am your friend until my days are over.
You shall own my house.
You shall sit on my blanket.
You shall have what I kill.
You shall bear my name.
My name belonged to me only, but now it is yours.
You are Cameahwait."
After that, all this tribe called Captain Clark "Cameahwait."




Ah hi e!      death     oars     pleased
bought        nev er    sad dles


SACAJAWEA'S PEOPLE WILL SHOW THE WAY.

Cameahwait told his people how good the white men were.
He told them what good things they had.
He said, "If we sell them horses and take them over the mountains, they
can get back soon.
No goods will come to us until they go back to their home.
If we do not help them, they cannot cross the mountains.
They do not know the way.
They cannot carry food enough.
They will meet death in the mountains.
Then we shall never get their goods.
Shall we help them, my brothers?"

And the people said, "Ah hi e! Ah hi e!"
That means, "We are pleased."
They got horses to carry the goods.
They could not get enough horses to give the men to ride.
The captains bought a horse for Sacajawea  to ride.
The soldiers made saddles from the oars tied together with pieces of
skins.
Then they started up the steep mountain.




heard    must    to-night    slipped


THE INDIANS TRY TO LEAVE THE WHITES.

When they were in the mountain tops, Sacajawea overheard some Indians
talking.
They said: "We do not want to go across the mountains with the whites.
We want to go down to the plains and hunt buffalo.
We are hungry here.
On the plains are many buffalo.
We must hunt them now for our winter food.
We do not care for the white men's goods.
Our fathers lived without their goods.
We can live without them.
We will go off to-night and leave them.
They will meet death in the mountains.
In the Spring we can come back and get their goods."

Sacajawea went to Captain Lewis.
She told him what she had heard.
He called the chiefs together.
They smoked a pipe together.
Sacajawea slipped a piece of sugar into Cameahwait's hand.
As he sucked it, she said, "You will get this good thing from the white
men if you are friends with them."


gone      land       word
keep      prom ise   yes


Then Captain Lewis said, "Are you men of your word?"

The Indians said, "Yes."

He said, "Did you not promise to carry our goods over the mountains?"

The Indians said, "Yes."

"Then," he said, "why are you going to leave us now?
If you had not promised, we would have gone back down the Missouri.
Then no other white man would come to your land.
You wish the whites to be your friends.
You want them to give you goods.
You should keep you promise to them.
I will keep my promise to you.
You seem afraid to keep your promise."

The chiefs said, "We are not afraid.
We will keep our promise."

They sent out word to all their men to keep their promise.
Captain Lewis thanked Sacajawea.
If she had not told him, the Indians would have gone off in the night.
The whites would have been left in the steep Rocky Mountains with no
horses and no way of getting food.




stiff    Pa cif ic    O cean
melt     sharp        trip


CROSSING THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS.

The trip across the mountains was very hard.
The mountain tops were steep.
There was no road.
The ground was made of sharp rocks.
The horses slipped and fell down.
The men's feet were cut and black and blue.
It rained many days and snowed nights.
They had no houses.
Before they could start on each day, they had to melt the snow off their
goods.
The men grew stiff from the wet and the cold.
The only way they could get warm was to keep on walking.
They had little food.
They had only a little corn when they started across the mountains.
This was soon gone.
There were no animals, no fish, and no roots on the way.
They had to kill their horses.
They had only horsemeat to eat.
The soldiers grew sick.
Some could hardly stand.
But they did not want to turn back.
They knew the Indians could find the way down to the Columbia River.
Then they could get to the Pacific Ocean without the Indians.
So they went on.




sud den ly     fun     salm on     watch


AT THE COLUMBIA RIVER.

At last they got across the mountains and down on the Columbia River.
The Indians who had showed them the way went home again.
There were other Indians near the Columbia.
These Indians gave the men salmon and roots.
They ate so much that they were ill.
The captains and all the soldiers were ill.
But they started to make canoes to ride down the Columbia.
They did not get well.
So they bought some dogs.
They cooked the dogs and ate them.
For days they could eat only dog.
The Indians laughed at them for eating dog.
They said, "Dogs are good to watch the camp.
They are not good to eat.
We do not eat them.
What poor men these must be to eat dog!"
Suddenly the captains fired off their guns and a soldier played the
fiddle.
Then the Indians stopped laughing.
They had never heard a gun before.
They had never before heard a fiddle.
They thought the white men must be wonderful people to have guns and
fiddles.
They wished to be friends with such wonderful people.
So they did not make fun of them any more.




full      grass      stones


HOW THE INDIANS DRIED SALMON.

The soldiers left their horses here on the Columbia River.
They asked the Indians to keep them until they should come back from the
West.
Then they started down the river in canoes.
On the Columbia, the party saw some Indians drying salmon.
They opened the fish.
Then they put it in the sun.
When it was well dried, they pounded it to powder between two stones.
Then they put it into a basket.
The basket was made of grass.
It had dried salmon skin inside.
The Indians pounded the powdered salmon down hard into the basket.
When a basket was full, they put dried salmon skin on the top.
Then the basket was put where it would keep dry.
The salmon powder would keep for years.
Only one tribe of Indians knew how to make it well.
The other tribes bought it from them.
All the tribes liked it.
The white men, too, liked it.

