producing the mysterious noise.

"I thought I heard a frightful noise last night soon after I went to
bed," said Mrs. Bickford, at the breakfast table. "Didn't you hear
anything, Mr. Holden?"

"No," said Abner, "I heard nothing. You were probably dreaming."

"Perhaps I was. Didn't you hear anything, Herbert?"

"I sleep pretty sound," said Herbert, quietly.

Abner Holden watched him as he said this, and was evidently more
perplexed than ever. But that was the last visit he paid to the garret
at night.




CHAPTER IX

EXPOSING A FRAUD


It would be hard to tell what Abner Holden's precise occupation was. He
had thirty or forty acres of land, but only cultivated enough to produce
supplies of vegetables for his own table, and grain for his horses.
He kept four cows, and he had, at this time, three horses. He had the
Yankee propensity for "swapping," and from time to time traded horses,
generally managing to get the best of the bargain, for he was tolerably
sharp and not much troubled by conscientious scruples about misstating
the merits of his horses.

But, about two months before Herbert came into his employ, he had
himself been overreached, and found himself the possessor of a horse
of excellent outward appearance, but blind of one eye, and with a
very vicious temper. He accepted the situation with a bad grace, and
determined, as soon as possible, to "trade" the horse to another party.

One day, about a fortnight after Herbert's arrival, a
gentlemanly-looking stranger knocked at Abner Holden's door.

The call was answered by the housekeeper.

"Is Mr. Holden at home?" he inquired.

"Yes, sir," was the reply.

"I should like to see him."

Abner Holden soon made his appearance.

"Mr. Holden." said the stranger "I am in search of a good family horse.
I am told that you have some animals for sale, and called on you,
thinking I might get suited through you."

"You've come to the right place," said Abner, glibly. "I've got just the
animal that will suit you."

"I should like to see it."

"He's in the pasture now. If you don't object to walking a short
distance, I will show him to you. I feel sure he will suit you."

"Very well, I will go with you."

"This way, then."

The two walked down a green lane at the back of the house to the
entrance of the pasture, where the three horses, at present comprising
Abner Holden's entire stock, were grazing leisurely.

Now, it happened that, of the three, the blind and vicious horse was
much the best looking. He held his head erect, had a graceful form, and
was likely to attract favorable notice at first sight.

Abner Holden paused at a little distance, and pointed him out.

"What do you think of that horse, Mr. Richmond?" he said.

"A very good-looking animal," said the stranger, with an approving
glance; "but I must explain that I want such an animal as my wife can
drive. It is absolutely necessary that he should be good-tempered
and gentle. If, with this, he is handsome, and of good speed, all the
better. Now you know what I am in search of. Can you recommend this
horse of yours?"

"Yes," said Abner, confidently, "he will just suit you. I did calculate
to keep him for my own use, but I'm rather short of money, and I shall
have to let him go."

"You say he is gentle?"

"Oh, yes, as gentle as need be."

"Could a woman drive him?"

"Oh, no trouble about that," said Abner.

"And he has no serious defect?"

"No."

"Well, that seems satisfactory. I like his appearance. He would look
well in harness. What is your price?"

"Two hundred and fifty dollars, cash down," said Abner. "That's too
cheap. He's worth a cool hundred more, but I got him cheap, and can
afford to sell him cheap."

The horse had cost Mr. Holden just a hundred and ten dollars, and at
this price he considered himself decidedly taken in; but this he did not
particularly care to mention.

"Two hundred and fifty dollars!" mused the stranger. "It is a little
more than I intended to pay. Still, if the animal is what you describe,
I don't know that I shall object on that score."

"You had better take him," said Abner. "It'll be the best bargain you
ever made, I'll warrant. You'll pay cash down, I suppose?"

"Of course."

"Then shall we say it's a bargain?"

"Not quite yet. I'll take till the afternoon to think about it."

"Better decide now. The fact is, Mr. Richmond, I ought not to let the
horse go at that figure, and I may change my mind."

"I think I shall take your horse, but I have agreed to look at another,
and must see that first."

"Whose?"

"It belongs to a man named Nichols."

"Sam Nichols?"

"I believe so."

"I wouldn't advise you to have anything to do with him."

"Why not?"

"He's a regular sharper. You can't depend on anything he says."

"Thank you for the caution. I will be on my guard. But I promised to
take a look at his horse before deciding. If I don't come to terms
with him, and I don't think I shall, I will come round some time this
afternoon and make a bargain with you."

Mr. Holden thought it was hardly politic to urge him farther. With a
renewed caution as to dealing with Sam Nichols, he let him go.

"Well," thought Abner, after he was gone, "it will be a pretty good
thing if I get rid of Spitfire"--he had named him thus--"for two
hundred and fifty dollars. He's a bad-tempered brute, and blind into the
bargain. But I'm not bound to tell Mr. Richmond that, and so spoil my
trade. I've put a flea in his ear about Nichols, and I guess he will be
back again."

The prospect of making a good bargain caused Abner to be unusually
pleasant and good-humored, so much so that Mrs. Bickford regarded him
with surprise. He voluntarily asked her if she did not wish something at
the store, volunteering to bring home whatever was needed.

"What's come over the man?" thought the housekeeper. "It's too good to
last."

She was quite correct there. Mr. Holden was naturally crabbed, and fair
weather with him was the exception rather than the rule. On the present
occasion it did not last many hours.

Abner Holden went to the store, but made other calls on the way, so that
he was three hours absent, and did not return till twelve o'clock, the
usual dinner hour in his household.

Meanwhile, Mr. Richmond, his caller of the morning, had been to see Sam
Nichols, and inspected the horse he had for sale. He did not altogether
like its appearance, and, moreover, he was prejudiced against him by
what he had heard from Abner Holden, and came away without effecting a
purchase.

"I don't think I can do better," he reflected, "than to take that horse
of Holden's. Let me see, it is only half-past ten. I shall have time to
go up there this morning. I suppose I might as well settle matters at
once."

Accordingly, eleven o'clock found him again in Abner Holden's yard.

Herbert was out in the yard, engaged in splitting wood.

"Is Mr. Holden at home?" inquired the stranger, pausing.

"No, sir."

"Will he be at home soon?"

"Yes, sir, I think so. He only went out to the store. He ought to be
home now."

"Then I think I will wait. I was here once before this morning. I was
talking with him about buying one of his horses. If you can spare the
time, I would like to have you go with me to the pasture, and I will
take another look at the one I saw this morning."

"Certainly, sir," said Herbert, driving the ax into the block upon
which he had been splitting, prepared to accompany Mr. Richmond to the
pasture.

They reached the bars dividing the pasture from the next field. Spitfire
was cropping the grass just on the other side.

"There," said the stranger, pointing him out, "that is the horse I was
looking at."

"THAT ONE!" repeated Herbert, in a tone of surprise.

"Yes, he is a fine-looking animal."

"Ye-es," said Herbert, hesitatingly.

"However, I don't so much care about that, as for his being gentle. I
want him for a family horse, such as my wife may drive, without fear,
while I am away."

"Did Mr. Holden say he's gentle?" asked Herbert.

"Yes. He recommended him highly for that, and told me he had no serious
defect."

"Are you sure this is the horse?" asked Herbert.

"Certainly. I am not likely to be mistaken in it. I suppose it is all as
he says?"

Herbert was in a perplexing position. He knew that if he told the truth
he should incur Abner Holden's anger, but his conscience revolted at
suffering the stranger to be taken in, and thus, perhaps, exposing his
wife to serious danger.

"I am afraid I cannot confirm what Mr. Holden says," he answered,
reluctantly. "The horse is very ill-tempered, and is blind of one eye."

"Is it possible? Then I have had a narrow escape. You have done me a
good service, my boy, in telling me the truth, for I am, myself,
unused to horses, and should have taken the animal on your employer's
recommendation. Accept this acknowledgment of my indebtedness."

He would have placed a five-dollar bill in Herbert's hand, but our hero
firmly refused to receive it.

"I have only done my duty, sir. I cannot accept money for doing that.
Thank you all the same."

"Perhaps you are right, my lad. If I ever have a chance to serve you,
don't hesitate to let me know it."

"There'll be a storm if Mr. Holden hears of this," thought Herbert. "But
I could not do otherwise."




CHAPTER X

THE CLOUDS GATHER


At twelve o'clock Abner Holden returned home, still in good humor. As
he did not anticipate another call from his expected customer until the
afternoon, he made no inquiries.

"Perhaps he won't hear about it," thought Herbert, and as he did not
wish to have any trouble with Mr. Holden, he hoped it might prove so.

Abner was so elated at the thought of his good bargain in prospect, that
he could not keep it to himself.

"I've about sold Spitfire, Mrs. Bickford," he said to the housekeeper.

"Sold Spitfire! Who wants to buy him?"

"A man that called here this morning. What do you think he wants him
for?"

"To break his neck," suggested the housekeeper.

"He wants him for a good family horse for his wife to drive," and Abner
Holden burst into a laugh.

"Perhaps he's anxious to become a widower," said Mrs. Bickford.

"No; the fact is he thinks the horse is gentle."

"You told him so, I suppose?"

"Of course, I did."

"Knowing it to be false?"

"Shut up, Mrs. Bickford. You know all is fair in trade."

"No, I don't, Mr. Holden. To my mind, a lie's just as much a lie
in trade as in anything else. I suppose the man trusted to your
recommendation."

"Suppose he did. I got cheated on the horse, and I've got to get rid of
it, somehow. As it is, I shall make a handsome profit."

"Well, Mr. Holden, all I've got to say is, I am glad I haven't got as
tough a conscience as you have."

"You don't know anything about business, Mrs. Bickford."

"Well, manage things your own way. I ain't responsible, but I pity the
poor man if he buys Spitfire."

"So do I," chuckled Abner. "That's where you and I agree, Mrs.
Bickford."

Herbert listened in silence. He was disgusted with the utter disregard
of fair dealing exhibited by Abner Holden, though he was not surprised
at it. He felt glad that he had been the means of saving Mr. Richmond
from being overreached, though he know very well that Mr. Holden's rage
would be furious when he learned what had interfered with the trade.
He did not feel under any obligations to reveal his own agency in the
matter, unless direct inquiry was made of him. In that case, he would
manfully stand by his acts.

"I'm expecting the man this afternoon, Mrs. Bickford," said Mr. Holden,
"and shall stay around home to see him. When he comes, call me at once;
and mind, not a word about Spitfire."

"Just as you say. I wash my hands of the whole affair."

"Washing your hands won't do you any harm," said Abner, with a laugh at
what he supposed to be a witticism.

Mrs. Bickford took no notice of this remark. It was not quite easy to
say why she remained in charge of Mr. Holden's household, for certainly,
she had no respect for her employer. However, he did not meddle with
her, or, if he did, he got the worst of it, and it was perhaps the
independence that she enjoyed which led her to remain in the house.
Knowing Abner's character, she was not particularly shocked at this
last evidence of it, but went about her work as usual, with scarcely a
thought of what had passed.

Abner Holden sat at the window, and looked up the road, awaiting
anxiously the appearance of the customer.

"I hope he'll bring the money with him," he thought. "I'd like to have
matters all arranged to-day, before he smells a rat. If I get the money
once in my hands, he may scold all he pleases about the horse. It won't
disturb my rest."

But the old clock in the corner kept ticking--minute after minute
passed--and still the stranger did not appear.

"He can't have struck a bargain with Sam Nichols," muttered Abner,
apprehensively. "If he has, it'll be sort of a swindle on me. Maybe
Nichols has been telling him lies about me."

Abner waxed so angry over this supposition, that although it was merely
conjecture, he already began to consider in what way he could "come up
with Sam Nichols."

"That money would come very handy," thought Abner. "There's a horse
worth two of Spitfire, I can get for a hundred and fifty, and that would
leave me a hundred. I wish he would come."

He looked out of the window, and, not content with that, went out of the
front door, and, shading his eyes with his hands, looked up the road.
But he could see nothing of Mr. Richmond. Abner began to fear that he
had lost his bargain.

"I guess I'll put on my hat and go round to the tavern," he said to Mrs.
Bickford. "If the gentleman I spoke of should call while I am away, just
send the boy around after me as quick as possible."

"Very well."

Abner Holden walked hurriedly to the tavern, determined to bring about
a bargain, which would be so desirable for him, if it were a possible
thing. He must and would get rid of Spitfire, however many falsehoods
he might have to tell. What was truth in comparison to two hundred and
fifty dollars! Suppose Spitfire should run away with the stranger's wife
and break her limbs, or even her neck, it was everybody's duty to look
out for himself in this world.

Thus reasoned Abner Holden. There is no particular need of my commenting
upon the fallacy of this reasoning, since it is not likely that any of
my young readers will sufficiently admire his character to be in any
danger of being led into imitation of it.

At the end of a very few minutes, Abner stood on the piazza, of the
tavern, a little out of breath with rapid walking.

"Is Mr. Richmond still here?" he inquired of the landlord, anxiously.

"Yes, but he means to leave in five minutes."

"Where is he?"

"In his room."

"I want to see him on particular business--I wish you would send up and
ask him to come down."

"Very well."

"William," said the landlord, summoning his son, "go up and tell Mr.
Richmond that Mr. Holden wishes to see him."

"You don't know of his having bought a horse of Sam Nichols, do you?"
asked Abner, nervously, of the landlord.

"No, I am sure he has not."

Abner felt somewhat relieved by this. As long as he was still unprovided
with a horse, there was still a chance of Spitfire. He resolved, if
necessary, to abate something from the rather high price he had demanded
in the morning.

Mr. Richmond followed William downstairs.

"You wish to see me?" he asked, glancing toward Mr. Holden.

"Yes, about the horse you were looking at this morning."

"I have concluded not to take him," said the other, coldly.

"You didn't buy of Sam Nichols, did you?"

"No; his horse did not suit me."

"You haven't any other in your eye, have you?" asked Mr. Holden.
