firecracker still in his pocket and lit it on the sly.  Just as it
was about to explode he threw it up into the air.

Bang!  The report was loud and clear, and everybody within hearing
rushed to the spot to see what it meant.  There were forty or
fifty pupils and two assistant teachers, but Captain Putnam had
gone out.

"Hi!  Hi!  What does this mean?" came in a high-pitched voice, and
Josiah Crabtree, the first assistant, rushed up to the carryall.
"What was that exploded?"

"A big firecracker, sir," answered Peleg Snuggers.

"And who exploded it?"

Before the utility man could answer there came a cry from the
parade ground:
"Don't peach, Peleg, don't peach!"

"Silence, boys!" burst from Josiah Crabtree wrathfully.  "Such a
disturbance is against the rules of this institution."

"We didn't fire the cracker," piped up a tall, slim boy.  "It came
from the carriage."

"Mumps, you're nothing but a sneak and tattle-tale," was the reply
to this, from several older cadets; and, afraid of having his ears
boxed on the sly, John Fenwick, nicknamed Mumps by everybody in
the Hall, ran off.

"Which of you fired the cracker?" demanded Josiah Crabtree,
advancing to the carriage step.

There was no reply, and he turned to the driver.

"Snuggers, what have you to say?"

"I can't say anything, sir.  I was taking care of the horses,
sir," answered the hired man meekly.

"I will find out who fired the cracker before I have finished with
you," growled the head assistant.  "Get down and march into the
Hall."

"Gracious, what have we struck now?" whispered Fred to Dick.

"Is this Captain Putnam?" asked Dick, without answering his chum.

"No, young man; I am Josiah Crabtree, A. M., Captain Putnam's
first assistant.  And you are--"  He paused.

"I am Dick Rover, sir.  These are my brothers, Tom and Sam."

"And I am Fred Garrison," finished that youth.

"Very good.  I hope, Richard, that you were not guilty of firing
that cracker?"

"Was there any great harm in giving a... a salute upon our
arrival?"

"Such a thing is against the rules of the institution.  Article 29
says, 'No pupil shall use any firearms or explosive at any time
excepting upon special permission'."

"We are not pupils yet, Mr. Crabtree."

"That argument will not pass, sir.  So you fired the cracker?
Very well.  Mr. Strong!"

The second assistant came up. He was a man of not over twenty-five,
and his face was mild and pleasant.

"What is it, Mr. Crabtree."

"You will take charge of the other new pupils, while I take charge
of the one who has broken our rules on his very arrival."

"Hold on!" cried Tom.  "What are you going to do with my brother?"

"That is... none of your business, Master Rover.  You will go with
Mr. Strong."

"He didn't fire the cracker.  I did that!  And I'm not ashamed of
it.  I wasn't a pupil when I did it, and I'm not a pupil now, so I
can't see how you can punish me for breaking one of your rules."

At this there came a titter from the cadets gathered around.
Hardly any of them liked Josiah Crabtree, who was dictatorial
beyond all reason.  The head assistant flushed up.

"You are a pupil here, and I will show you that you cannot break
our rules with impunity, and be impudent to me in the bargain!"
cried Crabtree.  "Come with me!"  And he caught Tom by the arm,
while Dick and the others were led off in another direction.

"Surely, this is a fine beginning," thought Tom as he walked
along.  He was half inclined to break away, but concluded to await
developments.

"Are you going to take me to Captain Putnam?" he questioned.

"We do not permit cadets placed under arrest to ask questions."

"Great smoke!  Am I under arrest?"

"You are."

"Perhaps you'll want to hang me next."

"Silence!  Or I shall be tempted to sentence you to a caning."

"You'll never cane me, sir."

"Silence!  You have evidently been a wayward boy at home.  If so
it will be best for you to remember that all that is now at an
end, and you must behave yourself and obey orders."

"Can't a fellow breathe without permission?"

"Silence!"

"How about if I want a drink of water?"

"Silence, I say!" stormed Josiah Crabtree.  "I'll warrant you'll
not feel so smart by the time you are ready to leave Putnam Hall."

There was a silence after this, as the head assistant led the way
into the building and conducted Tom to a small room looking out
toward the rear.

"You will remain here, Rover, until Captain Putnam returns."

"How long will that be?"

"Didn't I tell you not to ask questions?"

"But Captain Putnam may not return for a day or a month," went on
Tom innocently.

"Captain Putnam will be back in an hour or  two."  Without another
word, Josiah  Crabtree turned and left the room, locking the door
behind him.

"Well, by crickety!" came from the boy when he was left alone.
"I've put my foot into it from the very start.  I wonder what
Captain Putnam will say to this?  If he's half as sour minded as
old Crabtree, I'll catch it.  But I haven't done anything wrong,
and they shan't cane me--and that's flat!" and he shook his
curly head decidedly.

The room was less than ten feet square and plainly furnished with
two chairs and a small couch.  In one corner was a washstand
containing a basin and a pitcher of water.

"This looks a good deal like a cell," he mused as he gazed around.
Suddenly his eyes caught some writing on the wall in lead pencil.
He stepped over to read it.

    "Josiah Crabtree put me here,
    And I am feeling very queer;
    He boxed my ears and pulled my hair
    Oh, when I'm free won't I get square!"

"Somebody else has been here before me," thought Tom.  "I rather
reckon I'll get square too.  Hullo, here's another Whittier or
Longfellow:

    "In this lock-up I'm confined;
    If I stay long I'll lose my mind.
    Two days and nights I've paced the floor,
    As many others have before."

"I hope I don't stay two days and nights," said Tom half aloud.
Then he walked to the single window of the apartment to find that
it was heavily barred.

"No escaping that way," he went on to read another inscription,
this time in blank verse:

         "And I am jugged,
    Alone in solitude, and by myself
    Alone.  I sit and think, and think,
    And think again.  Old Crabtree,
    Base villain that he is, hath put me here!
    And why?  Ah, thereby hangs a tale, Horatio!
    His teeth, the teeth that chew the best of steak
    Set on our table--those I found and hid;
    And Mumps, the sneak, hath told on me!  Alas!
    When will my martyrdom end?"

"Good for the chap who hid the teeth!" continued Tom, and smiled
as he thought of the rage Crabtree must have been in when he
discovered that his false teeth were gone.  A rattle in the
keyhole disturbed him, and he dropped onto a chair just as the
head assistant again appeared.

"I want the keys to your trunk and your satchel," he said.

"What for, sir?"

"Didn't I tell you before not to ask questions?"

"But my keys are my own private property, and so is what is in the
trunk and the satchel."

"All pupils' baggage is examined, Rover, to see that nothing
improper is introduced into the Hall."

"Want to see if I've got any more firecrackers?"

"We do not allow dime novels, or, eatables, or other things that
might harm our pupils."

"Eating never harmed me, sir."

"Sometimes parents load up their boys with delicacies which are
decidedly harmful.  Come, the keys."

Josiah Crabtree's tones were so harsh that Tom's heart rebelled on
the moment.

"I shan't give them to you, Mr. Crabtree.  You have no right to
place me here.  I wish to see the proprietor, Captain Putnam, at
once."

"Do you--er--refuse to recognize my authority over you?" cried
Josiah Crabtree passionately.

"I do, sir.  When I have met Captain Putnam and been enrolled as a
cadet it may be different.  But at present I am not a cadet and
not under your authority."

"We'll see, boy, we'll see!" came hotly from the head assistant.
"Before I am done with you, you will be sorry that you have defied
me!"

And with these words he went out, slamming the door after him.
Tom had made an enemy at the very start of his career as a cadet.




CHAPTER VIII

A MEETING IN THE MESSROOM


In the meantime Dick, Sam, and Fred had been having quite a
different experience.  George Strong, the second assistant at
Putnam: Hall, was not only a first-class teacher, but a calm and
fair-minded gentleman as well; and in addition, and this was
highly important, he was not so old but that he could remember
perfectly well when he had been a boy himself.

"Come this way, my lads," he said with a faint smile.  "I trust
you will soon feel at home in Putnam Hall.  It is Captain Putnam's
desire to have all of his boys, as he calls them, feel that way."

"What will Mr. Crabtree do with my brother?" asked Dick anxiously.

"I cannot say, Rover.  Probably he will place him in the guardroom
until Captain Putnam arrives."

"I am sure he didn't do much that was wrong."

"We had better not discuss that question, my boy.  Come this way;
I will conduct you to your room."

"George Strong showed them into the main hallway and up the stairs
to the second story.  Passing through a side hall, they entered a
large, bright dormitory overlooking the parade- and the
playground.  Here were eight beds, four on either side, with as
many chairs, and also a table and two washbowls, with running
water supplied from a tower on the roof, the water being pumped up
by the aid of a windmill.

"This room has not been occupied this year," said the teacher.
"Captain Putnam and Mrs. Green, our housekeeper, thought it might
be as well to put you in here together, along with Lawrence Colby
and Frank Harrington, when they come.  I believe you are all
friends, at least Harrington and Colby intimated as much in their
letters."

"They told the truth," cried Sam.  "This just suits me, and we owe
Captain Putnam and Mrs. Green one for doing it."

George Strong smiled.  Then the smile faded as he remembered how
Josiah Crabtree once told Captain Putnam that he did not believe
in letting chums room together.  "Place each boy among strangers,"
Crabtree had said.  "It will make him more reliant."  But Captain
Putnam had not listened to the crabbed old fellow, and Strong was
glad of it.

"Here is a closet, in which each of you can stow his clothing when
it is dealt out to him.  Your ordinary suits will, of course, be
placed away for you, for during the academy term, you will as
cadets wear only your uniforms."

"When will I get my uniform?" asked Fred, who was anxious to don
his "soldier fixings," as he put it.

"Tomorrow, if we have any suit on hand that fits."

"I don't want a second-handed suit," put in Sam.

George Strong laughed. "Don't worry, my boy; every pupil gets new
clothing.  But, many boys are so nearly of a size that Captain
Putnam always keeps a dozen or more suits on hand."

"Oh, that's different."

"The beds are all numbered, and to avoid disputes we always put
the eldest boy in bed No. 1, and so on.  You can arrange this
between yourselves, and I feel certain you won't get into a dispute."

"We won't quarrel," said Dick.  "I don't how exactly how old Frank
and Larry are, though."

"Then arrange to suit yourselves until they come," concluded Mr.
Strong.

Having shown then their dormitory he conducted them through the
building and exhibited the various class- and drill-rooms, and
then ended up by introducing them to several other pupils,
including Bart Conners, the major for the term, and Harry Blossom
and Dave Kearney, the two captains.

"Welcome to Putnam Hall!" cried Major Bart Conners, a tall youth
of nearly seventeen.  He shook hands all around, and so did the
two captains; and then the assistant teacher left the party.

"Oh, it was a shame the way Crabtree treated your brother!" said
Captain Harry to Dick.  "It's a wonder to me that Captain Putnam
keeps him here."

"I was in for getting up a petition to have Crabtree removed," put in
Captain Dave. "I think every boy in the academy would sign it."

"I hope Captain Putnam is not so severe," said Fred.

"Not by a jugful, Garrison," came from Captain Harry.  "He's
strict, and makes everybody toe the mark, but you couldn't find a
better all-around man."

"Then he'll suit me."

It was now quite late, and presently a loud, clear bell rang out
in the belfry.

"Six o'clock," said Captain Dave Kearney.  "That is to bring in
the boys from the playground.  They have fifteen minutes in which
to wash up for supper.  Excuse me, I'll be needed in ten minutes
to form my company,"  and soon the newcomers found themselves
alone with several others who had just arrived at Putnam Hall.

The cadets were rushing from everywhere to the lavatories, to make
themselves presentable on parade.  Soon they began to form on the
grounds before the building.  Dick and the others saw them divide
up into two companies, with Harry Blossom at the head of the first
and Dave Kearney leading the second.  The two companies, called a
battalion, were commanded by Major Bart.  In addition to the
officers, there were two drummers, a bass-drummer, and two fifers.

"Companies, attention!" came the command, and the lines became
rigid.  "By column of fours--march!"  The drums struck up, and
away went the columns of each company, to the front of the parade
ground.  Then they wheeled to the right, the fifers started up a
lively air, and the cadets marched around the hall three times,
and at last into the door nearest to the mess-hall or dining room.

"By Jinks, that's fine!" cried Sam.  "Cadet life will suit me, I'm
sure of it."

The cadets had hardly disappeared before one of the waiters in the
mess-hall came forward.  "Please come right in, gents," he said.
"Mr. Strong will give you places at the tables." And they went
and soon found themselves seated among as jolly a set of boys as
they had ever encountered.

Of course there were exceptions; where would there not be in a
crowd of nearly a hundred?  There were pupils there who were
morose by nature, those who seldom or never smiled, and there were
likewise half a dozen of the Dan Baxter order--bullies and
worse.  We shall see more of all these characters as our tale
progresses.

"I wonder if Tom is going to get any supper?" said Dick to his
younger brother.

"If they don't give him any, I'll raise a kick, Dick."

