in the dear Old Briar-patch on the Green Meadows, but he felt that he
just couldn't leave little Miss Fuzzytail, and little Miss Fuzzytail
couldn't make up her mind to go with Peter, because she felt that she
just couldn't leave the Old Pasture, which always had been her home. So
Peter spent his days and nights ready to jump and run from Jed Thumper,
the gray old Rabbit who thought he owned the Old Pasture, and who had
declared that he would drive Peter out.

Now Peter, as you know, had an old friend in the Old Pasture, Tommy Tit
the Chickadee. One day Tommy took it into his head to fly down to the
Green Meadows. There he found everybody wondering what had become of
Peter Rabbit, for you remember Peter had stolen away from the dear Old
Briar-patch in the night and had told no one where he was going.

Now one of the first to ask Tommy Tit if he had seen Peter Rabbit was
Old Man Coyote. Tommy told him where Peter was and of the dreadful time
Peter was having, Old Man Coyote asked a lot of questions about the
Old Pasture and thanked Tommy very politely as Tommy flew over to the
Smiling Pool to call on Grandfather Frog and Jerry Muskrat.

That night, after jolly, round, red Mr. Sun had gone to bed behind the
Purple Hills, and the Black Shadows had crept over the Green Meadows,
Old Man Coyote started for the Old Pasture, Now, he had never been there
before, but he had asked so many questions of Tommy Tit, and he is so
smart anyway, that it didn't take him long to go all through the Old
Pasture and to find the bull-briar castle of Old Jed Thumper, who was
making life so miserable for Peter Rabbit, He wasn't at home, but Old
Man Coyote's wonderful nose soon found his tracks, and he followed them
swiftly, without making a sound. Pretty soon he came to a bramble-bush,
and under it he could see Old Jed Thumper. For just a minute he
chuckled, a noiseless chuckle, to himself. Then he opened his mouth
and out came that terrible sound which had so frightened all the little
people on the Green Meadows when Old Man Coyote had first come there to
live.

"Ha, ha, ha! Ho, ho, ho! Hee, hee, hee! Ha, ho, hee, ho!"

Old Jed Thumper never had heard anything like that before. It frightened
him so that before he thought what he was doing he had jumped out from
under the bramble-bush. Of course this was just what Old Man Coyote
wanted. In a flash he was after him, and then began such a race as the
Old Pasture never had seen before. Round and round, this way and that
way, along the cow paths raced Old Jed Thumper with Old Man Coyote at
his heels, until at last, out of breath, so tired that it seemed to him
he couldn't run another step, frightened almost out of his senses, Old
Jed Thumper reached his bull-briar castle and was safe.

Then Old Man Coyote laughed his terrible laugh once more and trotted
over to the tumble-down stone-wall in which his keen nose told him Peter
Rabbit was hiding.

"One good turn deserves another, and I always pay my debts, Peter
Rabbit," said he. "You did me a good turn some time ago down on the Green
Meadows, when you told me how Granny and Reddy Fox were planning to make
trouble for me by leading Bowser the Hound to the place where I took my
daily nap, and now we are even. I don't think that old gray Rabbit will
dare to poke so much as his nose out of his bull-briar castle for
a week. Now I am going back to the Green Meadows, Good night, Peter
Rabbit, and don't forget that I always pay my debts."

"Good night, and thank you, Mr. Coyote," said Peter, and then, when Old
Man Coyote had gone, he added to himself in a shame-faced way: "I didn't
believe him when he said that he guessed we would be friends."




CHAPTER XX

LITTLE MISS FUZZYTAIL WHISPERS "YES"


 Love is a beautiful, wonderful thing.
   There's nothing quite like it on all the
     green earth.

 'Tis love in the heart teaches birdies to sing,
   And gives the wide world all its joy and
     its mirth.
                                        Peter Rabbit.

Peter Rabbit was finding this out. Always he had been happy, for
happiness had been born in him. But the happiness he had known before
was nothing to the happiness that was his when he found that he loved
little Miss Fuzzytail and that little Miss Fuzzytail loved him, Peter
was sure that she did love him, although she wouldn't say so. But love
doesn't need words, and Peter had seen it shining in the two soft,
gentle eyes of little Miss Fuzzytail. So Peter was happy in spite of the
trouble that Old led Thumper, the big, gray Rabbit who was the father of
little Miss Fuzzytail, had made for him in the Old Pasture.

He had tried very hard, very hard indeed, to get little Miss Fuzzytail
to go back with him to the dear Old Briar-patch on the Green Meadows,
but in spite of all he could say she couldn't make up her mind to leave
the Old Pasture, which, you know, had been her home ever since she was
born. And Peter couldn't make up his mind to go back there and leave
her, because--why, because he loved her so much that he felt that he
could never, never be happy without her. Then, when Old Jed Thumper was
hunting Peter so hard that he hardly had a chance to eat or sleep, had
come Old Man Coyote the Wolf and given Old Jed Thumper such a fright
that for a week he didn't dare poke so much as his nose out of his
bull-briar castle.

Now, although Old Man Coyote didn't know it, his terrible voice had
frightened little Miss Fuzzytail almost as much as it had Old Jed
Thumper. You see, she never had heard it before, She didn't even know
what it was, and all that night she had crouched in her most secret
hiding-place, shivering and shaking with fright. The next morning Peter
had found her there. She hadn't slept a wink, and she was still too
frightened to even go look for her breakfast.

"Oh, Peter Rabbit, did you hear that terrible noise last night?" she
cried.

"What noise?" asked Peter, just as if he didn't know anything about it.

"Why, that terrible voice!" cried little Miss Fuzzytail, and shivered at
the thought of it.

"What was it like?" asked Peter.

"Oh, I can't tell you," said little Miss Fuzzy tall, "It wasn't like
anything I ever had heard before. It was something like the voice of
Hooty the Owl and the voice of Dippy the Loon and the voice of a little
yelping dog all in one, and it was just terrible!"

"Oh?" replied Peter, "you must mean the voice of my friend. Old Man
Coyote. He came up here last night just to do me a good turn because I
once did him a good turn."

Then he told all about how Old Man Coyote had come to the Green Meadows
to live, and how he was smarter than even old Granny Fox, but he didn't
tell her how he himself had once been frightened almost out of a year's
growth by that terrible voice, or that it was because he hadn't really
believed that Old Man Coyote was his friend that had led him to leave
the Old Briar-patch and come up to the Old Pasture.

"Is--is he fond of Rabbits?" asked little Miss Fuzzytail.

Peter was quite sure that he was.

"And do you think he'll come up here hunting again?" she asked.

Peter didn't know, but he suspected that he would.

"Oh, dear," wailed little Miss Fuzzytail. "Now, I never, never will feel
safe again!"

Then Peter had a happy thought. "I tell you what," said he, "the safest
place in the world for you and me is my dear Old Briar-patch, Won't you
go there now?"

Little Miss Fuzzytail sighed and dropped a tear or two. Then she nestled
up close to Peter. "Yes," she whispered.




CHAPTER XXI

PETER AND LITTLE MISS FUZZYTAIL LEAVE THE OLD PASTURE


 A danger past is a danger past,
   So why not just forget it?
 Watch out instead for the one ahead
   Until you've safely met it,
                                        Peter Rabbit.

As soon as little Miss Fuzzytail had agreed to go with him to make her
home in the dear Old Briar-patch down on the Green Meadows, Peter Rabbit
fairly boiled over with impatience to start, He had had so much trouble
in the Old Pasture that he was afraid if they waited too long little
Miss Fuzzytail might change her mind, and if she should do that--well,
Peter didn't know what he would do.

But Peter, who always had been so happy-go-lucky, with no one to think
about but himself, now felt for the first time re-sponsi-bil-ity. That's
a big word, but it is a word that everybody has to learn the meaning of
sometime. Johnny Chuck learned it when he made a home for Polly Chuck in
Farmer Brown's orchard, and tried to keep it a secret, so that no harm
would come to Polly. It means taking care of other people or other
people's things, and feeling that you must take even greater care than
you would of yourself or your own things, So, while Peter himself would
have been willing to take chances, and might even have made the journey
down to the dear Old Briar-patch in broad daylight, he felt that that
wouldn't do at all for little Miss Fuzzytail; that he must avoid every
possible chance of danger for her.

So Peter waited for a dark night, not too dark, you know, but a night
when there was no moon to make great patches of light, but only the
kindly little Stars looking down and twinkling in the friendly way they
have. At last there was just such a night. All the afternoon little Miss
Fuzzytail went about in the Old Pasture saying good-by to her friends
and visiting each one of her favorite little paths and hiding-places,
and I suspect that in each one she dropped a tear or two, for you see
she felt sure that she never would see them again, although Peter had
promised that he would bring her back to the Old Pasture for a visit
whenever she wanted to come.

At last it was time to start. Peter led the way. Very big and brave and
strong and important he felt, and very timid and frightened felt little
Miss Fuzzytail, hopping after him close at his heels. You see, she felt
that she was going out into the Great World, of which she knew nothing
at all.

"Oh, Peter," she whispered, "supposing we should meet Reddy Fox! I
wouldn't know where to run or hide."

"We are not going to meet Reddy Fox," replied Peter, "but if we should,
all you have to do is to just keep your eyes on the white patch on the
seat of my trousers and follow me. I have fooled Reddy so many times
that I'm not afraid of him."

Never in all his life had Peter been so watchful and careful. That was
because he felt his re-sponsi-bil-ity. Every few jumps he would stop to
sit up and look and listen. Then little Miss Fuzzytail would nestle up
close to him, and Peter's heart would swell with happiness, and he would
feel, oh, so proud and important. Once they heard the sharp bark of
Reddy Fox, but it was a long way off, and Peter smiled, for he knew that
Reddy was hunting on the edge of the Green Forest.

Once a dim shadow swept across the meadow grass ahead of them. Peter
dropped flat in the grass and kept perfectly still, and little Miss
Fuzzytail did just as he did, as she had promised she would.

"Wha--what was it?" she whispered.

"I think it was Hooty the Owl," Peter whispered back, "but he didn't see
us." After what seemed like a long, long time they heard Hooty's fierce
hunting call, but it came from way back of them on the edge of the Old
Pasture. Peter hopped to his feet.

"Come on," said he. "There's nothing to fear from him now."

So slowly and watchfully Peter led the way down across the Green Meadows
while the little Stars looked down and twinkled in the most friendly
way, and just as jolly, round, red Mr. Sun started to kick off
his bedclothes behind the Purple Hills they reached the dear Old
Briar-patch.

"Here we are!" cried Peter.

"Oh, I'm so glad!" cried little Miss Fuzzytail, hopping along one of
Peter's private little paths.




CHAPTER XXII

SAMMY JAY BECOMES CURIOUS


     Learn all you can about others,
     but keep your own affairs to yourself.
     --Peter Rabbit.

Of course it was Sammy Jay who first found out that Peter Rabbit was
back in the dear Old Briar-patch. Sammy took it into his head to fly
over there the very morning of Peter's home-coming. Indeed, little Miss
Fuzzytail hadn't had time to half see the clear Old Briar-patch which,
you know, was to be her new home, when Peter saw Sammy Jay coming. Now
Peter was not quite ready to have all the world know that there was a
Mrs. Peter, for of course that was what little Miss Fuzzytail was now
that she had come to make her home with Peter. They wanted to keep by
themselves for a little while and just be happy with each other. So as
soon as Peter saw Sammy Jay headed towards the Old Briar-patch, he hid
little Miss Fuzzytail under the thickest sweet-briar bush, and then
hurried out to the nearest sweet-clover patch.

Of course Sammy Jay saw him right away, and of course Sammy was very
much surprised.

"Hello, Peter Rabbit! Where'd you come from?" he shouted, as he settled
himself comfortably in a little poplar-tree growing on the edge of the
Old Briar-patch.

"Oh," said Peter with a very grand air, "I've been on a long journey to
see the Great World."

"Which means," said Sammy Jay with a chuckle, "that you've been in the
Old Pasture all this time, and let me tell you, Peter Rabbit, the Old
Pasture is a very small part of the Great World. By the way, Tommy Tit
the Chickadee was down here the other day and told us all about you.
He said that you had fallen in love with little Miss Fuzzytail, and
he guessed that you were going to make your home up there. What's the
matter? Did her father, Old Jed Thumper, drive you out?"

"No, he didn't!" snapped Peter angrily, "It's none of your business what
I came home for, Sammy Jay, but I'll tell you just the same. I came home
because I wanted to."

Sammy chuckled, for he dearly loves to tease Peter and make him angry.
Then the imp of mischief, who seems always to live just under that smart
cap of Sammy's, prompted him to ask: "Did you come home alone?"

Now Peter couldn't say "yes" for that would be an untruth, and whatever
faults Peter may have, he is at least truthful. So he just pretended not
to have heard Sammy's question.
