ran away from the home where he was born. Twice since then he had built
a new home, and now this would be better than either of the others. He
paid no heed to Polly, when she pouted because he did not dig where she
wanted him to. He went from tree to tree, big old apple-trees they were,
and at the very last tree, way down in a corner near a tumbled-down
stone wall, he found what he wanted--two spreading roots gave him a
chance to dig between them.

Polly watched him get ready for work and she pouted some more.

"It would be a lot nicer out in that grassy place, and a lot easier to
dig," said she.

Johnny Chuck smiled and made the dirt fly. "It certainly would be easier
to dig," said he, when he stopped for breath, "easier for me and easier
for Bowser the Hound or for old Granny Fox, if either wanted to dig us
out. Now, these old roots are just far enough apart for us to go in
and out. They make a beautiful doorway. But Bowser the Hound cannot get
through if he tries, and he can't make our doorway any larger. Don't you
see how safe it is?"

Polly Chuck had to own up that it was safer than a home in the open
could possibly be, and Johnny went on digging. He made a long hall down
to the snuggest of bedrooms, deep, deep down under ground. Then he made
a long back hall, and all the sand from this he carried out the front
way. By and by he made a back door at the end of the back hall, and
it opened right behind a big stone fallen from the old stone wall. You
would never have guessed that there was a back door there.

His new house was finished now, and Johnny Chuck and Polly Chuck sat on
the door-step and watched jolly, round, red Mr. Sun go to bed behind the
Purple Hills and were happy.




XV. SAMMY JAY FINDS THE NEW HOME


Johnny Chuck was missed from his old home on the Green Meadows. If he
had known how much he was missed, he certainly would have tried to go
back for at least a call on his old neighbors. There had been great
surprise when it had been discovered that Jimmy Skunk was living in
Johnny's old house, and at first some of the little meadow people were
inclined to look at Jimmy a wee bit distrustfully when he told how
Johnny Chuck had given away his house.

When Johnny sent back word by the Merry Little Breezes that it was true,
they believed Jimmy Skunk and forgot the unpleasant things that they
had begun to hint at about him. But they one and all thought that Johnny
Chuck must be crazy. Yes, Sir, they thought that Johnny Chuck must be
crazy. They were sure of it when the Merry Little Breezes brought word
of how Johnny had started out to see the world.

But everybody was so busy about their own affairs in the beautiful
bright spring-time that they couldn't spend much time wondering about
Johnny Chuck. They missed him every time they passed his old house and
then forgot him; that is, most of the little meadow people did.

Peter Rabbit didn't. Peter used to stop every day to gossip with Johnny
Chuck and tell him all the news, and now that Johnny Chuck was no longer
there, Peter missed him greatly. Jimmy Skunk was always asleep or off
somewhere. Besides, he was such a traveler that he knew all the news
almost as soon as Peter himself.

The Merry Little Breezes told Peter that Johnny Chuck was still on the
Green Meadows, hunting for a new home, so Peter made up his mind that
just as soon as Johnny got settled, Peter would hunt him up and call.
You see, he never dreamed that Johnny would leave the Green Meadows, and
he thought that of course the Merry Little Breezes would tell him just
where Johnny Chuck's new house was, whenever it was built. But there is
where Peter made a mistake.

The Merry Little Breezes are the friends of all the little meadow and
forest people, but they wouldn't be very long if they told everything
that they find out.

     Their merry tongues they guard full well
     And things they shouldn't never tell,
     For long ago they learned the way
     To keep a secret night and day.

And so when they found Johnny Chuck's new house in the corner of Farmer
Brown's old orchard, they promised Johnny that they wouldn't tell
anybody, and they didn't. So it was a long time before any one else
found out what had become of Johnny Chuck, for no one thought of looking
in the corner of the old orchard.

The Merry Little Breezes used to come every day and bring Johnny Chuck
the news, and he and Polly Chuck would laugh and tickle, as they thought
of Peter Rabbit hunting and hunting and never finding them.

Then one morning, as Johnny Chuck sat on his door-step, half dozing in
the sun with his heart filled with contentment, he happened to look up
straight into two sharp eyes peering down at him from among the leaves
of the apple-tree under which he had built his house. He knew those
eyes. They were such sharp eyes that they were unpleasant. He didn't
even have to look for the blue and white coat of the owner to know who
had found his snug home. But he pretended to keep right on dozing, and
pretty soon the owner of the eyes disappeared without making a sound.

"Oh, dear," sighed Johnny Chuck, "now the whole world will know where
we live, for that was Sammy Jay." Then his face brightened as he added:
"Anyway, he didn't see Polly Chuck, and he doesn't know anything about
her, so I'll keep twice as sharp a watch as before."




XVI. SAMMY JAY PLANS MISCHIEF


     Mischief may not mean to be really truly bad,
     But somehow it seems to make other people sad;
     Does a mean unpleasant thing and tries to think it fun;
     Then, alas, it runs away when trouble has begun.

Of all the little people who live in the Green Forest and on the Green
Meadows, none is more mischievous than Sammy Jay. It seems sometimes as
if there was more mischief under that pert little cap Sammy Jay wears
than in the heads of all the other little meadow and forest people put
together. When he isn't actually in mischief, Sammy Jay is planning
mischief. You see it has grown to be a habit with Sammy Jay, and habits,
especially bad habits, have a way of growing and growing.

Now Sammy Jay had no quarrel with Johnny Chuck. Oh, my, no! He would
have told you that he liked Johnny Chuck. Everybody likes Johnny Chuck.
But just as soon as Sammy Jay found Johnny Chuck's new house, he began
to plan mischief. He didn't really want any harm to come to Johnny
Chuck, but he wanted to make Johnny uncomfortable. That is Sammy Jay's
idea of fun--seeing somebody else uncomfortable. So he slipped away to
a thick hemlock-tree in the Green Forest to try to think of some plan to
tease Johnny Chuck and make him uncomfortable.

Of course he knew that Johnny had hidden his new house in the corner
of Farmer Brown's old orchard because he wanted it to be a secret. He
didn't know why Johnny wanted it a secret and he didn't care. If Johnny
wanted it a secret, it would be fun to tell everybody about it. As he
sat wondering who he should tell first; he saw Reddy Fox trotting down
the Lone Little Path.

"Hi, Reddy Fox!" he shouted.

Reddy looked up. "Hello, Sammy Jay! What have you got on your mind this
morning?" said Reddy.

"Nothing much," replied Sammy Jay. "What's the news?"

Reddy grinned. "There isn't any news," said he. "I was just going to ask
you the same thing."

It was Sammy Jay's turn to grin, "Just as if I could tell you any news,
Reddy Fox! Just as if I could tell you any news!" he exclaimed. "Why,
everybody knows that you are so smart that you find out everything as
soon as it happens."

Reddy Fox felt flattered. You know people who do a great deal of
flattering themselves are often the very easiest to flatter if you know
how. Reddy pretended to be very modest; but no one likes to be thought
smart and important more than Reddy Fox does, and it pleased him greatly
that Sammy Jay should think him so smart that no one could tell him any
news. Sammy knew this perfectly well, and he chuckled to himself as he
watched Reddy Fox pretending to be so modest.

"Have you called on Johnny Chuck at his new home yet?" asked Sammy Jay,
in the most matter-of-fact way.

"No," replied Reddy, "but I mean to, soon." He said this just as if he
knew all about Johnny Chuck's new home, when all the time he hadn't
the remotest idea in the world where it was. In fact he had hunted and
hunted for it, but hadn't found a trace of it. And all the time Sammy
Jay knew that Reddy didn't know where it was. But Sammy didn't let on
that he knew.

"I just happened to be up in Farmer Brown's old orchard this morning, so
I thought I'd pay Johnny Chuck a call," said Sammy, and chuckled as he
saw Reddy's ears prick up. "By the way, he thinks you don't know where
he lives now."

"Huh!" said Reddy Fox. "As if Johnny Chuck could fool me! Well, I must
be moving along. Good-by, Sammy Jay."

Reddy trotted off towards the Green Meadows, but the minute he was out
of sight of Sammy Jay, he turned towards Farmer Brown's old orchard,
just as Sammy Jay had known he would.

"I guess Johnny Chuck will have a visitor," chuckled Sammy Jay, as he
started to look for Jimmy Skunk.




XVII. MORE MISCHIEF


     Mischief's like a snowball
     Sent rolling down a hill;
     With every turn it bigger grows
     And bigger, bigger still.

Sammy Jay had started mischief by telling Reddy Fox where Johnny Chuck's
new house was. If you had asked him, Sammy Jay would have said that he
hadn't told. All he had said was that he had happened to be up in Farmer
Brown's old orchard and so had called on Johnny Chuck in his new house.

Now Reddy Fox is very sly, oh, very sly. He had pretended to Sammy Jay
that he knew all the time where Johnny Chuck was living. When he left
Sammy Jay, he had started in the direction of the Green Meadows, just as
if he had no thought of going over to Farmer Brown's old orchard.

But Sammy Jay is just as sly as Reddy Fox. He wasn't fooled for one
minute, not one little minute. He chuckled to himself as he started to
look for Jimmy Skunk. Then he changed his mind.

"I think I'll go up to the old orchard myself!" said Sammy Jay, and away
he flew.

He got there first and hid in the top of a big apple-tree, where he
could see all that went on. It wasn't long before he saw Reddy Fox
steal out from the Green Forest and over to the old orchard. Reddy
was nervous, very nervous. You see, it was broad daylight, and the old
orchard was very near Farmer Brown's house. Reddy knew that he ought
to have waited until night, but he knew that then Johnny Chuck would be
fast asleep, Now, perhaps, Johnny Chuck, thinking that no one knew where
he lived, would not be on watch, and he might be able to catch Johnny.

So Reddy, with one eye on Farmer Brown's house and one eye on the watch
for some sign of Johnny Chuck, stole into the old orchard. Every few
steps he would stop and look and listen. At every little noise he would
start nervously. Then Sammy Jay would chuckle under his breath.
