
Such was the state of things in Red River one beautiful morning in
April, when a band of voyageurs lounged in scattered groups about the
front gate of Fort Garry. They were as fine a set of picturesque, manly
fellows as one could desire to see. Their mode of life rendered them
healthy, hardy, arid good-humoured, with a strong dash of
recklessness--perhaps too much of it--in some of the younger men. Being
descended, generally, from French-Canadian sires and Indian mothers,
they united some of the good and not a few of the bad qualities of
both, mentally as well as physically--combining the light, gay-hearted
spirit and full, muscular frame of the Canadian with the fierce
passions and active habits of the Indian. And this wildness of
disposition was not a little fostered by the nature of their usual
occupations. They were employed during a great part of the year in
navigating the Hudson's Bay Company's boats, laden with furs and goods,
through the labyrinth of rivers and lakes that stud and intersect the
whole continent, or they were engaged in pursuit of the bisons,
[Footnote: These animals are always called buffaloes by American
hunters and fur-traders.] which roam the prairies in vast herds.

They were dressed in the costume of the country: most of them wore
light-blue cloth capotes, girded tightly round them', by scarlet or
crimson worsted belts. Some of them had blue and others scarlet cloth
leggings, ornamented more or less with stained porcupine quills,
coloured silk, or variegated beads; while some might be seen clad in
the leathern coats of winter--deer-skin dressed like chamois leather,
fringed all round with little tails, and ornamented much in the same
way as those already described. The heavy winter moccasins and duffel
socks, which gave to their feet the appearance of being afflicted with
gout, were now replaced by moccasins of a lighter and more elegant
character, having no socks below, and fitting tightly to the feet like
gloves. Some wore hats similar to those made of silk or beaver which
are worn by ourselves in Britain, but so bedizened with scarlet
cock-tail feathers, and silver cords and tassels, as to leave the
original form of the head-dress a matter of great uncertainty. These
hats, however, are only used on high occasions, and chiefly by the
fops. Most of the men wore coarse blue cloth caps with peaks, and not a
few discarded head-pieces altogether, under the impression, apparently,
that nature had supplied a covering which was in itself sufficient.
These costumes varied not only in character but in quality, according
to the circumstances of the wearer; some being highly ornamental and
mended--evincing the felicity of the owner in the possession of a good
wife--while others were soiled and torn, or but slightly ornamented.
The voyageurs were collected, as we have said, in groups. Here stood a
dozen of the youngest--consequently the most noisy and showily
dressed--laughing loudly, gesticulating violently, and bragging
tremendously. Near to them were collected a number of sterner
spirits--men of middle age, with all the energy, and muscle, and bone
of youth, but without its swaggering hilarity; men whose powers and
nerves had been tried over and over again amid the stirring scenes of a
voyageur's life; men whose heads were cool, and eyes sharp, and hands
ready and powerful, in the mad whirl of boiling rapids, in the sudden
attack of wild beast and hostile man, or in the unexpected approach of
any danger; men who, having been well tried, needed not to boast, and
who, having carried off triumphantly their respective brides many years
ago, needed not to decorate their persons with the absurd finery that
characterised their younger brethren. They were comparatively few in
number, but they composed a sterling band, of which every man was a
hero. Among them were those who occupied the high positions of bowman
and steersman, and when we tell the reader that on these two men
frequently hangs the safety of a boat, with all its crew and lading, it
will be easily understood how needful it is that they should be men of
iron nerve and strength of mind.

Boat-travelling in those regions is conducted in a way that would
astonish most people who dwell in the civilised quarters of the globe.
The country being intersected in all directions by great lakes and
rivers, these have been adopted as the most convenient highways along
which to convey the supplies and bring back the furs from outposts.
Rivers in America, however, as in other parts of the world, are
distinguished by sudden ebullitions and turbulent points of character,
in the shape of rapids, falls, and cataracts, up and down which neither
men nor boats can by any possibility go with impunity; consequently, on
arriving at such obstructions, the cargoes are carried overland to
navigable water above or below the falls (as the case may be), then the
boats are dragged over and launched, again reloaded, and the travellers
proceed. This operation is called "making a portage;" and as these
portages vary from twelve yards to twelve miles in length, it may be
readily conceived that a voyageur's life is not an easy one by any
means.

This, however, is only one of his difficulties. Rapids occur which are
not so dangerous as to make a "portage" necessary, but are sufficiently
turbulent to render the descent of them perilous. In such cases, the
boats, being lightened of part of their cargo, are _run_ down, and
frequently they descend with full cargoes and crews. It is then that
the whole management of each boat devolves upon its bowman and
steersman. The rest of the crew, or _middlemen_ as they are called,
merely sit still and look on, or give a stroke with their oars if
required; while the steersman, with powerful sweeps of his heavy oar,
directs the flying boat as it bounds from surge to surge like a thing
of life; and the bowman stands erect in front to assist in directing
his comrade at the stern, having a strong and long pole in his hands,
with which, ever and anon, he violently forces the boat's head away
from sunken rocks, against which it might otherwise strike and be stove
in, capsized, or seriously damaged.

Besides the groups already enumerated, there were one or two others,
composed of grave, elderly men, whose wrinkled brows, gray hairs, and
slow, quiet step, showed that the strength of their days was past;
although their upright figures and warm brown complexions gave promise
of their living to see many summers still. These were the principal
steersmen and old guides--men of renown, to whom the others bowed as
oracles or looked up to as fathers; men whose youth and manhood had
been spent in roaming the trackless wilderness, and who were,
therefore, eminently qualified to guide brigades through the length and
breadth of the land; men whose power of threading their way among the
perplexing intricacies of the forest had become a second nature, a kind
of instinct, that was as sure of attaining its end as the instinct of
the feathered tribes, which brings the swallow, after a long absence,
with unerring certainty back to its former haunts again in spring.




CHAPTER VII.

The store.


At whatever establishment in the fur-trader's dominions you may chance
to alight you will find a particular building which is surrounded by a
halo of interest; towards which there seems to be a general leaning on
the part of everybody, especially of the Indians; and with which are
connected, in the minds of all, the most stirring reminiscences and
pleasing associations.

This is the trading-store. It is always recognisable, if natives are in
the neighbourhood, by the bevy of red men that cluster round it,
awaiting the coming of the storekeeper or the trader with that stoic
patience which is peculiar to Indians. It may be further recognised, by
a close observer, by the soiled condition of its walls occasioned by
loungers rubbing their backs perpetually against it, and the peculiar
dinginess round the keyhole, caused by frequent applications of the
key, which renders it conspicuous beyond all its comrades. Here is
contained that which makes the red man's life enjoyable; that which
causes his heart to leap, and induces him to toil for months and months
together in the heat of summer and amid the frost and snow of winter;
that which _actually_ accomplishes, what music is _said_ to achieve,
the "soothing of the savage breast:" in short, here are stored up
blankets, guns, powder, shot, kettles, axes, and knives; twine for
nets, vermilion for war-paint, fishhooks and scalping-knives, capotes,
cloth, beads, needles, and a host of miscellaneous articles, much too
numerous to mention. Here, also occur periodical scenes of bustle and
excitement, when bands of natives arrive from distant hunting-grounds,
laden with rich furs, which are speedily transferred to the Hudson's
Bay Company's stores in exchange for the goods aforementioned. And many
a tough wrangle has the trader on such occasions with sharp natives,
who might have graduated in Billingsgate, so close are they at a
bargain. Here, too, voyageurs are supplied with an equivalent for their
wages, part in advance, if they desire it (and they generally do desire
it), and part at the conclusion of their long and arduous voyages.

It is to one of these stores, reader, that we wish to introduce you
now, that you may witness the men of the North brigade receive their
advances.

The store at Fort Garry stands on the right of the fort, as you enter
by the front gate. Its interior resembles that of the other stores in
the country, being only a little larger. A counter encloses a space
sufficiently wide to admit a dozen men, and serves to keep back those
who are more eager than the rest. Inside this counter, at the time we
write of, stood our friend, Peter Mactavish, who was the presiding
genius of the scene.

"Shut the door now, and lock it," said Peter, in an authoritative tone,
after eight or ten young voyageurs had crushed into the space in front
of the counter. "I'll not supply you with so much as an ounce of
tobacco if you let in another man."

Peter needed not to repeat the command. Three or four stalwart
shoulders were applied to the door, which shut with a bang like a
cannon-shot, and the key was turned.

"Come now, Antoine," began the trader, "we've lots to do, and not much
time to do it in, so pray look sharp."

Antoine, however, was not to be urged on so easily. He had been
meditating deeply all the morning on what he should purchase. Moreover,
he had a sweetheart, and of course he had to buy something for her
before setting out on his travels. Besides, Antoine was six feet high,
and broad shouldered, and well made, with a dark face and glossy black
hair; and he entertained a notion that there were one or two points in
his costume which required to be carefully rectified, ere he could
consider that he had attained to perfection: so he brushed the long
hair off his forehead, crossed his arms, and gazed around him.

"Come now, Antoine," said Peter, throwing a green blanket at him; "I
know you want _that_ to begin with. What's the use of thinking so long
about it, eh? And _that_, too," he added, throwing him a blue cloth
capote. "Anything else?"

"Oui, oui, monsieur," cried Antoine, as he disengaged himself from the
folds of the coat which Peter had thrown over his head. "Tabac,
monsieur, tabac!"

"Oh, to be sure," cried Peter. "I might have guessed that _that_ was
uppermost in your mind. Well, how much will you have?" Peter began to
unwind the fragrant weed off a coil of most appalling size and
thickness, which looked like a snake of endless length. "Will that do?"
and he flourished about four feet of the snake before the eyes of the
voyageur.

Antoine accepted the quantity, and young Harry Somerville entered the
articles against him in a book.

"Anything more, Antoine?" said the trader. "Ah, some beads and silks,
eh? Oho, Antoine!--By the way, Louis, have you seen Annette lately?"

Peter turned to another voyageur when he put this question, and the
voyageur gave a broad grin as he replied in the affirmative, while
Antoine looked a little confused. He did not care much, however, for
jesting. So, after getting one or two more articles--not forgetting
half-a-dozen clay pipes, and a few yards of gaudy calico, which called
forth from Peter a second reference to Annette--he bundled up his
goods, and made way for another comrade.

Louis Peltier, one of the principal guides, and a man of importance
therefore, now stood forward. He was probably about forty-five years of
age; had a plain, olive-coloured countenance, surrounded by a mass of
long jet-black hair, which he inherited, along with a pair of dark,
piercing eyes, from his Indian mother; and a robust, heavy, yet active
frame, which bore a strong resemblance to what his Canadian father's
had been many years before. His arms, in particular, were of herculean
mould, with large swelling veins and strongly-marked muscles. They
seemed, in fact, just formed for the purpose of pulling the heavy sweep
of an inland boat among strong rapids. His face combined an expression
of stern resolution with great good-humour; and truly his countenance
did not belie him, for he was known among his comrades as the most
courageous and at the same time the most peaceable man in the
settlement. Louis Peltier was singular in possessing the latter
quality, for assuredly the half-breeds, whatever other good points they
boast, cannot lay claim to very gentle or dove-like dispositions. His
grey capote and blue leggings were decorated with no unusual ornaments,
and the scarlet belt which encircled his massive figure was the only
bit of colour he displayed.

The younger men fell respectfully into the rear as Louis stepped
forward and begged pardon for coming so early in the day. "Mais,
monsieur," he said, "I have to look after the boats to-day, and get
them ready for a start to-morrow."

Peter Mactavish gave Louis a hearty shake of the hand before proceeding
to supply his wants, which were simple and moderate, excepting in the
article of _tabac_, in the use of which he was _im_-moderate, being an
inveterate smoker; so that a considerable portion of the snake had to
be uncoiled for his benefit.

"Fond as ever of smoking, Louis?" said Peter Mactavish, as he handed
him the coil.

"Oui, monsieur--very fond," answered the guide, smelling the weed. "Ah,
this is very good. I must take a good supply this voyage, because I
lost the half of my roll last year;" and the guide gave a sigh as he
thought of the overwhelming bereavement.

"Lost the half of it, Louis!" said Mactavish. "Why, how was that? You
must have lost _more_ than half your spirits with it!"

"Ah, oui, I lost _all_ my spirits, and my comrade Francois at the same
time!"

"Dear me!" exclaimed the clerk, bustling about the store while the
guide continued to talk.

"Oui, monsieur, oui. I lost _him_, and my tabac, and my spirits, and
very nearly my life, all in one moment!"

"Why, how came that about?" said Peter, pausing in his work, and laying
a handful of pipes on the counter.

"Ah, monsieur, it was very sad (merci, monsieur, merci; thirty pipes,
if you please), and I thought at the time that I should give up my
voyageur life, and remain altogether in the settlement with my old
woman. Mais, monsieur, that was not possible. When I spoke of it to my
old woman, she called _me_ an old woman; and you know, monsieur, that
_two_ old women never could live together in peace for twelve months
under the same roof. So here I am, you see, ready again for the voyage."

The voyageurs, who had drawn round Louis when he alluded to an anecdote
which they had often heard before, but were never weary of hearing over
again, laughed loudly at this sally, and urged the guide to relate the
story to "_monsieur_" who, nothing loath to suspend his operations for
a little, leaned his arms on the counter and said--

"Tell us all about it, Louis; I am anxious to know how you managed to
come by so many losses all at one time."

"Bien, monsieur, I shall soon relate it, for the story is very short."

Harry Somerville, who was entering the pipes in Louis's account, had
just set down the figures "30" when Louis cleared his throat to begin.
Not having the mental fortitude to finish the line, he dropped his pen,
sprang off his stool, which he upset in so doing, jumped up,
sitting-ways, upon the counter, and gazed with breathless interest into
the guide's face as he spoke.

"It was on a cold, wet afternoon," said Louis, "that we were descending
the Hill River, at a part of the rapids where there is a sharp bend in
the stream, and two or three great rocks that stand up in front of the
water, as it plunges over a ledge, as if they were put there a purpose
to catch it, and split it up into foam, or to stop the boats and canoes
that try to run the rapids, and cut them up into splinters. It was an
ugly place, monsieur, I can tell you; and though I've run it again and
again, I always hold my breath tighter when we get to the top, and
breathe freer when we get to the bottom. Well, there was a chum of mine
at the bow, Francois by name, and a fine fellow he was as I ever came
across. He used to sleep with me at night under the same blanket,
although it was somewhat inconvenient; for being as big as myself and a
stone heavier, it was all we could do to make the blanket cover us.
However, he and I were great friends, and we managed it somehow. Well,
he was at the bow when we took the rapids, and a first-rate bowman he
made. His pole was twice as long and twice as thick as any other pole
in the boat, and he twisted it about just like a fiddlestick. I
remember well the night before we came to the rapids, as he was sitting
by the fire, which was blazing up among the pine-branches that overhung
us, he said that he wanted a good pole for the rapids next day; and
with that he jumped up, laid hold of an axe, and went back into the
woods a bit to get one. When he returned, he brought a young tree on
his shoulder, which he began to strip of its branches, and bark.
'Louis, says he, 'this is hot work; give us a pipe.' So I rummaged
about for some tobacco, but found there was none left in my bag; so I
went to my kit and got out my roll, about three fathoms or so, and
cutting half of it off, I went to the fire and twisted it round his
neck by way of a joke, and he said he'd wear it as a necklace all
night, and so he did, too, and forgot to take it off in the morning;
and when we came near the rapids I couldn't get at my bag to stow it
away, so says I, 'Francois, you'll have to run with it on, for I can't
stop to stow it now.' 'All right,' says he, 'go ahead;' and just as he
said it, we came in sight of the first run, foaming and boiling like a
kettle of robbiboo. 'Take care, lads,' I cried, and the next moment we
were dashing down towards the bend in the river. As we came near to the
shoot, I saw Francois standing up on the gunwale to get a better view
of the rocks ahead, and every now and then giving me a signal with his
hand how to steer; suddenly he gave a shout, and plunged his long pole
into the water, to fend off from a rock which a swirl in the stream had
concealed. For a second or two his pole bent like a willow, and we
could feel the heavy boat jerk off a little with the tremendous strain,
but all at once the pole broke off short with a crack, Francois' heels
made a flourish in the air, and then he disappeared head foremost into
the foaming water, with my tobacco coiled round his neck! As we flew
past the place, one of his arms appeared, and I made a grab at it, and
caught him by the sleeve; but the effort upset myself and over I went
too. Fortunately, however, one of my men caught me by the foot, and
held on like a vice; but the force of the current tore Francois' sleeve
out of my grasp, and I was dragged into the boat again just in time to
see my comrade's legs and arms going like the sails of a windmill, as
he rolled over several times and disappeared. Well, we put ashore the
moment we got into still water, and then five or six of us started off
on foot to look for Francois. After half-an-hour's search, we found him
pitched upon a flat rock in the middle of the stream like a bit of
driftwood, We immediately waded out to the rock and brought him ashore,
where we lighted a fire, took off all his clothes, and rubbed him till
he began to show signs of life again. But you may judge, mes garcons,
of my misery when I found that the coil of tobacco was gone. It had
come off his neck during his struggles, and there wasn't a vestige of
it left, except a bright red mark on the throat, where it had nearly
strangled him. When he began to recover, he put his hand up to his neck
as if feeling for something, and muttered faintly, 'The tabac.' 'Ah,
morbleu!' said I, 'you may say that! Where is it?' Well, we soon
brought him round, but he had swallowed so much water that it damaged
his lungs, and we had to leave him at the next post we came to; and so
I lost my friend too."

"Did Francois get better?" said Charley Kennedy, in a voice of great
concern.

Charley had entered the store by another door, just as the guide began
his story, and had listened to it unobserved with breathless interest.

"Recover! Oh oui, monsieur, he soon got well again.'

"Oh, I'm so glad," cried Charley.

"But I lost him for that voyage," added the guide; "and I lost my tabac
for ever."

"You must take better care of it this time, Louis," said Peter
Mactavish, as he resumed his work.

"That I shall, monsieur," replied Louis, shouldering his goods and
quitting the store, while a short, slim, active little Canadian took
his place.

"Now, then, Baptiste," said Mactavish, "you want a--"

"Blanket, monsieur,"

"Good. And--"

"A capote, monsieur."

"And--"

"An axe--"

"Stop, stop!" shouted Harry Somerville from his desk. "Here's an entry
in Louis's account that I can't make out--30 something or other; what
can it have been?"

"How often," said Mactavish, going up to him with a look of
annoyance--"how often have I told you, Mr. Somerville, not to leave an
entry half-finished on any account!"

"I didn't know that I left it so," said Harry, twisting his features,
and scratching his head in great perplexity. "What _can_ it have been?
30--30--not blankets, eh?" (Harry was becoming banteringly bitter.) "He
couldn't have got thirty guns, could he? or thirty knives, or thirty
copper kettles?"

"Perhaps it was thirty pounds of tea," suggested Charley.

"No doubt it was thirty _pipes_," said Peter Mactavish.

"Oh, that was it!" cried Harry, "that was it! thirty pipes, to be sure.
What an ass I am!"

"And pray what is _that_?" said Mactavish, pointing sarcastically to an
entry in the previous account--"_5 yards of superfine Annette_. Really,
Mr. Somerville, I wish you would pay more attention to your work and
less to the conversation."

"Oh dear!" cried Harry, becoming almost hysterical under the combined
effects of chagrin at making so many mistakes, and suppressed merriment
at the idea of selling Annettes by the yard. "Oh, dear me--"

Harry could say no more, but stuffed his handkerchief into his mouth
and turned away.

"Well, sir," said the offended Peter, "when you have laughed to your
entire satisfaction, we will go on with our work, if you please."

"All right," cried Harry, suppressing his feelings with a strong
effort; "what next?"

Just then a tall, raw-boned man entered the store, and rudely thrusting
Baptiste aside, asked if he could get his supplies now.

