to retire to their bedrooms for the hottest hours of the day, she sat
down at her little table in the corner. Here she wrote down a page
with lightning speed, then taking up her book she read her lesson over
and over again till she knew it by heart. Soon she was finished, and
flinging the books into the drawer, she ran out of the house.

"Oh, Martha, I wish you knew how terrible it is at home now since Papa
has gone," called Cornelli to her old friend, before she had even
reached the top of the stairs. "I just wish Papa was back already and
everything was again as before."

"What is it, Cornelli, what makes you so cross? Come, sit down here
a while and tell me about it," said Martha kindly. She put a chair
beside her own at the table where her mending lay neatly sorted out.

"Of course, you can't understand it, Martha," Cornelli continued, just
as excited as before. "Here with you everything is always the same and
nobody comes and orders everything to be changed. Now, I am not allowed
to come in any more without getting washed; now, I cannot come out of
the stable without changing my clothes. Then I must not wash my hands
at the hydrant because I get splashed, and, oh, so many new things
have to be done; so different from before."

"I am sure, Cornelli, that it is not at all bad that things should not
always be the way they were before," said Martha reflectively. "I
believe that the lady who is related to you wants the same thing from
you that your mother would have wished had she lived. This is very
good for you. Of course, Miss Mina and Esther mean well, but your
relation knows much better what is to be done to make you grow up the
way your mother would have desired. Just think how happy your father
would be if you should resemble your mother and he be reminded of her
every time he looked at you. You well know what great joy that would
be to him."

Cornelli did know that her father would be very happy then, for he had
made many remarks which she had understood. A short time ago he had
said that his cousin found no likeness between his child and her mother,
and Cornelli had observed the sad expression of his eyes when he had
said it.

Cornelli shook her head. "You said once that my mother was different
from anybody," she said. "So I can't ever be like her; you said so
yourself, Martha."

"Yes, yes, I have said that," confirmed Martha. "But I have to explain
something to you, Cornelli. If you can't become exactly like your
mother, you certainly can become more like her than anybody else, for
you are her child, and a child always has something from her mother.
I have seen you look at me just the way she did, with the same brown
eyes; but not when you frown the way you do to-day. You must try to
watch the two ladies very carefully in all they do and in the way they
speak. They are your mother's kind, and that is why I am so glad that
you can watch their manners and can try to imitate them. You can learn
to resemble your mother in your ways, if you copy the ladies."

"Yes, I shall do that," agreed Cornelli. "Just the same, I am not
terribly pleased that they are here and that everything has to be
changed. Oh dear, I have just remembered that I have to be back now
and drink some hot coffee and milk, because Miss Dorner says that the
afternoons are so frightfully long in the country they have to be
interrupted. At that time I always used to get from the garden some
apples or cherries or whatever else there was, and they always tasted
so awfully good. If I only could lengthen my afternoon, which seems
too long to them! I never can do all I plan to do. Good-bye, Martha."

And with these words Cornelli ran away.




CHAPTER IV

THE UNWISHED-FOR HAPPENS



Esther, the able mistress of the kitchen, was standing in the garden
picking green peas, which hung in clusters from the vines. They had
ripened quickly in the sunny June weather.

"Come down here, Cornelli!" she called. "Just see how many peas there
are! Why do you steal about so quietly nowadays, and why don't you run
the way you used to?"

"I am not allowed to do anything any more," replied Cornelli,
approaching her. "Mina is beginning to tell me that I even must not
jump, for it might tangle my hair. I wish I had not a single hair left;
then I could at least run and jump about."

"No, no, child; that would look too dreadful. Just imagine it! But
don't get sad on account of that," Esther consoled her. "Just jump
around as before! Your hair can always be put in order again. Why
haven't you come into the kitchen lately to see if things taste right?"

"I am not allowed to; Miss Dorner says that is bad manners," Cornelli
informed her.

"Oh, I see! Well, you might do worse things. However, you must obey!
Yes, you have to obey," Esther repeated. "Don't you go to Miss Mina
any more, either, when she fixes the dessert?"

Cornelli shook her head.

Miss Mina had quickly understood the new order that had begun in the
household and accordingly had suited herself to it. When she thought
the ladies would not approve of an old custom, she dropped it quickly,
and Cornelli had soon noticed her change of attitude.

"I don't care if I never can go to the pantry any more, I don't care,"
Cornelli exploded now. "She can eat all the things herself which drop
beside the plate. I don't care. I don't want anything as long as I can
go to the little kid in the stable; it really is the most cunning
creature in the whole world. Have you seen it yet, Esther?"

"Certainly I have, and why not?" the cook replied. "Matthew took me
out to the stable as soon as it was born. You can certainly go to see
it as long as it is in our own stable. Just go there as much as you
like! Nobody can forbid you that."

"My teacher is coming," Cornelli now exclaimed, "and I have to go."

"Yes, child, but do keep up your spirits. There are lots of pleasant
things still left for you to enjoy. Just wait till you taste the
strawberry tarts I am going to make to-day."

With these words Esther smacked her lips to express the great succulence
of the promised dish.

"I wouldn't even care if you baked nettle tarts; I wish I didn't have
to eat at table and could just eat berries in the garden and drink
milk in the stable."

Cornelli ran towards the house, for she had forgotten to walk sedately,
as she had been told to do.

While Cornelli had her lessons upstairs in the living room, in the
jessamine arbor both ladies were sitting on a garden bench.

"It would be so pleasant and agreeable here," said Miss Dorner, "and
my cousin could have such a very charming life, if the child were only
a little different. Don't you think, Betty, that she has no manners
whatever?"

"Yes, but she has had no training at all." remarked Miss Grideelen;
"and she may have inherited some qualities from her mother."

"Oh no, not a single trait! You cannot possibly imagine a greater
difference than between the mother and this child," Miss Dorner
exclaimed. "Cornelia was full of amiability and gayety. She always
greeted and cheered everyone with her laughing brown eyes. If my cousin
could only have the happiness to see his child resemble her mother the
slightest bit! He was so fond of his wife! He deserves this joy, for
he is a splendid man."

"It is curious how very different children can be from their parents,"
said Miss Grideelen with regret in her voice. "But I am sure that
something can still be accomplished by educating the child. Many
qualities can be developed that hardly show themselves yet. We ought
to do our best for her, especially for her father's sake."

"That is just what I am doing, Betty. Unfortunately, I have had very
little success as yet," answered Miss Dorner. "But I just hope that
the day will come when I can write her father some pleasant news about
Cornelli, something different from what I feel obliged to send him
now."

The day had been exceedingly hot, and the ladies retired to their rooms
immediately after dinner, while Cornelli, according to her custom,
obediently did her lessons. Then she disappeared. In the late evening,
when the ladies sat down to supper, it was so warm that Miss Mina was
ordered to open all the windows.

Now Cornelli entered.

"For mercy's sake, what are you thinking of!" the cousin accosted the
child. "We are nearly perishing with the heat and you put on a fur
dress, which you could wear without a coat in a sleigh ride in the
middle of winter. Why do you do such foolish things?"

Cornelli was really attired very strangely. Her little dress was made
of such heavy, fur-like material that one could see it was meant for
the coldest winter weather, and for someone who disliked much outer
clothing. The child's cheeks were glowing red, and from the insufferable
heat whole streams of perspiration trickled down her face.

"I have no more dresses left," she said stubbornly.

"Can you understand it?" asked the cousin, looking at her friend.

"I really think that this is the fifth dress in which I have seen
Cornelli to-day," answered the friend. "In the early morning I saw her
running across the yard in a dark dress. At breakfast she wore a light
frock and for lunch a red one. I believe that she wore a blue dress
when we had our coffee this afternoon, so this must be the fifth
costume. I was beginning at lunch time to wonder about the frequent
changes."

"I have to change my dress every time I go to the stable," Cornelli
said, a little more stubbornly than before.

"How can anybody be so foolish!" exclaimed the cousin now. "I can
understand now why you have no fun and why you always wear an unhappy
face. You must be nearly perished with the heat! Finish your supper
quickly and then go to your room and take off this heavy dress. You
surely have another dress. I must forbid you to go to the stable from
now on! You can see for yourself what comes of it! If only you would
not frown like this, Cornelli. You look exactly as if you had two
little horns growing on your forehead, one on each side. There are
many other and better amusements for you than spending your life in
the stable. Are you able to embroider?"

"No," Cornelli answered curtly.

"Children of your age ought to be able to, though," said the cousin.
"But we have not come here to teach you that; have we, Betty? You
probably do not even know how to hold the needle in your hand."

"Why should it be necessary for Cornelli to learn embroidery just now?"
replied the friend. "She has lovely books that she can read; she has
shown us some herself. Don't you prefer reading a pretty story to
running about in the stable, child?"

"No, I don't," replied Cornelli crossly.

"We must not pay attention to what she says," remarked Miss Dorner.
"When Cornelli is bored, she will probably turn to her books herself.
Please, Miss Mina, keep an eye on Cornelli. Nonsense like this must
not happen any more."

When supper was finished, Cornelli went up to her room, and Miss Mina
followed her.

"You certainly don't need to do such silly things," she said scoldingly,
as soon as they were on the stairs, where her words could not be
overheard. "I have enough to do nowadays without watching whether you
put on a new dress every few hours."

"It isn't my fault," Cornelli replied morosely. "They ordered me to do
it."

"They won't always smell it when you have been to the stable," scolded
Miss Mina.

"Yes, but they do smell it," Cornelli retorted, "and even if they
didn't, I should have to obey. They told me to change every time I go
to the stable."

"Yes, but now you are told not to go there any more, remember that!--so
your frequent changing will have to stop," grumbled Miss Mina, while
she was helping Cornelli to take off her hot dress.

"Now I have to clean it, besides! You actually give more work than six
well brought up children." Miss Mina had never before spoken so roughly
to Cornelli, for she had always been anxious to keep in the child's
good graces. But she had suddenly ceased to care about that.

Cornelli looked at her with astonishment. The child's eyes were also
full of something that nobody had ever seen there before. Mina seemed
to understand: "I did not do you any harm," she said quickly; "what
I have said is only the truth." With that she left the room.

"If everybody treats me that way I'll be that way, too," cried Cornelli
with a furious look. Suddenly taking hold of the dress she had just
taken off she threw it out of the window. After a while Mina returned,
bringing back the dress. Cornelli was sitting on the window-sill crossly
looking down at the yard.

"Look out that the wind doesn't blow you down, too, like your dress,"
Miss Mina said unpleasantly.

"I don't care," Cornelli replied obstinately. "It did not blow down
at all, for I threw it down on purpose."

"Oh, is this the way you behave? Next time you can get it yourself,"
said Miss Mina, running away indignantly.

Next morning Cornelli was walking across the courtyard, happily talking
to her teacher, whose hand she was holding. During her school hours
she had forgotten all the troubles of the day before, for Mr. Malinger
had been as kind to her as ever. He at least had not changed.

"Could you give me a little rose?" he asked smilingly, while they were
passing the blooming rose bushes. So Cornelli quickly ran from bush
to bush till she had gathered a fine bunch of dark and light, white
and red roses. These she offered to her teacher, warning him not to
prick himself. Then the two parted most cordially.

Cornelli, on coming back, ran swiftly toward the stable. Suddenly,
however, she stood stock still, for she remembered that she was not
allowed to go there any more. No longer could she see the darling
little kid and watch its growth. She would be unable to tell when the
moment had come for it to be hitched to a carriage to be driven about
by her. She might not be allowed even to do that! She hoped, however,
that her father might be back by that time and that then everything
would be different. Cornelli danced with joy at that thought, and her
old gaiety seemed to return. She felt like going to Esther and talking
it all over with her good old friend. The moment the child went into
the house, Miss Dorner stepped out of the living room.

"You have just come in time," she said, "for I have to show you
something. Where are you going?"
