castle than to buy him suits of new raiment for himself and his wife.
The men at Court all dress in such tightly fitting garments, that, for
my part, I wonder how they get into them."

"And the women, husband?"

"Oh, as to that I say nothing; you must use your own eyes in that
matter. However, just at present men's thoughts are too much occupied
by these troubles in Essex and Kent to think much of feasting and
entertainments, and it will be well to wait to see what comes of it
before deciding on making new purchases."

"Is there any chance of trouble in the city, father?" Albert asked.

"I know not, lad. The better class of citizens are assuredly opposed to
those who make these troubles, although they have often shown that they
can make troubles themselves when they think that their privileges are
assailed; still, as they know that their booths are likely to be
ransacked, were bands of rioters to obtain possession of the town, they
will doubtless give us any aid in their power. But the matter does not
depend upon them; there are ever in great towns a majority composed of
the craftsmen, the butchers, and others, together with all the lower
rabble, who are ready to join in tumults and seditions; and like
enough, if the rioters come here, they will take part with them, while
the burgesses will be only too glad to put up their shutters and do or
say naught that would give the mob an excuse for breaking into their
magazines.

"Would that Lancaster were here with a thousand or so of men-at-arms,"
he went on, gloomily; "there is no one at the Court who can take
command. The king this morning asked me if I would undertake the
defence of the palace; but I said to him: 'I am but a simple knight,
your Majesty, and neither the young lords of the Court nor the citizens
would pay any heed to my orders; moreover, I am not one of those whose
head is good to plan matters. I would die in your Majesty's service,
and would warrant that many of your enemies would go down before I did.
I could set a host in battle array, were there a host here; but as to
what course to follow, or how it were best to behave at such a pinch,
are matters beyond me. As to these, it were best that your Majesty took
counsel with those whom the Duke of Lancaster has appointed, and to
whom such business appertains.

"'If you will give me orders I will carry them out, even if I am bade
to defend London Bridge with but half a dozen men-at-arms, and at such
work I might do as well as another; but as to counsel I have none to
give, save that were I in your place I would issue a proclamation to
these knaves saying that you would hold no parley with men having arms
in their hands, but that if they would peacefully disperse you would
order that a commission be appointed to examine into their complaints,
and that any ills that proved to be justified should be righted, but
that if forced you will give nothing, and that if they advance against
London their blood must be on their own heads.

"'Should they still come on I would shut myself up in the Tower, which
has a good garrison, and where you may well hold out against all the
rascaldom of the country until your barons can raise their levies and
come to your assistance. Still, it may well be, your Majesty, that
these fellows will think better of it, and may, after all, disperse
again to their homes. I pray you, take no heed of my words, but refer
the matter to those accustomed to deal with affairs of state. The noble
prince, your father, knew that he could lay his orders on me, and that
I would carry them out to the utmost of my strength. If he said to me,
"Lead a party, Sir Ralph, to attack that bridge," I gave no thought as
to whether the defences were too strong to be carried or not; or if he
entrusted the command of a post to me, and said, "Defend it against all
odds until I come to your assistance," he knew that it would be done,
but more than that I never pretended to; and I deem not that, as I have
grown older, I know more of such matters than I did when I was in the
prime of my strength.'"

"And what said his Majesty, Sir Ralph?"

"He laughed and said that I was the first he had known who was not
ready to give him advice, and that he would that all were as chary of
so doing as I was. When I told him this morning that I had sent for you
and my son and daughter, as I misliked leaving you in the centre of
these troubles, he offered apartments in the Tower, but I said that,
with his permission, I would remain lodged here, for that, seeing his
lady mother was away, I thought that you would prefer this lodging, as
there is here a fair garden where you and Aline can walk undisturbed,
to the Tower, which is full of armed men, young gallants, and others."

"It will indeed be more pleasant, Sir Ralph, for in the Tower Aline
could never venture from my side, and there would be neither peace nor
quietness."

The city had already stretched beyond the walls, and on the rising
ground between it and the Tower, and on the rise behind the latter,
extending to some distance east, many houses had been built. Some of
these were the property of nobles and officials of the Court, while
others had been built by citizens who let them to persons of degree,
who only came occasionally to Court on business or pleasure. The house
in which Sir Ralph had taken up his lodging was the property of a
trader who, when the house was not let to one needing it all, resided
there himself as a protection to the property it contained against
robbers or ill-doers, often letting one or more rooms to those who
needed not the whole house. Thus Sir Ralph was enabled to obtain good
accommodation for his family.

"The first thing to be done," he went on, "is to take the lads to a
tailor's to obtain clothes more suitable than those they wear."

"I was going to ask you if you would be good enough to do so, Sir
Ralph," Edgar said. "My father has furnished me with money for the
purpose."

"That is well," the knight said, "though indeed it would have mattered
not if he had not done so, for I had intended that you and Albert
should have garments of similar fashion at my cost, seeing how much I
owe to you."

"Indeed, Sir Ralph, such obligation as there is, is far more than
discharged by your kindness in speaking of me to the king and offering
to present me to him; indeed, I am ashamed that what was a pleasure to
me, and was done from the love I bear your son, should be regarded as
worthy of thanks, much less as an obligation."

"Cannot we come with you also?" Lady De Courcy said. "From what you say
we must need garments to the full as much as the boys; besides, this is
Aline's first visit to town. We saw but little as we rode through, and
we would fain look at the shops and see the finery before I make my
choice."

"So be it, wife; indeed, I had not intended that you should stay
behind."

It was but a quarter of a mile's walk to Aldersgate, and as they
reached East Chepe, the young people found infinite amusement in gazing
at the goods in the traders' booths, and in watching the throng in the
street. It was late in the afternoon now, and many of the citizens'
wives and daughters were abroad. These were dressed for the most part
in costly materials of sober hues, and Dame Matilda noted that a great
change had taken place since she had last been in London, not only in
the fashion, but in the costliness of the material; for with the death
of the old king and the accession of a young one fond of gaiety and
rich dresses, the spirit of extravagance had spread rapidly among all
classes. With these were citizens, of whom the elder ones clung to the
older fashions, while even the young men still displayed a sobriety in
their costumes that contrasted strongly with the brilliancy of several
groups of young courtiers. These sauntered along the streets, passing
remarks upon all who passed, and casting looks of admiration at some of
the pretty daughters of the citizens.

Among all these moved craftsmen and apprentices, the former taking to
their employers work they had finished at home, the latter carrying
messages, hurrying nimbly through the crowd, or exchanging saucy
remarks with each other, for which they were sometimes sharply rebuked
by their elders. From East Chepe the party passed on through Chepe to
St. Paul's, and then having chosen the shop at which they could make
their purchases the ladies entered a trader's booth, while Sir Ralph
went in with the two lads to another hard by.

"What can I serve you with, sir knight?"

"I require two suits for my son and this gentleman, his friend," Sir
Ralph said. "I desire clothes befitting a presentation to the king, and
wish them to be of the fashion, but not extravagantly so."

At the trader's orders his apprentices showed numerous samples, most of
them light and bright in colour.

"I want something more sober in hue," the knight said. "These are well
enough for men with long purses, and who can afford ample provision of
garments, but they would show every spot and stain, and would soon be
past wearing; besides, although doubtless such as are mostly used at
Court, they would be useful for that only, for in the country they
would be far too conspicuous for wear."

Other goods were brought down, and Edgar's eye at once fixed upon a
rich maroon. Sir Ralph took longer before he made his choice for
Albert, but finally fixed upon a somewhat light blue, which well suited
the lad's fair complexion and light golden hair. While they were
choosing, the mercer had sent into his neighbour, a tailor, who now
measured them. The goods were of satin, and both suits were to be made
in precisely similar fashion, namely, a close-fitting tunic reaching
down only to the hips. They had loose hanging sleeves, lined with white
silk, which was turned over and scolloped; the hose, which were of the
same colour as the doublets, were tight fitting.

The caps were to match the dresses in colour. They were turned up at
the brim, resembling in shape those still worn in Spain. As the matter
was pressing, the tailor promised that both suits should be ready by
the following evening.

It took the ladies longer to make their purchases, and it was some time
before they issued out from the mantua makers, when the dame informed
her husband that she had chosen white satin for Aline's bodice, which
was to be tight fitting, in the fashion, and trimmed round the bottom
and neck with white fur, while the skirt was of lilac and of the same
material. For herself, she had chosen a purple robe reaching below the
knees, with white skirt, both being of satin. The caps, which were
closely fitting to the head, were of the same material, and of light
yellow for herself and lilac for Aline.

"We shall have to economize, my lady," Sir Ralph laughed. "'Tis well
that I am too old for foppery."

"That is all very well, Sir Ralph, but you must remember that you had a
new suit the last time you were in London, and have not worn it from
then till now, and I will warrant me that it cost well-nigh as much as
Aline's garments or mine."

While waiting for the ladies, two sword-belts had been bought for the
lads, Edgar's being embroidered with gold thread, Albert's with silver.

"Now, boys, I think that you will do," Sir Ralph said. "You may not be
able to compete with some of those young peacocks of the Court, but you
will make a sufficiently brave show, and need not feel envious of the
best of them."

When the shopping was completed they returned to their lodgings. Here
they partook of a meal, after which Sir Ralph went to the Tower, while
his wife and daughter, fatigued by their day's journey, speedily betook
themselves to their beds. The lads sat talking for some time over the
events of the day.

"I fear, Edgar," Albert said, presently, "that from my father choosing
for me so light a coloured suit, instead of a graver hue like that
which you selected, he has hopes that I shall not go into the Church
after all."

"Well, why should you, Albert? You are gaining in strength, and I doubt
not that you will yet grow into a strong man. Of course as long as you
were weak and delicate, and, as it seemed, would never be able to bear
the weight of armour, it was but natural that he should regard a life
in the Church as one that was best fitted for you, and that you
yourself would be perfectly willing to follow that profession, but now
it is wholly different; besides, even if at present you may not wish,
as I do, to be a soldier, you may well become a wise councillor, and
hold high position at Court. There are few young nobles, indeed, who
have so much education as you, and surely such a life would be better
than burying yourself in a cloister."

Albert was silent for some time. "Do you really think, Edgar," he said,
at last, "that I shall be ever able to bear arms with credit? To become
a councillor, one must needs be a courtier, and I am sure that a life
at Court would suit me no better than it would suit you, therefore that
thought I must put aside. My tastes are all for a quiet life in the
country, and you know I could be very happy living at home as I have
done from my childhood. But if I am to be in the world I must bear my
part, and if needs be follow the king to battle, and unless I could do
my duty manfully I would rather follow out the life I thought must be
mine, and enter the Church. I should like, most of all, to be able to
be always with you, Edgar, and to fight by your side. We have long been
like brothers. I know that you will win rank and fame, and though I
have no ambition for myself I should glory in your success, and be well
content with your friendship as my share in it."

"That, you may be sure, you will always have, Albert, and as to your
plan, I see not why you should not carry it out. In war time you and I
could ride together, and in peace you could live at the castle, which
is so close to St. Alwyth that we can ride over and visit each other
daily when I am there, which mayhap would not be very often, for when
England and France are at peace, and there is no trouble between us and
Scotland, I may join some noble leader of free-lances in the service of
an Italian or German prince. Such, when there is peace at home, is the
best avenue for fame and distinction."

"I cannot say yet what I may feel as I gain strength and skill in arms,
but it may be that even there I may be your companion should strength
and health permit it."

"That indeed would be good--so good that I can scarce yet believe that
it can be so, although there is no reason to the contrary. It has for
years been a grief to me to know that our paths lay so far apart, and
that the time must soon be coming when we should be separated, and for
ever. It was with some faint hope that exercise might bring more colour
to your cheeks, and that with strength and skill in arms might come
thoughts of another life than that of the cloister, that I first urged
you to let me teach you the use of arms. That hope has grown gradually
since I found how much you benefited by the exercise, and acquired a
strength of arm that I had hardly hoped for.

"Moreover, Albert, you cannot but be proud of the name your father and
those before him have won by their gallant deeds, but if you went into
the Church it would no longer appear in the roll of the knights of
England. It would be ill indeed that a line of knights, who have so
well played their part on every battle-field since your ancestor came
over with the Conqueror, should become extinct."

"I had never thought of that before, Edgar," Albert said, after a long
pause. "You see, for years I have looked forward to entering the Church
as a matter settled for me by nature. I had no enthusiasm for it, but
it seemed there was no other place for me. Of late, since I have gained
health and strength, I have seen that possibly it might be otherwise.
At first I struggled against the idea and deemed it the suggestion of
the Evil One, but it has grown in spite of me, although I never allowed
myself fully to entertain it, until I saw the joy with which my father
perceived that I was not altogether the weakling that he had deemed me.

"Since then I have thought of it incessantly, but until now have been
unable to come to any decision. On the one hand I should please my
father, and at the same time satisfy the desire that has of late sprung
up for a more stirring life than that of the Church, and should be able
to remain your comrade. On the other hand, I have always regarded the
Church as my vocation, and did not like to go back from it, and
moreover, although stronger than of old, I thought that I might never
attain such health and strength as might render me a worthy knight, and
feared that when tried I should be found wanting. Thus I have wavered,
and knew not which way my inclinations drew me most strongly, but I
never thought of what you have just said, that if I were to enter the
Church our line would come to an end. However, there is no occasion
definitely to settle for another year yet, but I will tell my father
to-morrow that if at the end of that time he deems that I have so far
continued to gain in strength that he may consider me not unworthy to
represent our name in the field, I shall be ready to submit myself to
his wishes, while, upon the other hand, should he think me, as before,
better fitted for the Church. I will enter it at once."

"I am glad, indeed, to hear you say so, Albert. I think that there is
no reason to doubt that you will continue to gain strength, and will
prove worthy of your name."

Accordingly, the next morning Albert asked his father to accompany him
into the garden, and there detailed to him the conversation that he had
had with Edgar, and its result.

"Glad indeed am I, Albert, that this should have come about," the
knight said, laying his hand on the lad's shoulder. "What your friend
said to you has often been in my mind. It was a sore thought, my son.
There have ever been De Courcys on the battle-roll of England since our
ancestor fought at Hastings; and I might well feel grieved at the
thought that it might possibly appear there no more, and the pleasure
that you have given me is more than I can express. I will not allow
myself to fear that, now you have made so fair a start, you will fail
to gather fresh strength and vigour, and I will wager that you will
bear our banner as forward in the fight as those who have gone before
you.

"I blame myself deeply that I have misjudged you so long. Had I
encouraged, instead of slighting, you, you might long since have begun
to gain strength, and might early have commenced the exercises that are
so essential to form a good knight. In future, I will do all I can to
make up for lost time. As far as swordsmanship goes, you can have no
better instructor than your friend. I myself will train you in knightly
exercises on horseback--to vault into the saddle and to throw yourself
off when a horse is going at full speed, to use your lance and carry
off a ring; but I will take care not to press you beyond your strength,
and not to weary you with over-long work. My effort will be to increase
your store of strength and not to draw unduly upon it; and I will
warrant me that if you improve as rapidly under my tuition as you have
under that of Master Edgar, before a year is up I shall be able to
place you in the train of some noble knight without a fear that you
will prove yourself inferior to others of your own age."

Going into the house again when the morning meal was served, Sir Ralph
said:

"There is bad news as to the rioters in Kent, lads. Last night I heard
that a message had arrived, saying that they had entered Rochester,
broken open the jail, and released not only those held there for
non-payment of taxes, but malefactors; that they had been joined by the
rabble of the town, had slain several notaries and lawyers, and torn up
all parchments, deeds, and registers; had maltreated some of the
clergy, broken open cellars and drunk the wine, and that from thence
they intended to march to Maidstone and then to Canterbury, raising the
country as they went."

"This should at least give us time for preparations, Sir Ralph."

"So I pointed out last night," the knight replied; "but who is to make
the preparations? A proclamation was drawn up by the council, warning
all to return to their homes on pain of punishment, and promising an
inquiry into grievances. It is to be scattered broadcast through Kent
and Essex, but it is likely to have no effect. The men know well enough
that they have rendered themselves liable to punishment, and as they
were ready to run that risk when they first took up arms, it is not
likely that they will be frightened at the threat now when they find
none to oppose them, and that their numbers grow from day to day.
Seeing that time is likely to do little for us, I would rather they had
marched straight on to London; they would then have arrived here in
more sober mood; but now that they have begun to slay and to drink,
they will get fiercer and more lawless every day, and as their numbers
increase so will their demands."

Day by day more and more serious news came in. Canterbury was occupied
by the rebels, and they declared their intention of slaying the
archbishop, but he had left before they had arrived. There they
committed many excesses, executed three rich citizens, opened the
prisons, killed all lawyers, and burned all deeds and registers as they
had done at Rochester, and kept the whole place in a state of terror
while they remained, which they did while the stores of wine remained
unexhausted.

"Why should they be so bitter against lawyers, and why should they
destroy deeds and registers, father?" Albert asked.

"It can be but for one reason, Albert. The great part of them have
small plots of land, an acre or two, or perhaps more, on terms of
villeinage, paying so much in kind or money, and their desire is to
destroy all deeds and documents in order that they may henceforth pay
