and the chance of being shot at, and the sartainty of being ordered
about and not being able to call your life your own. On the other side
is a life of idleness and pleasure, of being your own master, and, if
you want something which the islands can't afford you, why, there's
just a short cruise and then back you come with your ship filled up with
plunder. I don't say as it's not tempting; but there's one thing agin
it, and the chaps as tells these yarns don't say much about that."

"What is it, sergeant?"

"It's just the certainty of a halter or a bloody grave sooner or later.
The thing goes on for some time, and then, when merchant ship after
merchant ship is missing, there are complaints at home, and out comes
a ship or two with the queen's pennant at the head, and then either the
pirate ship gets caught at sea and sunk or captured, or there's a visit
to the little island, and a short shrift for those found there.

"No, I don't think it can pay, my lad, even at its best. It's jolly
enough for awhile, maybe, for those whose hearts are so hard that they
think nothing of scuttling a ship with all on board, or of making the
crew and passengers walk the plank in cold blood. Still even they must
know that it can't last, and that there's a gallows somewhere waiting
for them. Still, you see, they don't think of all that when a chap is
atelling them of these islands, and how pleasant the life is there, and
how easy it would be to do for the officers, and take the command of
the ship and sail away. Two or three chaps as makes up their mind for it
will poison a whole crew in no time."

"You speak as if you knew all about it."

"I know a good deal about it," the sergeant replied gravely. "It's a
tale as there ain't many as knows; but you are a sort of lad as one can
trust, and so I don't mind if I tell it you. Though you wouldn't think
it, I have sailed under the black flag myself."

"You, sergeant!" Jack exclaimed incredulously; "do you mean to say you
have been a pirate?"

"Just that, my boy. I don't look like it, do I? There ain't nothing
buccaneering about my cut. I looks just what I am, a tough old sergeant
in a queen's regiment; but for all that I have been a pirate. The yarn
is a long one, and I can't tell it you now, because just at present, you
see, I have got to go below to look after the dinners of the company,
but the first time as we can get an opportunity for a quiet talk I will
tell it you. But don't you go away and think till then as I was a pirate
from choice. I shouldn't like you to think that of me; there ain't never
no saying at sea what may happen. I might tumble overboard tonight and
get drowned, or one of the convoy might run foul of us and sink us, and
tomorrow you might be alive and I might be dead, and I shouldn't like
you to go on thinking all your life as that Sergeant Edwards had been
a bloody pirate of his own free will. So you just bear in mind, till I
tells you the whole story, as how it was forced upon me. Mind, I don't
say as how I hadn't the choice of death or that, and maybe had you been
in my place you would have chosen death; but, you see, I had never been
brought up as you were. I had had no chances to speak of, and being only
just about your age, I didn't like the thought of dying, so you see I
took to it, making up my mind secret at the same time that the first
chance I had I would slip away from them. I won't tell you more now,
I hain't time; but just you bear that in mind, in case of anything
happening, that if Sergeant Edwards once sailed under the black flag, he
didn't do it willing."

The sergeant now hurried below, leaving Jack wondering over what he
had heard. Some days elapsed before the story was told, for a few hours
later the sky clouded over and the wind rose, and before next morning
the vessel was laboring heavily under double reefed topsails. The
soldiers were all kept below, and there was no possibility of anything
like a quiet talk. The weather had hitherto been so fine and the wind
so light that the vessels had glided over the sea almost without motion,
and very few indeed of those on board had experienced anything of the
usual seasickness; but now, in the stifling atmosphere between decks,
with the vessel rolling and plunging heavily, the greater part were soon
prostrate with seasickness, and even Jack, accustomed to the sea as he
was, succumbed to the unpleasantness of the surroundings.

On the second day of the storm Sergeant Edwards, who had been on deck to
make a report to the captain of the company, was eagerly questioned on
his return below on the condition of the weather.

"It's blowing about as hard as it can be," he said, "and she rolls fit
to take the masts out of her. There don't seem no chance of the gale
breaking, and none of the other ships of the fleet are in sight. That's
about all I have to tell you, except that I told the captain that if
he didn't get the hatches lifted a little we should be all stifled down
here. He says if there's a bit of a lull he will ask them to give us
a little fresh air, and in the mean time he says that any who are good
sailors may go up on deck, but it will be at their own risk, for some of
the seas go pretty nearly clean over her."



CHAPTER IV: THE SERGEANT'S YARN


Jack Stilwell and a few of the other men availed themselves of the
permission to escape for a time from the stifling atmosphere below, and
made their way on deck. For a time the rush of the wind and the wild
confusion of the sea almost bewildered them. Masses of water were
rushing along the deck, and each time she rolled the waves seemed as
if they would topple over the bulwarks. Several of the party turned
and went below again at once, but Jack, with a few others, waited their
opportunity and, making a rush across the deck, grasped the shrouds and
there hung on. Jack soon recovered from his first confusion and was able
to enjoy the grandeur of the scene.

Small as was the canvas she was showing, the vessel was traveling fast
through the waves, sometimes completely burying her head under a sea;
then as she rose again the water rushed aft knee deep, and Jack had
as much as he could do to prevent himself being carried off his feet.
Fortunately all loose articles had long since been swept overboard,
otherwise the risk of a broken limb from their contact would have been
serious.

In a quarter of an hour even Jack had had enough of it and went below,
and, having changed his drenched clothes, slung his hammock and turned
in. The next day the gale began to abate, and by evening the wind had
nearly died away, although the vessel was rolling as heavily as before
among the great masses of water which rolled in from the Atlantic.

The hatchways, however, were now removed, and all below ordered on deck,
and after awhile a party was told off to sluice down their quarters
below. The men were all weakened by their confinement, but their spirits
soon rose, and there was ere long plenty of laughter at the misfortunes
which befell those who tried to cross the deck, for the ship was rolling
so heavily that it was impossible for a landsman to keep his feet
without holding on.

The next morning, although a heavy swell was still rolling, the ship
assumed her normal aspect. The sailors had removed all trace of disorder
above, clothes were hung out to dry, and, as the ship was still far too
unsteady to allow of walking exercise, the soldiers sat in groups on
the deck, laughing and chatting and enjoying the warm sun whose rays
streamed down upon them. Seeing Sergeant Edwards standing alone looking
over the bulwark, Jack made his way up to him.

"It has been a sharp blow," the sergeant said, "and I am glad it's over;
the last four days have been enough to sicken one of the sea for life. I
suppose you think this is a good opportunity for my yarn."

"That is just what I was thinking, sergeant."

"Very well, then, my lad, here goes. I was born at Poole. My people were
all in the seafaring line, and it was only natural that, as soon as I
got old enough to stand kicking, I was put on board a coaster plying
between Poole and London. It was pretty rough, but the skipper wasn't a
bad kind of fellow when he was sober. I stuck to that for three years,
and then the old craft was wrecked on Shoreham beach. Fortunately she
was driven up so far that we were able to drop over the bowsprit pretty
well beyond the reach of the waves, but there was no getting the Eliza
off. It was no great loss, for she would have had to be broken up
as firewood in another year or two. About six hours out of every
twenty-four I was taking my turn at spells at the pump.

"Now the Eliza was cast away, I had to look out for another ship. I
had had enough of coasters, so instead of going home I tramped it up to
London. Having got a berth on board a foreign bound vessel I made two
voyages out to Brazil and back. A fine country is the Brazils, but the
Portuguese ain't the fellows to make much out of it. Little undersized
chaps, they are all chatter and jabber, and when they used to come
alongside to unload, it were jest for all the world like so many
boatfuls of monkeys.

"Well, I starts for my third voyage, being by this time about sixteen
or seventeen. We got out to Rio right enough; but we couldn't get a full
cargo back, and the captain determined to cruise among the West Indy
Islands and fill up his ship. We were pretty nigh full when one morning
the lookout hailed that there were two vessels just coming out of an
inlet in an island we were passing some three miles on the weather bow.

"The captain was soon on deck with his glass, and no sooner did he make
them out than he gave orders to clap every sail on her. We hadn't a very
smart crew, but there are not many British ships ever made sail faster
than we did then. The men just flew about, for it needed no glass to
show that the two vessels which came creeping out from among trees
weren't customers as one wanted to talk to on the high seas. The one
was a brig, the other a schooner. They carried lofty spars ever so much
higher than an honest trader could want; and quick as we had got up our
sails, they had got their canvas spread as soon as we had.

"The ship was a fast sailer, but it didn't need half an hour to show
that they had the legs of us. So the skipper called the crew aft. 'Now,
my lads,' he said, 'you see those two vessels astern. I don't think it
needs any telling from me as to what they are. They might be Spaniards
or they might be French, or they might be native traders, but we are
pretty well sure they ain't anything of the kind. They are pirates--I
guess the same two vessels I heard them talking about down at Rio. They
have been doing no end of damage there. There were pretty nigh a dozen
ships missing, and they put them all down to them. However, a couple of
English frigates had come into Rio, and hearing what had happened had
gone out to chase them. They hadn't caught them, and the Brazilians
thought that they had shifted their quarters and gone for a cruise in
other latitudes.

"'The description they gave of them answered to these two--a brig and a
schooner, with low hulls and tall spars. One of them carries ten guns,
the other two on each side, and a heavy piece mounted on a swivel
amidship. It was said that before they went down to Brazil they had been
carrying on their games among the West India Islands, and had made it so
hot for themselves that they had been obliged to move off from there.
It was like enough that, now the hue and cry after them had abated, they
would return to their old quarters.

"'Well, my lads, I needn't tell you what we have to expect if they take
us. Every man Jack will either get his throat cut or be forced to walk
the plank. So we will fight her to the last; for if the worst comes
to the worst, it's better to be killed fighting like men than to be
murdered in cold blood. However, I hope it won't come to that. We carry
twelve guns, and they are heavier metal than most merchantmen have on
board. We are more than a match for either of them alone; and if we can
manage to cripple one, we can beat the other off.

"'At any rate we will try our best. Thank God we have no women on board,
and only ourselves to think of! Now, my lads, cast the guns loose and
get the ammunition on deck; run two of the guns aft and train them over
the stern. As soon as they come within range we will try and knock some
spars out of them. Now, boys, give three cheers for the old flag, and we
will swear together it shall never come down while there's one of us to
fight the ship.'

"The men gave three cheers and then went off to their quarters at the
guns. They were quiet and grave, and it was easy enough to see that they
did not like the prospect. An Englishman always goes into action, as
far as I have seen, with a light heart and a joke on his lips when he's
fighting against Frenchmen or Spaniards or any other foe, but it's a
different thing when it's a pirate he has to deal with. Every man knows
then that it's a case of life or death, and that he's got to win or die.
The enemy made no secret of what they were, for when they got within a
mile of us two black flags ran up to their mastheads.

"The captain he trained one of the stern chasers hisself, and the first
mate took the other. They fired at the same moment, both aiming at the
schooner, which was getting the nearest to us. They were good shots both
of them. The mate's ball struck the water some twenty yards in front
of her forefoot, and smashed her bow planking some three feet above the
waterline; while the captain's struck her bulwark, tore along her deck,
and went out astern, doing some damage by the way, I reckon.

"We could see there was some confusion on board. They hadn't reckoned
that we carried such heavy metal, and our luck in getting both shots on
board must have surprised them. Then her bow paid off, there was a puff
of smoke amidship, and a ball from the long swivel gun buzzed overhead,
passing through our mainsail without touching mast or stay.

"So far we had the best of it, and the men looked more cheerful than
they had done from the first moment when the pirates showed from among
the trees. After that we kept up a fire from the stern guns as fast as
we could load. I could not see myself what damage we were doing, for I
was kept hard at work carrying ammunition. Presently the broadside guns
began to fire too, and taking the chance for a look round I saw that the
pirates had separated, and were coming up one on each side of us.

"So far they had not fired a shot after the first. I suppose they didn't
want to lose ground by yawing, but as they came abreast of us they both
opened fire. Our chaps fought their guns well, and I expect the pirates
found they were not getting much the best of it; for one of them made a
signal, and they both closed in to board. We hadn't had much luck after
our first shot. We had hulled them over and over again and spotted their
sails with shot. Many of their ropes were hanging loose, but we hadn't
succeeded in crippling them, although almost every shot had been aimed
at the masts; for every man knew that our only chance was to bring them
down.

"As they came up close to us they poured in a volley of grape, and a
minute later they grated alongside and a crowd of men swarmed on board
over the bulwarks. Our fellows fought to the last, but the odds were
five to one against them. The skipper had been killed by a grapeshot,
but the mate he led the men; and if fighting could have saved us the
ship would not have been captured. But it was no use. In two minutes
every man had been cut down or disarmed. I had laid about me with
a cutlass till I got a lick over my head with a boarding pike which
knocked my senses out of me.

"When I opened my eyes I was hauled up to my feet and put alongside the
mate and six others, all of whom was bleeding more or less. The rest had
all been chucked overboard at once. In a minute or two the captain of
one of the pirates, a little dapper Frenchman, came up to us. 'You have
fought your ship well,' he said to the mate, 'and have killed several of
my officers and men; but I bear you no malice, and if you are ready
to ship with me I will spare your life.' 'I would rather die a hundred
times!' the mate said. The pirate said nothing, but just nodded, and
four of his men seized the mate and flung him over the bulwarks. The
same question was asked of each of the men; but each in turn refused,
and an end was made of them. I was the last.

"'Now, my boy,' the captain said, 'I hope you won't be stupid like those
pig headed fellows. What do you say--good treatment and a free life on
the sea, or the sharks?'

"Well, lad, if my turn hadn't been last I would have said 'no' like
the others. I wouldn't have shown the white feather before any of my
shipmates; but they had gone--there wasn't one to cast a reproachful
look at me or to taunt me with cowardice. I just stood alone; there
weren't no one to back me up in choosing to die rather than to serve,
and so I says, 'I will join you, captain.' I don't say I was right, lad;
I don't say I didn't act as a coward; but I think most young chaps with
my bringing up, and placed as I was, would have done the same. There's
many as would have said 'no' if they had had comrades and friends
looking on, but I don't think there's many as would have said 'no' if
they had stood all alone as I did.

"I can't say as I blame myself much about that business, though I have
thought it over many a score of times; but anyhow, from the first I made
up my mind that at the very first chance I would get away from them. I
knew the chance wasn't likely to come for some time--still there it was;
and during all the black scenes I took part in on board that ship I was
always telling myself that I was there against my will.

"It was the brig as I was to go in. And as soon as that little matter of
the crew was settled all hands set to work to shift the cargo from the
