
"Then you're coming to see me!" exclaimed Pennington, with all the
impulsive warmth of youth. "And George here is coming with you. I won't
show you any mountains like the one over there, but boys, west of the
Platte River, when I was with my father and some other men I watched for
three days a buffalo herd passing. The herd was going north and all
the time it stretched so far from east to west that it sank under each
horizon. There must have been millions of them. Don't you think that was
something worth seeing?"

"We're surely coming," said Dick, "and you be equally sure to have your
buffalo herd ready for us when we come."

"It'll be there."

"Meanwhile, here we are at the Rapidan," said the practical Warner, "and
beyond it is our army. Look at that long line of fires, boys. Aren't
they cheering? A fine big army like ours ought to beat off anything. We
almost held our own with Jackson himself at Cedar Run, and he had two to
one."

"We will win! We're bound to win!" said Dick, with sudden access of
hope. "We'll crush Lee and Jackson, and next summer you and I, George,
will be out on the western plains with Frank, watching the buffalo
millions go thundering by!"

They forded the Rapidan and rejoined their regiment with nothing to
tell. But it was cheerful about the fires. Optimism reigned once more in
the Army of Virginia. McClellan had sent word to Pope that he would have
plenty of soldiers to face the attack that now seemed to be threatened
by the South. Brigades from the Army of the Potomac would make the Army
of Virginia invincible.

Dick having nothing particular to do, sat late with his comrades before
one of the finest of the fires, and he read only cheerful omens in the
flames. It was a beautiful night. The moon seemed large and near, and
the sky was full of dancing stars. In the clear night Dick saw the black
bulk of Clark's Mountain off there against the horizon, but he could not
see what was behind it.




CHAPTER III. BESIDE THE RIVER


Dick was on duty early in the morning when he saw a horseman coming at
a gallop toward the Rapidan. The man was in civilian clothing, but his
figure seemed familiar. The boy raised his glasses, and he saw at once
that it was Shepard. He saw, too, that he was urging his horse to its
utmost speed.

The boy's heart suddenly began to throb, and there was a cold, prickling
sensation at the roots of his hair. Shepard had made an extraordinary
impression upon him and he did not believe that the man would be coming
at such a pace unless he came with great news.

He saw Shepard stop, give the pass word to the pickets, then gallop on,
ford the river and come straight toward the heart of the army. Dick ran
forward and met him.

"What is it?" he cried.

"General Pope's tent! Where it is! I can't wait a minute."

Dick pointed toward a big marquee, standing in an open space, and
Shepard leaping from his horse and abandoning it entirely, ran toward
the marquee. A word or two to the sentinels, and he disappeared inside.

Dick, devoured with curiosity and anxiety, went to Colonel Winchester
with the story of what he had seen.

"I know of Shepard," said the colonel. "He is the best and most daring
spy in the whole service of the North. I think you're right in inferring
that he rides so fast for good cause."

Shepard remained with the commander-in-chief a quarter of an hour. When
he came forth from the tent he regained his horse and rode away without
a word, going in the direction of Clark's Mountain. But his news was
quickly known, because it was of a kind that could not be concealed.
Pennington came running with it to the regiment, his face flushed and
his eyes big.

"Look! Look at the mountain!" he exclaimed.

"I see it," said Warner. "I saw it there yesterday, too, in exactly the
same place."

"So did I, but there's something behind it. Lee and Jackson are there
with sixty or eighty thousand men! The whole Southern army is only six
or seven miles away."

Even Warner's face changed.

"How do you know this?" he asked.

"A spy has seen their army. They say he is a man whose reports are never
false. At any rate orders have already been issued for us to retreat
and I hear that we're going back until we reach the Rappahannock, behind
which we will camp."

Dick knew very well now that it was Shepard who brought the news, and
Pennington's report about the retreat was also soon verified. The
whole army was soon in motion and a feeling of depression replaced
the optimism of the night before. The advance had been turned into a
retreat. Were they to go back and forth in this manner forever? But
Colonel Winchester spoke hopefully to his young aides and said that the
retreat was right.

"We're drawing out of a trap," he said, "and time is always on our side.
The South to win has to hit hard and fast, and in this case the Army of
the Potomac and the Army of Virginia may join before Lee and Jackson can
come up."

The lads tried to reconcile themselves, but nevertheless they did not
like retreat. Dick with his powerful glasses often looked back toward
the dark bulk of Clark's Mountain. He saw nothing there, nor anything in
the low country between, save the rear ranks of the Union army marching
on.

But Shepard had been right. Lee and Jackson, advancing silently and with
every avenue of news guarded, were there behind the mountain with sixty
thousand men, flushed with victories, and putting a supreme faith in
their great commanders who so well deserved their trust. The men of
the valley and the Seven Days, wholly confident, asked only to be led
against Pope and his army, and most of them expected a battle that very
day, while the Northern commander was slipping from the well-laid trap.

Pope's judgment in this case was good and fortune, too, favored him.
Before the last of his men had left the Rapidan Lee himself, with his
staff officers, climbed to the summit of Clark's Mountain. They were
armed with the best of glasses, but drifting fogs coming down from
the north spread along the whole side of the mountain and hung like a
curtain between it and the retreating army. None of their glasses could
pierce the veil, and it was not until nearly night that rising winds
caught the fog and took it away. Then Lee and his generals saw a vast
cloud of dust in the northwest and they knew that under it marched
Pope's retreating army.

The Southern army was at once ordered forward in pursuit and in the
night the vanguard, wading the Rapidan, followed eagerly. Dick and his
comrades did not know then that they were followed so closely, but
they were destined to know it before morning. The regiment of Colonel
Winchester, one of the best and bravest in the whole service, formed a
part of the rearguard, and Dick, Warner and Pennington rode with their
chief.

The country was broken and they crossed small streams. Sometimes they
were in open fields, and again they passed through long stretches of
forest. There was a strong force of cavalry with the regiment, and the
beat of the horses' hoofs made a steady rolling sound which was not
unpleasant.

But Dick found the night full of sinister omens. They had left the
Rapidan in such haste that there was still a certain confusion of
impressions. The gigantic scale of everything took hold of him. One
hundred and fifty thousand men, or near it, were marching northward in
two armies which could not be many miles apart. The darkness and the
feeling of tragedy soon to come oppressed him.

He listened eagerly for the sounds of pursuit, but the long hours passed
and he heard nothing. The rear guard did not talk. The men wasted no
strength that way, but marched stolidly on in the moonlight. Midnight
passed and after a while it grew darker. Colonel Winchester and his
young officers rode at the very rear, and Pennington suddenly held up
his hand.

"What is it?" asked Colonel Winchester.

"Somebody following us, sir. I was trained out on the plains to take
notice of such things. May I get down and put my ear to the ground? I
may look ridiculous, sir, but I can make sure."

"Certainly. Go ahead."

Pennington sprang down and put his ear to the road. He did not listen
long, but when he stood up again he said:

"Horsemen are coming. I can't tell how many, but several hundreds at
least."

"As we're the very last of our own army, they must be Southern cavalry,"
said Colonel Winchester. "If they want to attack, I dare say our boys
are willing."

Very soon they heard clearly the gallop of the cavalry, and the men
heard it also. They looked up and turned their faces toward those who
must be foes. Despite the dimness Dick saw their eyes brighten. Colonel
Winchester had judged rightly. The boys were willing.

The rear guard turned back and waited, and in a few minutes the Southern
horsemen came in sight, opening fire at once. Their infantry, too, soon
appeared in the woods and fields and the dark hours before the dawn were
filled with the crackle of small arms.

Dick kept close to Colonel Winchester who anxiously watched the pursuit,
throwing his own regiment across the road, and keeping up a heavy fire
on the enemy. The Union loss was not great as most of the firing in the
dusk, of necessity, was at random, and Dick heard bullets whistling all
about him. Some times the bark flew from trees and now and then there
was a rain of twigs, shorn from the branches by the showers of missiles.

It was arduous work. The men were worn by the darkness, the uncertainty
and the incessant pursuit. The Northern rear guard presented a strong
front, retreating slowly with its face to the enemy, and always
disputing the road. Dick meanwhile could hear through the crash of
the firing the deep rumble of Pope's great army with its artillery and
thousands of wagons continually marching toward the Rappahannock. His
mind became absorbed in a vital question. Would Lee and Jackson come up
before they could reach the bigger river? Would a battle be forced the
next day while the Union army was in retreat? He confided his anxieties
to Warner who rode by his side.

"I take it that it's only a vanguard that's pursuing us," said the
Vermonter. "If they were in great force they'd have been pushing harder
and harder. We must have got a good start before Lee and Jackson found
us out. We know our Jackson, Dick, and he'd have been right on top of us
without delay."

"That's right, George. It must be their cavalry mostly. I suppose Jeb
Stuart is there leading them. At any rate we'll soon know better what's
doing. Look there toward the east. Don't you see a ray of light behind
that hill?"

"I see it, Dick."

"Is it the first ray of the morning, or is it just a low star?"

"It's the dawn, Dick, and mighty glad I am to see it. Look how fast it
comes!"

The sun shot up, over the hill. The sky turning to silver soon gave way
to gold, and the clear August light poured in a flood over the rolling
country.

Dick saw ahead of him a vast cloud of dust extending miles from east
to west, marking where the army of Pope pushed on its retreat to the
Rappahannock. There was no need to search for the Northern force. The
newest recruit would know that it was here.

The Southern vanguard was behind them and not many hundred yards away.
Dick distinctly saw the cavalry, riding along the road, and hundreds
of skirmishers pushing through the woods and fields. He judged that
the force did not number many thousands and that it could not think of
assailing the whole Union army. But with the coming of day the vigor of
the attack increased. The skirmishers fired from the shelter of every
tree stump, fence or hillock and the bullets pattered about Dick and his
comrades.

The Union rear guard maintained its answering fire, but as it was
retreating it was at a disadvantage. The regiments began to suffer. Many
men were wounded. The fire became most galling. A sudden charge by the
rearguard was ordered and it was made with spirit. The Southern van was
driven back, but when the retreat was resumed the skirmishers and the
cavalry came forward again, always firing at their retreating foe.

"I judge that it's going to be a very hot morning," said Colonel
Winchester, wiping away a few drops of blood, where a bullet had barely
touched his face. "I think the wind of that bullet hurt me more than its
kiss. There will be no great battle to-day. We can see now that they
are not yet in strong enough force, but we'll never know a minute's rest
until we're behind the Rappahannock. Oh, Dick, if McClellan's army
were only here also! This business of retreating is as bitter as death
itself!"

Dick saw the pain on his colonel's face and it was reflected on his own.

"I feel it, sir, in the same way. Our men are just as eager as the
Johnnies to fight and they are as brave and tenacious. What do you think
will happen, sir?"

"We'll reach the Rappahannock and take refuge behind it. We command the
railroad bridge there, and can cross and destroy it afterward. But the
river is broad and deep with high banks and the army of the enemy cannot
possibly force the passage in any way while we defend it."

"And after that, sir?"

"God alone knows. Look out, Dick, those men are aiming at us!"

Colonel Winchester seized the bridle of Dick's horse and pulled him
violently to one side, pulling his own horse in the same direction
in the same manner. The bullets of half a dozen Southern skirmishers,
standing under the boughs of a beech tree less than two hundred yards
away, hissed angrily by them.

"A close call," said the colonel. "There, they've been scattered by our
own riflemen and one of them remains to pay the toll."

The reply of the Northern skirmishers had been quick, and the gray
figure lying prone by the trunk of the tree told Dick that the colonel
had been right. He was shaken by a momentary shudder, but he could not
long remember one among so many. They rode on, leaving the prone figure
out of sight, and the Southern cavalry and skirmishers pressed forward
afresh.

Many of the Union men had food in their saddle bags, and supplies were
sent back for those who did not have it. Colonel Winchester who was
now thoroughly cool, advised his officers to eat, even if they felt no
hunger.

"I'm hungry enough," said Pennington to Dick. "Out on the plains, where
the air is so fresh and so full of life I was always hungry, and I
suppose I brought my appetite here with me. Dick, I've opened a can of
cove oysters, and that's a great deal for a fellow on horseback to
do. Here, take your share, and they'll help out that dry bread you're
munching."

Dick accepted with thanks. He learned that he, too, could eat with a
good appetite while bullets were knocking up dust only twenty yards
away. Meanwhile there was a steady flash of firing from every wood and
cornfield behind them.

As he ate he watched and he saw an amazing panorama. Miles in front
the great cloud of dust, cutting across from horizon to horizon swelled
slowly on toward the Rappahannock. Behind them rode the Southern cavalry
and masses of infantry were pressing forward, too. Far off on either
flank rolled the pleasant country, its beauty heightened by the loom of
blue mountains.

Colonel Winchester had predicted truly. The fighting between the
Northern rearguard, and the Southern vanguard never ceased. Every moment
the bullets were whistling, and occasionally a cannon lent its deep roar
to the crackling fire of the rifles. Daring detachments of the Southern
cavalry often galloped up and charged lagging regiments. And they were
driven off with equal courage and daring.

The three boys took especial notice of those cavalry bands and began
to believe at last that they could identify the very men in them. Dick
looked for his cousin, Harry Kenton. He was sure that he would be there
in the front--but he did not see him. Instead he saw after a while an
extraordinary figure on a large black horse, a large man in magnificent
uniform, with a great plume in his hat. He was nearer to them than any
other Southern horseman, and he seemed to be indifferent to danger.

"Look! look! There's Jeb Stuart!" exclaimed Dick. He had heard so
much about the famous Stuart and his gorgeous uniform that he knew him
instinctively, and, Warner and Pennington, as their eyes followed his
pointing finger felt the same conviction.

Three of the Northern riflemen fired at once at the conspicuous target,
and Dick breathed a little sigh of relief when all their bullets missed.
