"I wish they would give us some water," Percy said. "I am frightfully
thirsty."

"And so am I, Percy; there is one comfort, they won't let us die of
thirst, they could get no satisfaction out of our deaths now."

Two hours later some of the Chinese re-entered the room and led the
captives outside, and the lads then saw what was the meaning of the
noise they had heard. A cage had been manufactured of strong bamboos.
It was about four and a half feet long, four feet wide, and less than
three feet high; above it was fastened two long bamboos. Two or three of
the bars of the cage had been left open.

"My goodness! they never intend to put us in there," Percy exclaimed.

"That they do," Jack said. "They are going to carry us the rest of the
way."

The cords which bound the prisoners' hands were now cut, and they were
motioned to crawl into the cage. This they did; the bars were then put
in their places and securely lashed. Four men went to the ends of the
poles and lifted the cage upon their shoulders; two others took their
places beside it, and one man, apparently the leader of the party,
walked on ahead; the rest remained behind.

"I never quite realized what a fowl felt in a coop before," Jack said,
"but if its sensations are at all like mine they must be decidedly
unpleasant. It isn't high enough to sit upright in, it is nothing like
long enough to lie down, and as to getting out one might as well think
of flying. Do you know, Percy, I don't think they mean taking us to
Canton at all. I did not think of it before, but from the direction of
the sun I feel sure that we cannot have been going that way. What they
are up to I can't imagine."

In an hour they came to a large village. Here the cage was set down and
the villagers closed round. They were, however, kept a short distance
from the cage by the men in charge of it. Then a wooden platter was
placed on the ground, and persons throwing a few copper coins into this
were allowed to come near the cage.

"They are making a show of us!" Fothergill exclaimed. "That's what they
are up to, you see if it isn't; they are going to travel up country to
show the 'white devils' whom their valour has captured."

This was, indeed, the purpose of the pirates. At that time Europeans
seldom ventured beyond the limits assigned to them in the two or three
towns where they were permitted to trade, and few, indeed, of the
country people had ever obtained a sight of the white barbarians of
whose doings they had so frequently heard. Consequently a small crowd
soon gathered round the cage, eyeing the captives with the same interest
they would have felt as to unknown and dangerous beasts; they laughed
and joked, passed remarks upon them, and even poked them with sticks.
Fothergill, furious at this treatment, caught one of the sticks, and
wrenching it from the hands of the Chinaman, tried to strike at him
through the bars, a proceeding which excited shouts of laughter from the
by-standers.

"I think, Jack," Percy said, "it will be best to try and keep our
tempers and not to seem to mind what they do to us, then if they find
they can't get any fun out of us they will soon leave us alone."

"Of course, that's the best plan," Fothergill agreed, "but it's not so
easy to follow. That fellow very nearly poked out my eye with his stick,
and no one's going to stand that if he can help it."

It was some hours before the curiosity of the village was satisfied.
When all had paid who were likely to do so, the guards broke up their
circle, and leaving two of their number at the cage to see that no
actual harm was caused to their prisoners, the rest went off to a
refreshment house. The place of the elders was now taken by the boys
and children of the village, who crowded round the cage, prodded the
prisoners with sticks, and, putting their hands through the bars, pulled
their ears and hair. This amusement, however, was brought to an abrupt
conclusion by Fothergill suddenly seizing the wrist of a big boy and
pulling his arm through the cage until his face was against the bars;
then he proceeded to punch him until the guard, coming to his rescue,
poked Fothergill with his stick until he released his hold.

The punishment of their comrade excited neither anger nor resentment
among the other boys, who yelled with delight at his discomfiture, but
it made them more careful in approaching the cage, and though they
continued to poke the prisoners with sticks they did not venture again
to thrust a hand through the bars. At sunset the guards again came
round, lifted the cage and carried it into a shed. A platter of dirty
rice and a jug of water were put into the cage; two of the men lighted
their long pipes and sat down on guard beside it, and, the doors being
closed, the captives were left in peace.

"If this sort of thing is to go on, as I suppose it is," Fothergill
said, "the sooner they cut off our heads the better."

"It is very bad, Jack. I am sore all over with those probes from their
sharp sticks."

"I don't care for the pain, Percy, so much as the humiliation of the
thing. To be stared at and poked at as if we were wild beasts by these
curs, when with half a dozen of our men we could send a hundred of them
scampering, I feel as if I could choke with rage."

"You had better try and eat some of this rice, Jack. It is beastly, but
I daresay we shall get no more until to-morrow night, and we must keep
up our strength if we can. At any rate, the water is not bad, that's a
comfort."

"No thanks to them," Jack growled. "If there had been any bad water in
the neighbourhood they would have given it to us."

For six weeks the sufferings of the prisoners continued. Their captors
avoided towns where the authorities would probably at once have taken
the prisoners out of their hands. No one would have recognized the two
captives as the midshipmen of the _Perseus_; their clothes were in
rags--torn to pieces by the thrusts of the sharp-pointed bamboos, to
which they had daily been subjected--the bad food, the cramped position,
and the misery which they suffered had worn both lads to skeletons;
their hair was matted with filth, their faces begrimed with dirt. Percy
was so weak that he felt he could not stand. Fothergill, being three
years older, was less exhausted, but he knew that he, too, could not
support his sufferings for many days longer. Their bodies were covered
with sores, and try as they would they were able to catch only a few
minutes' sleep at a time, so much did the bamboo bars hurt their wasted
limbs.

They seldom exchanged a word during the daytime, suffering in silence
the persecutions to which they were exposed, but at night they talked
over their homes and friends in England, and their comrades on board
ship, seldom saying a word as to their present position. They were now
in a hilly country, but had not the least idea of the direction in which
it lay from Canton or its distance from the coast.

One evening Jack said to his companion, "I think it's nearly all over
now, Percy. The last two days we have made longer journeys, and have
not stopped at any of the smaller villages we passed through. I fancy
our guards must see that we can't last much longer, and are taking us
down to some town to hand us over to the authorities and get their
reward for us."

"I hope it is so, Jack; the sooner the better. Not that it makes much
difference now to me, for I do not think I can stand many more days of
it."

"I am afraid I am tougher than you, Percy, and shall take longer to
kill, so I hope with all my heart that I may be right, and that they may
be going to give us up to the authorities."

The next evening they stopped at a large place, and were subjected to
the usual persecution; this, however, was now less prolonged than during
the early days of their captivity, for they had now no longer strength
or spirits to resent their treatment, and as no fun was to be obtained
from passive victims, even the village boys soon ceased to find any
amusement in tormenting them.

When most of their visitors had left them, an elderly Chinaman
approached the side of the cage. He spoke to their guards and looked at
them attentively for some minutes, then he said in pigeon English, "You
officer men?"

"Yes!" Jack exclaimed, starting at the sound of the English words, the
first they had heard spoken since their captivity. "Yes, we are officers
of the _Perseus_."

"Me speeke English velly well," the Chinaman said; "me pilot-man many
years on Canton river. How you get here?"

"We were attacking some piratical junks, and landed to destroy the
village where the people were firing on us. We entered a place full of
pirates, and were knocked down and taken prisoners, and carried away up
the country; that is six weeks ago, and you see what we are now."

"Pirate men velly bad," the Chinaman said; "plunder many junk on river
and kill crew. Me muchee hate them."

"Can you do anything for us?" Jack asked. "You will be well rewarded if
you could manage to get us free."

The man shook his head.

"Me no see what can do, me stranger here; come to stay with wifey;
people no do what me ask them. English ships attack Canton, much fight
and take town, people all hate English. Bad country dis. People in one
village fight against another. Velly bad men here."

"How far is Canton away?" Jack asked. "Could you not send down to tell
the English we are here?"

"Fourteen days' journey off," the man said; "no see how can do
anything."

"Well," Jack said, "when you get back again to Canton let our people
know what has been the end of us; we shall not last much longer."

"All light," the man said, "will see what me can do. Muchee think
to-night!" And after saying a few words to the guards, who had been
regarding this conversation with an air of surprise, the Chinaman
retired.

The guards had for some time abandoned the precaution of sitting up at
night by the cage, convinced that their captives had no longer strength
to attempt to break through its fastenings or to drag themselves many
yards away if they could do so. They therefore left it standing in the
open, and, wrapping themselves in their thickly-wadded coats, for the
nights were cold, lay down by the side of the cage.

The coolness of the nights had, indeed, assisted to keep the two
prisoners alive. During the day the sun was excessively hot, and the
crowd of visitors round the cage impeded the circulation of the air and
added to their sufferings. It was true that the cold at night frequently
prevented them from sleeping, but it acted as a tonic and braced them
up.

"What did he mean about the villages attacking each other?" Percy asked.

"I have heard," Jack replied, "that in some parts of China things are
very much the same as they used to be in the highlands of Scotland.
There is no law or order. The different villages are like clans, and
wage war on each other. Sometimes the Government sends a number of
troops, who put the thing down for a time, chop off a good many heads,
and then march away, and the whole work begins again as soon as their
backs are turned."

That night the uneasy slumber of the lads was disturbed by a sudden
firing; shouts and yells were heard, and the firing redoubled.

"The village is attacked," Jack said. "I noticed that, like some other
places we have come into lately, there is a strong earthen wall round
it, with gates. Well, there is one comfort--it does not make much
difference to us which side wins."

The guards at the first alarm leapt to their feet, caught up their
matchlocks, and ran to aid in the defence of the wall. Two minutes later
a man ran up to the cage.

"All lightee," he said; "just what me hopee."

With his knife he cut the tough withes that held the bamboos in their
places, and pulled out three of the bars.

"Come along," he said; "no time to lose."

Jack scrambled out, but in trying to stand upright gave a sharp
exclamation of pain. Percy crawled out more slowly; he tried to stand
up, but could not. The Chinaman caught him up and threw him on his
shoulder.

"Come along quickee," he said to Jack; "if takee village, kill evely
one." He set off at a run. Jack followed as fast as he could, groaning
at every step from the pain the movement caused to his bruised body.

They went to the side of the village opposite to that at which the
attack was going on. They met no one on the way, the inhabitants having
all rushed to the other side to repel the attack. They stopped at a
small gate in the wall, the Chinaman drew back the bolts and opened it,
and they passed out into the country. For an hour they kept on. By the
end of that time Jack could scarcely drag his limbs along. The Chinaman
halted at length in a clump of trees surrounded by a thick undergrowth.

"Allee safee here," he said, "no searchee so far; here food;" and he
produced from a wallet a cold chicken and some boiled rice, and unslung
from his shoulder a gourd filled with cold tea.

"Me go back now, see what happen. To-mollow nightee come again--bringee
more food." And without another word went off at a rapid pace.

Jack moistened his lips with the tea, and then turned to his companion.
Percy had not spoken a word since he had been released from the cage,
and had been insensible during the greater part of his journey. Jack
poured some cold tea between his lips.

"Cheer up, Percy, old boy, we are free now, and with luck and that good
fellow's help we will work our way down to Canton yet."

"I shall never get down there; you may," Percy said feebly.

"Oh, nonsense, you will pick up strength like a steam-engine now. Here,
let me prop you against this tree. That's better. Now drink a drop of
this tea; it's like nectar after that filthy water we have been
drinking. Now you will feel better. Now you must try and eat a little of
this chicken and rice. Oh, nonsense, you have got to do it. I am not
going to let you give way when our trouble is just over. Think of your
people at home, Percy, and make an effort, for their sakes. Good
heavens! now I think of it, it must be Christmas morning. We were caught
on the 2nd and we have been just twenty-two days on show. I am sure that
it must be past twelve o'clock, and it is Christmas-day. It is a good
omen, Percy. This food isn't like roast beef and plum-pudding, but it's
not to be despised, I can tell you. Come, fire away, that's a good
fellow."

Percy made an effort and ate a few mouthfuls of rice and chicken, then
he took another draught of tea, and lay down, and was almost immediately
asleep.

Jack ate his food slowly and contentedly till he finished half the
supply, then he, too, lay down, and, after a short but hearty
thanksgiving for his escape from a slow and lingering death, he, too,
fell off to sleep. The sun was rising when he woke, being aroused by a
slight movement on the part of Percy; he opened his eyes and sat up.

"Well, Percy, how do you feel this morning?" he asked cheerily.

"I feel too weak to move," Percy replied languidly.

"Oh, you will be all right when you have sat up and eaten breakfast,"
Jack said. "Here you are; here is a wing for you, and this rice is as
white as snow, and the tea is first rate. I thought last night after I
lay down that I heard a murmur of water, so after we have had breakfast
I will look about and see if I can find it. We should feel like new men
after a wash. You look awful, and I am sure I am just as bad."

The thought of a wash inspirited Percy far more than that of eating, and
he sat up and made a great effort to do justice to breakfast. He
succeeded much better than he had done the night before, and Jack,
although he pretended to grumble, was satisfied with his companion's
progress, and finished off the rest of the food. Then he set out to
search for water. He had not very far to go; a tiny stream, a few
inches wide and two or three inches deep, ran through the wood from the
higher ground. After throwing himself down and taking a drink, he
hurried back to Percy.

"It is all right, Percy, I have found it. We can wash to our hearts'
content; think of that, lad."

Percy could hardly stand, but he made an effort, and Jack half carried
him to the streamlet. There the lads spent hours. First they bathed
their heads and hands, and then, stripping, lay down in the stream and
allowed it to flow over them, then they rubbed themselves with handfuls
of leaves dipped in the water, and when they at last put on their rags
again felt like new men. Percy was able to walk back to the spot they
had quitted with the assistance only of Jack's arm. The latter, feeling
that his breakfast had by no means appeased his hunger, now started for
a search through the wood, and presently returned to Percy laden with
nuts and berries.

"The nuts are sure to be all right; I expect the berries are too. I have
certainly seen some like them in native markets, and I think it will be
quite safe to risk it."

The rest of the day was spent in picking nuts and eating them. Then
they sat down and waited for the arrival of their friend. He came two
hours after nightfall with a wallet stored with provisions, and told
them that he had regained the village unobserved. The attack had been
repulsed, but with severe loss to the defenders as well as the
assailants; two of their guards had been among the killed. The others
had made a great clamour over the escape of the prisoners, and had made
a close search throughout the village and immediately round it, for they
were convinced that their captives had not had the strength to go any
distance. He thought, however, that although they had professed the
greatest indignation, and had offered many threats as to the vengeance
that Government would take upon the village, one of whose inhabitants,
at least, must have aided in the evasion of the prisoners, they would
not trouble themselves any further in the matter. They had already
reaped a rich harvest from the exhibition, and would divide among
themselves the share of their late comrades; nor was it at all
improbable that if they were to report the matter to the authorities
they would themselves get into serious trouble for not having handed
over the prisoners immediately after their capture.

For a fortnight the pilot nursed and fed the two midshipmen. He had
already provided them with native clothes, so that if by chance any
villagers should catch sight of them they would not recognize them as
the escaped white men. At the end of that time both the lads had almost
recovered from the effects of their sufferings. Jack, indeed, had picked
up from the first, but Percy for some days continued so weak and ill
that Jack had feared that he was going to have an attack of fever of
some kind. His companion's cheery and hopeful chat did as much good for
Percy as the nourishing food with which their friend supplied them, and
at the end of the fortnight he declared that he felt sufficiently strong
to attempt to make his way down to the coast.

The pilot acted as their guide. When they inquired about his wife, he
told them carelessly that she would remain with her kinsfolk, and would
travel on to Canton and join him there when she found an opportunity.
The journey was accomplished at night, by very short stages at first,
but by increasing distances as Percy gained strength. During the daytime
the lads lay hid in woods or jungles, while their companion went into
the village and purchased food. They struck the river many miles above
Canton, and the pilot, going down first to a village on its banks,
bargained for a boat to take him and two women down to the city.

The lads went on board at night and took their places in the little
cabin formed of bamboos and covered with mats in the stern of the boat,
and remained thus sheltered not only from the view of people in boats
passing up or down the stream, but from the eyes of their own boatmen.

After two days' journey down the river without incident, they arrived
off Canton, where the British fleet was still lying while negotiations
for peace were being carried on with the authorities at Pekin. Peeping
out between the mats, the lads caught sight of the English warships,
and, knowing that there was now no danger, they dashed out of the cabin,
to the surprise of the native boatmen, and shouted and waved their arms
to the distant ships.

In ten minutes they were alongside the _Perseus_, when they were hailed
as if restored from the dead. The pilot was very handsomely rewarded by
the English authorities for his kindness to the prisoners, and was
highly satisfied with the result of his proceedings, which more than
doubled the little capital with which he had retired from business. Jack
Fothergill and Percy Adcock declare that they have never since eaten
chicken without thinking of their Christmas fare on the morning of their
escape from the hands of the Chinese pirates.

THE END.




[Illustration: Blackie & Son's Books for Young People]

_By the Author of "John Herring," "Mehalah," &c._

=Grettir the Outlaw:= A Story of Iceland. By S. Baring-Gould.
With 10 full-page Illustrations by M. Zeno Diemer and a
Coloured Map. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, _6s_.

     A work of special interest, not only because of the high rank which
     Mr. Baring-Gould has of late years acquired by his brilliant series
     of novels, _Mehalah_, _John Herring_, _Court Royal_, &c., but
     because of his earlier won reputation as a historian and explorer
     of folk-legends and popular beliefs. In the story of Grettir, both
     the art of the novelist and the lore of the archaeologist have had
     full scope, with the result that we have a narrative of adventure
     of the most romantic kind, and at the same time an interesting and
     minutely accurate account of the old Icelandic families, their
     homes, their mode of life, their superstitions, their songs and
     stories, their bear-serk fury, and their heroism by land and sea.
     The story is told throughout with a simplicity which will make it
     attractive even to the very young, and no boy will be able to
     withstand the magic of such scenes as the fight of Grettir with the
     twelve bear-serks, the wrestle with Karr the Old in the chamber of
     the dead, the combat with the spirit of Glam the thrall, and the
     defence of the dying Grettir by his younger brother.

       *       *       *       *       *

BY G.A. HENTY.

       *       *       *       *       *

=With Lee in Virginia:= A Story of the American Civil War. By G.A.
Henty. With 10 full-page Illustrations by Gordon Browne.
Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, _6s_.

     The great war between the Northern and Southern States of America
     has the special interest for English boys of having been a struggle
     between two sections of a people akin to us in race and language--a
     struggle fought out by each side with unusual intensity of
     conviction in the rightness of its cause, and abounding in heroic
     incidents. Of these points Mr. Henty has made admirable use in this
     story of a young Virginian planter, who, after bravely proving his
     sympathy with the slaves, serves with no less courage and
     enthusiasm under Lee and Jackson through the most exciting events
     of the struggle. He has many hairbreadth escapes, is several times
     wounded and twice taken prisoner; but his courage and readiness
     bring him safely through all difficulties.

BY G.A. HENTY.

"Mr. Henty is one of the best of story tellers for young
people."--_Spectator._

       *       *       *       *       *

=By Pike and Dyke:= A Tale of the Rise of the Dutch Republic. By
G.A. Henty. With 10 full-page Illustrations by Maynard
Brown and 4 Maps. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, _6s_.

     A story covering the period which forms the thrilling subject of
     Motley's _Rise of the Dutch Republic_, when the Netherlands, under
     the guidance of William of Orange, revolted against the attempts of
     Alva and the Spaniards to force upon them the Catholic religion. To
     a story already of the keenest interest, Mr. Henty has added a
     special attractiveness for boys in tracing through the historic
     conflict the adventures and brave deeds of an English boy in the
     household of the ablest man of his age--William the Silent. Edward
     Martin; the son of an English sea-captain, after sharing in the
     excitement of an escape from the Spaniards and a sea-fight, enters
     the service of the Prince as a volunteer, and is employed by him in
     many dangerous and responsible missions, in the discharge of which
     he passes through the great sieges and more than one naval
     engagement of the time. He is subsequently employed in Holland by
     Queen Elizabeth, to whom he is recommended by Orange; and
     ultimately settles down as Sir Edward Martin and the husband of the
     lady to whom he owes his life, and whom he in turn has saved from
     the Council of Blood.

=The Lion Of St. Mark:= A Tale of Venice in the Fourteenth Century. By
G.A. Henty. With 10 full-page Illustrations by Gordon
Browne. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, _6s_.

     "Every boy should read _The Lion of St. Mark_. Mr. Henty has never
     produced any story more delightful, more wholesome, or more
     vivacious. From first to last it will be read with keen
     enjoyment."--_The Saturday Review._

     "Mr. Henty has probably not published a more interesting story than
     _The Lion of St. Mark_. He has certainly not published one in which
     he has been at such pains to rise to the dignity of his subject.
     Mr. Henty's battle-pieces are admirable."--_The Academy._

     "The young hero has shrewdness, courage, enterprise, principle, all
     the qualities that help the young in the race and battle of
     life."--_Literary Churchman._

=Captain Bailey's Heir:= A Tale of the Gold Fields of California. By
G.A. Henty. With 12 full-page Illustrations by H.M.
Paget. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, _6s_.

     "A Westminster boy who, like all this author's heroes, makes his
     way in the world by hard work, good temper, and unfailing courage.
     The descriptions given of life are just what a healthy intelligent
     lad should delight in."--_St. James's Gazette._

     "The portraits of Captain Bayley, and the head-master of
     Westminster school, are admirably drawn; and the adventures in
     California are told with that vigour which is peculiar to Mr.
     Henty."--_The Academy._

     "Mr. Henty is careful to mingle solid instruction with
     entertainment; and the humorous touches, especially in the sketch
     of John Holl, the Westminster dustman, Dickens himself could hardly
     have excelled."--_Christian Leader._

BY G.A. HENTY.

"Surely Mr. Henty should understand boys' tastes better than any man
living."--_The Times._

       *       *       *       *       *

=Bonnie Prince Charlie:= A Tale of Fontenoy and Culloden. By G.A.
Henty. With 12 full-page Illustrations by Gordon Browne.
Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, _6s_.

     "Ronald, the hero, is very like the hero of _Quentin Durward_. The
     lad's journey across France with his faithful attendant Malcolm,
     and his hairbreadth escapes from the machinations of his father's
     enemies, make up as good a narrative of the kind as we have ever
     read. For freshness of treatment and variety of incident, Mr. Henty
     has here surpassed himself."--_Spectator._

     "A historical romance of the best quality. Mr. Henty has written
     many more sensational stories, but never a more artistic
     one."--_Academy._

=For the Temple:= A Tale of the Fall of Jerusalem. By G.A.
Henty. With 10 full-page Illustrations by Solomon J.
Solomon: and a coloured Map. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine
edges, _6s_.

     "Mr. Henty is ever one of the foremost writers of historical tales,
     and his graphic prose pictures of the hopeless Jewish resistance to
     Roman sway adds another leaf to his record of the famous wars of
     the world. The book is one of Mr. Henty's cleverest
     efforts."--_Graphic._

     "The story is told with all the force of descriptive power which
     has made the author's war stories so famous, and many an 'old boy'
     as well as the younger ones will delight in this narrative of that
     awful page of history."--_Church Times._

=The Lion Of the North:= A Tale of Gustavus Adolphus and the Wars of
Religion. By G.A. Henty. With 12 full-page Illustrations by
John Schoenberg. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, _6s_.

     "As we might expect from Mr. Henty the tale is a clever and
     instructive piece of history, and as boys may be trusted to read it
     conscientiously, they can hardly fail to be profited as well as
     pleased."--_The Times._

     "A praiseworthy attempt to interest British youth in the great
     deeds of the Scotch Brigade in the wars of Gustavus Adolphus.
     Mackay, Hepburn, and Munro live again in Mr. Henty's pages, as
     those deserve to live whose disciplined bands formed really the
     germ of the modern British army."--_Athenaeum._

     "A stirring story of stirring times. This book should hold a place
     among the classics of youthful fiction."--_United Service Gazette._

=The Young Carthaginian:= A story of the Times of Hannibal. By G.A.
Henty. With 12 full-page Illustrations by C.J. Staniland,
R.I. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, _6s_.

     "The effect of an interesting story, well constructed and vividly
     told, is enhanced by the picturesque quality of the scenic
     background. From first to last nothing stays the interest of the
     narrative. It bears us along as on a stream, whose current varies
     in direction, but never loses its force."--_Saturday Review._

