point midway between the two parties and halted. At the same time, one
of the trappers went forward, the rest of the whites and red men keeping
their distance and watching them.

The Blackfoot opened business by what might be termed an apology which
was no more genuine than many made by his civilized brethren under
somewhat similar circumstances. He expressed great surprise to learn
that the horses belonged to their good friends the trappers. They had
supposed all along that they were the property of the Snake Indians
whom the Blackfeet considered it their duty to despoil on every suitable
occasion.

This glaring misrepresentation did not deceive the man who was acting as
spokesman for his side. By way of reply, he asked that if such was
the case, why had not the Blackfeet come forward on discovering their
mistake, greeted their white brothers as friends and returned their
property to them.

The replies were evasive and the hunters became convinced that the
Indians were seeking to gain time for some sinister purpose; but a full
parley having been agreed upon, both parties left their guns behind and
advanced to where their representatives were holding their interview.

The Blackfeet still professed the most ardent friendship, and as an
emphatic token of the same, produced the calumet and began smoking the
pipe of peace. The tobacco having been lit, each took several whiffs
and then passed it to his neighbor, who did the same until the round was
completed. This solemn pledge of good will having been exchanged, the
convention or peace congress was opened as may be said, in due and
ancient form.

Carson and his companions were distrustful from the start, though it was
hard for them to decide the meaning of the prolonged negotiations, since
no one could see what the Blackfeet were to gain by such a course. They
may have hoped to deceive the hunters and throw them off their guard,
but, if such was the case, they failed.

First of all, the leading warriors indulged in several long speeches
which were without point, but what was said in reply could admit of no
doubt as to its meaning. The trappers understood the Blackfoot tongue
well enough to make their responses models in the way of brevity and
force. They said that it was idle to talk of friendship or peace until
the stolen property was returned to its owners. The Indians still
attempted to postpone or evade, but the complainants were in no mood
for trifling and they repeated their declaration more positively than
before.

The Blackfeet were much more numerous than the whites, and confident of
their strength, began to bluster and to assert that whatever they did
would be dictated by their own wishes and not by any fear of their
visitors. Whether they desired to avoid a fight or not can only be
conjectured, but they finally sent back to where the horses were
tethered and caused five of the worst to be picked out and brought
forward.

When the trappers inquired the meaning of this proceeding, the Indians
said that it was the best they could do and the hunters must be content.

This last insult was the spark which exploded the magazine. Instantly
every white man ran for his gun, and the Blackfeet did the same. A few
seconds after they wheeled about and the sanguinary fight began.

Kit Carson and a companion were the first to obtain their guns and as
a consequence they led the advance. Each selected a warrior who was
partially hidden by the trunk of a tree. Carson was in the act of
firing, when he observed that his friend was examining the lock of his
gun all unmindful of the fact that one of the Blackfeet had levelled his
weapon directly at his breast. On the instant, Kit changed his aim and
shot the savage dead, thereby saving the life of his friend, who could
not have escaped had the weapon of his adversary been discharged.



CHAPTER XII.


 Carson Badly Wounded--A Drawn Battle--An Ineffectual Pursuit--The Summer
 Rendezvous--Carson's Duel.

This act of chivalry on the part of Carson simply transferred the peril
of his friend to himself, for the Indian whom he had selected for his
target was carefully sighting at him, at the very moment the gun was
discharged. Kit saw what was coming and bounded to one side in the hope
of dodging the bullet. Quick as he was, however, he did not entirely
succeed, though the act doubtless saved his life. The ball from
the rifle of his adversary grazed his neck and buried itself in his
shoulder, shattering the head of one of the bones.

Carson though badly hurt, did not fall or retreat. On the contrary, he
tried desperately to reload his gun, but found it impossible to raise
his arm. He was hors de combat beyond all question, and bleeding so
fast that his weakness compelled him to lie down on the ground while
the conflict went on about him. The fight was very hot for a time,
the result being what may be called a drawn battle, with the advantage
inclining to the side of the Indians. The trappers fell back to the
safest place that presented itself and went into camp. They dared not
start a fire; for they knew it would bring an attack from the Indians,
but wrapping their saddle blankets around them, they bore the intense
cold as best they could.

The sufferings of Carson were great. His wounds continued bleeding and
froze upon the dressings, which were of the most primitive character.
And yet not once through those hours of anguish did he utter a word of
complaint. Many a strong man would have cried out in his agony, but one
might have sat within arm's length of the mountaineer without knowing he
was hurt at all.

More than that, Carson took his part in the council which was held in
the cold and darkness. The conclusion reached was that the party of
trappers were not strong enough to pursue the Blackfeet, and the proper
course to pursue was to rejoin the main body and report what had been
done. It would then be time enough to decide upon their future action.

When this programme was carried out, a larger party of hunters under
the lead of an experienced mountaineer resumed the pursuit; but nothing
could be found of the savages. They had utilized the grace allowed
them so well that it was impossible to overtake or trace them, and the
indignant trappers were obliged to submit to their loss.

The severe cold moderated, and, as spring was close at hand the hunters
pushed their trapping operations along the Green and Snake Rivers,
meeting with unbounded success. They gathered more peltries than they
had dared to hope for, and when warm weather approached, went into
quarters where they remained until the following fall, a party of
traders having brought them all the supplies they needed.

The rugged constitution of Carson and his temperate habits caused him
speedily to recover from his severe wound. He again became the active,
vigilant, keen witted guide and hunter who was looked up to by all as
the most consummate master of woodcraft that had ever been known in the
west.

Such a large party as were gathered at the summer rendezvous was certain
to include many varieties of people. The frank, brave and open hearted,
the sly and treacherous, the considerate and courteous, the quarrelsome
and overbearing--indeed the temperaments of the individuals composing
the company were as varied as it is possible to imagine.

Among them was a powerful Frenchman known as Captain Shunan. He had won
his title by hard fighting, possessed a magnificent physique, was brave
and skilled in the use of arms, and was the most quarrelsome individual
in camp. It is impossible to picture a more irascible and disagreeable
personage than Captain Shunan, who appeared to spend all his spare
time in trying to provoke quarrels with those around him. Sometimes he
succeeded, but more often his insolence was submitted to by men as brave
as he, but who wished to avoid trouble with him.

The activity and strength of the Frenchman were so great that a skilful
pugilist would have found difficulty in handling him. The only ground
upon which he could be met with anything like fairness was where
firearms were used.

On one of these occasions, the bully became unbearable in his behavior.
He knocked down several weak and inoffensive persons, and swaggered back
and forth through camp, boasting that he could trounce any one there. In
the midst of his bluster, Carson walked up in front of him and said in a
voice loud enough to be heard by those around:

"Captain Shunan, there are plenty here who can easily chastise you, but
they prefer to submit to your impudence for the sake of peace: however,
we have had enough and now I notify you to stop at once or I shall kill
you!"

These were astounding words, and, as may be supposed, when uttered by
a man six inches shorter and many pounds lighter than the blustering
Captain, they fairly took away his breath. Carson spoke in his quiet,
soft voice, as though there was not the least cause for excitement;
but those who knew him, noted the flash of his clear, gray eye and
understood his deadly earnestness.

Captain Shunan was infuriated by the words of Carson. As soon as he
could recover himself, he turned about and without speaking a word,
walked to his quarters. Kit did not need be told what that meant. He
did the same, walking to his own lodge, from which he speedily emerged
holding a single barrel pistol. He was so anxious to be on the ground in
time, that he caught up the first weapon that presented itself.

Almost at the same moment, Captain Shunan appeared with his rifle.
Carson observed him, and, though he could have secured without
difficulty a similar weapon, he did not do so. He was willing to give
his burly antagonist the advantage, if it should prove such. The other
trappers as may be supposed, watched the actions of the two men with
breathless interest. The quarrel had taken such a course that they
were convinced that one or the other of the combatants would be killed.
Captain Shunan had been so loud in his boasts that he did not dare
swallow the insult, put on him by the fragile Kit Carson. Had he done
so, he would have been hooted out of camp and probably lynched.

As for Kit, his courage was beyond suspicion. He feared no man and was
sure to acquit himself creditably no matter in what circumstances he was
placed. He was the most popular member of the large company, while his
antagonist was the most detested; but the love of fair play was such
that no one would interfere, no matter how great the need for doing so.

The duellists, as they may be called, mounted each his horse and
circling about the plain, speedily headed toward each other and dashed
forward on a dead run. As they approached, they reined up and halted
face to face, within arm's length.

Looking his antagonist straight in the eye, Carson demanded:

"Are you looking for me?"

"Have you any business with me?"

"No," growled the savage Frenchman; but, while the words were in his
mouth, brought his rifle to his shoulder, and, pointing it at the breast
of Carson, pulled the trigger; but Kit expected some such treacherous
act, and, before the gun could be fired, he threw up his pistol and
discharged it as may be said, across the barrel of the leveled weapon.

The ball broke the forearm of Captain Shunan, at the very moment he
discharged his gun. The shock diverted the aim so that the bullet grazed
his scalp, inflicting a trifling wound; but the combatants were so close
that the powder of the rifle scorched the face of the mountaineer.

Captain Shunan had been badly worsted, and was disabled for weeks
afterward. He accepted his fate without complaint and was effectually
cured of his overbearing manner toward his associates.



CHAPTER XIII.


 On the Yellowstone--Repeated Disappointments--Carson Enters the Employ
 of a Hudson Bay Trader--Poor Success--A Trying Journey--Arrival at Fort
 Hall--The American Buffalo or Bison.

With the approach of cool weather, preparations were made for the fall
hunt. When all was ready, the trappers headed for the Yellowstone, which
was reached without mishap, and they immediately set their traps. The
country as a rule, was a good one for those valuable animals, but the
visitors were disappointed to learn they were unusually scarce.

When it became evident that it was useless to work on the Yellowstone,
they gathered up their traps and made their way to the Big Horn, but,
failing again, tried their fortunes on other rivers in that vicinity
with no better results.

It was while engaged in this discouraging work that they met a trader
belonging to the Hudson Bay Company. He had been pushing operations in
every direction, but the stories he told were of the same general tenor
as those of the larger party. He had been as unsuccessful in the way of
trade as they had been in catching the fur bearing animals.

The Hudson Bay trader, however, was confident he could succeed where
they had failed, and he made such liberal offers to Carson that he and
several of his companions accepted them on the spot.

The first point which they visited was the Humboldt River, from which
had come reports of the abundance of beavers. They began near the head
waters of the stream, and carefully trapped down to the Great Basin.
Meeting with only moderate success, they made their way to Big Snake
River. After remaining there a considerable time, the party divided,
the Hudson Bay trader and his friends going northward toward Fort Walla
Walla, while Carson and the larger number set out for Fort Hall.

The journey thither was one of the most distressing which Kit Carson
ever undertook. The country through which most of the march led is one
of the most dismal wastes on the American continent. Except in extent, a
journey across it is similar to that of the parched caravans across the
flaming sands of Sahara. Carson and his companions were accustomed to
all manner of privations, but more than once their endurance was tried
to the utmost point.

The trappers had gathered some nutritious roots upon which they managed
to subsist for a time, but these soon gave out, and their situation grew
desperate. When almost famishing they bled their mules and drank the
warm current. They would have killed one of the animals, but for the
fact that they could not spare it, and, as there was no calculating how
long the others would last, they were afraid to take the step, which was
likely to cripple them fatally.

This strange source of nourishment served them for the time, but a
repetition would endanger the lives of their animals, who were also in
sore straits, inasmuch as the grass was not only poor but very scanty.
Matters rapidly grew worse, and soon became so desperate that Carson
said they would have to kill one of their animals or else lie down and
perish themselves.

At this trying crisis, they discovered a band of Indians approaching.
Perhaps the hapless situation in which all were placed left no room for
enmity, for the red men showed a friendly disposition. The high hopes of
Carson and his friends were chilled when it was found that the Indians
were in about as bad a plight as themselves. They had barely a mouthful
of food among them, and, when besought to barter with the whites, they
shook their heads. They had nothing to trade, and, while they felt no
hostility toward the suffering trappers, they gave them to understand
they could not afford any help at all.

But Carson had fixed his eyes on a plump old horse, and never did a
shrewd New Englander apply himself more persistently to secure a prize
than did he. Kit's companions put forth all their powers of persuasion,
but in vain, and they advised Carson that he was throwing away his
efforts in attempting the impossible.

But Carson succeeded, and when the equine was slaughtered and broiled,
the trappers enjoyed one of the most delicious feasts of their lives.
They filled themselves to repletion and felt that the enjoyment it
brought was almost worth the suffering they had undergone to obtain it.

When their strength was recruited, they resumed their journey and a few
days later reached Fort Hall. There they found abundance of food and
received a cordial welcome. In a brief while they were as strong as ever
and eager for any new enterprise.

Hundreds of bisons were in the neighborhood of the fort and Carson
and his friends slew them by the score. Indeed they kept the post well
supplied with fresh meet as long as they remained there.

The animal almost universally known as the "buffalo" is miscalled, his
correct name being the "bison," of which there are droves numbering, it
is said, as high as a hundred thousand. The flesh is held in high
repute by hunters, and not only is nourishing but possesses the valuable
quality of not cloying the appetite. The most delicate portion of the
animal is the hump which gives the peculiar appearance to his back. That
and the tongue and marrow bones are frequently the only portions made
use of by the hunter.

The hide answers many useful purposes. All know how much a "buffalo
robe" is appreciated in wintry weather by those exposed to cold. It
serves to form the Indian's tents, his bed, parts of his dress and is
sometimes made into a shield which will turn aside a rifle ball that
does not strike it fairly.

Hundreds of thousands of bisons are killed annually--myriads of them
in pure wantonness--and yet enormous droves may be encountered today in
many portions of the west, where it is hard for the experienced hunters
to detect any decrease in their numbers.

Some of the methods employed to slay bisons are cruel in the extreme.
Many a time a large herd has been stampeded in the direction of some
precipice. When the leaders found themselves on the edge, they have
endeavored to recoil; but there was no stemming the tide behind them.
