did not know. We set to work with a will. We used all our tools--spades,
forks, hoes, and rakes--and Dora worked with the trowel, sitting down,
because her foot was hurt. We cleared the weedy patch beautifully,
scraping off all the nasty weeds and leaving the nice clean brown dirt.
We worked as hard as ever we could. And we were happy, because it was
unselfish toil, and no one thought then of putting it in the Book of
Golden Deeds, where we had agreed to write down our virtuous actions and
the good doings of each other, when we happen to notice them.

We had just done, and we were looking at the beautiful production of
our honest labour, when the cottage door burst open, and the soldier's
widowed mother came out like a wild tornado, and her eyes looked like
upas trees--death to the beholder.

'You wicked, meddlesome, nasty children!' she said, ain't you got enough
of your own good ground to runch up and spoil, but you must come into MY
little lot?'

Some of us were deeply alarmed, but we stood firm.

'We have only been weeding your garden,' Dora said; 'we wanted to do
something to help you.'

'Dratted little busybodies,' she said. It was indeed hard, but everyone
in Kent says 'dratted' when they are cross. 'It's my turnips,' she went
on, 'you've hoed up, and my cabbages. My turnips that my boy sowed
afore he went. There, get along with you do, afore I come at you with my
broom-handle.'

She did come at us with her broom-handle as she spoke, and even the
boldest turned and fled. Oswald was even the boldest. 'They looked like
weeds right enough,' he said.

And Dicky said, 'It all comes of trying to do golden deeds.' This was
when we were out in the road.

As we went along, in a silence full of gloomy remorse, we met the
postman. He said--

'Here's the letters for the Moat,' and passed on hastily. He was a bit
late.

When we came to look through the letters, which were nearly all for
Albert's uncle, we found there was a postcard that had got stuck in a
magazine wrapper. Alice pulled it out. It was addressed to Mrs Simpkins.
We honourably only looked at the address, although it is allowed by the
rules of honourableness to read postcards that come to your house if you
like, even if they are not for you.

After a heated discussion, Alice and Oswald said they were not afraid,
whoever was, and they retraced their steps, Alice holding the postcard
right way up, so that we should not look at the lettery part of it, but
only the address.

With quickly-beating heart, but outwardly unmoved, they walked up to the
white cottage door.

It opened with a bang when we knocked.

'Well?' Mrs Simpkins said, and I think she said it what people in books
call 'sourly'.

Oswald said, 'We are very, very sorry we spoiled your turnips, and we
will ask my father to try and make it up to you some other way.'

She muttered something about not wanting to be beholden to anybody.

'We came back,' Oswald went on, with his always unruffled politeness,
'because the postman gave us a postcard in mistake with our letters, and
it is addressed to you.'

'We haven't read it,' Alice said quickly. I think she needn't have said
that. Of course we hadn't. But perhaps girls know better than we do what
women are likely to think you capable of.

The soldier's mother took the postcard (she snatched it really, but
'took' is a kinder word, considering everything) and she looked at the
address a long time. Then she turned it over and read what was on the
back. Then she drew her breath in as far as it would go, and caught hold
of the door-post. Her face got awful. It was like the wax face of a dead
king I saw once at Madame Tussaud's.

Alice understood. She caught hold of the soldier's mother's hand and
said--

'Oh, NO--it's NOT your boy Bill!'

And the woman said nothing, but shoved the postcard into Alice's hand,
and we both read it--and it WAS her boy Bill.

Alice gave her back the card. She had held on to the woman's hand all
the time, and now she squeezed the hand, and held it against her face.
But she could not say a word because she was crying so. The soldier's
mother took the card again and she pushed Alice away, but it was not an
unkind push, and she went in and shut the door; and as Alice and Oswald
went down the road Oswald looked back, and one of the windows of the
cottage had a white blind. Afterwards the other windows had too. There
were no blinds really to the cottage. It was aprons and things she had
pinned up.

Alice cried most of the morning, and so did the other girls. We wanted
to do something for the soldier's mother, but you can do nothing when
people's sons are shot. It is the most dreadful thing to want to do
something for people who are unhappy, and not to know what to do.

It was Noel who thought of what we COIULD do at last.

He said, 'I suppose they don't put up tombstones to soldiers when they
die in war. But there--I mean Oswald said, 'Of course not.'

Noel said, 'I daresay you'll think it's silly, but I don't care. Don't
you think she'd like it, if we put one up to HIM? Not in the churchyard,
of course, because we shouldn't be let, but in our garden, just where it
joins on to the churchyard?'

And we all thought it was a first-rate idea.

This is what we meant to put on the tombstone:


          'Here lies

          BILL SIMPKINS

     Who died fighting for Queen

          and Country.'


               'A faithful son,
               A son so dear,
               A soldier brave
               Lies buried here.'


Then we remembered that poor brave Bill was really buried far away in
the Southern hemisphere, if at all. So we altered it to--


               'A soldier brave
               We weep for here.'


Then we looked out a nice flagstone in the stable-yard, and we got a
cold chisel out of the Dentist's toolbox, and began.

But stone-cutting is difficult and dangerous work.

Oswald went at it a bit, but he chipped his thumb, and it bled so he had
to chuck it. Then Dicky tried, and then Denny, but Dicky hammered his
finger, and Denny took all day over every stroke, so that by tea-time
we had only done the H, and about half the E--and the E was awfully
crooked. Oswald chipped his thumb over the H.

We looked at it the next morning, and even the most sanguinary of us saw
that it was a hopeless task.

Then Denny said, 'Why not wood and paint?' and he showed us how. We
got a board and two stumps from the carpenter's in the village, and we
painted it all white, and when that was dry Denny did the words on it.

It was something like this:

          'IN MEMORY OF
          BILL SIMPKINS

     DEAD FOR QUEEN AND COUNTRY.

     HONOUR TO HIS NAME AND ALL

     OTHER BRAVE SOLDIERS.'


We could not get in what we meant to at first, so we had to give up the
poetry.

We fixed it up when it was dry. We had to dig jolly deep to get the
posts to stand up, but the gardener helped us.

Then the girls made wreaths of white flowers, roses and Canterbury
bells, and lilies and pinks, and sweet-peas and daisies, and put them
over the posts. And I think if Bill Simpkins had known how sorry we
were, he would have been glad. Oswald only hopes if he falls on the wild
battlefield, which is his highest ambition, that somebody will be as
sorry about him as he was about Bill, that's all!

When all was done, and what flowers there were over from the wreaths
scattered under the tombstone between the posts, we wrote a letter to
Mrs Simpkins, and said--


DEAR MRS SIMPKINS--

We are very, very sorry about the turnips and things, and we beg your
pardon humbly. We have put up a tombstone to your brave son.


And we signed our names. Alice took the letter.

The soldier's mother read it, and said something about our oughting to
know better than to make fun of people's troubles with our tombstones
and tomfoolery.

Alice told me she could not help crying.

She said--

'It's not! it's NOT! Dear, DEAR Mrs Simpkins, do come with me and see!
You don't know how sorry we are about Bill. Do come and see.

We can go through the churchyard, and the others have all gone in, so as
to leave it quiet for you. Do come.'

And Mrs Simpkins did. And when she read what we had put up, and Alice
told her the verse we had not had room for, she leant against the wall
by the grave--I mean the tombstone--and Alice hugged her, and they both
cried bitterly. The poor soldier's mother was very, very pleased, and
she forgave us about the turnips, and we were friends after that, but
she always liked Alice the best. A great many people do, somehow.

After that we used to put fresh flowers every day on Bill's tombstone,
and I do believe his mother was pleased, though she got us to move it
away from the churchyard edge and put it in a corner of our garden under
a laburnum, where people could not see it from the church. But you could
from the road, though I think she thought you couldn't. She came every
day to look at the new wreaths. When the white flowers gave out we put
coloured, and she liked it just as well.

About a fortnight after the erecting of the tombstone the girls were
putting fresh wreaths on it when a soldier in a red coat came down the
road, and he stopped and looked at us. He walked with a stick, and he
had a bundle in a blue cotton handkerchief, and one arm in a sling.

And he looked again, and he came nearer, and he leaned on the wall, so
that he could read the black printing on the white paint.

And he grinned all over his face, and he said--

'Well, I AM blessed!'

And he read it all out in a sort of half whisper, and when he came to
the end, where it says, 'and all such brave soldiers', he said--

'Well, I really AM!' I suppose he meant he really was blessed. Oswald
thought it was like the soldier's cheek, so he said--

'I daresay you aren't so very blessed as you think. What's it to do with
you, anyway, eh, Tommy?'

Of course Oswald knew from Kipling that an infantry soldier is called
that. The soldier said--

'Tommy yourself, young man. That's ME!' and he pointed to the tombstone.

We stood rooted to the spot. Alice spoke first.

'Then you're Bill, and you're not dead,' she said. 'Oh, Bill, I am so
glad! Do let ME tell your mother.'

She started running, and so did we all. Bill had to go slowly because of
his leg, but I tell you he went as fast as ever he could.

We all hammered at the soldier's mother's door, and shouted--

'Come out! come out!' and when she opened the door we were going to
speak, but she pushed us away, and went tearing down the garden path
like winking. I never saw a grown-up woman run like it, because she saw
Bill coming.

She met him at the gate, running right into him, and caught hold of him,
and she cried much more than when she thought he was dead.

And we all shook his hand and said how glad we were.

The soldier's mother kept hold of him with both hands, and I couldn't
help looking at her face. It was like wax that had been painted on both
pink cheeks, and the eyes shining like candles. And when we had all said
how glad we were, she said--

'Thank the dear Lord for His mercies,' and she took her boy Bill into
the cottage and shut the door.

We went home and chopped up the tombstone with the wood-axe and had a
blazing big bonfire, and cheered till we could hardly speak.

The postcard was a mistake; he was only missing. There was a pipe and
a whole pound of tobacco left over from our keepsake to the other
soldiers. We gave it to Bill. Father is going to have him for
under-gardener when his wounds get well. He'll always be a bit lame, so
he cannot fight any more.



CHAPTER 4. THE TOWER OF MYSTERY

It was very rough on Dora having her foot bad, but we took it in turns
to stay in with her, and she was very decent about it. Daisy was most
with her. I do not dislike Daisy, but I wish she had been taught how to
play. Because Dora is rather like that naturally, and sometimes I have
thought that Daisy makes her worse.

I talked to Albert's uncle about it one day, when the others had gone to
church, and I did not go because of ear-ache, and he said it came
from reading the wrong sort of books partly--she has read Ministering
Children, and Anna Ross, or The Orphan of Waterloo, and Ready Work for
Willing Hands, and Elsie, or Like a Little Candle, and even a horrid
little blue book about the something or other of Little Sins. After this
conversation Oswald took care she had plenty of the right sort of books
to read, and he was surprised and pleased when she got up early one
morning to finish Monte Cristo. Oswald felt that he was really being
useful to a suffering fellow-creature when he gave Daisy books that were
not all about being good.

