Scotland on that day, and the Headmaster, approached on the subject
both by letter and in person, saw no reason why--the examinations
being over--Dunstable should not leave Locksley a day before the
end of term.

He called Dunstable to his study one night after preparation.

"Your father has written to me, Dunstable," he said, "to ask that you
may be allowed to go home on Wednesday instead of Thursday. I think
that, under the special circumstances, there will be no objection to
this. You had better see that the matron packs your boxes."

"Yes, sir," said Dunstable. "Good business," he added to himself, as
he left the room.

When he got back to his own den, he began to ponder over the matter,
to see if something could not be made out of it. That was Dunstable's
way. He never let anything drop until he had made certain that he had
exhausted all its possibilities.

Just before he went to bed he had evolved a neat little scheme for
scoring off Mr. Langridge. The knowledge of his plans was confined to
himself and the Headmaster. His dorm-master would imagine that he was
going to stay on till the last day of term. Therefore, if he
misbehaved himself in form, Mr. Langridge would set him lines in
blissful ignorance of the fact that he would not be there next day to
show them up. At the beginning of the following term, moreover, he
would not be in Mr. Langridge's form, for he was certain of his move
up.

He acted accordingly.

He spent the earlier part of Wednesday morning in breaches of the
peace. Mr. Langridge, instead of pulling him up, put him on to
translate; Dunstable went on to translate. As he had not prepared the
lesson and was not an adept at construing unseen, his performance was
poor.

After a minute and a half, the form-master wearied.

"Have you looked at this, Dunstable?" he asked.

There was a time-honoured answer to this question.

"Yes, sir," he said.

Public-school ethics do not demand that you should reply truthfully to
the spirit of a question. The letter of it is all that requires
attention. Dunstable had _looked_ at the lesson. He was looking
at it then. Masters should practise exactness of speech. A certain
form at Harrow were in the habit of walking across a copy of a Latin
author before morning-school. They could then say with truth that they
"had been over it." This is not an isolated case.

"Go on," said Mr. Langridge.

Dunstable smiled as he did so.

Mr. Langridge was annoyed.

"What are you laughing at? What do you mean by it? Stand up. You will
write out the lesson in Latin and English, and show it up to me by
four this afternoon. I know what you are thinking. You imagine that
because this is the end of the term you can do as you please, but you
will find yourself mistaken. Mind--by four o'clock."

At four o'clock Dunstable was enjoying an excellent tea in Green
Street, Park Lane, and telling his mother that he had had a most
enjoyable term, marred by no unpleasantness whatever. His holidays
were sweetened by the thought of Mr. Langridge's baffled wrath on
discovering the true inwardness of the recent episode.

        *       *         *        *       *

When he returned to Locksley at the beginning of the winter term, he
was at once made aware that that episode was not to be considered
closed. On the first evening, Mr. Day, his housemaster, sent for him.

"Well, Dunstable," he said, "where is that imposition?"

Dunstable affected ignorance.

"Please, sir, you set me no imposition."

"No, Dunstable, no." Mr. Day peered at him gravely through his
spectacles. "_I_ set you no imposition; but Mr. Langridge did."

Dunstable imitated that eminent tactician, Br'er Rabbit. He "lay low
and said nuffin."

"Surely," continued Mr. Day, in tones of mild reproach, "you did not
think that you could take Mr. Langridge in?"

Dunstable rather thought he _had_ taken Mr. Langridge in; but he
made no reply.

"Well," said Mr. Day. "I must set you some punishment. I shall give
the butler instructions to hand you a note from me at three o'clock
to-morrow." (The next day was a half-holiday.) "In that note you will
find indicated what I wish you to write out."

Why this comic-opera secret-society business, Dunstable wondered. Then
it dawned upon him. Mr. Day wished to break up his half-holiday
thoroughly.

That afternoon Dunstable retired in disgust to his study to brood over
his wrongs; to him entered Charles, his friend, one C. J. Linton, to
wit, of Seymour's, a very hearty sportsman.

"Good," said Linton. "Didn't think I should find you in. Thought you
might have gone off somewhere as it's such a ripping day. Tell you
what we'll do. Scull a mile or two up the river and have tea
somewhere."

"I should like to awfully," said Dunstable, "but I'm afraid I can't."

And he explained Mr. Day's ingenious scheme for preventing him from
straying that afternoon.

"Rot, isn't it," he said.

"Beastly. Wouldn't have thought old Day had it in him. But I'll tell
you what," he said. "Do the impot now, and then you'll be able to
start at three sharp, and we shall get in a good time on the river.
Day always sets the same thing. I've known scores of chaps get impots
from him, and they all had to do the Greek numerals. He's mad on the
Greek numerals. Never does anything else. You'll be as safe as
anything if you do them. Buck up, I'll help."

They accordingly sat down there and then. By three o'clock an imposing
array of sheets of foolscap covered with badly-written Greek lay on
the study table.

"That ought to be enough," said Linton, laying down his pen. "He can't
set you more than we've done, I should think."

"Rummy how alike our writing looks," said Dunstable, collecting the
sheets and examining them. "You can hardly tell which is which even
when you know. Well, there goes three. My watch is slow, as it always
is. I'll go and get that note."

Two minutes later he returned, full of abusive references to Mr. Day.
The crafty pedagogue appeared to have foreseen Dunstable's attempt to
circumvent him by doing the Greek numerals on the chance of his
setting them. The imposition he had set in his note was ten pages of
irregular verbs, and they were to be shown up in his study before five
o'clock. Linton's programme for the afternoon was out of the question
now. But he loyally gave up any other plans which he might have formed
in order to help Dunstable with his irregular verbs. Dunstable was too
disgusted with fate to be properly grateful.

"And the worst of it is," he said, as they adjourned for tea at
half-past four, having deposited the verbs on Mr. Day's table, "that
all those numerals will be wasted now."

"I should keep them, though," said Linton. "They may come in useful.
You never know."

       *       *       *       *       *

Towards the end of the second week of term Fate, by way of
compensation, allowed Dunstable a distinct stroke of luck. Mr. Forman,
the master of his new form, set him a hundred lines of Virgil, and
told him to show them up next day. To Dunstable's delight, the next
day passed without mention of them; and when the day after that went
by, and still nothing was said, he came to the conclusion that Mr.
Forman had forgotten all about them.

Which was indeed the case. Mr. Forman was engaged in editing a new
edition of the "Bacchae," and was apt to be absent-minded in
consequence. So Dunstable, with a glad smile, hove the lines into a
cupboard in his study to keep company with the Greek numerals which he
had done for Mr. Day, and went out to play fives with Linton.

Linton, curiously enough, had also had a stroke of luck in a rather
similar way. He told Dunstable about it as they strolled back to the
houses after their game.

"Bit of luck this afternoon," he said. "You remember Appleby setting
me a hundred-and-fifty the day before yesterday? Well, I showed
them up to-day, and he looked through them and chucked them into the
waste-paper basket under his desk. I thought at the time I hadn't seen
him muck them up at all with his pencil, which is his usual game, so
after he had gone at the end of school I nipped to the basket and
fished them out. They were as good as new, so I saved them up in case
I get any more."

Dunstable hastened to tell of his own good fortune. Linton was
impressed by the coincidence.

"I tell you what," he said, "we score either way. Because if we never
get any more lines----"

Dunstable laughed.

"Yes, I know," Linton went on, "we're bound to. But even supposing we
don't, what we've got in stock needn't be wasted."

"I don't see that," said Dunstable. "Going to have 'em bound in cloth
and published? Or were you thinking of framing them?"

"Why, don't you see? Sell them, of course. There are dozens of chaps
in the school who would be glad of a few hundred lines cheap."

"It wouldn't work. They'd be spotted."

"Rot. It's been done before, and nobody said anything. A chap in
Seymour's who left last Easter sold all his stock lines by auction on
the last day of term. They were Virgil mostly and Greek numerals. They
sold like hot cakes. There were about five hundred of them altogether.
And I happen to know that every word of them has been given up and
passed all right."

"Well, I shall keep mine," said Dunstable. "I am sure to want all the
lines in stock that I can get. I used to think Langridge was fairly
bad in the way of impots, but Forman takes the biscuit easily. It
seems to be a sort of hobby of his. You can't stop him."

But it was not until the middle of preparation that the great idea
flashed upon Dunstable's mind.

It was the simplicity of the thing that took his breath away. That and
its possibilities. This was the idea. Why not start a Lines Trust in
the school? An agency for supplying lines at moderate rates to all who
desired them? There did not seem to be a single flaw in the scheme. He
and Linton between them could turn out enough material in a week to
give the Trust a good working capital. And as for the risk of
detection when customers came to show up the goods supplied to them,
that was very slight. As has been pointed out before, there was
practically one handwriting common to the whole school when it came to
writing lines. It resembled the movements of a fly that had fallen
into an ink-pot, and subsequently taken a little brisk exercise on a
sheet of foolscap by way of restoring the circulation. Then, again,
the attitude of the master to whom the lines were shown was not likely
to be critical. So that everything seemed in favour of Dunstable's
scheme.

Linton, to whom he confided it, was inclined to scoff at first, but
when he had had the beauties of the idea explained to him at length,
became an enthusiastic supporter of the scheme.

"But," he objected, "it'll take up all our time. Is it worth it? We
can't spend every afternoon sweating away at impots for other people."

"It's all right," said Dunstable, "I've thought of that. We shall need
to pitch in pretty hard for about a week or ten days. That will give
us a good big stock, and after that if we turn out a hundred each
every day it will be all right. A hundred's not much fag if you spread
them over a day."

Linton admitted that this was sound, and the Locksley Lines Supplying
Trust, Ltd., set to work in earnest.

It must not be supposed that the Agency left a great deal to chance.
The writing of lines in advance may seem a very speculative business;
but both Dunstable and Linton had had a wide experience of Locksley
masters, and the methods of the same when roused, and they were thus
enabled to reduce the element of chance to a minimum. They knew, for
example, that Mr. Day's favourite imposition was the Greek numerals,
and that in nine cases out of ten that would be what the youth who had
dealings with him would need to ask for from the Lines Trust. Mr.
Appleby, on the other hand, invariably set Virgil. The oldest
inhabitant had never known him to depart from this custom. For the
French masters extracts from the works of Victor Hugo would probably
pass muster.

A week from the date of the above conversation, everyone in the
school, with the exception of the prefects and the sixth form, found
in his desk on arriving at his form-room a printed slip of paper.
(Spiking, the stationer in the High Street, had printed it.) It was
nothing less than the prospectus of the new Trust. It set forth in
glowing terms the advantages offered by the agency. Dunstable had
written it--he had a certain amount of skill with his pen--and Linton
had suggested subtle and captivating additions. The whole presented
rather a striking appearance.

The document was headed with the name of the Trust in large letters.
Under this came a number of "scare headlines" such as:

              SEE WHAT YOU SAVE!

                NO MORE WORRY!

             PEACE, PERFECT PEACE!

         WHY DO LINES WHEN WE DO THEM
                    FOR YOU?

Then came the real prospectus:

    The Locksley Lines Supplying Trust, Ltd. has been instituted to
    meet the growing demand for lines and other impositions. While
    there are masters at our public schools there will always be lines.
    At Locksley the crop of masters has always flourished--and still
    flourishes--very rankly, and the demand for lines has greatly taxed
    the powers of those to whom has been assigned the task of supplying
    them.

    It is for the purpose of affording relief to these that the Lines
    Trust has been formed. It is proposed that all orders for lines
    shall be supplied out of our vast stock. Our charges are moderate,
    and vary between threepence and sixpence per hundred lines. The
    higher charge is made for Greek impositions, which, for obvious
    reasons, entail a greater degree of labour on our large and
    efficient staff of writers.

    All orders, which will be promptly executed, should be forwarded to
    Mr. P. A. Dunstable, 6 College Grounds, Locksley, or to Mr. C. J.
    Linton, 10 College Grounds, Locksley. _Payment must be inclosed
    with order, or the latter will not be executed._ Under no
    conditions will notes of hand or cheques be accepted as legal
    tender. There is no trust about us except the name.

    Come in your thousands. We have lines for all. If the Trust's
    stock of lines were to be placed end to end it would reach part
    of the way to London. "You pay the threepence. We do the rest."

Then a blank space, after which came a few "unsolicited testimonials":

    "Lower Fifth" writes: "I was set two hundred lines of Virgil on
    Saturday last at one o'clock. Having laid in a supply from your
    agency I was enabled to show them up at five minutes past one.
    The master who gave me the commission was unable to restrain his
    admiration at the rapidity and neatness of my work. You may make
    what use of this you please."

    "Dexter's House" writes: "Please send me one hundred (100) lines
    from _Aeneid, Book Two_. Mr. Dexter was so delighted with the last
    I showed him that he has asked me to do some more."

    "Enthusiast" writes: "Thank you for your Greek numerals. Day took
    them without blinking. So beautifully were they executed that I can
    hardly believe even now that I did not write them myself."

        *       *       *       *       *

There could be no doubt about the popularity of the Trust. It caught
on instantly.

Nothing else was discussed in the form-rooms at the quarter to eleven
interval, and in the houses after lunch it was the sole topic of
conversation. Dunstable and Linton were bombarded with questions and
witticisms of the near personal sort. To the latter they replied with
directness, to the former evasively.

"What's it all _about?_" someone would ask, fluttering the
leaflet before Dunstable's unmoved face.

"You should read it carefully," Dunstable would reply. "It's all
there."

"But what are you playing at?"

"We tried to make it clear to the meanest intelligence. Sorry you
can't understand it."

While at the same time Linton, in his form-room, would be explaining
to excited inquirers that he was sorry, but it was impossible to reply
to their query as to who was running the Trust. He was not at liberty
to reveal business secrets. Suffice it that there the lines were,
waiting to be bought, and he was there to sell them. So that if
anybody cared to lay in a stock, large or small, according to taste,
would he kindly walk up and deposit the necessary coin?

But here the public showed an unaccountable disinclination to deal. It
was gratifying to have acquaintances coming up and saying admiringly:
"You are an ass, you know," as if they were paying the highest of
compliments--as, indeed, they probably imagined that they were. All
this was magnificent, but it was not business. Dunstable and Linton
felt that the whole attitude of the public towards the new enterprise
was wrong. Locksley seemed to regard the Trust as a huge joke, and its
prospectus as a literary _jeu d'esprit_.

In fact, it looked very much as if--from a purely commercial point of
view--the great Lines Supplying Trust was going to be what is known in
theatrical circles as a frost.

For two whole days the public refused to bite, and Dunstable and
Linton, turning over the stacks of lines in their studies, thought
gloomily that this world is no place for original enterprise.

