Mrs. Sankey hated being troubled, and the ayahs always found that any
complaints to her recoiled upon themselves, for she always took the
part of her children, and insisted that the fault lay on the side of the
nurses and not on them. The natural result was, that the ayahs ceased
to trouble her, and found it easier to allow the children to do as they
chose, and to give way quietly to Ned's outbursts of passion.

Captain Sankey knew nothing of all this. Ned was very fond of him, and
was always bright and good tempered when with his father, and it was
not until he left India and was thrown more with him that Captain Sankey
discovered how grievously Ned's disposition, which was in other respects
a fine one, was marred by the habit which had been encouraged by
indulgence and want of control. Then he set to work earnestly to remedy
the mischief, but the growth of years is hard to eradicate, and although
under the influence of the affection for his father and his own good
sense Ned had so far conquered himself that his fits of passion were few
and far between, the evil still existed, and might yet, as his father
felt, lead to consequences which would mar his whole life.

Thinking the matter sadly over, Captain Sankey was proceeding toward the
school when he met one of the constables. The man touched his hat and
stopped.

"This be a moighty oonpleasant business, captain," he said; "your boy,
he ha' been and battered schoolmaister; and t' doctor says he ha' broke
his collarbone. Oi ha' got to take him afore t' magistrate."

"Very well, Harper," Captain Sankey said quietly; "of course you must
do your duty. It is a sad business, and I was on my way to the school to
see if the matter could not be arranged; however, as it has been put in
your hands it is now too late, and things must take their course; the
magistrates are not sitting today. I will guarantee that my son shall be
present at the sitting on Thursday, I suppose that will be sufficient?"

"Yes, oi supposes if you promises to produce him, that will do," the
constable said. "Oi doan't suppose as nought will come o't; these
schoolmaister chaps does thrash t' boys cruel, and oi ain't surprised as
t' little chaps roises ag'in it soometoimes. T'others all seem moighty
glad o' it: oi heard 'em shouting and, cheering in t' yard as if they
was all mad."

Captain Sankey shook his head. "I'm afraid the magistrates won't see it
in that light, Harper; discipline is discipline. However, we must hope
for the best."

The story that there had been a rebellion among the boys at Hathorn's,
that the schoolmaster had his shoulder broken, and that Captain Sankey's
son was to go before the magistrates, spread rapidly through Marsden,
and the courthouse was crowded at the sitting of the magistrates on
Thursday.

There were two magistrates on the bench. Mr. Thompson the local banker,
and Squire Simmonds of Lathorpe Hall, three miles from the town. Several
minor cases were first disposed of, and then Ned's name was called.
Captain Sankey had been accommodated with a seat near the magistrates,
with both of whom he had some personal acquaintance. Ned was sitting by
the side of the lawyer whom his father had retained to defend him; he
now moved quietly into the dock, while Mr. Hathorn, with his arm in a
sling, took his place in the witness box.

Ned had recovered now from his fit of passion, and looked amused rather
than concerned as the schoolmaster gave his evidence as to the fray in
the schoolroom.

"I have a few questions to ask you, Mr. Hathorn," Mr. Wakefield, Ned's
lawyer, said. "Had you any reason for expecting any outbreak of this
kind among your boys?"

"None whatever," Mr. Hathorn said.

"You use the cane pretty freely, I believe, sir."

"I use it when it is necessary," Mr. Hathorn replied.

"Ah, and how often do you consider it necessary?"

"That must depend upon circumstances."

"You have about thirty boys, I think?"

"About thirty."

"And you consider it necessary that at least fifteen out of that thirty
should be caned every day. You must have got a very bad lot of boys, Mr.
Hathorn?"

"Not so many as that," the schoolmaster said, flushing.

"I shall be prepared to prove to your worships," the lawyer said, "that
for the last six months the average of boys severely caned by this man
has exceeded sixteen a day, putting aside such minor matters as one,
two, or three vicious cuts with the cane given at random. It fortunately
happened, as I find from my young friend in the dock, that one of the
boys has, from motives of curiosity, kept an account for the last six
months of the number of boys thrashed every day. I have sent round for
him, and he is at present in court."

Mr. Hathorn turned pale, and he began to think that it would have been
wiser for him to have followed Ned's advice, and not to have brought the
matter into court.

"Your worships," the lawyer said, "you have been boys, as I have, and
you can form your own ideas as to the wretchedness that must prevail
among a body of lads of whom more than half are caned daily. This,
your worships, is a state of tyranny which might well drive any boys to
desperation. But I have not done with Mr. Hathorn yet.

"During the ten days previous to this affair things wore even more
unpleasant than usual in your establishment, were they not, sir?
I understand that the whole of the boys were deprived of all play
whatever, and that every minute was occupied by extra tasks, and
moreover the prospect was held out to them that this sort of thing would
continue for months."

There had already been several demonstrations of feeling in court,
but at this statement by the lawyer there was a general hiss. The
schoolmaster hesitated before replying.

"Now, Mr. Hathorn," the lawyer said briskly, "we want neither hesitation
nor equivocation. We may as well have it from you, because if you don't
like telling the truth I can put the thirty miserable lads under your
charge into the box one after the other."

"They have had extra tasks to do during their play time," Mr. Hathorn
said, "because they refused to reveal which among them brutally murdered
my cat."

"And how do you know they murdered your cat?"

"I am sure they did," the schoolmaster said shortly.

"Oh! you are sure they did! And why are you so sure? Had they any grudge
against your cat?"

"They pretended they had a grudge."

"What for, Mr. Hathorn?"

"They used to accuse her of upsetting the ink bottles when they did it
themselves."

"You did not believe their statements, I suppose?"

"Not at all."

"You caned them just the same as if they had done it themselves. At
least I am told so."

"Of course I caned them, especially as I knew that they were telling a
lie."

"But if it was a lie, Mr. Hathorn, if this cat did not upset their ink,
why on earth should these boys have a grudge against her and murder
her?"

The schoolmaster was silent.

"Now I want an answer, sir. You are punishing thirty boys in addition to
the sixteen daily canings divided among them; you have cut off all their
play time, and kept them at work from the time they rise to the time
they go to bed. As you see, according to your own statement, they could
have had no grudge against the cat, how are you sure they murdered her?"

"I am quite sure." Mr. Hathorn said doggedly. "Boys have always a spite
against cats."

"Now, your honors, you hear this," Mr. Wakefield said. "Now I am about
to place in the witness box a very respectable woman, one Jane Tytler,
who is cook to our esteemed fellow townsman, Mr. Samuel Hawkins, whose
residence is, as you know, not far from this school. She will tell you
that, having for some time been plagued by a thieving cat which was in
the habit of getting into her larder and carrying off portions of food,
she, finding it one day there in the act of stealing a half chicken,
fell upon it with a broomstick and killed it, or as she thought killed
it, and I imagine most cooks would have acted the same under the
circumstances.

"She thought no more about it until she heard the reports in the town
about this business at the school, and then she told her master. The
dates have been compared, and it is found that she battered this cat
on the evening before the Hathorn cat was found dead in the yard.
Furthermore, the cat she battered was a white cat with a black spot
on one side, and this is the exact description of the Hathorn cat;
therefore, your honors, you will see that the assumption, or pretense,
or excuse, call it what you will, by which this man justifies his
tyrannical treatment of these unfortunate boys has no base or foundation
whatever. You can go now, Mr. Hathorn; I have nothing further to say to
you."

A loud hiss rose again from the crowded court as the schoolmaster
stepped down from the witness box, and Jane Tytler took his place.
After giving her evidence she was succeeded by Dick Tompkins in much
trepidation. Dick was a most unwilling witness, but he produced the
notebook in which he had daily jotted down the number of boys caned, and
swore to the general accuracy of the figures.

Mr. Wakefield then asked the magistrates if they would like to hear any
further witnesses as to the state of things in the schoolroom. They said
that what they had heard was quite sufficient. He then addressed them on
the merits of the case, pointing out that although in this case one of
the parties was a master and the other a pupil this in no way removed it
in the eye of the law from the category of other assaults.

"In this case," he said, "your worships, the affair has arisen out of
a long course of tyranny and provocation on the part of one of the
parties, and you will observe that this is the party who first commits
the assault, while my client was acting solely in self defense.

"It is he who ought to stand in the witness box; and the complainant
in the dock, for he is at once the aggressor and the assailant. The law
admits any man who is assaulted to defend himself, and there is, so far
as I am aware, no enactment whatever to be found in the statute book
placing boys in a different category to grownup persons. When your
worships have discharged my client, as I have no doubt you will do at
once, I shall advise him to apply for a summons for assault against this
man Hathorn."

The magistrates consulted together for some time, then the squire, who
was the senior, said:

"We are of opinion that Master Sankey, by aiding this rebellion
against his master, has done wrongly, and that he erred grievously in
discharging a heavy missile at his master; at the same time we think
that the provocation that he received by the tyranny which has been
proved to have been exercised by Mr. Hathorn toward the boys under his
charge, and especially by their unjust punishment for an offense which
the complainant conceived without sufficient warrant, or indeed without
any warrant at all, that they had committed, to a great extent justifies
and excuses the conduct of Master Sankey. Therefore, with a reprimand as
to his behavior, and a caution as to the consequences which might have
arisen from his allowing his temper to go beyond bounds, we discharge
him.

"As to you, sir," he said to the schoolmaster, "we wish to express our
opinion that your conduct has been cruel and tyrannical in the extreme,
and we pity the unfortunate boys who are under the care of a man who
treats them with such cruel harshness as you are proved to have done."

The magistrates now rose, and the court broke up. Many of those present
crowded round Ned and shook his hand, congratulating him on the issue;
but at a sign from his father the boy drew himself away from them, and
joining Captain Sankey, walked home with him.

"The matter has ended better than I expected, Ned," he said gravely;
"but pray, my boy, do not let yourself think that there is any reason
for triumph. You have been gravely reprimanded, and had the missile you
used struck the schoolmaster on the head, you would now be in prison
awaiting your trial for a far graver offense, and that before judges
who would not make the allowances for you that the magistrates here have
done.

"Beware of your temper, Ned, for unless you overcome it, be assured that
sooner or later it may lead to terrible consequences."

Ned, who had in fact been inclined to feel triumphant over his success,
was sobered by his father's grave words and manner; and resolved that
he would try hard to conquer his fault; but evil habits are hard to
overcome, and the full force of his father's words was still to come
home to him.

He did not, of course, return to Mr. Hathorn's, and indeed the
disclosures of the master's severity made at the examination before
the magistrates obtained such publicity that several of his pupils were
removed at once, and notices were given that so many more would not
return after the next holidays that no one was surprised to hear that
the schoolmaster had arranged with a successor in the school, and that
he himself was about to go to America.

The result was that after the holidays his successor took his place,
and many of the fathers who had intended to remove their sons decided
to give the newcomer a trial. The school opened with nearly the usual
number of pupils. Ned was one of those who went back. Captain Sankey had
called on the new master, and had told him frankly the circumstances of
the fracas between Ned and Mr. Hathorn.

"I will try your son at any rate, Mr. Sankey," the master said. "I have
a strong opinion that boys can be managed without such use of the cane
as is generally adopted; that, in my opinion, should be the last resort.
Boys are like other people, and will do more for kindness than for
blows. By what you tell me, the circumstances of your son's bringing
up in India among native servants have encouraged the growth of a
passionate temper, but I trust that we may be able to overcome that; at
any rate I will give him a trial."

And so it was settled that Ned should return to Porson's, for so the
establishment was henceforth to be known.




CHAPTER V: THE NEW MASTER


It was with much excitement and interest that the boys gathered in their
places for the first time under the new master. The boarders had not
seen him upon their arrival on the previous evening, but had been
received by an old housekeeper, who told them Mr. Porson would not
return until the coach came in from York that night.

All eyes were turned to the door as the master entered. The first
impression was that he was a younger man than they had expected. Mr.
Hathorn had been some forty-five years old; the newcomer was not
over thirty. He was a tall, loosely made man, with somewhat stooping
shoulders; he had heavy eyebrows, gray eyes, and a firm mouth. He did
not look round as he walked straight to his desk; then he turned, and
his eyes traveled quietly and steadily round the room as if scanning
each of the faces directed toward him.

"Now, boys," he said in a quiet voice, "a few words before we begin.
I am here to teach, and you are here to learn. As your master I expect
prompt obedience. I shall look to see each of you do your best to
acquire the knowledge which your parents have sent you here to obtain.
Above all, I shall expect that every boy here will be straightforward,
honorable, and truthful. I shall not expect to find that all are capable
of making equal progress; there are clever boys and stupid boys, just
as there are clever men and stupid men, and it would be unjust to expect
that one can keep up to the other; but I do look to each doing his best
according to his ability. On my part I shall do my best to advance you
in your studies, to correct your faults, and to make useful men of you.

"One word as to punishments. I do not believe that knowledge is to be
thrashed into boys, or that fear is the best teacher. I shall expect you
to learn, partly because you feel that as your parents have paid for you
to learn it is your duty to learn, partly because you wish to please me.
I hope that the cane will seldom be used in this school. It will be used
if any boy tells me a lie, if any boy does anything which is mean and
dishonorable, if any boy is obstinately idle, and when it is used it
will be used to a purpose, but I trust that the occasion for it will be
rare.

"I shall treat you as friends whom it is my duty to instruct. You will
treat me, I hope, as a friend whose duty it is to instruct you, and who
has a warm interest in your welfare; if we really bear these relations
to each other there should be seldom any occasion for punishment. And
now as a beginning today, boys, let each come up to my desk, one at a
time, with his books. I shall examine you separately, and see what each
knows and is capable of doing. I see by the report here that there are
six boys in the first class. As these will occupy me all the morning
the rest can go into the playground. The second class will be taken this
afternoon."

The boys had listened with astonished silence to this address, and so
completely taken aback were they that all save those ordered to remain
rose from their seats and went out in a quiet and orderly way, very
different from the wild rush which generally terminated school time.

Ned being in the second class was one of those who went out. Instead of
scattering into groups, the boys gathered in a body outside.

"What do you think of that, Sankey?" Tompkins said. "It seems almost
too good to be true. Only fancy, no more thrashing except for lying and
things of that sort, and treating us like friends! and he talked as if
he meant it too."

"That he did," Ned said gravely; "and I tell you, fellows, we shall have
to work now, and no mistake. A fellow who will not work for such a man
as that deserves to be skinned."

"I expect," said James Mather, who was one of the biggest boys in the
