tear, from that hour until this moment.

But--and you may see by this how a wrong act of any one mortal is a
calamity to the whole world--by Pandora's lifting the lid of that
miserable box, and by the fault of Epimetheus, too, in not preventing
her, these Troubles have obtained a foothold among us, and do not seem
very likely to be driven away in a hurry.  For it was impossible, as you
will easily guess, that the two children should keep the ugly swarm in
their own little cottage.  On the contrary, the first thing that they
did was to fling open the doors and windows, in hopes of getting rid of
them; and, sure enough, away flew the winged Troubles all abroad, and so
pestered and tormented the small people, everywhere about, that none of
them so much as smiled for many days afterwards.  And, what was very
singular, all the flowers and dewy blossoms on earth, not one of which
had hitherto faded, now began to droop and shed their leaves, after a
day or two.  The children, moreover, who before seemed immortal in their
childhood, now grew older, day by day, and came soon to be youths and
maidens, and men and women by and by, and aged people, before they
dreamed of such a thing.

Meanwhile, the naughty Pandora, and hardly less naughty Epimetheus,
remained in their cottage.  Both of them had been grievously stung, and
were in a good deal of pain, which seemed the more intolerable to them,
because it was the very first pain that had ever been felt since the
world began.  Of course, they were entirely unaccustomed to it, and
could have no idea what it meant.  Besides all this, they were in
exceedingly bad humor, both with themselves and with one another.  In
order to indulge it to the utmost, Epimetheus sat down sullenly in a
corner with his back towards Pandora; while Pandora flung herself upon
the floor and rested her head on the fatal and abominable box.  She was
crying bitterly, and sobbing as if her heart would break.

Suddenly there was a gentle little tap, on the inside of the lid.

"What can that be?" cried Pandora, lifting her head.

But either Epimetheus had not heard the tap, or was too much out of
humor to notice it.  At any rate, he made no answer.

"You are very unkind," said Pandora, sobbing anew, "not to speak to me!"

Again the tap!  It sounded like the tiny knuckles of a fairy's hand,
knocking lightly and playfully on the inside of the box.

"Who are you?"  asked Pandora, with a little of her former curiosity.
"Who are you, inside of this naughty box?"

A sweet little voice spoke from within,--

"Only lift the lid, and you shall see."

"No, no," answered Pandora, again beginning to sob, "I have had enough
of lifting the lid!  You are inside of the box, naughty creature, and
there you shall stay!  There are plenty of your ugly brothers and
sisters already flying about the world.  You need never think that I
shall be so foolish as to let you out!"

She looked towards Epimetheus, as she spoke, perhaps expecting that he
would commend her for her wisdom.  But the sullen boy only muttered that
she was wise a little too late.

"Ah," said the sweet little voice again, "you had much better let me
out.  I am not like those naughty creatures that have stings in their
tails.  They are no brothers and sisters of mine, as you would see at
once, if you were only to get a glimpse of me.  Come, come, my pretty
Pandora!  I am sure you will let me out!"

And, indeed, there was a kind of cheerful witchery in the tone, that
made it almost impossible to refuse anything which this little voice
asked.  Pandora's heart had insensibly grown lighter, at every word that
came from within the box.  Epimetheus, too, though still in the corner,
had turned half round, and seemed to be in rather better spirits than
before.

"My dear Epimetheus," cried Pandora, "have you heard this little voice?"

"Yes, to be sure I have," answered he, but in no very good-humor as yet.
"And what of it?"

"Shall I lift the lid again?" asked Pandora.

"Just as you please," said Epimetheus.  "You have done so much mischief
already, that perhaps you may as well do a little more.  One other
Trouble, in such a swarm as you have set adrift about the world, can
make no very great difference."

"You might speak a little more kindly!" murmured Pandora, wiping her
eyes.

"Ah, naughty boy!" cried the little voice within the box, in an arch and
laughing tone.  "He knows he is longing to see me.  Come, my dear
Pandora, lift up the lid.  I am in a great hurry to comfort you.  Only
let me have some fresh air, and you shall soon see that matters are not
quite so dismal as you think them!"

"Epimetheus," exclaimed Pandora, "come what may, I am resolved to open
the box!"

"And, as the lid seems very heavy," cried Epimetheus, running across the
room, "I will help you!"

So, with one consent, the two children again lifted the lid.  Out flew a
sunny and smiling little personage, and hovered about the room, throwing
a light wherever she went.  Have you never made the sunshine dance into
dark corners, by reflecting it from a bit of looking-glass?  Well, so
looked the winged cheerfulness of this fairylike stranger, amid the
gloom of the cottage.  She flew to Epimetheus, and laid the least touch
of her finger on the inflamed spot where the Trouble had stung him, and
immediately the anguish of it was gone.  Then she kissed Pandora on the
forehead, and her hurt was cured likewise.

After performing these good offices, the bright stranger fluttered
sportively over the children's heads, and looked so sweetly at them,
that they both began to think it not so very much amiss to have opened
