Hatta's neck.

Hatta looked round and nodded, and went on with his bread and butter.

'Were you happy in prison, dear child?' said Haigha.

Hatta looked round once more, and this time a tear or two trickled down
his cheek: but not a word would he say.

'Speak, can't you!' Haigha cried impatiently. But Hatta only munched
away, and drank some more tea.

'Speak, won't you!' cried the King. 'How are they getting on with the
fight?'

Hatta made a desperate effort, and swallowed a large piece of
bread-and-butter. 'They're getting on very well,' he said in a choking
voice: 'each of them has been down about eighty-seven times.'

'Then I suppose they'll soon bring the white bread and the brown?' Alice
ventured to remark.

'It's waiting for 'em now,' said Hatta: 'this is a bit of it as I'm
eating.'

There was a pause in the fight just then, and the Lion and the Unicorn
sat down, panting, while the King called out 'Ten minutes allowed for
refreshments!' Haigha and Hatta set to work at once, carrying rough
trays of white and brown bread. Alice took a piece to taste, but it was
VERY dry.

'I don't think they'll fight any more to-day,' the King said to Hatta:
'go and order the drums to begin.' And Hatta went bounding away like a
grasshopper.

For a minute or two Alice stood silent, watching him. Suddenly she
brightened up. 'Look, look!' she cried, pointing eagerly. 'There's the
White Queen running across the country! She came flying out of the wood
over yonder--How fast those Queens CAN run!'

'There's some enemy after her, no doubt,' the King said, without even
looking round. 'That wood's full of them.'

'But aren't you going to run and help her?' Alice asked, very much
surprised at his taking it so quietly.

'No use, no use!' said the King. 'She runs so fearfully quick. You might
as well try to catch a Bandersnatch! But I'll make a memorandum about
her, if you like--She's a dear good creature,' he repeated softly to
himself, as he opened his memorandum-book. 'Do you spell "creature" with
a double "e"?'

At this moment the Unicorn sauntered by them, with his hands in his
pockets. 'I had the best of it this time?' he said to the King, just
glancing at him as he passed.

'A little--a little,' the King replied, rather nervously. 'You shouldn't
have run him through with your horn, you know.'

'It didn't hurt him,' the Unicorn said carelessly, and he was going
on, when his eye happened to fall upon Alice: he turned round rather
instantly, and stood for some time looking at her with an air of the
deepest disgust.

'What--is--this?' he said at last.

'This is a child!' Haigha replied eagerly, coming in front of Alice
to introduce her, and spreading out both his hands towards her in an
Anglo-Saxon attitude. 'We only found it to-day. It's as large as life,
and twice as natural!'

'I always thought they were fabulous monsters!' said the Unicorn. 'Is it
alive?'

'It can talk,' said Haigha, solemnly.

The Unicorn looked dreamily at Alice, and said 'Talk, child.'

Alice could not help her lips curling up into a smile as she began: 'Do
you know, I always thought Unicorns were fabulous monsters, too! I never
saw one alive before!'

'Well, now that we HAVE seen each other,' said the Unicorn, 'if you'll
believe in me, I'll believe in you. Is that a bargain?'

'Yes, if you like,' said Alice.

'Come, fetch out the plum-cake, old man!' the Unicorn went on, turning
from her to the King. 'None of your brown bread for me!'

'Certainly--certainly!' the King muttered, and beckoned to Haigha. 'Open
the bag!' he whispered. 'Quick! Not that one--that's full of hay!'

Haigha took a large cake out of the bag, and gave it to Alice to hold,
while he got out a dish and carving-knife. How they all came out of it
Alice couldn't guess. It was just like a conjuring-trick, she thought.

The Lion had joined them while this was going on: he looked very
tired and sleepy, and his eyes were half shut. 'What's this!' he said,
blinking lazily at Alice, and speaking in a deep hollow tone that
sounded like the tolling of a great bell.

'Ah, what IS it, now?' the Unicorn cried eagerly. 'You'll never guess!
_I_ couldn't.'

The Lion looked at Alice wearily. 'Are you animal--vegetable--or
mineral?' he said, yawning at every other word.

'It's a fabulous monster!' the Unicorn cried out, before Alice could
reply.

'Then hand round the plum-cake, Monster,' the Lion said, lying down and
putting his chin on his paws. 'And sit down, both of you,' (to the King
and the Unicorn): 'fair play with the cake, you know!'

The King was evidently very uncomfortable at having to sit down between
the two great creatures; but there was no other place for him.

'What a fight we might have for the crown, NOW!' the Unicorn said,
looking slyly up at the crown, which the poor King was nearly shaking
off his head, he trembled so much.

'I should win easy,' said the Lion.

'I'm not so sure of that,' said the Unicorn.

'Why, I beat you all round the town, you chicken!' the Lion replied
angrily, half getting up as he spoke.

Here the King interrupted, to prevent the quarrel going on: he was very
nervous, and his voice quite quivered. 'All round the town?' he
said. 'That's a good long way. Did you go by the old bridge, or the
market-place? You get the best view by the old bridge.'

'I'm sure I don't know,' the Lion growled out as he lay down again.
'There was too much dust to see anything. What a time the Monster is,
cutting up that cake!'

Alice had seated herself on the bank of a little brook, with the great
dish on her knees, and was sawing away diligently with the knife. 'It's
very provoking!' she said, in reply to the Lion (she was getting quite
used to being called 'the Monster'). 'I've cut several slices already,
but they always join on again!'

'You don't know how to manage Looking-glass cakes,' the Unicorn
remarked. 'Hand it round first, and cut it afterwards.'

This sounded nonsense, but Alice very obediently got up, and carried the
dish round, and the cake divided itself into three pieces as she did so.
'NOW cut it up,' said the Lion, as she returned to her place with the
empty dish.

'I say, this isn't fair!' cried the Unicorn, as Alice sat with the knife
in her hand, very much puzzled how to begin. 'The Monster has given the
Lion twice as much as me!'

'She's kept none for herself, anyhow,' said the Lion. 'Do you like
plum-cake, Monster?'

But before Alice could answer him, the drums began.

Where the noise came from, she couldn't make out: the air seemed full
of it, and it rang through and through her head till she felt quite
deafened. She started to her feet and sprang across the little brook in
her terror,

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

and had just time to see the Lion and the Unicorn rise to their feet,
with angry looks at being interrupted in their feast, before she dropped
to her knees, and put her hands over her ears, vainly trying to shut out
the dreadful uproar.

'If THAT doesn't "drum them out of town,"' she thought to herself,
'nothing ever will!'




CHAPTER VIII. 'It's my own Invention'

After a while the noise seemed gradually to die away, till all was dead
silence, and Alice lifted up her head in some alarm. There was no one
to be seen, and her first thought was that she must have been dreaming
about the Lion and the Unicorn and those queer Anglo-Saxon Messengers.
However, there was the great dish still lying at her feet, on which she
had tried to cut the plum-cake, 'So I wasn't dreaming, after all,' she
said to herself, 'unless--unless we're all part of the same dream. Only
I do hope it's MY dream, and not the Red King's! I don't like belonging
to another person's dream,' she went on in a rather complaining tone:
'I've a great mind to go and wake him, and see what happens!'

At this moment her thoughts were interrupted by a loud shouting of
'Ahoy! Ahoy! Check!' and a Knight dressed in crimson armour came
galloping down upon her, brandishing a great club. Just as he reached
her, the horse stopped suddenly: 'You're my prisoner!' the Knight cried,
as he tumbled off his horse.

Startled as she was, Alice was more frightened for him than for herself
at the moment, and watched him with some anxiety as he mounted again.
As soon as he was comfortably in the saddle, he began once more 'You're
my--' but here another voice broke in 'Ahoy! Ahoy! Check!' and Alice
looked round in some surprise for the new enemy.

This time it was a White Knight. He drew up at Alice's side, and tumbled
off his horse just as the Red Knight had done: then he got on again,
and the two Knights sat and looked at each other for some time without
speaking. Alice looked from one to the other in some bewilderment.

'She's MY prisoner, you know!' the Red Knight said at last.

'Yes, but then _I_ came and rescued her!' the White Knight replied.

'Well, we must fight for her, then,' said the Red Knight, as he took up
his helmet (which hung from the saddle, and was something the shape of a
horse's head), and put it on.

'You will observe the Rules of Battle, of course?' the White Knight
remarked, putting on his helmet too.

'I always do,' said the Red Knight, and they began banging away at each
other with such fury that Alice got behind a tree to be out of the way
of the blows.

'I wonder, now, what the Rules of Battle are,' she said to herself, as
she watched the fight, timidly peeping out from her hiding-place: 'one
Rule seems to be, that if one Knight hits the other, he knocks him off
his horse, and if he misses, he tumbles off himself--and another Rule
seems to be that they hold their clubs with their arms, as if they were
Punch and Judy--What a noise they make when they tumble! Just like
a whole set of fire-irons falling into the fender! And how quiet the
horses are! They let them get on and off them just as if they were
tables!'

Another Rule of Battle, that Alice had not noticed, seemed to be that
they always fell on their heads, and the battle ended with their both
falling off in this way, side by side: when they got up again, they
shook hands, and then the Red Knight mounted and galloped off.

'It was a glorious victory, wasn't it?' said the White Knight, as he
came up panting.

'I don't know,' Alice said doubtfully. 'I don't want to be anybody's
prisoner. I want to be a Queen.'

'So you will, when you've crossed the next brook,' said the White
Knight. 'I'll see you safe to the end of the wood--and then I must go
back, you know. That's the end of my move.'

'Thank you very much,' said Alice. 'May I help you off with your
helmet?' It was evidently more than he could manage by himself; however,
she managed to shake him out of it at last.

'Now one can breathe more easily,' said the Knight, putting back his
shaggy hair with both hands, and turning his gentle face and large mild
eyes to Alice. She thought she had never seen such a strange-looking
soldier in all her life.

He was dressed in tin armour, which seemed to fit him very badly, and
he had a queer-shaped little deal box fastened across his shoulder,
upside-down, and with the lid hanging open. Alice looked at it with
great curiosity.

'I see you're admiring my little box.' the Knight said in a friendly
tone. 'It's my own invention--to keep clothes and sandwiches in. You see
I carry it upside-down, so that the rain can't get in.'

'But the things can get OUT,' Alice gently remarked. 'Do you know the
lid's open?'

'I didn't know it,' the Knight said, a shade of vexation passing over
his face. 'Then all the things must have fallen out! And the box is no
use without them.' He unfastened it as he spoke, and was just going to
throw it into the bushes, when a sudden thought seemed to strike him,
and he hung it carefully on a tree. 'Can you guess why I did that?' he
said to Alice.

Alice shook her head.

'In hopes some bees may make a nest in it--then I should get the honey.'

'But you've got a bee-hive--or something like one--fastened to the
saddle,' said Alice.

'Yes, it's a very good bee-hive,' the Knight said in a discontented
tone, 'one of the best kind. But not a single bee has come near it yet.
And the other thing is a mouse-trap. I suppose the mice keep the bees
out--or the bees keep the mice out, I don't know which.'

'I was wondering what the mouse-trap was for,' said Alice. 'It isn't
very likely there would be any mice on the horse's back.'

'Not very likely, perhaps,' said the Knight: 'but if they DO come, I
don't choose to have them running all about.'

'You see,' he went on after a pause, 'it's as well to be provided for
EVERYTHING. That's the reason the horse has all those anklets round his
feet.'

'But what are they for?' Alice asked in a tone of great curiosity.

'To guard against the bites of sharks,' the Knight replied. 'It's an
invention of my own. And now help me on. I'll go with you to the end of
the wood--What's the dish for?'

'It's meant for plum-cake,' said Alice.

'We'd better take it with us,' the Knight said. 'It'll come in handy if
we find any plum-cake. Help me to get it into this bag.'

This took a very long time to manage, though Alice held the bag open
very carefully, because the Knight was so VERY awkward in putting in
the dish: the first two or three times that he tried he fell in himself
instead. 'It's rather a tight fit, you see,' he said, as they got it in
a last; 'There are so many candlesticks in the bag.' And he hung it
to the saddle, which was already loaded with bunches of carrots, and
fire-irons, and many other things.

'I hope you've got your hair well fastened on?' he continued, as they
set off.

'Only in the usual way,' Alice said, smiling.

'That's hardly enough,' he said, anxiously. 'You see the wind is so VERY
strong here. It's as strong as soup.'

'Have you invented a plan for keeping the hair from being blown off?'
Alice enquired.

'Not yet,' said the Knight. 'But I've got a plan for keeping it from
FALLING off.'

'I should like to hear it, very much.'

'First you take an upright stick,' said the Knight. 'Then you make your
hair creep up it, like a fruit-tree. Now the reason hair falls off is
because it hangs DOWN--things never fall UPWARDS, you know. It's a plan
of my own invention. You may try it if you like.'

It didn't sound a comfortable plan, Alice thought, and for a few minutes
she walked on in silence, puzzling over the idea, and every now and then
stopping to help the poor Knight, who certainly was NOT a good rider.

Whenever the horse stopped (which it did very often), he fell off in
front; and whenever it went on again (which it generally did rather
suddenly), he fell off behind. Otherwise he kept on pretty well, except
that he had a habit of now and then falling off sideways; and as he
generally did this on the side on which Alice was walking, she soon
found that it was the best plan not to walk QUITE close to the horse.

'I'm afraid you've not had much practice in riding,' she ventured to
say, as she was helping him up from his fifth tumble.

The Knight looked very much surprised, and a little offended at the
remark. 'What makes you say that?' he asked, as he scrambled back into
the saddle, keeping hold of Alice's hair with one hand, to save himself
from falling over on the other side.

'Because people don't fall off quite so often, when they've had much
practice.'

'I've had plenty of practice,' the Knight said very gravely: 'plenty of
practice!'

Alice could think of nothing better to say than 'Indeed?' but she said
it as heartily as she could. They went on a little way in silence after
this, the Knight with his eyes shut, muttering to himself, and Alice
watching anxiously for the next tumble.

'The great art of riding,' the Knight suddenly began in a loud voice,
waving his right arm as he spoke, 'is to keep--' Here the sentence ended
as suddenly as it had begun, as the Knight fell heavily on the top of
his head exactly in the path where Alice was walking. She was quite
frightened this time, and said in an anxious tone, as she picked him up,
'I hope no bones are broken?'

'None to speak of,' the Knight said, as if he didn't mind breaking two
or three of them. 'The great art of riding, as I was saying, is--to keep
your balance properly. Like this, you know--'

He let go the bridle, and stretched out both his arms to show Alice
what he meant, and this time he fell flat on his back, right under the
horse's feet.

'Plenty of practice!' he went on repeating, all the time that Alice was
getting him on his feet again. 'Plenty of practice!'

'It's too ridiculous!' cried Alice, losing all her patience this time.
'You ought to have a wooden horse on wheels, that you ought!'

'Does that kind go smoothly?' the Knight asked in a tone of great
interest, clasping his arms round the horse's neck as he spoke, just in
time to save himself from tumbling off again.

'Much more smoothly than a live horse,' Alice said, with a little scream
of laughter, in spite of all she could do to prevent it.

'I'll get one,' the Knight said thoughtfully to himself. 'One or
two--several.'

There was a short silence after this, and then the Knight went on again.
'I'm a great hand at inventing things. Now, I daresay you noticed, that
last time you picked me up, that I was looking rather thoughtful?'

'You WERE a little grave,' said Alice.

'Well, just then I was inventing a new way of getting over a gate--would
you like to hear it?'

'Very much indeed,' Alice said politely.

'I'll tell you how I came to think of it,' said the Knight. 'You see, I
said to myself, "The only difficulty is with the feet: the HEAD is high
enough already." Now, first I put my head on the top of the gate--then I
stand on my head--then the feet are high enough, you see--then I'm over,
you see.'

'Yes, I suppose you'd be over when that was done,' Alice said
thoughtfully: 'but don't you think it would be rather hard?'

'I haven't tried it yet,' the Knight said, gravely: 'so I can't tell for
certain--but I'm afraid it WOULD be a little hard.'

He looked so vexed at the idea, that Alice changed the subject hastily.
'What a curious helmet you've got!' she said cheerfully. 'Is that your
invention too?'
