was quite sure that such would be his course.  The wary Southern leader
instantly detailed a swarm of his best riflemen to creep through the
woods toward the cannon.  In a few minutes the gunners themselves were
under the fire of hidden marksmen who shot surpassingly well.  The
gunners, the cannoneers, the spongers, the rammers and the ammunition
passers were cut down with deadly certainty.

The captain of the guns, knowing that the terrible rifle fire was
coming from the thickets, deluged the woods and bushes with shells and
shrapnel, but the riflemen lay close, hugging the ground, and although
a few were killed and more wounded, the vast majority crept closer and
closer, shooting straight and true in the moonlight.  The fire from the
batteries became scattered and wild.  Their crews were cut down so fast
that not enough men were left to work the guns, and their commander
reluctantly gave the order to withdraw to a less exposed position.

"Rifles triumphant over artillery," said Harry, who studied everything
through his glasses; "but of course the dusk helped the riflemen."

"That's true," said Dalton, "but it takes good men like Sherburne to
use the favoring chances.  Now our boys are charging!"

The tremendous rebel yell swelled through the forest, and the Southern
infantry rushed to the attack.  Harry saw that the charge was
successful, and his ears told him so too.  The firing moved further and
further away, and soon declined in volume.

"They've been beaten off," said Harry.

"At least for the time," said Dalton, "but I've an idea they'll hang on
our front and may attack again in a day or so."

"How then are you and I to get through and tell General Lee that this
is the place to bridge the Potomac, if it's to be bridged at all?"

Dalton shook his head.

"I don't know," he replied, "and I won't think about it until Colonel
Sherburne gives his orders."

The sounds of battle died in the distant woods.  The last shot, whether
from cannon or rifle, was fired, and the Southern troops returned to
their positions, which they began to fortify strongly.  Sherburne
appeared presently, his uniform cut by bullets in two or three places,
but his body untouched.  He drew Harry and Dalton aside, where their
words could not be heard by anybody else.

"You two," he said, "were to report to General Lee when I thought fit.
Well, the time has come; Harry, you go first, and, at a suitable
moment, George will follow.  We have news of surpassing importance.  We
took a number of prisoners in that battle and we were also lucky enough
to rescue several of our men who had been held as captives.  We've
learned from them that General Meade, after making up his mind to
pursue, followed straight behind us for a while, but he has now turned
and gone southward in the direction of Frederick.  He will cross South
Mountain, advance toward Sharpsburg, and attempt to smash us here, with
our backs to this swollen river.  Why, some of the Federal leaders
consider the Army of Northern Virginia as good as destroyed already!"

He spoke with angry emphasis.

"But it isn't," said Harry.

"No, it isn't.  Doubtless General Lee will learn from scouts of his own
of General Meade's flanking movement, but we mustn't take the chance.
Moreover, we must tell him that this is the place for our army to
cross. If the river runs down in two or three days we'll have a ford
here."

"I'm ready to go at any moment," said Harry.  "Night helping me, I may
be able to ride through the lines of our enemies out there."

"No, Harry, you must not go that way.  They're so vigilant that you
would not have any possible chance.  Nor can you ride.  You must leave
your horse behind."

"What way then must I go, sir?"

"By the river.  We have gathered up a few small boats, used at the
crossing here.  You can row, can't you?"

"Fairly well, sir."

"'Twill do, because you're not to stay in the boat long.  I want you to
drop down the stream until you're well beyond the Federal lines.  Then
leave the boat and strike out across the country for General Lee. You
know the way.  You can buy or seize a horse, and you must not fail."

"I will not fail," said Harry confidently.

"You'll succeed if anybody will, and now you must be off.  Your pistols
are loaded, Harry?  You may have to use them."

They did not delay a minute, going down the shelving shore to the
Potomac, where a man held a small boat against the bank.

"Get in, Harry," said Sherburne.  "You'd better drop down three or four
miles, at least.  Good-by and good luck."

He shook hands with his colonel and Dalton, took the oars and pulled
far out into the stream.




CHAPTER IV

A HERALD TO LEE


When he swept out upon the sullen bosom of the Potomac, Harry looked
back only once.  He saw two dim figures going up the bank, and, at its
crest, a line of lights that showed the presence of the Southern force.
There was no sound of firing, and he judged that the enemy had
withdrawn to a distance of two or three miles.

The night had turned darker since the battle ceased, and not many stars
were out.  Clouds indicated that flurries of rain might come, but he
did not view them now with apprehension.  Darkness and rain would help
a herald to Lee.  The current was strong, and he did not have to pull
hard, but, observing presently that the far shore was fringed with
bushes, he sent the boat into their shadow.

He did not anticipate any danger from the southern shore, but the old
inherited caution of the forest runners was strong within him.  Under
the hanging bushes he was well hidden, but, in some places, the flood
in the river had turned the current back upon itself, and he was
compelled to pull with vigor on the oars.

The clouds that had threatened did not develop much, and while the
forests were dark, the surface of the river showed clearly in the faint
moonlight.  Any object upon it could be seen from either bank, and
Harry was glad that he had sought the shelter of the overhanging
bushes. He realized now that in this region, which was really the
theater of war, many scouts and skirmishers must be about.

The bank above him was rather high and quite steep, for which he was
glad, as it afforded protection.  A half mile farther down he came to
the mouth of a creek coming in from the South, and just as he passed it
he heard voices on the bank.  He held his boat among the bushes on the
cliff and listened.  Several men were talking, but he judged them to be
farmers, not soldiers.  Yet they talked of the battle that night, and
Harry surmised that they were looking at the lights in the Southern
camp which might yet be visible from the high point on which they
stood.  He could not gather from their words whether they were Northern
or Southern sympathizers, but it did not matter, as he had no intention
of speaking to them, hoping only that they would go away in a few
minutes and let him continue his journey unseen.

His hope speedily came to pass.  He heard their voices sinking in the
distance, and leaving the shelter of the bushes he pulled down the
stream once more.  Then he found that he had deceived himself about the
clouds. If they had retired, they had merely recoiled, to use the
French phrase, in order to gather again with greater force.

During his short stay among the bushes at the foot of the cliff the
whole heavens had blackened and the air was surcharged with the heavy
damp and tensity that betoken a coming storm.  The lightning blazed
across the river thrice, and he heard a mutter which was not that of
cannon. Then came rain and a rushing wind and the surface of the river
was troubled grievously.  It rose up in waves like those of a lake, and
Harry's boat rocked and tumbled so badly that in a few minutes it was
half-full of water.

Fearing he might sink, carrying with him his great message, he pulled
again, but fiercely now, for the southern bank and the shelter of the
bushes, which, fortunately for him, grew here in the water's edge. He
shoved his boat with all his might among them, as their tops snapped
and crackled in the hurricane.  But he knew he was safe there, and he
continued to push until it reached the edge of the land.

The river would be swollen by another storm, but for the present it did
not bother him greatly.  He was more immediately concerned with his
wish to get back to Lee as soon as possible, and he was grateful for
that dense clump of bushes, growing in the very water's edge, because
the wind was blowing like a hurricane and the waves were chasing one
another on the Potomac, like the billows on a lake.  He was a fair
oarsman, but it would have taken greater skill than his to have kept
his boat afloat in the tempestuous river.

The bushes formed an absolute protection.  His boat swayed with them,
which saved it from being damaged, and the overhanging lee of the cliff
kept most of the rain from him.  He also wrapped about his body the
pair of blankets that he always carried, and he sat there not only in
safety, but with a certain physical pleasure.

Once more amid surroundings with the like of which Henry Ware had been
so familiar, the soul of his great ancestor seemed to have descended
upon him.  Most young officers, no matter how brave or how skilled in
war, would have been awed and alarmed.  He had no comrades at his
elbow. There was no light, no friendly sound to encourage him, he was
as truly alone, so far as his present situation was concerned, as any
pioneer had ever been in the heart of the wilderness.  But for him
there was pleasure at that moment in being alone.  He did not quiver
when the thunder rolled and crashed above his head, and the lightning
blazed in one Titanic sword slash after another across the surface of
the river.  Rather, the wilderness and majesty of the scene appealed to
him.  Leaning well back in his boat with his blankets closely wrapped
about him, he watched it, and his soul rose with the storm.

Harry knew from its sudden violence that the rain would soon pass, and
if the waves abated a little he would certainly take his boat into the
river and try his fortunes again.  Yet a precious hour was lost, and
nothing could replace it.  The thunder ceased by and by and there was
only dim lightning on the far horizon.  The waves began to abate, and,
taking off his blankets, he pushed his boat once more into the stream.

It rocked prodigiously and shipped water, but by strenuous effort he
kept it afloat, and as the wind sank still further he decided that he
would seek the northern shore and disembark as soon as possible.  It
would be easier to steal through the thickets than to navigate what
amounted to a wild sea.  But the banks were yet too high and steep for
a landing, and he continued to row, keeping now near the middle of the
stream.

Wind and rain were dying fast, and he heard a sound behind uncommonly
like the distant swish of oars.  It sent an unpleasant thrill through
him, because he wished to be alone on the river at that particular
time, but his eyes, tracing a course through all the dusk and gloom,
rested upon another boat, about two hundred yards away, containing a
single occupant.

A farmer or a riverman, Harry thought, but to his great astonishment
the man suddenly raised himself up a little and shouted to him in a
tremendous voice to halt.  Harry had not the least idea of stopping for
anybody.  He bent to his oars and rowed swiftly on.  Again came that
shout to halt, and it seemed more insolent to him than before.  He put
a few more ounces of strength into his arms and shoulders and increased
his speed.

The pursuer, suddenly drawing in his oars, raised a rifle from the
bottom of his boat, and fired point blank at the fugitive.  The bullet
whistled so near Harry that he felt his ear burn, and at first thought
he was hit. He would have been glad to fire back, but his pistols could
not carry like his enemy's rifle, and there was nothing to do but flee.
Once again he sought to draw a few more ounces of energy from his body.
But the man behind him was a much greater oarsman than he and gained
rapidly. The stranger, shouting another command to halt, to which no
attention was paid, fired a second time, and the bullet went through
the side of Harry's boat, barely scraping his knee as it passed.

His rage became intense.  He had been shot at many times in battle, and
many times he had fired his pistols into the opposing masses, but here
upon this river a man sought his life, as the savages of old sought the
hunter.  Another glance showed him that pursuer had closed up half the
distance between them, and, snatching one of the pistols from his belt,
he fired.  He knew that he had missed, as he saw the water spurt up
beside the boat, but he thought that his bullet and the probability of
more might delay the pursuit.  Nevertheless the man came on as boldly
and as fast as ever.  If he fired a third time he could scarcely miss
at such short range.

It seemed to Harry the gift of Heaven, that a whole pack of clouds
should drift above them at that moment, deepening the obscurity and
making the pursuing boat, although it was so near, a shapeless form in
the mist. He could not see the features of the man, but he was able to
discern his large and powerful figure, and he noticed the rhythmic
manner in which his arms and shoulders worked at the oars.  Obviously
he had no chance to escape him by flight, and drawing his second pistol
he fired.  The bullet struck the boat but did no damage.  The man came
on faster than ever. Harry took a desperate resolution, and, whirling
his boat about, he rowed it straight at his pursuer, who was now almost
level with him.  He intended to ram and take his chances.  His movement
was so quick and unexpected that it succeeded.  The bow of his boat,
helped perhaps by a wave, struck the other with such violence that both
were shattered and sank instantly.

Harry went down with his craft, but in a few seconds came up again, his
mouth and eyes full of muddy water.  He was a splendid swimmer, and his
eyes clearing in a moment he looked toward the northern shore, seeking
an easy place for landing.  They encountered ten feet away a large
sun-browned face and two burning eyes.

"Shepard!" Harry gasped.

"And so it was you, Lieutenant Kenton.  Perhaps if I had known it was
you I wouldn't have fired upon you."

"Don't let that deter you.  We're enemies."

"I merely said 'perhaps!'  I like you, but that wouldn't keep me from
stopping you by any method I could from reaching Lee."

"I'm sure it wouldn't.  I like you, too, Mr. Shepard, but we're enemies
here in this river, deadly enemies, and I mean to beat you off."

"One may mean to do a thing and yet not do it.  I'm the larger and the
more powerful.  Besides, I'm toughened by superior age.  You'd better
surrender, Mr. Kenton.  I don't want to do you any bodily harm."

"I admit that you're larger and stronger, but on land only.  I'm the
better swimmer.  We're both floating now, but if you'll make a
comparison, Mr. Shepard, you'll find that I'm doing it with the
greatest ease. Take my advice, and swim to the southern bank of the
river while I go to the northern.  I say it in all good faith."

"I've no doubt of that, but the young are likely to over-estimate their
powers.  I'm a good swimmer, and you can't escape me."

"The important point is not whether I can escape you, but whether you
can escape me.  Since you have lost your boat and your rifle and we're
in such a treacherous and unstable element as water, I occupy the
superior position.  The young may indeed over-estimate their powers,
but in swimming at least I'm a competent critic.  For instance, you're
holding your shoulders too high, and you kick too much.  You're
splashing water, a useless waste of energy.  Now observe me.  The
surface of this river is rough.  Little waves are yet running upon it,
but I float as easily as a fish, come up to see by the moon what time
it is.  It is not egotism on my part, merely a recognition of the
facts, but I warn you, Mr. Shepard, to swim to the other shore and let
me alone."

The two were not ten feet apart, and, despite the lightness of their
talk, their eyes burned with eagerness and intensity.  Harry knew that
Shepard would not dream of turning back.  Yet in the water he awaited
the result with a confidence that he would not have felt on land.

"It's your move, Mr. Shepard," he said.

The intensity of Shepard's gaze increased, and Harry never took his
eyes from those of his enemy.  He intended like a prize fighter to read
there what the man's next effort would be.

"I don't see that it's my move," said Shepard, as he floated calmly.

"You're following me for the purpose of capturing me."

"To capture you, or delay you.  Meanwhile, it seems to me that I'm
delaying you very successfully.  I can't see that you're making much
progress towards Lee."

"That depends upon which way this river is flowing.  You note that we
float gently with the stream."

"It's a poor argument.  The Potomac flows directly by Washington, and
if we were to float on we'd float into the heart of great Northern
fortresses instead of Lee's camp."

"That's true as far as it goes, but it doesn't go far enough.  I'm
leaving the river soon.  You can have it all then."

"Thanks, but I think I'll go with you, Lieutenant Kenton."

"Then come to the bottom!" exclaimed Harry, as he dived forward like a
flash, seized Shepard by the ankles and headed for the bottom of the
river with him.  The water gurgled in his eyes and ears and nose, but
he held on for many seconds, despite the man's desperate struggles.
Then he was forced to let go and rise.

As his head shot above the stream he saw another shooting up in the
same manner about fifteen feet away.  Both were choked and gasping, but
Harry managed to say:

"I didn't intend for you to come up so soon."

"I suppose not, but perhaps you didn't pause to think that when you
rose I'd rise with you."

"Yes, that's true.  It seems to me that matters grow complicated. Can't
you persuade yourself, Mr. Shepard, to go and leave me alone? I really
have no use for you here."

