compressed between the hands. Common lake or river sand is not
suitable for the purpose, as it is too coarse and will not make a
good mold.

For mixing and preparing the sand a small shovel, D, and a sieve,
E, will be required. If desired the sieve may be homemade.
Ordinary wire netting such as is used in screen doors, is about
the right mesh, and this, nailed to replace the bottom of a box,
makes a very good sieve.

The rammer, F, is made of wood, and is wedge-shaped at one end and
flat at the other, as shown. In foundries each molder generally
uses two rammers, but for the small work which will be described
one will be sufficient. An old teaspoon, G, will be found useful
in the molding operations and may be hung on the wall or other
convenient place when not in use.

The cloth bag, H, which can be made of a knitted stocking, is
filled with coal dust; which is used for a parting medium in
making the molds. Take a small lump of soft coal and reduce to
powder by pounding. Screen out all the coarse pieces and put the
remainder in the bag. A slight shake of the bag

[Illustration: Fig. 2; Homemade Flask]

over the mold will then cause a cloud of coal-dust to fall on it,
thus preventing the two layers of sand from sticking, but this
operation will be described more fully later on.

The flask, J, Fig. 1, is shown more clearly in Fig. 2. It is made
of wood and is in two halves, the "cope," or upper half, and the
"drag," or lower part. A good way to make the flask is to take a
box, say 12 in. by 8 in. by 6 in. high, and saw it in half
longitudinally, as shown. If the box is not very strong, the
corners should be braced with triangular wooden strips, A A, which
should be nailed in, previous to sawing. The wooden strips BB are
used to hold the sand, which would otherwise slide out of the
flask when the two halves of the mold are separated.

The dowels, CC, are a very important part of the flask as upon
them depends the matching of the two halves of the mold. A
wedge-shaped piece, CC, is nailed to each end of the cope, and the
lower pieces, DD, are then nailed on the drag so that they just
touch C when the flask is closed. The two halves of the flask will
then occupy exactly the same relative position whenever they are
put together.

After the flask is done make two boards as shown at K, Fig. 1, a
little larger than the outside of the flask. A couple of cleats
nailed to each board will make it easier to pick up the mold when
it is on the floor.

A cast-iron glue-pot makes a very good crucible for melting the
metal, which can be either aluminum, white metal, zinc or any
other metal having a low melting-point. This completes the
equipment with the exception of one or two simple devices which
will now be described.



** II - How to Make a Mold [96]

Having finished making the flask and other equipment, as
described, everything will be ready for the operation of molding.
It would be well for those who have never had any experience in
this line to visit a small brass foundry, where they can watch the
molders at work, as it is much easier to learn by observation; but
they must not expect to make a good mold at the first trial. The
first attempt usually results in the sand dropping out of the cope
when it is being lifted from the drag, either because of
insufficient ramming around the edges or because the sand is too
dry.

A good way to tell when the sand is moist enough is to squeeze it
in the hand. If it forms into a cake and shows all the
finger-marks, it has a sufficient amount of moisture, but if it
crumbles or fails to cake it is too dry. An ordinary watering-pot
will be found useful in moistening the sand, but care should be
taken not to get it too wet, or the hot metal coming in contact
with it when the mold is poured will cause such rapid evaporation
that the mold will "boil" and make a poor casting. A little
practice in this operation will soon enable the molder to
determine the correct amount of moisture.

When molding with sand for the first time it will be necessary to
screen it all before using it, in order to remove the lumps, and
if water is added, the sand should be thoroughly shoveled until
the moisture is evenly distributed. The sand is then ready for
molding.

The operation of making a mold is as follows: The lower half of
the flask, or "drag," and the pattern to be molded are both placed
on the cover board as shown at A. A quantity of sand sufficient to
completely cover the pattern is then sifted into the drag, which
is then filled level with the top with unscreened sand. This is
rammed down slightly with the rammer, and then more sand is added
until

[Illustration: Fig,. 3-Making a Mold]

it becomes heaped up as shown at B. It is then rammed again as
before.

It is impossible to describe just how hard a mold should be
rammed, but by observing the results the beginner can tell when a
mold is too hard or too soft, and thus judge for himself. If the
sand falls out of the flask when lifting the cope, or if it opens
up or spreads after it is poured, it shows that the mold has been
rammed too little, and if the surface of the sand next to the
pattern is cracked it shows that the mold has been rammed too
hard. It will be found that the edges of the mold can stand a
little more ramming than the middle. In finishing the ramming,
pound evenly all over the surface with the blunt end of the
rammer.

After ramming, scrape off the surplus sand with a straight-edged
stick, as shown at C, and scatter about 1/16 in. of loose sand
over the surface for a good bearing. Place another cover board on
top, as shown at D, and by grasping with both hands, as shown,
turn the drag other side up. Remove the upper cover board and
place the upper half of the flask, or "cope," in position, as
shown at E.

In order to prevent the two layers of sand sticking together, the
surface of the sand at E should be covered with coal-dust. This is
done by shaking the coal-dust bag over the flask, after which the
dust on the pattern may be removed by blowing. The cope is then
filled with sand and rammed in exactly the same manner as in the
case of the drag.

After the ramming is done a number of vent holes are made, as
shown at F, from the surface of the mold to the pattern, in order
to allow the escape of air and steam when the mold is being
poured. These vent holes may be made by pushing a wire about the
size of a knitting-needle down through the sand until it touches
the pattern. The "sprue," or pouring-hole, is next cut, by means
of the sprue-cutter shown at the right, which consists of a piece
of thin brass or steel tubing about 3/4 in. in diameter.

Now comes the critical part of the molding operation--that of
lifting the cope from the drag. It is here that the amateur often
becomes discouraged, as the sand is liable to fall out of the cope
and spoil the mold; but with a little practice and patience the
molder can lift the cope every time without breaking it, as shown
at G.

The next operation is that of cutting the gate, which carries the
molten metal from the sprue to the opening left by the pattern.
This is done with a spoon, a channel being cut about 3/4 in. wide
and about 1/4 in. deep. The pattern is then drawn from the mold,
as shown at H, by driving a sharp pointed steel rod into the
pattern and lifting it from the sand. When a metal pattern is used
a thread rod is used, which is screwed into a tapped hole in the
pattern. Before drawing it is well to tap the drawing-rod lightly
with another and larger rod, striking it in all directions and
thus loosening the sand slightly from the pattern. Some molders
tap the pattern gently when withdrawing, as shown at H, in order
to loosen any sand which has a tendency to stick.

After drawing the pattern, place the cope back on the drag, as
shown at J. Place a brick or other flat, heavy object on top of
the mold above the pattern, to prevent the pressure of the melted
metal separating the two halves of the mold, and then pour.



** III- Melting and Pouring [98]

Having prepared one or more molds, the next operation is that of
melting and pouring. An ordinary cast-iron glue-pot makes a good
crucible and can be easily handled by a pair of tongs, made out of
steel rod, as shown in the sketch. In order to hold the tongs
together a small link can be slipped on over the handle, thus
holding the crucible securely.

A second piece of steel rod bent in the form of a hook at the end
is very useful for supporting the weight of the crucible and
prevents spilling the molten metal should the tongs slip off the
crucible. The hook is also useful for removing the crucible from
the fire, which should be done soon after the metal is entirely
melted, in order to prevent overheating. The metal should be
poured into the mold in a small stream, to give the air a chance
to escape, and should not be poured directly into the center of
the opening, as the metal will then strike the bottom hard enough
to loosen the sand, thus making a dirty casting.

[Illustration: Fig. 4 -Pouring the Metal]

If, after being poured, the mold sputters and emits large volumes
of steam, it shows that the sand is too wet, and the castings in
such cases will probably be imperfect and full of holes.

A mold made in the manner previously described may be poured with
any desired metal, but a metal which is easily melted will give
the least trouble. One of the easiest metals to melt and one which
makes very attractive castings is pure tin. Tin melts at a
temperature slightly above the melting point of solder, and,
although somewhat expensive, the permanent brightness and
silver-like appearance of the castings is very desirable. A good
"white metal" may be made by mixing 75% tin, 15% lead, 5% zinc and
5% antimony. The object of adding antimony to an alloy is to
prevent shrinkage when cooling.

A very economical alloy is made by melting up all the old
type-metal, babbitt, battery zincs, white metal and other scrap
available, and adding a little antimony if the metal shrinks too
much in cooling. If a good furnace is available, aluminum can be
melted without any difficulty, although this metal melts at a
higher temperature than any of the metals previously mentioned.

In casting zincs for batteries a separate crucible, used only for
zinc, is very desirable, as the presence of a very small amount of
lead or other impurity will cause the batteries to polarize. A
very good way to make the binding posts is to remove the binding
posts from worn-out dry batteries and place them in the molds in
such a way that the melted zinc will flow around them.

The time required for a casting to solidify varies with the size
and shape of the casting, but unless the pattern is a very large
one about five minutes will be ample time for it to set. The
casting is then dumped out of the mold and the sand brushed off.
The gate can be removed with either a cold chisel or a hacksaw,
and the casting is then ready for finishing.



** Battery Switch [99]

In cases where batteries are used in series and it is desirable to
change the strength and direction of the current frequently, the
following device will be found most convenient. In my own case I
used four batteries, but any reasonable number may be used.
Referring to the figure, it will be seen that by moving the switch
A toward the left the current can be reduced from four batteries
to none, and then by moving the switch B toward the right the
current can be turned on in the opposite

  [Illustration: Battey Switch]

direction to the desired strength. In the various positions of
these two switches the current from each individual cell, or from
any adjacent pair of cells, may be used in either direction.
--Contributed by Harold S. Morton, Minneapolis.



** An Optical Illusion [99]

The engraving shows a perfectly straight boxwood rule laid over a
number of turned brass rings of various sizes. Although the effect
in the illustration

[Illustration: An Optical Illusion]

is less pronounced than it was in reality, it will be noticed that
the rule appears to be bent, but sighting along the rule from one
end will show that it is perfectly straight.

The brass rings also appear distorted. The portions on one side of
the rule do not appear to be a continuation of those on the other,
but that they really are can be proved by sighting in the same
manner as before.
--Contributed by Draughtsman, Chicago.



** New Method of Lifting a Table [99]

To perform this feat effectively the little device illustrated
will be required. To make it take a sheet-iron band, A, 3/4 in.
wide and attach a strap to fasten on the forearm between the wrist
and elbow. Put a sharp needle point, B, through the sheet-iron so
that it extends 3/4 in. outward. Make one of these pieces for each
arm. In lifting the table first show the hands unprepared to the
audience and also a tight table, removing the cover to show that
the surface of the table is not prepared in any way. Then replace
the table,

[Illustration: Table Lifting Device]

rest the hands upon it and at the same time press the needle
points in the arm pieces into the wood of the table, which will be
sufficient to hold it, says a correspondent of the Sphinx. Then
walk down among the audience.



** How to Make a Paddle Boat [100]

A rowboat has several disadvantages. The operation of the oars is
both tiresome and uninteresting, and the oarsman is obliged to
travel, backward.

[Illustration: Paddle Boat]

By replacing the oars with paddles, as shown in the illustration,
the operator can see where he is going and enjoy the exercise much
better than with oars. He can easily steer the boat with his feet,
by means of a pivoted stick in the bottom of the boat, connected
by cords to the rudder.

At the blacksmith shop have a 5/8-in. shaft made, as shown at A,
Fig. 2. It will be necessary to furnish a sketch giving all the
dimensions of the shaft, which should be designed to suit the
dimensions of the boat, taking care that sufficient clearance is
allowed, so that the cranks in revolving will not strike the
operator's knees. If desired, split-wood handles may be placed on
the cranks, to prevent them from rubbing the hands.

The bearings, B, may be made of hardwood, but preferably of iron
pipe filled with melted babbitt. If babbitt is used, either
thoroughly smoke or chalk the shaft or wrap paper around it to
prevent the babbitt sticking. The pieces of pipe may be then
fastened to the boat by means of small pipe straps, such as may be
obtained at any plumber's at a very small cost.

The hubs, C, should be made of wood, drilled to fit the shaft and
mortised out to hold the paddles, D. The covers, E, may be
constructed of thin wood or galvanized iron and should be braced
by triangular boards, as shown in Fig. 1. If galvanized iron is
used, it should be exposed to the weather two or three months
before painting, or the paint will come off, spoiling its
appearance.

[Illustration: Detail of Paddle Boat]



** Peculiar Properties of Ice [100]

Of all the boys who make snowballs probably few know what occurs
during the process. Under ordinary conditions water turns to ice
when the temperature falls to 32 degrees, but when in motion, or
under pressure, much lower temperatures are required to make it a
solid. In the same way, ice which is somewhat below the freezing
point can be made liquid by applying pressure, and will remain
liquid until the pressure is removed, when it will again return to
its original state. Snow, being simply finely divided ice, becomes
liquid in places when compressed by the hands, and when the
pressure is removed the liquid portions solidify and unite all the
particles in one mass. In extremely cold weather it is almost
impossible to make a snowball, because a greater amount of
pressure is then required to make the snow liquid.

This process of melting and freezing under different pressures and
a constant temperature is well illustrated by the experiment shown
in Figs. 1, 2 and 3. A block of ice, A, Fig. 1, is

[Illustration: Experiment with a Block of Ice]

supported at each end by boxes BB, and a weight, W, is hung on a
wire loop which passes around the ice as shown. The pressure of
the wire will then melt the ice and allow the wire to sink down
through the ice as shown in Fig. 2. The wire will continue to cut
its way through the ice until it passes all the way through the
piece, as shown in Fig. 3. This experiment not only illustrates
how ice melts under pressure, but also how it solidifies when the
pressure is removed, for the block will still be left in one piece
after the wire has passed through.

Another peculiar property of ice is its tendency to flow. It may
seem strange that ice should flow like water, but the glaciers of
Switzerland and other countries are literally rivers of ice. The
snow which accumulates on the mountains in vast quantities is
turned to ice as a result of the enormous pressure caused by its
own weight, and flows through the natural channels it has made in
the rock until it reaches the valley below. In flowing through
these channels it frequently passes around bends, and when two
branches come together the bodies of ice unite the same as water
would under the same conditions. The rate of flow is often very
slow; sometimes only one or two feet a day, but, no matter how
slow the motion may be, the large body of ice has to bend in
moving.

This property of ice is hard to illustrate with the substance
itself, but may be clearly shown by sealing-wax, which resembles
ice in this respect. Any attempt to bend a piece of cold
sealing-wax with the hands results in breaking it, but by placing
it between books, as shown on page 65, or supporting it in some
similar way, it will gradually change from the original shape A,
and assume the shape shown at B.



** Return-Call Bell With One Wire [101]

[Illustration: Wiring Diagram]

To use only one wire for a return call bell connect up as shown in
the diagram, using a closed circuit or gravity battery, B. The
current is flowing through both bells all the time, the same as
the coils of a telegraph sounder, but is not strong enough to ring
both connected in series. Pressing either push button, P, makes a
short circuit of that bell and rings the one at the other end of
the line.
--Contributed by Gordon T. Lane, Crafton, Pa.



** Circuit Breaker for Induction Coils [101]

Amateurs building induction coils are generally bothered by the
vibrator contacts blackening, thus giving a high resistance
contact, whenever there is any connection made at all. This
trouble may be done away with by departing from the old
single-contact vibrator and using one with self-cleaning contacts
as shown. An old bell magnet is rewound full of No. 26 double
cotton-covered wire and is mounted

[Illustration: Interrupter for Induction Coil]

upon one end of a piece of thin sheet iron 1 in. by 5 in. as per
sketch. To the other end of the strip of iron is soldered a piece
of brass 1/64 in. by 1/4, in. by 2 in., on each end of which has
been soldered a patch of platinum foil 1/4 in. square.

The whole is connected up and mounted on a baseboard as per
sketch, the contact posts being of 1/4 in. by 1/2 in. brass, bent
into shape and provided with platinum tipped thumb screws. The
advantage of this style of an interrupter is that at each stroke
there is a wiping effect at the heavy current contact which
automatically cleans off any carbon deposit.

In the wiring diagram, A is the circuit breaker; B, the induction
coil, and C, the battery.
--Contributed by A. G. Ward, Wilkinsburg, Pa.



** Spit Turned by Water Power [102]

Many of the Bulgarian peasants do their cooking in the open air
over bonfires. The illustration shows a laborsaving machine in use
which enables the cook to go away and leave meat roasting for an
hour at a time. The

[Illustration: For a Summer Camp]

illustration shows how the spit to which the meat is fastened is
constantly turned by means of a slowly moving water wheel. Some of
our readers may wish to try the scheme when camping out. The
success depends upon a slow current, for a fast-turning wheel will
burn the meat.



** A Short-Distance Wireless Telegraph [102]

The accompanying diagrams show a wireless-telegraph system that I
have used successfully for signaling a distance of 3,000 ft. The
transmitter consists of an induction coil, about the size used for
automobiles, a key or push-button for completing the circuit, and
five dry batteries. The small single-point switch is left open as
shown when sending a message, but when receiving it should be
closed in order that the electric waves from the antenna may pass
through the coherer. The coherer in this case is simply two
electric-light carbons sharpened to a wedge at one end with a
needle

[Illustration: Wiring Diagram for Wireless Telegraph]

connecting the two, as shown. An ordinary telephone receiver is
connected in series with the coherer, as shown. To receive
messages hold the receiver to the ear and close the switch, and
answer by opening the switch and operating the key. --Contributed
by Coulson Glick, Indianapolis.



** Automatic Draft-Opener [102]

A simple apparatus that will open the draft of the furnace at any
hour desired is illustrated. The parts are: A, furnace; B, draft;
C, draft chain; D, pulleys; E, wooden supports; F, vertical lever;
G, horizontal lever; H, cord; I, alarm clock; J, weight. K shows
where and how the draft is regulated during the day, the automatic

[Illustration: Draft Regulator]

device being used to open it early in the morning. The spool on
the alarm clock is fastened to the alarm key by sawing a slit
across the top of the spool and gluing it on. When the alarm goes
off a cord is wound up on the spool and pulls the horizontal lever
up, which releases the vertical lever and allows the weight to
pull the draft open.
--Contributed by Gordon Davis, Kalamazoo, Mich.



** A Window Conservatory [103]

During the winter months, where house plants are kept in the home,
it is always a question how to arrange them so they can get the
necessary light without occupying too much room.

The sketch shows how a neat window conservatory may be made at
small cost that can be fastened on the house just covering a
window, which will provide a fine place for the plants. The frame
(Fig. 2) is made of about 2 by 2-in. material framed together as
shown in Fig. 3. This frame should be made with the three openings
of such a size that a four-paned sash, such as used for a storm
window, will fit nicely in them. If the four vertical pieces that
are shown in Fig. 2 are dressed to the right angle, then it will
be easy to put on the finishing corner boards that hold the sash.

[Illustration: Artistic Window Boxes]

The top, as well as the bottom, is constructed with two small
pieces like the rafters, on which is nailed the sheathing boards
and then the shingles on top and the finishing boards on the
bottom.



** How to Make an Electroscope [103]

An electroscope for detecting electrified bodies may be made out
of a piece of note paper, a cork and a needle. Push the needle
into the cork, and cut the paper in the shape of a small arrow.
Balance the arrow on the needle

[Illustration: Simple Electroscope]

as shown in the sketch, and the instrument will then be complete.
If a piece of paper is then heated over a lamp or stove and rubbed
with a piece of cloth or a small broom, the arrow will turn when
the paper is brought near it.
--Contributed by Wm. W. Grant, Halifax, N. S., Canada.



** Miniature Electric Lighting [104]

Producing electric light by means of small bulbs that give from
one-half to six candle power, and a suitable source of power, is
something that will interest the average American boy.

These circular bulbs range from 1/4 to 2 in. in diameter, and cost
27 cents

[Illustration: FIG. 1]

each complete with base. They are commonly known as miniature
battery bulbs, since a battery is the most popular source of
power. The 1/2-cp. bulbs are usually 2-1/2 volts and take 1/4
ampere of current. It requires about three medium dry cells to
operate it. However, there is now upon the market a battery
consisting of 3 small dry cells connected in series, put up in a
neat case with 2 binding posts, which sells for 25 cents. This is
more economical than dry cells, as it gives about 4 volts and 3
amperes. It will run as large a lamp a 3-1/2 volts, 1 cp., for
some time very satisfactorily. More than one lamp can be run by
connecting the bulbs in parallel, as indicated by Fig. 1, which
shows the special battery with 3 dry cells in the case, and the 2
binding posts for connection with the bulbs. In this case it is
also advisable to connect several batteries in parallel also, so
as to increase the current, but maintain the voltage constant.
Thus the individual cells are in multiple series, i. e., multiples
of series of three. By keeping in mind the ampere output of the
battery and rating of the lamp, one can regulate the batteries as
required. It must be remembered, in this connection, that any
battery which is drawn upon for half of its output will last
approximately three times as long, as if drawn upon for its total
output. Thus, in any system of lamps, it is economical to provide
twice as many batteries as necessary. This also supplies a means
of still maintaining the candle power when the batteries are
partially exhausted, by connecting them in series. However, this
must be done with very great caution, as the lights will be burnt
out if the voltage is too high.

Persons living in the city will find an economical means of
lighting lamps by securing exhausted batteries from any garage,
where they are glad to have them taken away. A certain number of
these, after a rest, can be connected up in series, and will give
the proper voltage.

In conclusion, for battery power: Connecting batteries in series
increases the voltage, and slightly cuts down the current or
amperage, which is the same as that of one battery; while
connecting batteries in parallel increases the amperage, but holds
the voltage the same as that of one cell. Thus, if the voltage and
amperage of any cell be known, by the proper combination of these,
we can secure the required voltage and amperage to light any
miniature lamp. And it might be said that dry cells are the best
for this purpose, especially those of low internal resistance.

[Illustration: FIG.2]

For those having a good water supply there is a more economical
means of maintenance, although the first cost is greater. Fig. 2
shows the scheme. A small dynamo driven by a water motor attached
to a faucet, generates the power for the lights. The cost of the
smallest outfit of the kind is about $3 for the water motor and $4
for the dynamo. This dynamo has an output of 12 watts, and will
produce from 18 to 25 cp., according to the water pressure
obtainable. It is advisable to install the outfit in the basement,
where the water pressure is the greatest, and then lead No. 18 B &
S. double insulated wire wherever needed. The dynamo can also be
used as a motor,

[Illustration: Fig. 3]

and is wound for any voltage up to ten. The winding should
correspond to the voltage of the lamps which you desire to run.
However, if wound for 6 volts, one could run parallel series of
two 3-volt, 1-cp. lamps; making, as in Fig. 3, 11 series, or 22
lights. If wound for 10 volts, it would give 1-1/4 amperes and run
four 6-cp. lamps. Thus, it will be seen that any candle power lamp
can be operated by putting the proper number of lights in each
series, and running the series in parallel. So, to secure light by
this method, we simply turn on the water, and the water
consumption is not so great as might be imagined.

For the party who has electric light in his house there is still
an easier solution for the problem of power. If the lighting
circuit gives 110 volts he can connect eleven 10-volt lamps in
series. These will give 3 cp. each, and the whole set of 11 will
take one ampere of current, and cost about the same as a 32-cp.
lamp, or 1-1/4 cents per hour. Simply connect the miniature
circuit to an Edison plug, and insert in the nearest lamp socket.
Any number of different candle power lamps can be used providing
each lamp takes the same amount of current, and the sum of their
voltages equals the voltage of the circuit used. This arrangement
of small lights is used to produce a widely distributed, and
diffused light in a room, for display of show cases, and for
Christmas trees. Of all these sources of power the two last are
the most economical, and the latter of these two has in its favor
the small initial cost. These lamps are by no means playthings or
experiments, but are as serviceable and practical as the larger
lamps.
--Contributed by Lindsay Eldridge, Chicago.



** How to Make a New Language [105]

Anyone possessing a phonograph can try a very interesting and
amusing experiment without going to any expense. Remove the belt
and replace with a longer one, which can be made of narrow braid
or a number of strands of yarn. The new belt should be long enough
to allow crossing it, thus reversing the machine. This reverses
every sound on the record and changes it to such an extent that
very few words can be recognized.



** How to Make a Cup-and-Saucer Rack [105]

The rack is made of any suitable kind of wood, and the sides, A,
are cut just alike, or from one pattern. The shelves are made in
various widths to fit the sides at the places where they are
wanted. The number of shelves can be varied and to suit the size
of the dishes. Cup hooks are placed on top and bottom shelves. It
is hung on the wall the same as a picture from the molding.
--Contributed by F. B. Emig, Santa Clara, Cal.

[Illustration: Cup-and-Saucer Rack]

Reversing a Small Motor [105]

All that is necessary for reversing the motor is a pole-changing
switch. Connect the two middle posts of the switch with each other
and the two outside posts with each other. Then connect one of the
outside posts of the switch to one brush of the motor and one
middle post to the other brush.

Connect one bar of the switch to one end of the field coil and the
other bar to one pole of the battery, and connect the other pole
of the battery to the other field coil. To reverse the motor,
simply change the switch.

[Illustration: Reverse for a Small Motor]

Referring to the illustration, the letters indicate as follows:
FF, field of motor; BB, brushes of motor; AA, bars of
pole-changing switch; DD, center points of switch; CC, outside
points of switch.
--Contributed by Leonard E. Parker, Plymouth, Ind.



** To Drive Away Dogs [106]

The dogs in my neighborhood used to come around picking up scraps.
After I connected up my induction coil, as shown in the sketch, we
were not bothered with them. A indicates the ground; B, switch;
and C, a bait of meat, or a tempting bone.

[Illustration: Shocking-Machine]

--Contributed by Geo. W. Fry, 903 Vine St., San Jose, Cal.



** An Automatic Lock [106]

The illustration shows an automatic lock operated by electricity,
one cell being sufficient. When the circuit is broken a weight, A,
attached to the end of the armature B, tends to push the other end
of the armature into the screw eye or hook C, which is in the
door, thus locking the door.

To unlock the door, merely push the button E, The magnet then
draws the armature out of the screw eye and the door is unlocked.
The dotted line at D shows the position of the armature when the
circuit is complete and the door unlocked. The weight must be in
proportion to the strength of the magnet. If it is not, the door
will not

[Illustration: Automatic Electric Lock for Doors]

lock, or would remain locked. The button can be hidden, as it is
the key to the lock.
--Contributed by Claude B. Melchior, Hutchinson, Minn.



** Experiment with Two-Foot Rule and Hammer [106]

An example of unstable equilibrium is shown in the accompanying
sketch. All that is needed is a 2-foot rule, a hammer, a piece of
string, and a table or bench. The experiment works best

[Illustration: An Experiment in Equilibrium]

with a hammer having a light handle and a very heavy head.

Tie the ends of the string together, forming a loop, and pass this
around the hammer handle and rule. Then place the apparatus on the
edge of the table, where it will remain suspended as shown.
--Contributed by Geo. P. Schmidt, Culebra, Porto Rico, W. I.



** Simple Current Reverser [107]

On a block of hardwood draw a square (Fig. 1) and drill a hole in
each corner of the square. Fill these holes with mercury and
connect them to four binding posts (Fig. 1).

On another block of wood fasten two wires, as shown in Fig. 2, so
that their ends can be placed in the holes in the first block.
Then connect up with the

[Illustration: Details of Reverser]

motor and battery as in Fig. 3. When the block is placed on with
the big arrow A pointing in the direction indicated in Fig. 3, the
current flows with the small arrows. To reverse turn through an
angle of 90 degrees (Fig. 4). -- Contributed by F. Crawford Curry,
Brockville, Ontario, Canada.



** Alarm Clock to Pull up Furnace Draft [107]

A stout cord, A, is attached to the draft B of the furnace, run
through a pulley, C, in the ceiling and has a window weight, D,
attached at the other end. A small stick is put through a loop in
the cord at about the level of the table top on which the alarm
clock F stands. The other end of stick E is placed under the key G
of the alarm clock. When the alarm rings in the early morning, the
key turns, the stick

[Illustration: Automatic Time Draft-Opener]

falls away, releasing the weight, which pulls the draft open.
--Contributed by Edward Whitney, 18 Gorham St., Madison, Wis.



** How to Transmit Phonograph Music to a Distance [107]

An interesting experiment, and one calculated to mystify anyone
not in the secret, is to transmit the music or speech from a
phonograph to another part of the house or even a greater
distance. For an outdoor summer party the music can be made to
come from a bush, or tree, or from a bed of flowers. The apparatus
is not difficult to construct.

The cut shows the arrangement. Procure a long-distance telephone
transmitter, D, including the mouthpiece, and fasten it to the
reproducer of the phonograph. Also a watch case

[Illustration: The Long-Distance Phonograph]

receiver, R, which fasten to the horn. These parts may be
purchased from any electrical-supply house. Connect two wires to
the transmitter, running one direct to the receiver, and the other
to the battery, thence to a switch, S, and then to the receiver.
The more batteries used the louder will be the sound produced by
the horn, but avoid using too much battery or the receiver is apt
to heat.
--Contributed by Wm. J. Farley, Jr., Camden, N. J.



** How to Make a Telescope [108]

With a telescope like the one here described, made with his own
hands, a farmer boy not many years ago discovered a comet which
had escaped the watchful eyes of many astronomers.

First, get two pieces of plate glass, 6 in. square and 1 in.
thick, and break the corners off to make them round, grinding the
rough edges on a grindstone. Use a barrel to work on, and

[Illustration: Homemade Telescope]

fasten one glass on the top of it in the center by driving three
small nails at the sides to hold it in place. Fasten, with pitch,
a round 4-in. block of wood in the center on one side of the other
glass to serve as a handle.

Use wet grain emery for coarse grinding. Take a pinch and spread
it evenly on the glass which is on the barrel, then take the glass
with the handle and move it back and forth across the lower glass,
while walking around the barrel; also rotate the glass, which is
necessary to make it grind evenly. The upper glass or speculum
always becomes concave, and the under glass or tool convex.

Work with straight strokes 5 or 6 in. in length; after working 5
hours hold the speculum in the sunshine and throw the rays of the
sun onto a paper; where the rays come to a point gives the focal
length. If the glass is not ground enough to bring the rays to a
point within 5 ft., the coarse grinding must be continued, unless
a longer focal length is wanted.

Have ready six large dishes, then take 2 lb. flour emery and mix
in 12 qt. of water; immediately turn the water into a clean dish
and let settle 30 seconds; then turn it into another dish and let
settle 2 minutes, then 8 minutes, 30 minutes and 90 minutes, being
careful not to turn off the coarser emery which has settled. When
dry, turn the emery from the 5 jars into 5 separate bottles, and
label. Then take a little of the coarsest powder, wetting it to
the consistency of cream, and spread on the glass, work as before
(using short straight strokes 1-1/2 or 2 in.) until the holes in
the glass left by the grain emery are ground out; next use the
finer grades until the pits left by each coarser grade are ground
out. When the two last grades are used shorten the strokes to less
than 2 in. When done the glass should be semi-transparent, and is
ready for polishing.

When polishing the speculum, paste a strip of paper 1-1/3 in. wide
around the convex glass or tool, melt 1 lb. of pitch and turn on
to it and press with the wet speculum. Mold the pitch while hot
into squares of 1 in., with 1/4-in. spaces, as in Fig. 1. Then
warm and press again with the speculum, being careful to have all
the squares touch the speculum, or it will not polish evenly. Trim
the paper from the edge with a sharp knife, and paint the squares
separately with jeweler's rouge, wet till soft like paint. Use a
binger to spread it on with. Work the speculum over the tool the
same as when grinding, using straight strokes 2 in. or less.

When the glass is polished enough to reflect some light, it should
be tested with the knife-edge test. In a dark room, set the
speculum against the wall, and a large lamp, L, Fig. 2, twice the
focal length away. Place a large sheet of pasteboard, A, Fig. 2,
with a small needle hole opposite the blaze, by the side of the
lamp, so the light

[Illustration: Detail of Telescope Construction]

from the blaze will shine onto the glass. Place the speculum S,
Fig. 2, so the rays from the needle hole will be thrown to the
left side of the lamp (facing the speculum), with the knife
mounted in a block of wood and edgeways to the lamp, as in K, Fig.
2. The knife should not be more than 6 in. from the lamp. Now move
the knife across the rays from left to right, and look at the
speculum with the eye on the right side of the blade. When the
focus is found, if the speculum is ground and polished evenly it
will darken evenly over the surface as the knife shuts off the
light from the needle hole. If not, the speculum will show some
dark rings, or hills. If the glass seems to have a deep hollow in
the center, shorter strokes should be used in polishing; if a hill
in the center, longer strokes. The polishing and testing done, the
speculum is ready to be silvered. Two glass or earthenware dishes,
large enough to hold the speculum and 2 in. deep, must be
procured. With pitch, cement a strip of board 8 in. long to the
back of the speculum, and lay the speculum face down in one of the
dishes; fill the dish with distilled water, and clean the face of
the speculum with nitric acid, until the water will stick to it in
an unbroken film.

The recipe for silvering the speculum is:

    Solution A:
    Distilled water.............................4 oz.
    Silver nitrate............................100 gr.

    Solution B:
    Distilled water.............................4 oz.
    Caustic stick potash (pure by alcohol)....100 gr.

    Solution C:
    Aqua Ammonia.

    Solution D:
    Sugar loaf................................840 gr.
    Nitric acid................................39 gr.
    Alcohol (Pure).............................25 gr.

Mix solution D and make up to 25 fluid oz. with distilled water,
pour into a bottle and carefully put away in a safe place for
future use, as it works better when old:

Now take solution A and set aside in a small bottle one-tenth of
it, and pour the rest into the empty dish; add the ammonia
solution drop by drop; a dark brown precipitate will form and
subside; stop adding ammonia solution as soon as the bath clears.
Then add solution B, then ammonia until bath is clear. Now add
enough of the solution A, that was set aside, to bring the bath to
a warm saffron color without destroying its transparency. Then add
1 oz. of solution D and stir until bath grows dark. Place the
speculum, face down, in the bath and leave until the silver rises,
then raise the speculum and rinse with distilled water. The small
flat mirror may be silvered the same way. When dry, the silver
film may be polished with a piece of chamois skin, touched with
rouge, the polishing being accomplished by means of a light spiral
stroke.

Fig. 3 shows the position of the glasses in the tube, also how the
rays R from a star are thrown to the eyepiece E in the side of the
tube. Make the tube I of sheet iron, cover with paper and cloth,
then paint to make a non-conductor of heat or cold. Make the
mounting of good seasoned lumber.

Thus an excellent 6-in. telescope can be made at home, with an
outlay of only a few dollars. My telescope is 64 in. long and cost
me just $15, but I used all my spare time in one winter in making
it. I first began studying the heavens through a spyglass, but an
instrument such as I desired would cost $200--more than I could
afford. Then I made the one described, with which I discovered a
new comet not before observed by astronomers.- John E. Mellish.



** How to Make "Freak" Photographs [110]

The "freak" pictures of well-known people which were used by some
daily newspapers recently made everybody wonder how the distorted
photographs were made. A writer in Camera Craft gives the secret,
which proves to be easy of execution. The distortion is
accomplished by the use of prisms, as follows: Secure from an
optician or leaded-glass establishment, two glass prisms, slightly
wider than the lens mount. The flatter they are the less they will
distort. About 20. deg. is a satisfactory angle. Secure them as
shown by the sectional sketch, using strawboard and black paper.
Then make a ring to fit over the lens mount and connect it with
the prisms in such a way as to exclude all light from the camera
except that which passes through the face of the prisms. The inner
surface of this hood must be

[Illustration: Arrangement of Prisms]

dull black. The paper which comes around plates answers nicely. If
the ring which slips over the lens mount is lined with black
velvet, it will exclude all light and hold firmly to the mount,
Place over lens, stop down well after focusing, and proceed as for
any picture.



** Another Electric Lock [110]

The details of the construction of an electrically operated lock
are shown in the illustration. When the door is closed and the
bolt A pushed into position,

[Illustration: Simple Electric Lock]

it automatically locks. To unlock, push the button D, which act
will cause the electromagnet to raise the latch C, when the bolt
may be drawn and the door opened.
--Contributed by A. D. Zimmerman, Boody, Ill.



** How to Mix Plaster of Paris [110]

For the mixing of plaster of Paris for any purpose, add the
plaster gradually to the water, instead of the contrary, says the
Master Painter. Do not stir it, just sprinkle it in until you have
a creamy mass without lumps. Equal parts of plaster and water is
approximately the correct proportion. The addition of a little
vinegar or glue water will retard the setting of the plaster, but
will not preserve its hardening. Marshmallow powder also retards
the setting. In this way the plaster may be handled a long time
without getting hard. If you wish the plaster to set extra hard,
then add a little sulphate of potash, or powdered alum.



** Enlarging with a Hand Camera [111]

Everyone who owns a hand camera has some pictures he would like
enlarged. It is not necessary to have a large camera to do this,
as the process is exceedingly simple to make large pictures from
small negatives with the same hand camera.

A room from which all light may be excluded and a window through
which the light can enter without obstruction from trees or nearby
buildings, with a shelf to hold the camera and a table with an
upright drawing-board attached, complete the arrangement. The back
is taken out of the camera and fitted close against the back of
the shelf, which must be provided with a hole the same size and
shape as the opening in the back of the camera. The negative used
to make the enlarged print is placed in the shelf at A, Fig. 1.
