

XVII


OLD MR. TOAD'S MISTAKE

If is a very little word to look at, but the biggest word you have ever
seen doesn't begin to have so much meaning as little "if." _If_ Jimmy Skunk
hadn't ambled down the Crooked Little Path just when he did; _if_ he hadn't
been looking for fat beetles; _if_ he hadn't seen that big piece of bark at
one side and decided to pull it over; _if_ it hadn't been for all these
"ifs," why Old Mr. Toad wouldn't have made the mistake he did, and you
wouldn't have had this story. But Jimmy Skunk _did_ amble down the Crooked
Little Path, he _did_ look for beetles, and he _did_ pull over that big
piece of bark. And when he had pulled it over, he found Old Mr. Toad there.

Old Mr. Toad had crept under that piece of bark because he wanted to take a
nap. But when Jimmy Skunk told him that he had seen Mr. Blacksnake that
very morning, and that Mr. Blacksnake had asked after Old Mr. Toad, the
very last bit of sleepiness left Old Mr. Toad. Yes, Sir, he was wide awake
right away. You see, he knew right away why Mr. Blacksnake had asked after
him. He knew that Mr. Blacksnake has a fondness for Toads. He turned quite
pale when he heard that Mr. Blacksnake had asked after him, and right then
he made his mistake. He was in such a hurry to get away from that
neighborhood that he forgot to ask Jimmy Skunk just where he had seen Mr.
Blacksnake. He hardly waited long enough to say good-by to Jimmy Skunk, but
started off as fast as he could go.

Now it just happened that Old Mr. Toad started up the Crooked Little Path,
and it just happened that Mr. Blacksnake was coming down the Crooked Little
Path. Now when people are very much afraid, they almost always seem to
think that danger is behind instead of in front of them. It was so with Old
Mr. Toad. Instead of watching out in front as he hopped along, he kept
watching over his shoulder, and that was his second mistake. He was so sure
that Mr. Blacksnake was somewhere behind him that he didn't look to see
where he was going, and you know that people who don't look to see where
they are going are almost sure to go headfirst right into trouble.

Old Mr. Toad went hopping up the Crooked Little Path as fast as he could,
which wasn't very fast, because he never can hop very fast. And all the
time he kept looking behind for Mr. Blacksnake. Presently he came to a turn
in the Crooked Little Path, and as he hurried around it, he almost ran into
Mr. Blacksnake himself. It was a question which was more surprised. For
just a wee second they stared at each other. Then Mr. Blacksnake's eyes
began to sparkle.

"Good morning, Mr. Toad. Isn't this a beautiful morning? I was just
thinking about you," said he.

But poor Old Mr. Toad didn't say good morning. He didn't say anything. He
couldn't, because he was too scared. He just gave a frightened little
squeal, turned around, and started down the Crooked Little Path twice as
fast as he had come up. Mr. Blacksnake grinned and started after him, not
very fast because he knew that he wouldn't have to run very fast to catch
Old Mr. Toad, and he thought the exercise would do him good.

And this is how it happened that summer morning that jolly, bright Mr. Sun,
looking down from the blue, blue sky and smiling to see how happy everybody
seemed, suddenly discovered that there was one of the little meadow people
who wasn't happy, but instead was terribly, terribly unhappy. It was Old
Mr. Toad hopping down the Crooked Little Path for his life, while after
him, and getting nearer and nearer, glided Mr. Blacksnake.




XVIII


JIMMY SKUNK IS JUST IN TIME

Jimmy Skunk ambled slowly along, chuckling as he thought of what a hurry
Mr. Toad had been in, when he had heard that Mr. Blacksnake had asked after
him. It had been funny, very funny indeed, to see Mr. Toad try to hurry.

Suddenly Jimmy stopped chuckling. Then he stopped ambling along the Crooked
Little Path. He turned around and looked back, and as he did so he
scratched his head thoughtfully. He had just happened to think that Old Mr.
Toad had gone up the Crooked Little Path, and it was _up_ the Crooked
Little Path that Mr. Blacksnake had shown himself that morning.

"If he's still up there," thought Jimmy, "Old Mr. Toad is hopping right
straight into the very worst kind of trouble. How stupid of him not to have
asked me where Mr. Blacksnake was! Well, it's none of my business. I guess
I'll go on."

But he had gone on down the Crooked Little Path only a few steps when he
stopped again. You see, Jimmy is really a very kind-hearted little fellow,
and somehow he didn't like to think of what might happen to Old Mr. Toad.

"I hate to go way back there," he grumbled, for you know he is naturally
rather lazy. "Still, the Green Meadows wouldn't be quite the same without
Old Mr. Toad. I should miss him if anything happened to him. I suppose it
would be partly my fault, too, for if I hadn't pulled over that piece of
bark, he probably would have stayed there the rest of the day and been
safe."

"Maybe he won't meet Mr. Blacksnake," said a little voice inside of Jimmy.

"And maybe he will," said Jimmy right out loud. And with that, he started
back up the Crooked Little Path, and strange to say Jimmy hurried.

He had just reached a turn in the Crooked Little Path when who should run
right plump into him but poor Old Mr. Toad. He gave a frightened squeal and
fell right over on his back, and kicked foolishly as he tried to get on his
feet again. But he was all out of breath, and so frightened and tired that
all he could do was to kick and kick. He hadn't seen Jimmy at all, for he
had been looking behind him, and he didn't even know who it was he had run
into.

Right behind him came Mr. Blacksnake. Of course he saw Jimmy, and he
stopped short and hissed angrily.

"What were you going to do to Mr. Toad?" demanded Jimmy.

"None of your business!" hissed Mr. Blacksnake. "Get out of my way, or
you'll be sorry."

Jimmy Skunk just laughed and stepped in front of poor Old Mr. Toad. Mr.
Blacksnake coiled himself up in the path and darted his tongue out at Jimmy
in the most impudent way. Then he tried to make himself look very fierce.
Then he jumped straight at Jimmy Skunk with his mouth wide open, but he
took great care not to jump quite far enough to reach Jimmy. You see, he
was just trying to scare Jimmy. But Jimmy didn't scare. He knows all
about Mr. Blacksnake and that really he is a coward. So he suddenly gritted
his teeth in a way not at all pleasant to hear and started for Mr.
Blacksnake. Mr. Blacksnake didn't wait. No, Sir, he didn't wait. He
suddenly turned and glided back up the Crooked Little Path, hissing
angrily. Jimmy followed him a little way, and then he went back to Old Mr.
Toad.

"Oh," panted Mr. Toad, "you came just in time! I couldn't have hopped
another hop."

"I guess I did," replied Jimmy. "Now you get your breath and come along
with me." And Old Mr. Toad did.




XIX


OLD MR. TOAD GETS HIS STOMACH FULL

  Pray do not tip your nose in scorn
    At things which others eat,
  For things to you not good at all
    To others are most sweet.

There are ants, for instance. You wouldn't want to eat them even if you
were dreadfully hungry. But Old Mr. Toad and Buster Bear think there is
nothing much nicer. Now Buster Bear had found Old Mr. Toad catching ants,
one at a time, as he kept watch beside their home, and it had pleased
Buster to find some one else who liked ants. Right away he invited Old Mr.
Toad to dine with him. But poor Old Mr. Toad was frightened almost to death
when he heard the deep, grumbly-rumbly voice of Buster Bear, for he had
been so busy watching the ants that he hadn't seen Buster coming.

He fell right over on his back, which wasn't at all dignified, and made
Buster Bear laugh. That frightened Mr. Toad more than ever. You see he
didn't have the least doubt in the world that Buster Bear meant to eat him,
and when Buster invited him to dinner, he was sure that that was just a
joke on Buster's part.

But there was no way to escape, and after a little Old Mr. Toad thought it
best to be polite, because, you know, it always pays to be polite. So he
said in a very faint voice that he would be pleased to dine with Buster.
Then he waved his feet feebly, trying to get on his feet again. Buster
Bear laughed harder than ever. It was a low, deep, grumbly-rumbly laugh,
and sent cold shivers all over poor Old Mr. Toad. But when Buster reached
out a great paw with great cruel-looking claws Mr. Toad quite gave up. He
didn't have strength enough left to even kick. He just closed his eyes and
waited for the end.

What do you think happened? Why, he was rolled over on to his feet so
gently that he just gasped with surprise. It didn't seem possible that such
a great paw could be so gentle.

"Now," said Buster Bear in a voice which he tried to make sound pleasant,
but which was grumbly-rumbly just the same, "I know where there is a fine
dinner waiting for us just a little way from here. You follow me, and we'll
have it in no time."

So Buster Bear led the way, and Old Mr. Toad followed as fast as he could,
because he didn't dare not to. Presently Buster stopped beside a big
decayed old log. "If you are ready, Mr. Toad, we will dine now," said he.

Old Mr. Toad didn't see anything to eat. His heart sank again, and he shook
all over. "I--I'm not hungry," said he in a very faint voice.

Buster Bear didn't seem to hear. He hooked his great claws into the old log
and gave a mighty pull. Over rolled the log, and there were ants and ants
and ants, hurrying this way and scurrying that way, more ants than Mr. Toad
had seen in all his life before!

"Help yourself," said Buster Bear politely.

Old Mr. Toad didn't wait to be told twice. He forgot all about his fright.
He forgot all about Buster Bear. He forgot that he wasn't hungry. He
forgot his manners. He jumped right in among those ants, and for a little
while he was the busiest Toad ever seen. Buster Bear was busy too. He swept
his long tongue this way, and he swept it that way, and each time he drew
it back into his mouth, it was covered with ants. At last Old Mr. Toad
couldn't hold another ant. Then he remembered Buster Bear and looked up a
little fearfully. Buster was smacking his lips, and there was a twinkle in
each eye.

"Good, aren't they?" said he.

"The best I ever ate," declared Old Mr. Toad with a sigh of satisfaction.

"Come dine with me again," said Buster Bear, and somehow this time Old Mr.
Toad didn't mind because his voice sounded grumbly-rumbly.

