in spite of Bowser the Hound.

But now he felt that he dared do a thing that not one of them dared do.
He dared go right into Farmer Brown's house and make himself quite at
home in the room of Farmer Brown's boy. He felt that he was a
tremendously brave fellow. You see, he quite forgot one thing. He forgot
that he had found out that love destroys fear, and that though it might
look to others like a very bold thing to walk right into Farmer Brown's
house, it really wasn't bold at all, because all the time he _knew_ that
no harm would come to him. It is never brave to do a thing that you are
not afraid to do. It had been brave of him to go in at that open window
the first time, because then he had been afraid, but now he wasn't
afraid, and so it was no longer either brave or bold of him.

Tommy Tit the Chickadee knew all this, and he used to chuckle to himself
as he saw how proud of himself Happy Jack was, but he said nothing to
any one about it. Of course, it wasn't long before others began to
notice Happy Jack's pride. One of the first was Sammy Jay. There is
very little that escapes Sammy Jay's sharp eyes. Silently stealing
through the Green Forest early one morning, he surprised Happy Jack
strutting.

"Huh," said he, "what are you feeling so big about?"

Like a flash the thought came to Happy Jack that here was a chance to
show what a bold fellow he had become. "Hello, Sammy!" he exclaimed.
"Are you feeling very brave this morning?"

"Me feeling brave? What are you talking about? If I was as timid as you
are, I wouldn't ever talk about bravery to other people. If there is
anything you dare to do that I don't, I've never heard of it," retorted
Sammy Jay.

"Come on!" cried Happy Jack. "I'm going to get my breakfast, and I dare
you to follow me!"

Sammy Jay actually laughed right out. "Go ahead. Wherever you go, I'll
go," he declared.

Happy Jack started right away for Farmer Brown's house, and Sammy
followed. Through the Old Orchard, across the dooryard and into the big
maple tree Happy Jack led the way, and Sammy followed, all the time
wondering what was up. He had been there many times. In fact, he had had
many a good meal of suet there during the cold weather, for Farmer
Brown's boy had kept a big piece tied to a branch of the maple tree for
those who were hungry.

Sammy was a little surprised when he saw Happy Jack jump over on to the
window-sill. Still, he had been on that window-sill more than once
himself, when he had made sure that no one was near, and had helped
himself to the cracked nuts he had found there.

"Come on!" called Happy Jack, his eyes twinkling.

Sammy Jay chuckled. "He thinks I don't dare go over there," he thought.
"Well, I'll fool him."

With a hasty look to see that no danger was near, he spread his wings to
follow Happy Jack on to the window-sill. Happy Jack waited to make sure
that he really was coming and then slipped in at the open window and
scampered over to a table on the farther side of the room and helped
himself from a dish of nuts there.

When Sammy saw Happy Jack disappear inside he gave a little gasp. When
he looked inside and saw Happy Jack making himself quite at home, he
gasped again. And when he saw a door open and Farmer Brown's boy enter,
and still Happy Jack did not run, he was too upset for words. He didn't
dare stay to see more, and for once in his life was quite speechless as
he flew back to the Green Forest.




CHAPTER XXIV

A DREAM COMES TRUE

    What are all our dreams made up of
      That they often are so queer?
    Wishes, hopes, and fond desires
      All mixed up with foolish fears.

    _Happy Jack._


Which is worse, to have a very beautiful dream never come true, or to
have a bad dream really come true? Happy Jack Squirrel says the latter
is worse, much worse. Dreams do come true once in a great while, you
know. One of Happy Jack's did. It came true, and it made a great
difference in Happy Jack's life. You see, it was like this:

Happy Jack had had so many things to think of that he had almost
forgotten about Shadow the Weasel. Happy Jack hadn't seen or heard
anything of him since Farmer Brown's boy had chased him into the Green
Forest and so saved Happy Jack's life. Since then life had been too full
of pleasant things to think of anything so unpleasant as Shadow the
Weasel. But one night Happy Jack had a bad dream. Yes, Sir, it was a
very bad dream. He dreamed that once more Shadow the Weasel was after
him, and this time there was no Farmer Brown's boy to run to for help.
Shadow was right at his heels and in one more jump would have him.
Happy Jack opened his mouth to scream, and--awoke.

He was all ashake with fright. It was a great relief to find that it was
only a dream, but even then he couldn't get over it right away. He was
glad that it was almost morning, and just as soon as it was light enough
to see, he crept out. It was too early to go over to Farmer Brown's
house; Farmer Brown's boy wouldn't be up yet. So Happy Jack ran over to
one of his favorite lookouts, a tall chestnut tree, and there, with his
back against the trunk, high above the ground, he watched the Green
Forest wake as the first Sunbeams stole through it. But all the time he
kept thinking of that dreadful dream.

A little spot of black moving against the white snow caught his sharp
eyes. What was it? He leaned forward and held his breath, as he tried to
make sure. Ah, now he could see! Just ahead of that black thing was a
long, slim fellow all in white, and that black spot was his tail. If it
hadn't been for that, Happy Jack very likely wouldn't have seen him at
all. It was Shadow the Weasel! He was running swiftly, first to one side
and then to the other, with his nose to the snow. He was hunting. There
was no doubt about that. He was hunting for his breakfast.

Happy Jack's eyes grew wide with fear. Would Shadow find his tracks? It
looked very much as if Shadow was heading for Happy Jack's house, and
Happy Jack was glad, very glad, that that bad dream had waked him and
made him so uneasy that he had come out. Otherwise he might have been
caught right in his own bed. Shadow was almost at Happy Jack's house
when he stopped abruptly with his nose to the snow and sniffed eagerly.
Then he turned, and with his nose to the snow, started straight toward
the tree where Happy Jack was. Happy Jack waited to see no more. He knew
now that Shadow had found his trail and that it was to be a case of run
for his life.

"My dream has come true!" he sobbed as he ran. "My dream has come true,
and I don't know what to do!" But all the time he kept on running as
fast as ever he could, which really was the only thing to do.




CHAPTER XXV

HAPPY JACK HAS A HAPPY THOUGHT

    Who runs when danger comes his way
    Will live to run some other day.

    _Happy Jack._


Frightened and breathless, running with all his might from Shadow the
Weasel, Happy Jack Squirrel was in despair. He didn't know what to do or
where to go. The last time he had run from Shadow he had run to Farmer
Brown's boy, who had just happened to be near, and Farmer Brown's boy
had chased Shadow the Weasel away. But now it was too early in the
morning for him to expect to meet Farmer Brown's boy. In fact, jolly,
round, red Mr. Sun had hardly kicked his bedclothes off yet, and Happy
Jack was very sure that Farmer Brown's boy was still asleep.

Now most of us are creatures of habit. We do the thing that we have been
in the habit of doing, and do it without thinking anything about it.
That is why good habits are such a blessing. Happy Jack Squirrel is just
like the rest of us. He has habits, both good and bad. Of late, he had
been in the habit of getting his breakfast at Farmer Brown's house every
morning, so now when he began to run from Shadow the Weasel he just
naturally ran in the direction of Farmer Brown's house from force of
habit. In fact, he was halfway there before he realized in which
direction he was running.

Right then a thought came to him. It gave him a wee bit of hope, and
seemed to help him run just a little faster. If the window of Farmer
Brown's boy's room was open, he would run in there, and perhaps Shadow
the Weasel wouldn't dare follow! How he did hope that that window would
be open! He knew that it was his only chance. He wasn't quite sure that
it really was a chance, for Shadow was such a bold fellow that he might
not be afraid to follow him right in, but it was worth trying.

Along the stone wall beside the Old Orchard raced Happy Jack to the
dooryard of Farmer Brown, and after him ran Shadow the Weasel, and
Shadow looked as if he was enjoying himself. No doubt he was. He knew
just as well as Happy Jack did that there was small chance of meeting
Farmer Brown's boy so early in the morning, so he felt very sure how
that chase was going to end, and that when it did end he would breakfast
on Squirrel.

By the time Happy Jack reached the dooryard, Shadow was only a few jumps
behind him, and Happy Jack was pretty well out of breath. He didn't stop
to look to see if the way was clear. There wasn't time for that.
Besides, there could be no greater danger in front than was almost at
his heels, and so, without looking one way or another, he scampered
across the dooryard and up the big maple tree close to the house. Shadow
the Weasel was surprised. He had not dreamed that Happy Jack would come
over here. But Shadow is a bold fellow, and it made little difference to
him where Happy Jack went. At least, that is what he thought.

So he followed Happy Jack across the dooryard and up the maple tree. He
took his time about it, for he knew by the way Happy Jack had run that
he was pretty nearly at the end of his strength. "He never'll get out of
this tree," thought Shadow, as he started to climb it. He fully
expected to find Happy Jack huddled in a miserable little heap somewhere
near the top. Just imagine how surprised he was when he discovered that
Happy Jack wasn't to be seen. He rubbed his angry little red eyes, and
they grew angrier and redder than before.

"Must be a hollow up here somewhere," he muttered. "I'll just follow the
scent of his feet, and that will lead me to him."

But when that scent led him out on a branch the tip of which brushed
against Farmer Brown's house Shadow got another surprise. There was no
sign of Happy Jack. He couldn't have reached the roof. There was no
place he could have gone unless--. Shadow stared across at a window open
about two inches.

"He couldn't have!" muttered Shadow. "He wouldn't dare. He couldn't
have!"

But Happy Jack had. He had gone inside that window.




CHAPTER XXVI

FARMER BROWN'S BOY WAKES WITH A START

    Never think another crazy just because it happens you
    Never've heard of just the thing that they have started out to do.

    _Happy Jack._


Isn't it queer how hard it seems to be for some boys to go to bed at the
proper time and how much harder it is for them to get up in the morning?
It was just so with Farmer Brown's boy. I suppose he wouldn't have been
a real boy if it hadn't been so. Of course, while he was sick with the
mumps, he didn't have to get up, and while he was getting over the
mumps his mother let him sleep as long as he wanted to in the morning.
That was very nice, but it made it all the harder to get up when he
should after he was well again. In summer it wasn't so bad getting up
early, but in winter--well, that was the one thing about winter that
Farmer Brown's boy didn't like.

On this particular morning Farmer Brown had called him, and he had
replied with a sleepy "All right." and then had rolled over and promptly
gone to sleep again. In two minutes he was dreaming just as if there
were no such things as duties to be done. For a while they were very
pleasant dreams, very pleasant indeed. But suddenly they changed. A
terrible monster was chasing him. It had great red eyes as big as
saucers, and sparks of fire flew from its mouth. It had great claws as
big as ice tongs, and it roared like a lion. In his dream Farmer Brown's
boy was running with all his might. Then he tripped and fell, and
somehow he couldn't get up again. The terrible monster came nearer and
nearer. Farmer Brown's boy tried to scream and couldn't. He was so
frightened that he had lost his voice. The terrible monster was right
over him now and reached out one of his huge paws with the great claws.
One of them touched him on the cheek, and it burned like fire.

With a yell, a real, genuine yell, Farmer Brown's boy awoke and sprang
out of bed. For a minute he couldn't think where he was. Then with a
sigh of relief he realized that he was safe in his own snug little room
with the first Jolly Little Sunbeam creeping in at the window to wish
him good morning and chide him for being such a lazy fellow. A thump and
a scurry of little feet caught his attention, and he turned to see a
Gray Squirrel running for the open window. It jumped up on the sill,
looked out, then jumped down inside again, and ran over to a corner of
the room, where he crouched as if in great fear. It was clear that he
had been badly frightened by the yell of Farmer Brown's boy, and that he
was still more frightened by something he had seen when he looked out of
the window.

A great light broke over Farmer Brown's boy. "Happy Jack, you little
rascal, I believe you are the terrible monster that scared me so!" he
exclaimed. "I believe you were on my bed, and that it was your claws
that I felt on my face. But what ails you? You look frightened almost to
death."

He went over to the window and looked out. A movement in the big maple
tree just outside caught his attention. He saw a long, slim white form
dart down the tree and disappear. He knew who it was. It was Shadow the
Weasel.

"So that pesky Weasel has been after you again, and you came to me for
help," said he gently, as he coaxed Happy Jack to come to him. "This is
the place to come to every time. Poor little chap, you're all of a
tremble. I guess I know how you feel when a Weasel is after you. I guess
you feel just as I felt when I dreamed that that monster was after me.
My, but you certainly did give me a scare when you touched my face!" He
gently stroked Happy Jack as he talked, and Happy Jack let him.

"Breakfast!" called a voice from downstairs.

"Coming!" replied Farmer Brown's boy as he put Happy Jack on the table
by a dish of nuts and began to scramble into his clothes.




CHAPTER XXVII

HAPPY JACK IS AFRAID TO GO HOME

Safety first is the best rule to insure a long life.

_Happy Jack._


