boy, sitting on the fence by the brook; but there was music in the
ragged urchin and it came out through his simple toy. It tingled over
Felix from head to foot; and, when Leon held out the mouth-organ with a
fraternal grin of invitation, he snatched at it as a famished creature
might snatch at food.

Then, with it half-way to his lips, he paused. True, it was only the
violin he had promised never to touch; but he felt that if he gave way
ever so little to the desire that was in him, it would sweep everything
before it. If he played on Leon Buote's mouth-organ, there in that misty
spring dale, he would go to old Abel's that evening; he KNEW he would
go. To Leon's amazement, Felix threw the mouth-organ back at him and
ran up the hill as if he were pursued. There was something in his boyish
face that frightened Leon; and it frightened Janet Andrews as Felix
rushed past her in the hall of the manse.

"Child, what's the matter with you?" she cried. "Are you sick? Have you
been scared?"

"No, no. Leave me alone, Janet," said Felix chokingly, dashing up the
stairs to his own room.

He was quite composed when he came down to tea, an hour later, though he
was unusually pale and had purple shadows under his large eyes.

Mr. Leonard scrutinized him somewhat anxiously; it suddenly occurred to
the old minister that Felix was looking more delicate than his wont
this spring. Well, he had studied hard all winter, and he was certainly
growing very fast. When vacation came he must be sent away for a visit.

"They tell me Naomi Clark is real sick," said Janet. "She has been
ailing all winter, and now she's fast to her bed. Mrs. Murphy says she
believes the woman is dying, but nobody dares tell her so. She won't
give in she's sick, nor take medicine. And there's nobody to wait on her
except that simple creature, Maggie Peterson."

"I wonder if I ought to go and see her," said Mr. Leonard uneasily.

"What use would it be to bother yourself? You know she wouldn't see
you--she'd shut the door in your face like she did before. She's an
awful wicked woman--but it's kind of terrible to think of her lying
there sick, with no responsible person to tend her."

"Naomi Clark is a bad woman and she lived a life of shame, but I like
her, for all that," remarked Felix, in the grave, meditative tone in
which he occasionally said rather startling things.

Mr. Leonard looked somewhat reproachfully at Janet Andrews, as if to ask
her why Felix should have attained to this dubious knowledge of good
and evil under her care; and Janet shot a dour look back which, being
interpreted, meant that if Felix went to the district school she could
not and would not be held responsible if he learned more there than
arithmetic and Latin.

"What do you know of Naomi Clark to like or dislike?" she asked
curiously. "Did you ever see her?"

"Oh, yes," Felix replied, addressing himself to his cherry preserve with
considerable gusto. "I was down at Spruce Cove one night last summer
when a big thunderstorm came up. I went to Naomi's house for shelter.
The door was open, so I walked right in, because nobody answered my
knock. Naomi Clark was at the window, watching the cloud coming up over
the sea. She just looked at me once, but didn't say anything, and then
went on watching the cloud. I didn't like to sit down because she hadn't
asked me to, so I went to the window by her and watched it, too. It was
a dreadful sight--the cloud was so black and the water so green, and
there was such a strange light between the cloud and the water; yet
there was something splendid in it, too. Part of the time I watched the
storm, and the other part I watched Naomi's face. It was dreadful to
see, like the storm, and yet I liked to see it.

"After the thunder was over it rained a while longer, and Naomi sat down
and talked to me. She asked me who I was, and when I told her she asked
me to play something for her on her violin,"--Felix shot a deprecating
glance at Mr. Leonard--"because, she said, she'd heard I was a great
hand at it. She wanted something lively, and I tried just as hard as I
could to play something like that. But I couldn't. I played something
that was terrible--it just played itself--it seemed as if something was
lost that could never be found again. And before I got through, Naomi
came at me, and tore the violin from me, and--SWORE. And she said, 'You
big-eyed brat, how did you know THAT?' Then she took me by the arm--and
she hurt me, too, I can tell you--and she put me right out in the rain
and slammed the door."

"The rude, unmannerly creature!" said Janet indignantly.

"Oh, no, she was quite in the right," said Felix composedly. "It served
me right for what I played. You see, she didn't know I couldn't help
playing it. I suppose she thought I did it on purpose."

"What on earth did you play, child?"

"I don't know." Felix shivered. "It was awful--it was dreadful. It was
fit to break your heart. But it HAD to be played, if I played anything at
all."

"I don't understand what you mean--I declare I don't," said Janet in
bewilderment.

"I think we'll change the subject of conversation," said Mr. Leonard.



It was a month later when "the simple creature, Maggie" appeared at the
manse door one evening and asked for the preached.

"Naomi wants ter see yer," she mumbled. "Naomi sent Maggie ter tell yer
ter come at onct."

"I shall go, certainly," said Mr. Leonard gently. "Is she very ill?"

"Her's dying," said Maggie with a broad grin. "And her's awful skeered
of hell. Her just knew ter-day her was dying. Maggie told her--her
wouldn't believe the harbour women, but her believed Maggie. Her yelled
awful."

Maggie chuckled to herself over the gruesome remembrance. Mr. Leonard,
his heart filled with pity, called Janet and told her to give the poor
creature some refreshment. But Maggie shook her head.

"No, no, preacher, Maggie must get right back to Naomi. Maggie'll tell
her the preacher's coming ter save her from hell."

She uttered an eerie cry, and ran at full speed shoreward through the
spruce woods.

"The Lord save us!" said Janet in an awed tone. "I knew the poor girl
was simple, but I didn't know she was like THAT. And are you going,
sir?"

"Yes, of course. I pray God I may be able to help the poor soul," said
Mr. Leonard sincerely. He was a man who never shirked what he believed
to be his duty; but duty had sometimes presented itself to him in
pleasanter guise than this summons to Naomi Clark's death-bed.

The woman had been the plague spot of Lower Carmody and Carmody
Harbour for a generation. In the earlier days of his ministry to the
congregation he had tried to reclaim her, and Naomi had mocked and
flouted him to his face. Then, for the sake of those to whom she was
a snare or a heart-break, he had endeavoured to set the law in motion
against her, and Naomi had laughed the law to scorn. Finally, he had
been compelled to let her alone.

Yet Naomi had not always been an outcast. Her girlhood had been
innocent; but she was the possessor of a dangerous beauty, and her
mother was dead. Her father was a man notorious for his harshness and
violence of temper. When Naomi made the fatal mistake of trusting to a
false love that betrayed and deserted, he drove her from his door with
taunts and curses.

Naomi took up her quarters in a little deserted house at Spruce Cove.
Had her child lived it might have saved her. But it died at birth, and
with its little life went her last chance of worldly redemption. From
that time forth, her feet were set in the way that takes hold on hell.

For the past five years, however, Naomi had lived a tolerably
respectable life. When Janet Peterson had died, her idiot daughter,
Maggie, had been left with no kin in the world. Nobody knew what was to
be done with her, for nobody wanted to be bothered with her. Naomi Clark
went to the girl and offered her a home. People said she was no fit
person to have charge of Maggie, but everybody shirked the unpleasant
task of interfering in the matter, except Mr. Leonard, who went to
expostulate with Naomi, and, as Janet said, for his pains got her door
shut in his face.

But from the day when Maggie Peterson went to live with her, Naomi
ceased to be the harbour Magdalen.



The sun had set when Mr. Leonard reached Spruce Cove, and the harbour
was veiling itself in a wondrous twilight splendour. Afar out, the
sea lay throbbing and purple, and the moan of the bar came through the
sweet, chill spring air with its burden of hopeless, endless longing and
seeking. The sky was blossoming into stars above the afterglow; out
to the east the moon was rising, and the sea beneath it was a thing of
radiance and silver and glamour; and a little harbour boat that went
sailing across it was transmuted into an elfin shallop from the coast of
fairyland.

Mr. Leonard sighed as he turned from the sinless beauty of the sea and
sky to the threshold of Naomi Clark's house. It was very small--one room
below, and a sleeping-loft above; but a bed had been made up for the
sick woman by the down-stairs window looking out on the harbour; and
Naomi lay on it, with a lamp burning at her head and another at her
side, although it was not yet dark. A great dread of darkness had always
been one of Naomi's peculiarities.

She was tossing restlessly on her poor couch, while Maggie crouched on a
box at the foot. Mr. Leonard had not seen her for five years, and he
was shocked at the change in her. She was much wasted; her clear-cut,
aquiline features had been of the type which becomes indescribably
witch-like in old age, and, though Naomi Clark was barely sixty, she
looked as if she might be a hundred. Her hair streamed over the pillow
in white, uncared-for tresses, and the hands that plucked at the
bed-clothes were like wrinkled claws. Only her eyes were unchanged; they
were as blue and brilliant as ever, but now filled with such agonized
terror and appeal that Mr. Leonard's gentle heart almost stood still
with the horror of them. They were the eyes of a creature driven wild
with torture, hounded by furies, clutched by unutterable fear.

Naomi sat up and dragged at his arm.

"Can you help me? Can you help me?" she gasped imploringly. "Oh, I
thought you'd never come! I was skeered I'd die before you got here--die
and go to hell. I didn't know before today that I was dying. None of
those cowards would tell me. Can you help me?"

"If I cannot, God can," said Mr. Leonard gently. He felt himself very
helpless and inefficient before this awful terror and frenzy. He had
seen sad death-beds--troubled death-beds--ay, and despairing death-beds,
but never anything like this. "God!" Naomi's voice shrilled terribly as
she uttered the name. "I can't go to God for help. Oh, I'm skeered of
hell, but I'm skeereder still of God. I'd rather go to hell a thousand
times over than face God after the life I've lived. I tell you, I'm
sorry for living wicked--I was always sorry for it all the time. There
ain't never been a moment I wasn't sorry, though nobody would believe
it. I was driven on by fiends of hell. Oh, you don't understand--you
CAN'T understand--but I was always sorry!"

"If you repent, that is all that is necessary. God will forgive you if
you ask Him."

"No, He can't! Sins like mine can't be forgiven. He can't--and He
won't."

"He can and He will. He is a God of love, Naomi."

"No," said Naomi with stubborn conviction. "He isn't a God of love at
all. That's why I'm skeered of him. No, no. He's a God of wrath and
justice and punishment. Love! There ain't no such thing as love! I've
never found it on earth, and I don't believe it's to be found in God."

"Naomi, God loves us like a father."

"Like MY father?" Naomi's shrill laughter, pealing through the still
room, was hideous to hear.

The old minister shuddered.

"No--no! As a kind, tender, all-wise father, Naomi--as you would have
loved your little child if it had lived."

Naomi cowered and moaned.

"Oh, I wish I could believe THAT. I wouldn't be frightened if I could
believe that. MAKE me believe it. Surely you can make me believe that
there's love and forgiveness in God if you believe it yourself."

"Jesus Christ forgave and loved the Magdalen, Naomi."

"Jesus Christ? Oh, I ain't afraid of HIM. Yes, HE could understand and
forgive. He was half human. I tell you, it's God I'm skeered of."

"They are one and the same," said Mr. Leonard helplessly. He knew he
could not make Naomi realize it. This anguished death-bed was no place
for a theological exposition on the mysteries of the Trinity.

"Christ died for you, Naomi. He bore your sins in His own body on the
cross."

"We bear our own sins," said Naomi fiercely. "I've borne mine all my
life--and I'll bear them for all eternity. I can't believe anything
else. I CAN'T believe God can forgive me. I've ruined people body and
soul--I've broken hearts and poisoned homes--I'm worse than a murderess.
No--no--no, there's no hope for me." Her voice rose again into that
shrill, intolerable shriek. "I've got to go to hell. It ain't so much
the fire I'm skeered of as the outer darkness. I've always been so
skeered of darkness--it's so full of awful things and thoughts. Oh,
there ain't nobody to help me! Man ain't no good and I'm too skeered of
God."

She wrung her hands. Mr. Leonard walked up and down the room in the
keenest anguish of spirit he had ever known. What could he do? What
could he say? There was healing and peace in his religion for this woman
as for all others, but he could express it in no language which this
tortured soul could understand. He looked at her writhing face; he
looked at the idiot girl chuckling to herself at the foot of the bed;
he looked through the open door to the remote, starlit night--and
a horrible sense of utter helplessness overcame him. He could do
nothing--nothing! In all his life he had never known such bitterness of
soul as the realization brought home to him.

"What is the good of you if you can't help me?" moaned the dying woman.
"Pray--pray--pray!" she shrilled suddenly.

Mr. Leonard dropped on his knees by the bed. He did not know what
to say. No prayer that he had ever prayed was of use here. The old,
beautiful formulas, which had soothed and helped the passing of many a
soul, were naught save idle, empty words to Naomi Clark. In his anguish
of mind Stephen Leonard gasped out the briefest and sincerest prayer his
lips had ever uttered.

"O, God, our Father! Help this woman. Speak to her in a tongue which she
can understand."



A beautiful, white face appeared for a moment in the light that streamed
out of the doorway into the darkness of the night. No one noticed it,
and it quickly drew back into the shadow. Suddenly, Naomi fell back on
her pillow, her lips blue, her face horribly pinched, her eyes rolled up
in her head. Maggie started up, pushed Mr. Leonard aside, and proceeded
to administer some remedy with surprising skill and deftness. Mr.
Leonard, believing Naomi to be dying, went to the door, feeling sick and
bruised in soul.

Presently a figure stole out into the light.

"Felix, is that you?" said Mr. Leonard in a startled tone.

"Yes, sir." Felix came up to the stone step. "Janet got frightened that
you might fall on that rough road after dark, so she made me come after
you with a lantern. I've been waiting behind the point, but at last I
thought I'd better come and see if you would be staying much longer. If
you will be, I'll go back to Janet and leave the lantern here with you."
"Yes, that will be the best thing to do. I may not be ready to go home
for some time yet," said Mr. Leonard, thinking that the death-bed of sin
behind him was no sight for Felix's young eyes.

"Is that your grandson you're talking to?" Naomi spoke clearly and
strongly. The spasm had passed. "If it is, bring him in. I want to see
him."

Reluctantly, Mr. Leonard signed Felix to enter. The boy stood by Naomi's
bed and looked down at her with sympathetic eyes. But at first she did
not look at him--she looked past him at the minister.

"I might have died in that spell," she said, with sullen reproach in her
voice, "and if I had, I'd been in hell now. You can't help me--I'm done
with you. There ain't any hope for me, and I know it now."

She turned to Felix.

"Take down that fiddle on the wall and play something for me," she said
imperiously. "I'm dying--and I'm going to hell--and I don't want to
think of it. Play me something to take my thoughts off it--I don't care
what you play. I was always fond of music--there was always something in
it for me I never found anywhere else."

Felix looked at his grandfather. The old man nodded, he felt too ashamed
to speak; he sat with his fine silver head in his hands, while Felix
took down and tuned the old violin, on which so many godless lilts had
been played in many a wild revel. Mr. Leonard felt that he had failed
his religion. He could not give Naomi the help that was in it for her.

Felix drew the bow softly, perplexedly over the strings. He had no
idea what he should play. Then his eyes were caught and held by Naomi's
burning, mesmeric, blue gaze as she lay on her crumpled pillow. A
strange, inspired look came over the boy's face. He began to play as if
it were not he who played, but some mightier power, of which he was but
the passive instrument.

Sweet and soft and wonderful was the music that stole through the
room. Mr. Leonard forgot his heartbreak and listened to it in puzzled
amazement. He had never heard anything like it before. How could the
child play like that? He looked at Naomi and marvelled at the change
in her face. The fear and frenzy were going out of it; she listened
breathlessly, never taking her eyes from Felix. At the foot of the bed
the idiot girl sat with tears on her cheeks.

In that strange music was the joy of the innocent, mirthful childhood,
blent with the laughter of waves and the call of glad winds. Then it
held the wild, wayward dreams of youth, sweet and pure in all their
wildness and waywardness. They were followed by a rapture of young
love--all-surrendering, all-sacrificing love. The music changed. It
held the torture of unshed tears, the anguish of a heart deceived and
desolate. Mr. Leonard almost put his hands over his ears to shut out its
intolerable poignancy. But on the dying woman's face was only a strange
relief, as if some dumb, long-hidden pain had at last won to the healing
of utterance.

The sullen indifference of despair came next, the bitterness of
smouldering revolt and misery, the reckless casting away of all good.
There was something indescribably evil in the music now--so evil that
Mr. Leonard's white soul shuddered away in loathing, and Maggie cowered
and whined like a frightened animal.

Again the music changed. And in it now there was agony and fear--and
