Instantly the whole pile was in a blaze.

As soon as the flames began to rage, the poor woman, now in the midst of
them, was called upon by name, from all sides; but as insensible as the
corpse on which she lay, she made no answer. She entered eternity,
suffocated at once, most probably, by the flames.

The second case of suttee which I shall mention took place at the death
of the rajah, or king of Tanjore. He left behind him four wives.

The Brahmins having determined that two of these four should be burned
with the corpse of their husband, and having selected the two whom they
thought best to sacrifice, they told them of what awaited them. They
received the information with apparent joy. A refusal would have been
attended with their utter disgrace.

One day only was necessary to get ready for the funeral ceremonies. They
were conducted as follows: In a field somewhat distant from the palace,
the people made a hollow, not very deep, but about twelve or fifteen
feet square. Within it they made a pyramid of the sweet-smelling
sandal-wood. On the middle of the pyramid, a scaffold was built in such
a manner that the posts could easily be taken away, by which means the
scaffold would fall at once. On the four corners of the platform, large
jars were placed, filled with melted butter, to besmear the pyramid,
that it might be the more easily set on fire.

The following was the order of the procession. It was headed by a great
number of soldiers under arms. They were followed by a multitude of
musicians, chiefly trumpeters, who made the air reecho with their
melancholy sounds. Next came the body of the king upon a splendid
palanquin, richly adorned. This was surrounded by the nearest relations
and by the priest of the king. They were all on foot, and without their
turbans in token of mourning. A large party of Brahmins formed around
them as an immediate escort. The two wives who were to be burned with
the corpse came next, each borne on a palanquin. During the journey they
appeared calm and cheerful. The troops kept off the immense crowds who
were assembled from every direction.

The two queens, loaded with jewels, were attended by their favorite
women, with whom they occasionally conversed, and by their relations of
both sexes. To many of these they had made presents before leaving the
palace. They were also accompanied by thousands of Brahmins, collected
from different quarters. These were followed by an innumerable multitude
of persons of both sexes. When they arrived at the ground where they
were to be burned, the two victims were made to descend from their
palanquins, for the purpose of performing the preparatory ceremonies.
They went through the whole without showing any fear until towards the
close, when their countenances began to change, and their three circuits
around the pile were not performed without considerable effort to
maintain calmness.

In the meantime, the body of the king had been placed on the scaffold
over the platform. The two queens were also laid down beside the corpse,
one on the right hand, and the other on the left, and they joined hands
by stretching them over the body. The astrologer having then declared
that the happy moment was come for firing the pile, the Brahmins
repeated several prayers in a loud voice, and sprinkled the pile with
holy water. When these ceremonies were finished, a signal was given, and
the pillars which supported the pyramid and the scaffold were suddenly
taken away. Immediately the women were covered with the falling mass of
timber, which tumbled over them with a crash. At the same instant the
pile was fired in all its parts. On one side, the nearest relative of
the king applied his torch, and on the other side, the priest; while the
Brahmins, in every quarter, were pouring jars of melted butter on the
flames, creating so intense a heat as must instantly have consumed the
victims. Then the multitude shouted for joy, and the relations
approaching the pile also set up a loud cry, calling them by their
names. They supposed that they heard a voice in answer pronouncing
_Enna?_ that is, _What_? but the fall of the platform, and the immediate
bursting out of the flames, must have stifled them at once.

Such was the miserable cud of these poor unhappy queens--unhappy victims
of the most cruel religion that ever disgraced the earth.

Not unfrequently the sons take a prominent part in destroying their
mothers. This will appear from the following case. A Brahmin died, and
was brought to the place of burning. His wife was fastened to the pile,
and the fire was kindled, but the night was dark and rainy. When the
fire began to scorch the poor woman, she contrived to disentangle
herself from the dead body, and creeping from under the pile, hid
herself among some brushwood. In a little time it was discovered that
there was but one body on the pile. The relations immediately took the
alarm, and searched for the poor creature. The son soon dragged her
forth, and insisted that she should throw herself on the pile again, or
drown or hang herself. She pleaded for her life at the hands of her own
son, and declared that she could not embrace so horrid a death; but she
pleaded in vain. He urged, that he should lose his caste if she were
spared, and added, that either he or she must die. Unable to persuade
her to hang or drown herself, the son and the others present tied her
hands and feet, and threw her on the funeral pile, where she quickly
perished.

[Illustration: BURNING OF WIDOWS]

I observed that the rite of suttee is riveted in the affections of this
people. The following communications from two of the native princes who
lately consented to put a stop to this rite, will show you that this is
the case. The rajah of Oorcha declares, that "no subject of his state
shall in future be permitted to become a suttee, though according to the
Shasters, it is no doubt very meritorious for a widow to die of grief
for the death of her husband." The rajah of Sumpthem says, "The practice
of suttee is so very old, and has been countenanced and encouraged by
the wise men of so many generations that I have never thought myself
justified in interposing to prevent it; but my anxiety to meet the
wishes of the governor-general in this and in all things, is so great,
that I have waived all other considerations, and forbidden suttee."

If the British were to lose their power in India, the suttee would
immediately be reestablished. Power has put it down, but power alone
will never root it out of the affections of the people. Nothing but the
Gospel can do this. O that Christians would think of this, and hasten,
yea, with great haste, to send this blessed Gospel to them.




CHAPTER XVII.

THE REVENGEFUL NATURE OF THE HINDOO RELIGION.


My dear Children--The sacred books of the Hindoos encourage revenge. In
the Vedas, which are the most sacred books, are laid down forms of
religious service, or acts of worship, which are designed to injure or
destroy their enemies. When a person wishes to have his enemy
destroyed, he goes to a Brahmin or priest, and secures his supposed aid.
The Brahmin, before he proceeds to his work, clothes himself with a
black garment. He also makes four images of the foe, and clothes these
with black garments. He then kindles a sacrificial fire, and after the
performance of various ceremonies, he takes pieces of some animal which
has been consecrated for the purpose, and throws them into this fire. On
every occasion when he makes this burnt-offering, he touches the mouth
of the image of this enemy, uttering one or other of the forms of prayer
which are written in the sacred books. Of these, the following are a
few: "O Agni," god of fire, "thou who art the mouth of all gods, do
thou destroy the wisdom of my enemy." "O Agni, fill with distraction the
mind of this my enemy." "O Agni, destroy the senses of this my enemy."
"O Agni, make dumb the mouth of this my enemy." "O Agni, fasten with a
peg the tongue of this my enemy." "O Agni, reduce to ashes this my
enemy."

How different, my dear children, is the religion of Jesus from the
religion of which I have been giving you a description. No precepts
teach us that we may injure or destroy our enemies. On the contrary,
they teach us to love them, and do them good. Let me repeat to you some
of the words which our Saviour spoke on this point. "Ye have heard that
it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy;
but I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do
good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use you
and persecute you, that ye may be the children of your Father which is
in heaven; for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good,
and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust."

One of the young Hindoos in Dr. Duff's school in Calcutta, when reading
the above and similar passages, was so struck with the difference
between these precepts and the precepts of his Shasters, that he could
not but exclaim "O, how beautiful, how divine. Surely this is the
truth--this is the truth--this is the truth." The consequence was, that
he never could rest until he had thrown aside his sacred books and his
idols, and embraced that Saviour whose precepts appeared to him to be so
beautiful. And was this heathen so struck with the beauty of the
precepts of the Bible--so struck, that he had no peace until he gave
himself to his Saviour? And have you ever, my dear children, been struck
with the precepts of your Saviour--so struck with them, that you could
never rest until you had given up your hearts to him? If not, how great
is the contrast between you and that young Hindoo. He gave his heart to
the Saviour. You withhold yours. He, through grace, will dwell for ever
with Christ in heaven. You, if you continue in your present awful
condition, must be banished from his presence, and cast into hell, where
you shall be tormented day and night for ever, with the devil and his
angels. Flee, my dear children, flee to the Saviour now, if you have
never yet done so. Flee to him, and then you also shall dwell for ever
with him.




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE DECEPTION OF THE HINDOOS.


My dear Children--From what I have previously stated, you are aware that
the Hindoos are a very deceitful people. Let me give you another
instance of their deception. A late head catechist of one of my
missionary brethren was, before his conversion, the priest of a temple.
A man from whom about one thousand rupees' worth of jewels and similar
things had been stolen, came to this priest, and promised to reward him
well, if he would detect the thief, and secure to him the restoration of
his property. The priest promised to comply with his wishes; and in
order to effect his purpose, he had drums beaten through the village,
and proclaimed, that at a certain time he would hold a meeting and
detect the thief. At the appointed time, a large concourse of people
assembled, the priest appearing in the midst of them with a cocoa-nut
bound around with saffron-cords. He then told them, that if, after
putting down the cocoa-nut, it should move of its own accord towards
him, they might know that he would be able certainly to detect the
thief; and added, that after it had thus moved, it would pursue the
offender, and follow him until it would break his head. He then
performed certain ceremonies calculated to awaken superstitious feelings
in the minds of the people, and laid the cocoa-nut down at a little
distance from him. To the great amazement of all present, it began to
move towards the priest, and continued to move until it reached his
feet. This being done, he told the people, that they might conclude from
what they had seen, that the cocoa-nut would follow the thief until it
would break his head. He consented, however, to give him a little
grace--to spare his life until the next day; adding his advice, that the
thief, whoever he might be, had better come to him privately, and tell
him where the property was. In the dead of the night, a tap was heard at
the door of the priest; the thief presented himself, and delivered up
the property. The priest received a present from the owner of the
property, and rewarded the thief for his promptness. After this man was
converted, he was asked how he contrived to make the cocoa-nut move
towards him. "Why, sir," he answered, "if you will carefully divide a
cocoa-nut, scoop out the kernel from one-half of it, enclose a strong,
lively rat, put the parts of the cocoa-nut together, and bind the whole
with saffron-cords, to prevent the crack being seen, and then place it
on a declivity previously prepared, it is clear, that if you place
yourself at the foot of this declivity the rat will twirl the cocoa-nut,
and cause it to descend until it reaches your feet."




CHAPTER XIX.

SUPERSTITION OF THE HINDOOS.


My dear Children--In my Sermon to Children, before alluded to, I
mentioned a few particulars to prove that the people of India are very
superstitious. Let me mention a few more. It is said that no act,
however good it may be, if performed on Sunday, will succeed. Some will
not eat at all on Sunday, until they have seen a certain bird--the bird
on which the god Vrishnoo rides. If a man rubs oil on his head on
Monday, and bathes, he will commit a sin equal to the sin of destroying
a temple of Siva. If he has his hair out on Tuesday, he will become
poor. Even to worship the gods on Wednesday, is bad. If a person takes
medicine on Thursday, his sickness will be increased. Should he lend any
thing on Friday, he will lose his property. If he should buy a new cloth
on Saturday, take it home, and keep it there, death may be the
consequence. Should he die on this day, some other member of the family
will die on the following week.

If the foundation of a house is laid in June, the destruction of that
house will follow. Should a family enter a new house in March, some
member of the family will die. If a marriage is celebrated in September,
the husband and wife will fight with each other.

Should a thunderbolt fall on a house, or a vulture alight on it, some
evil will befall the people living in it. If a crow should strike any
person on the head with its wings, some of his relations will die.
Should a cat or a snake cross his path, it would be an indication of
evil. In the latter case, one of his relations will die. If, when
returning home, a person should meet him bearing a light, a quarrel will
be the result.

After a person has left his house, should he meet a single Brahmin, or a
woman who has had her head shaved, or a dumb or a blind man, or a
washerman or a barber, the object for which he left would not succeed.
Or, when going out, should he hit his head against the top of the
door-frame, or should any one ask him where he was going, or should he
happen to sneeze, he would consider these things as hinderances to his
going, and reenter the house.

Should a son or a daughter be born on the new moon in April, they will
become thieves. If a person is born under the planet Saturn, he will be
slandered, his riches will be dissipated, and his wife, son, and friends
will be destroyed. He will also be at variance with others, and endure
many sufferings. Should he be born under the planet Mars, he will be
full of anxious thoughts, be imprisoned, and oppressed with fear from
robbers, fire, etc. He also will lose his lands, trees, and good name.

If a person dreams that a monkey has bitten him, he will die in six
months; or if he dreams that bedbugs, in large numbers, are creeping
over his body to bite him, he will die in eight days. Should he dream
that a dog has bitten him, he will die in three years; or should he
dream that a dead person has appeared to him and spoken to him, he will
die immediately.

If a man has a little head, he will become rich. If he has a large head,
he will be poor. If his forehead is wide, he will live a hundred years.
If he has a small neck, he will be a murderer. If the second toe is
long, he will be a bad man. If a woman has curly hair, she will not
prosper. If her nose is long, she will have a good disposition. If her
ear is wide, she will tell falsehoods. If she has a mole on her nose,
she will be subject to anger; if on her lips, she will be learned; if on
the eyebrows she will be cunning.

I could continue to fill a number of pages with things of the same
description, but it will be unnecessary. I will merely mention one
instance more. On a certain night in the month of November, the people
will not look at the moon. The reason assigned for this, is as follows.
Once, when the elephant-faced god Pulliar was dancing before the gods,
the moon happening to see him, laughed at him, and told him that he had
a large stomach, an ear like a winnowing-fan, etc. This so enraged him,
that he cursed her. This curse was inflicted on the night above
mentioned.

How does the wretchedness of a people, both in reference to the things
of this world and of the world to come, show itself where the Bible is
unknown. If this blessed book was not an inspired book--if it did no
more than remove the temporal miseries of men, how invaluable would it
be! Of how much more value then, is it, in reference to the removal of
their spiritual miseries?

O, why is it that Christians have not long since sent this Bible to
them? Why is it that they do not send it to them _now_? This is a
mystery, which we must leave to be unravelled at the judgment-seat of
the last day. My dear children, you are to stand before that
judgment-seat. Shall any of these heathen among whom I dwell, rise up at
that awful season--stretch out their hands towards you, and say, There
stand the children who might have sent us the Bible, but they did not
send it; and now we must be lost--_lost for ever!_




CHAPTER XX.

BURMAH, CHINA, ETC., ETC.


My dear children--If you will look on your map of Asia, you will see,
adjoining Hindostan, at the east, a country called Burmah. This is
another land of idols. Here the "Baptist General Convention for Foreign
Missions" have one of the most interesting and flourishing missions in
the world. The people of Burmah are, if possible, still further removed
from divine knowledge than the people of India. They are in reality
atheists, or, in other words, people who do not believe in a creator or
preserver of the world. But still they worship gods, who, they say, have
become so by acts of religious merit. He whom they now worship is called
Gaudama, or Boodh. He is reputed to be the son of the king of Benares,
and, if their history be correct, was born six hundred years before
Christ. The Boodhists are all idolaters. They have many temples erected
to the honor of Boodh and his image. Before this image they present
flowers, incense, rice, betel-nuts etc. Like all other idolatrous
nations, the Burmese are very wicked. They do not respect their females
as they should do. They treat them as an inferior order of beings. They
often sell them.

A very singular custom prevails in that country. It consists in paying a
kind of homage to a white elephant. This elephant is sumptuously dressed
and fed. It is provided with officers, like a second sovereign, and is
made to receive presents from foreign ambassadors. It is next in rank to
the king, and _superior_ to the queen.

Burmah is the country in which Drs. Judson and Price, and Messrs. Hough
and Wade suffered so much, during the war with England several years
ago. Messrs. Hough and Wade were the first to suffer. As the ships which
were to make the attack upon Rangoon approached the city, they were
seized and cast into prison. Their legs were bound together with ropes,
and eight or ten Burmans, armed with spears and battle-axes, were
placed over them, as a guard. They were afterwards put in irons. The
next morning, as the fleet approached still nearer the city, orders were
sent to the guard, through the grates of their prison, that the instant
the shipping should fire upon the town, they were to kill them, together
with the other prisoners confined with them. The guard, on receiving
these orders, began to sharpen the instruments with which they intended
to kill them, and moved them about their heads to show with how much
skill and pleasure they would attend to their orders. Upon the floor
where they intended to butcher them, a large quantity of sand was spread
to receive the blood. The gloom and silence of death reigned among the
prisoners; the vast ocean of eternity seemed but a step before them. At
length the fleet arrived, and the firing commenced The first ball which
was thrown into the town passed, with a tremendous noise, directly over
their heads. This so frightened the guard, that they seemed unable to
execute their murderous orders. They shrunk away into one corner of the
prison, where they remained quiet, until a broadside from one of the
ships made the prison shake and tremble to its very foundation. This so
alarmed them, that they burst open the doors of the prison and fled. The
missionaries, with the other prisoners, were then left alone. Their
danger, however, was not at an end; but as God had protected them thus
far, he continued to protect them until they were set at liberty, and
allowed to preach the Gospel again to those perishing heathen. Drs.
Judson and Price were also imprisoned, and suffered much; but they, too,
were preserved and delivered. The accounts of their sufferings are so
long, that I cannot now relate them all to you. You will find them in
the life of Mrs. Judson.

After the war was over, the missionaries were permitted to go everywhere
to proclaim the name of the Saviour; and their efforts have been very
much blessed, especially among the Karens. It will be impossible for me
to give you an account of their many labors, and of the many tokens
which they have received of God's favor towards multitudes who have
become followers of the Redeemer. Suffice it to say, that more than six
thousand have been received into the Christian church. One of the native
teachers not long since baptized, on one occasion, three hundred and
seventy-two persons.

Adjoining Burmah, is China, a country containing more than three hundred
millions of people, about twenty times as many as there are in the
United States of America. It is a country filled with idols. Many of the
people earn their living by making and selling these idols. There are
many shops where they are sold, or repaired when they become broken or
defaced.

The females in that country are in a very degraded state. They are the
slaves of their husbands, and live and die in the greatest ignorance.
Any attempt to raise themselves to the level of females in Christian
lands, is considered as very wicked. The little female child is tortured
from her birth. You have, perhaps, heard that the women of China have
small feet. These are made small by a very cruel practice--by putting
bandages of cloth so tightly around them, that they cannot grow. Many
women have feet not larger than those of an American infant of one year
old. Mr. Doty, missionary to China, says, that he was acquainted with a
little girl whose mother had bound up her feet so tightly, that she
cried two or three hours every day, on account of the great pain which
she suffered.

With such little feet, you may well suppose that it would be very
difficult for the women to walk. It is so. They limp and hobble along,
