
[Illustration: Script Exercise:

I wish, Mamma you would
tell me where the rain comes
from. Does it come from the
sky? And when the little
drops pitter-patter on the window
do you think they are
playing with me? I can not
work or read for I love to listen
to them. I often think their
sound is pretty music. But the
rain keeps children at home
and sometimes I do not like
that, then.
The little raindrops only say,
"Pit, pitter, patter, pat;
While we play on the out-side,
Why can't you play on that?"
]



LESSON L.

sled    throw    win'ter    hurt    ice      cov'er    Hen'ry       next

skate   ground   mer'ry     snow    sister   laugh'ing (laf'ing)    pair


[Illustration: Children skating and playing in the snow.]


I like winter, when snow and ice cover the ground. What fun it is to throw
snowballs, and to skate on the ice!

See the boys and girls! How merry they are! Henry has his sled, and draws
his little sister. There they go!

I think Henry is kind, for his sister is too small to skate.

Look! Did you see that boy fall down? But I see he is not hurt, for he is
laughing.

Some other boys have just come to join in the sport. See them put on their
skates.

Henry says, that he hopes his father will get a pair of skates for his
sister next winter.



LESSON LI.

paw      po lite'    means     isn't    speak   sir    shake    Fi'do

tricks   teach       din'ner   El'len   bow'wow


[Illustration: Girl and boy playing with dog. Dog on hind legs,
seated on chair, with hat on head.]


Ellen, do look at Fido! He sits up in a chair, with my hat on. He looks
like a little boy; but it is only Fido.

Now see him shake hands. Give me your paw, Fido. How do you do, sir? Will
you take dinner with us. Fido? Speak! Fido says, "Bowwow," which means,
"Thank you, I will."

Isn't Fido a good dog, Ellen? He is always so polite.

When school is out, I will try to teach him some other tricks.



LESSON LII.

puss     shed     pain     way          stole    saw     hid    eat

Hat'tie  suf'fer  sor'ry   some'thing   caught   tried   Ne'ro


[Illustration: Cat sitting on box.]


"O Hattie! I just saw a large rat in the shed; and old Nero tried to catch
it."

"Did he catch it, Frank?"

"No; Nero did not; but the old cat did."

"My cat?"

"No, it was the other one."

"Do tell me how she got it, Frank. Did she run after it?"

"No, that was not the way. Puss was hid on a big box. The rat stole out,
and she jumped at it and caught it."

"Poor rat! It must have been very hungry; it came out to get something to
eat."

"Why, Hattie, you are not sorry puss got the rat, are you?"

"No, I can not say I am sorry she got it; but I do not like to see even a
rat suffer pain."



LESSON LIII.

roll       build    grand'pa    hard     foam       ships

hous'es    long     sail        break    wood'en    blow


[Illustration: Two girls play in sand. Man with cane and top hat is
seated on beach.]


Mary and Lucy have come down to the beach with their grandpa. They live in
a town near the sea.

Their grandpa likes to sit on the large rock, and watch the big ships as
they sail far away on the blue sea. Sometimes he sits there all day long.

The little girls like to dig in the sand, and pick up pretty shells. They
watch the waves as they roll up on the beach, and break into white foam.

They sometimes make little houses of sand, and build walls around them;
and they dig wells with their small wooden spades.

They have been picking up shells for their little sister. She is too young
to come to the beach.

I think all children like to play by the seaside when the sun is bright,
and the wind does not blow too hard.



LESSON LIV.

asked    want'ed    four    Wil'lie's    night     rab'bits

lad      car'ried   cents   tell'ing     fif'ty    mas'ter


[Illustration: Two boys playing with rabbits.]


One day, Willie's father saw a boy at the market with four little white
rabbits in a basket.

He thought these would be nice pets for Willie; so he asked the lad how
much he wanted for his rabbits.

The boy said, "Only fifty cents, sir."

Willie's father bought them, and carried them home.

Here you see the rabbits and their little master. He has a pen for them,
and always shuts them in it at night to keep them safe.

He gives them bread and grass to eat. They like grass, and will take it
from his hand. He has called in a little friend to see them.

Willie is telling him about their funny ways.

SLATE WORK.

[Illustration: Script Exercise:

Some rabbits are as white as
snow, some are black, and others
have white and black spots.
What soft, kind eyes they have.
]



LESSON LV.

bush     cun'ning    place     show    find    bro'ken

o'ver    bring       a'gain (a gen')   fas'ten (fas' n )


[Illustration: Boy and girl looking over a fence in woods.]


"Come here, Rose. Look down into this bush."

"O Willie! a bird's nest! What cunning, little eggs! May we take it, and
show it to mother? "

"What would the old bird do, Rose, if she should come back and not find
her nest?"

"Oh, we would bring it right back, Willie!"

"Yes; but we could not fasten it in its place again. If the wind should
blow it over, the eggs would get broken."



LESSON LVI.

strong    round    dry    bill    worked

sends     claws    flit   God     spring


"How does the bird make the nest so strong, Willie?"

"The mother bird has her bill and her claws to work with, but she would
not know how to make the nest if God did not teach her. Do you see what it
is made of?"

"Yes, Willie, I see some horse-hairs and some dry grass. The old bird must
have worked hard to find all the hairs, and make them into such a pretty,
round nest."
