it. I know you are not afraid.
George. Well, I am not afraid to throw. Give me the
snowball. I would as soon throw it as not.
Whack! went the snowball against the door; and the boys
took to their heels. Henry was laughing as heartily as he
could, to think what a fool he had made of George.
George had a whipping for his folly, as he ought to have
had. He was such a coward, that he was afraid of being
called a coward. He did not dare refuse to do as Henry told
him, for fear that he would be laughed at.
If he had been really a brave boy, he would have said,
"Henry, do you suppose that I am so foolish as to throw that
snowball, just because you want to have me? You may throw
your own snowballs, if you please!"

	THIRD READER. 	137
Henry would, perhaps, have laughed at him, and called
him a coward.
But George would have said, "Do you think that 1 care for
your laughing? I do not think it right to throw the snowball. I
will not do that which 1 think to be wrong, if the whole town
should join with you in laughing."
This would have been real courage. Henry would have
seen, at once, that it would do no good to laugh at a boy who
had so bold a heart. You must have this fearless spirit, or you
will get into trouble, and will be, and ought to be, disliked by
all.


LESSON LIII.

THE OLD CLOCK.

1.  In the old, old hall the old clock stands,
And round and round move the steady hands;
With its tick, tick, tick, both night and day,
While seconds and minutes pass away.

	138 	ECLECTIC SERIES,

2.  At the old, old clock oft wonders Nell,
For she can't make out what it has to tell;



She has ne'er yet read, in prose or rhyme,
That it marks the silent course of time.

3.  When I was a child, as Nell is now,
And long ere Time had wrinkled my brow,
The old, old clock both by night and day
Said,--"Tick, tick, tick!" Time passes away.

	THIRD READER. 	139



LESSON LIV.
THE WAVES.
1. "Where are we to go?" said the little waves to the great,
deep sea.
"Go, my darlings, to the yellow sands: you will find work
to do there."
2. "I want to play," said one little wave; "I want to see
who can jump the highest."
"No; come on, come on," said an earnest wave; "mother
must be right. I want to work."
3. "Oh, I dare not go," said another; "look at those great,
black rocks close to the sands; I dare not go there, for they
will tear me to pieces."
4. "Take my hand, sister," said the earnest wave; "let us go
on together. How glorious it is to do some work."
5. "Shall we ever go back to mother?" "Yes, when our
work is done."

	140 	ECLECTIC SERIES.
6. So one and all hurried on. Even the little wave that
wanted to play, pressed on, and thought that work might be
fun after all. The timid ones did not like to be left behind,
and they became earnest as they got nearer the sands.
7. After all, it was fun, pressing on one after another--
jumping, laughing, running on to the broad, shining sands.
8. First, they came in their course to a great sand castle.
Splash, splash! they all


	THIRD READER. 	141
went over it, and down it came. "Oh, what fun!" they cried.
9. "Mother told me to bring these seaweeds; I will find a
pretty place for them," said one--and she ran a long way over
the sands, and left them among the pebbles. The pebbles
cried, "We are glad you are come. We wanted washing."
10. "Mother sent these shells; I do n't know where to put
them," said a little fretful wave. "Lay them one by one on the
sand, and do not break them," said the eldest wave.
11. And the little one went about its work, and learned to
be quiet and gentle, for fear of breaking the shells.
12. "Where is my work?" said a great, full-grown wave.
"this is mere play. The little ones can do this and laugh over
it. Mother said there was work for me." And he came down
upon some large rocks.
13. Over the rocks and into a pool he went, and he heard
the fishes say, "The sea is coming. Thank you, great sea; you
always send a big wave when a storm is nigh. Thank you,
kind wave; we are all ready for you now."

	142 	ECLECTIC SERIES.
14. Then the waves all went back over the wet sands,
slowly and carelessly, for they were tired.
15. "All my shells are safe," said one.
16. And, "My seaweeds are left behind," said another.
17. "I washed all of the pebbles," said a third.
18. "And I--I only broke on a rock, and splashed into a
pool," said the one that was so eager to work. "I have done
no good, mother--no work at all"
19. "Hush!" said the sea. And they heard a child that was
walking on the shore, say, "O mother, the sea has been here!
Look, how nice and clean the sand is, and how clear the
water is in that pool."
20. Then the sea, said, "Hark!" and far away they heard
the deep moaning of the coming storm.
21. "Come, my darlings," said she; "you have done your
work, now let the storm do its work."


	THIRD READER. 	143

LESSON LV.

DO N'T KILL THE BIRDS.

1. Do n't kill the birds! the little birds,
That sing about your door
Soon as the joyous Spring has come,
And chilling storms are o'er.

2. The little birds! how sweet they sing!
Oh, let them joyous live;
And do not seek to take the life
Which you can never give.

3. Do n't kill the birds! the pretty birds,
That play among the trees;

	144 	ECLECTIC SERIES.

For earth would be a cheerless place,
If it were not for these.

4. The little birds! how fond they play!
Do not disturb their sport;
But let them warble forth their songs,
Till winter cuts them short.

5. Do n't kill the birds! the happy birds,
That bless the field and grove;
So innocent to look upon,
They claim our warmest love.

6. The happy birds, the tuneful birds,
How pleasant  't is to see!
No spot can be a cheerless place
Where'er their presence be.





LESSON LVI.

WHEN TO SAY NO.

1. Though "No" is a very little word, it is not always easy
to say it; and the not doing so, often causes trouble.

	THIRD READER. 	145
2. When we are asked to stay away from school, and
spend in idleness or mischief the time which ought to be
spent in study, we should at once say "No."
3. When we are urged to loiter on our way to school, and
thus be late, and interrupt our teacher and the school, we
should say "No." When some schoolmate wishes us to
whisper or play in the schoolroom, we should say "No."
4. When we are tempted to use angry or wicked words, we
should remember that the eye of God is always upon us, and
should say "No."
5. When we have done anything wrong, and are tempted
to conceal it by falsehood, we should say "No, we can not
tell a lie; it is wicked and cowardly."
6. If we are asked to do anything which we know to be
wrong, we should not fear to say "No."
7. If we thus learn to say "No," we shall avoid much
trouble, and be always safe.



3.10.

146 	ECLECTIC SERIES.
LESSON LVII.
WHICH LOVED BEST?

"I love you, mother," said little John;
Then, forgetting work, his cap went on,
And he was off to the garden swing,
Leaving his mother the wood to bring.


2.  "I love you, mother," said rosy Nell;
"I love you better than tongue can tell;"

	THIRD READER. 	147

Then she teased and pouted full half the day,
Till her mother rejoiced when she went to play.

3.  "I love you, mother," said little Fan;
 "To-day I'll help you all I can;
How glad I am that school does n't keep!"
So she rocked the baby till it fell asleep.

4.  Then, stepping softly, she took the broom,
And swept the floor, and dusted the room;
Busy and happy all day was she,
Helpful and cheerful as child could be.

5.  "I love you, mother," again they said--
Three little children going to bed;
How do you think that mother guessed
Which of them really loved her best?
Joy Allison.

LESSON LVIII.

JOHN CARPENTER.
1. John Carpenter did not like to buy toys that somebody
else had made. He liked the fun of making them himself. The
thought that they were his own work delighted him.
2. Tom Austin, one of his playmates, thought a toy was
worth nothing unless it cost a great deal of money. He never
tried to make anything, but bought all his toys.

	148 	ECLECTIC SERIES.
3. "Come and look at my horse," said he, one day. "It cost
a dollar, and it is such a beauty! Come and see it."
4. John was soon admiring his friend's

horse; and he was examining it carefully, to see how it was
made. The same evening he began to make one for himself.
5. He went into the wood shed, and picked

	THIRD READER. 	149
out two pieces of wood--one for the head of his horse, the
other for the body. It took him two or three days to shape
them to his satisfaction.
6. His father gave him a bit of red leather for a bridle, and
a few brass nails, and his mother found a bit of old fur with
which he made a mane and tail for his horse.
7. But what about the wheels? This puzzled him. At last
he thought he would go to a turner's shop, and see if he could
not get some round pieces of wood which might suit his
purpose.
8. He found a large number of such pieces among the
shavings on the floor, and asked permission to take a few of
them. The turner asked him what he wanted them for, and he
told him about his horse.
9. "Oh," said the man, laughing, "if you wish it, I will
make some wheels for your horse. But mind, when it is
finished, you must let me see it."
10. John promised to do so, and he soon ran home with
the wheels in his pocket. The next evening, he went to the
turner's shop with his horse all complete, and was told that
he was an ingenious little fellow

150 	ECLECTIC SERIES.
11. Proud of this compliment, he ran to his friend Tom,
crying, "Now then, Tom, here is my horse,--look!"
12. "Well, that is a funny horse," said Tom; "where did
you buy it?" "I did n't buy it," replied John; I made it."
13. "You made it yourself! Oh, well, it's a good horse for
you to make. But it is not so good as mine. Mine cost a
dollar, and yours did n't cost anything."
14. "It was real fun to make it, though," said John, and
away he ran with his horse rolling after him.
15. Do you want to know what became of John? Well, I
will tell you. He studied hard in school, and was called the
best scholar in his class. When he left school, he went to
work in a machine shop. He is now a master workman, and
will soon have a shop of his own.


	THIRD READER. 	151

LESSON LIX.

PERSEVERE.

1. The fisher who draws in his net too soon,
Won't have any fish to sell;
The child who shuts up his book too soon,
Won't learn any lessons well.

2. If you would have your learning stay,
Be patient,--do n't learn too fast:
The man who travels a mile each day,
May get round the world at last.


LESSON LX.

THE CONTENTED BOY.
Mr. Lenox was one morning riding by himself. He got off
from his horse to look at something on the roadside. The
horse broke away from him, and ran off. Mr. Lenox ran after
him, but soon found that he could not catch him.
A little boy at work in a field near the road, heard the
horse. As soon as he saw him running from his master, the
boy ran

	152 	ECLECTIC SERIES.

very quickly to the middle of the road, and, catching the
horse by thc bridle, stopped him till Mr. Lenox came up.
Mr. Lenox. Thank you, my good boy, you have caught my
horse very nicely. What shall I give you for your trouble?
Boy. I want nothing, sir.
Mr. L. You want nothing? So much the better for you.
Few men can say as much. But what were you doing in the
field?
B. I was rooting up weeds, and tending the sheep that
were feeding on turnips.
Mr. L. Do you like to work?
B. Yes, sir, very well, this fine weather.
Mr. L. But would you not rather play?
B. This is not hard work. It is almost as good as play.
Mr. L. Who set you to work?
B. My father, sir.
Mr. L. What is your name?
B. Peter Hurdle, sir.
Mr. L. How old are you?
B. Eight years old, next June.
Mr. L. How long have you been here?
B. Ever since six o'clock this morning.
Mr. L. Are you not hungry?
B. Yes, sir, but I shall go to dinner soon.

	THIRD READER. 	153

Mr. L. If you had a dime now, what would you do with it?
B. I do n't know, sir. I never had so much.
Mr. L. Have you no playthings?

	154 	ECLECTIC SERIES.
B. Playthings? What are they?
Mr. L. Such things as ninepins, marbles, tops, and wooden
horses.
B. No, sir. Tom and I play at football in winter, and I have
a jumping rope. I had a hoop, but it is broken.
Mr. L. Do you want nothing else?
B. I have hardly time to play with what I have. I have to
drive the cows, and to run on errands, and to ride the horses
to the fields, and that is as good as play.
Mr. L. You could get apples and cakes, if you had money,
you know.
B. I can have apples at home. As for cake, I do not want
that. My mother makes me a pie now and then, which is as
good.
Mr. L. Would you not like a knife to cut sticks?
B. I have one. Here it is. Brother Tom gave it to me.
Mr. L. Your shoes are full of holes. Do n't you want a new
pair?
B. I have a better pair for Sundays.
Mr. L. But these let in water.
B. I do not mind that, sir.
Mr. L. Your hat is all torn, too.
B. I have a better one at home.

	THIRD READER. 	155
Mr. L. What do yon do when it rains?
B. If it rains very hard when I am in the field, I get under a
tree for shelter.
Mr. L. What do you do, if you are hungry before it is time
to go home?
B. I sometimes eat a raw turnip.
Mr. L. But if there is none?
B. Then I do as well as I can without. I work on, and never
think of it.
Mr. L. Why, my little fellow, I am glad to see that you are
so contented. Were you ever at school?
B. No, sir. But father means to send me next winter.
Mr. L. You will want books then.
B. Yes, sir; each boy has a Spelling Book, a Reader, and a
Testament.
Mr. L. Then I will give them to you. Tell your father so,
and that it is because you are an obliging, contented little
boy.
B. I will, sir. Thank you.
Mr. L. Good by, Peter.
B. Good morning, sir.
Dr. John Aiken


	156 	ECLECTIC SERIES.

LESSON LXI.

LITTLE GUSTAVA.

1.  Little Gustava sits in the sun,
Safe in the porch, and the little drops run
From the icicles under the eaves so fast,
For the bright spring sun shines warm at last,
And glad is little Gustava.

2.  She wears a quaint little scarlet cap,
And a little green bowl she holds in her lap,
Filled with bread and milk to the brim,
And a wreath of marigolds round the rim:
"Ha! ha!" laughs little Gustava.

3.  Up comes her little gray, coaxing cat,
With her little pink nose, and she mews, "What's that ?"
Gustava feeds her,--she begs for more,
And a little brown hen walks in at the door:
"Good day!" cries little Gustava.

4.  She scatters crumbs for the little brown hen,
There comes a rush and a flutter, and then
Down fly her little white doves so sweet,
With their snowy wings and their crimson feet:
"Welcome!" cries little Gustava.

5.  So dainty and eager they pick up the crumbs.
But who is this through the doorway comes?

	THIRD READER. 	157

Little Scotch terrier, little dog Rags,
Looks in her face, and his funny tail wags:
"Ha! ha!" laughs little Gustava.



6.  "You want some breakfast, too?" and down
She sets her bowl on the brick floor brown,
And little dog Rags drinks up her milk,
While she strokes his shaggy locks, like silk:
"Dear Rags!" says little Gustava.

7.  Waiting without stood sparrow and crow,
Cooling their feet in the melting snow.

	158	ECLECTIC SERIES.

"Won't you come in, good folk?" she cried,
But they were too bashful, and staid outside,
Though "Pray come in!" cried Gustava.

8.  So the last she threw them, and knelt on the mat,
With doves, and biddy, and dog, and cat.
And her mother came to the open house door:
"Dear little daughter, I bring you some more,
My merry little Gustava."

9.  Kitty and terrier, biddy and doves,
All things harmless Gustava loves,
The shy, kind creatures  't is joy to feed,
And, oh! her breakfast is sweet indeed
To happy little Gustava!
Celia Thaxter.




