"He did not spread-eagle that fool," he said to himself, "but let me have
the glory of pounding the ugly brute into jelly, and made me go in and
win when I was ready to give in to the cad. Why did not Phil give him his
cap? There's something rotten somewhere."

As for Acton, as I said before, he regarded this little incident as a
treasure trove upon which he could draw almost unlimitedly in his
campaign against Bourne. "I'll strike at Bourne, senr., through his young
brother. I'll train him up in the way he should go, and when our
unspeakable prig of a Philip sees what a beautiful article young Jack
finally emerges, he'll wish he'd left me alone. Jack, my boy, I'm sorry,
but I'm going to make you a bad boy, just to give your elder brother
something to think about. You're going to become a terrible monster of
iniquity, just to shock your reverend brother."

Acton took not the smallest interest in the usual Easter Term games.
Footer was only played occasionally, but there was one blessing, the
fellows need not play the usual Thursday Old Game. As for cross-country
running, paper chases, _et hoc genus omne_, Acton refused to have
anything to do with them. "That sort," he said to Dick Worcester, "isn't
in the same street with footer."

"Why not try and lift the Public School Heavy at Aldershot?" suggested
Worcester.

"There's Hodgson in for it, Dick."

"A good man; but if you would only apply yourself seriously to the
business I'd back you. You're a good weight, and got a longer reach than
Hodgson."

"There's Bourne, too."

"Personally, I believe Phil is only pacing Hodgson to take him along
quicker."

"It's an awful fag, and I believe Eton have got the Heavy safe and sure
this year. A cousin of mine there says that their pet, Jarvis, would walk
right through the best man we've ever turned out."

"Oh, that's their usual brag!"

"Personally, I don't think so. They have got a young Bermondsey
professor--who is up to all the latest dodges--to coach. Our sergeant is
a bit old-fashioned--good, but old-fashioned. Does not do enough with his
right."

"I'm quite an amateur," said Dick. "Don't understand the finer shades of
the arts. Should have thought the sergeant good enough."

"_Dubito!_ Anyhow, Dick, I'll think it over; and if I think I can
make a decent show I'll have a shot. When does it come off?"

"At Aldershot? Oh!--last week in March."

"That gives me nearly two months. One can turn round in two months; and
if I'm satisfied as to my coaching I'll certainly try at Aldershot. But
what has a fellow to do on the half-holidays now? No footer, and one
might do enough practice after tea for the Heavy. I wish Kipling would
write a book every week. He is the only fellow in England who can write."

So Acton, on the half-holidays, prepared to read his novels by his
fireside. Not that he was particularly fond of toasting himself, but
because, for him, it was all he could do.

But Corker came to his rescue. The old man, after having had his back to
the wall for an age, consented to monitors being allowed to cycle by
themselves, and even to be _chaperon_ to any fags who cared to run
with them, and--important _proviso_--whom the monitors did not
object to. Otherwise the old rule of no cycling _sans_ house-master
was in force.

Acton thereupon invested in a swell machine, and he and young Bourne, or
Grim, or Wilson on the hired article, would cover no end of country
between dinner and roll call.

By-and-by Phil noticed that his brother was getting pretty thick with
Acton.

"Rather thick with Acton, Jack? I don't think he'll do you any good."

"He has, anyhow, Phil."

"How?"

Jack explained.

"I'm glad you licked the animal, young 'un; but, all the same, I wish
some other fellow had seen you through."

"I don't!" said Jack, hotly.

"I wonder," said Phil, dryly, "what is the great attraction which a Sixth
Form fellow sees in a fag? Above all, a fag of the name of Bourne?"

"Fact is, I don't see it myself," said Jack, shortly. "Better ask him."

"No, I don't think I shall. All the same, I would not dog Acton's
footsteps quite so much."

"He's a monitor."

"Who'll make you useful. Take my word for it."

"We'll see."

"Oh! Certainly we shall."

Jack was thoroughly unhinged by his brother's dry bantering tone, and
said hotly--

"I cannot understand, Phil, why he didn't get his cap. He deserved it."

"There's no need for you to understand it, young 'un."

"My opinion is----"

"Not worth the breath you're going to waste."

"It's considered a shame pretty generally."

"I've heard so; but, still, that does not alter matters. However, I did
not want to talk politics with you, Jack. Don't put your innocent little
toes into any scrape--that is all I wanted to tell you. Here is half a
crown for you to buy butterscotch, and while you're sucking it think over
what I've said. What! Little boys given up toffee? Then I'd better say
good night, Jack." Jack went out pretty sore.

About a week or so after this, Acton and young Bourne sped down to the
old Lodestone Farm, and as they pedalled in at the gate young Hill, the
farmer's son, said to Acton--

"The man's been here since twelve, sir."

"That's all right," said Acton. "Has he got the stable ready?"

"He's been putting it to rights the last hour."

"I say, Bourne," said Acton, turning to Jack, "ever heard of the Alabama
Coon?"

"The fellow who won that fight in Holland? The prize-fighter?"

"The very same."

"Rather!"

"Well, I've engaged him to give me a few lessons here. I'm going to try
for the Heavy at Aldershot. Like to see the fun?"

"Rather!"

"Then come along."

Together they went into the stable, and therein found "The Coon," a
coal-black negro, busily shovelling sand upon the floor, smoking an
enormous cigar the while.

"Making ready the cockpit," said Acton to Jack, who was staring open-eyed
at the worker. "Lusty looking animal, eh?"

"My aunt!" said Jack.

"Hallo, Coon, you're about ready!"

"Yaas, sir," said the negro. "I'm almost through."

"Brought the mittens with you, too?"

"Yaas, sir, I have the feather beds."

"Then when you've peeled we'll start."

The Coon put down his spade and slipped behind a stall.

"You see, young 'un, the sergeant at the gym is a good old hand, but he
is an old hand, so to speak--hasn't got the polish. Seeing that at
Aldershot they tie us down to a very few rounds, if St. Amory's have to
make any show at all they must get all the points they can first round or
so. That's why I've got the Coon down here. He is the most scientific
boxer we have."

"The figure will be pretty stiff, Acton, eh?"

"No matter about that if I can beat Jarvis. By the way, Bourne, you need
not say anything about this to any one. I have particular reasons for
keeping this quiet."

"All serene. I'm mum, of course."

"Thanks. You watch the Coon, and you'll pick up no end of wrinkles."

The Coon came out from behind the stall dressed in a vest, trousers, and
thin boots; his black arms were bare, and he had exchanged his cigar for
a straw, which he chewed vigorously. Acton changed his shoes and took off
his coat, and the lesson began.

Acton's opinion of the Coon's knowledge was, in Jack's mind, absolutely
corroborated by the display. His marvellous parrying of Acton's
attentions; his short step inwards, which invariably followed a mis-hit
by Acton; his baits to lure his opponent to deliver himself a gift into
his hands; his incredible ducking and lightning returns, held Bourne
fascinated. Everything was done so easily, so lithely, so lightly, and so
surely, that Jack gasped in admiration. Acton in the hands of the nigger
was a lamb indeed.

"This is an eye-opener," said Jack. "I'll try that left feint on Rogers,
the cocky ass!"

The negro stopped now and then to show Acton where and how to avail
himself of opportunities; and Acton, who was in grim earnest, applied
himself whole-heartedly to the business in hand, and, in consequence, as
Jack afterwards told us, "you could almost hear old Acton travelling on
the right road."

After about half an hour of instruction, Acton said--

"That is enough of jawing for the afternoon, Coon. Let us have three
rounds to finish up with. Take the time, young 'un."

Jack, with immense pride, took out his watch and prepared to act as
timekeeper.

"Better take it easily first two, sir, and put in all you know for the
last. A little hurricane in the third round is my advice."

Jack had an ecstatic ten minutes, the final round putting him in the
seventh heaven of enjoyment.

"All I could make out was Acton's white arms mixed with Alabama's black
ones, and the sand flying in all directions. Stunning isn't the word for
it!"

As Acton and young Bourne pedalled leisurely home for roll call, Jack
said--

"I think Jarvis' chance of collaring the Heavy for his place is a trifle
'rocky.'"

"I hope so."

"Crumbs! How Alabama does get home!"




CHAPTER XI

TODD PAYS THE BILL


Another youth had come back to St. Amory's with resolutions as fixed and
steady, though more legitimate than Acton's. Augustus Vernon Robert Todd
returned to school with pockets more scantily lined than ever from the
parental source, with his mind constantly fixed on the conversation which
he had had with his house-master on that awful concluding day last term,
and his chin still thrust out valiantly. Gus's square chin meant an
undeviating attention to serious study, and Gus, armed _cap-a-pie_,
against all his old friends.

For Todd had taken his precautions. His watch--a gold one, "jewelled in
numberless holes," as its owner pathetically remarked--had been left with
the family jeweller for three bright golden sovereigns, an eight-and-six
brass turnip, which went jolly well, although its tick was a trifle
vigorous under Gus's pillow, and an agreement. This document, drawn up by
himself, Gus regarded as a very masterpiece of business-like acumen. Gus
could have his gold watch back again within the year by paying three
sovereigns, and buying the brass turnip for half a sovereign, the profit
accruing on this latter transaction being, as Gus explained proudly, the
jeweller's percentage on the loan. The family jeweller had informed Gus
casually that he couldn't keep a wife and growing family on such
percentages, but to oblige, etc.

Todd received Mr. James Cotton blandly and politely, and Jim, in his
heavy way, mistook this airiness for non-paying symptoms on Gus's part.

"Had a good time, old cock, during the holidays?"

"Beastly," said Gus.

"Governor rusty?"

"No end. Been making the will again, and leaving me out."

"Perry _fiasco_, eh?"

"Yes, and other things."

"Well, I hope you can pay up all you owe me, old chap."

"Oh yes!" said Gus. "I said I would keep my word, although you were so
good as to have your doubts."

"All right, glad you can manage it."

"Here you are," said Gus, thrusting his hand into his pocket and bringing
up his coins. "Three three for that rotten bet, and the other fifteen bob
I owed you. It's all there."

Cotton opened his eyes.

"You said the governor was rusty, Gus?"

"So he was, beastly; but I can pay you all the same."

"Well," said Cotton, after a little awkward pause, "I don't want to clean
you out quite, so pay half now and the rest next term. Would that suit
you better, Gus?"

"Thanks, I don't mind," said Gus, airily. "Here's half, then."

Cotton left his friend's room considerably puzzled, but when he came next
night with his books for his old jackal's attentions as before, he was
more than puzzled, for Gus said--

"Can give you half an hour, Jim."

"We won't be able to screw up enough for Merishall in that time, old
man."

"Then you'll have to do the rest yourself, Jim. I'm not going to piffle
about any more."

"Oh, don't be an ass, Gus! I've heard that footle before," said Cotton,
with his heavy selfishness.

"Not quite, for this time I mean what I say."

"Oh no, you don't!"

"Oh yes, I do!"

"You wouldn't leave a fellow in the lurch like this, after all I--"

"I was left in the lurch last term, Jim, dear, and I'd rather you had a
taste of it this go. Do you remember when old Corker was savaging me
before all the school!"

The ghost of a smile flitted over Cotton's lips as he said--

"Rather!"

"The entire school, from the meanest fag up to Carr, was laughing at me,
and, by Jove! Jim, your laugh was the loudest and longest."

"It was your tips I was thinking of, and Corker's frothing through your
list of names," said Cotton, apologetically.

"All right," said Todd, acidly. "If you had left me alone I wouldn't have
wanted those tips, and as for my names, I did not christen myself. If you
want half an hour to shake out your work roughly I'll do it, but I can't
do more, Jim, honour bright."

"I don't want _that_!" said Cotton, angrily, gathering up his
books.

"Am deucedly glad you don't. And here, Jim, is the other half of the
money. Since I'm not obliging you in any way, why should you me?"

"You're logical, Todd, at any rate," said Jim, with half a sneer.

"Didn't know you could spot logic when you heard it, Cotton," said Gus,
with an equal amount of acid, and yet good-naturedly too.

"I suppose I clean you out?"

"You do. I've got a shilling to look at when you've taken up that heap."

"Is that your last word?"

"It is, but there's no need to quarrel--we're as we were before I began
to take your hire, Jim."

"Not quite," said Cotton, who was hit by Gus's decision. "I'll leave you
to your odd shilling and your forsaken tips."

He stumped off to his own room, and called Todd pet names till bedtime.
What made Cotton so angry was that, deep down in his own mind, he knew
that Gus was about to do a sensible and a manly thing, and just because
he himself was going to suffer by it he had not moral courage enough to
speak out openly his better mind.

But Gus, smiling at Cotton's bad temper, took out his books, drew up a
scheme for study, bolted his door, and commenced to work. He slacked off
when the bell went half an hour before lights out, and spent the time
left him in boring a hole in his solitary shilling. He then slipped it on
his watch-guard, prepared boldly to face a term of ten weeks without a
stiver.




CHAPTER XII

RAFFLES OF ROTHERHITHE


Twice a week, on half-holidays, Acton and Bourne ran over to the farm, to
find the Coon waiting for them in the stable, smoking an enormous cigar
as usual, and reading sporting papers on the corn-chest. Young Hill, the
farmer's son, generally put in an appearance when the boxing was about
over, and to Jack's utter disgust, plainly showed that he would rather
