Empire, with the flush of unbroken victory in war after war, could
command the complete devotion of its sons, but the French Republic,
without such triumphs as yet, could do as well. John felt an immense
pride because he, too, was republican to the core, and often there was a
lot in a name.

It was about noon now, and the sun was shining with dazzling brilliancy.
The tall hill and the low hill were clothed in deep green, and the
waters of the little river that ran between, sparkled in the light. The
air was crisp with a cool wind that blew from the west, and John felt
that the omens were good for the great mysterious movement which he
believed to be at hand.

He looked into the tent and saw that Lannes was sleeping soundly, with a
good color in his face. A powerful constitution aided by a strong will
had done its work and he was sure that on the morrow Lannes would again
be the most daring French scout of the air.

John found the waiting hard work. There was so much movement and action
that he wanted to be a part of it. He had thrown in his lot with this
army and he wanted to share its work at once. Yet much time passed, and
de Rougemont did not return. The evidences that the great French army
was marching to the point designated in the note brought by Lannes
multiplied. From the crest of the hill he already saw large bodies of
troops marching forward steadily, their long blue coats flapping
awkwardly about their legs. He wondered once more why they wore such an
inharmonious and conspicuous uniform as blue frock coats and baggy red
trousers.

He heard presently the martial sounds of the Marseillaise, and the
regiment singing it passed very close to him. The men were nearly all
short, dark, and very young. But the spring and fire with which they
marched were magnificent. As they thundered out the grand old tune their
feet seemed scarcely to touch the earth, and fierce eyes glowed in dark
faces.

John, with a start, recognized one, a petty officer, a sergeant it
seemed, who marched beside the line. He was the most eager of them all,
and his face was tense and wrapt. It was Geronimo, the little Apache, in
whom the spark of patriotism had lit the fire of genius. His call had
come and it had drawn him from a half savage life into one of glorious
deeds for his country.

"He'll be a general if he isn't killed first," murmured John, with
absolute conviction.

Geronimo, at that moment, looked his way and recognized him. His hand
flew to his head in a military salute, which John returned in kind, and
his eyes plainly showed pleasure at sight of this new friend whom he had
made in a few minutes on the Butte Montmartre.

"We meet again," he said, "and before the week is out it will be victory
or death."

"I think so, too," said John.

"I know it," said Geronimo, and, saluting once more, he marched on with
his regiment. John saw them pass across the valley and join the great
mass of troops that filled the whole northern horizon. About an hour
later a cheerful voice called to him, and he beheld Lannes standing in
the door of the tent, his head well bandaged, but his eyes clear and
strong and the natural color in his face.

"What has happened, John?" he asked.

"You've slept six or seven hours."

"And while I slept, the army, as I can see, has begun its march
according to the order we brought. I'm sorry I had to miss any of it,
but I was bound to sleep."

"You're a marvel."

"No marvel at all. I'm merely one of a million Frenchmen molded on the
same model. An army can't move fast and tonight the _Arrow_ and I will
be hovering over its front. There's your old place for you in the
plane."

"I'd only be in your way, Philip. But can't you wait until tomorrow?
Don't rush yourself while you've got a new wound."

"The wound is nothing. I'm bound to go tonight with the _Arrow_. But
what are you going to do if you don't go with me?"

"A new friend whom I've made while you slept has found a place for me
with him, on the staff of General Vaugirard, a brigade commander. I
shall serve there until I'm able to rejoin the Strangers."

"General Vaugirard! I've seen him. An able man, and a most noticeable
figure. You've fared well."

"I hope so. Here comes Captain de Rougemont."

The captain showed much pleasure at seeing Lannes up and apparently
well.

"What! Has our king of the air revived so soon!" he exclaimed.

"The dead themselves would rise when we're about to strike for the life
of France," said Lannes, his dramatic quality again coming to the front.

"Well spoken," said de Rougemont, the color flushing into his face.

"I return to my aeroplane within two hours," said Lannes. "I hold a
commission from our government which allows me to operate somewhat as a
free lance, but, of course, I shall conform for the present to the
wishes of the man who commands the flying corps of this army. Meanwhile,
I leave with you my young Yankee friend here, John Scott. For some
strange reason I've conceived for him a strong brotherly affection.
Kindly see that he doesn't get killed unless it's necessary for our
country, and this, I think, is a long enough speech for me to make now."

"I'll do my best for him," said de Rougemont earnestly. "I've come for
you, Scott."

"Good-bye, Philip," said John, extending his hand.

"Good-bye, John," said Lannes, "and do as I tell you. Don't get yourself
killed unless it's absolutely necessary."

Usually so stoical, his voice showed emotion, and he turned away after
the strong pressure of the two hands. John and de Rougemont walked down
the valley, where they joined General Vaugirard and the rest of his
staff.

As soon as John saw the general he knew what Lannes meant by his phrase
"a noticeable figure." General Vaugirard was a man of about sixty, so
enormously fat that he must have weighed three hundred pounds. His face
was covered with thick white beard, out of which looked small, sharp red
eyes. He reminded John of a great white bear. The little red eyes bored
him through for an instant, and then their owner said briefly:

"De Rougemont has vouched for you. Stay with him. An orderly has your
horse."

A French soldier held for him a horse bearing all the proper equipment,
and John, saluting the general, sprang into the saddle. He was a good
horseman, and now he felt thoroughly sure of himself. If it came to the
worst, and he was unseated, the earth was not far away, but if he were
thrown out of the _Arrow_ he would have a long and terrible time in
falling.

General Vaugirard had not yet mounted, but stood beside a huge black
horse, fit to carry such a weight. He was listening and looking with the
deepest attention and his staff was silent around him. John saw from
their manner that these men liked and respected their immense general.

More trumpets sounded, much nearer now, and a messenger galloped up,
handing a note to General Vaugirard, who glanced at it hastily, uttered
a deep Ah! of relief and joy and thrust it into his pocket.

Then saying to his staff, "Gentlemen, we march at once," he put one hand
on his horse's shoulder, and, to John's immense surprise, leaped as
lightly into the saddle as if he had been a riding master. He settled
himself easily into his seat, spoke a word to his staff, and then he
rode with his regiments toward that great mass of men on the horizon who
were steadily marching forward.

John kept by the side of de Rougemont. There were brief introductions to
some of the young officers nearest him, and he felt an air of
friendliness about him. As de Rougemont told them he had already given
ample proof of his devotion to the cause, and he was accepted promptly
as one of them.

John was now conscious how strongly he had projected himself into the
life of the French. He was an American for generations back and his
blood by descent was British. He had been among the Germans and he liked
them personally, he had served already with the English, and their point
of view was more nearly like the American than any other. But he was
here with the French and he felt for them the deepest sympathy of all.
He was conscious of a tie like that of blood brotherhood.

He knew it was due to the old and yet unpaid help France had given to
his own country, and above all to the conviction that France, minding
her own business, had been set upon by a greater power, with intent to
crush and destroy. France was attacked by a dragon, and the old similes
of mythology floated through his mind, but, oftenest, that of Andromeda
chained to the rock. And the figure that typified France always had the
golden hair and dark blue eyes of slim, young Julie Lannes.

They advanced several hours almost in silence, as far as talk was
concerned, but two hundred thousand men marching made a deep and steady
murmur. General Vaugirard kept well in front of his staff, riding,
despite his immense bulk, like a Comanche, and occasionally putting his
glasses to those fiery little red eyes. At length he turned and beckoned
to John, who promptly drew up to his side.

"You speak good French?" he said in his native tongue.

"Yes, sir," replied John promptly.

"I understand that you came with the flying man, Lannes, who brought the
message responsible for this march, and that it is not the only time
you've done good service in our cause?"

John bowed modestly.

"Did you see any German troops on the way?"

"Only a band of Uhlans."

"A mere scouting party. It occurred to me that you might have seen
masses of troops belonging to the foe, indicating perhaps what is
awaiting us at the end of our march."

"I know nothing, sir. The Uhlans were all the foes we saw from the air,
save the man who shot Lannes."

"I believe you. You belong to the youngest of the great nations. Your
people have not yet learned to say with the accents of truth the thing
that is not. I am sixty years old, and yet I have the curiosity to know
where I am going and what I am expected to do when I get there. Behold
how I, an old man, speak so frankly to you, so young."

"When I saw your excellency leap into the saddle you did not seem to me
to be more than twenty."

John called him "your excellency" because he thought that in the absence
of precise knowledge of what was fitting the term was as good as
another.

A smile twinkled in the eyes of General Vaugirard. Evidently he was
pleased.

"That is flattery, flattery, young man," he said, "but it pleases me.
Since I've drawn from you all you know, which is but little, you may
fall back with your comrades. But keep near; I fancy I shall have much
for you to do before long. Meanwhile, we march on, in ignorance of what
is awaiting us. Ah, well, such is life!"

He seemed to John a strange compound of age and youth, a mixture of the
philosopher and the soldier. That he was a real leader John could no
longer doubt. He saw the little red eyes watching everything, and he
noticed that the regiments of Vaugirard had no superiors in trimness and
spirit.

They marched until sundown and stopped in some woods clear of
undergrowth, like most of those in Europe. The camp kitchens went to
work at once, and they received good food and coffee. As far as John
could see men were at rest, but he could not tell whether the whole army
was doing likewise. It spread out much further to both right and left
than his eyes could reach.

The members of the staff tethered their horses in the grove, and after
supper stood together and talked, while the fat general paced back and
forth, his brow wrinkled in deep thought.

"Good old Papa Vaugirard is studying how to make the best of us," said
de Rougemont. "We're all his children. They say that he knows nearly ten
thousand men under his command by face if not by name, and we trust him
as no other brigade commander in the army is trusted by his troops. He's
thinking hard now, and General Vaugirard does not think for nothing. As
soon as he arrives at what seems to him a solution of his problem he
will begin to whistle. Then he will interrupt his whistling by saying:
'Ah, well, such is life.'"

"I hope he'll begin to whistle soon," said John, "because his brow is
wrinkling terribly."

He watched the huge general with a sort of fascinated gaze. Seen now in
the twilight, Vaugirard's very bulk was impressive. He was immense,
strong, primeval. He walked back and forth over a line about thirty feet
long, and the deep wrinkles remained on his brow. Every member of his
staff was asking how long it would last.

A sound, mellow and soft, but penetrating, suddenly arose. General
Vaugirard was whistling, and John's heart gave a jump of joy. He did not
in the least doubt de Rougemont's assertion that an answer to the
problem had been found.

General Vaugirard whistled to himself softly and happily. Then he said
twice, and in very clear tones: "Ah, well, such is life!" He began to
whistle again, stopped in a moment or two and called to de Rougemont,
with whom he talked a while.

"We're to march once more in a half-hour," said de Rougemont, when he
returned to John and his comrades. "It must be a great converging
movement in which time is worth everything. At least, General Vaugirard
thinks so, and he has a plan to get us into the very front of the
action."

"I hope so," said John. "I'm not anxious to get killed, but I'd rather
be in the battle than wait. I wonder if I'll meet anywhere on the front
that company to which I belong, the Strangers."

"I think I've heard of them," said de Rougemont, "a body of Americans
and Englishmen, volunteers in the French service, commanded by Captain
Daniel Colton."

"Right you are, and I've two particular friends in that company--I
suppose they've rejoined it--Wharton, an American, and Carstairs, an
Englishman. We went through a lot of dangers together before we reached
the British army near Mons, and I'd like to see them again."

"Maybe you will, but here comes an extraordinary procession."

They heard many puffing sounds, uniting in one grand puffing chorus, and
saw advancing down a white road toward them a long, ghostly train, as if
a vast troop of extinct monsters had returned to earth and were marching
this way. But John knew very well that it was a train of automobiles and
raising the glasses that he now always carried he saw that they were
empty except for the chauffeurs.

General Vaugirard began to whistle his mellowest and most musical tune,
stopping only at times to mutter a few words under his breath. John
surmised that he was expressing deep satisfaction, and that he had been
waiting for the motor train. War was now fought under new conditions.
The Germans had thousands and scores of thousands of motors, and perhaps
the French were provided almost as well.

"I fancy," said de Rougemont, who was also watching the arrival of the
machines, "that we'll leave our horses now and travel by motor."

De Rougemont's supposition was correct. The line of automobiles began to
mass in front, many rows deep, and all the chauffeurs, their great
goggles shining through the darkness, were bent over their wheels ready
to be off at once with their armed freight. It filled John with elation,
and he saw the same spirit shining in the eyes of the young French
officers.

General Vaugirard began to puff like one of the machines. He threw out
his great chest, pursed up his mouth and emitted his breath in little
gusts between his lips, "Very good! Very good, my children!" he said,
"Oil and electricity will carry us now, and we go forward, not
backward!"

True to de Rougemont's prediction, the horses were given to orderlies,
and the staff and a great portion of the troops were taken into the
cars. General Vaugirard and several of the older officers occupied a
huge machine, and just behind him came de Rougemont, John and a
half-dozen young lieutenants and captains in another. Before them
