"I am sorry to inform you, Wilton, that no leave of absence will be
granted to-morrow," replied Pelham in accordance with the instructions
given him by the captain, who, in turn, had received his orders from the
principal.

"No leave!" exclaimed Wilton, his jaw dropping down.

"Such are the orders."

"I have always been in the habit of celebrating the Fourth of July,"
replied Wilton. "Are we to stay on board the ship, and mope all day?"

"I presume the day will be celebrated on board in a proper manner,"
added the first lieutenant.

"On board! What can a fellow do here? We might as well go to bed, and
sleep off the day."

"No words are necessary, Wilton," replied Pelham as he turned and walked
away.

"That's a good one!" added Wilton, to the group of boys who had come
with him to the mainmast, to request the same favor, if the spokesman
was permitted to go on shore and celebrate the day.

"Not to celebrate!" exclaimed Monroe, with something like horror in his
tones and looks.

"Work on the Fourth of July!" chimed in Adler.

"I won't stand it, for one!" said Wilton.

"Nor I, for another," added Monroe.

So said half a dozen others.

"Well, what are you going to do about it?" demanded Adler. "Here we are,
and we can't get ashore."

"Perhaps we can," said Wilton, as he led the way to a retired part of
the deck, where they could talk without being overheard. "Did any one
ever hear of such a thing as keeping the fellows on board on the Fourth
of July? Why, every little Greek in the city yonder has his liberty on
that day; and we are to be cooped up here like a parcel of sick
chickens! I suppose we shall have to recite history and French, and
shake out topsails, as usual."

"It's outrageous. I don't believe the fellows will stand it," added
Adler, who did not know how bad the case was, until it had been
rehearsed by Wilton, who, in the absence of Shuffles, had become the
leader of a certain clique on board, given to taking opposite views.

"But I don't see what we can do," said Monroe.

"We will do something. I won't stand it. If I stay on board the ship
to-morrow, it will be as a prisoner," answered Wilton.

"It's a hard case; but what can we do about it?" asked Sanborn.

"Suppose we go to Lowington, and state the case to him," suggested
Adler.

"What's the use of that? Of course the first lieutenant spoke by the
card. He had his orders to say what he did, and I'm sure they came from
Lowington."

"There can be no doubt of that; but it would be better to have it from
him."

"I'm willing to ask Lowington for the day, if the fellows want me to do
so; but it won't do any more good than it would to bark at the
mainmast," continued Wilton. "I have an idea in my head, if the fellows
will stand by me," he added, in a lower tone, as he looked over the rail
at the swinging boom, to which the boats in constant use were made fast.

"What is it?" asked Monroe, eagerly.

"Keep shady, for a while. How many fellows can we muster?"

"I don't know."

"Well, don't stir the matter yet. Here comes Lowington and we will talk
to him first. Come, fellows, let's make a dive at him."

Wilton, attended by his companions, walked up to the principal, as he
was going forward. Touching his cap respectfully, as the discipline of
the ship required, he opened the case.

"Mr. Lowington, some of the students would like to go on shore
to-morrow, to celebrate the Fourth. Can't we have liberty?"

"You know the rule; you should apply to the first lieutenant for leave
of absence," replied Mr. Lowington.

"We have, sir, and been refused."

"Then there is nothing more to be said. The first lieutenant speaks with
authority."

"I beg your pardon, sir, but are we to stay on board all day to-morrow?"

"That is certainly the arrangement, Wilton."

"Some of us would like to celebrate the day, sir, and we think it is
rather hard to be obliged to do duty on the Fourth of July."

"I intend to have the day celebrated in a proper manner. I have made
preparations for a gala day on board."

"If you please, sir, we would rather go on shore."

"I am very sorry, for your sake, that I shall be unable to reverse the
answer of the first lieutenant. If I permit one or a dozen to go ashore,
I cannot refuse any, and all must go. I think the boys will be satisfied
with the arrangements I have made for the day."

"I never was kept in school on the Fourth of July before, sir," growled
Wilton.

"Then this will be a new event in your experience," answered Mr.
Lowington, coldly, as he turned from the petitioners, and went forward.

There were a great many wild boys on board of the Young America, and it
was morally impossible for the whole crew to attend the celebration in
the city, without more or less of them getting into a scrape. They had
been kept on board for two months, and not allowed to go on shore,
except under the supervision of one of the instructors; and to let any
considerable number of them loose on such a day as the Fourth of July,
would only be courting trouble, for they would be all the more
disorderly after the long period of restraint.

Mr. Lowington did not willingly deprive the boys of any innocent
gratification. He had faithfully considered the matter of celebrating
the day, and taken the advice of the instructors on the subject. It had
been proposed to procure a band of music, and visit the city in a body,
under the usual discipline; but there were many difficulties attending
such a plan. The boys were all the sons of rich men, and most of them
were abundantly supplied with pocket money. As it would be impossible to
prevent the escape of some of them from the procession, in the crowded
streets, it was feared that their money would prove to be "the root of
all evil." The project had finally been abandoned; and, as a substitute,
a programme for a celebration on board had been arranged, for there the
students would be entirely under the control of the instructors, who
would check all excesses. It was anticipated that a few discontented
spirits would grumble, but no rebellion was expected.

Wilton and his companions were dissatisfied, and disposed to be rash.
They felt that they had been harshly and cruelly denied a reasonable
privilege. The subject of celebrating the Fourth had been under
consideration for a long time among the boys, and it had been generally
believed that all hands would be permitted to go on shore, with perfect
liberty, on that day; and many of them had already arranged their plans
for the occasion.

"Well, what do you think now?" said Wilton, as Mr. Lowington walked
forward.

"I think it's too bad," replied Adler. "It is meaner than dirt to make
us stay on board on the Fourth of July."

"But I don't see how we are going to help ourselves," added Monroe,
looking at Wilton for a solution of this difficult problem.

"I do."

"How?"

"Keep still; don't say a word here," continued Wilton. "Scatter, now,
and I will be on the top-gallant forecastle in a few minutes."

Wilton strolled about the deck a short time, and then went to the place
of meeting, where he was soon joined by the rest of the discontented
pupils.

"How many fellows can we muster?" asked he, when his associates in
mischief had again gathered around him.

"I know at least a dozen, who are up to anything," replied Monroe; "but
some of them are in the other watch. What are you going to do?"

"I'll tell you: There are the professors' barge and the third cutter at
the swinging boom. We will drop into them when the instructors go down
to supper, and make for the shore. All the rest of the boats are at the
davits; and before they can get them into the water, we shall be out of
their reach. What do you think of that for a plan!"

"I think it is a first-rate one. But hadn't we better wait till the
instructors turn in?" suggested Adler.

"No; the boats will all be hoisted up to the davits at sunset. We must
do it while the professors are at supper, or not at all. We want eight
oars for the barge, and six for the third cutter; that makes fourteen
fellows. Can we raise as many as that?"

"Yes, I think we can; we will try, at any rate."

"But you must look out, or some fellow will blow the whole thing," added
Wilton. "Mind whom you speak to."

The trustworthiness of the various students was canvassed, and it was
decided what ones should be invited to join the enterprise. The
discontented boys separated, and went to work with great caution to
obtain the needed recruits. Unfortunately, in such a crowd of young men,
there are always enough to engage in any mischievous plot, and it is
quite likely that twice as many as were wanted could have been obtained
to man the boats in the runaway expedition.

Wilton missed Shuffles very much in arranging the details of the present
enterprise. While at the Brockway Academy, they had plotted mischief so
often that each seemed to be necessary to the other. But Shuffles had
reformed; he was now third lieutenant of the ship, and it was not safe
to suggest a conspiracy to him, for he would attempt to gain favor with
the principal by exposing or defeating it.

Yet Shuffles was so bold in thought, and so daring in execution, that
Wilton could hardly abandon the hope of obtaining his assistance;
besides, the third lieutenant would be officer of the deck when the
professors went to supper, and might wink at their departure in the
boats, if he did not actually help them off.

"Would you say anything to Shuffles?" asked Wilton, still in doubt, of
Monroe, as they happened to meet again in the waist.

"To Shuffles!" exclaimed Monroe, in an energetic whisper.

"I mean so."

"Certainly not. I should as soon think of speaking to Lowington
himself."

"But Shuffles may join us. He is always in for a good time."

"Why, you ninny, he is third lieutenant of the ship."

"No matter if he is. I think Shuffles would like to join us."

"Nonsense! He has been in office only three days, and it would break
him. He would be degraded to the steerage," replied Monroe, who could
not help thinking that Wilton was beside himself in proposing such a
thing, and that the enterprise was doomed to failure in such incompetent
hands.

"If he won't join us, perhaps he will help us off. He is officer of the
deck, you know, in the second dog watch."

"I know he is; but don't you open your mouth to him. If you do, I'll
back out at once."

"Back out?"

"Yes, back out. I believe you are crazy. Why don't you go to Captain
Carnes, and done with it?" said Monroe, with energy.

"I haven't any hold on Carnes, and I have on Shuffles."

"What do you mean?" asked the prudent conspirator, curiously.

"If Shuffles won't join us, he won't blow on us, you may depend upon
that. He wouldn't dare to do it. I could break him before sundown, if I
chose," said Wilton, with conscious power.

"That alters the case."

"Of course, I shouldn't think of saying anything to him, if I did not
know what I was talking about. I have him where the hair is short, and
he knows it, as well as I do."

"What is it, Wilton?"

"No matter what it is. When a thing is told me in confidence, I keep it
to myself; but if he turns traitor to his cronies, he must look out for
breakers. He knows what it is."

"Well, if you can get him, he will be a first-rate fellow to have."

"I think I can get him. Here he comes; you keep out of the way, and I
will see how deep the water is."

Monroe went forward to find a student to whom he had been deputed to
speak in the interest of the enterprise leaving Wilton to grapple with
the old lion of mischief, whose teeth, however, seemed to have been worn
out in the cause.

"What's up, Wilton?" demanded the third lieutenant who was now off duty,
and therefore allowed to speak to the crew, though it was a privilege of
which the officers seldom availed themselves.

"Who said anything was up?" asked Wilton.

"You look as though you meant something. What were you and Ike Monroe
talking about just now?" continued Shuffles. "About me, I'll be bound,
for you kept looking at me, as though you meant something."

"What makes you think so? Have you heard anything?" asked Wilton,
fearful that the plot had leaked out.

"Not a word? I only judged by your looks."

"I suppose if anything was up, you wouldn't have anything to do with it
now."

"Most decidedly, I should not. I like my present position too well to
fall out of it. I'm going to be captain next term, if I can fetch it any
way in the world."

"You mean to be a flunky, just like the rest of them. You are not the
same fellow you used to be."

"Yes, I am."

"You are getting too big for your boots."

"You wrong me, Wilton. I'm just as good a fellow as I ever was. I think
I'm the best fellow in the ship, and for that reason I want to be
captain. I'm ahead of Carnes so far on marks this month."

"Well, if you want to be the head flunky, I hope you'll get it. We are
not going ashore to-morrow, they say," added Wilton, changing the topic
to get nearer to the business of the hour.

"So Pelham told me."

"Are you willing to stay on board and study, and do ship's duty, on the
Fourth of July?"

"We are going to celebrate."

"How?"

"I'm sure I don't know."

"We shall celebrate to-morrow just as we do every day--as close
prisoners on board the ship. I, for one, don't like it, and I won't
stand it."

"Won't you?" laughed Shuffles.

"When I say I won't, I mean so."

"O, you do--do you?"

"You better believe I do," added Wilton, shaking his head resolutely.

"What are you going to do?"

"I'm going ashore, by hook or by crook."

"Better not get into any scrape."

"You say that as one of the flunkies."

"Well, you had better not say anything to me, for I shall have to do my
duty as an officer. Don't say anything to me, and then I shall not know
anything about it."

"Humph!" sneered Wilton, not pleased with this non-committal policy.

"I don't want to do anything mean with any of our fellows; so don't say
a word to me. I shall do my duty as an officer, as I promised to do when
I was made third lieutenant."

"Do you mean to say you will stop me, Shuffles, if you see me going?"
demanded Wilton.

"I do mean so; I promised faithfully to do my duty as an officer, and I
shall do it."

"See here, Bob Shuffles; you needn't talk to me in that manner. I knew
the ship's cable from a pint of milk, and you can't come the flunky over
me."

