"The bear eats almost everything," said Nick, "but I don't believe he
can make much of a meal off hickory nuts."

"Well, he has got a good thing of it anyway, here, there is so much food
around him, and if he had only been smart enough to keep out of sight
and never show himself he might have died of old age without being once
disturbed by hunters."

"I ain't sure he won't die of old age as it is," said Nick, with a
laugh; "for every one who went after him came back without the first
glimpse. I guess they have all given up hope of shooting him, and I
shouldn't wonder if we had to do the same."

But whether such was to be the result or not remained to be seen, and
the boys were sure of plenty of sport in an all-day ramble through the
woods.

During all this time Nick and Nellie were attending school, and they
maintained their places in their studies, and were surpassed by none in
the excellence of their deportment.

Nick rose early and helped his father with his work, and at night did
his chores. With all this, he found opportunity to practice with the
rifle and to prepare his lessons for the morrow, so that it need not be
said he had little idle time on his hands.

On a bright Saturday morning in November, when the smoky haze of the
delicious Indian summer overspread forest, stream, and country, Sam
Harper came to the house of Nick Ribsam according to appointment.

His rifle was slung over his shoulder, and the dog, which they had
christened Bowser, was at his heels. There was no school that day, and
Mr. Ribsam, having satisfied himself of the ability of Nick to handle
the rifle of his neighbor, had given him permission to go on a hunt for
the bear which had so frightened Nellie a couple of months before.

The mother and daughter were a little anxious when the rosy-cheeked boy
donned his heavy boots, pushed his trousers down the legs, and taking
the long-barreled rifle from where it rested in the corner turned to
kiss them good-by.

Mr. Ribsam seemed as cool and stolid as ever; but any one looking
closely at him would have observed that he puffed his pipe a little
oftener than was his wont, while his eye beamed more kindly upon his
brave little boy.

"Look out, Nick, and don't be too venturesome," said the mother, as she
pressed her lips to those of her only son.

"And remember that the bear is an awful big animal," said Nellie, "for
I _seen_ him."

The brother, who was in the act of leaning over his sister to kiss her,
drew back with a reproving look.

"Why is it a girl can't talk without saying 'awful' in every sentence? I
wish for variety's sake, Nellie, you and the rest of the girls would
leave 'awful' out of one sentence in a hundred, and don't say 'I _seen_
him,' for you know better than that, sister."

She hung her head and her eyes were growing misty, when Nick took the
kiss with a laugh and moved to the door.

"There, there, good-by; you all act as if I was going to Africa to hunt
lions and tigers."

Nellie snapped him up in a flash:

"There ain't any tigers in Africa, smarty!"

"You got me that time," laughed Nick; "where is father?"

"He went out of the door a minute ago; he is standing by the gate," said
the mother, after a quick glance through the window.

Mr. Ribsam was leaning on the gate-post, as was a favorite custom of
his, and the tobacco smoke ascended in clouds and rings, as though he
was a locomotive tugging hard at a train, with the wheels continually
slipping.

He looked at the boys without stirring or speaking, as they passed out
the gate and gently closed it, so as not to jar the old gentleman
leaning upon it.

When they had gone a rod or so, Mr. Ribsam called out:

"Nicholas!"

"Yes, sir!" answered the son, wheeling instantly.

The father took the long stem of his pipe from his mouth, emitted a
blast of vapor, and then shut his eyes and flung his head backward with
a quick flirt, which meant that his boy should come to him.

Nick obeyed with his usual promptness, and paused immediately in front
of his parent, while Sam Harper stopped short and looked backward at the
two, with the purpose of waiting until the interview ended.

The old gentleman meant his words for both, and he therefore used the
English tongue as best he could, and spoke loud:

"Nicholas, bears ish shtrong amimals as nefer vos: they can squeeze in
der ribs of a ox of dey tried, I dinks, so looks out dot de bears don't
not squeeze mit you."

"I will take good care, you may depend."

"His claws am sharp and he has big jaws; look outs for dem, Nicholas!"

"You may be sure I will."

"And, Nicholas, ven you goes for to hunt bears _you must helps one
anoder; you hears_?"

This was the all-important sentence the father had prepared himself to
utter. It will be observed that it was in violation of his oft repeated
creed, for it clearly called upon the boys to render mutual support
should danger arise; and they would have been zanies had they not done
so.

The father expected them to show that much sense, but he was impelled to
impress the necessity of it: he meant them to understand that his
declarations were subject to amendment under certain conditions.

Nick gave the pledge and stepped briskly up the road with Sam, while
Bowser frolicked in the fields and road until they were fairly in the
woods, when he frisked among the trees, sometimes starting up a squirrel
or rabbit, which had no trouble in skurrying out of his reach.

As the bear when seen by Nellie was near Shark Creek, the boys agreed to
follow the road to the bridge, descend into the bed of the stream, and
then go downward toward the pond and finally off into the woods, where
they intended to pass that day and probably the night and following day.

They had reached and passed the tree in which Nellie Ribsam took refuge
two months before, when Nick suddenly exclaimed:

"Hallo, there is some one ahead of us!"

"It's the season for game and we shall find plenty of hunters in the
wood," said Sam Harper, who, nevertheless, scanned the person with much
interest.

The fact that the boys were following precisely in his footsteps raised
the suggestion that perhaps he was engaged on the same business or
sport, as it might be termed.

Our friends hastened their pace so as to overtake him, for his company
might be desirable, or possibly it might be otherwise.

"Hallo, there!" called out Nick; "wait a minute!"

The individual thus hailed turned about, and looked back to see who it
was that called.

As he did so his face was seen, and Nick Ribsam gave utterance to an
expression of astonishment.




CHAPTER XIV.

A RECRUIT.


The stranger ahead of the two boys was Herbert Watrous, the city youth
upon whom Nick had sat down so hard three years before.

He was unusually tall when visiting the country school, and during the
intervening time he had continued to grow upward, until his height
equaled that of an ordinary man. He was scarce fourteen years old, but
he lacked very little of six feet in altitude.

He was correspondingly slim, so that he looked as if a smart blow on the
back would snap him in two. He was arrayed in a most gorgeous hunting
suit of green, with all the paraphernalia which the hunter from the city
thinks necessary when he honors the country with a tramp for game.

Herbert, beyond question, was fitted out in fine style, and there was
nothing lacking, except perhaps skill. He carried one of the finest of
breech-loading rifles, which would have been very effective in the hands
of a party who knew how to use it.

The face of the lad had not changed in expression to any extent since
Nick Ribsam drove him into the earth, but there was some downy furze on
his upper lip and chin, while his voice was of that squeaky and
uncertain tone heard when "changing."

"Hallo! is that you?" was the rather superfluous question of Herbert, as
he waited for the two boys to come up. He recognized Nick, but of course
was a stranger to Sam Harper, to whom Nick introduced him, and there was
a general shaking of hands all around.

Young Watrous glanced rather askance at his old school-mate, but there
was such a cordial welcome on the part of the young "American of Dutch
descent" that all reserve vanished.

A certain loftiness of manner and conceit of expression, however, were
natural to Herbert, and he did not fail to look down, in a literal and
figurative sense, upon the two hunters.

"That's a fine gun you have there, Herbert," said Nick, venturing to
reach out his hand for it.

"Yes," answered Herbert, passing it to him rather gingerly, "be careful
not to drop it."

The gun was a beautiful weapon, known as the long range "Creedmoor." It
was a Remington, highly finished, and cost $125. It had a front sight,
known as the wind-gauge, with the spirit-level, and with the vernier
sight on the stock, which is raised from its flat position when the
hunter wishes to shoot a long distance, and is graduated up to a
thousand yards, carrying a 44 cartridge.

"That isn't of much account in this part of the world," said Sam Harper,
passing the weapon back; "it's light enough, for I don't suppose it
weighs more than six or seven pounds."

"It's just the thing for these woods," said Herbert, in his important
manner, "for I calculate to bring down game a half mile away, if I
happen to see it."

"And provided it will stand still and you can know the exact distance."

"I can tell that by my eye easily enough."

"You can't guess within two hundred yards of it, if your life depended
on it."

"That remains to be seen."

"The first time you try it will prove it. I have seen them shoot with
the telescopes, globe, and peep sights and all the new fangled notions,
and they're good only for fancy shooting. You've got to use that
breech-loader off-hand, just as I do, or it won't be worth a cent to
you."

"I understand that a big black bear has been seen in the woods," said
Herbert, in his loftiest style; "I've come to kill him."

Nick and Sam looked significantly at each other, and Nick said:

"That is what we are after; won't you join us?"

Instead of responding promptly, Herbert said:

"Well, I don't know as I have any objection to letting you go with me,
though you must promise to do as I say."

Without giving this pledge, the two said they would render all the help
they could, and the party moved on down the creek toward the pond.

"Have you a dog?" asked Nick of their new recruit.

"No, what do I want of a dog? He would only be a bother; you ought to
send back that pumpkin of yours."

"We don't expect him to be of much help, except to find the track of the
bear, if he is anywhere in the neighborhood--_there!_ do you hear that?"

At that moment Bowser, who had trotted into the woods ahead, gave
utterance to a hoarse, resounding bay, which sounded as though his voice
had also changed, for it ended in a dismal squeaking howl that made all
laugh.

"He is on the track of something," said Nick in some excitement.

"A rabbit, I am sure," remarked Herbert, with a sneer.

The three started off at a rapid walk, which occasionally broke into a
trot, and following the baying of the hound they turned to the right
before reaching the big pond, and struck into the very heart of the
woods.

Herbert was so much taller and lighter than his companions that he drew
away from them once or twice, but was obliging enough to stop and wait.

Hurrying along in this headlong fashion they soon stopped, all pretty
well out of breath.

Although Herbert had laughed at their tardiness, he was the most
exhausted and the first one to wish to rest.




CHAPTER XV.

A SURPRISE.


All this time the baying of the hound continued, the sounds showing that
he had circled and was approaching the boys, who were not a little
astonished at the unexpected turn of affairs.

"That's a pretty dog," laughed Herbert; "he is making fools of us all."

"There isn't any need of that so far as _you_ are concerned," retorted
Nick, losing patience with the slurs of their companion. "You had better
wait till you find out what it means before you condemn Bowser."

Herbert made no answer, for the dog was now so close that the interest
of all was centered on his actions.

"My gracious, what a terrible racket he makes!" exclaimed Nick; "there
must be something unusual to excite Bowser like that."

The dog was not heard for several minutes, but the crashing through the
undergrowth sounded nearer and nearer, and, as Sam declared, showed that
Bowser had steam up and was going for something.

Suddenly the bushes parted only a short ways from where the three
wondering lads stood, and, instead of the hound, some kind of a wild
animal came toward them on a dead run.

The group were too amazed to think of the guns they held, and only
stared in mute wonder.

The game did not see them until within a hundred feet, when he whirled
at right angles and plunged away with arrowy speed.

As he did so, he exposed his flank to the young hunters, who could not
have been given a better opportunity to bring him down, for the throwing
forward of the foreleg, opened his most vulnerable part to the bullet.

But none was sent after him; at that instant he was recognized as a fine
buck deer, with branching antlers thrown back so that they seemed to
rest on his spine, while his legs were flung straight in front and then
backward, as he took his long graceful leaps.

The boys had set out to hunt a bear, and were astounded that, when they
dared not hope they were anywhere in his vicinity, a splendid deer
should spring up and dash by them.

Before they could give utterance to their amazement, Bowser came along
with his nose to the ground and baying hoarsely.

Just as he turned to follow the deer, Herbert Watrous raised his
breech-loader to his shoulder and fired point blank at him.

"What did you do that for?" demanded Sam Harper, striding threateningly
toward him with his fist raised.

"Why--why--I declare! I thought it was the bear!" exclaimed the abashed
Herbert; "I never dreamed it was the dog."

Sam was not disposed to believe this story, and he stood irresolute,
strongly inclined to punish the city youth who had fired at his hound;
but Nick compelled his angry friend to laugh by saying:

"You shouldn't be mad, Sam, for Bowser is safe so long as Herbert aims
at him. I don't think he came within twenty feet. If he should hit him
you can make up your mind it is an accident."

Herbert hardly knew how to answer this remark, for he saw that he had
not done a very creditable thing, view it as he might, so he made a
radical turn in the conversation.

"Who would have thought it, boys? We've got not only a bear, but a deer
to hunt, and I say, may the best fellow win!"

And with this manly sentiment on his lips he broke into a rapid run
after the buck and hound, the others following, forgetful of the little
flurry a few minutes before.

It was not in the order of things that the lads should be able to make
their way through the woods and undergrowth with anything like the speed
of the fallow deer or dog. Hunters don't expect to overtake their game
in anything like a fair chase when all are on foot, but resort to
stratagem.

By stationing themselves so as to head off a deer, they secure the one
shot which is all-sufficient. It would be counted an extremely good
piece of fortune could they obtain such a fair target as has already
been given the young hunters; and, having let it pass unimproved, they
scarcely would have expected to be so favored again.

It was natural, therefore, that they should make a pell-mell rush after
the deer and hound, and that they should keep going until, once more,
they were forced to stop from exhaustion.

By this time the baying of Bowser came to them so faintly that it was
plain he was a mile distant at the least, while there could be little
