reason; but this was the oldest of all. Friedrich gave up love stories
on the spot. It was clearly not his _forte_.

Then he thought he would have a large family of brothers and sisters,
and kill them all by a plague. But, besides the want of further
incident, this idea did not seem to him sufficiently sad. Either from
its unreality, or from their better faith, the idea of death does not
possess the same gloom for the young that it does for those older
minds that have a juster sense of the value of human life, and are,
perhaps, more heavily bound in the chains of human interests.

No; the plague story might be pathetic, but it was not miserable--not
miserable enough at any rate for Friedrich.

In truth, he felt at last that every misfortune that he could invent
was lost in the depths of the real sorrow which oppressed his own
life, and out of this knowledge came an idea for his ballad. What a
fool never to have thought of it before!

He would write the history--the miserable bitter history--of a great
man born to a small way of life, whose merits should raise him from
his low estate to a deserved and glorious fame; who should toil, and
strive, and struggle, and when his hopes and prayers seemed to be at
last fulfilled, and the reward of his labours at hand, should awake
and find that it was a dream; that he was no nearer to Fame than ever,
and that he might never reach it. Here was enough sorrow for a
tragedy. The ballad should be written now.

The next day. Friedrich plunged into the bookseller's shop.

"Well, now, what is it?" smiled the comfortable little bookseller.

"I want some paper, please," gasped Friedrich; "a good big bit if I
may have it, and, if you please, I must go now. I will come and clean
out the shop for you at the end of the week, but I am very busy
to-day."

"The condition of the shop," said the little bookseller,
grandiloquently, with a wave of his hand, "yields to more important
matters; namely, to thy condition, my child, which is not of the best.
Thou art as white as this sheet of paper, to which thou art heartily
welcome. I am silent, but not ignorant. Thou wouldst be a writer, but
art not yet a philosopher, my Friedrich. Thou art not fast-set on thy
philosophic equilibrium. Thou hast knocked down three books and a
stool since thou hast come in the shop. Be calm, my child: consider
that even if truly also the fast-bound-eternally-immutable-condition
of everlastingly-varying-circumstance--"

But by this time Friedrich was at home.

How he got through the next three days he never knew. He stumbled in
and out of the house with the awkwardness of an idiot, and was so
stupid in school that nothing but his previous good character saved
him from a flogging. The day before the Feast of St. Nicholas (which
was a holiday) the schoolmaster dismissed him with the severe inquiry,
if he meant to be a dunce all his life? and Friedrich went home with
two sentences ringing in his head--

"Do I mean to be a dunce all my life?"

"Friedrich can do nothing useful."

To-night the ballad must be finished.

He contrived to sit up beyond his usual hour, and escaped notice by
crouching behind a large linen chest, and there wrote and wrote till
his heart beat and his head felt as if it would split in pieces. At
last, the careful mother discovered that Friedrich had not bid her
good-night, and he was brought out of his hiding-place and sent to
bed.

He took a light and went softly up the ladder into the loft, and, to
his great satisfaction, found the others asleep. He said his prayers,
and got into bed, but he did not put out the light; he put a box
behind it to prevent its being seen, and drew out his paper and wrote.
The ballad was done, but he must make a fair copy for the
Maerchen-Frau; and very hard work it was, in his feverish excited
state, to write out a thing that was finished. He worked resolutely,
however, and at last completed it with trembling hands, and pushed it
under his pillow.

Then he sat up in bed, and looked round him.

Time passed, and still he sat shivering and clasping his knees, and
the reason he sat so was--because he dared not lie down.

The work was done, and the overstrained mind, no longer occupied,
filled with ghastly fears and fancies. He did not dare to put out the
light, and yet its faint glimmer only made the darkness more horrible.
He did not dare to look behind him, though he knew that there was
nothing there. He trembled at the scratching sound in the wainscot,
though he knew that it was only mice. A sudden light on the window,
and a distant chorus, did not make his heart beat less wildly from
being nothing more alarming than two or three noisy students going
home with torches. Then his light took the matter into its own hands,
and first flared up with a suddenness that almost made Friedrich jump
out of his skin, and then left him in total darkness. He could endure
no longer, and, scrambling out of bed, crossed the floor to where the
warm light came up the steps of the ladder from the room beneath.
There our hero crouched without daring to move, and comforted himself
with the sounds of life below. But it was very wearying, and yet he
dared not go back. A neighbour had "dropped in," and he could see
figures passing to and fro across the kitchen.

At last his sister passed, with the light shining on her golden
plaits, and he risked a low murmur of "Marie! Marie!"

She stopped an instant, and then passed on; but after a few minutes,
she returned, and came up the ladder with her finger on her lips to
enjoin silence. He needed no caution, being instinctively aware that
if one parental duty could be more obvious than another to the
tradesman, it would be that of crushing such folly as Friedrich was
displaying by timely severity. The boy crept back to bed, and Marie
came after him.

There are unheroic moments in the lives of the greatest of men, and
though when the head is strong and clear, and there is plenty of light
and good company, it is highly satisfactory and proper to smile
condescension upon female inanity, there are times when it is not
unpleasant to be at the mercy of kind arms that pity without asking a
reason, and in whose presence one may be foolish without shame. And it
is not ill, perhaps, for some of us, whose acutely strung minds go up
with every discovery, and down with every doubt, if we have some
humble comforter (whether woman or man) on whose face a faithful
spirit has set the seal of peace--a face which in its very
steadfastness is "as the face of an angel."

Such a face looked down upon Friedrich, before which fancied horrors
fled; and he wound his arms round Marie's neck, and laid down his
head, and was comfortable, if not sublime.

After a dozen or so of purposeless kisses, she spoke--

"What is it, my beloved?"

"I--I don't think I can get to sleep," said the poet.

Marie abstained from commenting on this remark, and Friedrich was
silent and comfortable. So comfortable that, though he despised her
opinion on such matters he asked it in a low whisper--"Marie, dost
thou not think it would be the very best thing in the world to be a
great man? To labour and labour for it, and be a great man at last?"

Marie's answer was as low, but quite decided--

"No."

"Why not, Marie?"

"It is very nice to be great, and I should love to see thee a great
man, Friedrich, very well indeed, but the very best thing of all is to
be good. Great men are not always happy ones, though when they are
good also it is very glorious, and makes one think of the words of the
poor heathen in Lycaonia--'The gods have come down to us in the
likeness of men.' But if ever thou art a great man, little brother, it
will be the good and not the great things of thy life that will bring
thee peace. Nay, rather, neither thy goodness nor thy greatness, but
the mercy of GOD!"

And in this opinion Marie was obstinately fixed, and Friedrich argued
no more.

"I think I shall do now," said the hero at last; "I thank thee very
much, Marie."

She kissed him anew, and bade GOD bless him, and wished him
good-night, and went down the ladder till her golden plaits caught
again the glow of the warm kitchen, and Friedrich lost sight of her
tall figure and fair face, and was alone once more.

He was better, but still he could not sleep. Wearied and vexed, he lay
staring into the darkness till he heard steps upon the ladder, and
became the involuntary witness of--the true St. Nicholas.

It was the mother, with a basket in her hand, and Friedrich watched
her as she approached the place where all the shoes were laid out, his
among them.

The children were by no means immaculate or in any way greatly
superior to other families, but the mother was tender-hearted, and had
a poor memory for sins that were past, and Friedrich saw her fill one
shoe after another with cakes and sweetmeats. At last she came to his,
and then she stopped. He lifted up his head, and an indefinable fury
surged in his heart. He had been very tiresome since the ballad was
begun; was she going to put rods into his shoes only? _His_! He could
have borne anything but this. Meanwhile, she was fumbling in the
basket; and, at last, pulled out--not a rod, but--a paper of cakes of
another kind, to which Friedrich was particularly attached, and with
these she lined the shoes thickly, and filled them up with sweetmeats,
and passed on.

"Oh, mother! mother! Far, far too kind!" The awkwardness and
stupidity of yesterday, and of many yesterdays, smote him to the
heart, and roused once more the only too ready tears. But he did not
cry long, he had a happy feeling of community with his brothers and
sisters in getting more than they any of them deserved; to have seen
the St. Nicholas's proceedings had diverted his mind from gloomy
fancies, and altogether, with a comfortable sensation of cakes and
kindness, he fell asleep smiling, and slept soundly and well.

The next day he threw his arms round his mother, and said that the
cakes were "so nice."

"But I don't deserve them," he added.

"Thou'lt mend," said she kindly. "And no doubt the Saint knew that
thou hadst eaten but half a dinner for a week past, and brought those
cakes to tempt thee; so eat them all, my child; for, doubtless, there
are plenty more where they come from."

"I am very much obliged to whoever did think of it," said Friedrich.

"And plenty more there are," said the good woman to Marie afterwards,
as they were dishing the dinner. "Luise Jansen's shop is full of them.
But, bless the boy! he's too clever for anything. There's no playing
St. Nicholas with him."

The day went by at last, and the evening came on. The tradesman went
off of himself to see if he could meet with the Burgomaster, and the
children became rabid in their impatience for Friedrich's ballad.

He would not read it himself, so Marie was pressed into the service,
and crowned with the hood and cloak, and elected Maerchen-Frau.

The author himself sat in an arm-chair, with a face as white and
miserable as if he were ordered for execution. He formed a painful
contrast to his ruddy brothers and sisters; and it would seem as if he
had begun already to experience the truth of Marie's assertion, that
"great men are not always happy ones."

The ballad was put into the Maerchen-Frau's hands, and she was told
that Friedrich had written it. She gave a quick glance at it, and
asked if he had really invented it all. The children repeated the
fact, which was a pleasant but not a surprising one to them, and Marie
began.

The young poet had evidently a good ear, for the verses were easy and
musical, and the metre more than tolerably correct; and as the hero of
the ballad worked harder and harder, and got higher and higher, the
children clapped their hands, and discovered that it was "quite like
Friedrich."

Why, when that hero was almost at the height of fortune, and the
others gloried in his success, did the foolish author bury his face
upon his arms, and sob silently but bitterly in sympathy?--moreover,
with such a heavy and absorbing grief that he did not hear it, when
Marie stopped for an instant and then went on again, or know that
steps had come behind his chair, and that his father and the
Burgomaster were in the room.

The Maerchen-Frau went on; the hero awoke from his unreal happiness to
his real fate, and bewailed in verse after verse the heavy weights of
birth, and poverty, and circumstance, that kept him from the heights
of fame. The ballad was ended.

Then a voice fell on Friedrich's ear, which nearly took away his
breath. It was his father's asking sternly, "What is all this?"

And then he knew that Marie was standing up, with a strange emotion on
her face, and he heard her say--

"It is a poem that Friedrich has written. He has written it all
himself. Every word. And he is but twelve years old!" She was pointing
to him, or, perhaps, the Burgomaster might not have recognized in that
huddled miserable figure the genius of the family.

His was the next voice, and what he said Friedrich could hardly
remember; the last sentences only he clearly understood.

"GOD has not blessed me with children, neighbour. My wife, as
well as I, would be ashamed if such genius were lost for want of a
little money. Give the child to me. He shall have a liberal education,
and will be a great man."

"I shall not," said the tradesman, "stand in the way of his interests
or your commands. I cannot tell what to say to your kindness,
Burgomaster. GOD willing, I hope he will be a credit to the town."

"GOD willing, he will be a credit to his country," said the
Burgomaster.

The words rang in Friedrich's ears over and over again, like the
changes of bells. They danced before his eyes as if he saw them in a
book. They were written in his heart as if "graven with an iron pen
and lead in the rock for ever."

"GOD _willing, I hope he will be a credit to the town._"

"GOD _willing, he will be a credit to his country._"

"_He shall have a liberal education, and will be a_ GREAT
MAN."

Friedrich tried to stand on his feet and thank the Burgomaster; who,
on any other occasion, might have been tempted to suppose him an
idiot, so white and distorted was the child's face, struggling through
tears and smiles. He could not utter a word; a mist began to come
before his eyes, through which the Burgomaster's head seemed to bob up
and down, and then his father's, and his mother's, and Marie's, with a
look of pity on her face. He tried to tell _her_ that he was now a
great man and felt quite happy; but, unfortunately, was only able to
burst into tears, and then to burst out laughing, and then a sharp
pain shot through his head, and he remembered no more.

       *       *       *       *       *

Friedrich had a dim consciousness of coming round after this, and
being put to bed; then he fell asleep, and slept heavily. When he woke
Marie was sitting by his side, and it was dark. The mother had gone
downstairs, she said, and she had taken her place. Friedrich lay
silent for a bit; at last he said,

"I am very happy, Marie."

"I am very glad, dearest."

"Dost thou think father will let the Burgomaster give me a good
education, Marie?"

"Yes, dear, I am sure he will."

"It is very kind," said Friedrich, thoughtfully; "for I know he wants
me for the business. But I will help him some day. And, Marie, I will
be a good man, and when I am very rich I will give great alms to the
poor."

"Thou wilt be a good man before thou art a rich one, I trust," said
his dogmatic sister. "We are accepted in that we have, and not in that
we have not. Thou hast great talent, and wilt give it to the Lord,
whether He make thee rich or no. Wilt thou not, dearest?"

"What dost thou mean, Marie? Am I never to write anything but hymns?"

"No, no, I do not mean that," she said. "I am very ignorant and cannot
rightly explain it to thee, little brother. But genius is a great and
perilous gift; and, oh, Friedrich! Friedrich! promise me just
this:--that thou wilt never, never write anything against the faith or
the teaching of the Saviour, and that thou wilt never use the graces
of poetry to cover the hideousness of any of those sins which it is
the work of a lifetime to see justly, and to fight against manfully.
Promise me just this."

"Oh, Marie! to think that I could be so wicked!"

"No! no!" she said, covering him with kisses. "I know thou wilt be
good and great, and we shall all be proud of our little brother.
GOD give thee the pen of a ready writer, and grace to use it
to His glory!"

"I will," he said, "GOD help me! and I will write beautiful
hymns for thee, Marie, that when I am dead shall be sung in the
churches. They shall be like that Evening Hymn we sing so often. Sing
it now, my sister!"

Marie cleared her throat, and in a low voice, that steadied and grew
louder and sweeter till it filled the house and died away among the
rafters, sang the beautiful hymn that begins--

    "Herr, Dein Auge geht nicht unter, wenn es bei uns Abend wird;"
