

    DANDELION.

    "It's much too funny by half,"
    Said the Dandelion; "it makes me ill,
    For I cannot keep still,
    And my hair comes out if I laugh."

    The Hedgehog he spoke never a word,
            And he never stirred;
    His peeping eyes, his inquisitive nose,
            And his tender toes,
    Were all wrapped up in his prickly clothes.
    A provoking enemy you may suppose!
    And a dangerous one to flout--
    Like a well-stocked pin-cushion inside out.

    The Dog was valiant, the Dog was vain,
    He flew at the prickly ball again,
    Snapping with all his might and main,
            But, oh! the pain!
    He sat down on his stumpy tail and howled,
    Then he laid his jaws on his paws and growled.


    DANDELION.

    With laughter the Dandelion shook--
    "It passes a printed book;
    It's as good as a play, I declare,
    But it's cost me half my back hair!"
    The Dog he made another essay,
    It really and truly was very plucky--
    But "third times," you know, are not always lucky--
    And this time he ran away!


    HEDGE-PLANTS.

    Then the Hedge-plants every one
    Rustled together, "What fun! what fun!
                The battle is done,
                The victory won.
    Dear Hedge-pig, pray come out of the Sun."

    The Hedge-pig put forth his snout,
    He sniffed hither and thither and peeped about;
    Then he tucked up his prickly clothes,
    And trotted away on his tender toes
    To where the hedge-bottom is cool and deep,
    Had a slug for supper, and went to sleep.
    His leafy bed-clothes cuddled his chin,
    And all the Hedge-plants tucked him in.

    But the hairs and the tears that we shed
                Never can be recalled;
    And when _he_ too went off, in hysterics, to bed,
                DANDELION was bald.




    MOTHER'S BIRTHDAY REVIEW.

    BROTHER BILL.


    To have a good birthday for a grown-up person is very difficult indeed;
    We don't give it up, for Mother says the harder things are, the harder
             you must try till you succeed.
    Still, _our_ birthdays are different; we want so many things, and
             choosing your own pudding, and even half-holidays are treats;
    But what can you do for people who always order the dinner, and never
             have lessons, and don't even like sweets?
    I know Mother does not. Baby put a big red comfit in her mouth, and I
             saw her take it out again on the sly;
    I don't believe she even enjoys going a-gypseying, for she gets
             neuralgia if she stands about where it isn't dry.
    And how can you boil the kettle if you're not near the brook? But it's
             the last time she shall go there,
    I told her so; I said, "What's the good of having five sons, except to
             mount guard over you, you Queen of all Mothers that
             ever were?"
    But she's not easy to manage, and she shams sometimes, and shamming is
             a thing I can't bear.
    She shammed about the red comfit, when she didn't think Baby could
             see her;
    And (because they're the only things we can think of for birthday
             presents for her) she shams wearing out a needle-book and a
             pin-cushion every year.
    The only things we can think of for Father are paper-cutters; but
             there's no sham about _his_ wearing _them_ out;
    He would always lose them, long before his next birthday, if Mother
             did not keep finding them lying about.
    Last year's paper-cutter was as big as a sword (not as big as Father's
             sword, but as big as a wooden one, like ours),
    And he left it behind in a railway-carriage, when he'd had it just
             thirty-six hours;
    So we knew he was ready for another. It was Mother's birthday that
             bothered us so;

    [Illustration: Review of the Household Troops
                   The Cavalry]

    And if it hadn't been for Dolly's Major (he's her Godfather, and she
             calls him "my Major"), what we should have done I really
             don't know!
    He said, "What's the matter?" And Dolly said,
    "Mother's birthday's the matter." And I said, "We can't think what
             to devise
    To give her a birthday treat that won't give her neuralgia, and will
             take her by surprise.
    Look here, Major! How can you give people treats who can order what
             they wish for far better than you?
    I wonder what they do for the Queen!--her birthday must be the hardest
             of all." But he said, "Not a bit of it! They have a review:
    Cocked hats and all the rest of it; and a salute, and a _feu de joie_,
             and a March-Past.
    That's the way we keep the Queen's Birthday; and every year the same
             as the last."
    So I settled at once to have a Mother's Birthday Review; and that she
             should be Queen, and I should be the General in command.
    I thought she couldn't come to any harm by sitting in a fur cloak and
             a birthday wreath at the window, and bowing and waving
             her hand.
    We did not tell her what was coming, we only asked for leave to have
             all the seven donkeys for an hour and a half;
    (We always hire them from the same old man)--two for the girls, and
             five for me and my brothers--I told him, "for me and
             my Staff."
    We could have managed with five, if the girls would only have been
             Maids of Honour, and stayed indoors with the Queen.
    Maggie would if I'd asked her; but Dolly will go her own way, and
             that's into the thick of everything, to see whatever there
             is to be seen.
    She's only four years old, but she's ridiculously like the picture
             of an ancient ancestress of ours
    Who defended an old castle in Cornwall, against the French, for
             hours and hours.
    Her husband was away, so she was in command, and all her household
             obeyed her;
    She made them strip the lead off the roofs, and they did, and she
             boiled it down and gave it very hot indeed to the
             French invader.[5]
    Maggie would have let the French in; she doesn't like me to say so,
             but I know she would,--you can get anything out of Maggie
             by talking.

    [Illustration: The Spectators.]

    She likes to hire a donkey, and then sham she'd rather not ride, for
             fear of being too heavy; and to take Spike out for a run,
             and then carry him to save him the trouble of walking.
    But she's very good; she made all our cocked hats, and at the review
             she and Dolly and Spike were the loyal crowd.
    Dick and Tom and Harry were the troops, and I was the General, and
             Mother looked quite like a Queen at the window, and bowed.
    The donkeys made very good chargers on the whole, and especially mine;
    Jem's was the only one that gave trouble, and neither fair means nor
             foul would keep him in line.
    Just when I'd dressed all their noses to a nice level (you can do
             nothing with their ears), then back went Jem's brute,
    And Jem caught him a whack with the flat of his sword (a thing you
             never see done on the Staff), and it rather spoilt the salute;
    But the spirit of the troops was excellent, and we'd a _feu de joie_
             with penny pistols (Jem's donkey was the only one that shied),
             and Dolly's Major says that, all things considered, he never
             saw a better March-Past;
    And Mother was delighted with her first Birthday Review, and she is
             none the worse for it, and says she only hopes that it won't
             be the last.

    [Footnote 5: Dame Elizabeth Treffry (_temp._ Henry VI.) defended Place
    House, Fowey, Cornwall, in the circumstances and with the
    vigorous measures described. On his return her husband wisely
    "Embattled all the walls of the house, and in a manner made it
    a Castelle, and unto this day it is the glorie of the town building
    in Faweye."--_Carew_. The beauties of Place Castle remain to
    this day also.]


    DOLLY.

    They call me Dolly, but I'm not a doll, and I'm not a baby, though
             Baby is sometimes my name;
    I behave beautifully at meals, and at church, and I can put on my
             own boots, and can say a good deal of the Catechism, and ride
             a donkey, and play at any boys' game.
    I've ridden a donkey that kicks (at least I rode him as long as I was
             on), and a donkey that rolls, and an old donkey that
             goes lame.
    I mean to ride like a lady now, but that's because I ought, not because
             I easily can;
    For what with your legs and your pommels (I mean the saddle's pommels),
             it would be much easier always to ride like a man.
    Boys _look_ braver, but I think it's really more dangerous to ride
             sideways, because of the saddle slipping round.
    (I didn't cry; I played at slipping round the world, and getting to
             New Zealand with my head upside down on the ground.)
    The reason the saddle is slippery is not because it's smooth,
             for it's rather rough; and there's a hard ridge behind,
    And the horse's hair coming through the donkey's back (I mean through
             his saddle) scratches you
    dreadfully; but I tuck my things under me, and pretend I don't mind.
    They work out again though, particularly when they are starched, and
             I think frocks get shorter every time they go to the wash;
    But I don't complain; if it's very uncomfortable, I make an ugly face
             to myself, and say, "Bosh!"
    We've all of us had a good deal of practice, so we ought to know
             how to ride;
    We've ridden a great deal since we came to live on the Heath, and we
             rode a good deal when Father was stationed at the sea-side.
    My Major taught me to ride sideways, and at first he would hold me on;
    But I don't like being touched; and I don't call it riding like a lady
             if you're held on by an officer, and I'd rather tumble off if
             I can't stick on by myself; so I sent him away, and the nasty
             saddle slipped round directly he was gone.
    I only crushed my sun-bonnet, and the donkey stood quite still. (We
             always call that one "the old stager.")
    I wasn't frightened, except just the tiniest bit; but he says he was
             dreadfully frightened. So I said, "Then you ought to be
             ashamed of yourself, considering all your medals, and that
             you're a Major."
    He likes me very much, and I like him, and when my fifth birthday
             comes, he says I'm to choose a donkey, and he'll buy it for
             me, but the saddle and bridle shall be quite new;
    So I've made up my mind to choose the one Brother Bill had for his
             charger at Mother's Birthday Review;
    And Maggie is so glad, she says her life is quite miserable with
             thinking how miserable other lives are, if only we knew.
    Maggie loves every creature that lives; she won't confess to black
             beetles, but she can't stamp on them (I've stamped out lots
             in my winter boots), and she doesn't even think a donkey
             ugly when he brays;
    And she says she shall buy a brush, out of her pocket-money, and brush
             my donkey every day till he looks like a horse, and that it
             shan't be her fault if there isn't one poor old brute beast
             who lives happily to the end of his days.


    JACK ASS.

    The dew falls over the Heath, Brother Donkeys, and the darkness falls,
             but still through the gathering night
    All around us spreads the Heath Bed-straw[6] in glimmering sheets of
             white.
    Dragged and trampled, and plucked and wasted, it patiently spreads
             and survives;
    Kicked and thwacked, and prodded and over-laden, we patiently cling
             to our lives.
    Hee-haw! for the rest and silence of darkness that follow the labours
             of light.
    Hee-haw! for the hours from night to morning, that balance the hours
             from morning to night.
    Hee-haw! for the sweet night air that gives human beings cold in
             the head.
    Hee-haw! for the civilization that sends human beings to bed.
    Rest, Brother Donkeys, rest, from the bit, the burden, the blow,
    The dust, the flies, the restless children, the brutal roughs, the
             greedy donkey-master, the greedier donkey-hirer, the
             holiday-maker who knows no better, and the holiday-makers
             who ought to know!
    When the odorous furze-bush prickles the seeking nose, and the short
             damp grass refreshes the tongue,--lend, Brother Donkeys, lend
             a long and attentive ear!
                Whilst I proudly bray
                Of the one bright day
            In our hard and chequered career.
    I've dragged pots, and vegetables, and invalids, and
    fish, and I've galloped with four costermongers to the races;
    I've carried babies, and sea-coal, and sea-sand, and sea-weed in
             panniers, and been sold to the gypsies, and been bought back
             for the sea-side, and ridden (in a white saddle-cloth with
             scarlet braid) by the fashionable visitors. (There was always
             a certain distinction in my paces,
    Though I say it who shouldn't) I've spent a summer on the Heath, and
             next winter near Covent Garden, and moved the following year
             to the foot of a mountain, to take people up to the top to
             show them the view.
    But how little we know what's before us! And how little I guessed I
             should ever be chief charger at a Queen's Birthday Review!
    Did I triumph alone? No, Brother Donkeys, no! You also took your place
             with the defenders of the nation;
    Subordinate positions to my own, but meritoriously filled, though a
             little more style would have well become so great an occasion.
    That malevolent old Moke--may his next thistle choke him!--disgraced us
             all with his jibbing--the ill-tempered old ass!
    Young Neddy is shaggy and shy, but not amiss, if he'd held his ears up,
             and not kept his eyes on the grass.
    Nothing is more je-june (I may say vulgar) than to seem anxious to eat
             when the crisis calls for public spirit, enthusiasm, and an
             elevated tone;
    And I wish, Brother Donkeys, I wish that all had felt as I felt, the
             responsibility of a March-Past the Throne!
    Respect and self-respect delicately blended; one ear up, and the other
             lowered to salute, as I passed the window from which we
             were seen
    (Unless I grievously misunderstood the young General this morning,) by
             no less a personage than her Most Gracious Majesty THE QUEEN.
    Sleep, Brother Donkeys, sleep! But I fancy you're sleeping already,
             for you make no reply;
    Not a quiver of your ears, not a sign from your motionless drooping
             noses, dark against the dusky night sky.
    As black and immovable as the silent fir-trees you solemnly
             slumber beneath,
    Whilst I wakefully meditate on a glorious past, and painfully ponder
             the future, as the dews fall over the Heath.

    [Footnote 6: Heath bed-straw (_Galium Saxatile_). This white-flowered
    bed-straw grows profusely on Hampstead Heath.]




    THE PROMISE.


    CHILD.

            Five blue eggs hatching,
            With bright eyes watching,
    Little brown mother, you sit on your nest.


    BIRD.

            Oh! pass me blindly,
            Oh! spare me kindly,
    Pity my terror, and leave me to rest.


    CHORUS OF CHILDREN.

            Hush! hush! hush!
            'Tis a poor mother thrush.
    When the blue eggs hatch, the brown birds will sing--
    This is a promise made in the Spring.


    CHILD.

            Five speckled thrushes
            In leafy bushes
    Singing sweet songs to the hot Summer sky.
            In and out twitting,
            Here and there flitting,
    Happy is life as the long days go by.


    CHORUS.

          Hush! hush! hush!
          'Tis the song of the thrush:
    Hatched are the blue eggs; the brown birds do sing--
    Keeping the promise made in the Spring.

    Published in _Aunt Judy's Magazine_, July 1866, with music by
    Alexander Ewing.




    CONVALESCENCE.


    Hold my hand, little Sister, and nurse my head, whilst I try to
             remember the word,
    What was it?--that the doctor says is now fairly established both
             in me and my bird.
    C-O-N-_con_, _with a con_, S-T-A-N-_stan_, _with a stan_--No! That's
             Constantinople, that is
    The capital of the country where rhubarb-and-magnesia comes from, and
             I wish they would keep it in that country, and not send
             it to this.
    C-O-N-_con_--how my head swims! Now I've got it!
             C-O-N-V-A-L-E-S-C-E-N-C-E.
    _Convalescence!_ And that's what the doctor says is now fairly
             established both in my blackbird and me.
    He says it means that you are better, and that you'll be well
             by and by.
    And so the Sea-captain says, and he says we ought to be friends,
             because we're both convalescents--at least we're all three
             convalescents, my blackbird, and the Captain and I.
    He's a sea-captain, not a land-captain, but, all the same, he was
             in the war,
    And he fought,--for I asked him,--and he's been ill ever since, and
             that's why he's not afloat, but ashore;
    And why somebody else has got his ship; and she behaved so beautifully
             in the battle, and he loves her quite as much as his wife,
             and rather better than the rest of his relations, for I asked
             him; and now he's afraid she will never belong to him
             any more.
    I like him. I've seen him three times out walking with two sticks, when
             I was driving in the bath-chair, but I never talked to him
             till to-day.
    He'd only one stick and a telescope, and he let me look through it at
             the big ship that was coming round the corner into the bay.
    He was very kind, and let me ask questions. I said, "Are you a
             sea-captain?" and he said, "Yes." And I said, "How funny it
             is about land things and sea things!
    There are captains and sea-captains, and weeds and sea-weeds, and
             serpents and sea-serpents. Did you ever meet one, and is it
             really like the dragons on our very old best blue tea-things?"
    But he never did. So I asked him, "Have you got convalescence? Does
             your doctor say it is fairly established? Do your eyes ache
             if you try to read, and your neck if you draw, and your back
             if you sit up, and your head if you talk?
    Don't you get tired of doing nothing, and worse tired still if you do
             anything; and does everything wobble about when you walk?
    Wouldn't you rather go back to bed? I think I would. Don't you wish
             you were well? Wouldn't you rather be ill than only better?
             I do hate convalescence, don't you?"
    Then I stopped asking, and he shut up his telescope, and sat down on
             the shingle, and said, "When you come to my age, little chap,
             you won't think 'What is it I'd rather have?' but, 'What is
             it I've got to do?'
    'What have I got to do or to bear; and how can I do it or bear
             it best?'
    That's the only safe point to make for, my lad. Make for it, and
             leave the rest!"
    I said, "But _wouldn't_ you rather be in battles than in bed, with
             your head aching as if it would split?"
    And he said, "Of course I would; so would most men. But, my little
             convalescent, that's not it.
    What would _you_ think of a man who was ordered into battle, and went
             grumbling and wishing he were in bed?"
    "What should I think of the fellow? Why, I should know he was a
             coward," I said.
    "And if he were confined to bed," said the Sea-captain, "and lay
             grumbling and wishing he were in battle, I should give
             him no better a name;
    For the courage that dares, and the courage that bears, are really
             one and the same."
    Hold my hand, little Sister, and nurse my head, for I'm thinking, and
             I very much fear
    You've had no good of being well since I was ill; I've led you such a
             life; but indeed I am obliged to you, dear!
    Is it true that Nurse has got something the matter with her legs, and
             that Mary has gone home because she's worn out with nursing,
    And won't be fit to work for months? (will _she_ be convalescent,
             because it was such hard work waiting on _me_?) and did Cook
             say, "So much grumbling and complaining is nigh as big a sin
