than three thalers."

Poor Samuel sighed deeply. He had spent on that piece the nights of many
months. But he was starving now; and the pitiful sum offered would give
bread for a few days. He nodded his head to the auctioneer, and retiring
took his seat in a corner.

The sale began. After some paintings and engravings had been disposed of,
Samuel's was exhibited. "Who bids at three thalers? Who bids?" was the
cry. Duhobret listened eagerly, but none answered. "Will it find a
purchaser?" said he despondingly, to himself. Still there was a dead
silence. He dared not look up; for it seemed to him that all the people
were laughing at the folly of the artist, who could be insane enough to
offer so worthless a piece at a public sale.

"What will become of me?" was his mental inquiry. "That work is certainly
my best;" and he ventured to steal another glance. "Does it not seem that
the wind actually stirs those boughs and moves those leaves! How
transparent is the water! What life breathes in the animals that quench
their thirst at that spring! How that steeple shines! How beautiful are
those clustering trees!" This was the last expiring throb of an artist's
vanity. The ominous silence continued, and Samuel, sick at heart, buried
his face in his hands.

"Twenty-one thalers!" murmured a faint voice, just as the auctioneer was
about to knock down the picture. The stupefied painter gave a start of
joy. He raised his head and looked to see from whose lips those blessed
words had come. It was the picture dealer, to whom he had first thought of
applying.

"Fifty thalers," cried a sonorous voice. This time a tall man in black was
the speaker. There was a silence of hushed expectation. "One hundred
thalers," at length thundered the picture dealer.

"Three hundred!" "Five hundred!" "One thousand!" Another profound silence,
and the crowd pressed around the two opponents, who stood opposite each
other with eager and angry looks.

"Two thousand thalers!" cried the picture dealer, and glanced around him
triumphantly, when he saw his adversary hesitate. "Ten thousand!"
vociferated the tall man, his face crimson with rage, and his hands
clinched convulsively. The dealer grew paler; his frame shook with
agitation; he made two or three efforts, and at last cried out "Twenty
thousand!"

His tall opponent was not to be vanquished. He bid forty thousand. The
dealer stopped; the other laughed a low laugh of insolent triumph, and a
murmur of admiration was heard in the crowd. It was too much for the
dealer; he felt his peace was at stake. "Fifty thousand!" exclaimed he in
desperation. It was the tall man's turn to hesitate. Again the whole crowd
were breathless. At length, tossing his arms in defiance, he shouted "One
hundred thousand!" The crestfallen picture dealer withdrew; the tall man
victoriously bore away the prize.

How was it, meanwhile, with Duhobret, while this exciting scene was going
on? He was hardly master of his senses. He rubbed his eyes repeatedly, and
murmured to himself, "After such a dream, my misery will seem more cruel!"
When the contest ceased, he rose up bewildered, and went about asking
first one, then another, the price of the picture just sold. It seemed
that his apprehension could not at once be enlarged to so vast a
conception.

The possessor was proceeding homeward, when a decrepit, lame, and
humpbacked invalid, tottering along by the aid of a stick, presented
himself before him. He threw him a piece of money, and waved his hand as
dispensing with his thanks. "May it please your honor," said the supposed
beggar, "I am the painter of that picture!" and again he rubbed his eyes.

The tall mall was Count Dunkelsback, one of the richest noblemen in
Germany. He stopped, took out his pocketbook, took out a leaf, and wrote
on it a few lines. "Take it, friend," said he; "it is a check for your
money. Adieu."

Duhobret finally persuaded himself that it was not a dream. He became the
master of a castle, sold it, and resolved to live luxuriously for the rest
of his life, and to cultivate painting as a pastime. But, alas, for the
vanity of human expectation! He had borne privation and toil; prosperity
was too much for him, as was proved soon after, when an indigestion
carried him off. His picture remained long in the cabinet of Count
Dunkelsback, and afterward passed into the possession of the King of
Bavaria.

Notes.--Albert Durer (b. 1471, d. 1528) lived at Nuremburg, Germany. He
was eminent as a painter, and as an engraver on copper and wood. He was
one of the first artists who studied anatomy and perspective. His
influence on art is clearly felt even at the present day.

Newburg, or Neuburg, is on the Danube, fifty miles south of Nuremburg.
Bergen Abbey was north of the village.



X. PICTURES OF MEMORY. (88)

Alice Cary, 1820-1871, was born near Cincinnati. One of her ancestors was
among the "Pilgrim Fathers," and the first instructor of Latin at
Plymouth, Mass. Miss Cary commenced her literary career at her western
home, and, in 1849, published a volume of poems, the joint work of her
younger sister, Phoebe, and herself. In 1850, she moved to New York. Two
of her sisters joined her there, and they supported themselves by their
literary labor. Their home became a noted resort for their literary and
artistic friends. Miss Cary was the author of eleven volumes, besides many
articles contributed to periodicals. Her poetry is marked with great
sweetness and pathos. Some of her prose works are much admired, especially
her "Clovernook Children."
###


Among the beautiful pictures
  That hang on Memory's wall,
Is one of a dim old forest,
  That seemeth best of all;
Not for its gnarled oaks olden,
  Dark with the mistletoe;
Not for the violets golden,
  That sprinkle the vale below;
Not for the milk-white lilies,
  That lean from the fragrant hedge,
Coquetting all day with the sunbeams,
  And stealing their golden edge;
Not for the vines on the upland,
  Where the bright red berries rest,
Nor the pinks, nor the pale, sweet cowslip,
  It seemeth to me the best.

I once had a little brother,
  With eyes that were dark and deep;
In the lap of that dim old forest,
  He lieth in peace asleep:
Light as the down of the thistle,
  Free as the winds that blow,
We roved there the beautiful summers,
  The summers of long ago;
But his feet on the hills grew weary,
  And, one of the autumn eves,
I made for my little brother,
  A bed of the yellow leaves.

Sweetly his pale arms folded
  My neck in a meek embrace,
As the light of immortal beauty
  Silently covered his face;
And when the arrows of sunset
  Lodged in the tree tops bright,
He fell, in his saintlike beauty,
  Asleep by the gates of light.
Therefore, of all the pictures
  That hang on Memory's wall,
The one of the dim old forest
  Seemeth the best of all.



XI. THE MORNING ORATORIO. (90)

Wilson Flagg, 1806-1884, was born in Beverly, Mass. He pursued his
academical course in Andover, at Phillips Academy, and entered Harvard
College, but did not graduate. His chief Works are: "Studies in the Field
and Forest," "The Woods and Byways of New England," and "The Birds and
Seasons of New England."
###


Nature, for the delight of waking eyes, has arrayed the morning heavens in
the loveliest hues of beauty. Fearing to dazzle by an excess of delight,
she first announces day by a faint and glimmering twilight, then sheds a
purple tint over the brows of the rising morn, and infuses a transparent
ruddiness throughout the atmosphere. As daylight widens, successive groups
of mottled and rosy-bosomed clouds assemble on the gilded sphere, and,
crowned with wreaths of fickle rainbows, spread a mirrored flush over
hill, grove, and lake, and every village spire is burnished with their
splendor.

At length, through crimsoned vapors, we behold the sun's broad disk,
rising with a countenance so serene that every eye may view him ere he
arrays himself in his meridian brightness. Not many people who live in
towns are aware of the pleasure attending a ramble near the woods and
orchards at daybreak in the early part of summer. The drowsiness we feel
on rising from our beds is gradually dispelled by the clear and healthful
breezes of early day, and we soon experience an unusual amount of vigor
and elasticity.

During the night, the stillness of all things is the circumstance that
most powerfully attracts our notice, rendering us peculiarly sensitive to
every accidental sound that meets the ear. In the morning, at this time of
year, on the contrary, we are overpowered by the vocal and multitudinous
chorus of the feathered tribe. If you would hear the commencement of this
grand anthem of nature, you must rise at the very first appearance of
dawn, before the twilight has formed a complete semicircle above the
eastern porch of heaven.

The first note that proceeds from the little warbling host, is the shrill
chirp of the hairbird,--occasionally vocal at an hours on a warm summer
night. This strain, which is a continued trilling sound, is repeated with
diminishing intervals, until it becomes almost incessant. But ere the
hairbird has uttered many notes, a single robin begins to warble from a
neighboring orchard, soon followed by others, increasing in numbers until,
by the time the eastern sky is flushed with crimson, every male, robin in
the country round is singing with fervor.

It would be difficult to note the exact order in which the different birds
successively begin their parts in this performance; but the bluebird,
whose song is only a short, mellow warble, is heard nearly at the same
time with the robin, and the song sparrow joins them soon after with his
brief but finely modulated strain. The different species follow rapidly,
one after another, in the chorus, until the whole welkin rings with their
matin hymn of gladness.

I have often wondered that the almost simultaneous utterance of so many
different notes should produce no discords, and that they should result in
such complete harmony. In this multitudinous confusion of voices, no two
notes are confounded, and none has sufficient duration to grate harshly
with a dissimilar sound. Though each performer sings only a few strains
and then makes a pause, the whole multitude succeed one another with such
rapidity that we hear an uninterrupted flow of music until the broad light
of day invites them to other employments.

When there is just light enough to distinguish the birds, we may observe,
here and there, a single swallow perched on the roof of a barn or shed,
repeating two twittering notes incessantly, with a quick turn and a hop at
every note he utters. It would seem to be the design of the bird to
attract the attention of his mate, and this motion seems to be made to
assist her in discovering his position. As soon as the light has tempted
him to fly abroad, this twittering strain is uttered more like a continued
song, as he flits rapidly through the air.

But at this later moment the purple martins have commenced their more
melodious chattering, so loud as to attract for a while the most of our
attention. There is not a sound in nature so cheering and animating as the
song of the purple martin, and none so well calculated to drive away
melancholy. Though not one of the earliest voices to be heard, the chorus
is perceptibly more loud and effective when this bird has united with the
choir.

When the flush of the morning has brightened into vermilion, and the place
from which the sun is soon to emerge has attained a dazzling brilliancy,
the robins are already less tuneful. They are now becoming busy in
collecting food for their morning repast, and one by one they leave the
trees, and may be seen hopping upon the tilled ground, in quest of the
worms and insects that, have crept out during the night from their
subterranean retreats.

But as the robins grow silent, the bobolinks begin their vocal revelries;
and to a fanciful mind it might seem that the robins had gradually
resigned their part in the performance to the bobolinks, not one of which
is heard until some of the former have concluded their songs. The little
hairbird still continues his almost incessant chirping, the first to begin
and the last to quit the performance. Though the voice of this bird is not
very sweetly modulated, it blends harmoniously with the notes of other
birds, and greatly increases the charming effect of the combination.

It would be tedious to name all the birds that take part in this chorus;
but we must not omit the pewee, with his melancholy ditty, occasionally
heard like a short minor strain in an oratorio; nor the oriole, who is
really one of the chief performers, and who, as his bright plumage flashes
upon the sight, warbles forth a few notes so clear and mellow as to be
beard above every other sound. Adding a pleasing variety to all this
harmony, the lisping notes of the meadowlark, uttered in a shrill tone,
and with a peculiar pensive modulation, are plainly audible, with short
rests between each repetition.

There is a little brown sparrow, resembling the hairbird, save a general
tint of russet in his plumage, that may be heard distinctly among the
warbling host. He is rarely seen in cultivated grounds, but frequents the
wild pastures, and is the bird that warbles so sweetly at midsummer, when
the whortleberries are ripe, and the fields are beautifully spangled with
red lilies.

There is no confusion in the notes of his song, which consists of one
syllable rapidly repeated, but increasing in rapidity and rising to a
higher key towards the conclusion. He sometimes prolongs his strain, when
his notes are observed to rise and fall in succession. These plaintive and
expressive notes are very loud and constantly uttered, during the hour
that precedes the rising of the sun. A dozen warblers of this species,
singing in concert, and distributed in different parts of the field, form,
perhaps, the most delightful part of the woodland oratorio to which we
have listened.

At sunrise hardly a robin can be beard in the whole neighborhood, and the
character of the performance has completely changed during the last half
hour. The first part was more melodious and tranquilizing, the last is
more brilliant and animating. The grass finches, the vireos, the wrens,
and the linnets have joined their voices to the chorus, and the bobolinks
are loudest in their song. But the notes of the birds in general are not
so incessant as before sunrise. One by one they discontinue their lays,
until at high noon the bobolink and the warbling flycatcher are almost the
only vocalists to be heard in the fields.



XII. SHORT SELECTIONS IN POETRY. (94)

1. THE CLOUD.

A cloud lay cradled near the setting sun,
  A gleam of crimson tinged its braided snow;
Long had I watched the glory moving on,
  O'er the still radiance of the lake below:
  Tranquil its spirit seemed, and floated slow,
E'en in its very motion there was rest,
  While every breath of eve that chanced to blow,
Wafted the traveler to the beauteous west.
Emblem, methought, of the departed soul,
  To whose white robe the gleam of bliss is given,
And by the breath of mercy made to roll
  Right onward to the golden gate of heaven,
While to the eye of faith it peaceful lies,
And tells to man his glorious destinies.
                                          --John Wilson


II. MY MIND.

My mind to me a kingdom is;
  Such perfect joy therein I find,
As far exceeds all earthly bliss
  That God or nature hath assigned;
Though much I want that most would have,
Yet still my mind forbids to crave.

NOTE.--This is the first stanza of a poem by William Byrd (b, 1543, d.
1623), an English composer of music.



III. A GOOD NAME. (95)

Good name, in man or woman, dear my lord,
Is the immediate jewel of their souls.
Who steals my purse, steals trash; 'tis something, nothing;
'Twas mine, 'tis his, and has been slave to thousands;
But he that filches from me my good name,
Robs me of that which not enriches him,
And makes me poor indeed.
                             Shakespeare.--Othello, Act III, Scene III.



IV. SUNRISE.

But yonder comes the powerful king of day,
Rejoicing in the east. The lessening cloud,
The kindling azure, and the mountain's brow
Illumed with liquid gold, his near approach
Betoken glad. Lo! now apparent all,
Aslant the dew-bright earth and colored air
He looks in boundless majesty abroad,
And sheds the shining day that, burnished, plays
On rocks, and hills, and towers, and wandering streams,
High gleaming from afar.
                                                        Thomson.



V. OLD AGE AND DEATH. (95)

Edmund Waller, 1605-1687, an English poet, was a cousin of John Hampden,
and related to Oliver Cromwell. He was educated at Eton and Cambridge.
Waller was for many years a member of Parliament. He took part in the
civil war, and was detected in a treasonable plot. Several years of his
life were spent in exile in France. After the Restoration he came into
favor at court. His poetry is celebrated for smoothness and sweetness, but
is disfigured by affected conceits.
###


  The seas are quiet when the winds give o'er;
  So calm are we when passions are no more.
  For then we know how vain it was to boast
  Of fleeting things, too certain to be lost.
  Clouds of affection from our younger eyes
  Conceal that emptiness which age descries.
  The soul's dark cottage, battered and decayed,
  Lets in new light through chinks that time has made:
  Stronger by weakness, wiser men become,
  As they draw near to their eternal home.
  Leaving the old, both worlds at once they view,
  That stand upon the threshold of the new.



VI. MILTON. (96)

John Dryden, 1631-1703, was a noted English writer, who was made poet
laureate by James II. On the expulsion of James, and the accession of
William and Mary, Dryden lost his offices and pension, and was compelled
to earn his bread by literary work. It was during these last years of his
life that his best work was done. His "Ode for St. Cecilia's Day" is one
of his most, celebrated poems. His prose writings are specimens of good,
strong English.
###


  Three poets, in three distant ages born,
  Greece, Italy, and England did adorn;
  The first in loftiness of thought surpassed,
  The next in majesty, in both the last.
  The force of nature could no further go;
  To make a third she joined the other two.

Note.--The two poets referred to, other than Milton, are Homer and Dante.



XIII. DEATH OF LITTLE NELL. (96)

Charles Dickens. 1812-1870, one of the greatest novelists of modern,
times, was born in Portsmouth, but spent nearly all his life in London.
His father was a conscientious man, but lacked capacity for getting a
livelihood. In consequence, the boy's youth was much darkened by poverty.
It has been supposed that he pictured his father in the character of
"Micawber." He began his active life as a lawyer's apprentice; but soon
left this employment to become a reporter. This occupation he followed
from 1831 to 1836. His first book was entitled "Sketches of London
Society, by Boz." This was followed, in 1837, by the "Pickwick Papers," a
work which suddenly brought much fame to the author. His other works
followed with great rapidity, and his last was unfinished at the time of
his death. He was buried in Westminster Abbey. Mr. Dickens visited America
in 1842, and again in 1867. During his last visit, he read his works in
public, in the principal cities of the United States.

The resources of Dickens's genius seemed exhaustless. He copied no author,
imitated none, but relied entirely on his own powers. He excelled
especially in humor and pathos. He gathered materials for his works by the
most careful and faithful observation. And he painted his characters with
a fidelity so true to their different individualities that, although they
sometimes have a quaint grotesqueness bordering on caricature, they stand
before the memory as living realities. He was particularly successful in
the delineation of the joys and griefs of childhood. "Little Nell" and
little "Paul Dombey" are known, and have been loved and wept over, in
almost every household where the English language is read. His writings
present very vividly the wants and sufferings of the poor, and have a
tendency to prompt to kindness and benevolence. His works have not escaped
criticism. It has been said that "his good characters act from impulse,
not from principle," and that he shows "a tricksy spirit of fantastic
exaggeration." It has also been said that his novels sometimes lack
skillful plot, and that he seems to speak approvingly of conviviality and
dissipation. "The Old Curiosity Shop," from which the following extract is
taken, was published in 1840.
###


She was dead. No sleep so beautiful and calm, so free from trace of pain,
so fair to look upon. She seemed a creature fresh from the hand of God,
and waiting for the breath of life; not one who had lived, and suffered
death. Her couch was dressed with here and there some winter berries and
green leaves, gathered in a spot she had been used to favor. "When I die,
put near me something that has loved the light, and had the sky above it
always." These were her words.

She was dead. Dear, gentle, patient, noble Nell was dead. Her little bird,
a poor, slight thing the pressure of a finger would have crushed, was
stirring nimbly in its cage, and the strong heart of its child mistress
was mute and motionless forever! Where were the traces of her early cares,
her sufferings, and fatigues? All gone. Sorrow was dead, indeed, in her;
but peace and perfect happiness were born, imaged in her tranquil beauty
and profound repose.

And still her former self lay there, unaltered in this change. Yes! the
old fireside had smiled upon that same sweet face; it had passed, like a
dream, through haunts of misery and care; at the door of the poor
schoolmaster on the summer evening, before the furnace fire upon the cold
wet night, at the still bedside of the dying boy, there had been the same
mild and lovely look. So shall we know the angels, in their majesty, after
death.

The old man held one languid arm in his, and had the small hand tight
folded to his breast for warmth. It was the hand she had stretched out to
him with her last smile; the hand that had led him on through all their
wanderings. Ever and anon he pressed it to his lips; then hugged it to his
breast again, murmuring that it was warmer now, and, as he said it, he
looked in agony to those who stood around, as if imploring them to help
her.

She was dead, and past all help, or need of help. The ancient rooms she
had seemed to fill with life, even while her own was waning fast, the
garden she had tended, the eyes she had gladdened, the noiseless haunts of
many a thoughtful hour, the paths she had trodden, as it were, but
yesterday, could know her no more.

"It is not," said the schoolmaster, as he bent down to kiss her on the
cheek, and gave his tears free vent, "it is not in this world that
heaven's justice ends. Think what earth is, compared with the world to
which her young spirit has winged its early flight, and say, if one
deliberate wish, expressed in solemn tones above this bed, could call her
back to life, which of us would utter it?"

She had been dead two days. They were all about her at the time, knowing
that the end was drawing on. She died soon after daybreak. They had read
and talked to her in the earlier portion of the night; but, as the hours
crept on, she sank to sleep. They could tell by what she faintly uttered
in her dreams, that they were of her journeyings with the old man; they
were of no painful scenes, but of people who had helped them, and used
them kindly; for she often said "God bless you!" with great fervor.

Waking, she never wandered in her mind but once, and that was at beautiful
music, which, she said, was in the air. God knows. It may have been.
Opening her eyes, at last, from a very quiet sleep, she begged that they
would kiss her once again. That done, she turned to the old man, with a
lovely smile upon her face, such, they said, as they had never seen, and
could never forget, and clung, with both her arms, about his neck. She had
never murmured or complained; but, with a quiet mind, and manner quite
unaltered, save that she every day became more earnest and more grateful
to them, faded like the light upon the summer's evening.

The child who had been her little friend, came there, almost as soon as it
was day, with an offering of dried flowers, which he begged them to lay
upon her breast. He told them of his dream again, and that it was of her
being restored to them, just as she used to be. He begged hard to see her:
saying, that he would be very quiet, and that they need not fear his being
alarmed, for he had sat alone by his young brother all day long, when he
was dead, and had felt glad to be so near him. They let him have his wish;
and, indeed, he kept his word, and was, in his childish way, a lesson to
them all.

Up to that time, the old man had not spoken once, except to her, or
stirred from the bedside. But, when he saw her little favorite, he was
moved as they had not seen him yet, and made as though he would have him
come nearer. Then, pointing to the bed, he burst into tears for the first
time, and they who stood by, knowing that the sight of this child had done
him good, left them alone together.

Soothing him with his artless talk of her, the child persuaded him to take
some rest, to walk abroad, to do almost as he desired him. And, when the
day came, on which they must remove her, in her earthly shape, from
earthly eyes forever, he led him away, that he might not know when she was
taken from him. They were to gather fresh leaves and berries for her bed.

And now the bell, the bell she had so often heard by night and day, and
listened to with solemn pleasure, almost as a living voice, rung its
remorseless toll for her, so young, so beautiful, so good. Decrepit age,
and vigorous life, and blooming youth, and helpless infancy,--on crutches,
in the pride of health and strength, in the full blush of promise, in the
mere dawn of life, gathered round her. Old men were there, whose eyes were
dim and senses failing, grandmothers, who might have died ten years ago,
and still been old, the deaf, the blind, the lame, the palsied, the living
dead, in many shapes and forms, to see the closing of that early grave.

Along the crowded path they bore her now, pure as the newly fallen snow
that covered it, whose day on earth had been as fleeting. Under that
porch, where she had sat when heaven, in its mercy, brought her to that
peaceful spot, she passed again, and the old church received her in its
quiet shade.



XIV. VANITY OF LIFE. (100)

Johann Gottfried von Herder, 1744-1803, an eminent German poet, preacher,
and philosopher, was born in Mohrungen, and died in Weimar. His published
works comprise sixty volumes. This selection is from his "Hebrew Poetry."
###


Man, born of woman,
Is of a few days,
And full of trouble;
He cometh forth as a flower, and is cut down;
He fleeth also as a shadow,
And continueth not.

Upon such dost thou open thine eye,
And bring me unto judgment with thee?
Among the impure is there none pure?
Not one.

Are his days so determined?
Hast thou numbered his months,
And set fast his bounds for him
Which he can never pass?
Turn then from him that he may rest,
And enjoy, as an hireling, his day.

The tree hath hope, if it be cut down,
It becometh green again,
And new shoots are put forth.
If even the root is old in the earth,
And its stock die in the ground,
From vapor of water it will bud,
And bring forth boughs as a young plant.

But man dieth, and his power is gone;
He is taken away, and where is he?

Till the waters waste from the sea,
