passed through the chest of Almos, but it was not observed by Mustad or
the other Ghoojurs, who probably attributed it in some way to the bite
of the cobra, in spite of the miraculous cure that seemed to have been
wrought before their eyes.  The three remained in the background, but
the fall of the leader appeared to add flames to the hatred of Mustad,
who, assuming the mantle of the fallen chieftain, stepped to the front.

"You shall not escape us!" he hissed; "all the Inglese loge shall die!"

"But before any more of them perish, you shall go to the infernal
regions to keep company with the imp that has just gone thither."

The doctor had learned from the exhibition of the preceding afternoon
the time required by Jack Everson to repeat his marvelous shots.  He
knew, therefore, about the moment when a second was due, and he decided
to make its arrival as dramatic as possible.

"You stand almost on the same spot where stood Almos; he dropped dead
before me, and," raising his hand impressively, "I command you to do
the same."

Mustad obeyed.

Again the faint report swept across the extent of jungle, travelling
with almost the same speed as the bullet, which, like its predecessor,
bored through the dusky chest of the victim and lost itself in the
vegetation beyond.  Mustad gasped, convulsively clasped one hand to his
breast, flung out both arms, groped blindly for an instant, and then
slumped down as dead as one of the mummies of the Pyramids.

And the young American, still reclining on that gray, blistering rock,
again rose to a sitting posture and clapped the glasses to his eyes to
observe more clearly the result of his last trial at markmanship.

"That makes seven bull's-eyes!" was his delighted exclamation, "but I
have done as well when the distance was twice as great.  I must keep
the number in mind, for it will be like the doctor to insist that I
made but six out of a possible eight.  I notice that three gentlemen
are left and require attention."

With the same care as before, he lay back and drew bead on the group,
but the next moment uttered an impatient exclamation and straightened
up again.

"They have fled; only Mary and her father are left, and there's no call
to send any bullets in their direction."

The fall of Mustad at the command of the wrathful physician was more
than the other Ghoojurs could stand.  Suspecting no connection between
the almost inaudible reports and the terrifying incidents, they
believed their only hope was in headlong flight.  Without a word they
dashed down the trail, quickly passing from sight, and were seen no
more.

Meanwhile Jack Everson, finding no demand for long shooting, sprang
from the rock and made all haste to the spot where he had recognized
his friends, and where they awaited his coming with an anxiety that
could not have been more intense.  That others of their enemies were in
the neighborhood was certain, and their vengeance could not be
restrained or turned aside as had been that of the Ghoojurs.  A
collision between them and the fugitives must be fatal to the latter.

Great, therefore, was the delight of father and daughter when the brave
fellow bounded into sight, his whole concern, as it seemed, being to
learn whether the score kept by the doctor agreed with his own.  When
assured that it did, he announced that he was at the disposal of the
venerable physician and his daughter.

The three pushed steadily toward Nepaul, cheered by the knowledge that
with every mile passed their danger lessened.  They were in great peril
more than once.  Twice they exchanged shots with marauding bands, and
once their destruction seemed inevitable; but good fortune attended
them, and at the end of a week they entered the wild, mountainous and
sparsely-settled region, where at last all danger was at an end.

So it came about that when the young people took their final departure
down the Ganges for Calcutta, thence to return to the United States,
Dr. Marlowe went with them.  He and his son-in-law formed a partnership
in the practice of their profession, and it is only a few years since
that the aged physician was laid to rest.  He was full of years and
honors, and willing to go, for he knew that the happiness of his
daughter could be in no safer hands than those of Jack Everson.




LOST IN THE WOODS.


CHAPTER I.

THE CABIN IN THE WOOD.

Harvey Bradley had been superintendent of the Rollo Mills not quite a
year when, to his annoyance, the first strike in their history took
place.

Young Bradley was a college graduate, a trained athlete, and a bright
and ambitious man, whose father was president of the company in New
York which owned the extensive mills.  It was deemed best to have a
direct representative of the corporation on the ground, and Harvey
qualified himself for the responsible situation by a six-months'
apprenticeship, during all of which he wrought as hard as any laborer
in the establishment.

He made his home in the remote village of Bardstown, where the Rollo
Mills had been built.  He lived with his Aunt Maria, (who went all the
way from New York with her favorite nephew that she might look after
him), and his sister Dollie, only six years old.  The plan was that she
should stay until Christmas, when her father was to come and take her
home.  Aunt Maria, with the help of honest Maggie Murray, kept house
for Harvey, who found his hands and brains fully occupied in looking
after the interests of the Rollo Mills, which gave employment to two
hundred men, women and children.

All went well with the young superintendent for some months after the
assumption of his duties.  He was alert, and surprised every one by his
practical knowledge.  He was stern and strict, and, after warning
several negligent employes, discharged them.  This did not help his
popularity, but, so long as the directors were satisfied, Harvey cared
for the opinion of no one else.

When dull times came, Superintendent Bradley scaled down the wages of
all, including his own.  The promise to restore them, as soon as
business warranted the step, averted the threatened strike.  Within a
month the restoration took place, but every employe was required to
work a half hour over time without additional pay.

A strike was averted for the time, but the friendly feeling and mutual
confidence that ought to exist between the employer and the employed
was destroyed.  The latter kept at work, and the former felt that he
had not sacrificed his dignity nor his discipline.

But the discontent increased.  One day Hugh O'Hara, the chief foreman,
and Thomas Hansell, one of the most influential of the workmen, called
upon Mr. Bradley, and speaking for the employes, protested against the
new arrangement.  They said every man, woman and child was willing to
work the extra half hour, but inasmuch as the need for such extra time
indicated an improvement in business, they asked for the additional pay
to which they were clearly entitled.

Harvey was looking for such protest and he was prepared.  He said it
was an error to think there was an improvement in business.  While in
one sense it might be true, yet the price of the manufactured goods had
fallen so low that the mills really made less money than before.  The
wages that had been paid were better than were warranted by the state
of trade.  Now, when the employes were asked to help in a slight degree
their employers who had done so much for them, they would not do so.
O'Hara and Hansell, showing a wish to discuss the matter, the
superintendent cut them short by saying that it was idle to talk
further.  He would not make any reduction in their time, nor would he
pay any extra compensation.

That night 200 employes of the Rollo Mills quit work, with the
intention of staying out until justice was done them.  Harvey asserted
that he would never yield; he would spend a few days in overhauling the
machinery and in making a few needed repairs; then, if the employes
chose, they could come back.  All who did not do so would not be taken
back afterwards.  New hands would be engaged and in a short time the
mills would be running the same as before.

O'Hara and Hansell warned the superintendent that serious trouble would
follow any such course.  While making no threat themselves, they told
him that blood was likely to be shed.  Harvey pooh-poohed and reminded
them that a few men and children would make sorry show in fighting the
whole state, for, in the event of interference by the strikers, he
meant to appeal to the authorities.

The repairs needed at the mills were soon made.  Steam was gotten up
and the whistle called the hands to work.  Only O'Hara and Hansell came
forward.  They explained that all would be glad to take their places if
the superintendent would allow them a slight increase of pay for
overwork.  They had held a meeting and talked over the matter, and now
abated a part of their first demand; they were willing to accept
one-half rate for overtime.

The superintendent would not yield a jot.  The most that he would
consent to do was to wait until noon for them to go to work.  The two
men went away muttering threats; not one of the hands answered the
second call to work.

Quite sure that such would be the result, Harvey had telegraphed to
Carville, fifty miles away, for sixty men, to take the place of those
who had quit work.  He asked only for men, since it would have been
unwise to bring women and children to become involved in difficulties.

By some means this step became known, and, as is always the case, it
added fuel to the flames.  Warning notices were sent to the
superintendent that if the new hands went to work they would be
attacked; Bradley himself was told to keep out of sight unless ready to
come to the terms of the strikers.  Even in his own home, he could not
be guaranteed safety.  His house as well as the mills would be burnt.

Harvey felt no special alarm because of these threats; he did not
believe that those who made them dare carry them out.  But that night
the mills escaped destruction only by the vigilance of the extra
watchmen.  The same evening Aunt Maria was stopped on the village
street and told that it was best she should lose no time in moving away
with her little niece Dollie, since it was more than likely the
innocent would suffer with the guilty.  For the first time, Harvey
understood the earnestness of the men; but he clung to his resolution
all the same.

You can see how easily the trouble could have been ended.  The employes
had abated their first demand and were willing to compromise.  Had
Harvey spoken his honest thoughts, he would have said the men were
right, or at any rate he ought to have agreed to their proposal to
submit the dispute to arbitration; but he was too proud to yield.

"They will take it for weakness on my part," was his thought; "it will
make an end of all system and open the way for demands that in the end
will destroy the business."

The sixty new hands reached Bardstown and were about as numerous as the
men who wrought in the mills before the strike.  They looked like a
determined band, who would be able to take care of themselves in the
troubles that impended.

The arrivals were received with scowls by the old employes, who hooted
and jeered them as they marched grimly to the mills.  No blows were
struck, though more than once an outbreak was imminent.  It was too
late in the day to begin work, but the new hands were shown through the
establishment, with a view of familiarizing them to some extent with
their new duties.  Most of them had had some experience in the same
kind of work, but there was enough ignorance to insure much vexation
and loss.

The night that followed was so quiet that Harvey believed the strikers
had been awed by his threat to appeal to the law and by the determined
front of the new men.

"It's a dear lesson," he said to himself, "but they need it, and it is
high time it was taught to them."

The next morning the whistle sent out its ear-splitting screech, whose
echoes swung back and forth, like so many pendulums between the hills,
but to the amazement of Harvey Bradley, not a person was seen coming
toward the mills.  The whistle called them again, and Hugh O'Hara and
Tom Hansell strolled leisurely up the street to the office, where Mr.
Bradley wonderingly awaited them.

"You'll have to blow that whistle a little louder," said O'Hara, with a
tantalizing grin.

"What do you mean, sir?"

"Those chaps all left town last night; they must be about forty miles
away; you see we explained matters to them; I don't think, if I was
you, I would feel bad about it; they believe they can get along better
at Carville than at Bardstown."

For the first time since the trouble began, Harvey Bradley lost his
temper.  To be defied and taunted in this manner was more than he could
bear.  He vowed over again that not one of the strikers should do
another day's work for him, even if he begged for it on his knees and
he was starving.  He at once telegraphed to Vining, fully one hundred
miles away, where he knew there were many people idle, for one hundred
men who would not only come, but stay.  He preferred those who knew
something about the business, but the first need was that the men would
remain at their posts, and if necessary fight for their positions.  He
guaranteed larger wages than he had ever paid experienced hands, but he
wanted no man who would not help hold the fort against all comers.  The
superintendent was on his mettle; he meant to win.

Having sent off this message, for which it cannot be denied, Harvey had
every legal and moral warrant, he set out on a long tramp through the
woods at the rear of Bardstown.  It was a crisp autumn day, and the
long brisk walk did him much good.  The glow came to his cheeks, his
blood was warmed, and his brain cleared by the invigorating exercise.
So much indeed did he enjoy it that he kept it up until, to his
surprise, he saw that it was growing dark, and he was several miles
from home.

It was snowing, though not heavily.  He walked fast, but, when night
had fully come, paused with the uncomfortable discovery that he was
hopelessly lost in the woods.

"Well, this is pleasant!" he exclaimed, looking around in vain for some
landmark in the gloom.  "I believe I shall have to spend the night out
doors, though I seem to be following some sort of path."

He struck a match, shading it with his hand from the chilly wind, and
stooped down.  Yes; there was an unmistakable trail, and with renewed
hope he hurried on, taking care not to stray to either side.  Within
the next ten minutes, to his delight, he caught the twinkle of a
star-like point of light among the trees, a short distance ahead.

While making his way hopefully forward, Harvey became aware of a
singular fact.  The air around him was tainted with a peculiar odor,
such as he had never met before.  It was of a rank nature, and, while
not agreeable, could not be said to be really unpleasant.  It might
have interested him more, but for his anxiety to reach the shelter
which was now so near at hand.

Arriving at the cabin, he found the latch-string hanging out.  A sharp
pull, the door was swung inward and Harvey stepped into a small room,
lit up by a crackling wood-fire on the hearth.

As he entered, two men who were smoking their pipes, looked up.  The
visitor could not hide his expression of surprise, for they were Hugh
O'Hara and Thomas Hansell, the last persons in the world he wished to
see.




CHAPTER II.

A POINTED DISCUSSION.

Hugh O'Hara was in middle life.  He was of Scotch descent, and, in his
younger days, had received a fair education.  Even now he spent much
time over his books.  He talked well, and was not without a certain
grace of manner founded, no doubt, on his knowledge of human nature,
which gave him great influence with others.  It was this, as much as
his skill, that made him the leading foreman at a time when a score of
others had the right by seniority of service to the place.

But Hugh had dipped into the springs of learning just enough to have
his ideas of right and wrong turned awry and to form a distaste for his
lot that made his leadership dangerous.  Besides, he had met with
sorrows that deepened the shadows that lay across his pathway.  In that
little cabin he had seen a young wife close her eyes in death, and his
only child, a sweet girl of five years, not long afterward was laid
beside her mother.  Many said that Hugh buried his heart with Jennie
and had not been the same man since.  He was reserved, except to one or
two intimate friends.  Shaggy, beetle-browed and unshaven, his looks
were anything but pleasing to those who did not fully know him.

Tom Hansell was much the same kind of man, except that he lacked the
book education of his companion and leader.  He had strong impulses,
and was ready to go to an extreme length in whatever direction he
started, but he always needed a guiding spirit, and that he found in
Hugh O'Hara.

The latter, after burying his child, moved into the village, saying
that he never wanted to look again upon the cabin that had brought so
much sorrow to him.  Most people believed he could not be led to go
near it, and yet on this blustery night he and Tom Hansell were seated
in the structure without any companions except the well known hound
Nero, and were smoking their pipes and plotting mischief.

Hugh and Tom were in their working clothes--coarse trousers, shirts,
and heavy shoes, without vest or coat.  Their flabby caps lay on the
floor behind them, and their tousled hair hung over their foreheads
almost to their eyes.  Tom had no side whiskers, but a heavy mustache
and chin whiskers, while the face of Hugh was covered with a spiky
black beard that stood out from his face as if each hair was charged
with electricity.

Nero, the hound, raised his nose from between his paws and looked up at
the visitor.  Then, as if satisfied, he lowered his head and resumed
his nap.

Bradley, as I have said, was angry with himself for walking into such a
trap.  It was not fear, but a deep dislike of the man who was the head
and front of the trouble at the mills.  He was the spokesman and leader
of the strikers, and he was the real cause of the stoppage of the
works.  Harvey looked upon him as insolent and brutal, and he was sure
that no circumstances could arise that would permit him to do a stroke
of work in the Rollo Mills again.

"Good evening," said Harvey stiffly, "I did not expect to find you
here."

Hansell nodded in reply to the salutation, but Hugh simply motioned
with the hand that held the pipe toward a low stool standing near the
middle of the apartment.

"Help yourself to a seat, Mr. Bradley; the presence of Tom and myself
here is no odder than is your own."

"I suppose not," replied Harvey with a half-laugh, as he seated
himself; "I started out for a walk to-day and went too far--that is, so
far that I lost my way.  I had about made up my mind that I would have
to sleep in the woods, when I caught the light from your window and
made for it."

The glance that passed between Hugh and Tom--sly as it was--did not
elude the eye of Harvey Bradley.  He saw that his explanation was not
believed, but he did not care; there was no love between him and them,
and, had it not looked as if he held them in fear, he would have turned
and walked away after stepping across the threshold.  As it was, he
meant to withdraw as soon as he could do it without seeming to be
afraid.

"Is this the first time you have taken a walk up this way?" asked Hugh.

"The fact that I lost my way ought to answer that question; how far is
it, please, to Bardstown?"

"An even mile by the path you came."

"But I didn't come by any path, except for a short distance in front of
this place."

"Then how did you get here?"

"Is there no way of traveling through the woods except by the road that
leads to your door?"

The conversation was between Harvey and Hugh alone.  Tom was abashed in
the presence of two such persons, and nothing could have led him to
open his mouth unless appealed to by one or the other.  Neither made
any allusion to the strike.  After the superintendent's rebuff, Hugh
scorned to do so, while Harvey would have stultified himself had he
invited any discussion.  The repugnance between the two men was too
strong for them calmly to debate any question.  Besides Hugh and Tom
were suspicious; they did not believe that the presence of the
superintendent was accidental; there was a sinister meaning in it which
boded ill for Hugh and his friends, and the former, therefore, was in a
vicious mood.

With the conditions named, a wrangle may be set down as one of the
certainties.  But Harvey Bradley had defied the fury of half a hundred
men, and he meant to teach this marplot his proper place.  There was a
threatening gleam in his eye, but he puffed a few seconds at his pipe,
and then, glaring through the rank smoke that curled upward from his
face said:

"There are a good many ways by which Hugh O'Hara's cabin can be found,
but those who come on honest errands stick to the path."

"Which explains why the path is so little worn," was the reply of
Harvey.

"Aye, and your feet have done mighty little to help the wearing of the
same."

"If those who live in the cabin were honest themselves, they would not
tremble every time the latch-string is pulled, nor would they be scared
if they saw a visitor stop to snuff the air in this neighborhood."
