"We'll go anywhere you think right, Mr. Rowe," said I diplomatically.

"I knows a waterman," said Mr. Rowe, "that was in the Royal Navy like
myself. He lives near here, and they're decent folk. The place is a
poor place, but you'll have to make the best of it, young gentlemen,
and a shilling 'll cover the damage. If you wants supper you must pay
for it. Give the missis the money, and she'll do the best she can, and
bring you the change to a half-farthing."

My courage was now fully restored, but Fred was very much overwhelmed
by the roughness of the streets we passed through, the drunken,
quarrelling, poverty-struck people, and the grim, dirty old houses.

"We shall be out of it directly," I whispered, and indeed in a few
minutes more Mr. Rowe turned up a shabby entry, and led us to one of
several lower buildings round a small court. The house he stopped at
was cleaner within than without, and the woman was very civil.

"It's a very poor place, sir," said she; "but we always keep a berth,
as his father calls it, for our son John."

"But we can't take your son's bed," said I; "we'll sit up here, if you
will let us."

"Bless ye, love," said the woman, "John's in foreign parts. He's a
sailor, sir, like his father before him; but John's in the merchant
service."

Mr. Rowe now bade us good-night. "I'll be round in the morning," said
he.

"What o'clock, Mr. Rowe?" I asked; I had a reason for asking.

"There ain't much in the way of return cargo," he replied; "but I've a
bit of business to do for your father, Mr. Fred, that'll take me until
half-past nine. I'll be here by then, young gentlemen, and show you
about a bit."

"It's roughish quarters for you," added the bargemaster, looking
round; "but you'll find rougher quarters at sea, Master Charles."

Mr. Howe's moralizings nettled me, and they did no good, for my whole
thoughts were now bent on evading his guardianship and getting to sea,
but poor Fred was quite overpowered. "I wish we were safe home again,"
he almost sobbed when I went up to the corner into which he had
huddled himself.

"You'll be all right when we're afloat," said I.

"I'm so hungry," he moaned.

I was hungry myself, and decided to order some supper, so when the
woman came up and civilly asked if she could do anything for us before
we went to bed, I said, "If you please we're rather hungry, but we
can't afford anything very expensive. Do you think you can get us
anything--rather cheap--for supper?"

"A red herring?" she suggested.

"What price are they?" I felt bound to inquire.

"Mrs. Jones has them beautiful and mild at two for a penny. You _can_
get 'em at three a penny, but you wouldn't like 'em, sir."

I felt convinced by the expression of her face that I should not, so I
ordered two.

"And a penny loaf?" suggested our landlady, getting her bonnet from
behind the door.

"If you please."

"And a bunch of radishes and a pint of fourpenny would be
fivepence-half-penny the lot, sir."

"If you please. And, if you please, that will do," said I, drawing a
shilling from the bag, for the thought of the herrings made me
ravenous, and I wanted her to go. She returned quickly with the bread,
and herrings. The "fourpenny" proved to be beer. She gave me
sixpence-half-penny in change, which puzzled my calculations.

"You said _fourpenny_," said I, indicating the beer.

"Yes, sir, but it's a pint," was the reply; and it was only when in
after-years I learned that beer at fourpence a quart is known to some
people as "fourpenny" that I got that part of the reckoning of the
canvas bag straight in my own mind.

The room had an unwholesome smell about it, which the odour from our
fried herrings soon pleasantly overpowered. The bread was good, and
the beer did us no harm. Fred picked up his spirits again; when Mr.
Rowe's old mate came home he found us very cheerful and chatty. Fred
asked him about the son who was at sea, but I had some more important
questions to put, and I managed so to do, and with a sufficiently
careless air.

"I suppose there are lots of ships at London?" said I.

"In the Docks, sir, plenty," said our host.

"And where are the Docks?" I inquired. "Are they far from you?"

"Well, you see, sir, there's a many docks. There's the East India
Docks, St. Katharine's Docks, and the Commercial Docks, and Victoria
Dock, and lots more."

I pondered. Ships in the East India Dock probably went only to India.
St. Katharine conveyed nothing to my mind. I did not fancy Commercial
Docks. I felt a loyal inclination towards the Victoria Dock.

"How do people get from here to Victoria Dock now, if they want to?" I
asked.

"Well, of course, sir, you can go down the river, or part that way and
then by rail from Fenchurch Street."

"Where is Fenchurch Street, Mr. Smith?" said I, becoming a good deal
ashamed of my pertinacity.

"In the city, sir," said Mr. Smith.

The city! Now I never heard of any one in any story going out into the
world to seek his fortune, and coming to a city, who did not go into
it to see what was to be seen. Leaving the king's only daughter and
those kinds of things, which belong to story-books, out of the
question, I do not believe the captain would have passed a new city
without looking into it.

"You go down the river to Fenchurch Street--in a barge?" I suggested.

"Bless ye, no, sir!" said Mr. Smith, getting the smoke of his pipe
down his throat the wrong way with laughing, till I thought his
coughing-fit would never allow him to give me the important
information I required. "There's boats, sir, plenty on 'em. I could
take you myself, and be thankful, and there's steamers calls at the
wharf every quarter of an hour or so through the day, from nine in the
morning, and takes you to London Bridge for threepence. It ain't many
minutes' walk to Fenchurch Street, and the train takes you straight to
the Docks."

After this we conversed on general seafaring matters. Mr. Smith was
not a very able-bodied man, in consequence of many years' service in
unhealthy climates, he said; and he complained of his trade as a
"poor one," and very different from what it had been in his father's
time, and before new London Bridge was built, which "anybody and
anything could get through" now without watermen's assistance. In his
present depressed condition he seemed to look back on his seafaring
days with pride and tender regret, and when we asked for tales of his
adventures he was checked by none of the scruples which withheld Mr.
Rowe from encouraging me to be a sailor.

"John's berth" proved to be a truckle-bed in a closet which just held
it, and which also held more nasty smells than I could have believed
there was room for. Opening the window seemed only to let in fresh
ones. When Fred threw himself on his face on the bed, and said, "What
a beastly hole!" and cried bitterly, I was afraid he was going to be
ill; and when I had said my prayers and persuaded him to say his and
come to bed, I thought that if we got safely through the night we
would make the return voyage with Mr. Rowe, and for the future leave
events and emergencies to those who liked danger and discomfort.

But when we woke with the sun shining on our faces, and through the
little window beheld it sparkling on the river below us, and on the
distant city, we felt all right again, and stuck to our plans.

"Let's go by the city," said Fred, "I should like to see some of the
town."

"If we don't get off before half-past nine we're lost," said I.

We found an unexpected clog in Mr. Smith, who seemed inclined to stick
to us and repeat the stories he had told us overnight. At about
half-past eight, however, he went off to his boat, saying he supposed
we should wait for Mr. Rowe, and when his wife went into a neighbour's
house I laid a shilling on the table, and Fred and I slipped out and
made our way to the pier.

Mr. Rowe was not there, and a church clock near struck nine. This was
echoed from the city more than once, and then we began to look
anxiously for the steamer. Five, ten minutes must have passed--they
seemed hours to me--when I asked a man who was waiting also when the
steamer from London Bridge would come.

"She'll be here soon," said he.

"So will old Rowe," whispered Fred.

But the steamer came first, and we went on board; and the paddles
began to splash, and our escape was accomplished.

It was a lovely morning, and the tall, dirty old houses looked almost
grand in the sunlight as we left Nine Elms. The distant city came
nearer and shone brighter, and when the fretted front of the Houses
of Parliament went by us like a fairy palace, and towers and blocks of
buildings rose solidly one behind another in shining tints of white
and grey against the blue summer sky, and when above the noise of our
paddle-wheels came the distant roar of the busy streets--Fred pressed
the arm I had pushed through his and said, "We're out in the world at
last!"




CHAPTER XII.

EMERGENCIES AND POLICEMEN--FENCHURCH STREET STATION--THIRD CLASS TO
CUSTOM HOUSE--A SHIP FOREST.


Policemen are very useful people. I do not know how we should have got
from the London Bridge Pier to the Fenchurch Street Station if it had
not been that Fred told me he knew one could ask policemen the way to
places. There is nothing to pay, which I was very glad of, as the
canvas bag was getting empty.

Once or twice they helped us through emergencies. We had to go from
one footpath to another, straight across the street, and the street
was so full of carts and cabs and drays and omnibuses, that one could
see that it was quite an impossibility. We did it, however, for the
policeman made us. I said, "Hadn't we better wait till the crowd has
gone?" But the policeman laughed, and said then we had better take
lodgings close by and wait at the window. So we did it. Fred said the
captain once ran in a little cutter between two big ships that were
firing into him, but I do not think that can have been much worse than
running between a backing dray, full of rolling barrels, and a hansom
cab pulled up and ramping like a rocking-horse at the lowest point of
the rockers.

When we were safely on the other pavement we thanked the policeman
very much, and then went on, asking our way till we got to Fenchurch
Street.

If anything could smell nastier than John's berth in Nine Elms it is
Fenchurch Street Station. And I think it is worse in this way; John's
berth smelt horrible, but it was warm and weather-tight. You never
swallow a drop of pure air in Fenchurch Street Station, and yet you
cannot find a corner in which you can get out of the draughts.

With one gale blowing on my right from an open door, and another gale
blowing on my left down some steps, and nasty smells blowing from
every point of the compass, I stood at a dirty little hole in a dirty
wooden wall and took our tickets. I had to stand on tiptoe to make the
young man see me.

"What is the cheapest kind of tickets you have, if you please?" I
inquired, with the canvas bag in my hand.

"Third class," said the young man, staring very hard at me, which I
thought rather rude. "Except working men's tickets, and they're not
for this train."

"Two third-class tickets for Victoria Dock, then, if you please," said
I.

"Single or return?" said he.

"I beg your pardon?" I said, for I was puzzled.

"Are you coming back to-day?" he inquired.

"Oh dear, no!" said I, for some of the captain's voyages had lasted
for years; but the question made me anxious, as I knew nothing of
railway rules, and I added, "Does it matter?"

"Not by no means," replied the young man smartly, and he began to
whistle, but stopped himself to ask, "Custom House or Tidal Basin?"

I had no alternative but to repeat "I _beg_ your pardon?"

He put his face right through the hole and looked at me. "Will you
take your ticket for Custom House or Tidal Basin?" he repeated;
"either will do for Victoria Docks."

"Then whichever you please," said I, as politely as I could.

The young man took out two tickets and snapped them impatiently in
something; and as a fat woman was squeezing me from behind, I was glad
to take what I could get and go back to Fred.

He was taking care of our two bundles and the empty pie-dish.

That pie-dish was a good deal in our way. Fred wanted to get rid of
it, and said he was sure his mother would not want us to be bothered
with it; but Fred had promised in his letter to bring it back, and he
could not break his word. I told him so, but I said as he did not like
to be seen with it I would carry it. So I did.

With a strong breeze aft, we were driven up-stairs in the teeth of a
gale, and ran before a high wind down a platform where, after annoying
one of the railway men very much by not being able to guess which was
the train, and having to ask him, we got in among a lot of
rough-looking people, who were very civil and kind. A man with a black
face and a white jacket said he would tell us when we got to Custom
House, and he gave me his seat by the window, that I might look out.

What struck me as rather odd was that everybody in the third-class
carriage seemed to have bundles like ours, and yet they couldn't all
be running away. One thin woman with a very troublesome baby had
three. Perhaps it is because portmanteaus and things of that sort are
rather expensive.

Fred was opposite to me. It was a bright sunny morning, a fresh breeze
blew, and in the sunlight the backs of endless rows of shabby houses
looked more cheerful than usual, though very few of the gardens had
anything in them but dirt and cats, and very many of the windows had
the week's wash hanging out on strings and poles. The villages we had
passed on the canal banks all looked pretty and interesting, but I
think that most of the places we saw out of the window of the train
would look very ugly on a dull day.

I fancy there were poplar-trees at a place called Poplar, and that I
thought it must be called after them; but Fred says No, and we have
never been there since, so I cannot be sure about it. If not, I must
have dreamt it.

I did fall asleep in the corner, I know, I was so very much tired, and
we had had no breakfast, and I sat on the side where the wind blows
in, which I think helped to make me sleepy. I was wakened partly by
the pie-dish slipping off my lap, and partly by Fred saying in an
eager tone,

"Oh, Charlie! LOOK! _Are they all ships_?"

We stuffed our heads through the window, and my hat was nearly blown
away, so the man with the black face and the white jacket gave it to
the woman with the troublesome baby to take care of for me, and he
held us by our legs for fear we should fall out.

On we flew! There was wind enough in our faces to have filled the
barge-sail three times over, and Fred licked his lips and said, "I do
believe there's salt in it!"

But what he woke me up to show me drove me nearly wild. When I had
seen a couple of big barges lying together with their two bare masts
leaning towards each other I used to think how dignified and beautiful
they looked. But here were hundreds of masts, standing as thick as
tree-trunks in a fir-wood, and they were not bare poles, but lofty and
slender, and crossed by innumerable yards, and covered with ropes in
orderly profusion, which showed in the sunshine as cobwebs shine out
in a field in summer. Gay flags and pennons fluttered in the wind;
brown sails, grey sails, and gleaming white sails went up and down;
and behind it all the water sparkled and dazzled our eyes like the
glittering reflections from a mirror moving in the sun.

As we ran nearer the ropes looked thicker, and we could see the
devices on the flags. And suddenly, straining his eyes at the yards of
a vessel in the thick of the ship-forest, on which was something
black, like a spider with only four legs, Fred cried, "It's a sailor!"

I saw him quite well. And seeing him higher up than on any tree one
could ever climb, with the sunny sky above him and the shining water
below him, I could only mutter out with envious longing--"How happy he
must be!"




CHAPTER XIII.

A DIRTY STREET--A BAD BOY--SHIPPING AND MERCHANDISE--WE STOWAWAY ON
BOARD THE 'ATALANTA'--A SALT TEAR.


The man in the white jacket helped us out, smiling as he did so, so
that his teeth shone like ivory in his black face. We took the
pie-dish and our bundles, and thanked him very much, and the train
went on and took him with it, which we felt sorry for. For when one
_is_ out in the world, you know, one sometimes feels rather lonely,
and sorry to part with a kind friend.

Everybody else went through a little gate into the street, so we did
the same. It was a very dirty street, with houses on one side and the
railway on the other. There were cabbages and carrots and old shoes
and fishes' heads and oyster-shells and potato-peelings in the street,
and a goat was routing among it all with its nose, as if it had lost
something and hoped to find it by and by.

Places like this always seemed to depress Fred's courage. Besides
which, he was never in good spirits when he had to go long without
food, which made me fear he would not bear being cast adrift at sea
without provisions as well as his grandfather had done. I was not
surprised when he said,

"_What_ a place! And I don't believe one can get anything fit to eat,
