the ground behind him. As he was thus creeping by a large bush of
reeds, he heard a loud, sudden noise, between a bark and a roar; he felt
something heavy strike his feet, and, instantly jumping up, he saw to
his astonishment, a large puma actually standing on his poncho; and,
perhaps, the animal was equally astonished to find himself in the
immediate presence of so athletic a man. The man told me he was
unwilling to fire, as his gun was loaded with very small shot; and he
therefore remained motionless, the puma standing on his poncho for many
seconds; at last the creature turned his head, and walking very slowly
away about ten yards, stopped, and turned again: the man still
maintained his ground, upon which the puma tacitly acknowledged his
supremacy, and walked off."

"I dare say the man was very glad to be so easily quit of such a
formidable visitor, Uncle Thomas."

[Illustration: THE SURPRISE--Page 140.]

"No doubt of it, Frank. I have one other story to tell you about the
puma, which fortunately exhibits it in a more favourable light than
some of those which I have told you.

"During the government of Don Diego de Mendoza, in Paraguay, a dreadful
famine raged at Buenos Ayres; yet Diego, afraid to give the Indians a
habit of spilling Spanish blood, forbade the inhabitants, on pain of
death, to go into the fields, in search of relief, placing soldiers at
all the outlets to the country, with orders to fire upon those who
should attempt to transgress his orders. A woman, however, called
Maldonata, was artful enough to elude the vigilance of the guards, and
to effect her escape. After wandering about the country for a long time,
she sought shelter in a cavern; but she had scarcely entered it, when
she became dreadfully alarmed, on observing a puma occupying the same
den. She was, however, soon quieted by the animal approaching and
caressing her. The poor brute was very ill, and scarcely able to crawl
towards her. Maldonata soon discovered what was the cause of the
animal's illness, and kindly ministered to it. It soon recovered, and
was all gratitude and attention to its kind benefactress, never
returning from searching after its daily subsistence without laying a
portion of it at the feet of Maldonata.

"Some time after, Maldonata fell into the hands of the Spaniards; and,
being brought back to Buenos Ayres, was conducted before Don Francis
Ruez de Galen, who then commanded there. She was charged with having
left the city contrary to orders. Galen was a man of a cruel and
tyrannical disposition, and condemned the unfortunate woman to a death
which none but the most cruel tyrant could have devised. He ordered some
soldiers to take her into the country, and leave her tied to a tree,
either to perish with hunger, or to be torn to pieces by wild beasts.
Two days after, he sent the same soldiers to see what had been her fate,
when, to their great surprise, they found her alive and unhurt, though
surrounded by pumas and jaguars, while a female puma at her feet kept
them at bay. As soon as the puma saw the soldiers, she retired to some
distance and they unbound Maldonata, who related to them the history of
this puma, whom she knew to be the same she had formerly relieved in the
cavern. On the soldiers taking Maldonata away, the animal approached,
and fawned upon her, as if unwilling to part. The soldiers reported what
they had seen to their commander, who could not but pardon a woman who
had been so singularly protected, without the danger of appearing more
inhuman than pumas themselves.




CHAPTER VII.

     Uncle Thomas tells about the Migrating Instinct of Animals.--Of the
     House Swallow of England; and the Esculent Swallow, whose Nest is
     eaten by the Chinese.--He tells also about the Passenger Pigeon of
     America; of the Myriads which are found in various parts of the
     United States; of the Land-Crab and its Migrations, and of those of
     the Salmon and the Common Herring.


"Uncle Thomas, I heard to-day of a swallow which for many years returned
to the same window, and built its nest in the same corner. Now as I
believe swallows are birds of passage, and leave this country to spend
the winter in warmer climates, I wish you to explain to me how it is
that they can return from such distances to the same spot."

"That is a question, Frank, which I cannot very well answer, but so many
instances of the kind have been observed as to leave no doubt as to the
fact. It has sometimes been known even to penetrate into the house, and
attach its nest to articles of furniture.

"At Camerton Hall, near Bath, a pair of swallows built their nest on the
upper part of the frame of an old picture over the chimney; and, coming
into the room through a broken pane in one of the windows, they
continued to use the same place for their nest for three successive
years, and would probably have continued to do so, but the room having
been put into repair, they could no longer obtain access to it."

"Is it want of food which makes birds migrate, Uncle Thomas?"

"Principally, I should say that it is so, Frank, but in shifting from
one place to another they only fulfil an instinct impressed on them by
their Creator for the preservation of their species. Thus, for instance,
an old swallow might know by experience, that when its food fails here,
it begins to become plentiful elsewhere, but the young bird which had
never been more than a few miles from the place where it was hatched,
can have no such experimental knowledge; yet, when the season arrives,
we find the whole flock ready to set out. I dare say you have all seen
them, Boys, gathering in flocks and resting on the house tops, as if
taking breath before setting out on their long journey."

"Oh, yes, Uncle Thomas, I have often seen them doing so, but I have
heard that they dive to the bottom of lakes and ponds, and remain there
till winter is over."

"Many foolish stories are told of swallows being found in such
situations, Harry, but they are now well known to be fables. There is no
doubt that they migrate in the same way as many other birds. Last autumn
I watched with great pleasure the movements of a flock, which was
evidently preparing for their arduous flight.

"For several evenings they assembled in large numbers on a tree at a
short distance from my house, and, after remaining seated for some time,
one of them, who appeared to be commander-in-chief, kept flying about
in all directions, and at length, with a sharp and loudly repeated call,
he darted up into the air. In an instant the whole congregation were on
the wing, following their leader in a sort of spiral track. In a little
time they had risen so high that I lost sight of them, but after a short
absence they again returned and took up their position on the tree which
they had just left.

"This manoeuvre they continued for some time, till one day they set
off in reality, and I saw no more of them for the winter."

"I read, somewhere, Uncle Thomas, that the Chinese eat swallows' nests.
I cannot understand this, Sir; surely the mud and clay, of which
swallows' nests are composed, would make but an indifferent repast."

"I dare say they would, Frank, if they were made of clay and mud, as the
nests of our swallows are; but such is not the case. Various opinions
are entertained as to the substance of which the nest of the esculent
swallow is made. Sir George Staunton, who accompanied Lord Macartney in
his embassy to China, gives a very interesting account both of the
swallow and of its nest.

"In the Cass," says Sir George, "a small island near Sumatra, we found
two caverns running horizontally into the side of the rock, and in these
were a number of those birds' nests so much prized by the Chinese
epicures. They seemed to be composed of fine filaments, cemented
together by a transparent viscous matter, not unlike what is left by the
foam of the sea upon stones alternately covered by the tide, or those
gelatinous animal substances found floating on every coast. The nests
adhere to each other and to the sides of the cavern, mostly in
horizontal rows, without any break or interruption, and at different
depths from fifty to five hundred feet. The birds that build these nests
are small grey swallows, with bellies of a dirty white. They were flying
about in considerable numbers, but were so small, and their flight was
so quick, that they escaped the shot fired at them. The same sort of
nests are said to be also found in deep caverns at the foot of the
highest mountains in the middle of Java, at a distance from the sea;
from which source it is thought that the birds derive no materials,
either for their food, or the construction of their nests, as it does
not appear probable they should fly in search of either over the
intermediate mountains, which are very high, or against the boisterous
winds prevailing thereabouts. They feed on insects, which they find
hovering over stagnated pools between the mountains, and for the
catching of which their wide opening beaks are particularly adapted.
They prepare their nests from the best remnants of their food. Their
greatest enemy is the kite, who often intercepts them in their passage
to and from the caverns, which are generally surrounded with rocks of
grey limestone or white marble. The colour and value of the nests depend
on the quantity and quality of the insects caught, and perhaps also on
the situation where they are built. Their value is chiefly ascertained
by the uniform fineness and delicacy of their texture; those that are
white and transparent being most esteemed, and fetching often in China
their weight in silver.

"These nests are a considerable object of traffic among the Javanese,
many of whom are employed in it from their infancy. The birds, after
having spent nearly two months in preparing their nests, lay each two
eggs, which are hatched in about fifteen days. When the young birds
become fledged, it is thought the proper time to seize upon their nests,
which is done regularly three times a year, and is effected by means of
ladders of bamboo and reeds, by which the people descend into the
caverns; but when these are very deep, rope-ladders are preferred. This
operation is attended with much danger, and several perish in the
attempt. The inhabitants of the mountains generally employed in this
business begin always by sacrificing a buffalo, which custom is observed
by the Javanese on the eve of every extraordinary enterprise. They also
pronounce some prayers, anoint themselves with sweet-scented oil, and
smoke the entrance of the cavern with gumbenjamin. Near some of the
caverns a tutelar goddess is worshipped, whose priest burns incense, and
lays his projecting hands on every person preparing to descend. A
flambeau is carefully prepared at the same time, with a gum which exudes
from a tree growing in the vicinity, and which is not easily
extinguished by fixed air or subterraneous vapours."

"But how are the nests eaten, Uncle Thomas? Are they prepared in any
way, or are they fit for use as they are taken down?"

"They are always prepared before they are eaten. The finest sort, which
are of a clear colour, and not unlike isinglass, are dissolved in broth,
to which they are said to give an exquisite flavour. After being soaked,
they are sometimes introduced into the body of a fowl and stewed; but I
am not quite versed in all the mysteries of a Chinese kitchen, so you
must be satisfied with these two modes of preparation."

"Thank you, Uncle Thomas."

"I have only one more story to tell you about the swallow, Boys, and
then I must turn to two or three other animals, whose peregrinations
exhibit as strong instances of instinct as it does."

"A swallow's nest, built in the west corner of a window facing the
north, was so much softened by the rain beating against it, that it was
rendered unfit to support the superincumbent load of five pretty full
grown swallows. During a storm the nest fell into the tower corner of
the window, leaving the young brood exposed to all the fury of the
blast. To save the little creatures from an untimely death, the owner of
the house benevolently caused a covering to be thrown over them, till
the severity of the storm was past. No sooner had it subsided, than the
sages of the colony assembled, fluttering round the window, and hovering
over the temporary covering of the fallen nest. As soon as this careful
anxiety was observed, the covering was removed, and the utmost joy
evinced by the group, on finding the young ones alive and unhurt. After
feeding them, the members of this assembled community arranged
themselves into working order. Each division taking its appropriate
station, commenced instantly to work, and before night-fall they had
jointly completed an arched canopy over the young brood in the corner
where they lay, and securely covered them against a succeeding blast.
Calculating the time occupied by them in performing this piece of
architecture, it appeared evident that the young must have perished from
cold and hunger, before any single pair could have executed half the
job."

"How very kind, Uncle Thomas! Had they been reasoning creatures, they
could not have behaved more properly."

"I dare say not, Frank. Such traits overstep the limits of _instinct_,
and almost trespass on that of reason."

"You asked, Frank, if it was want of food which prompted the flight of
migratory animals from one place to another. In some cases it is so,
undoubtedly; as for instance, in that which I am now going to tell you
about, the American passenger pigeon; it is from the work of the great
naturalist, Wilson.

"The migrations of these pigeons appear to be undertaken rather in quest
of food than merely to avoid the cold of the climate; since we find them
lingering in the northern regions around Hudson's Bay so late as
December, and since their appearance is so casual and irregular,
sometimes not visiting certain districts for several years in any
considerable numbers, while at other times they are innumerable. I have
often witnessed these migrations in the Genesee country, often in
Pennsylvania, and also in various parts of Virginia, with amazement; but
all that I have seen of them are mere straggling parties, when compared
with the congregated millions which I have since beheld in the western
forests in the states of Ohio, Kentucky, and the Indiana territory.
These fertile and extensive regions abound with the nutritious beech
nut, which constitutes the chief food of the wild pigeon. In seasons
when these nuts are abundant, corresponding multitudes of pigeons may be
confidently expected. It sometimes happens, that having consumed the
whole produce of the beech trees in an extensive district, they discover
another at the distance of perhaps sixty or eighty miles, to which they
regularly repair every morning, and return as regularly in the course of
the day, or in the evening, to their place of general rendezvous, or, as
it is generally called, the roosting place. These roosting places are
always in the wood, and sometimes occupy a large extent of forest. When
they have frequented one of these places for some time, the appearance
it exhibits is surprising. The ground is covered to the depth of several
inches with their droppings; all the tender grass and underwood
destroyed; the surface strewed with large limbs of trees, broken down
by the weight of the birds clustering one above another, and the trees
themselves, for thousand of acres, killed as completely as if girdled
with an axe. The marks of this desolation remain for many years on the
spot, and numerous places could be pointed out, where for several years
after scarcely a single vegetable made its appearance.

"When these roosts are first discovered, the inhabitants from
considerable distances visit them in the night with guns, clubs, long
poles, pots of sulphur, and various other engines of destruction. In a
few hours they fill many sacks, and load their horses with them. By the
Indians, a pigeon roost or breeding place is considered an important
source of national profit and dependence for the season, and all their
active ingenuity is exercised on the occasion. The breeding place
differs from the former in its greater extent. In the western countries
before mentioned, these are generally in beech woods, and often extend
in nearly a straight line across the country for a great way. Not far
from Shelbyville, in the state of Kentucky, about five years ago, there
was one of these breeding places, which stretched through the woods in
nearly a north and south direction, which was several miles in breadth,
and was said to be upwards of forty miles in extent. In this tract
almost every tree was furnished with nests wherever the branches could
accommodate them. The pigeons made their first appearance there about
the 10th of April, and left it altogether with their young before the
25th of May.

"As soon as the young were fully grown, and before they left the nests,
numerous parties of the inhabitants, from all parts of the adjacent
country, came with waggons, axes, beds, cooking utensils, many of them
accompanied by the greater part of their families, and encamped for
several days in this immense nursery. Several of them informed me that
the noise in the woods was so great as to terrify their horses, and that
it was difficult for one person to hear another speak without bawling
in his ear. The ground was strewed with broken limbs of trees, eggs, and
young squab pigeons which had been precipitated from above, and on which
herds of hogs were fattening; hawks, buzzards, and eagles were sailing
about in great numbers, and seizing the squabs from their nests at
pleasure; while from twenty feet upwards to the tops of the trees, the
view through the woods presented a perpetual tumult of crowding and
fluttering multitudes of pigeons, their wings roaring like thunder,
mingled with the frequent crash of falling timber; for now the axemen
were at work, cutting down those trees which seemed to be most crowded
with nests, and contrived to fell them in such a manner, that in their
descent they might bring down several others, by which means the falling
of one large tree sometimes produced two hundred squabs, little inferior
in size to the old pigeons, and almost one mass of fat. On some single
trees, upwards of one hundred nests were found, each containing one
young only, a circumstance in the history of this bird not generally
known to naturalists. It was dangerous to walk under these fluttering
and flying millions, from the frequent fall of large branches, broken
down by the weight of the multitudes above, and which in their descent
often destroyed numbers of the birds themselves.

"I had left the public road to visit the remains of the breeding place
near Shelbyville, and was traversing the woods with my gun on my way to
Frankfort, when about one o'clock, the pigeons which I had observed
flying the greater part of the morning northerly, began to return in
such immense numbers as I never before had witnessed; coming to an
opening by the side of a creek called the Benson, where I had a more
uninterrupted view, I was astonished at their appearance. They were
flying with great steadiness and rapidity, at a height beyond gun-shot,
and several strata deep, and so close together, that could shot have
reached them, one discharge could not have failed in bringing down
several individuals. From right to left as far as the eye could reach,
the breadth of this vast procession extended, seeming every where
equally crowded. Curious to determine how long this appearance would
continue, I took out my watch to note time, and sat down to observe
them. It was then half-past one; I sat for more than an hour, but
instead of a diminution of this prodigious procession, it seemed rather
to increase both in numbers and rapidity, and anxious to reach Frankfort
before night, I arose and went on. About four o'clock in the afternoon,
I crossed the Kentucky river at the town of Frankfort, at which time the
living torrent above my head seemed as numerous and as extensive as
ever; and long after this, I observed them in large bodies that
continued to pass for six or eight minutes, and these again were
followed by other detached bodies, all moving in the same south-east
direction, till after six in the evening. The great breadth of front
which this mighty multitude preserved would seem to intimate a
corresponding breadth of their breeding place, which, by several
gentlemen who had lately passed through part of it, was stated to me at
several miles. It was said to be in Green County, and that the young
began to fly about the middle of March. On the 17th of April, forty-nine
miles beyond Danville, and not far from Green River, I crossed this same
breeding place, where the nests for more than three miles spotted every
tree; the leaves not being yet out, I had a fair prospect of them, and
was really astonished at their numbers. A few bodies of pigeons lingered
yet in different parts of the woods, the roaring of whose wings was
heard in various quarters around me.

"The vast quantity of food which these multitudes consume is a serious
loss to the other animals, such as bears, pigs, squirrels, which are
dependent on the fruits of the forest. I have taken from the crop of a
single wild pigeon a good handful of the kernels of beech nuts
intermixed with acorns and chesnuts. To form a rough estimate of the
daily consumption of one of these immense flocks, let us first attempt
to calculate the numbers above mentioned, as seen in passing between
Frankfort and the Indian Territory. If we suppose this column to have
been one mile in breadth (and I believe it to have been much more), and
that it moved at the rate of one mile in a minute, four hours, the time
it continued passing, would make its whole length two hundred and forty
miles. Again, supposing that each square yard of this moving body
comprehended three pigeons, the square yards in the whole space,
multiplied by three, would give two thousand two hundred and thirty
millions two hundred and seventy-two thousand pigeons!--an almost
incredible multitude, and yet far below the actual amount. Computing
each of these to consume half a pint of mast (nuts, and other seeds of
trees) daily, the whole quantity, at this rate, would equal seventeen
millions four hundred and twenty-four thousand bushels per day! Heaven
has wisely and graciously given to these birds rapidity of flight, and a
disposition to range over vast uncultivated tracts of the earth;
otherwise they must have perished in the districts where they resided,
or devoured the whole productions of agriculture, as well as those of
the forests.

"The appearance of large detached flocks of these birds in the air, and
the various evolutions they display, are strikingly picturesque and
interesting. In descending the Ohio by myself, I often rested on my oars
to contemplate their aerial manoeuvres. A column of eight or ten miles
in length would appear from Kentucky high in air, steering across to
