    warmth
    in-stead'
    star'-ing
    spar-row
    stopped
    crowd
    cush'-ion
    mid'-dle
    gar'-den
    know

1. It was very hot, the sky was blue, and the air was full of the
humming and buzzing of bees and flies. A white butterfly flitted by, but
soon went away over the garden-wall.

2. Bee after bee, and fly after fly, settled on the sunflowers and
hunted for honey. Dora and Harry watched for a long time.

3. 'The sunflower is like a little sun,' said Dora.

'And it loves the sun,' said her mother, who was snipping off dead roses
close by; 'it always turns to look at it. See, its face is towards the
sun now. And if you look again before sunset you will find the flower
turned to it still.'

4. 'How strange!' said Dora.

[Illustration: Sunflower.]

'And it has such a strong stalk,' said Harry. 'You would not think that
it could turn round. It must be alive!'

'Of course it is alive!'

'But, I mean, it must feel, or why should it turn and turn to get the
light and warmth?'

5. 'How ragged all the stalks and leaves are!' said Dora. 'I wish they
would make themselves tidy instead of always staring at the sun. Why are
there so many holes in the leaves?'

6. 'Grubs have been eating them. Our friend Mr Sparrow must have been
away lately!'

7. Here mother stopped snipping at her rose-trees, and came up to one of
the sunflowers.

8. 'There is something I want you to see,' she said. 'You think this is
one big flower, but it is really a crowd of little flowers. Look! Can
you think of another flower that is something like it?'

9. Harry and Dora shook their heads.

'It is very small,' mother went on, 'with a cushion in the middle like
this, and rays standing out all round like these.'

10. 'Does it grow on a tree?'

'No.'

'In this garden?'

'No.'

'In the fields?'

'Yes.'

'Oh, I know!' cried Harry. 'It is the daisy.'




MERRY WORKERS.


    wheels
    bus'-y
    i'-dle
    brook'-lets
    ripp'-ling
    sky'-lark
    lis'-ten
    hon'-ey
    mer'-ri-ly
    hum'-ming
    e-nough'
    wea'-ry

    1.  Tell me what the mill-wheels say,
        Always turning night and day;
        When we sleep and when we wake,
        What a busy sound they make!
        Never idle, never still,
        What a worker is the mill!

    2.  What is it that the brooklets say,
        Rippling onward day by day?
        Sweet as skylark on the wing,
        Ripple, ripple--thus they sing.
        Never idle, never still,
        Always working with a will!

    3.  Listen to the honey-bee,
        Flying now so merrily
        Here and there with busy hum--
        Humming, drumming, drumming, drum.
        Never idle, never still,
        Humming, drumming--hum it will!

    4.  Like the mill, the brook, the bee,
        May it now be said of me
        That I'm always busy too,
        For there's work enough to do.
        If I work, then, with a will,
        It will be but playing still;
        Ever merry, never weary,
        It will be but playing still.




THE ROSE.


    bas'-ket
    wo'-man
    vil'-lage
    sweet'-ly
    cab'-bage
    be-cause'
    stooped
    smile
    thorns
    yel'-low
    a-greed'
    win'-ter

1. Mother went back to her roses, and soon called for a little basket,
saying that Dora and Harry should take a few to an old woman who lived
in the village.

2. 'Poor granny,' she said, 'is so fond of roses, and she can never get
out now to see them. Which shall we pick for her?'

3. 'Some of these white ones,' said Dora.

'I think she would like these red ones,' said Harry, 'they smell so
sweetly.'

4. Mother cut one or two of each, and then a moss-rose, which looked as
if it had moss growing round it, and then a pink cabbage-rose.

5. 'What has it to do with cabbage?' asked Harry.

'It is only called cabbage because it is so big and round.'

6. 'I like it the best of all,' said Dora, and stooped to smell it,
putting her nose far down into the sweet, deep cup: 'it is such a nice
rose!'

[Illustration: Wild Rose.]

[Illustration: Garden Rose.]

7. 'Yes, I am very fond of it, and of all roses,' said mother, looking
at her bushes with a smile, 'but I almost think I like the wild ones
best. Do you know that the wild rose is the mother of all these? Once
upon a time all roses were wild.'

8. Harry and Dora did not think that wild roses were very like garden
roses. 'But they both have thorns,' they said.

9. 'Look at them as you go along. There are some bushes not far from the
bottom of the lane, after you turn round to go to the village. I don't
think you will find many roses left, but you will see their fruit. They
are the birds' fruit-trees.'

10. 'What can mother mean?' they asked as they went along.

But they soon found out. The bushes were covered with hips; some green,
others yellow, one or two quite red.

11. They agreed to leave them for the birds. Dora said 'They would be
sure to want them in the winter.'

[Illustration]




WOOD.

[Illustration: Making the Doll's House.]


    min'-er-al
    cop'-per
    zinc
    chalk
    gummed
    climbed
    knees
    eve'-nings
    tools
    dead
    thought
    oak
    beech
    birch
    wil'-low
    build'-ing

1. The little mineral box was made, and Harry and Dora put in the lumps
of lead, iron, copper, tin, zinc, chalk, and slate. Father wrote the
names on tiny slips of paper and gummed them on.

2. Then he said that he was going to make Dora a doll's house. On
hearing this, Dora first jumped about for joy, and then climbed up on
her father's knees to kiss and hug him.

3. The doll's house was not made all at once. It had to be done bit by
bit in the evenings after father had come home from work and had his
tea.

4. Dora and Harry always helped him, or stood by and talked, played with
bits of wood, and turned over the tools in the box.

5. They said that saw-dust should be called wood-dust; and they found
out that wood was called tree when it was alive, and tree was called
wood when it was dead. They thought this very funny.

6. They also learned that there were as many kinds of wood as there were
trees.

'Some wood is hard,' said their father, 'some is half-hard, and some is
soft.'

'Soft wood!' cried Dora.

7. 'Well, not soft like butter! But softer than oak, beech, birch, and
elm'----

'The trunk of an oak-tree is lying where the rabbits live,' said Harry,
in a great hurry. 'We often play on it. I know that it is hard. What
sort of wood are you making the doll's house of?'

8. 'Soft wood. It is a bit of pine. So is the box that holds the
minerals. I should find it hard work to cut oak.

'Now, there is one kind of wood so soft that you can bend it. It is
called willow, and baskets are made of it.

'But oak was once used in building the great strong ships.'




COAL.

PART 1.


    win'-dow
    shov'-el
    spade
    coal
    tum'-bled
    con-tent'
    won'-der-ing
    earth
    cage
    stretch'-ing
    en'-gine
    doz'-en

1. 'Here comes the coal,' said Harry, looking out of the window.
'Mother, may we help Jim to get it in? I can have the big shovel, and
Dora the little one. I should like to see the cart upset! What fun it
will be!'

2. Crash came the coal on the ground. Then the coal-man drew his horse
and cart away, and set to work with a spade to fill the little
coal-place.

3. The dog jumped, and got in every one's way. He wanted to help, too,
but did not know how. Dora tumbled over the heap and bumped her head, so
she thought she would be content with watching Jim and Harry. But Harry
was soon tired, and Jim was left to go on alone.

4. 'Where does coal come from, Jim?' he asked.

'Out of the ground, my lad.'

'Does it? Do you dig for it?'

'I don't. But I know somebody who does.'

5. 'If I were to dig for it, should I find any, Jim?'

'Not you! Why, you have to go down ever such a long way before you can
even begin to dig.'

6. 'How do you get down?'

'You go down in a thing they call a cage. You can't walk down, you know.
It is like going down a deep pit. They call it a mine.'

7. 'Oh, I have heard of coal-mines!'

Dora was taking up one little lump of coal after another, and wondering
why it was so shiny if it had really come out of the earth.

8. Harry went on. 'How do they let the cage down? Have you ever been
down?'

[Illustration: Coal-miners going down to work.]

'I have been down once,' said Jim, stopping in his work and stretching
himself. 'This is the way. There is an engine at the top of the
shaft'----

'What is the shaft?'

9. 'The pit I told you about. The engine is fixed there and it lets
down the cage and pulls it up again. Half-a-dozen men or so can go in it
at a time.'

'It must be very strong.'

10. 'Yes, it is, and it has strong chains to hold it. It goes up and
down all day long, bringing up the coal.'




COAL.

PART 2.


    re'-al-ly
    eas'-i-ly
    slic'-es
    straight
    knife
    be-tween'
    met'-al
    fetched
    pic'-tures
    an'-i-mal
    whole
    for'-ests
    thou'-sands
    piec'-es
    to-geth'-er
    puz'-zles

1. Next day the children asked their mother to tell them what coal
really was. Harry did not think it was a stone, because he had broken
two or three lumps with a hammer. He found that it broke much more
easily than stone.

2. Besides, it did not fly all into sharp bits, but came off in slices;
and he saw that it had straight lines along it. When he poked his knife
in between these lines, he could take off a slice of coal at once!

3. Dora did not think it was a metal, because she had learnt that iron
would melt in a fire and flow like water. 'Coal does not melt,' she
said, 'every one knows that!'

4. She took a small lump out of the coal-box, and Harry did the same.
Mother then fetched some pictures, and one or two other things, and the
talk began.

5. 'It is no wonder that you can't guess what coal is! It does not look
at all like what it was at first. It was not always in the ground; it
used to live on the top and get the air and sunshine.'

6. 'It must have been alive,' said Harry. 'Was it an animal?'

'No.'

'Then it was a plant!' cried Dora.

7. 'Well, it is all that is left of many plants and trees, whole forests
of plants and trees, that grew long, long ago.'

'Before you were born, mother?'

8. 'Yes, long before that! It was hundreds and thousands of years ago.
It was so far back that the trees were not like the trees we have now.
Many of them were big ferns. Think of a fern grown up to be a tree! And
many were great horse-tails. You know what a horse-tail is?'

9. 'Oh yes,' said Dora, 'we find them in the ditch down the lane. It is
such fun pulling them to pieces and putting them together again--like
puzzles!'

[Illustration: Horse-tail.]

10. 'Those trees must have been very strange,' said Harry. 'They would
not be nice to climb. But there were no boys in those days, so it did
not matter.'

[Illustration]




FIRE.


    min'-er-al
    coal
    fen'-der
    prop'-er
    walk'-ing
    laugh'-ing
    grate
    cru'-el
    Lon'-don
    smoke
    al-read'-y
    flame
    blaze
    beast
    cage
    pic'-tures

1. 'Don't you think,' said Harry, 'that a bit of coal would be a good
thing for our mineral box?'

2. 'I do,' said his father. 'Get a little lump, and put it in. And, by
the way, we want more coal on the fire. I must get some.'

3. 'How nice a fire is on a cold day!' said Dora, sitting down on the
fender, to be as near to it as she could.

'Very nice,' said her mother, 'in its proper place--in the grate.'

4. 'Ah, we should not like it to come walking about the room!' said
Harry, laughing. 'There would soon be no room'----

'And no house!' said Dora, shaking her head. 'And then what should we
do?'

5. Father came back with the coal, and put some into the grate, saying:

'Fire is a good servant but a bad master. If it gets its own way it is a
cruel thing. It would burn a town down. It once burned big London.'

6. Harry was looking at one of the lumps that had been put on the fire.
Smoke was coming out of it already. A flame burst out in front, and soon
the whole lump was in a blaze.

7. 'It seems such a pity that it should all be burned up,' said Harry,
'when it took so long to make.'

'That is the way of fire,' said father, 'it eats up everything, and when
it has nothing more to feed on it comes to an end--it goes out, we say.'

8. 'We don't want it to go out, and so we keep on feeding it,' said
mother. 'It is like a wild beast in a cage.'

'Now look at the coal!' said father.

9. By this time the lumps were red and very hot. The children went down
on their knees to look for pictures in the fire. They soon saw what
looked like men and dogs, rocks, hills, and trees, and at last a great
cat with red-hot eyes and a very curly tail.




OBJECT LESSONS.




THE CAT.                      [_Page 7._


1. The cat lives in and about our homes; so we call it a domestic
animal.

2. It belongs to the same tribe of animals as the lion and tiger. They
