
"Storm! What storm? The weather has been splendid. We cannot wish
for anything better. It has been just as you see it now--a bright
sun, and just enough wind for her to carry whole sail."

The lads both looked astonished.

"Then why should we roll and toss about so much?" Harry asked.

"Roll and toss! Nonsense, lad! There has been a little movement, of
course, as there always must be when there is a brisk wind; but as
for rolling and tossing, you must wait till you see a storm, then
you will begin to have an idea of what the sea is."

The boys both felt rather crestfallen, for they had flattered
themselves that their sufferings were caused by something quite out
of the ordinary way, and it was mortifying to know that the weather
had been really fine, and there had been nothing even approaching a
storm.

The rest of the voyage was a pleasant one. They found they had
regained their appetites, and were able to enjoy their meals; still
they were not sorry when they saw the coast of Sweden, and, a few
hours later, entered the port of Gottenburg, where Sir Marmaduke,
for the first time, came on deck--looking a mere shadow of his
former jovial self.

"Well, lads," he said, "I was glad to hear that you got through
this business quicker than I did. Here we are in Sweden, and here
I, at least, am likely to stay, unless I can pass by land through
Holland, France, and across from Calais, for never again will I
venture upon a long voyage. I have been feeling very ungrateful,
for, over and over again, I wished that you had not rescued me, as
death on Tower Hill would have been nothing to the agonies that I
have been enduring!"

As soon as the vessel was warped alongside the quay, they landed,
and put up at an hotel, Sir Marmaduke insisting that the ground was
as bad as the sea, as it kept on rising and falling beneath his
feet. Mr. Jervoise agreed to return on board the following day, to
fetch the luggage, which would by that time have been got up from
the hold.

At the hotel, they met several persons able to speak English, and
from them learnt how matters had been going on since they had last
heard. The town and fortress of Tonningen had fallen, after a
vigorous defence; it had been bombarded for eight days, and had
repulsed one assault, but had been captured at the second attack.
England and Holland had agreed to furnish fleets, and an army of
twelve thousand Swedes were in readiness to march, at once, while
other armies were being formed. The king had, the week before,
reviewed the army gathered at Malmoe; and had, on the previous day,
arrived at Gottenburg, accompanied by the Duke of Holstein.

Mr. Jervoise went, the same afternoon, to find out some of his
friends who resided at Gottenburg. He was fortunate enough to find
one of them, who was able to inform him that his wife's cousin was
now a major, in one of the newly-raised regiments stationed at
Gottenburg.

He found him without difficulty. Major Jamieson was delighted at
the coming of his former friend.

"You are the last person I expected to see here, Jervoise. It is
true that, when we met last, you said that if matters went wrong in
England you should come out here, instead of taking refuge in
France; but, as everything is quiet, I had little hope of seeing
you again, until I paid another visit to Scotland, of which at
present there is but little prospect. Have you grown tired of doing
nothing, and is it a desire to see something of a stirring life
that has brought you over here?"

Mr. Jervoise related, shortly, the events by which he had been
driven into exile, and expressed his desire to serve in the army of
Sweden, and that his son and young Carstairs should also enter the
army.

"They are but sixteen yet," he said, "but are stout, active
fellows, and could hold their own in a day's march or in a stout
fight with many men. Of course, if I could obtain commissions for
them, all the better, but if not they are ready to enlist in the
ranks. Roughing it will do them no harm."

"Their age is no drawback," Major Jamieson said. "There are many no
older, both in the ranks and as officers. Men in Sweden of all ages
and of all ranks are joining, for this unprovoked attack, on the
part of Poland, has raised the national spirit to boiling heat. The
chief difficulty is their and your ignorance of the language. Were
it not for that, I could obtain, from the minister of war,
commissions for you at once."

He sat thinking for some minutes, in silence.

"I think I see how it can be managed, Jervoise. I have some twenty
or thirty Scotchmen in my regiment, and I know a colonel who has as
many in his, and these I could manage to get, in exchange for an
equal number of my Swedes. Ships are coming daily from Scotland,
and most of them bring young fellows who have come out to join the
army.

"You know how the Scots fought, under Gustavus Adolphus, and there
is scarce a glen in Scotland where there are not traditions of
fathers, or grandfathers, who fought in Hepburn's Green Brigade.
Therefore, it is natural that, seeing there is no chance of
military service at home, there should be many young fellows coming
out to join.

"I can go across this evening to the minister of war, who is a
personal friend of mine, and get him to give you permission to
raise a company of Scotchmen for service. I shall, of course, point
out to him that you will enlist them here. I shall show him the
advantage of these men being gathered together, as their ignorance
of the language makes them, for some time, useless as soldiers if
enrolled in a Swedish regiment. I shall mention that I have twenty
in my own corps, who are at present positively useless, and in fact
a source of great trouble, owing to their understanding nothing
that is said to them, and shall propose that they be at once handed
over to you. As to the exchange, we can manage that quietly between
ourselves. You would have no difficulty with fresh-landed men, as
these will naturally be delighted at joining a company of their own
countrymen."

"Thank you very heartily, Jamieson. This altogether exceeds my
hopes, but I fear that I know nothing of drilling them."

"Two of my men are sergeants, and, having been in the army for some
years, speak Swedish well. They will do the drilling at first. The
manoeuvres are not complicated, and, for a pound or two, they will
be glad to teach you all the orders necessary. I don't know how you
are situated as to money, but I can assure you my purse is at your
service."

"Thank you; I am, in that respect, excellently well provided, as is
my friend Sir Marmaduke. We have both made provision for unexpected
contingencies."

"Then, if you will call tomorrow after breakfast, I shall probably
have your commission ready. As a matter of course, you will have
the appointment of your own officers, and will only have to send in
their names. Each company is from a hundred and forty to a hundred
and fifty strong, and has a captain, two lieutenants, and two
ensigns."

Mr. Jervoise's news was, on his return to the inn, received with
delight by the two lads; and Sir Marmaduke said:

"I wish I could shake off twenty of my years, Jervoise, and join
also. Well, well, I daresay I shall get on comfortably enough. I
know there are a good many English and Scotch Jacobites settled in
the town or neighbourhood, and I shall not be long before I meet
someone I know.

"As the matter seems settled, I should advise you lads to go down,
the first thing in the morning, to the wharves. There is no saying
when ships may come in. Moreover, it is likely enough that you may
light upon young fellows who have landed within the last few weeks,
and who have been kept so far, by their ignorance of the language,
from enlisting."

"That is a very good idea," Mr. Jervoise said. "They will be
delighted to hear a friendly voice, and be only too glad to enlist
in a Scottish company. You can say that each man will have a free
outfit given him."

Accordingly, the next morning early, the two lads went down to the
wharf. Presently they saw three young fellows, who were evidently
Scotch by their dress and caps, talking together. They strolled up
near enough to catch what they were saying.

"It is hard," one said, "that, now we are here, we can make no one
understand us, and it seems to me we had far better have stayed at
home."

"We shall find some one who speaks our language presently, Jock,"
another said more cheerfully. "The old man, where we lodged last
night, said in his broken tongue, that we had but to go over to
Malmoe, or some such place as that, where there is a big camp, and
walk up to an officer and say we wish to enlist."

"Oh, that is all very well," the other grumbled; "but, if he did
not understand us, we should be no better off than before."

"Are you wanting to enlist?" Harry said, going up to them.

The men gave an exclamation of pleasure, at being addressed in
their own tongue.

"That we do, sir. If you can put us in the way, we shall be
grateful."

"That I can do easily," Harry said. "My father is raising a company
of Scotch and Englishmen, for the regiment commanded by Colonel
Jamieson. This will be far better than joining a Swedish company,
where no one will understand your language, and you will not be
able to make out the orders given. My father will give each man who
joins a free outfit."

"That is the very thing for us, sir. We expected to find Scotch
regiments here, as there were in the old times, and we had hoped to
join them; but whether it is a company or regiment, it makes but
little difference, so that we are with those who speak our tongue."

"Very well, then. If you come to the Lion Inn, at nine o'clock, you
will see my father there. If you know of any others in the same
mind as yourselves, and willing to join, bring them with you."

"There are ten or twelve others who came over in the ship with us,
two days since, and I have no doubt they will be fine and glad to
join."

"Well, see if you can hunt them up, and bring them with you."

On returning to the inn, they found that Mr. Jervoise had already
received his commission as captain, and, by ten o'clock, fifteen
young Scotchmen had been sworn in. All of them had brought
broadswords and dirks, and Captain Jervoise at once set to work
buying, at various shops, iron head pieces, muskets, and other
accoutrements.

During the next three days ten other English and Scotchmen had
joined, and then a ship came in, from which they gathered another
four-and-twenty recruits. Arms had already been purchased for them,
and, on the following day, Captain Jervoise marched off to Malmoe
with his forty-nine recruits. Harry accompanied them, Charlie being
left behind, with his father, to gather another fifty men as the
ships arrived.

A week later this number was obtained, and Charlie started with
them for the camp, Sir Marmaduke accompanying them on horseback, in
order to aid Charlie in maintaining order among his recruits. He
had already fixed upon a small house, just outside the town, and,
having met two or three old friends, who had been obliged to leave
England at William's accession, he already began to feel at home.

"Don't you fidget about me, Charlie," he said. "Ferrers tells me
that there are at least a score of Jacobites here, and that they
form quite a society among themselves. Living is very cheap, and he
will introduce me to a man of business, who will see that my money
is well invested."



Chapter 5: Narva.


For the next fortnight, drilling went on from morning till night,
the officers receiving instructions privately from the sergeants,
and further learning the words of command by standing by while the
men were being drilled. At the end of that time, both officers and
men were sufficiently instructed to carry out the simple movements
which were, alone, in use in those days.

It was not, however, until two months later that they were called
upon to act. The English and Dutch fleets had arrived, and effected
a junction with that of Sweden, and the Danish fleet had shut
themselves up in the port of Copenhagen, which was closely
blockaded. A large army had crossed to Zeeland, and repulsed the
Danes, who had endeavoured to prevent their landing, and had then
marched up to within sight of the walls of Copenhagen, which they
were preparing to besiege; when the King of Denmark, alarmed at
this unexpected result of his aggression on Holstein, conceded
every point demanded, and peace was signed.

The negotiations were carried on in Holland, and the Swedes were
extremely angry, when they found that they were baulked of their
expected vengeance on their troublesome neighbours. The peace,
however, left Charles the Twelfth at liberty to turn his attention
to his other foes, and to hurry to the assistance of Riga, which
was beleaguered by the Saxons and Poles; and of Narva, against
which city the Russians had made several unsuccessful assaults.

Without losing an hour, the king crossed to Malmoe. The troops
there were ordered to embark, immediately, in the vessels in the
harbour. They then sailed to Revel, where the Swedish commander,
Welling, had retired from the neighbourhood of Riga, his force
being too small to meet the enemy in the open field.

No sooner had the troops landed than the king reviewed them, and
General Welling was ordered, at once, to march so as to place
himself between the enemy and Wesenberg, where a large amount of
provisions and stores for the use of the army had been collected.

The two lieutenants, in the company of Captain Jervoise, were young
Scotchmen of good family, who had three months before come over and
obtained commissions, and both had, at the colonel's request, been
transferred to his regiment, and promoted to the rank of
lieutenants. Captain Jervoise and his four officers messed
together, and were a very cheerful party; indeed, their commander,
to the surprise both of his son and Charlie, had quite shaken off
his quiet and somewhat gloomy manner, and seemed to have become
quite another man, in the active and bracing life in which he was
now embarked. Cunningham and Forbes were both active young men,
full of life and energy, while the boys thoroughly enjoyed roughing
it, and the excitement and animation of their daily work.

Sometimes they slept in the open air, sometimes on the floor of a
cottage. Their meals were rough but plentiful. The king's orders
against plundering were very severe, and, even when in Denmark, the
country people, having nothing to complain of, had brought in
supplies regularly. Here in Linovia they were in Swedish dominions,
but there was little to be purchased, for the peasantry had been
brought to ruin by the foraging parties of the Russians and Poles.

There was some disappointment, that the enemy had fallen back at
the approach of Welling's force, but all felt sure that it would
not be long before they met them, for the king would assuredly lose
no time in advancing against them, as soon as his army could be
brought over. They were not, however, to wait for the arrival of
the main force, although the cavalry only took part in the first
affair. General Welling heard that a force of three thousand
Circassians had taken up their quarters in a village, some fifteen
miles away, and sent six hundred horse, under Majors Patkul and
Tisenbausen, to surprise them. They were, at first, successful and,
attacking the Circassians, set fire to the village, and were
engaged in slaughtering the defenders, when twenty-one squadrons of
Russian cavalry came up and fell upon them, attacking them on all
sides, and posting themselves so as to cut off their retreat. The
Swedes, however, gathered in a body, and charged the Russians so
furiously that they cut a way through their ranks, losing, however,
many of their men, while Major Patkul and another officer were made
prisoners.

The king was at Revel when this engagement took place, and,
although but few of the troops had arrived, he was too impatient
for action to wait until the coming of the fleet. He therefore
marched to Wesenberg, with his bodyguard and a few troops from
Revel. He at once despatched a thousand men, to cover the frontier,
and issued orders for the rest of the troops to leave the whole of
their baggage behind them, to take three days' provision in their
haversacks, and to prepare to march the next morning.

Major Jamieson came into the cottage, occupied by Captain Jervoise
and his officers, late in the evening. They had a blazing fire, for
it was now the middle of November, and the nights were very sharp.

"Well, Jervoise, what do you think of the orders?" he asked, as he
seated himself on a log that had been brought in for the fire.

"I have not thought much about them, except that we are going to do
a long and quick march somewhere."

"And where is that somewhere, do you think?"

"That, I have not the slightest idea."

"You would not say that it was to Narva?"

"I certainly should not, considering that we have but five thousand
infantry, and three thousand cavalry, and of these a large number
have been so weakened, by fever, as to be unfit for fighting; while
at Narva, report says there are eighty thousand Russians, in a
strongly intrenched camp."

"Well, that is where we are going, Jervoise, nevertheless. At
least, that is what the colonel has told me."

"He must have been surely jesting, major. We may be going to push
forward in that direction, and occupy some strong position until
the army comes up, but it would be the height of madness to attack
an enemy, in a strong position, and just tenfold our force."

"Well, we shall see," Jamieson said coolly. "It is certain that
Narva cannot hold out much longer, and I know that the king has set
his heart on relieving it; but it does seem somewhat too dangerous
an enterprise to attack the Russians. At any rate, that is the
direction in which we are going, tomorrow. It is a good seventy
miles distant, and, as they say that the whole country has been
devastated, and the villagers have all fled, it is evident that
when the three days' bread and meat we carry are exhausted we shall
have to get some food, out of the Russian camp, if nowhere else."

Captain Jervoise laughed, as did the others.

"We can live for a short time on the horses, Jamieson, if we are
hard pushed for it, though most of them are little beyond skin and
bone."

"That is true. The cavalry are certainly scarcely fit for service.
Welling's troops have had a very hard time of it, and we may thank
our stars, though we did not think so at the time, that we were
kept nearly three months at Malmoe, instead of being here with
Welling."

"But do you seriously think, major, that the king means to attack
the Russians?" Cunningham asked.

"My own idea is that he does, Cunningham. I cannot see what else
there is for us to do. At any rate, if he does, you may be sure
that we shall make a tough fight for it. The cavalry showed, the
other day, that they can stand up against many times their number
of the Russians, and if they can do it, I fancy we can. There is
one thing, the very audacity of such an attempt is in its favour."

"Well, we will all do our best, you may be sure; but since
Thermopylae, I doubt if men have fought against longer odds."

The next morning the men fell in. Captain Jervoise, who, like all
of his rank, was mounted, took his place at the head of his
company, and the little army marched away from Wesenberg. It was a
dreary march to Purts, but the sight of the ruined villages, and
devastated fields, aroused a feeling of indignation and fury among
the troops, and a fierce longing to attack men who had so
ruthlessly spread ruin through a fertile country. Orders were
issued, that evening, that the men were to husband their provisions
as much as possible, and the order was more strictly obeyed than
such orders usually are, for the men saw, for themselves, that
there was no possibility of obtaining fresh supplies in the wasted
country, and were well aware that there existed no train of waggons
and horses capable of bringing up stores from Wesenberg.

There were a few aged men and women remaining at Purts, and from
these they learned that their next day's march would take them to a
very difficult pass, which was held by six hundred of the Russian
cavalry, together with a force of infantry and some guns. It was
the intention of the king to encamp that evening near the pass,
and, when within three or four miles of it, General Meidel, who had
with him the quartermaster of the army, and four hundred cavalry,
rode on ahead to choose a site for the camp. He presently saw a
large body of Russian foragers in front of him, and sent back to
the king for permission to attack them. Charles ordered the army to
continue its march, and, hurrying forward with some of his
officers, joined General Meidel and charged the foragers, killing
many, taking others prisoners, and putting the rest to flight. He
followed close upon their heels, and rode right up to the mouth of
the pass, in spite of the heavy fire of artillery and musketry
opened by the Russians.

He at once determined to take advantage of the alarm produced by
the defeat of the Russian cavalry, and, although darkness was now
drawing on, brought up some of his infantry and artillery, and
