soon, two or three dozen birds' eggs were to repose in fleece-lined
nooks: for Jabe Slocum's collection of three summers (every egg acquired
in the most honorable manner, as he explained), had all passed into
Timothy's hands that very day, in consideration of various services well
and conscientiously performed. What a delight it was to handle the
precious bits of things, like porcelain in their daintiness!--to sort
out the tender blue of the robin, the speckled beauty of the sparrow; to
put the pee-wee's and the thrush's each in its place, with a swift throb
of regret that there would have been another little soft throat bursting
with a song, if some one had not taken this pretty egg. And there was,
over and above all, the never ending marvel of the one humming-bird's
egg that lay like a pearl in Timothy's slender brown hand. Too tiny to
be stroked like the others, only big enough to be stealthily kissed. So
tiny that he must get out of bed two or three times in the night to see
if it is safe. So tiny that he has horrible fears lest it should slip
out or be stolen, and so he must take the box to the window and let the
moonlight shine upon the fleecy cotton, and find that it is still there,
and cover it safely over again and creep back to bed, wishing that he
might see a "thumb's bigness of burnished plumage" sheltering it with
her speck of a breast. Ah! to have a little humming-bird's egg to love,
and to feel that it was his very own, was something to Timothy, as it is
to all starved human hearts full of love that can find no outlet.

Miss Vilda was knitting, and Samantha was shelling peas, on the
honeysuckle porch. It had been several days since Miss Cummins had gone
to the city, and had come back no wiser than she went, save that she had
made a somewhat exhaustive study of the slums, and had acquired a more
intimate knowledge of the ways of the world than she had ever possessed
before. She had found Minerva Court, and designated it on her return as
a "sink of iniquity," to which Afric's sunny fountains, India's coral
strand, and other tropical localities frequented by missionaries were
virtuous in comparison.

"For you don't expect anything of black heathens," said she; "but there
ain't any question in my mind about the accountability of folks livin'
in a Christian country, where you can wear clothes and set up to an
air-tight stove and be comfortable, to say nothin' of meetinghouses
every mile or two, and Bible Societies and Young Men's and Young Women's
Christian Associations, and the gospel free to all with the exception of
pew rents and contribution boxes, and those omitted when it's
necessary."

She affirmed that the ladies and gentlemen whose acquaintance she had
made in Minerva Court were, without exception, a "mess of malefactors,"
whose only good point was that, lacking all human qualities, they didn't
care who she was, nor where she came from, nor what she came for; so
that as a matter of fact she had escaped without so much as leaving her
name and place of residence. She learned that Mrs. Nancy Simmons had
sought pastures new in Montana; that Miss Ethel Montmorency still
resided in the metropolis, but did not choose to disclose her modest
dwelling-place to the casual inquiring female from the rural districts;
that a couple of children had disappeared from Minerva Court, if they
remembered rightly, but that there was no disturbance made about the
matter as it saved several people much trouble; that Mrs. Morrison had
had no relations, though she possessed a large circle of admiring
friends; that none of the admiring friends had called since her death or
asked about the children; and finally that Number 3 had been turned into
a saloon, and she was welcome to go in and slake her thirst for
information with something more satisfactory than she could get outside.

The last straw, and one that would have broken the back of any
self-respecting (unmarried) camel in the universe, was the offensive
belief, on the part of the Minerva Courtiers, that the rigid Puritan
maiden who was conducting the examination was the erring mother of the
children, visiting (in disguise) their former dwelling-place. The
conversation on this point becoming extremely pointed and jocose, Miss
Cummins finally turned and fled, escaping to the railway station as fast
as her trembling legs could carry her. So the trip was a fruitless one,
and the mystery that enshrouded Timothy and Lady Gay was as impenetrable
as ever.

"I wish I'd 'a' gone to the city with you," remarked Samantha. "Not that
I could 'a' found out anything more 'n you did, for I guess there ain't
anybody thereabouts that knows more 'n we do, and anybody 't wants the
children won't be troubled with the relation. But I'd like to give them
bold-faced jigs 'n' hussies a good piece o' my mind for once! You're too
timersome, Vildy! I b'lieve I'll go some o' these days yet, and carry a
good stout umbrella in my hand too. It says in a book somewhar's that
there's insults that can only be wiped out in blood. Ketch 'em hintin'
that I'm the mother of anybody, that's all! I declare I don' know what
our Home Missionary Societies's doin' not to regenerate them places or
exterminate 'em, one or t' other. Somehow our religion don't take holt
as it ought to. It takes a burnin' zeal to clean out them slum places,
and burnin' zeal ain't the style nowadays. As my father used to say,
'Religion's putty much like fish 'n' pertetters; if it's hot it's good,
'n' if it's cold 'tain't wuth a'--well, a short word come in there, but
I won't say it. Speakin' o' religion, I never had any experience in
teachin', but I didn't s'pose there was any knack 'bout teachin'
religion, same as there is 'bout teachin' readin' 'n' 'rithmetic, but I
hed hard work makin' Timothy understand that catechism you give him to
learn the other Sunday. He was all upsot with doctrine when he come to
say his lesson. Now you can't scare some children with doctrine, no
matter how hot you make it, or mebbe they don't more 'n half believe it;
but Timothy's an awful sensitive creeter, 'n' when he come to that
answer to the question 'What are you then by nature? An enemy to God, a
child of Satan, and an heir of hell,' he hid his head on my shoulder and
bust right out cryin'. 'How many Gods is there?' s' e, after a spell.
'Land!' thinks I, 'I knew he was a heathen, but if he turns out to be an
idolater, whatever shall I do with him!' 'Why, where've you ben fetched
up?' s' I. 'There's only one God, the High and Mighty Ruler of the
Univarse,' s' I. 'Well,' s' e', 'there must be more 'n one, for the God
in this lesson isn't like the one in Miss Dora's book at all!' Land
sakes! I don't want to teach catechism agin in a hurry, not tell I've
hed a little spiritual instruction from the minister. The fact is,
Vildy, that our b'liefs, when they're picked out o' the Bible and set
down square and solid 'thout any softening down 'n' explainin' that they
ain't so bad as they sound, is too strong meat for babes. Now I'm
Orthodox to the core" (here she lowered her voice as if there might be a
stray deacon in the garden), "but 'pears to me if I was makin' out
lessons for young ones I wouldn't fill 'em so plumb full o' brimstun.
Let 'em do a little suthin' to deserve it 'fore you scare 'em to death,
say I."

"Jabe explained it all out to him after supper. It beats all how he gets
on with children."

"I'd ruther hear how he explained it," answered Samantha sarcastically.
"He's great on expoundin' the Scripters jest now. Well, I hope it'll
last. Land sakes! you'd think nobody ever experienced religion afore,
he's so set up 'bout it. You'd s'pose he kep' the latch-key o' the
heavenly mansions right in his vest pocket, to hear him go on. He
couldn't be no more stuck up 'bout it if he'd ben one o' the two
brothers that come over in three ships!"

"There goes Elder Nichols," said Miss Vilda. "Now there's a plan we
hadn't thought of. We might take the children over to Purity Village. I
think likely the Shakers would take 'em. They like to get young folks
and break 'em into their doctrines."

"Tim 'd make a tiptop Shaker," laughed Samantha. "He'd be an Elder afore
he was twenty-one. I can seem to see him now, with his hair danglin'
long in his neck, a blue coat buttoned up to his chin, and his hands
see-sawin' up 'n' down, prancin' round in them solemn dances."

"Tim would do well enough, but I ain't so sure of Gay. They'd have their
hands full, I guess!"

"I guess they would. Anybody that wanted to make a Shaker out o' her
would 'a' had to begin with her grandmother; and that wouldn't 'a' done
nuther, for they don't b'lieve in marryin', and the thing would 'a'
stopped right there, and Gray wouldn't never 'a' been born int' the
world."

"And been a great sight better off," interpolated Miss Vilda.

"Now don't talk that way, Vildy. Who knows what lays ahead o' that
child? The Lord may be savin' her up to do some great work for Him," she
added, with a wild flight of the imagination.

"She looks like it, don't she?" asked Vilda with a grim intonation; but
her face softened a little as she glanced at Gay asleep on the rustic
bench under the window.

The picture would have struck terror to the sad-eyed aesthete, but an
artist who liked to see colors burn and glow on the canvas would have
been glad to paint her: a little frock of buttercup yellow calico, bare
neck and arms, full of dimples, hair that put the yellow calico to shame
by reason of its tinge of copper, skin of roses and milk that dared the
microscope, red smiling lips, one stocking and ankle-tie kicked off and
five pink toes calling for some silly woman to say "This little pig went
to market" on them, a great bunch of nasturtiums in one warm hand and
the other buried in Rags, who was bursting with the white cat's dinner,
and in such a state of snoring bliss that his tail wagged occasionally,
even in his dreams.

"She don't look like a missionary, if that's what you mean," said
Samantha hotly. "She may not be called 'n' elected to traipse over to
Africy with a Test'ment in one hand 'n' a sun umbreller in the other,
savin' souls by the wholesale; but 't ain't no mean service to go
through the world stealin' into folks' hearts like a ray o' sunshine,
'n' lightin' up every place you step foot in!"

"I ain't sayin' anything against the child, Samanthy Ann; you said
yourself she wa'n't cut out for a Shaker!"

"No more she is," laughed Samantha, when her good humor was restored.
"She'd like the singin' 'n' dancin' well enough, but 't would be hard
work smoothin' the kink out of her hair 'n' fixin' it under one o' their
white Sunday bunnets. She wouldn't like livin' altogether with the
women-folks, nuther. The only way for Gay 'll be to fetch her right up
with the men-folks, 'n' hev her see they ain't no great things, anyway.
Land sakes! If 't warn't for dogs 'n' dark nights, I shouldn't care if I
never see a man; but Gay has 'em all on her string a'ready, from the boy
that brings the cows home for Jabe to the man that takes the butter to
the city. The tin peddler give her a dipper this mornin', and the
fish-man brought her a live fish in a tin-pail. Well, she makes the
house a great sight brighter to live in, you can't deny that, Vildy."

"I ain't denyin' anything in partic'ler. She makes a good deal of work,
I know that much. And I don't want you to get your heart set on one or
both of 'em, for 't won't be no use. We could make out with one of 'em,
I suppose, if we had to, but two is one too many. They seem to set such
store by one another that 't would be like partin' the Siamese twins;
but there, they'd pine awhile, and then they 'd get over it. Anyhow,
they'll have to try."

"Oh yes; you can git over the small-pox, but you'll carry the scars to
your grave most likely. I think 't would be a sin to part them children.
I wouldn't do it no more 'n I'd tear away that scarlit bean that's
twisted itself round 'n' round that pink hollyhock there. I stuck a
stick in the ground, and carried a string to the winder; but I didn't
git at it soon enough, the bean vine kep' on growin' the other way,
towards the hollyhock. Then the other night I got my mad up, 'n' I jest
oncurled it by main force 'n' wropped it round the string, 'n,' if
you'll believe me, I happened to look at it this mornin,' 'n' there it
't was, as nippant as you please, coiled round the hollyhock agin! Then
says I to myself, 'Samantha Ann Ripley, you've known what 't was to be
everlastin'ly hectored 'n' intefered with all your life, now s'posin'
you let that bean have its hollyhock, if it wants it!'"

Miss Vilda looked at her sharply as she said, "Samantha Ann Ripley, I
believe to my soul you're fussin' 'bout Dave Milliken again!

"Well, I ain't! Every time I talk 'bout hollyhocks and scarlit beans I
ain't meanin' Dave Milliken 'n' me,--not by a long chalk! I was only
givin' you my views 'bout partin' them children, that's all!"

"Well, all I can say is," remarked Miss Vilda obstinately, "that those
that's desirous of takin' in two strange children, and boardin' and
lodgin' 'em till they get able to do it for themselves, and runnin' the
resk of their turnin' out heathens and malefactors like the folks they
came from,--can do it if they want to. If I come to see that the baby is
too young to send away anywheres I may keep her a spell, but the boy has
got to go, and that's the end of it. You've been crowdin' me into a
corner about him for a week, and now I've said my say!"

Alas! that tiny humming-bird's egg was crushed to atoms,--crushed by a
boy's slender hand that had held it so gently for very fear of breaking
it. For poor little Timothy Jessup had heard his fate for the second
time, and knew that he must "move on" again, for there was no room for
him at the White Farm.




SCENE XII.

_The Village._

LYDDY PETTIGROVE'S FUNERAL.


Lyddy Pettigrove was dead. Not one person, but a dozen, had called in at
the White Farm to announce this fact and look curiously at Samantha Ann
Ripley to see how she took the news.

To say the truth, the community did not seem to be overpowered by its
bereavement. There seemed to be a general feeling that Mrs. Pettigrove
had never been wanted in Pleasant River, coupled with a mild surprise
that she should have been wanted anywhere else. Speculation was rife as
to who would keep house for Dave Milliken, and whether Samantha Ann
would bury the Ripley-Milliken battle-axe and go to the funeral, and
whether Mis' Pettigrove had left her property to David, as was right, or
to her husband's sister in New Hampshire, which would be a sin and a
shame; but jest as likely as not, though she was well off and didn't
need it no more 'n a toad would a pocket-book, and couldn't bear the
sight o' Lyddy besides,--and whether Mr. Pettigrove's first wife's
relations would be asked to the funeral, bein' as how they hadn't spoke
for years, 'n' wouldn't set on the same side the meetin'-house, but when
you come to that, if only the folks that was on good terms with Lyddy
Pettigrove was asked to the funeral, there'd be a slim attendance,
and--so on.

Aunt Hitty was the most important person in the village on these
occasions. It was she who assisted in the last solemn preparations and
took the last solemn stitches; and when all was done, and she hung her
little reticule on her arm, and started to walk from the house of
bereavement to her own home (where "Si" was anxiously awaiting his
nightly draught of gossip), no royal herald could have been looked for
with greater interest or greeted with greater cordiality. All the
housewives that lived on the direct road were on their doorsteps, so as
not to lose a moment, and all that lived off the road had seen her from
the upstairs windows, and were at the gate to waylay her as she passed.
At such a moment Aunt Hitty's bosom swelled with honest pride, and she
humbly thanked her Maker that she had been bred to the use of scissors
and needle.

Two days of this intoxicating popularity had just passed; the funeral
was over, and she ran in to the White Farm on her way home, to carry a
message, and to see with her own eyes how Samantha Ann Ripley was
comporting herself.

"You didn't git out to the fun'ral, did ye, Samanthy?" she asked, as she
seated herself cosily by the kitchen window.

"No, I didn't. I never could see the propriety o' goin' to see folks
dead that you never went to see alive."

"How you talk! That's one way o' puttin' it! Well, everybody was lookin'
for you, and you missed a very pleasant fun'ral. David 'n' I arranged
everything as neat as wax, and it all went off like clock-work, if I do
say so as shouldn't. Mis' Pettigrove made a beautiful remains."

"I'm glad to hear it. It's the first beautiful thing she ever did make,
I guess!"

"How you talk! Ain't you a leetle hard on Lyddy, Samanthy? She warn't
sech a bad neighbor, and she couldn't help bein' kind o' sour like. She
was born with her teeth on aidge, to begin with, and then she'd ben
through seas o' trouble with them Pettigroves."

"Like enough; but even if folks has ben through seas o' trouble, they
needn't be everlastin'ly spittin' up salt brine. 'Passin' through the
valley of sorrow they make it full o' fountings;' that's what the Psalms
says 'bout bearin' trouble."

"Lyddy warn't much on fountings," said Aunt Hitty contemplatively; "but,
there, we hadn't ought to speak nothin' but good o' the dead. Land
sakes! You'd oughter heard Elder Weekses remarks; they was splendid. We
ain't hed better remarks to any fun'ral here for years. I shouldn't 'a'
suspicioned he was preachin' 'bout Lyddy, though. Our minister's sick
abed, you know, 'n' warn't able to conduct the ex'cises. Si thinks he
went to bed a-purpose, but I wouldn't hev it repeated; so David got
Elder Weeks from Moderation. He warn't much acquainted with the remains,
but he done all the better for that. He's got a wond'ful faculty for
fun'rals. They say he's sent for for miles around. He'd just come from
a fun'ral nine miles the other side o' Moderation, up on the Blueb'ry
road; so he was a leetle mite late, 'n' David 'n' I was as nervous as
witches, for every room was cram full 'n' the thermometer stood at 87 in
the front entry, 'n' the bearers sot out there by the well-curb, with
the sun beatin' down on 'em, 'n' two of 'em, Squire Hicks 'n' Deacon
Dunn, was fast asleep. Inside, everything was as silent 's the tomb,
'cept the kitchen clock, 'n' that ticked loud enough to wake the dead
most. I thought I should go inter conniptions. I set out to git up 'n'
throw a shawl over it, it ticked so loud. Then, while we was all settin'
there 's solemn 's the last trump, what does old Aunt Beccy Burnham do
but git up from the kitchen corner where she sot, take the corn-broom
from behind the door, and sweep down a cobweb that was lodged up in one
o' the corners over the mantelpiece! We all looked at one 'nother, 'n' I
thought for a second somebody 'd laugh, but nobody dassed, 'n' there
warn't a sound in the room 's Aunt Beccy sot down agin' without movin' a
muscle in her face. Just then the minister drove in the yard with his
horse sweatin' like rain; but behind time as he was, he never slighted
things a mite. His prayer was twenty-three minutes by the clock.
Twenty-three minutes is a leetle mite too long this kind o' weather, but
it was an all-embracin' prayer, 'n' no mistake! Si said when he got
through the Lord had his instructions on most any p'int that was likely
to come up durin' the season. When he got through his remarks there
warn't a dry eye in the room. I don't s'pose it made any odds whether he
was preachin' 'bout Mis' Pettigrove or the woman on the Blueb'ry
road,--it was a movin', elevatin' discourse, 'n' that was what we went
there for."

"It wouldn't 'a' ben so elevatin' if he'd told the truth," said
Samantha; "but, there, I ain't goin' to spit no more spite out. Lyddy
Pettigrove's dead, 'n' I hope she's in heaven, and all I can say is,
that she'll be dretful busy up there ondoin' all she done down here. You
say there was a good many out?"

"Yes; we ain't hed so many out for years, so Susanna Rideout says, and
she'd ought to know, for she ain't missed a fun'ral sence she was nine
years old, and she's eighty-one, come Thanksgivin', ef she holds out
that long. She says fun'rals is 'bout the only recreation she has, 'n'
she doos git a heap o' satisfaction out of 'em, 'n' no mistake. She'll
go early, afore any o' the comp'ny assembles. She'll say her clock must
'a' ben fast, 'n' then they'll ask her to set down 'n' make herself to
home. Then she'll choose her seat accordin' to the way the house is
planned. She won't git too fur from the remains, because she'll want to
see how the fam'ly appear when they take their last look, but she'll
want to git opposite a door, where she can look into the other rooms 'n'
see whether they shed any tears when the minister begins his remarks.
She allers takes a little gum camphire in her pocket, so't if anybody
faints away durin' the long prayer, she's right on hand. Bein' near the
door, she can hear all the minister says, 'n' how the order o' the
mourners is called, 'n' ef she ain't too fur from the front winders she
can hev a good view of the bearers and the mourners as they get into the
kerridges. There's a sight in knowin' how to manage at a fun'ral; it
takes faculty, same as anything else."

"How does David bear up?" asked Miss Vilda.

"Oh, he's calm. David was always calm and resigned, you know. He shed
tears durin' the remarks, but I s'pose, mebbe, he was wishin' they was
more appropriate. He's about the forlornest creeter now you ever see' in
your life. There never was any self-assume to David Milliken. I declare
it's enough to make you cry jest to look at him. I cooked up victuals
enough to last him a week, but that ain't no way for men-folks to live.
When he comes in at noon-time he washes up out by the pump, 'n' then he
steps int' the butt'ry 'n' pours some cold tea out the teapot 'n' takes
a drink of it, 'n' then a bite o' cold punkin pie 'n' then more tea, all
the time stan'in' up to the shelf 'stid o' sittin' down like a
Christian, and lookin' out the winder as if his mind was in Hard
Scrabble 'n' his body in Buttertown, 'n' as if he didn't know whether he
was eatin' pie or putty. Land! I can't bear to watch him. I dassay he
misses Lyddy's jawin',--it must seem dretful quiet. I declare it seems
to me that meek, resigned folks, that's too good to squeal out when
they're abused, is allers the ones that gits the hardest knocks; but I
don't doubt but what there's goin' to be an everlastin' evenupness
somewheres."

Samantha got up suddenly and went to the sink window. "It's 'bout time
the men come in for their dinner," she said. But though Jabe was mowing
the millstone hill, and though he wore a red flannel shirt, she could
not see him because of the tears that blinded her eyes.




SCENE XIII.

_The Village._

PLEASANT RIVER IS BAPTIZED WITH THE SPIRIT OF ADOPTION.


"But I didn't come in to talk 'bout the fun'ral," continued Aunt Hitty,
wishing that human flesh were transparent so that she could see through
Samanthy Ann Ripley's back. "I had an errant 'n' oughter ben in afore,
but I've ben so busy these last few days I couldn't find rest for the
sole o' my foot skersely. I've sewed in seven dif'rent houses sence I
was here last, and I've made it my biz'ness to try 'n' stop the gossip
'bout them children 'n' give folks the rights o' the matter, 'n' git 'em
interested to do somethin' for 'em. Now there ain't a livin' soul that
wants the boy, but"--

"Timothy," said Miss Vilda hurriedly, "run and fetch me a passle of
chips, that's a good boy. Land sakes! Aunt Hitty, you needn't tell him
to his face that nobody wants him. He's got feelin's like any other
child."

"He set there so quiet with a book in front of him I clean forgot he was
in the room," said Aunt Hitty apologetically. "Land! I'm so
tender-hearted I can't set my foot on a June bug 'n' 't aint' likely I'd
hurt anybody's feelin's, but as I was sayin' I can't find nobody that
wants the boy, but the Doctor's wife thinks p'raps she'll be willin' to
take the baby 'n' board her for nothing if somebody else 'll pay for her
clothes. At least she'll try her a spell 'n' see how she behaves, 'n'
whether she's good comp'ny for her own little girl that's a reg'lar limb
o' Satan anyway, 'n' consid'able worse sence she's had the scarlit
fever, 'n' deef as a post too, tho' they're blisterin' her, 'n' she may
git over it. I told her I'd bring Gay over to-night as I was comin' by,
bein' as how she was worn out with sickness 'n' house-cleanin' 'n' one
thing 'n' nother, 'n' couldn't come to git her very well herself. I
thought mebbe you'd be willin' to pay for her clothes ruther 'n hev so
much talk 'bout it, tho' I've told everybody that they walked right in
to the front gate, 'n' you 'n' Samanthy never set eyes on 'em before,
'n' didn't know where they come from."

Samantha wiped her eyes surreptitiously with the dishcloth and turned a
scarlet face away from the window. Timothy was getting his "passle o'
chips." Gay had spied him, and toddling over to his side, holding her
dress above the prettiest little pair of feet that ever trod clover, had
sat down on him (a favorite pastime of hers), and after jolting her fat
little person up and down on his patient head, rolled herself over and
gave him a series of bear-hugs. Timothy looked pale and languid,
Samantha thought, and though Gay waited for a frolic with her most
adorable smile, he only lifted her coral necklace to kiss the place
where it hung, and tied on her sun-bonnet soberly. Samantha wished that
