
"I don't see her!"

"I do, though. There she is."

He pointed to a bed right in front of where Diamond was standing.

"That's not Nanny!" cried Diamond.

"Yes, it _is_ Nanny. I have seen her a great many times since you have,
and that is she."

So Diamond looked again and looked hard. "If that is Nanny," said
Diamond to himself, "then she must have been at the back of the north
wind. That is why she looks so different." He said nothing aloud, only
stared. And as he stared, something of the face of the old Nanny began
to come out in the face of the new Nanny. The old Nanny had been
somewhat rough in her speech, her face rather hard, and she had not
kept herself clean--how could she! Now, in her fresh white bed, she
looked sweet and gentle and refined.

"Surely North Wind has had something to do with it," thought Diamond. In
her weeks of sickness, had North Wind carried Nanny to the country at
her back--as she once had carried him--and changed her from a rough girl
to a gentle maiden? As he gazed, the best of the old face, the good and
true part of the old Nanny, dawned upon him like the moon coming out of
a cloud. He saw that it was Nanny, indeed--but very worn and grown
almost beautiful.

He went up to her and she smiled. He had heard her laugh, but he had
never seen her smile before. "Nanny, do you know me?" asked Diamond. She
only smiled again. She was not likely to forget him. To be sure, she did
not know that it was he who had got her there. But he was the only boy
except cripple Jim who had ever been kind to her.

Mr. Raymond walked about talking to the other children, while Diamond
visited with Nanny. Then after a time, he stood in the middle of the
room and told them a nice fairy story. He often did that and the
children watched for his visits. After he finished the story, he had to
go. Diamond took leave of Nanny and promised to go and see her again
soon and went away with Mr. Raymond.

Now Mr. Raymond had been turning over in his mind what he could do for
Diamond and for Nanny. He knew Diamond's father somewhat. But he wanted
to find out better what sort of a man he was and whether he was worth
doing anything for. He decided to see if he would do anything for any
body else. For that would be the very best way to find out if it were
worth while to do anything for _him_. So as they walked away together,
he said to little Diamond, "Nanny must leave the hospital soon, Diamond.
They cannot keep her as long as they would like. They cannot keep her
till she is quite strong. There are always so many sick children they
want to take in and make better. The question is what will she do when
they send her out again?"

"That is just what I can't tell," said Diamond, "though I've been
thinking it over and over. Her crossing was taken long ago. I couldn't
bear to see Nanny fighting for it, especially with the poor lame boy who
has taken it. Besides she has no better right to it than he has. Nobody
gave it to her. She just took it and now he has taken it."

"She would get sick again, anyway," said Mr. Raymond, "if she went to
sweeping again right away in the wet. If somebody could only teach her
something to do it would be better. Perhaps if she could be taught to be
nice and clean and to speak only gentle words----"

"Mother could teach her that!" interrupted Diamond.

"And to dress babies and feed them and take care of them," Mr. Raymond
went on, "she might get a place as nurse maid somewhere. People would
give her money for that."

"Why, I'll ask mother!" cried Diamond. "She could learn to dress our
baby, you know, with me to show her how!"

"But you will have to give her food then. And your father, not being
strong, has enough to do already without that."

"Still there am I!" said Diamond. "I'll help him out with it. When he
gets tired of driving, up I get. And I could drive more if Nanny was at
home to help mother."

"Now I wonder," said Mr. Raymond, "if you couldn't do better with two
horses. I am going away for a few months and I am willing to let your
father have my horse while I am gone. He is nearly as old as your
Diamond. I don't want to part with him and yet I don't want him to be
idle. Nobody ought to be idle, not even a horse. Still I do not want him
to be worked hard. Will you tell your father what I say and see if he
wants to take charge of him?"

"Yes, I will," said Diamond. "And he will come and see you about it."

So when Diamond went home, he told his father all about it. But when his
father went to see about it, he found that he must agree to work the
horse only six hours a day. Then too he must take Nanny from the
hospital and feed her, and teach her to be useful and keep her as long
as he had Mr. Raymond's horse. Diamond's father could not help thinking
that it was a pretty close bargain and so it was. Mr. Raymond wanted to
find out if Diamond's father was the kind of man who was willing to help
some one else without getting any advantage out of it for himself. Then
it would be worth while to help _him_. Diamond's father was that kind of
a man. So when he heard all about Nanny, he decided to accept Mr.
Raymond's offer and do the best he could.

Nanny was not fit to be moved for some time yet and Diamond went to see
her as often as he could. But he went out to drive old Diamond every day
now for a few hours at least. Then he had to help mind his baby brother
for part of the time. So he did not go to the hospital as often as he
would have liked. When he did go, he sat by Nanny's bed and told her all
that had happened to him since he had been there before. In her turn
Nanny would tell him of what went on in the hospital--what visitors they
had and things like that.

"Day before yesterday," said Nanny one day, "a lady came to see us. She
was a very beautiful lady. She sat down beside my bed and let me stroke
her hand. She had on a most beautiful ring with a rich red stone in it.
When she saw me looking at it, she slipped it off her finger and put it
on mine. She said I might wear her lovely ruby for a little while if it
would make me happy."

"Her ruby!" cried Diamond. "How funny that is! Our new horse's name is
Ruby. And we took him so that we could take you to live with us, while
you are getting strong again. I do believe a ruby is for good luck!"

"It did me good right then," said Nanny. "For that night I had such a
lovely dream. It began with a red sunset like my darling ruby ring. Then
somehow a wind came out of it and blew me along out of the dirty streets
into a yard with a lovely lawn of soft grass."

"That was North Wind, I know!" cried Diamond. "That is what she does to
me."

"I do not know what you mean," said Nanny. "I do not know anything about
North Wind. But all at once there was no more ruby sunset but a great
golden moon hanging very low and seeming to be shining just to be good
to me. It was easy, I suppose, for me to dream about the moon. I've
always been used to watching her. She was the only thing worth looking
at in our street, at night."

"Don't call it your street," said Diamond. "You are not going back to
it. You are coming to us, you know."

"That is too good to be true!" said Nanny.

"No, no!" cried Diamond. "How could anything be too good to be true? To
be true is to be the very best thing of all. It sounds like your wicked
old granny to say that!"

"Do you know, Diamond," said Nanny, "I do not think my old granny is my
real old granny at all. I don't think she was ever any one's granny or
mother. That was why she was not good to me. Perhaps she never had any
mother when she was little to be good to her. And somebody must first be
good to you, don't you think, before you can learn how to be good to any
body else? Isn't that so? But where was I in my dream? Oh yes, the big
yellow moon came down closer and closer to the grass in front of me.
Then somehow, it seemed to be my ruby lady. She reached out soft warm
arms of golden light and took me up. I sank against her breast into very
downy, golden clouds and went to sleep and left off having pain. And yet
I didn't sleep but knew it all the time, and just swung softly there all
night long."

"Wasn't it really North Wind?" said Diamond to himself. "Perhaps it
_was_ North Wind though she doesn't know it. Maybe the moon does just
the same. What if it should some day carry her to that same country--at
the back of _my_ North Wind! Who knows?"

The nurse now came and told him it was time to go. Nanny had closed her
eyes as if she were tired or asleep. So Diamond arose quietly and
tip-toed away.




CHAPTER IX

THINGS GO HARD WITH DIAMOND'S FAMILY


It was a great delight to Diamond, when at length Nanny was well enough
to leave the hospital and go to their house. She was not strong yet but
Diamond's mother was very careful of her. She took care she should have
nothing to do that she was not fit for. If Nanny had been taken straight
from the street, it is pretty sure she would not have been so pleasant
in a nice house nor so easy to teach. But the kindness they had shown
her in the hospital while she was ill so long had changed her quite a
little.

As she got better, the colour came back to her cheeks, her step grew
lighter and quicker, her smile shone out more readily, and it was clear
she would soon be a treasure of help. It was great fun to see Diamond
teaching her how to hold the baby and wash and dress him. Nanny had
never had a little brother or sister to care for and she and Diamond
often had to laugh over her awkwardness. But she was soon able to do it
all as well as Diamond himself.

Things, however, did not go very well with Diamond's father from the
first coming of the horse, Ruby. It almost seemed as if the red beast
brought bad luck with him. The fares were fewer and the pay less.
Ruby's work did indeed make the week's income at first a little more
than it used to be. But then there were two more to feed. After the
first month, however, he fell lame, and for the whole of the next month,
Diamond's father did not dare work him at all. It cost just as much to
feed him and all he did was to stand in the stable and grow fat.

And after he got well again, it was not much better. Times had then
become hard and fewer and fewer people felt that they could afford to
ride in cabs. The cabmen got fewer and fewer shillings to live on.
Diamond's household had less and less to buy food and clothing with.
Then too, Diamond's mother was poorly for a new baby was coming.

Diamond's father began to feel gloomier and gloomier and if Diamond had
not made himself remember that he had been at the back of the north
wind, he would have been gloomy himself. But when his father came home,
Diamond would get out his book and show him how well he could read.
Besides he taught Nanny how to read and as she was a very clever little
girl, she picked it up very fast. Nanny was such a comfort about the
house that Diamond's father just had to cheer up a little when he came
home at night and the dull day's work was over.

After the new baby came, Diamond sang to her and of course he had to
make up new songs to sing to her because she was a little sister baby.
It would never do, he said, to sing the little brother songs to her.
While he sang, his father and mother could not help listening and
forgetting for the time how bad things were getting to be.

The three months Mr. Raymond had spoken of were now gone and Diamond's
father was very anxious for him to come back and take Ruby off his
hands, for he did not seem to work enough to pay for his keep. Then he
was so lazy and fat, while poor old Diamond had got so thin he was just
skin and bones! For Diamond's father was an honest man and felt that he
must stick to his promise to feed Ruby while he kept him, whether old
Diamond got enough to eat or not. But he _did_ wish Mr. Raymond would
come, though when he looked at Nanny he felt that he would be sorry to
lose her. For it was understood that a place as a nurse girl would be
found for her when Ruby was taken away.

Mr. Raymond did not come, however, and things got worse and worse.
Diamond could do little but drive old Diamond in the cab whenever he
could be of help that way, and sing to the two babies at home. At last,
one week was worse than anything they had yet had. They were almost
without bread before it was over.

It was Friday night, and Diamond like the rest of the household had had
very little to eat that day. His mother would always pay the week's rent
before she spent anything even for food. His father had been very
gloomy--so gloomy that he was very cross. It had been a stormy winter
and even now that spring had come, the north wind often blew. When
Diamond went to his bed, which was in a tiny room in the roof, he heard
it like the sea, moaning. As he fell asleep, he still heard the moaning,
and presently, he heard the voice of North Wind calling him. His heart
beat very fast, it was such a long time since he had heard that voice!
He jumped out of bed, but did not see her. Yet she kept on calling.

"Diamond, come here! Diamond, come here!" the voice repeated again and
again.

"Dear North Wind," said Diamond, "I want so much to come to you but I
can't tell where to find you."

"Come here, Diamond!" was all her answer.

So he opened his door and trotted down the long stair and out into the
yard. A great puff of wind at once came against him. He turned and went
with it, and it blew him up to the stable door and kept on blowing.

"She wants me to go into the stable," said Diamond. "But the door is
locked."

Just then, a great blast of wind brought down the key upon the stones at
his feet from where it was kept hanging high above his head. He picked
it up, opened the door, and went in without much noise. And what did he
hear? He heard the two horses, Diamond and Ruby, talking to each other.
They talked in a strange language, yet somehow he could understand it.

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself," old Diamond was saying, "sleek
and fat as _you_ are, and so lazy you get along no faster than a big
dray-horse that is pulling tons!"

"Oh, I like to be fat and lazy!" said Ruby.

"And you like to hear master abused on account of you, too, I dare say,"
replied old Diamond angrily. "Why don't you get up a little speed, while
you are drawing a fare, at least! The abuse master gets for your sake is
quite shameful! No wonder he doesn't get many fares when he has you!"

"Well, if I worked as hard as I could, I'd be a bag of bones like you!"

"I'm proud to work!" said old Diamond. "I wouldn't be as fat as you, not
for all you're worth. You are a disgrace! Look at the horse next you.
_He_ is something _like_ a horse--all skin and bones. He knows he has
got his master's wife and children to support and he works _like_ a
horse!"

"I might get lamed again, if I didn't go slowly and carefully," said
Ruby.

"Lame again!" snorted old Diamond. "It's my belief you lamed yourself on
purpose so you could stay in the stable and stuff yourself and grow fat!
You selfish beast!"

"I might get angry at you," said Ruby, "if I didn't know a little better
than you do how things are coming out. What do you think my master would
say if he were to come back--and he may come any day now--and find me
all worn down to a rack of bones and lamed into the bargain? Do you
think anything would make him believe that your master had used me right
and as he promised he would? And isn't it better he should live a little
hard himself and prove himself to be an honest man who does what he says
he'll do? You don't know everything, old Diamond. You would not probably
believe me if I told you that enduring bad things is often just a way
for bringing good things about. But you'll see!"

Old Diamond just snorted sleepily in reply and gave all his attention to
doubling up his knees and getting down upon the floor to go to sleep.
The racket he made gave young Diamond a start. With a shiver, he seemed
to come awake and see the stable door standing open. He trotted out of
it, back up the long stairs, and tumbled into bed. But Ruby's words kept
sounding in his head.

"Is it like what's in my book?" he said to himself sleepily,--"that
about a blessing in disguise, when things look bad but are working out
all right--like things at the back of the north wind?" He got sleepier,
however, as he tried to think and was fast asleep before he knew it. The
next morning, he sang to the baby more cheerily than ever and here is
part of the song he sung:

          Where did you come from, Baby dear?
          Out of everywhere into here.

          Where did you get your eyes so blue?
          Out of the sky as I came through.

          Where did you get this pearly ear?
          God spoke and it came out to hear.

          But how did you come to us, you dear?
          God thought of you and so I am here.

"You never made that song, Diamond," said his mother.

"No, mother. But it's mine just the same, for I love it."

"Does loving a thing make it yours?"

