And Joab said unto the man that told him, And, behold, thou sawest him,
and why didst thou not smite him there to the ground? and I would have
given thee ten shekels of silver, and a girdle.

And the man said unto Joab, Though I should receive a thousand shekels
of silver in mine hand, yet would I not put forth mine hand against the
king's son: for in our hearing the king charged thee and Abishai and
Ittai, saying, Beware that none touch the young man Absalom. Otherwise I
should have wrought falsehood against mine own life: for there is no
matter hid from the king, and thou thyself wouldest have set thyself
against me.

Then said Joab, I may not tarry thus with thee. And he took three darts
in his hand, and thrust them through the heart of Absalom, while he was
yet alive in the midst of the oak. And ten young men that bare Joab's
armour compassed about and smote Absalom, and slew him.

And Joab blew the trumpet, and the people returned from pursuing after
Israel: for Joab held back the people. And they took Absalom, and cast
him into a great pit in the wood, and laid a very great heap of stones
upon him: and all Israel fled every one to his tent.

     *       *       *      *       *

And David sat between the two gates: and the watchman went up to the
roof over the gate unto the wall, and lifted up his eyes, and looked,
and behold a man running alone. And the watchman cried, and told the
king. And the king said, If he be alone, there is tidings in his mouth.
And he came apace, and drew near.

And the watchman saw another man running: and the watchman called unto
the porter, and said, Behold another man running alone. And the king
said, He also bringeth tidings. And the watchman said, Me thinketh the
running of the foremost is like the running of Ahimaaz, the son of
Zadok. And the king said, He is a good man, and cometh with good
tidings.

And Ahimaaz called, and said unto the king, All is well. And he fell
down to the earth upon his face before the king, and said, Blessed be
the Lord thy God, which hath delivered up the men that lifted up their
hand against my lord the king.

And the king said, Is the young man Absalom safe? And Ahimaaz answered,
When Joab sent the king's servant, and me thy servant, I saw a great
tumult, but I knew not what it was. And the king said unto him, Turn
aside, and stand here. And he turned aside, and stood still.

And, behold, Cushi came; and Cushi said, Tidings, my lord the king: for
the Lord hath avenged thee this day of all them that rose up against
thee. And the king said unto Cushi, Is the young man Absalom safe? And
Cushi answered, The enemies of my lord the king, and all that rise
against thee to do thee hurt, be as that young man is.

And the king was much moved, and went up to the chamber over the gate,
and wept: and as he went, thus he said, O my son Absalom, my son, my son
Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son!

     *       *       *      *       *

And the victory that day was turned into mourning unto all the people:
for the people heard say that day how the king was grieved for his son.
And the people gat them by stealth that day into the city, as people
being ashamed steal away when they flee in battle.

But the king covered his face, and the king cried with a loud voice, O
my son Absalom, O Absalom, my son, my son!

II. Samuel, XVIII-XIX.




    I slept, and dreamed that life was beauty;
    I woke, and found that life was duty.
    Was my dream, then, a shadowy lie?
    Toil on, brave heart, unceasingly,
    And thou shalt find thy dream to be
    A noonday light and truth to thee.

Hooper




THE BURIAL OF MOSES

(Read Deuteronomy, XXXII. 48-50)


    By Nebo's lonely mountain,
    On this side Jordan's wave,
    In a vale in the land of Moab,
    There lies a lonely grave;
    And no man knows that sepulchre,
    And no man saw it e'er;
    For the angels of God upturned the sod,
    And laid the dead man there.

    That was the grandest funeral
    That ever passed on earth;
    But no man heard the trampling,
    Or saw the train go forth:
    Noiselessly as the daylight
    Comes when the night is done,
    And the crimson streak on ocean's cheek
    Grows into the great sun;

    Noiselessly as the spring-time
    Her crown of verdure weaves,
    And all the trees on all the hills
    Open their thousand leaves:
    So, without sound of music,
    Or voice of them that wept,
    Silently down from the mountain's crown
    The great procession swept.

    Perchance the bald old eagle,
    On gray Beth-peor's height,
    Out of his lonely eyry
    Looked on the wondrous sight;
    Perchance the lion stalking
    Still shuns that hallowed spot;
    For beast and bird have seen and heard
    That which man knoweth not.

    But, when the warrior dieth,
    His comrades in the war,
    With arms reversed and muffled drums,
    Follow his funeral car;
    They show the banners taken,
    They tell his battles won,
    And after him lead his masterless steed,
    While peals the minute-gun.

    Amid the noblest of the land
    We lay the sage to rest,
    And give the bard an honoured place,
    With costly marble dressed,
    In the great minster transept
    Where lights like glories fall,
    And the sweet choir sings, and the organ rings
    Along the emblazoned wall.

    This was the bravest warrior
    That ever buckled sword;
    This the most gifted poet
    That ever breathed a word;
    And never earth's philosopher
    Traced, with his golden pen,
    On the deathless page, truths half so sage
    As he wrote down for men.

    And had he not high honour,--
    The hillside for his pall;
    To lie in state, while angels wait,
    With stars for tapers tall;
    And the dark rock pines, like tossing plumes,
    Over his bier to wave;
    And God's own hand, in that lonely land,
    To lay him in the grave;--

    In that strange grave, without a name,
    Whence his uncoffined clay
    Shall break again--O wondrous thought!--
    Before the judgment-day,
    And stand, with glory wrapped around,
    On the hills he never trod,
    And speak of the strife that won our life
    With the incarnate Son of God.

    O lonely grave in Moab's land!
    O dark Beth-peor's hill!
    Speak to these curious hearts of ours,
    And teach them to be still:
    God hath His mysteries of grace,
    Ways that we cannot tell;
    He hides them deep, like the hidden sleep
    Of him He loved so well.

Cecil Frances Alexander




THE CRUSADER AND THE SARACEN


As the Knight of the Couchant Leopard continued to fix his eyes
attentively on the yet distant cluster of palm trees, it seemed to him
as if some object was moving among them. The distant form separated
itself from the trees, which partly hid its motions, and advanced
towards the knight with a speed which soon showed a mounted horseman,
whom his turban, long spear, and green caftan floating in the wind, on
his nearer approach, showed to be a Saracen cavalier.

"In the desert," saith an Eastern proverb, "no man meets a friend." The
Crusader was totally indifferent whether the infidel, who now approached
on his gallant barb, as if borne on the wings of an eagle, came as
friend or foe; perhaps, as a vowed champion of the Cross, he might
rather have preferred the latter. He disengaged his lance from his
saddle, seized it with the right hand, placed it in rest with its point
half-elevated, gathered up the reins in the left, waked his horse's
mettle with the spur, and prepared to encounter the stranger with the
calm self-confidence belonging to the victor in many contests.

The Saracen came on at the speedy gallop of an Arab horseman, managing
his steed more by his limbs and the inflection of his body than by any
use of the reins, which hung loose in his left hand; so that he was
enabled to wield the light round buckler of the skin of the rhinoceros,
ornamented with silver loops, which he wore on his arm, swinging it as
if he meant to oppose its slender circle to the formidable thrust of the
Western lance. His own long spear was not couched or levelled like that
of his antagonist, but grasped by the middle with his right hand, and
brandished at arm's length above his head.

As the cavalier approached his enemy at full career, he seemed to expect
that the Knight of the Leopard should put his horse to the gallop to
encounter him. But the Christian knight, well acquainted with the
customs of Eastern warriors, did not mean to exhaust his good horse by
any unnecessary exertion; and, on the contrary, made a dead halt,
confident that, if the enemy advanced to the actual shock, his own
weight, and that of his powerful charger, would give him sufficient
advantage, without the additional momentum of rapid motion. Equally
sensible and apprehensive of such a probable result, the Saracen
cavalier, when he had approached towards the Christian within twice the
length of his lance, wheeled his steed to the left with inimitable
dexterity, and rode twice around his antagonist, who, turning without
quitting his ground, and presenting his front constantly to his enemy,
frustrated his attempts to attack him on an unguarded point; so that the
Saracen, wheeling his horse, was fain to retreat to the distance of a
hundred yards.

A second time, like a hawk attacking a heron, the Heathen renewed the
charge, and a second time was fain to retreat without coming to a close
struggle. A third time he approached in the same manner, when the
Christian knight, desirous to terminate this illusory warfare, in which
he might at length have been worn out by the activity of his foeman,
suddenly seized the mace which hung at his saddle-bow, and, with a
strong hand and unerring aim, hurled it against the head of the Emir,
for such and not less his enemy appeared. The Saracen was just aware of
the formidable missile in time to interpose his light buckler betwixt
the mace and his head; but the violence of the blow forced the buckler
down on his turban, and though that defence also contributed to deaden
its violence, the Saracen was beaten from his horse. Ere the Christian
could avail himself of this mishap, his nimble foeman sprang from the
ground, and, calling on his steed, which instantly returned to his side,
he leaped into his seat without touching the stirrup, and regained all
the advantage of which the Knight of the Leopard hoped to deprive him.
But the latter had in the meanwhile recovered his mace, and the Eastern
cavalier, who remembered the strength and dexterity with which his
antagonist had aimed it, seemed to keep cautiously out of the reach of
that weapon, of which he had so lately felt the force, while he showed
his purpose of waging a distant warfare with missile weapons of his
own. Planting his long spear in the sand at a distance from the scene of
combat, he strung, with great address, a short bow, which he carried at
his back, and, putting his horse to the gallop, once more described two
or three circles of a wider extent than formerly, in the course of which
he discharged six arrows at the Christian with such unerring skill that
the goodness of his harness alone saved him from being wounded in as
many places. The seventh shaft apparently found a less perfect part of
the armour, and the Christian dropped heavily from his horse. But what
was the surprise of the Saracen, when, dismounting to examine the
condition of his prostrate enemy, he found himself suddenly within the
grasp of the European, who had had recourse to this artifice to bring
his enemy within his reach! Even in this deadly grapple the Saracen was
saved by his agility and presence of mind. He unloosed the sword-belt,
in which the Knight of the Leopard had fixed his hold, and, thus eluding
his fatal grasp, mounted his horse, which seemed to watch his motions
with the intelligence of a human being, and again rode off. But in the
last encounter the Saracen had lost his sword and his quiver of arrows,
both of which were attached to the girdle, which he was obliged to
abandon. He had also lost his turban in the struggle. These
disadvantages seemed to incline the Moslem to a truce: he approached the
Christian with his right hand extended, but no longer in a menacing
attitude.

"There is truce betwixt our nations," he said, in the _lingua franca_
commonly used for the purpose of communication with the Crusaders;
"Wherefore should there be war betwixt thee and me? Let there be peace
betwixt us."

"I am well contented," answered he of the Couchant Leopard; "but what
security dost thou offer that thou wilt observe the truce?"

"The word of a follower of the Prophet was never broken," answered the
Emir. "It is thou, brave Nazarene, from whom I should demand security,
did I not know that treason seldom dwells with courage."

The Crusader felt that the confidence of the Moslem made him ashamed of
his own doubts.

"By the cross of my sword," he said, laying his hand on the weapon as he
spoke, "I will be true companion to thee, Saracen, while our fortune
wills that we remain in company together."

"By Mohammed, Prophet of God, and by Allah, God of the Prophet," replied
his late foeman, "there is not treachery in my heart towards thee. And
now wend we to yonder fountain, for the hour of rest is at hand, and the
stream had hardly touched my lip when I was called to battle by thy
approach."

The Knight of the Couchant Leopard yielded a ready and courteous assent;
and the late foes, without an angry look or gesture of doubt, rode side
by side to the little cluster of palm trees.

Scott: "The Talisman."




    The quality of mercy is not strained;
    It droppeth, as the gentle rain from heaven
    Upon the place beneath: it is twice blessed;
    It blesseth him that gives, and him that takes:
    'Tis mightiest in the mightiest: it becomes
    The throned monarch better than his crown;
    His sceptre shows the force of temporal power,--
    The attribute to awe and majesty,
    Wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings,--
    But mercy is above this sceptred sway;
    It is enthroned in the hearts of kings,
    It is an attribute to God himself;
    And earthly power doth then shew likest God's
    When mercy seasons justice.

Shakespeare




_From_ "AN AUGUST REVERIE"


    The ragged daisy starring all the fields,
      The buttercup abrim with pallid gold,
    The thistle and burr-flowers hedged with prickly shields,
      All common weeds the draggled pastures hold,
    With shrivelled pods and leaves, are kin to me,
    Like-heirs of earth and her maturity.

    They speak a silent speech that is their own,
      These wise and gentle teachers of the grass;
    And when their brief and common days are flown,
      A certain beauty from the year doth pass:--
    A beauty of whose light no eye can tell,
    Save that it went; and my heart knew it well.

    I may not know each plant as some men know them,
      As children gather beasts and birds to tame;
    But I went 'mid them as the winds that blow them,
      From childhood's hour, and loved without a name.
    There is more beauty in a field of weeds
    Than in all blooms the hothouse garden breeds.

    For they are nature's children; in their faces
      I see that sweet obedience to the sky
    That marks these dwellers of the wilding places,
      Who with the season's being live and die;
    Knowing no love but of the wind and sun,
    Who still are nature's when their life is done.
