was notable as being the first battle in which the newly raised
Egyptian army met the Mahdists, and showed that, trained and
disciplined by British officers, the Egyptian fellah was capable of
standing against the Dervish of the desert.

From this point the railway left the Nile and, for thirty miles,
crossed the desert. Another twenty miles, and they reached Fareeg.

"It was here," the officer said, "that the North Staffordshires came up
and joined the Egyptians. The Dervishes had fallen back before we
advanced, after a halt at Sadeah, which we sha'n't see, as the railway
cuts across, to Abu Fetmeh. We bivouacked five miles from their camp,
and turned out at three next morning. The orders were passed by mouth,
and we got off as silently as an army of ghosts.

"I shall never forget our disgust when a small cavalry force, sent on
ahead to reconnoitre, reported that the Dervishes had abandoned the
place during the night, and had crossed the river in native boats. It
was a very clever move, at any rate, on the part of fellows who did not
want to fight. There were we facing them, with our whole infantry and
cavalry useless, and we had nothing available to damage the enemy
except our artillery and the gunboats.

"These opened fire, and the Dervishes replied heavily. They had
earthworks, but the boats kept on, pluckily, till they got to a narrow
point in the stream; when a couple of guns, which had hitherto been
hidden, opened upon them at close range; while a strong force of
Dervish infantry poured in such a hot fire that the boats had to fall
back.

"After our field guns had peppered the enemy for a bit, the gunboats
tried again, but the fire was too hot for them, and the leading boat
had to retire.

"Things did not look very bright, till nine o'clock; when we found
that, at one point, the river was fordable to a small island, opposite
the enemy's lines. Four batteries, and the Maxims, at once moved over,
with two companies of Soudanese, and opened fire. The distance across
was but six hundred yards, and the fire was tremendous--shell,
shrapnel, and rockets--while the Soudanese fired volleys, and the
Maxims maintained a shower of bullets.

"It seemed that nothing could stand against it, but the Dervishes stuck
to their guns with great pluck. However, their fire was so far kept
down, that the three gunboats succeeded in forcing their way up; and,
passing the Dervish works, sank a steamer and a number of native boats.

"The Dervishes now began to give way, and the gunboats steamed up the
river, making for Dongola. The Dervishes, as soon as they had gone,
reopened fire, and the duel continued all day; but the great mass of
the enemy soon left, and also made their way towards Dongola.

"It was awfully annoying being obliged to remain inactive, on our side,
and it was especially hard for the cavalry; who, if they could have got
over, would have been able to cut up and disperse the enemy.

"The next morning the Dervishes were all gone, and that was practically
the end of the fighting. The gunboats went up and shelled Dongola; and
when we got there, two days later, the Dervishes had had enough of it.
Of course, there was a little fighting, but it was the effort of a
party of fanatics, rather than of an enemy who considered resistance
possible.

"We were greeted with enthusiasm by the unfortunate inhabitants, who
had been subject to the Dervish tyranny. As a whole, however, they had
not been badly treated here, and had been allowed to continue to
cultivate their land, subject only to about the same taxation as they
had paid to Egypt. Of course, from what they have done elsewhere, the
comparative mildness of the conduct of the Dervishes was not due to any
feeling of mercy, but to policy. As the most advanced position, with
the exception of scattered and temporary posts lower down the river, it
was necessary that there should be food for the considerable body of
tribesmen encamped at Dongola; especially as an army invading Egypt
would provide itself, there, with stores for the journey. It was
therefore good policy to encourage the cultivators of land to stay
there."

"Thank you very much!" Gregory said, when the officer had concluded his
sketch of the previous campaign. "Of course, I heard that we had beaten
the Khalifa's men, and had taken Dongola, but the papers at Cairo gave
no details. The Staffordshire regiment went down, directly the place
was taken, did they not?"

"Yes. They had suffered heavily from cholera; and as there was now no
fear that the Egyptians and Soudanese would prove unequal to
withstanding a Dervish rush, there was no necessity for keeping them
here."

At Abu Fetmeh they left the train, and embarked in a steamer. Of the
party that had left Assouan, only four or five remained. The rest had
been dropped at other stations on the road.

The boat stopped but a few hours at Dongola, which had for a time been
the headquarters of the advanced force. Great changes had been made,
since the place was captured from the Dervishes. At that time the
population had been reduced to a handful, and the natives who remained
tilled but enough ground for their own necessities; for they knew that,
at any time, a Dervish force might come along and sweep everything
clear. But with the advent of the British, the fugitives who had
scattered among the villages along the river soon poured in.

Numbers of Greek traders arrived, with camels and goods, and the town
assumed an aspect of life and business. The General established a court
of justice, and appointed authorities for the proper regulation of
affairs; and by the time Gregory came up, the town was showing signs of
renewed prosperity.

But the steamer stopped at Dongola only to land stores needed for the
regiment stationed there. The headquarters had, months before, been
moved to Merawi, some eighty miles higher up, situated at the foot of
the fourth cataract.

Although he had enjoyed the journey, Gregory was glad when the steamer
drew up against a newly constructed wharf at Merawi. Now he was to
begin his duties, whatever they might be.

At the wharf were a large number of Soudanese soldiers. A telegram,
from the last station they touched at, had given notice of the hour at
which the boat would arrive; and a battalion of native troops had
marched down, to assist in unloading the stores. A white officer had
come down with them, to superintend the operation, and the other
officers at once went on shore to speak to him.

Gregory had got all his traps together and, as the Soudanese poured on
board, he thought it better to remain with them; as, if his belongings
once got scattered, there would be little chance of his being able to
collect them again. After a short time, he went up to one of the native
officers.

"This is my first visit here," he said in Arabic, "and as I have not
brought up a servant with me, I do not like to leave my baggage here,
while I go and report myself to General Hunter. Will you kindly tell me
what I had better do?"

"Certainly. I will place one of my corporals in charge of your things.
It would be as well to get them ashore at once, as we shall want the
decks clear, in order that the men may work freely in getting the
stores up from below. The corporal will see that your baggage is
carried to the bank, to a spot where it will be out of the way, and
will remain with it until you know where it is to be taken."

Thanking him for his civility, Gregory went on shore. The officer who
had told him the story of the campaign was still talking, to the Major
who had come down with the blacks. As Gregory came up, he said:

"I wondered what had become of you, Hilliard. I have been telling Major
Sidney that a young lieutenant had come up, to report himself to the
General for service."

"I am glad to see you, sir," the Major said, holding out his hand.
"Every additional white officer is a material gain, and I have no doubt
that General Hunter will find plenty for you to do. I hear you can
speak the Negro language, as well as Arabic. That will be specially
useful here, for the natives are principally Negro, and speak very
little Arabic.

"How about your baggage?"

"One of the native officers has undertaken to get it ashore, and to put
a corporal in charge of it, until I know where it is to go."

"Well, Fladgate, as you are going to the General's, perhaps you will
take Mr. Hilliard with you, and introduce him."

"With pleasure.

"Now, Mr. Hilliard, let us be off, at once. The sun is getting hot, and
the sooner we are under shelter, the better."

Ten minutes' walk took them to the house formerly occupied by the
Egyptian Governor of the town, where General Hunter now had his
headquarters. The General, who was a brevet colonel in the British
Army, had joined the Egyptian Army in 1888. He had, as a captain in the
Lancashire regiment, taken part in the Nile Expedition, 1884-85; had
been severely wounded at the battle of Ginnis; and again at Toski,
where he commanded a brigade. He was still a comparatively young man.
He had a broad forehead, and an intellectual face, that might have
betokened a student rather than a soldier; but he was celebrated, in
the army, for his personal courage and disregard of danger, and was
adored by his black soldiers.

He rose from the table at which he was sitting, as Captain Fladgate
came in.

"I am glad to see you back again," he said. "I hope you have quite
shaken off the fever?"

"Quite, General. I feel thoroughly fit for work again. Allow me to
present to you Mr. Hilliard, who has just received a commission as
lieutenant in the Egyptian Army. He has a letter from the Sirdar, to
you."

"Well, I will not detain you now, Captain Fladgate. You will find your
former quarters in readiness for you. Dinner at the usual time; then
you shall tell me the news of Cairo.

"Now, Mr. Hilliard," and he turned to Gregory, "pray take a seat. This
is your first experience in soldiering, I suppose?"

"Yes, sir."

"I think you are the first white officer who has been appointed, who
has not had experience in our own army first. You have not been
appointed to any particular battalion, have you?"

"No, sir. I think I have come out to make myself generally useful.
These are the letters that I was to hand to you--one is from the Sirdar
himself, the other is from his chief of the staff, and this letter is
from Captain Ewart."

The General read the Sirdar's letter first. He then opened that from
the chief of the staff. This was the more bulky of the two, and
contained several enclosures.

"Ah! this relates to you," the General said as, after glancing over the
two official despatches, he read through the letter of Captain Ewart,
who was a personal friend of his.

The latter had given a full account of Gregory's history, and said that
the Sirdar had especially asked him to put him in the way of things;
that he had seen a great deal of him on the journey up, and was very
greatly pleased with him.

"The lad is a perfect gentleman," he said, "which is certainly
astonishing, he being a product of Cairo. I consider him in all
respects--except, of course, a classical education--fully equal to the
average young officer, on first joining. He is very modest and
unassuming; and will, I feel sure, perform with credit any work that
you may give him to do."

"I see," he said, laying it down, "you have only joined the army
temporarily, and with a special purpose, and I am told to utilize your
services as I think best. You have a perfect knowledge of Arabic, and
of the Negro dialect. That will be very useful, for though we all speak
Arabic, few speak the Negro language, which is more commonly used here.

"Your father fell with Hicks Pasha, I am told, and you have joined us
with the object of obtaining news as to the manner in which he met his
death?"

"That is so, sir. It was always my mother's wish that I should, when I
was old enough, come up to the Soudan to make enquiries. As my father
was a good Arabic scholar, my mother always entertained a faint hope
that he might have escaped; especially as we know that a good many of
the Egyptian soldiers were not killed, but were taken prisoners, and
made to serve in the Mahdi's army."

"Yes, there are several of them among the Khalifa's artillerymen, but I
am very much afraid that none of the officers were spared. You see,
they kept together in a body, and died fighting to the last."

"I have hardly any hopes myself, sir. Still, as my father was
interpreter, he might not have been with the others, but in some other
part of the square that was attacked."

"That is possible; but he was a white man, and in the heat of the
battle I don't think that the Dervishes would have made any exception.
You see, there were two correspondents with Hicks, and neither of them
has ever been heard of; and they must, I should think, have joined in
that last desperate charge of his.

"Well, for the present I must make you a sort of extra aide-de-camp,
and what with one thing and another, I have no doubt that I shall find
plenty for you to do. As such, you will of course be a member of
headquarters mess, and therefore escape the trouble of providing for
yourself. You have not brought a servant up with you, I suppose?"

"No, sir. Captain Ewart, who most kindly advised me as to my outfit,
said that, if I could find an intelligent native here, it would be
better than taking a man from Cairo."

"Quite right; and the fellows one picks up at Cairo are generally lazy,
and almost always dishonest. The men you get here may not know much,
but are ready enough to learn; and, if well treated, will go through
fire and water for their master.

"Go down to the stores, and tell the officer in charge there that I
shall be glad if he will pick out two or three fellows, from whom you
may choose a servant."

When Gregory had given his message, the officer said:

"You had better pick out one for yourself, Mr. Hilliard. Strength and
willingness to work are the points I keep my eye upon; and, except for
the foremen of the gangs, their intelligence does not interest me. You
had better take a turn among the parties at work, and pick out a man
for yourself."

Gregory was not long in making his choice. He selected a young fellow
who, although evidently exerting himself to the utmost, was clearly
incapable of doing his share in carrying the heavy bales and boxes,
that were easily handled by older men. He had a pleasant face, and
looked more intelligent than most of the others.

"To what tribe do you belong?" Gregory asked him.

"The Jaalin. I come from near Metemmeh."

"I want a servant. You do not seem to be strong enough for this work,
but if you will be faithful, and do what I tell you, I will try you."

The young fellow's face lit up.

"I will be faithful, bey. It would be kind of you to take me. I am not
at my full strength yet and, although I try my hardest, I cannot do as
much as strong men, and then I am abused. I will be very faithful, and
if you do not find me willing to do all that you tell me, you can send
me back to work here."

"Well, come along with me, then."

He took him to the officer.

"I have chosen this man, sir. Can I take him away at once?"

"Certainly. He has been paid up to last night."

"Thank you very much! I will settle with him for today."

And, followed by the young tribesman, he went to the headquarters camp,
near which an empty hut was assigned to him.



Chapter 6: Gregory Volunteers.


The hut of which Gregory took possession was constructed of dry mud.
The roof was of poles, on which were thickly laid boughs and palm
leaves; and on these a layer of clay, a foot thick. An opening in the
wall, eighteen inches square, served as a window. Near the door the
floor was littered with rubbish of all kinds.

"What is your name?"

"Zaki."

"Well, Zaki, the first thing is to clear out all this rubbish, and
sweep the floor as clean as you can. I am going down to the river to
get my baggage up. Can you borrow a shovel, or something of that sort,
from one of the natives here? Or, if he will sell it, buy one. I will
pay when I return. It will always come in useful. If you cannot get a
shovel, a hoe will do. Ah! I had better give you a dollar, the man
might not trust you."

He then walked down to the river, and found the black corporal sitting
tranquilly by the side of his baggage. The man stood up and saluted,
and on Gregory saying that he had now a house, at once told off two
soldiers to carry the things.

Arriving at the hut, he found Zaki hard at work, shovelling the rubbish
through the doorway. Just as he came up, the boy brought down his tool,
with a crash, upon a little brown creature that was scuttling away.

"What is that, Zaki?"

"That is a scorpion, bey; I have killed four of them."

"That is not at all pleasant," Gregory said. "There may be plenty of
them, up among the boughs overhead."

Zaki nodded.

"Plenty of creatures," he said, "some snakes."

"Then we will smoke them out, before I go in. When you have got the
rubbish out, make a fire in the middle, wet some leaves and things and
put them on, and we will hang a blanket over the window and shut the
door. I will moisten some powder and scatter it among the leaves, and
the sulphur will help the smoke to bring them down."

This was done, the door closed and, as it did not fit at all tightly,
the cracks were filled with some damp earth from the watercourse.

"What did you pay for the shovel, Zaki?"

"Half a dollar, bey. Here is the other half."

"Well, you had better go and buy some things for yourself. Tomorrow I
will make other arrangements. Get a fire going out here. There is a
sauce pan and a kettle, so you can boil some rice or fry some meat."

Gregory then went again to the officer who was acting as quartermaster.

"I have been speaking to the General," the latter said. "You will mess
with the staff. The dinner hour is seven o'clock. I am sure you will
soon feel at home."

Gregory now strolled through the camp. The troops were in little mud
huts, of their own construction; as these, in the heat of the day, were
much cooler than tents. The sun was getting low, and the Soudanese
troops were all occupied in cooking, mending their clothes, sweeping
the streets between the rows of huts, and other light duties. They
seemed, to Gregory, as full of fun and life as a party of
schoolboys--laughing, joking, and playing practical tricks on each
other.

The physique of some of the regiments was splendid, the men averaging
over six feet in height, and being splendidly built. Other regiments,
recruited among different tribes, were not so tall, but their sturdy
figures showed them to be capable of any effort they might be called
upon to make.

One of the officers came out of his tent, as he passed.

"You are a new arrival, I think, sir?" he said. "We have so few white
officers, here, that one spots a fresh face at once."

"Yes, I only arrived two or three hours ago. My name is Hilliard. I am
not attached to any regiment; but, as I speak the languages well,
General Hunter is going, so he said, to make me generally useful. I
only received my commission a few days before leaving Cairo."

"Well, come in and have a soda and whisky. The heat out here is
frightful. You can tell me the last news from Cairo, and when we are
going to move."

"I shall be happy to come in and have a chat," Gregory said, "but I do
not drink anything. I have been brought up in Cairo, and am accustomed
to heat, and I find that drinking only makes one more thirsty."

"I believe it does," the other said, "especially when the liquid is
almost as hot as one is, one's self. Will you sit down on that box?
Chairs are luxuries that we do not indulge in here. Well, have you
heard anything about a move?"

"Nothing; but the officers I have spoken to all seem to think that it
will soon begin. A good many came up with me, to Wady Halfa and the
stations on the river; and I heard that all who had sufficiently
recovered were under orders to rejoin, very shortly."

"Yes, I suppose it won't be long. Of course we know nothing here, and I
don't expect we shall, till the order comes for us to start. This is
not the time of year when one expects to be on the move; and if we do
go, it is pretty certain that it is because Kitchener has made up his
mind for a dash forward. You see, if we take Abu Hamed and drive the
Dervishes away, we can, at once, push the railway on to that place;
and, as soon as it is done, the troops can be brought up and an advance
made to Berber, if not farther, during the cool season--if you can ever
call it a cool season, here."

"Is there any great force at Abu Hamed?"

"No; nothing that could stand against this for a moment. Their chief
force, outside Omdurman, is at Metemmeh under Mahmud, the Khalifa's
favourite son. You see, the Jaalin made fools of themselves. Instead of
waiting until we could lend them a hand, they revolted as soon as we
took Dongola, and the result was that Mahmud came down and pretty well
wiped them out. They defended themselves stoutly, at Metemmeh, but had
no chance against such a host as he brought with him. The town was
taken, and its defenders, between two and three thousand fighting men,
were all massacred, together with most of the women and children.

"By the accounts brought down to us, by men who got away, it must have
been an even more horrible business than usual; and the Dervishes are
past masters in the art of massacre. However, I think that their course
is nearly up. Of late, a good many fugitives from Kordofan have arrived
here, and they say that there will be a general revolt there, when they
hear that we have given the Dervishes a heavy thrashing."

"And where do you think the great fight is likely to take place?"
Gregory asked.

"Not this side of Metemmeh. Except at Abu Hamed, we hear of no other
strong Dervish force between this and Omdurman. If Mahmud thinks
himself strong enough, no doubt he will fight; but if he and the
Khalifa know their business, he will fall back and, with the forces at
Omdurman, fight one big battle. The two armies together will, from what
we hear, amount to sixty or seventy thousand; and there is no doubt
whatever that, with all their faults, the beggars can fight. It will be
a tough affair, but I believe we shall have some British troops here to
help, before the final advance. We can depend now on both the Soudanese
and the Egyptians to fight hard, but there are not enough of them. The
odds would be too heavy, and the Sirdar is not a man to risk failure.
But with a couple of brigades of British infantry, there can be no
doubt what the result will be; and I fancy that, if we beat them in one
big fight, it will be all up with Mahdism.

"It is only because the poor beggars of tribesmen regard the Dervishes
as invincible, that they have put up so long with their tyranny. But
the rising of the Jaalin, and the news we get from Kordofan, show that
the moment they hear the Dervishes are beaten, and Khartoum is in our
hands, there will be a general rising, and the Dervishes will be pretty
well exterminated. We all hope that Mahmud won't fight, for if he does,
and we beat him, the Khalifa and his lot may lose heart and retire
before we get to Omdurman; and, once away, the tremendous business of
trying to follow him will confront us. Here we have got the river and
the railway, but we have no land carriage for an army, and he might
keep on falling back to the great lakes, for anything that we could do
to overtake him. So we all hope that Mahmud will retire to Omdurman
without fighting, and with such a host as the Khalifa would then have,
he would be certain to give battle before abandoning his capital."

"They are fine-looking fellows, these blacks," Gregory said.

"They are splendid fellows--they love fighting for fighting's sake. It
is, in their opinion, the only worthy occupation for a man, and they
have shown themselves worthy to fight by the side of our men. They have
a perfect confidence in us, and would, I believe, go anywhere we led
them. They say themselves, 'We are never afraid--just like English.'"

