food for the winter.

You see, it was this way: When the Merry Little Breezes of Old Mother
West Wind first heard what was going on in the Green Forest and hurried
around over the Green Meadows and through the Green Forest to spread the
news, as is their way, they took the greatest pains not to even hint it
to Old Man Coyote because they were afraid that he would make trouble
and perhaps drive Paddy away. The place that Paddy had chosen to build
his dam was so deep in the Green Forest that Old Man Coyote seldom went
that way. So it was that he knew nothing about Paddy, and Paddy knew
nothing about him for some time.

But after a while Old Man Coyote noticed that the little people of
the Green Meadows were not about as much as usual. They seemed to have
a secret of some kind. He mentioned the matter to his friend, Digger
the Badger.

Digger had been so intent on his own affairs that he hadn't noticed
anything unusual, but when Old Man Coyote mentioned the matter he
remembered that Blacky the Crow headed straight for the Green Forest
every morning. Several times he had seen Sammy Jay flying in the same
direction as if in a great hurry to get somewhere.

Old Man Coyote grinned. "That's all I need to know, friend Digger,"
said he. "When Blacky the Crow and Sammy Jay visit a place more than
once, something interesting is going on there. I think I'll take a
stroll up through the Green Forest and have a look around."

With that, off Old Man Coyote started. But he was too sly and crafty to
go straight to the Green Forest. He pretended to hunt around over the
Green Meadows just as he usually did, all the time working nearer and
nearer to the Green Forest. When he reached the edge of it, he slipped
in among the trees, and when he felt sure that no one was likely to see
him, he began to run this way and that way with his nose to the ground.

"Ha!" he exclaimed presently, "Reddy Fox has been this way lately."

Pretty soon he found another trail. "So," said he, "Peter Rabbit has
been over here a good deal of late, and his trail goes in the same
direction as that of Reddy Fox. I guess all I have to do now is to
follow Peter's trail, and it will lead me to what I want to find out."

So Old Man Coyote followed Peter's trail, and he presently came to the
pond of Paddy the Beaver. "Ha!" said he, as he looked out and saw
Paddy's new house. "So there is a newcomer to the Green Forest! I have
always heard that Beaver is very good eating. My stomach begins to feel
empty this very minute." His mouth began to water, and a fierce, hungry
look shone in his yellow eyes.

It was just then that Sammy Jay saw him and began to scream at the top
of his lungs so that Paddy the Beaver over in his house heard him. Old
Man Coyote knew that it was of no use to stay longer with Sammy Jay
about, so he took a hasty look at the pond and found where Paddy came
ashore to cut his food. Then, shaking his fist at Sammy Jay, he started
straight back for the Green Meadows. "I'll just pay a visit here in the
night," said he, "and give Mr. Beaver a surprise while he is at work."

But with all his craft, Old Man Coyote didn't notice that he had left a
footprint in the mud.

[Illustration]




XVII

OLD MAN COYOTE IS DISAPPOINTED


Old Man Coyote lay stretched out in his favorite napping place on the
Green Meadows. He was thinking of what he had found out up in the Green
Forest that morning--that Paddy the Beaver was living there. Old Man
Coyote's thoughts seemed very pleasant to himself, though really they
were very dreadful thoughts. You see, he was thinking how easy it was
going to be to catch Paddy the Beaver, and what a splendid meal he would
make. He licked his chops at the thought.

"He doesn't know I know he's here," thought Old Man Coyote. "In fact, I
don't believe he even knows that I am anywhere around. Of course, he
won't be watching for me. He cuts his trees at night, so all I will have
to do is to hide right close by where he is at work, and he'll walk
right into my mouth. Sammy Jay knows I was up there this morning, but
Sammy sleeps at night, so he will not give the alarm. My, my, how good
that Beaver will taste!" He licked his chops once more, then yawned and
closed his eyes for a nap.

Old Man Coyote waited until jolly, round, red Mr. Sun had gone to bed
behind the Purple Hills, and the Black Shadows had crept out across the
Green Meadows. Then, keeping in the blackest of them, and looking very
much like a shadow himself, he slipped into the Green Forest. It was
dark in there, and he made straight for Paddy's new pond, trotting along
swiftly without making a sound. When he was near the aspen-trees which
he knew Paddy was planning to cut, he crept forward very slowly and
carefully. Everything was still as still could be.

"Good!" thought Old Man Coyote. "I am here first, and now all I need do
is to hide and wait for Paddy to come ashore."

So he stretched himself flat behind some brush close beside the little
path Paddy had made up from the edge of the water and waited. It was
very still, so still that it seemed almost as if he could hear his heart
beat. He could see the little stars twinkling in the sky and their own
reflections twinkling back at them from the water of Paddy's pond. Old
Man Coyote waited and waited. He is very patient when there is something
to gain by it. For such a splendid dinner as Paddy the Beaver would make
he felt that he could well afford to be patient. So he waited and
waited, and everything was as still as if no living thing but the trees
were there. Even the trees seemed to be asleep.

At last, after a long, long time, he heard just the faintest splash. He
pricked up his ears and peeped out on the pond with the hungriest look
in his yellow eyes. There was a little line of silver coming straight
towards him. He knew that it was made by Paddy the Beaver swimming.
Nearer and nearer it drew. Old Man Coyote chuckled way down deep inside,
without making a sound. He could see Paddy's head now, and Paddy was
coming straight in, as if he hadn't a fear in the world.

Almost to the edge of the pond swam Paddy. Then he stopped. In a few
minutes he began to swim again, but this time it was back in the
direction of his house, and he seemed to be carrying something. It was
one of the little food logs he had cut that day, and he was taking it
out to his storehouse. Then back he came for another. And so he kept on,
never once coming ashore. Old Man Coyote waited until Paddy had carried
the last log to his storehouse and then, with a loud whack on the water
with his broad tail, had dived and disappeared in his house.

Then Old Man Coyote arose and started elsewhere to look for his dinner,
and in his heart was bitter disappointment.




XVIII

OLD MAN COYOTE TRIES ANOTHER PLAN


For three nights Old Man Coyote had stolen up through the Green Forest
with the coming of the Black Shadows and had hidden among the
aspen-trees where Paddy the Beaver cut his food, and for three nights
Paddy had failed to come ashore. Each night he had seemed to have enough
food logs in the water to keep him busy without cutting more. Old Man
Coyote lay there, and the hungry look in his eyes changed to one of
doubt and then to suspicion. Could it be that Paddy the Beaver was
smarter than he thought? It began to look very much as if Paddy knew
perfectly well that he was hiding there each night. Yes, Sir, that's the
way it looked. For three nights Paddy hadn't cut a single tree, and yet
each night he had plenty of food logs ready to take to his storehouse in
the pond.

"That means that he comes ashore in the daytime and cuts his trees,"
thought Old Man Coyote as, tired and with black anger in his heart, he
trotted home the third night. "He couldn't have found out about me
himself; he isn't smart enough. It must be that some one has told him.
And nobody knows that I have been over there but Sammy Jay. It must be
he who has been the tattletale. I think I'll visit Paddy by daylight
to-morrow, and then we'll see!"

Now the trouble with some smart people is that they are never able to
believe that others may be as smart as they. Old Man Coyote didn't know
that the first time he had visited Paddy's pond he had left behind him a
footprint in a little patch of soft mud. If he had known it, he wouldn't
have believed that Paddy would be smart enough to guess what that
footprint meant. So Old Man Coyote laid all the blame at the door of
Sammy Jay, and that very morning, when Sammy came flying over the Green
Meadows, Old Man Coyote accused him of being a tattletale and threatened
the most dreadful things to Sammy if ever he caught him.

Now Sammy had flown down to the Green Meadows to tell Old Man Coyote
how Paddy was doing all his work on land in the daytime. But when Old
Man Coyote began to call him a tattletale and accuse him of having
warned Paddy, and to threaten dreadful things, he straightway forgot all
his anger at Paddy and turned it all on Old Man Coyote. He called him
everything he could think of, and this was a great deal, for Sammy has a
wicked tongue. When he hadn't any breath left, he flew over to the Green
Forest, and there he hid where he could watch all that was going on.

That afternoon Old Man Coyote tried his new plan. He slipped into the
Green Forest, looking this way and that way to be sure that no one saw
him. Then very, very softly, he crept up through the Green Forest
towards the pond of Paddy the Beaver. As he drew near, he heard a crash,
and it made him smile. He knew what it meant. It meant that Paddy was at
work cutting down trees. With his stomach almost on the ground, he crept
forward little by little, little by little, taking the greatest care not
to rustle so much as a leaf. Presently he reached a place where he could
see the aspen-trees, and there sure enough was Paddy, sitting up on his
hind legs and hard at work cutting another tree.

Old Man Coyote lay down for a few minutes to watch. Then he wriggled
a little nearer. Slowly and carefully he drew his legs under him and
made ready for a rush. Paddy the Beaver was his at last! At just
that very minute a harsh scream rang out right over his head "Thief!
thief! thief!"

It was Sammy Jay, who had silently followed him all the way. Paddy the
Beaver didn't stop to even look around. He knew what that scream meant,
and he scrambled down his little path to the water as he never had
scrambled before. And as he dived with a great splash, Old Man Coyote
landed with a great jump on the very edge of the pond.




XIX

PADDY AND SAMMY JAY BECOME FRIENDS


Paddy the Beaver floated in his pond and grinned in the most provoking
way at Old Man Coyote, who had so nearly caught him. Old Man Coyote
fairly danced with anger on the bank. He had felt so sure of Paddy
that time that it was hard work to believe that Paddy had really gotten
away from him. He bared his long cruel teeth, and he looked very fierce
and ugly.

"Come on in; the water's fine!" called Paddy.

Now, of course, this wasn't a nice thing for Paddy to do, for it only
