master?"

"I can carry a sword," Oswald replied. "In times like these, no man
travels unarmed; and as I go as a servitor, and an assistant to your
reverence, there will be nothing unseemly in my carrying a weapon, to
defend you from the attack of foes."

"You can surely take a dagger, too. A dagger is a meet companion to a
sword, and is sometimes mighty useful, in a close fight. And, mark me,
take a smaller dagger also, that can be concealed under your coat. I
myself will assuredly do the same. There are many instances in which a
trifle of that kind might come in useful, such as for shooting the lock
of a door, or working out iron bars."

"I will do so," Oswald said, "though I hope there will be no occasion,
such as you say, for its use."

"When do we start, Master Oswald?"

"Tomorrow, at daybreak. We shall ride as far as Roxburgh. I shall go on
my own horse, which, though as good an animal as was ever saddled, has
but a poor appearance. You had best purchase a palfrey, as fat and
sleek as may be found, but with strength enough to carry your weight. I
shall be amply provided with money; and if you find a bargain, let me
know, and I will give you the means. Mind, buy nothing that looks like
a warhorse, but something in keeping with your appearance."

That evening, Oswald had another interview with Percy, and received his
final instructions, and a bag of money.

"Be careful with it, lad," he said; "not so much because of the use
that it may be to you, but because, were you seized and searched by
robbers, and others, the sight of the gold might awake suspicions that
you were not what you seemed, and might lead to a long detention. Keep
your eye on Brother Roger, and see that he does not indulge too much in
the wine cups, and that he comports himself rather in keeping with his
attire, than with his natural disposition; and if you have any
difficulty in restraining him, or if he does not obey your orders, send
him back, at once. Will you see him again this evening?"

"He is waiting for me in my apartment, now, my lord, having come for
the money for the purchase of a palfrey, which I bade him get."

"Send him to me, when you get there."

When the monk appeared before Hotspur, the latter said, "See here,
monk, I have saved you from punishment, and become, as it were, your
surety. See that you do not discredit me. You will remember that,
although my young esquire may ask your advice, and benefit by your
experience, he is your leader; and his orders, when he gives them, are
to be obeyed as promptly as if it were I myself who spoke, to one of my
men-at-arms. He is my representative in the matter, and is obeying my
orders, as you will obey his. The mission is one of importance, and if
it fails from any fault of yours, you had better drown yourself in the
first river you come to, than return to Northumberland."

"I think that you can trust me, my lord," the monk said, calmly. "I am
a very poor monk, but methinks that I am not a bad soldier; and
although I go in the dress of the one, I shall really go as the other.
I know that my duty, as a soldier, will be to obey. Even as regards my
potations, which I own are sometimes deeper than they should be,
methinks that, as a soldier, I shall be much less thirsty than I was as
a monk. If the enterprise should fail from any default of mine, your
lordship may be sure that I shall bear your advice in mind."

"I doubt not that you will do well, Roger. I should not have sent you
with my esquire, on such a business, had I not believed that you would
prove yourself worthy of my confidence. I know that a man may be a good
soldier, and even a wise counsellor, though he may be a very bad monk."

The next morning the pair rode out from the castle, at daybreak. Roger
was dressed in the usual monkish attire of the time, a long loose gown
with a cape, and a head covering resembling a small turban. He rode a
compactly built little horse, which seemed scarce capable of carrying
his weight, but ambled along with him as if it scarcely felt it. Oswald
was dressed as a lay servitor, in tightly-fitting high hose, short
jerkin girt in by a band at the waist, and going half-way down to the
knee. He rode his own moorland horse, and carried on his arm a basket
with provisions for a day's march. He wore a small cloth cap, which
fell down to his neck behind. His uncle accompanied him to the gate,
which was, by his orders, opened to give them egress.

"Goodbye, lad," he said. "I know not, and do not wish to know, the
object of your journey. It is enough for me that it is a confidential
mission for Hotspur, and I am proud that you should have been chosen
for it, and I feel convinced that you will prove you have merited our
lord's confidence.

"Goodbye, friend Roger! Don't let your love of fisticuffs and hard
knocks carry you away, but try and bear yourself as if you were still
in the monastery, with the abbot keeping his eye upon you."

Brother Roger laughed.

"You make a cold shiver run down my back, Alwyn. I was feeling as if I
had just got out of a cold cellar, into the sunshine, and could shout
with very lightness of heart. I am not in the least disposed to quarrel
with anyone, so let your mind be easy as to my doings. I shall be
discretion itself; and even if I am called upon to strike, will do so
as gently as may be, putting only such strength into the blow as will
prevent an opponent from troubling us further."

So, with a wave of the hand, they rode on.

"I had better strap that staff beside your saddle, and under your
knee," Oswald said, when they had ridden a short distance. "You carry
it as if it were a spear, and I have seen already three or four people
smile, as we passed them."

Roger reluctantly allowed Oswald to fasten the staff beside him.

"One wants something in one's hands," he said. "On foot it does not
matter so much, but now I am on horseback again, I feel that I ought to
have a spear in hand, and a sword dangling at my side."

"You must remember that you are still a monk, Roger, although enlarged
for a season. Some day, perhaps, you will be able to gratify your
desires in that way. You had best moderate the speed of your horse, for
although he ambles along merrily, at present, he can never carry that
great carcase of yours, at this pace, through our journey."

"I should like one good gallop," Roger sighed, as he pulled at the
rein, and the horse proceeded at a pace better suited to the appearance
of its rider.

"A nice figure you would look, with your robes streaming behind you,"
Oswald laughed. "There would soon be a story going through the country,
of a mad monk.

"Now, we take this turning to the right, and here leave the main north
road, for we are bound, in the first place, to Roxburgh."

"I thought that it must be that, or Berwick, though I asked no
questions."

"We shall not travel like this beyond Roxburgh, but shall journey
forward on foot."

"I supposed that we should come to that, Master Oswald, for otherwise
you would not have told me to provide myself with a staff."

They journeyed pleasantly along. Whenever they approached any town or
large village, Oswald reined back his horse a little, so that its head
was on a level with Roger's stirrup. They slept that night at
Kirknewton, where they put up at a small hostelry. Oswald had intended
going to the monastery there, but Roger begged so earnestly that they
should put up elsewhere, that he yielded to him.

"I should have no end of questions asked, as to our journey across the
border, and its object," Roger said; "and it always goes against my
conscience to have to lie, unless upon pressing occasions."

"And, moreover," Oswald said, with a laugh, "you might be expected to
get up to join the community at prayers, at midnight; and they might
give you a monk's bed, instead of a more comfortable one in the guest
chambers."

"There may be something in that," Roger admitted, "and I have so often
to sleep on a stone bench, for the punishment of my offences, that I
own to a weakness for a soft bed, when I can get one."

However, Oswald was pleased to see that his follower behaved, at their
resting place, with more discretion than he could have hoped for;
although he somewhat surprised his host, by the heartiness of his
appetite; but, on the other hand, he was moderate in his potations, and
talked but little, retiring to a bed of thick rushes, at curfew.

"In truth, I was afraid to trust myself," he said to Oswald, as they
lay down side by side. "Never have I felt so free, since
Otterburn--never, indeed, since that unfortunate day when I was
wounded, and conceived the fatal idea of becoming a monk. Two or three
times, the impulse to troll out a trooper's song was so strong in me,
that I had to clap my hand over my mouth, to keep it in."

"'Tis well you did, Roger, for assuredly if you had so committed
yourself, on the first day of starting, I must have sent you back to
Alnwick, feeling that it would not be safe for you to proceed with me
farther. When we get upon the Cheviots, tomorrow, you may lift your
voice as you choose; but it were best that you confined yourself to a
Latin canticle, even there, for the habit of breaking into songs of the
other kind might grow upon you."

"I will do so," Roger said, seriously. "Some of the canticles have
plenty of ring and go, and the words matter not, seeing that I do not
understand them."

The next morning they resumed their journey, crossed the Cheviots,
which were here comparatively low hills; and, after four hours' riding,
arrived at Roxburgh.

"Why do we come here?" Roger asked. "It would surely have been much
shorter had we travelled through Berwick, and along the coast road."

"Much shorter, Roger; but Sir Henry thought it better that we should go
inland to Haddington, and thence east to Dunbar; as, thus entering the
town, it would seem that we came from Edinburgh, or from some western
monastery; whereas, did we journey by the coast road, it might be
guessed that we had come from England."

As before, they put up at a hostelry; and Oswald then proceeded, on
foot, to the governor's house. Some soldiers were loitering at the
door.

"What do you want, lad?" one of them asked, as he came up.

"I have a letter, which I am charged to deliver into the governor's own
hands."

"A complaint, I suppose, from some worthy prior, who has lost some of
his beeves?"

"Maybe the governor will inform you, if you ask him," Oswald replied.

"I shall pull your ear for you, when you come out, young jackanapes,"
the soldier said, hotly.

"That danger I must even risk. Business first, and pleasure
afterwards."

And while the other soldiers burst into a fit of laughter, at the
astonishment of their comrade at what he deemed the insolence of this
young servitor of a monastery, he quietly entered. The guard at the
door, who had heard the colloquy, led him into the governor's room.

"A messenger with a letter desires speech with you, Sir Philip," he
said.

"Bid him enter," the knight said, briefly.

Oswald entered, and bowed deeply. He waited until the door closed
behind the attendant, and then said:

"I am the bearer of a letter, sir, from Lord Percy to you."

The knight looked at him in surprise.

"Hotspur has chosen a strange messenger," he muttered to himself, as he
took the missive Oswald held out to him, cut the silk that bound it
with a dagger, and read its contents. As he laid it down, he rose to
his feet.

"Excuse my want of courtesy," he said. "Lord Percy tells me that you
are one of his esquires--no slight recommendation--and that you are
intrusted with somewhat important a mission, on his part, to Dunbar, a
still higher recommendation--for assuredly he would not have selected
you for such a purpose, had you not stood high in his regard. But,
indeed, at first I took you for what you seemed, as the bearer of a
complaint from some abbot; for in truth, such complaints are not
uncommon, for whenever a bullock is lost, they put it down to my men.

"Where are your horses that Percy speaks of? You will, I hope, take up
your abode here, as long as you stay in the town."

"Thank you, Sir Philip; but I shall go forward in the morning. I have
already put up at the Golden Rose. It would attract attention, were I
to come here, and it were best that I remain as I am; and indeed, I
have brought no clothes with me, save those I stand in."

"Well, perhaps, as you do not wish to attract attention, it were best
so; and I pray you inform Lord Percy of the reason why you declined my
entertainment."

"I shall be glad, Sir Philip, if you will send down a couple of your
men to fetch the horses up to your stables; as I shall start, as soon
as the gates are open, tomorrow morning."

"I will do so, at once."

And the governor rang a handbell on the table.

"Send two of the men up here," he said, as an attendant entered.

A minute later a door opened, and two soldiers came in, and saluted.
One of them, to Oswald's amusement, was the man with whom he had
exchanged words, below.

"You will accompany this gentleman to the Golden Rose, and bring back
two horses, which he will hand over to you, and place them in the
stables with mine.

"Are you sure, Master Forster, that there is nothing more that I can do
for you?"

"Nothing, whatever, I thank you, sir; and I am greatly obliged by your
courtesy, and with your permission I will take my leave. I hope to
return here in the course of a week, or ten days."

So saying, Oswald shook hands with the governor and went downstairs,
followed by the soldiers, who had not yet recovered from their surprise
at seeing Oswald seated, and evidently on familiar terms with their
lord. Oswald said nothing to them, until he arrived at the Golden Rose.
Then he led the way to the stables, and handed the horses over to them.

"I suppose that that pulling of the ear will be deferred, for a time?"
he said, with a smile, to the soldier who had made the remark.

The man sheepishly took hold of the bridle.

"I could not tell, sir--" he began.

"Of course you could not," Oswald interrupted. "Still, it may be a
lesson, to you, that it is just as well not to make fun of people,
until you are quite sure who they are. There, I bear no malice; get
yourselves a stoup of wine, in payment for your services."

"I thought that there was something out of the way about him," the
other man said, as they walked up the street with the two horses; "or
he would never have turned upon you, as he did. It is evident that he
is someone of consequence, and is here on some secret business or
other, with Sir Philip. It is well that he did not bear malice, for you
would have got it hot, from the governor, had he reported what you said
to him."



Chapter 6: At Dunbar.


The journey passed without any incident of importance, but Oswald had
reason to congratulate himself on having taken the monk with him. On
one occasion, as they were passing over a wild heath, a party of eight
or ten men, on rough ponies, rode up. They were armed with spears and
swords. They reined up with exclamations of disappointment as Roger,
who had rolled up his robe round his waist, for convenience of walking,
let it fall round him.

"You have played us a scurvy trick, monk," the leader said, angrily.
"Who was to guess it was a monk, who was thus striding along?"

"You would find it difficult to walk, yourself, with this robe dangling
about your heels," Roger said.

"Whither are you bound, and whence are you going?"

"We are travelling to Dunbar, being sent to the convent of Saint Magnus
there, and come from Roxburgh."

"'Tis a shame that so stalwart a fellow as you are should be leading a
drone's life, in a convent; when every true Scotsman is sharpening his
spear, in readiness for what may come when the truce with England
expires."

"I am glad to hear that you are so well employed," Roger replied; "but
methinks that, in days like these, it is sometimes useful to have a few
men of thews and sinews, even in a religious house; for there are those
who sometimes fail in the respect they owe to the Church."

"That is true enough," the men laughed. "Well, go thy way. There is
naught to be gained from a travelling monk."

"Naught, good friend, save occasionally hard blows, when the monk
happens to be of my strength and stature, and carries a staff like
this."

"'Tis a goodly weapon, in sooth, and you look as if you knew how to
wield it."

"Even a monk may know that, seeing that a staff is not a carnal
weapon."

And rolling up his sleeves, Roger took the staff in the middle with
both hands, in the manner of a quarterstaff, and made it play round his
head; with a speed, and vigour, that showed that he was a complete
master of the exercise.

"Enough, enough!" the man said, while exclamations of admiration broke
from the others. "Truly from such a champion, strong enough to wield a
weapon that resembles a weaver's beam, rather than a quarterstaff,
there would be more hard knocks than silver to be gained; but it is all
the more pity that such skill and strength should be thrown away, in a
convent. Perhaps it is as well that you are wearing a monk's gown, for
methinks that, eight to one as we are, some of us might have got broken
heads, before we gained the few pence in your pocket.

"Come on, men. Better luck next time. It is clear that this man is not
the one we are charged to capture."

And, with his followers, he rode off across the moor.

"I do not think that they are what they seem," Oswald said, as they
resumed their journey. "The man's speech was not that of a border
raider, and his followers would hardly have sat their horses so
silently, and obeyed his orders so promptly, had they been merely
thieving caterans; besides, you marked that he said you were not the
man they were watching for."

"Whom think you that they are, then, Master Oswald?"

"I think it possible that they may be a party of Douglas's followers,
led by a knight. It may be that Douglas has received some hint of
March's being in communication with England; and that he has sent a
party to seize, and search, any traveller who looked like a messenger
from the south. Of course, this may be only fancy. Still, I am right
glad that you were wearing your monkish robe; for, had I been alone, I
might have been cross-questioned so shrewdly as to my purpose in
travelling, that I might have been held on suspicion, and means
employed to get the truth out of me."

At the small town where they stopped, next night, they learned that
many complaints had been made, by travellers from the south, of how
they had been stopped by a party of armed men on the border, closely
questioned, and searched, and in some cases robbed. This had been going
on for some weeks, and the sheriff of the county had twice collected an
armed force, and ridden in search of the robbers, but altogether
without success. It was believed that they were strangers to the
district, and the description given of them had not agreed with those
of any noted bad characters, in the neighbourhood.

"Certainly, Master Oswald," the monk said, "all this seems to support
your idea. Money and valuables are soon found; but by what these men
say of the way in which the clothes and belongings of these travellers
were searched, it would seem to show that money was not the object of
the band, but rather the discovery of correspondence, and that money
was only taken as a cloak."

"I have no doubt that they were there to intercept someone, Roger,
though it may not have been Percy's messengers; still, we are well rid
of them, and I hope that we shall meet no more, on our way."

The hope was fulfilled, and they reached Dunbar without further
interruption. Here they deemed it better to separate. The monk went to
a convent, and gave out there that he was on the way to Edinburgh,
being on a journey thither to see his aged father, who was in his last
sickness. Oswald went to a shop, and bought clothes suited for the son
of a trader in a fair position; and, changing his things at the inn
where he had put up, made his way to the castle.

"I would have speech with the earl," he said, to the warder at the
gate. "I have his orders to wait upon him."

"What is your name and condition?"

"That matters not. I am here by the earl's orders. He sent me a ring,
by which it might be known that I am authorized to have access to him."

On seeing the ring, the warder at once called to one of the servitors,
and bade him conduct Oswald to the earl's apartment.

"Whom shall I say?" he asked, when he reached the door.

"Give this ring to him, and say that the bearer awaits admittance to
him."

The man entered the room and then, opening the door again, motioned to
Oswald to enter. The earl, a tall and powerfully-built man, looked with
a keen scrutiny at him.

"From whom come you, young sir?"

"From the holder of that ring, my Lord Earl," Oswald said, presenting
the ring that Percy had given him. "My name is Oswald Forster, and I
have the honour to be one of Lord Percy's esquires."

"Come you alone?" the earl asked.

"I came with a companion, a monk. I was in the disguise of a young
servitor of his convent. We came on foot from Roxburgh."

He then unscrewed the handle of a dagger Percy had given him, for the
purpose, and pulled out a small roll of paper, which he handed to the
earl. It contained only the following words:

"Do not intrust undue confidence in the bearer. The matters you wot of
are in good train; of them my messenger knows nothing."

