effect of the news throughout the United States was tremendous, and Mr.
Lincoln at once called out 75,000 men of the militia of the various
States to put down the rebellion--the border States being ordered to
send their proportion. This brought matters to a climax. Virginia, North
Carolina, Kentucky, Tennessee, and Missouri all refused to furnish
contingents to act against the Southern States; and Virginia and North
Carolina a few days later passed Ordinances of Secession and joined the
Southern States. Missouri, Maryland, and Delaware were divided in their
counsels.

The struggle that was about to commence was an uneven one. The white
population of the Seceding States was about 8,000,000; while that of the
Northern States was 19,614,885. The North possessed an immense
advantage, inasmuch as they retained the whole of the Federal navy, and
were thereby enabled at once to cut off all communication between the
Southern States and Europe, while they themselves could draw unlimited
supplies of munitions of war of all kinds from across the Atlantic.

Although the people of Virginia had hoped to the last that some peaceful
arrangement might be effected, the Act of Secession was received with
enthusiasm. The demand of Mr. Lincoln that they should furnish troops to
crush their Southern brethren excited the livliest indignation, and
Virginia felt that there was no course open to her now but to throw in
her lot with the other slave States. Her militia was at once called out,
and volunteers called for to form a provisional army to protect the
State from invasion by the North.

The appeal was answered with enthusiasm; men of all ages took up arms;
the wealthy raised regiments at their own expense, generally handing
over the commands to experienced army officers, and themselves taking
their places in the ranks; thousands of lads of from fifteen to sixteen
years of age enrolled themselves, and men who had never done a day's
work in their lives prepared to suffer all the hardships of the campaign
as private soldiers.

Mrs. Wingfield was an enthusiastic supporter of State rights; and when
Vincent told her that numbers of his friends were going to enroll
themselves as soon as the lists were opened, she offered no objection to
his doing the same.

"Of course you are very young, Vincent; but no one thinks there will be
any serious fighting. Now that Virginia and the other four States have
cast in their lot with the seven that have seceded, the North can never
hope to force the solid South back into the Union. Still it is right you
should join. I certainly should not like an old Virginian family like
ours to be unrepresented; but I should prefer your joining one of the
mounted corps.

"In the first place, it will be much less fatiguing than carrying a
heavy rifle and knapsack; and in the second place, the cavalry will for
the most part be gentlemen. I was speaking only yesterday, when I went
into Richmond, to Mr. Ashley, who is raising a corps. He is one of the
best riders in the country, and a splendid specimen of a Virginian
gentleman. He tells me that he has already received a large number of
applications from young volunteers, and that he thinks he shall be able
without any difficulty to get as many as he wants. I said that I had a
son who would probably enroll himself, and that I should like to have
him in his corps.

"He said that he would be glad to put down your name, and that he had
had many applications from lads no older than yourself. He considered
that for cavalry work, scouting, and that sort of thing age mattered
little, and that a lad who was at once a light weight, a good rider,
and a good shot was of as much good as a man."

"Thank you, mother. I will ride into Richmond to-morrow morning and see
Ashley. I have often met him and should like to serve under him very
much. I should certainly prefer being in the cavalry to the infantry."

Rosie and Annie, who were of course enthusiastic for the South, were
almost as pleased as was Vincent when they heard that their mother had
consented to his enrolling himself. So many of the girls of their
acquaintance had brothers or cousins who were joining the army, that
they would have felt it as something of a slur upon the family name had
Vincent remained behind.

On the following morning Vincent rode over and saw Mr. Ashley, who had
just received his commission as major. He was cordially received.

"Mrs. Wingfield was speaking to me about you, and I shall be glad to
have you with me--the more so as you are a capital rider and a good
shot. I shall have a good many in my ranks no older than you are. Did I
not hear a few months since that you bought Wildfire? I thought, when I
heard it, that you would be lucky if you did not get your neck broken in
the course of a week. Peters, who owns the next estate to mine, had the
horse for about three weeks, and was glad enough to get rid of it for
half what he had given for it. He told me that the horse was the most
savage brute he ever saw. I suppose you didn't keep it many days?"

"I have got it still, and mean to ride it with you. The horse is not
really savage. It was hot-tempered, and had, I think, been badly treated
by its first owner. It only wanted kindness and a little patience; and
as soon as it found that it could not get rid of me, and that I had no
intention of ill-treating it, it settled down quietly, after running
away a few times and giving me some little trouble at starting. And now
I would not change it for any horse in the State."

"You must be a first-rate rider," Major Ashley said, "to be able to tame
Wildfire. I never saw the horse, for I was away when Peters had her;
but from his description it was a perfect savage."

"Are we allowed to bring a servant with us?" Vincent asked.

"Yes, if you like. I know that a good many are going to do so, but you
must not make up your mind that you will get much benefit from one. We
shall move rapidly, and each man must shift for himself, but at the same
time we shall of course often be stationary; and then servants will be
useful. At any rate I can see no objection to men having them. We must
be prepared to rough it to any extent when it is necessary, but I see no
reason why at other times a man should not make himself comfortable. I
expect the order to-morrow or next day to begin formally to enroll
volunteers. As I have now put down your name there will be no occasion
for you to come in then. You will receive a communication telling you
when to report yourself.

"I shall not trouble much about uniform at first. High boots and
breeches, a thick felt hat that will turn the edge of a sword, and a
loose coat-jacket of dark-gray cloth. Here is the name of the tailor who
has got the pattern, and will make them. So I should advise you to go to
him at once, for he will be so busy soon that there is no saying when
the whole troop will get their uniforms."

Upon his return home Vincent related to his mother and sisters the
conversation that he had had with Major Ashley.

"Certainly you had better take a servant with you," his mother said. "I
suppose, when you are riding about you will have to cook your dinner and
do everything for yourself; but when you are in a town you should have
these things done for you. Who would you like to take?"

"I should like to take Dan, mother, if you have no objection. He is very
strong and active, and I think would generally be able to keep up with
us; besides, I know he would always stick to me."

"You shall have him certainly, Vincent; I will make him over formally to
you."

"Thank you, mother," Vincent said joyfully; for he had often wished that
Dan belonged to him, as he would then be able to prevent any
interference with him by the overseer or anyone else, and could, if he
liked, give him his freedom--although this would, he knew, be of very
doubtful advantage to the lad as long as he remained in the South.

The next morning the necessary papers were drawn up, and the ownership
of Dan was formally transferred to Vincent. Dan was wild with delight
when he heard that Vincent was now his master, and that he was to
accompany him to the war. It had been known two days before that Vincent
was going, and it seemed quite shocking to the negroes that the young
master should go as a private soldier, and have to do everything for
himself--"just," as they said, "like de poor white trash"; for the
slaves were proud to belong to an old family, and looked down with
almost contempt upon the poorer class of whites, regarding their own
position as infinitely superior.

Four days later Vincent received an official letter saying that the
corps would be mustered in two days' time. The next day was spent in a
long round of farewell visits, and then Vincent mounted Wildfire, and,
with Dan trotting behind, rode off from the Orangery amidst a chorus of
blessings and good wishes from all the slaves who could on any pretext
get away from their duties, and who had assembled in front of the house
to see him start.

The place of meeting for the regiment was at Hanover Courthouse--a
station on the Richmond and Fredericksburg Railway, close to the Pamunky
River, about eighteen miles from the city.

The Orangery was a mile from the village of Gaines, which lay to the
northeast of Richmond, and was some twelve miles from Hanover
Courthouse.

A month was spent in drill, and at the end of that time the corps were
able to execute any simple maneuver. More than this Major Ashley did
not care about their learning. The work in which they were about to
engage was that of scouts rather than that of regular cavalry, and the
requirements were vigilance and attention to orders, good shooting, and
a quick eye. Off duty there was but little discipline. Almost the whole
of the men were in a good position in life, and many of them very
wealthy; and while strict discipline and obedience were expected while
on duty, at all other times something like equality existed between
officers and men, and all were free to live as they chose.

The rations served out were simple and often scanty, for at present the
various departments were not properly organized, and such numbers of men
were flocking to the standards that the authorities were at their wits'
end to provide them with even the simplest food. This mattered but
little, however, to the regiment, whose members were all ready and
willing to pay for everything they wanted, and the country people round
found a ready market for all their chickens, eggs, fruit, and vegetables
at Hanover Courthouse, for here there were also several infantry
regiments, and the normally quiet little village was a scene of bustle
and confusion.

The arms of the cavalry were of a very varied description. Not more than
a dozen had swords; the rest were armed with rifles or shot-guns, with
the barrels cut short to enable them to be carried as carbines. Many of
them were armed with revolvers and some carried pistols so antiquated
that they might have been used in the Revolutionary War. A certain
number of tents had been issued for the use of the corps. These,
however, were altogether insufficient for the numbers, and most of the
men preferred to sleep in shelters composed of canvas, carpets,
blankets, or any other material that came to hand, or in arbors
constructed of the boughs of trees, for it was now April and warm enough
to sleep in the open air.

In the third week in May the order came that the corps was to march at
once for Harper's Ferry--an important position at the point where the
Shenandoah River runs into the Potomac, at the mouth of the Shenandoah
Valley. The order was received with the greatest satisfaction. The
Federal forces were gathering rapidly upon the northern banks of the
Potomac, and it was believed that, while the main army would march down
from Washington through Manassas Junction direct upon Richmond, another
would enter by the Shenandoah Valley, and, crossing the Blue Ridge
Mountains, come down on the rear of the Confederate army, facing the
main force at Manassas. The cavalry marched by road, while the infantry
were dispatched by rail as far as Manassas Junction, whence they marched
to Harper's Ferry. The black servants accompanied the infantry.

The cavalry march was a pleasant one. At every village through which
they passed the people flocked out with offerings of milk and fruit. The
days were hot, but the mornings and evenings delightful; and as the
troops always halted in the shade of a wood for three or four hours in
the middle of the day, the marches, although long, were not fatiguing.
At Harper's Ferry General Johnston had just superseded Colonel Jackson
in command. The force there consisted of eleven battalions of infantry,
sixteen guns, and after Ashley's force arrived, three hundred cavalry.
Among the regiments there Vincent found many friends, and learned what
was going on.

He learned that Colonel Jackson had been keeping them hard at work. Some
of Vincent's friends had been at the Virginia Military Institute at
Lexington, where Jackson was professor of natural philosophy and
instructor of artillery.

"He was the greatest fun," one of the young men said; "the stiffest and
most awkward-looking fellow in the Institute. He used to walk about as
if he never saw anything or anybody. He was always known as Old Tom, and
nobody ever saw him laugh. He was awfully earnest in all he did, and
strict, I can tell you, about everything. There was no humbugging him.
The fellows liked him because he was really so earnest about
everything, and always just and fair. But he didn't look a bit like a
soldier except as to his stiffness, and when the fellows who had been at
Lexington heard that he was in command here they did not think he would
have made much hand at it; but I tell you, he did. You never saw such a
fellow to work.

"Everything had to be done, you know. There were the guns, but no horses
and no harness. The horses had to be got somehow, and the harness
manufactured out of ropes; and you can imagine the confusion of nine
battalions of infantry, all recruits, with no one to teach them except a
score or two of old army and militia officers. Old Tom has done wonders,
I can tell you. You see, he is so fearfully earnest himself everyone
else has got to be earnest. There has been no playing about anything,
but just fifteen hours' hard work a day. Fellows grumbled and growled
and said it was absurd, and threatened to do all sorts of things. You
see, they had all come out to fight, if necessary, but hadn't bargained
for such hard work as this.

"However, Jackson had his way, and I don't suppose anyone ever told him
the men thought they were too hard worked. He is not the sort of man one
would care about remonstrating with. I don't know yet whether he is as
good at fighting as he is at working and organizing; but I rather expect
a fellow who is so earnest about everything else is sure to be earnest
about fighting, and I fancy that, when he once gets into the thick of
it, he will go through with it. He had such a reputation as an oddity at
Lexington that there were a lot of remarks when he was made colonel and
sent here; but there is no doubt that he has proved himself the right
man so far, and although his men may grumble they believe in him.

"My regiment is in his brigade, and I will bet any money that we have
our share of fighting. What sort of man is Johnston? He is a fine
fellow--a soldier, heart and soul. You could tell him anywhere, and we
have a first-rate fellow in command of the cavalry--Colonel Stuart--a
splendid, dashing fellow, full of life and go. His fellows swear by him.
I quite envy you, for I expect you will astonish the Yankee horsemen.
They are no great riders up there, you know, and I reckon the first time
you meet them you will astonish them."

[Illustration: Map--GENL. LEE'S CAMPAIGNS IN VIRGINIA.]

Here he suddenly stopped, stood at attention, and saluted.

Vincent at once did the same, although, had he not been set the example
by his friend, he would never have thought of doing so to the figure who
had passed.

"Who is it?" he asked, as his companion resumed his easy attitude.

"Why, that's Old Tom."

"What! Colonel Jackson!" Vincent said in surprise, "Well, he is an
odd-looking fellow!"

The figure that had passed was that of a tall, gaunt man, leaning
awkwardly forward in his saddle. He wore an old gray coat, and there was
no sign of rank, nor particle of gold lace upon the uniform. He wore on
his head a faded cadet cap, with the rim coming down so far upon his
nose that he could only look sideways from under it. He seemed to pay
but little attention to what was going on around him, and did not enter
into conversation with any of the officers he met.

The brigade commanded by Jackson was the 1st of the Army of the
Shenandoah, and consisted of the 2d, 4th, 5th, and 27th Virginians, to
which was shortly added the 33d. They were composed of men of all ranks
and ages, among them being a great number of lads from fifteen and
upward; for every school had been deserted. Every boy capable of
carrying a musket had insisted upon joining, and among them were a whole
company of cadets from Lexington. The regiments selected their own
officers, and among these were many who were still lads. Many of the
regiments had no accouterments, and were without uniforms, and numbers
carried no better arms than a double-barreled shot-gun; but all were
animated with the same spirit of enthusiasm in their cause, and a
determination to die rather than to allow the invaders to pass on
through the fertile valleys of their native land.

Of all these valleys that of the Shenandoah was the richest and most
beautiful. It was called the Garden of Virginia; and all writers agreed
in their praises of the beauties of its fields and forests, mountains
and rivers, its delicious climate, and the general prosperity which
prevailed among its population.

It was a pleasant evening that Ashley's horse spent at Harper's Ferry on
the day they marched in. All had many friends among the other Virginia
regiments, and their campfires were the center toward which men trooped
by scores. The rest was pleasant after their hard marches; and, although
ready to do their own work when necessary, they appreciated the
advantage of having their servants again with them to groom their horses
and cook their food.

The negroes were not less glad at being again with their masters. Almost
all were men who had, like Dan, been brought up with their young owners,
and felt for them a strong personal attachment, and, if it had been
allowed, would gladly have followed them in the field of battle, and
fought by their side against the "Yankees." Their stay at Harper's Ferry
was to be a short one. Colonel Stuart, with his 200 horse, was scouting
along the whole bank of the Potomac, watching every movement of the
enemy, and Ashley's horse was to join them at once.

It was not difficult for even young soldiers to form an idea of the
general nature of the operations. They had to protect the Shenandoah
Valley, to guard the five great roads by which the enemy would advance
against Winchester, and not only save the loyal inhabitants and rich
resources of the valley from falling into the hands of the Federals, but
what was of even greater importance, to prevent the latter from marching
across the Blue Ridge Mountains, and falling upon the flank of the main
Confederate army at Manassas.

The position was a difficult one, for while "the grand army" was
assembling at Alexandria to advance against Manassas Junction, McClellan
was advancing from the northwest with 20,000 men, and Patterson from
Pennsylvania with 18,000.

In the morning, before parading his troop, 100 strong, Ashley called
them together and told them that, as they would now be constantly on the
move and scattered over a long line, it was impossible that they could
take their servants with them.

"I should never have allowed them to be brought," he said, "had I known
that we should be scouting over such an extensive country; at the same
time, if we can manage to take a few on it would certainly add to our
comfort. I propose that we choose ten by lot to go on with us. They must
be servants of the troop and not of individuals. We can scatter them in
pairs at five points, with instructions to forage as well as they can,
and to have things in readiness to cook for whoever may come in off duty
or may for the time be posted there. Henceforth every man must groom and
see to his own horse, but I see no reason, military or otherwise, why we
shouldn't get our food cooked for us; and it will be just as well, as
long as we can, to have a few bundles of straw for us to lie on instead
of sleeping on the ground.

"Another ten men we can also choose by lot to go to Winchester; which
is, I imagine, the point we shall move to if the enemy advance, as I
fancy they will, from the other side of the Shenandoah Valley. The rest
must be sent home."

Each man accordingly wrote his name on a piece of paper, and placed it
in a haversack. Ten were then drawn out; and their servants were to
accompany the troop at once. The servants of the next ten were to
proceed by train to Winchester, while the slaves of all whose names
remained in the bag were to be sent home at once, provided with passes
permitting them to travel. To Vincent's satisfaction his name was one of
the first ten drawn, and Dan was therefore to go forward. The greater
part of the men evaded the obligation to send their servants back to
Richmond by dispatching them to friends who had estates in the
Shenandoah Valley, with letters asking them to keep the men for them
until the troop happened to come into their neighborhood.

At six o'clock in the morning the troop mounted and rode to Bath, thirty
miles away. It was here that Stuart had his headquarters, whence he sent
out his patrols up and down the Potomac, between Harper's Ferry on the
east and Cumberland on the west. Stuart was away when they arrived, but
he rode in a few hours afterward.

"Ah, Ashley! I am glad you have arrived," he said as he rode up to the
troop, who had hastily mounted as he was seen approaching. "There is
plenty for you to do, I can tell you; and I only wish you had brought a
thousand men instead of a hundred. I am heartily glad to see you all,
gentlemen," he said to the troop. "I am afraid just at first that the
brightness of your gray jackets will put my men rather to shame; but we
shall soon get rid of that. But dismount your men, Ashley; there is
plenty for them and their horses to do without wasting time in parade
work. There is very little of that here, I can tell you. I have not seen
a score of my men together for the last month."

Vincent gazed with admiration at the young leader, whose name was soon
to be celebrated throughout America and Europe. The young Virginian--for
he was not yet twenty-eight years old--was the _beau ideal_ of a cavalry
officer. He was singularly handsome, and possessed great personal
strength and a constitution which enabled him to bear all hardships. He
possessed unfailing good spirits, and had a joke and laugh for all he
met; and while on the march, at the head of his regiment, he was always
ready to lift up his voice and lead the songs with which the men made
the woods resound.

He seemed to live in his saddle, and was present at all hours of the
night and day along the line he guarded, seeing that the men were
watchful and on the alert, instructing the outposts in their duty, and
infusing his own spirit and vigilance among them. He had been educated
at West Point, and had seen much service with the cavalry against the
Indians in the West. Such was the man who was to become the most famous
cavalry leader of his time. So far he had not come in contact with the
enemy, and his duties were confined to obtaining information regarding
their strength and intentions, to watching every road by which they
could advance, and to seeing that none passed North to carry information
to the enemy as to the Confederate strength and positions, for even in
the Shenandoah Valley there were some whose sympathies were with the
Federals.

These were principally Northern men settled as traders in the towns, and
it was important to prevent them from sending any news to the enemy. So
well did Stuart's cavalry perform this service, and so general was the
hostility of the population against the North, that throughout the whole
of the war in Virginia it was very seldom that the Northern generals
could obtain any trustworthy information as to the movements and
