
"Why doesn't she go through the gateway, then?" asked the Swallow.

"Because she says she would rather go the other way, and that if she
can't go that way, she won't go at all."

"And she is missing all that fun?" said the Swallow.

"All of it," answered the Nigh Ox, "but then, you know, she is such a
Goose!"




WHY THE SHEEP RAN AWAY


It was during the hottest summer weather that the wind-storm came. The
farmyard people always spoke of it as "the" wind-storm, because not even
the Blind Horse, who had lived on the farm longer than any of his
neighbors, could remember anything like it. "I recall one time," he
said, "when a sweet-apple tree was blown down in the fall. The Hogs
found it and ate all the fruit before the farmer knew that it was down.
You should have heard them grunt over it. They were afraid the farmer
would drive them away before they had eaten it all. Eh, well! They ate
all they wanted, but one of the Pigs told me afterward that it made them
sick, and that he never wanted to see another sweet apple as long as he
lived. That was a hard storm, but not like this, not like this."

It had come in the night when the farmyard people were asleep, and there
was much scampering to shelter. The fowls, who were roosting in the old
apple-tree, did not have time to oil their feathers and make them
water-proof. They just flew off their perches as fast as they could and
ran for the open door of the Hen-house. When they were once inside, they
ruffled up their feathers and shook themselves to get rid of the
rain-drops. Fowls do not like wet weather, and it vexes them very much
to be in the rain. Their neighbors know this so well that it has become
their custom to say of an angry person that he is "as mad as a wet Hen."

The Cows were in their part of the barn with their necks between the
stanchions, so there was nothing for them to do but to keep still and
think of those who were out of doors. The Horses were in their
comfortable stalls. They had been working hard all day and the farmer
had gotten a good supper of oats ready for them in their mangers, so
that they could eat quickly and go to sleep, instead of staying awake
and walking around to get their own suppers in the pasture.

Out in the meadow the Sheep huddled close together under a low-branching
tree, and stood still until the storm passed. They had been so warm that
the cool rain made them comfortable, but the wind pushed them and swayed
the branches of the trees. The loud thunder made the Lambs jump. They
liked the lightning and made a game out of it, each one telling what he
had seen by the last flash. The clouds, too, were beautiful, and flew
across the sky like great dark birds with downy breasts, dropping now
and then shining worms from their beaks.

At last the air became cool and clear, and the clouds flew far away
toward the east. Next, the stars peeped out, first one, then two, then
six, then twenty, and then so many that you could not have counted
them,--more than the leaves on a maple-tree, more than the grass-blades
of the meadow. The Sheep ran around a little to shake off the rain-drops
and warm themselves, then they huddled down again to sleep.

When the sun arose in the eastern sky, his warm beams fell upon the
Sheep and awakened them. "How cool and beautiful a day," they said.
"What a morning for a run!"

"I can beat you to the tall grass!" called one little Lamb to the rest,
and they all scampered around the field, throwing up their heels for
joy. They had been away from their mothers for awhile, and had learned
to eat grass instead of milk. They were quite proud of the way in which
they broke it off, with quick upward jerks of their heads, and their
teeth were growing finely. They did not expect any upper front teeth,
for in place of them the Sheep have only a hard pad of flesh.

Soon they came running back to the flock. "There is a Dog over there,"
they cried, "a strange Dog. He doesn't look like Collie. He is coming
this way, and we are afraid."

Their uncle, the Bell-Wether, looked over to where the strange Dog was,
then turned quickly and began to run. The bell around his neck clinked
at every step. When the other Sheep heard the bell they raised their
heads and ran after him, and the Lambs ran after them. The strange Dog
did not follow or even bark at them, yet on they went, shaking the
shining rain-drops from the grass as they trod upon it. Not one of them
was thinking for himself what he really ought to do. The Bell-Wether
thought, "I feel like running away from the Dog, and so I will run."

The other Sheep said to themselves, "The Bell-Wether is running and so
we will run."

And the Lambs said, "If they are all running we will run."

Along the fence they went, the bell clinking, their hoofs pattering, and
not one of them thinking for himself, until they reached a place where
the fence was blown over. It was not blown 'way down, but leaned so that
it could be jumped. If a single one of the flock, even the youngest
Lamb, had said, "Don't jump!" they would have stayed in the pasture; but
nobody said it. The Bell-Wether felt like jumping over, so he jumped.
Then the Sheep did as the Bell-Wether had done, and the Lambs did as the
Sheep had done.

Now they were in the road and the Bell-Wether turned away from the
farmhouse and ran on, with the Sheep and the Lambs following. Even now,
if anybody had said, "Stop!" they would have stopped, for they knew that
they were doing wrong; but nobody said it.

After a while a heavy wagon came rumbling down the road behind them, and
the Bell-Wether jumped over a ditch and ran into a hilly field with
woodland beyond. Because he went the Sheep did, and because the Sheep
went the Lambs did, and nobody said "Stop!" You see, by this time they
were very badly frightened, and no wonder. When they saw the strange Dog
they were a little scared, for they thought he might chase them. If they
had made themselves stay there and act brave they would soon have felt
brave. Even if the Dog had been a cruel one, they could have kept him
from hurting them, for Sheep have been given very strong, hard foreheads
with which to strike, and the Bell-Wether had also long, curled horns
with three ridges on the side of each. But it is with Sheep as it is
with other people,--if they let themselves be frightened they grow more
and more fearful, even when there is no real danger and now all of their
trouble came from their not stopping to think what they ought to do.

They hurried up to the highest ground in the field, and when they were
there and could go no farther, they stopped and looked at each other.
One Lamb said to his mother, "Why did we come here? It isn't nearly so
nice as our own meadow."

"Why, I came because the Bell-Wether did," she answered. Then she turned
to the Bell-Wether and said, "Why did you bring us here?"

"I didn't bring you here," he replied. "I felt like coming, and I came.
I didn't make you follow."

"N-no," answered the Sheep; "but you might have known that if you came
the Sheep would come."

"Well," said the Bell-Wether, "you might have known that if you Sheep
came the Lambs would, so you'd better not say anything."

"Baa!" cried the Lambs. "We are hot and thirsty and there isn't any
water here to drink. We want to go back."

Everybody was out of patience with somebody else, and nobody was
comfortable. They did not dare try to go home again, for fear they would
have more trouble, so they huddled together on the top of the hill and
were very miserable and unhappy. They hadn't any good reason for coming,
and they could not even have told why they ran to the hilltop instead of
staying in the pleasant hollow below.

There was a reason for their running up, however, although
they didn't know it. It was because their
great-great-great-great-great-great-grandfather and-grandmother were
wild Sheep in the mountains, and when frightened ran up among the rocks
where there was nobody to hurt them. They got into the habit of running
up-hill when scared, and their children did the same, and their
children's children did the same, and now even the farmyard Sheep do so,
although they long ago forgot the reason why.

"Bow-wow-wow!" rang out on the still morning air.

"There's Collie!" cried the Lambs joyfully. "He's coming to take us
home. Let's bleat to help him find us more quickly." All the Lambs said,
"Baa! Baaa!" in their high, soft voices, and their mothers said "Baa!
Baaa!" more loudly; and the Bell-Wether added his "Baa! Baaa!" which was
so deep and strong that it sounded like a little, very little, clap of
thunder.

Collie came frisking along with his tail waving and his eyes gleaming.
He started the flock home, and scolded them and made fun of them all the
way, but they were now so happy that they didn't care what he said. When
they were safely in the home meadow again and the farmer had mended the
fence, Collie left them. As he turned to go, he called back one last
piece of advice.

"I'm a Shepherd Dog," he said, "and it's my work to take care of Sheep
when they can't take care of themselves, but I'd just like to be a
Bell-Wether for a little while. You wouldn't catch me doing every
foolish thing I felt like doing and getting all the flock into trouble
by following me! Nobody can do anything without somebody else doing it
too, and I wouldn't lead people into trouble and then say I didn't
think. Bow-wow-wow-wow!"

[Illustration: COLLIE AND THE BELL-WETHER.]

The Bell-Wether grumbled to himself, "Well, the rest needn't tag along
unless they want to. Pity if I can't jump a fence without everybody
following." But down in his heart he felt mean, for he knew that one who
leads should do right things.




THE FINE YOUNG RAT AND THE TRAP


The Mice were having a great frolic in the corn-crib. The farmer's man
had carelessly left a board leaning up against it in such a way that
they could walk right up and through one of the big cracks in the side.
It was the first time that some of them had ever been here. When the
farmer built the crib, he had put a tin pan, open side down, on top of
each of the wooden posts, and had then nailed the floor beams of the
crib through these pans. That had kept the hungry Mice from getting into
the corn.

This was a great day for them, and their gnawing-teeth would certainly
be worn down enough without giving them any extra wear. That, you know,
is one thing about which all Rats and Mice have to be very careful, for
their front teeth are growing all the time, and they have to gnaw hard
things every day to keep them from becoming too long.

There was only one thing that ever really troubled these Mice, and that
was the Cat. They did not feel afraid of Hawks and Owls because they
lived indoors. Weasels did not often come up to the barn, and men made
so much noise when they were around that any wide-awake Mouse could
easily keep out of their way. With the Cat it was different. She was
always prowling around in the night-time, just when they had their
finest parties; and many a young Mouse had been scared away from a
midnight supper by seeing her eyes glowing like balls of fire in the
darkness. By daylight it was not so bad, for they could see her coming,
and besides, she slept much of the time then.

They were talking about her when in the corn-crib. "Have any of you seen
the Cat to-day?" asked the Oldest Mouse.

Nobody answered. Then one young fellow, who was always worrying, said:
"Supposing she should come out of the barn now! Supposing she should
come right toward this corn-crib! Supposing she should stand right under
the floor! Supposing she should catch us as we jumped down!
Supposing----"

But here the other young Mice all squeaked to him to stop, and one of
them declared that it made her fur stand on end to think of it. The
Oldest Mouse spoke quite sharply. "Supposing," said he to the first
young Mouse, "you should eat more and talk less. There are enough
pleasant things to speak about without scaring all your friends in this
way."

The young Mouse who said that her fur stood on end couldn't eat anything
more, she was so frightened. "What could we do," she said, "if the Cat
should come?"

"Stay right where we are," answered her mother. "She couldn't reach us
with the door closed. Now go on with your eating and don't be foolish."

A Rat ran up the board. "Good-morning," said he. "Have you heard the
news?"

"No, no!" cried the Mice, hurrying to that side of the corn-crib, and
peeping through the crack.

"The Yellow Kitten has been hunting with her mother, and they say that
her brother is going to-night."

"Well," said a mother Mouse, "I knew we would have to expect it, but I
did hope they would wait a while. Now, children," she added, "do be
careful! I know that when you are looking for food you have to go into
dangerous places, but don't stop there to talk or to clean your fur.
Find safe corners for that, or I shall worry about you all the time."

"We will," squeaked all the little Mice together. "We will be very, very
careful."

"Thank you for the news," said the Oldest Mouse to the Rat. "We will try
to send you word of new dangers when we hear of them."

The Rat, who was a fine young fellow, ran down the board and away. They
could not ask him in to lunch, because he was too large and stout to
squeeze through the cracks, but he understood how it was, and knew that
he could find food elsewhere. Now he ran to the Pig-pen to snatch a
share of the breakfast which the farmer had just left there. He often
did this as soon as the farmer went away, and the Pigs never troubled
him. Perhaps that was because they knew that if they drove him away when
he came alone, he would bring all his sisters and his cousins and his
aunts, and his brothers and his uncles too, the next time, and would
eat every bit of food they had.

After he had taken a hearty breakfast, he ran under the edge of the barn
to clean himself. He was always very particular about this. His mother
had taught him when very small that he must keep his fur well brushed
and his face washed, and he did it just as a Cat would, by wetting his
paws and scrubbing his face and the top of his head. He brushed his fur
coat with his paws also.

While he was here, one of his cousins came from the barn above. She ran
down the inside of the wall, head foremost, and her hind feet were
turned around until they pointed backward. That let her hold on with her
long, sharp claws, quite as a Squirrel does, and kept her from tumbling.
She was much out of breath when she reached the ground, but it was not
from running.

"What do you think that farmer has done now?" she cried. "It was bad
enough for him to nail tin over the holes we gnawed into his grain-bins,
but this is worse still. It needn't make us so much trouble, but it
hurts my feelings."

"What is it?" asked her cousin.

"A trap!" said she. "A horrible, shining trap. The Rat from the other
farm told me about it. It lies open and flat on the floor of a
grain-bin,--the very one you and I gnawed into last night,--and there is
a lovely piece of cheese in the middle of it. The Rat who told me about
it says that as soon as one touches the cheese, the trap springs shut on
him."

"Bah!" exclaimed the young Rat who had just eaten breakfast in the
Pig-pen. "Let it stay there! We don't have to touch it, although I do
mean to look at it some time. I believe in knowing about things."

"I wish you wouldn't look at it," said his cousin, who was very fond of
him.

"The Rat from the other farm says it is very dangerous to even look at
traps, especially if your stomach is empty."

"Then the Rat from the other farm might better keep away," said this
young fellow, as he put one paw up to see that his whiskers were all
right. "I don't think very much of him anyway. He thinks he knows
everything because he has travelled. I wish you would have nothing to do
with him. I dare say you were in the grain-bin with him when you saw the
trap."

"Yes," said she, "I was."

"Well," said he, "you both got away safely, and I shall too. I may not
be very clever, but I think I do know enough to keep out of a trap."
Then he turned into his hole and went to sleep. He had been running
around all night, and was very tired. He was cross, too. This was the
second time that his cousin had told him what the Rat from the other
farm had said, and he thought she liked him altogether too well.

When he awakened, it was night again and he was aroused by the stamping
of the Dappled Gray on the floor above his head. For a minute he could
hardly think where he was. Then it all came to him. He was in his own
cozy little hole under the barn, and it was night. He remembered
something about the Yellow Kitten. What was it? Oh yes, she had begun
hunting. Well, he was not afraid of her yet. But there was something
else--the trap! He wondered if his cousin were in that bin again. As
like as not her friend, the Rat from the other farm, was showing her the
trap now. He would go up there himself, and at once, too.

He ran up the wall, through an opening, and across the barn floor to the
grain-bin. It was a moonlight night and the barn was not very dark. The
cover of the bin was raised. Perhaps the farmer's man had forgotten to
close it. Perhaps there was so little grain left in it that the man
didn't care to. At any rate, he could now see the trap quite plainly.
There was nobody else in the bin, and he went close to it.

"I would not touch it for anything," said he, as he entered the bin,
"but it will not hurt me to look at it."

When he went nearer, he was very careful to see that his tail did not
even brush against the chain which held the trap down. "So that is the
terrible, dangerous trap?" said he. "It doesn't look particularly
dreadful. That is fine-smelling cheese though." He sniffed two or three
times. "I have tasted cheese only once in my whole life," said he, "and
I am almost starved now. I wouldn't mind a nibble at that." He looked at
it and thought about it until it seemed to him he could not go away and
leave that cheese there.

Then he thought, "If I am very careful to step over these shining steel
things and rest my feet only on the floor, it cannot spring the trap.
Then I will snatch the cheese and jump.... I am pretty sure I can do
it.... Why, yes, I know I can." So the Rat who had come just to look at
the trap, began to lift first one foot and then another over the shining
curved bars, and got all ready to catch up the cheese and run.

"Now!" he cried. "One, two, three!" He did snatch it and jump, but the
trap jumped, too, in its own trappy way, and the Rat who got the cheese
left the three tip rings of his tail to pay for it. "Ouch!" he cried.
"My tail! My tail! My beautiful, long, bony tail, all covered with
scales and short hair!" He did not care at all for the cheese now. He
did not want to see it, for he would rather have had the point on his
tail again than to eat a whole binful of cheese.

"How it will look!" said he. "So stumpy and blunt. And it has been so
very useful always. I could wind it around a stick to hold myself up
when my paws were full, and many a time I have rolled eggs across the
floor by curling it around them." Then he heard Rat voices and scampered
out and down to his own hole.

His cousin and the Rat from the other farm came into the bin. "Don't
look at the trap," he was saying, "but just eat your grain from the
farther corner."

"I won't," she answered, and she half closed her eyes to keep from
seeing it. He was beside her and they stumbled over the cheese, which
now lay on the floor away from the trap. "How does this happen?" said
he. "We will eat it first and then find out." By this advice he showed
that he was a Rat of excellent sense.

When they had eaten it, they began to look toward the trap. As there was
no longer any cheese in it to tempt them, they felt perfectly safe in
doing so. They found that it had been sprung, and there lay the last
three rings of some Rat's tail.

"How dreadful!" she exclaimed. "I hope that was not lost by any of our
friends."

"Hum-hum!" said the Rat from the other farm. "Now, whom have I seen
wearing that? I have certainly seen that tail before--it was your
cousin!"

"Poor fellow!" said she. "I must go to see him."

"Oh, don't go now," cried the Rat from the other farm. "I think he might
want to be alone for a while. Besides," he added coaxingly, "you haven't
tasted of the grain yet, and it is very good."

"W-well," answered she, "perhaps my cousin would just as soon not have
me come now." So she waited, and the Rat from the other farm told her
wonderful stories of his travels, and they had a very fine supper.

When her cousin began to run around again, he was a much sadder and
wiser Rat. Sometimes the younger Rats would ask him how he lost the tip
of his tail. "By not turning it toward a tempting danger," he would
answer, very solemnly. Then, after he had told them the story, he always
added, "The time to turn your tail toward a tempting danger is the
minute you see it, for if you wait and look and long for something you
ought not to take, there is sure to be trouble, and many a Rat has lost
more than the tip of his tail in just that way."




THE QUICK-TEMPERED TURKEY GOBBLER


There was only one Gobbler on the farm, and he was so used to having his
own way that he never tried to make the best of it when he couldn't, and
sometimes he became exceedingly cross. He was bigger than the Cocks, the
Hens, the Geese, and the Ducks, so when they were in his way and he
gobbled a gruff "Move along," they murmured "Oh, certainly," and
scampered away as fast as their legs would carry them. The Peacock was
larger than the Turkey Gobbler, it is true, but as long as he could sit
on a fence in the sunshine and have somebody admiring his train, he did
not care anything about the Gobbler, and they did not get in each
other's way.

There were seven Hen Turkeys, timid, sweet-tempered people, who were
fond of walking. They had never been known to answer back when the
Gobbler scolded them, although at times he was very unreasonable. This
was polite of them, but it made the Gobbler more careless than ever of
the way in which he spoke. The Black Spanish Hen said it made her
wattles tingle to hear him find fault with them. She wouldn't have stood
it--no, indeed!

When the Black Spanish Cock heard her say so, he shook his feathers and
smiled a queer little smile, and said, "I certainly know that she would
not." The other fowls looked at each other, and the Shanghai Cock winked
his round little eyes at the Dorking Hen, and she had to oil a feather
on the under side of her wing just then, so, of course, nobody saw her
laugh--if she did laugh.

The Black Spanish fowls were kind-hearted and honest, and had fine
manners, but they would not stand it to be spoken to hastily by any one
who was not very much bigger than they, and it was said that the Cock
had once--only once--but then, perhaps it would be just as well not to
tell what the other fowls had heard about their family quarrel, for,
after all, it did not come very straight, the Pigs having told the
