"A man told me, and now I see even Buldeo can speak truth. It was well
done, Hathi with the white mark; but the second time it shall be done
better, for the reason that there is a man to direct. Thou knowest the
village of the Man-Pack that cast me out? They are idle, senseless, and
cruel; they play with their mouths, and they do not kill the weaker for
food, but for sport. When they are full-fed they would throw their own
breed into the Red Flower. This I have seen. It is not well that they
should live here any more. I hate them!"

"Kill, then," said the youngest of Hathi's three sons, picking up a tuft
of grass, dusting it against his fore-legs, and throwing it away, while
his little red eyes glanced furtively from side to side.

"What good are white bones to me?" Mowgli answered angrily. "Am I the
cub of a wolf to play in the sun with a raw head? I have killed Shere
Khan, and his hide rots on the Council Rock; but--but I do not know
whither Shere Khan is gone, and my stomach is still empty. Now I
will take that which I can see and touch. Let in the Jungle upon that
village, Hathi!"

Bagheera shivered, and cowered down. He could understand, if the worst
came to the worst, a quick rush down the village street, and a right and
left blow into a crowd, or a crafty killing of men as they ploughed in
the twilight; but this scheme for deliberately blotting out an entire
village from the eyes of man and beast frightened him. Now he saw why
Mowgli had sent for Hathi. No one but the long-lived elephant could plan
and carry through such a war.

"Let them run as the men ran from the fields of Bhurtpore, till we have
the rain-water for the only plough, and the noise of the rain on the
thick leaves for the pattering of their spindles--till Bagheera and I
lair in the house of the Brahmin, and the buck drink at the tank behind
the temple! Let in the Jungle, Hathi!"

"But I--but we have no quarrel with them, and it needs the red rage
of great pain ere we tear down the places where men sleep," said Hathi
doubtfully.

"Are ye the only eaters of grass in the Jungle? Drive in your peoples.
Let the deer and the pig and the nilghai look to it. Ye need never show
a hand's-breadth of hide till the fields are naked. Let in the Jungle,
Hathi!"

"There will be no killing? My tusks were red at the Sack of the Fields
of Bhurtpore, and I would not wake that smell again."

"Nor I. I do not wish even their bones to lie on the clean earth. Let
them go and find a fresh lair. They cannot stay here. I have seen and
smelled the blood of the woman that gave me food--the woman whom they
would have killed but for me. Only the smell of the new grass on their
door-steps can take away that smell. It burns in my mouth. Let in the
Jungle, Hathi!"

"Ah!" said Hathi. "So did the scar of the stake burn on my hide till we
watched the villages die under in the spring growth. Now I see. Thy war
shall be our war. We will let in the jungle!"

Mowgli had hardly time to catch his breath--he was shaking all over with
rage and hate before the place where the elephants had stood was empty,
and Bagheera was looking at him with terror.

"By the Broken Lock that freed me!" said the Black Panther at last. "Art
THOU the naked thing I spoke for in the Pack when all was young?
Master of the Jungle, when my strength goes, speak for me--speak for
Baloo--speak for us all! We are cubs before thee! Snapped twigs under
foot! Fawns that have lost their doe!"

The idea of Bagheera being a stray fawn upset Mowgli altogether, and he
laughed and caught his breath, and sobbed and laughed again, till he had
to jump into a pool to make himself stop. Then he swam round and round,
ducking in and out of the bars of the moonlight like the frog, his
namesake.

By this time Hathi and his three sons had turned, each to one point of
the compass, and were striding silently down the valleys a mile away.
They went on and on for two days' march--that is to say, a long sixty
miles--through the Jungle; and every step they took, and every wave of
their trunks, was known and noted and talked over by Mang and Chil and
the Monkey People and all the birds. Then they began to feed, and fed
quietly for a week or so. Hathi and his sons are like Kaa, the Rock
Python. They never hurry till they have to.

At the end of that time--and none knew who had started it--a rumour went
through the Jungle that there was better food and water to be found in
such and such a valley. The pig--who, of course, will go to the ends of
the earth for a full meal--moved first by companies, scuffling over the
rocks, and the deer followed, with the small wild foxes that live on
the dead and dying of the herds; and the heavy-shouldered nilghai moved
parallel with the deer, and the wild buffaloes of the swamps came after
the nilghai. The least little thing would have turned the scattered,
straggling droves that grazed and sauntered and drank and grazed again;
but whenever there was an alarm some one would rise up and soothe them.
At one time it would be Ikki the Porcupine, full of news of good feed
just a little farther on; at another Mang would cry cheerily and flap
down a glade to show it was all empty; or Baloo, his mouth full of
roots, would shamble alongside a wavering line and half frighten, half
romp it clumsily back to the proper road. Very many creatures broke back
or ran away or lost interest, but very many were left to go forward. At
the end of another ten days or so the situation was this. The deer and
the pig and the nilghai were milling round and round in a circle of
eight or ten miles radius, while the Eaters of Flesh skirmished round
its edge. And the centre of that circle was the village, and round the
village the crops were ripening, and in the crops sat men on what they
call machans--platforms like pigeon-perches, made of sticks at the top
of four poles--to scare away birds and other stealers. Then the deer
were coaxed no more. The Eaters of Flesh were close behind them, and
forced them forward and inward.

It was a dark night when Hathi and his three sons slipped down from the
Jungle, and broke off the poles of the machans with their trunks; they
fell as a snapped stalk of hemlock in bloom falls, and the men that
tumbled from them heard the deep gurgling of the elephants in their
ears. Then the vanguard of the bewildered armies of the deer broke down
and flooded into the village grazing-grounds and the ploughed fields;
and the sharp-hoofed, rooting wild pig came with them, and what the deer
left the pig spoiled, and from time to time an alarm of wolves would
shake the herds, and they would rush to and fro desperately, treading
down the young barley, and cutting flat the banks of the irrigating
channels. Before the dawn broke the pressure on the outside of the
circle gave way at one point. The Eaters of Flesh had fallen back and
left an open path to the south, and drove upon drove of buck fled along
it. Others, who were bolder, lay up in the thickets to finish their meal
next night.

But the work was practically done. When the villagers looked in the
morning they saw their crops were lost. And that meant death if they did
not get away, for they lived year in and year out as near to starvation
as the Jungle was near to them. When the buffaloes were sent to graze
the hungry brutes found that the deer had cleared the grazing-grounds,
and so wandered into the Jungle and drifted off with their wild mates;
and when twilight fell the three or four ponies that belonged to the
village lay in their stables with their heads beaten in. Only Bagheera
could have given those strokes, and only Bagheera would have thought of
insolently dragging the last carcass to the open street.

The villagers had no heart to make fires in the fields that night, so
Hathi and his three sons went gleaning among what was left; and where
Hathi gleans there is no need to follow. The men decided to live on
their stored seed-corn until the rains had fallen, and then to take
work as servants till they could catch up with the lost year; but as
the grain-dealer was thinking of his well-filled crates of corn, and the
prices he would levy at the sale of it, Hathi's sharp tusks were picking
out the corner of his mud-house, and smashing open the big wicker chest,
leeped with cow-dung, where the precious stuff lay.

When that last loss was discovered, it was the Brahmin's turn to speak.
He had prayed to his own Gods without answer. It might be, he said,
that, unconsciously, the village had offended some one of the Gods of
the Jungle, for, beyond doubt, the Jungle was against them. So they sent
for the head-man of the nearest tribe of wandering Gonds--little, wise,
and very black hunters, living in the deep Jungle, whose fathers came of
the oldest race in India--the aboriginal owners of the land. They made
the Gond welcome with what they had, and he stood on one leg, his bow in
his hand, and two or three poisoned arrows stuck through his top-knot,
looking half afraid and half contemptuously at the anxious villagers
and their ruined fields. They wished to know whether his Gods--the Old
Gods--were angry with them and what sacrifices should be offered. The
Gond said nothing, but picked up a trail of the Karela, the vine that
bears the bitter wild gourd, and laced it to and fro across the temple
door in the face of the staring red Hindu image. Then he pushed with his
hand in the open air along the road to Khanhiwara, and went back to his
Jungle, and watched the Jungle People drifting through it. He knew that
when the Jungle moves only white men can hope to turn it aside.

There was no need to ask his meaning. The wild gourd would grow where
they had worshipped their God, and the sooner they saved themselves the
better.

But it is hard to tear a village from its moorings. They stayed on as
long as any summer food was left to them, and they tried to gather nuts
in the Jungle, but shadows with glaring eyes watched them, and rolled
before them even at mid-day; and when they ran back afraid to their
walls, on the tree-trunks they had passed not five minutes before the
bark would be stripped and chiselled with the stroke of some great
taloned paw. The more they kept to their village, the bolder grew the
wild things that gambolled and bellowed on the grazing-grounds by the
Waingunga. They had no time to patch and plaster the rear walls of the
empty byres that backed on to the Jungle; the wild pig trampled them
down, and the knotty-rooted vines hurried after and threw their elbows
over the new-won ground, and the coarse grass bristled behind the vines
like the lances of a goblin army following a retreat. The unmarried men
ran away first, and carried the news far and near that the village was
doomed. Who could fight, they said, against the Jungle, or the Gods
of the Jungle, when the very village cobra had left his hole in the
platform under the peepul-tree? So their little commerce with the
outside world shrunk as the trodden paths across the open grew fewer
and fainter. At last the nightly trumpetings of Hathi and his three sons
ceased to trouble them; for they had no more to be robbed of. The crop
on the ground and the seed in the ground had been taken. The outlying
fields were already losing their shape, and it was time to throw
themselves on the charity of the English at Khanhiwara.

Native fashion, they delayed their departure from one day to another
till the first Rains caught them and the unmended roofs let in a flood,
and the grazing-ground stood ankle deep, and all life came on with a
rush after the heat of the summer. Then they waded out--men, women,
and children--through the blinding hot rain of the morning, but turned
naturally for one farewell look at their homes.

They heard, as the last burdened family filed through the gate, a crash
of falling beams and thatch behind the walls. They saw a shiny,
snaky black trunk lifted for an instant, scattering sodden thatch. It
disappeared, and there was another crash, followed by a squeal. Hathi
had been plucking off the roofs of the huts as you pluck water-lilies,
and a rebounding beam had pricked him. He needed only this to unchain
his full strength, for of all things in the Jungle the wild elephant
enraged is the most wantonly destructive. He kicked backward at a mud
wall that crumbled at the stroke, and, crumbling, melted to yellow
mud under the torrent of rain. Then he wheeled and squealed, and tore
through the narrow streets, leaning against the huts right and left,
shivering the crazy doors, and crumpling up the caves; while his
three sons raged behind as they had raged at the Sack of the Fields of
Bhurtpore.

"The Jungle will swallow these shells," said a quiet voice in the
wreckage. "It is the outer wall that must lie down," and Mowgli, with
the rain sluicing over his bare shoulders and arms, leaped back from a
wall that was settling like a tired buffalo.

"All in good time," panted Hathi. "Oh, but my tusks were red at
Bhurtpore; To the outer wall, children! With the head! Together! Now!"

The four pushed side by side; the outer wall bulged, split, and fell,
and the villagers, dumb with horror, saw the savage, clay-streaked
heads of the wreckers in the ragged gap. Then they fled, houseless and
foodless, down the valley, as their village, shredded and tossed and
trampled, melted behind them.

A month later the place was a dimpled mound, covered with soft, green
young stuff; and by the end of the Rains there was the roaring jungle in
full blast on the spot that had been under plough not six months before.




MOWGLI'S SONG AGAINST PEOPLE

     I will let loose against you the fleet-footed vines--
     I will call in the Jungle to stamp out your lines!
         The roofs shall fade before it,
           The house-beams shall fall,
         And the Karela, the bitter Karela,
           Shall cover it all!

     In the gates of these your councils my people shall sing,
     In the doors of these your garners the Bat-folk shall cling;
         And the snake shall be your watchman,
           By a hearthstone unswept;
         For the Karela, the bitter Karela,
           Shall fruit where ye slept!

     Ye shall not see my strikers; ye shall hear them and guess;
     By night, before the moon-rise, I will send for my cess,
         And the wolf shall be your herdsman
           By a landmark removed,
         For the Karela, the bitter Karela,
           Shall seed where ye loved!

     I will reap your fields before you at the hands of a host;
     Ye shall glean behind my reapers, for the bread that is lost,
         And the deer shall be your oxen
           By a headland untilled,
         For the Karela, the bitter Karela,
           Shall leaf where ye build!

     I have untied against you the club-footed vines,
     I have sent in the Jungle to swamp out your lines.
         The trees--the trees are on you!
           The house-beams shall fall,
         And the Karela, the bitter Karela,
            Shall cover you all!




THE UNDERTAKERS

        When ye say to Tabaqui, "My Brother!" when ye call the
            Hyena to meat,
        Ye may cry the Full Truce with Jacala--the Belly that runs
            on four feet.
                                                  Jungle Law

"Respect the aged!"

"It was a thick voice--a muddy voice that would have made you shudder--a
voice like something soft breaking in two. There was a quaver in it, a
croak and a whine.

"Respect the aged! O Companions of the River--respect the aged!"

Nothing could be seen on the broad reach of the river except a
little fleet of square-sailed, wooden-pinned barges, loaded with
building-stone, that had just come under the railway bridge, and were
driving down-stream. They put their clumsy helms over to avoid the
sand-bar made by the scour of the bridge-piers, and as they passed,
three abreast, the horrible voice began again:

"O Brahmins of the River--respect the aged and infirm!"

A boatman turned where he sat on the gunwale, lifted up his hand, said
something that was not a blessing, and the boats creaked on through
the twilight. The broad Indian river, that looked more like a chain
of little lakes than a stream, was as smooth as glass, reflecting the
sandy-red sky in mid-channel, but splashed with patches of yellow and
dusky purple near and under the low banks. Little creeks ran into the
river in the wet season, but now their dry mouths hung clear above
water-line. On the left shore, and almost under the railway bridge,
stood a mud-and-brick and thatch-and-stick village, whose main street,
full of cattle going back to their byres, ran straight to the river, and
ended in a sort of rude brick pier-head, where people who wanted to
wash could wade in step by step. That was the Ghaut of the village of
Mugger-Ghaut.

Night was falling fast over the fields of lentils and rice and cotton
in the low-lying ground yearly flooded by the river; over the reeds
that fringed the elbow of the bend, and the tangled jungle of the
grazing-grounds behind the still reeds. The parrots and crows, who had
been chattering and shouting over their evening drink, had flown inland
to roost, crossing the out-going battalions of the flying-foxes; and
cloud upon cloud of water-birds came whistling and "honking" to
the cover of the reed-beds. There were geese, barrel-headed and
black-backed, teal, widgeon, mallard, and sheldrake, with curlews, and
here and there a flamingo.

A lumbering Adjutant-crane brought up the rear, flying as though each
slow stroke would be his last.

"Respect the aged! Brahmins of the River--respect the aged!"

The Adjutant half turned his head, sheered a little in the direction of
the voice, and landed stiffly on the sand-bar below the bridge. Then you
saw what a ruffianly brute he really was. His back view was immensely
respectable, for he stood nearly six feet high, and looked rather like a
very proper bald-headed parson. In front it was different, for his Ally
Sloper-like head and neck had not a feather to them, and there was a
horrible raw-skin pouch on his neck under his chin--a hold-all for the
things his pick-axe beak might steal. His legs were long and thin and
skinny, but he moved them delicately, and looked at them with pride as
he preened down his ashy-gray tail-feathers, glanced over the smooth of
his shoulder, and stiffened into "Stand at attention."

A mangy little Jackal, who had been yapping hungrily on a low bluff,
cocked up his ears and tail, and scuttered across the shallows to join
the Adjutant.

He was the lowest of his caste--not that the best of jackals are good
for much, but this one was peculiarly low, being half a beggar, half a
criminal--a cleaner-up of village rubbish-heaps, desperately timid or
wildly bold, everlastingly hungry, and full of cunning that never did
him any good.

"Ugh!" he said, shaking himself dolefully as he landed. "May the red
mange destroy the dogs of this village! I have three bites for each flea
upon me, and all because I looked--only looked, mark you--at an old shoe
in a cow-byre. Can I eat mud?" He scratched himself under his left ear.

"I heard," said the Adjutant, in a voice like a blunt saw going through
