a field. Just by the crocus there was a gap in the hedge, which in the
sketch was indicated rather than drawn. And round the corner of the bare
thorn branches from the hedge-bank in the field there peeped a celandine
and a daisy. They were not nearly such finished portraits as that of the
crocus. A few telling strokes of colour made them, and gave them a life
and pertness that were clever enough. Beneath the sketch was written, "La
Demoiselle. Des enfants du village la regardent."

My great-grandfather translated this for me, and used to show me how the
"little peasants," Marguerite and Celandine, were peeping in at the
pretty young lady in her mauve dress striped with violet.

But every sketch had its story, and often its moral; not, as a rule, a
very original one. In one, a lovely study of ivy crept over a rotten
branch upon the ground. A crimson toadstool relieved the heavy green,
and suggested that the year was drawing to a close. Beneath it was
written, "Charity." "Thus," said my great-grandfather, "one covers up
and hides the defects of one he loves."

A study of gaudy summer tulips stood--as may be guessed--for Pride.

"Pride," said my great-grandfather, "is a sin; a mortal sin, dear child.
Moreover, it is foolish, and also vulgar--the pride of fine clothes,
money, equipages, and the like. What is called pride of birth--the
dignity of an ancient name--this, indeed, is another thing. It is not
petty, not personal; it seems to me more like patriotism--the pride of
country."

I did my best to describe to Elspeth both the sketch and my
great-grandfather's commentary.

"A' pride's sinful," said Elspeth decidedly. "Pride o' wealth, and pride
o' birth. Not that I'm for objecting to a decent satisfaction in a
body's ain gude conduct and respectability. Pride o' character, that's
anither thing a'thegither, and to be respectit."

My great-grandfather gave me a few paints, and under his directions I
daubed away, much to my own content. When I was struggling hopelessly
with the perspective of some pansies of various colours (for in
imitation of him I painted flowers), he would say, "Never mind the
shape, dear Marguerite, get the colour--the colour, my child!" And he
trained me to a quickness in the perception of colour certainly not
common at my age.

I spent many pleasant hours, too, in the less intellectual society of
Adolphe. He dug a bed for me in a bit of spare ground, and shaped it
like a heart. He laboured constantly at this heart, making it plump by
piling up the earth, and cramming it with plants of various
kinds--perennials much in want of subdivision, and often in full
bloom--which he brought from cottage gardens of "folk he knew," and
watered copiously to "sattle 'em."

His real name was not Adolphe, but Thomas. As this, however, had created
some confusion between him and the cat, my great-grandmother had named
him afresh, after a retainer of the de Vandaleurs in days gone by,
whose faithful service was a tradition in the family.

I was very happy at The Vine--by day. I feel ashamed now to recall how
miserable I was at night, and yet I know I could not help it. In old
times I had always been accustomed to be watched to sleep by Ayah. After
I came to Aunt Theresa, I slept in the same room with one or more of the
other children. At The Vine, for the first time, I slept alone.

This was not all. It was not merely the being alone in the dark which
frightened me. Indeed, a curious little wick floating on a cup of oil
was lighted at night for my benefit, but it only illumined the great
source of the terror which made night hideous to me.

Some French refugee artist, who had been indebted to my
great-grandparents for kindness, had shown his gratitude by painting a
picture of the execution of that Duc de Vandaleur who perished in the
Revolution, my great-grandfather having been the model. It was a
wretched daub, but the subject was none the less horrible for that, and
the caricatured likeness to my great-grandfather did not make it seem
less real or more pleasant.

That execution which was never over, this ghastly head which never found
rest in the grave, that awful-looking man who was, and yet was not,
Grandpapa--haunted me. They were the cause of certain horrible dreams,
which I can remember quite as clearly at this day as if I dreamed them
last night, and which I know I shall never forget. The dreams again
associated themselves with the picture, and my fears grew instead of
lessening as the time went by.

Very late one night Elspeth came in and found me awake, and probably
looking far from happy. I had nothing to say for myself, but I burst
into tears. Elspeth was tenderness itself, but she got hold of a wrong
idea. I was "just homesick," she thought, and needed to be "away home
again," with "bairns like myself."

I do not know why I never explained the real reason of my
distress--children are apt to be reticent on such occasions. I think a
panic seized upon the members of the household, that they were too old
to make a child happy. I was constantly assured that "it was very
natural," and I "had been very good." But I was sent back to Riflebury.
No one knew how loth I was to leave, still less that it was to a much
older relative than those at The Vine that I owed my expulsion--to my
great-great-great-grandfather--Monsieur le Duc de Vandaleur.

Thomas, the cat, purred so loudly as I withdrew, that I think he was
glad to be rid of me.

Adolphe alone was against the verdict of the household, and I think
believed that I would have preferred to remain.

"I'm sure I thought you was quite sattled, miss," he said, as he saw me
off; and he blubbered like a baby. His transplanted perennials were
"sattled" by copious floods of water. Perhaps he hoped that tears would
settle me!




CHAPTER XI.

MATILDA'S NEWS--OUR GOVERNESS--MAJOR BULLER TURNED TUTOR--ELEANOR
ARKWRIGHT.


The grief I felt at leaving The Vine was greatly forgotten in the warm
welcome which awaited me on my return to Riflebury.

In a household where gossip is a principal amusement, the return of any
member from a visit is a matter for general congratulation till the new
budget is exhausted. Indeed, I plead guilty to a liking to be the first
to skim the news when Eleanor or one of the boys comes back from a
visit, at the present time.

Matilda withdrew me from Aunt Theresa as soon as she could.

"I am so glad to get you back, Margery dear," said she. "And now you
must tell me all your news, and I'll tell you all mine. And to begin
with--what do you think?--we've got a governess, and you and I are to
have the little room at the head of the stairs all to ourselves."

Matilda's news was lengthy enough and interesting enough to make us late
for tea, and mine kept us awake for a couple of hours after we were
fairly in our two little iron bedsteads in the room that was now our
very own. That is to say, I told what I had to tell after we came to
bed, but my news was so tame compared with Matilda's that we soon
returned to the discussion of hers. I tried to describe my
great-grandfather's sketches, but neither Aunt Theresa in the
drawing-room, nor Matilda when we retired for the night, seemed to feel
any interest in the subject; and when Mrs. Buller asked what sort of
people called at The Vine, I felt that my reply was, like the rest of my
news, but dull.

Matilda's, on the contrary, was very entertaining. She spoke
enthusiastically of Miss Perry, the governess.

"She is so good-natured, Margery, you can't think. When lessons are over
she takes me walks on the Esplanade, and she calls me her dear Matilda,
and I take her arm, and she tells me all about herself. She says she
knows she's very romantic. And she's got lots of secrets, and she's told
me several already; for she says she has a feeling that I can keep a
secret, and so I can. But telling you's not telling, you know, because
she's sure to tell you herself; only you'd better wait till she does
before you say anything, for fear she should be vexed."

Of course I promised to do so, and craned my neck out of bed to catch
Matilda's interesting but whispered revelations.

Matilda herself was only partially in Miss Perry's confidence, and I
looked anxiously forward to the time when she would admit me also to her
secrets, though I feared she might consider me too young. My fears were
groundless, as I found Miss Perry was fond of talking about herself, and
a suitable audience was quite a secondary consideration with her.

She was a _protegee_ of Mrs. Minchin's, who had persuaded Aunt Theresa
to take her for our governess. She was quite unfit for the position, and
did no little harm to us in her brief reign. But I do not think that our
interests had entered in the least into Mrs. Minchin's calculations in
the matter. She had "taken Miss Perry up," and to get Miss Perry a
comfortable home was her sole object.

To do our new governess justice, she did her best to impart her own
superficial acquirements to us. We plodded regularly through French
exercises, which she corrected by a key, and she kept us at work for a
given number of hours during the day; tatting by our sides as we
practised our scales, or roasting her petticoats over the fire, whilst
Matilda and I read Mrs. Markham's _England_ or Mrs. Trimmer's _Bible
Lessons_ aloud by turns to full-stops. But when lessons were over Miss
Perry was quite as glad as we were, and the subjects of our studies had
as little to do with our holiday hours as a Sunday sermon with the rest
of the week.

She was a great novel-reader, and I think a good many of the things she
told us of, as having happened to herself, had their real origin in the
Riflebury circulating library. For she was one of those strange
characters who indulge in egotism and exaggeration, till they seem
positively to lose the sense of what is fact and what is fiction.

She filled our poor empty little heads with a great deal of folly, and
it was well for us that her reign was not a long one.

She was much attached to the school-room fireside. She could not sit too
close to it, or roast herself too thoroughly for her own satisfaction. I
sometimes wondered if the bony woman who kept the library ever
complained of the curled condition of the backs of the books Miss Perry
held between her eyes and the hot coals for so many hours.

In this highly heated state our governess was, of course, sensitive to
the smallest inlet of cooler air, and "draughts" were accordingly her
abhorrence. How we contrived to distinguish a verb from a noun, or
committed anything whatever to memory in the fever-heat and "stuffy"
atmosphere of the little room which was sacred to our studies, I do not
know. At a certain degree of the thermometer Miss Perry's face rises
before me and makes my brain spin even now.

This was, no doubt, one cause of the very severe headaches to which
Matilda became subject about this time, though, now I look back, I do
not think she had been quite strong since we all had the measles. They
were apt to end in a fainting condition, from which she recovered by
lying on the floor. Then, if Miss Perry happened to be in good humour,
she would excuse Matilda from further lessons, invariably adding, in her
"mystery" voice--"But not a word to your mamma!"

It was the most unjustifiable use she made of influence she gained over
us (especially over poor Matilda, who was very fond of her, and believed
in her) that she magnified her own favours at the expense of Major
Buller and my aunt. For some time they had no doubts as to the wisdom of
Mrs. Minchin's choice.

Miss Perry was clever enough not to display her romantic side to Mrs.
Buller. She amused her, too, with Riflebury gossip, in which she was an
adept. She knew equally well how far she might venture with the Major;
and the sleight-of-hand with which she threw needlework over a novel
when Aunt Theresa came into the school-room was not more skilful than
the way in which she turned the tail of a bit of scandal into a remark
upon the weather as Uncle Buller opened the drawing-room door.

But Miss Perry was not skilful enough to win the Major's lasting favour.
He was always slow to interfere in domestic matters, but he was not
unobservant.

"I'm sure you see a great deal more than one would think, Edward," Aunt
Theresa would say; "although you are so wrapt up in insects and things."

"The insects don't get into my eyes, my dear," said Major Buller.

"And hear too," Mrs. Buller continued. "Mrs. O'Connor was saying only
the other day that you often seem to hear of things before other people,
though you do talk so little."

"It is, perhaps, because I am not always talking that I do hear. But
Mrs. O'Connor is not likely to think of that," said the Major, rather
severely.

He was neither blind nor deaf in reference to Miss Perry, and she was
dismissed. Aunt Theresa rather dreaded Mrs. Minchin's indignation in the
matter, I believe; but needlessly, for Miss Perry and Mrs. Minchin
quarrelled about this time, and Mrs. Minchin had then so much
information to Miss Perry's disadvantage at her fingers' ends, that it
seemed wonderful that she should ever have recommended her.

For some little time our education progressed in a very desultory
fashion. Major Buller became perversely prejudiced against governesses,
and for a short time undertook to carry on our English lessons himself.
He made sums amusing, and geography lessons "as good as stories," though
the latter so often led (by very interesting channels) to his dearly
beloved insects, that Mrs. Buller accused him of making our lessons an
excuse for getting out his "collection."

With "grammar" we were less successful. Major Buller was so good a
teacher that he brought out what intelligence we possessed, and led us
constantly to ask questions about anything we failed to understand. In
arithmetic this led to his helping us over our difficulties; in
geography it led, sooner or later, to the "collection"; but in English
grammar it led to stumbling-blocks and confusion, and, finally, to the
Major's throwing the book across the room, and refusing to pursue that
part of our education any further.

"I never learnt English grammar," said the Major, "and it's quite
evident that I can't teach it."

"If _you_ don't know grammar, Papa, then _we_ needn't," said Matilda
promptly, and being neat of disposition, she picked up the book and
proceeded to put it away.

"I never said that I didn't know grammar," said the Major; "I fancy I
can speak and write grammatically, but what I know I got from the Latin
grammar. And, upon my soul," added Uncle Buller, pulling at his heavy
moustache, "I don't know why you shouldn't do the same."

The idea of learning Latin pleased us greatly, and Major Buller (who had
been at Charterhouse in his boyhood) bought a copy of Dr. Russell's
_Grammar_, and we set to work. And either because the rules of the Latin
grammar bore explanation better than the English ones, or because Major
Buller was better able to explain them, we had no further difficulties.

We were very proud of doing lessons in these circumstances, and boasted
of our Latin, I remember, to the little St. Quentins, when we met them
at the dancing-class. The St. Quentins were slender, ladylike girls,
much alike, and rendered more so by an exact similarity of costume.
Their governess was a very charming and talented woman, and when Mrs.
St. Quentin proposed that Matilda and I should share her daughters'
French lessons under Miss Airlie, Major Buller and Aunt Theresa
thankfully accepted the offer. I think that our short association with
this excellent lady went far to cure us of the silly fancies and tricks
of vulgar gossip which we had gleaned from Miss Perry.

So matters went on for some months, much to Matilda's and my
satisfaction, when a letter from my other guardian changed our plans
once more.

Mr. Arkwright's only daughter was going to school. He wrote to ask the
Bullers to let her break the journey by spending a night at their house.
It was a long journey, for she was coming from the north.

"They live in Yorkshire," said Major Buller, much as one might speak of
living in Central Africa.

Matilda and I looked forward with great interest to Miss Arkwright's
arrival. Her name, we learnt, was Eleanor, and she was nearly a year
older than Maria.

"She'll be _your_ friend, I suppose," I said, a little enviously, in
reference to her age.

"Of course," said Matilda, with dignity. "But you can be with us a good
deal," she was kind enough to add.

I remember quite well how disappointed I felt that I should have so
little title to share the newcomer's friendship.

"If she had only been ten years old, and so come between us," I
thought, "she would have been as much mine as Matilda's."

I little thought then what manner of friends we were to be in spite of
the five years' difference in age. Indeed, both Matilda and I were
destined to see more of her than we expected. Aunt Theresa and Major
Buller came to a sudden resolution to send us also to the school where
she was going, though we did not hear of this at first.

Long afterwards, when we were together, Eleanor asked me if I could
remember my first impression of her. For our affection's sake I wish it
had been a picturesque one; but truth obliges me to confess that, when
our visitor did at last arrive, Matilda and I were chiefly struck by the
fact that she wore thick boots, and did not wear crinoline.

And yet, looking back, I have a very clear picture of her in my mind,
standing in the passage by her box (a very rough one, very strongly
corded, and addressed in the clearest of handwriting), purse in hand,
and paying the cabman with perfect self-possession. An upright, quite
ladylike, but rather old-fashioned little figure, somewhat quaint from
the simplicity of her dress. She had a rather quaint face, too, with a
nose slightly turned up, a prominent forehead, a charming mouth, and
most beautiful dark eyes. Her hair was rolled under and tied at the top
of her head, and it had an odd tendency to go astray about the parting.

This was, perhaps, partly from a trick she seemed to have of doing her
hair away from the looking-glass. She stood to do it, and also (on one
leg) to put on her shoes and stockings, which amused us. But she was
always on her feet, and seemed unhappy if she sat idle. We took her for
a walk the morning after her arrival, and walked faster than we had ever
walked before to keep pace with our new friend, who strode along in her
thick boots and undistended skirts with a step like that of a kilted
Highlander.

When we came into the town, however, she was quite willing to pause
before the shop-windows, which gave her much entertainment.

"I'm afraid I should always be looking in at the windows if I lived in a
town," she said, "there are such pretty things."

Eleanor laughs when I remind her of that walk, and how we stood still by
every chemist's door because she liked the smell. When anything
interested her, she stopped, but at other times she walked as if she
were on the road to some given place, and determined to be there in good
time; or perhaps it would be more just to say that she walked as if
walking were a pleasure to her. It was walking--not strolling. When she
was out alone, I know that she constantly ran when other people would
have walked. It is a north-country habit, I think. I have seen
middle-aged Scotch and Yorkshire ladies run as lightly as children.

It was not the fashionable time of day, so that we could not, during
that walk, show Eleanor the chief characters of Riflebury. But just as
we were leaving High Street she stopped and asked, "Who is that lady?"

"The one in the mauve silk?" said Matilda. "That is one of the cavalry
ladies. All the cavalry ladies dress grandly."

