north, and therefore it was the part of everyone, whether man, woman or
child to redouble his vigilance and caution. Then he adjourned school
for the day.

The boys drew apart from their elders and discussed the great news.
Henry's blood was on fire. The message from that little Massachusetts
town, thrilled him as nothing in his life had done before. He had a
vague idea of going there, and of doing what he considered his part, and
he spoke to Paul about it, but Paul thought otherwise.

"Why, Henry!" he said. "We may have to defend ourselves here and we'll
need you."

The people of Wareville knew little about the causes of the war and
after this one message brought by Ross they heard no more of its
progress. They might be fighting great battles away off there on the
Atlantic coast, but no news came through the wall of woods. Wareville
itself was peaceful, and around it curved the mighty forest which told
nothing.

Mountains and forest alike lay under deep snow, and it was not likely
that they would hear anything further until spring, because the winter
was unusually cold and a man who ventured now on a long journey was
braver than his fellows.

The new Kentuckians were glad that they had provided so well for winter.
All the cupboards were full and there was no need for them now to roam
the cold forests in search of game. They built the fires higher and
watched the flames roar up the chimneys, while the little children
rolled on the floor and grasped at the shadows.

Though but a bit of mankind hemmed in by the vast and frozen wilderness
theirs was not an unhappy life by any means. The men and boys, though
now sparing their powder and ball, still set traps for game and were not
without reward. Often they found elk and deer, and once or twice a
buffalo floundering in the deep snowdrifts, and these they added to the
winter larder. They broke holes in the ice on the river and caught fish
in abundance. They worked, too, about the houses, making more tables and
benches and chairs and shelves and adding to their bodily comforts.

The great snow lasted about a month and then began to break up with a
heavy rain which melted all the ice, but which could not carry away all
the snow. The river rose rapidly and overflowed its banks but Wareville
was safe, built high on the hill where floods could not reach. Warm
winds followed the rain and the melting snow turned great portions of
the forest into lakes. The trees stood in water a yard deep, and the
aspect of the wilderness was gloomy and desolate. Even the most resolute
of the hunters let the game alone at such a time. Often the warm winds
would cease to blow when night came and then the great lagoons would be
covered with a thin skim of ice which melted again the next day under
the winds and the sun. All this brought chills and fever to Wareville
and bitter herbs were sought for their cure. But the strong frame of
Henry was impervious to the attacks and he still made daily journeys to
his traps in the wet and steaming wilderness.

Henry was now reconciled to the schoolroom. It was to be his last term
there and he realized with a sudden regret that it was almost at its
end. He was beginning to feel the sense of responsibility, that he was
in fact one of the units that must make up the state.

Despite these new ideas a sudden great longing lay hold of him. The
winds from the south were growing warmer and warmer, all the snow and
ice was gone long ago, faint touches of green and pink were appearing on
grass and foliage and the young buds were swelling. Henry heard the
whisper of these winds and every one of them called to him. He knew that
he was wanted out there in the woods. He began to hate the sight of
human faces, he wished to go alone into the wilderness, to see the deer
steal among the trees and to hear the beaver dive into the deep waters.
He felt himself a part of nature and he would breathe and live as nature
did.

He grew lax in his tasks; he dragged his feet and there were even times
when he was not hungry. When his mother noticed the latter circumstance
she knew surely that the boy was ill, but her husband shrewdly said:

"Henry, the spring has come; take your rifle and bring us some fresh
venison."

So Henry shouldered his rifle and went forth alone upon the quest, even
leaving behind Paul, his chosen comrade. He did not wish human
companionship that day, nor did he stop until he was deep in the
wilderness. How he felt then the glory of living! The blood was flushing
in his veins as the sap was rising in the trees around him. The world
was coming forth from its torpor of winter refreshed and strengthened.
He saw all about him the signs of new life--the tender young grass in
shades of delicate green, the opening buds on the trees, and a subtle
perfume that came on the edge of the Southern wind. Beyond him the wild
turkeys on the hill were calling to each other.

He stood there a long time breathing the fresh breath of this new world,
and the old desire to wander through illimitable forests and float
silently down unknown rivers came over him. He would not feel the need
of companionship on long wanderings. Nature would then be sufficient,
talking to him in many tongues.

The wind heavy, with perfumes of the South, came over the hill and on
its crest the wild turkeys were still clucking to each other. Henry,
through sheer energy and flush of life, ran up the slope, and watched
them as they took flight through the trees, their brilliant plumage
gleaming in the sunshine.

It was the highest hill near Wareville and he stood a while upon its
crest. The wilderness here circled around him, and, in the distance, it
blended into one mass, already showing a pervading note of green with
faint touches of pink bloom appearing here and there. The whole of it
was still and peaceful with no sign of human life save a rising spire of
smoke behind him that told where Wareville stood.

He walked on. Rabbits sprang out of the grass beside him and raced away
into the thickets. Birds in plumage of scarlet and blue and gold shot
like a flame from tree to tree. The forest, too, was filled with the
melody of their voices, but Henry took no notice.

He paused a while at the edge of a brook to watch the silver sunfish
play in the shallows, then he leaped the stream and went on into the
deeper woods, a tall, lithe, strong figure, his eyes gazing at no one
thing, the long slender-barreled rifle lying forgotten across his
shoulder.

A great stag sprang up from the forest and stood for a few moments,
gazing at him with expanding and startled eyes. Henry standing quite
still returned the look, seeking to read the expression in the eyes of
the deer.

Thus they confronted each other a half minute and then the stag turning
fled through the woods. There was no undergrowth, and Henry for a long
time watched the form of the deer fleeing down the rows of trees, as it
became smaller and smaller and then disappeared.

All the forest glowed red in the setting sun when he returned home.

"Where is the deer?" asked his father.

"Why--why I forgot it!" said Henry in confused reply.

Mr. Ware merely smiled.




CHAPTER VII

THE GIANT BONES


About this time many people in Wareville, particularly the women and
children began to complain of physical ills, notably lassitude and a
lack of appetite; their food, which consisted largely of the game
swarming all around the forest, had lost its savor. There was no mystery
about it; Tom Ross, Mr. Ware and others promptly named the cause; they
needed salt, which to the settlers of Kentucky was almost as precious as
gold; it was obtained in two ways, either by bringing it hundreds of
miles over the mountains from Virginia in wagons or on pack horses, or
by boiling it out at the salt springs in the Indian-haunted woods.

They had neither the time nor the men for the long journey to Virginia,
and they prepared at once for obtaining it at the springs. They had
already used a small salt spring but the supply was inadequate, and they
decided to go a considerable distance northward to the famous Big Bone
Lick. Nothing had been heard in a long time of Indian war parties south
of the Ohio, and they believed they would incur no danger. Moreover they
could bring back salt to last more than a year.

When they first heard of the proposed journey, Paul Cotter pulled Henry
to one side. They were just outside the palisade, and it was a beautiful
day, in early spring. Already kindly nature was smoothing over the cruel
scars made by the axes in the forest, and the village within the
palisade began to have the comfortable look of home.

"Do you know what the Big Bone Lick is, Henry?" asked Paul eagerly.

"No," replied Henry, wondering at his chum's excitement.

"Why it's the most wonderful place in all the world!" said Paul, jumping
up and down in his wish to tell quickly. "There was a hunter here last
winter who spoke to me about it. I didn't believe him then, it sounded
so wonderful, but Mr. Pennypacker says it's all true. There's a great
salt spring, boiling out of the ground in the middle of a kind of marsh,
and all around it, for a long distance, are piled hundreds of large
bones, the bones of gigantic animals, bigger than any that walk the
earth to-day."

"See here, Paul," said Henry scornfully, "you can't stuff my ears with
mush like that. I guess you were reading one of the master's old
romances, and then had a dream. Wake up, Paul!"

"It's true every word of it!"

"Then if there were such big animals, why don't we see 'em sometimes
running through the forest?"

"My, they've all been dead millions of years and their bones have been
preserved there in the marsh. They lived in another geologic era--that's
what Mr. Pennypacker calls it--and animals as tall as trees strolled up
and down over the land and were the lords of creation."

Henry puckered his lips and emitted a long whistle of incredulity.

"Paul," he said, reprovingly, "you do certainly have the gift of
speech."

But Paul was not offended at his chum's disbelief.

"I'm going to prove to you, Henry, that it's true," he said. "Mr.
Pennypacker says it's so, he never tells a falsehood and he's a scholar,
too. But you and I have got to go with the salt-makers, Henry, and we'll
see it all. I guess if you look on it with your own eyes you'll believe
it."

"Of course," said Henry, "and of course I'll go if I can."

A trip through the forest and new country to the great salt spring was
temptation enough in itself, without the addition of the fields of big
bones, and that night in both the Ware and Cotter homes, eloquent boys
gave cogent reasons why they should go with the band.

"Father," said Henry, "there isn't much to do here just now, and they'll
want me up at Big Bone Lick, helping to boil the salt and a lot of
things."

Mr. Ware smiled. Henry, like most boys, seldom showed much zeal for
manual labor. But Henry went on undaunted.

"We won't run any risk. No Indians are in Kentucky now and, father, I
want to go awful bad."

Mr. Ware smiled again at the closing avowal, which was so frank. Just at
that moment in another home another boy was saying almost exactly the
same things, and another father ventured the same answer that Mr. Ware
did, in practically the same words such as these:

"Well, my son, as it is to be a good strong company of careful and
experienced men who will not let you get into any mischief, you can go
along, but be sure that you make yourself useful."

The party was to number a dozen, all skilled foresters, and they were to
lead twenty horses, all carrying huge pack saddles for the utensils and
the invaluable salt. Mr. Silas Pennypacker who was a man of his own will
announced that he was going, too. He puffed out his ruddy cheeks and
said emphatically:

"I've heard from hunters of that place; it's one of the great
curiosities of the country and for the sake of learning I'm bound to see
it. Think of all the gigantic skeletons of the mastodon, the mammoth and
other monsters lying there on the ground for ages!"

Henry and Paul were glad that Mr. Pennypacker was to be with them, as in
the woods he was a delightful comrade, able always to make instruction
entertaining, and the superiority of his mind appealed unconsciously to
both of these boys who--each in his way--were also of superior cast.

They departed on a fine morning--the spring was early and held
steady--and all Wareville saw them go. It was a brilliant little
cavalcade; the horses, their heads up to scent the breeze from the
fragrant wilderness, and the men, as eager to start, everyone with a
long slender-barreled Kentucky rifle on his shoulder, the fringed and
brilliantly colored deerskin hunting shirt falling almost to his knees,
and, below that deerskin leggings and deerskin moccasins adorned with
many-tinted beads. It was a vivid picture of the young West, so young,
and yet so strong and so full of life, the little seed from which so
mighty a tree was soon to grow.

All of them stopped again, as if by an involuntary impulse, at the edge
of the forest, and waved their hands in another, and, this time, in a
last good-by to the watchers at the fort. Then they plunged into the
mighty wilderness, which swept away and away for unknown thousands of
miles.

They talked for a while of the journey, of the things that they might
see by the way, and of those that they had left behind, but before long
conversation ceased. The spell of the dark and illimitable woods, in
whose shade they marched, fell upon them, and there was no noise, but
the sound of breathing and the tread of men and horses. They dropped,
too, from the necessities of the path through the undergrowth, into
Indian file, one behind the other.

Henry was near the rear of the line, the stalwart schoolmaster just in
front of him, and his comrade Paul, just behind. He was full of
thankfulness that he had been allowed to go on this journey. It all
appealed to him, the tale that Paul told of the giant bones and the
great salt spring, the dark woods full of mystery and delightful danger,
and his own place among the trusted band, who were sent on such an
errand. His heart swelled with pride and pleasure and he walked with a
light springy step and with endurance equal to that of any of the men
before him. He looked over his shoulder at Paul, whose face also was
touched with enthusiasm.

"Aren't you glad to be along?" he asked in a whisper.

"Glad as I can be," replied Paul in the same whisper.

Up shot the sun showering golden beams of light upon the forest. The air
grew warmer, but the little band did not cease its rapid pace northward
until noon. Then at a word from Ross all halted at a beautiful glade,
across which ran a little brook of cold water. The horses were tethered
at the edge of the forest, but were allowed to graze on the young grass
which was already beginning to appear, while the men lighted a small
fire of last year's fallen brushwood, at the center of the glade on the
bank of the brook.

"We won't build it high," said Ross, who was captain as well as guide,
"an' then nobody in the forest can see it. There may not be an Indian
south of the Ohio, but the fellow that's never caught is the fellow that
never sticks his head in the trap."

"Sound philosophy! sound philosophy! your logic is irrefutable, Mr.
Ross," said the schoolmaster.

Ross grinned. He did not know what "irrefutable" meant, but he did know
that Mr. Pennypacker intended to compliment him.

Paul and Henry assisted with the fire. In fact they did most of the
work, each wishing to make good his assertion that he would prove of use
on the journey. It was a brief task to gather the wood and then Ross and
Shif'less Sol lighted the fire, which they permitted merely to smolder.
But it gave out ample heat and in a few minutes they cooked over it
their venison and corn bread and coffee which they served in tin cups.
Henry and Paul ate with the ferocious appetite that the march and the
clean air of the wilderness had bred in them, and nobody restricted
them, because the forest was full of game, and such skillful hunters and
riflemen could never lack for a food supply.

Mr. Pennypacker leaned with an air of satisfaction against the upthrust
bough of a fallen oak.

"It's a wonderful world that we have here," he said, "and just to think
that we're among the first white men to find out what it contains."

"All ready!" said Tom Ross, "then forward we go, we mustn't waste time
by the way. They need that salt at Wareville."

Once more they resumed the march in Indian file and amid the silence of
the woods. About the middle of the afternoon Ross invited Mr.
Pennypacker and the two boys to ride three of the pack horses. Henry at
first declined, not willing to be considered soft and pampered, but as
the schoolmaster promptly accepted and Paul who was obviously tired did
the same, he changed his mind, not because he needed rest, but lest Paul
should feel badly over his inferiority in strength.

Thus they marched steadily northward, Ross leading the way, and
Shif'less Sol who was lazy at the settlement, but never in the woods
where he was inferior in knowledge and skill to Ross only, covering the
rear. Each of these accomplished borderers watched every movement of the
forest about him, and listened for every sound; he knew with the eye of
second sight what was natural and if anything not belonging to the usual
order of things should appear, he would detect it in a moment. But they
saw and heard nothing that was not according to nature: only the wind
among the boughs, or the stamp of an elk's hoof as it fled, startled at
the scent of man. The hostile tribes from north and south, fearful of
the presence of each other, seemed to have deserted the great wilderness
of Kentucky.

Henry noted the beauty of the country as they passed along; the gently
rolling hills, the rich dark soil and the beautiful clear streams. Once
they came to a river, too deep to wade, but all of them, except the
schoolmaster, promptly took off their clothing and swam it.

"My age and my calling forbid my doing as the rest of you do," said the
schoolmaster, "and I think I shall stick to my horse."

He rode the biggest of the pack horses, and when the strong animal began
to swim, Mr. Pennypacker thrust out his legs until they were almost
parallel with the animal's neck, and reached the opposite bank,
untouched by a drop of water. No one begrudged him his dry and unlabored
passage; in fact they thought it right, because a schoolmaster was
mightily respected in the early settlements of Kentucky and they would
have regarded it as unbecoming to his dignity to have stripped, and swum
the river as they did.

Henry and Paul in their secret hearts did not envy the schoolmaster.
They thought he had too great a weight of dignity to maintain and they
enjoyed cleaving the clear current with their bare bodies. What! be
deprived of the wilderness pleasures! Not they! The two boys did not
remount, after the passage of the river, but, fresh and full of life,
walked on with the others at a pace so swift that the miles dropped
rapidly behind them. They were passing, too, through a country rarely
trodden even by the red men; Henry knew it by the great quantities of
game they saw; the deer seemed to look from every thicket, now and then
a magnificent elk went crashing by, once a bear lumbered away, and twice
small groups of buffalo were stampeded in the glades and rushed off,
snorting through the undergrowth.

"They say that far to the westward on plains that seem to have no end
those animals are to be seen in millions," said Mr. Pennypacker.

"It's so, I've heard it from the Indians," confirmed Ross the guide.

They stopped a little while before sundown, and as the game was so
plentiful all around them, Ross said he would shoot a deer in order to
save their dried meat and other provisions.

"You come with me, while the others are making the camp," he said to
Henry.

The boy flushed with pride and gratification, and, taking his rifle,
plunged at once into the forest with the guide. But he said nothing,
knowing that silence would recommend him to Ross far more than words,
and took care to bring down his moccasined feet without sound. Nor did
he let the undergrowth rustle, as he slipped through it, and Ross
regarded him with silent approval. "A born woodsman," he said to
himself.

A mile from the camp they stopped at the crest of a little hill, thickly
clad with forest and undergrowth, and looked down into the glade beyond.
