child. There is not a moment to lose--get up, Effie. You can go at once
to The Grange. Go, go quickly and bring Dorothy Fraser. We none of us
can nurse him as she will. She will do it. He has been murmuring in his
sleep about her, about something she did for little Freda, clasping his
throat all the time and suffocating. One glance showed me what ailed him
when I awoke this morning. He has a hard fight before him, but he must
not die--I tell you, child, your father must not die!"

"No, no, mother! God will spare him to us," said Effie. Tears dimmed her
eyes, she got quickly into her clothes.

"Now, I will go," she said. "I will bring Dorothy back with me."

"If there is any difficulty," said Mrs. Staunton, "if she hesitates for
a moment, you must remember, there is only one thing to be done."

"Yes, mother; what do you mean?"

"You must offer to nurse Freda Harvey instead of her--do you
understand?"

"And I am not to come back to father when he is ill?" said Effie,
aghast.

"That is not the point," exclaimed Mrs. Staunton. "The only thing to be
considered is, what will save him, and you and I, and our feelings, are
of no consequence. His life is so valuable that no sacrifice is too
great to keep it. Go, child, go. If you can come back, come--if not,
stay."

"And who will manage the children--they ought not to remain in the
house."

"Don't worry about the children. Get Dorothy as quickly as possible."

Effie buttoned her dress and pinned on her hat, and then went out on the
landing.

"Where are you going, child? Why don't you go downstairs?"

"I must kiss father first."

"What folly!--why should there be this delay?"

"I won't be a minute."

Effie turned the handle of the bedroom door, and went softly into the
room. Her father was lying on his back--there was a livid look about his
face. Great beads of perspiration stood on his brow. His eyes were
closed. He did not see Effie when she came into the room, but when she
bent down and kissed his forehead, he opened his eyes and looked at her.
He said something which she could not distinguish--he was too hoarse to
make any words articulate.

"I am going for Dorothy," she said, with a smile,--"she'll soon make you
better,--good-by. God bless you--father. I love you--father, I love
you."

His eyes smiled at her, but his lips could not speak.

She went quickly out of the room.




CHAPTER VIII.


It did not take Effie long to harness the old horse to the gig. She had
often driven old Jock, and this part of her task did not put her out in
the least. She had a curious sense, as she was driving toward The Grange
in the fresh early morning air, of the complete change which was
awaiting her. She was quite certain that one door in her life was
shut--shut forever. She had longed for change,--it had come at last with
a vengeance; it was horrible,--it made her shudder.

Effie was a thoroughly healthy girl, healthy both in mind and body, but
now a sick pain was over her. She did not care to think of the real
terror which haunted her. She arrived at The Grange between six and
seven o'clock. The woman at the lodge ran out and opened the gate for
the doctor's gig in some surprise. She thought something was wrong
again up at the house, but her surprise strengthened to astonishment
when she saw that Effie was driving the horse.

"Why, Miss Effie, what is the matter?" she exclaimed. Everyone in the
place knew Effie, and loved her for her father's sake.

"The doctor is ill, Mrs. Jones," said Effie, "and I have come to fetch
Miss Fraser."

"Oh, God help us! he hasn't taken it?" said the woman, falling back a
step or two in horror.

Effie nodded her head--she had no words to speak. She whipped up Jock,
and drove quickly down the avenue.

A kitchen-maid was on her knees whitening and polishing the front steps.
Effie jumped from the gig, and asked the girl to call someone to hold
the horse.

"There ain't any of the men round just now, it is too early," said the
girl.

"Then take the reins yourself," said Effie. "Stand just here; Jock won't
stir if I tell him to be quiet. Hold the reins. I am in a great hurry."

"You are Miss Effie Staunton, ain't you, miss?"

"I am. My father is ill, and I want Miss Fraser."

"God help us! the doctor ill!" exclaimed the girl.

She stood where Effie told her, holding Jock's reins.

"Be quiet, Jock; don't stir till I come out," said Effie. The old horse
drooped his head. Effie ran up the steps and into the house. She had
never been at The Grange before, but she had no eyes for the beauties of
the old place this morning. There was something too awful lying at the
bottom of her heart, for any external things to affect her. She went
quickly up the broad front stairs, and paused on the first landing. How
was she to discover the room where Dorothy and little Freda Harvey
spent their time together? She was about to turn back in utter
bewilderment, when, to her relief, she saw another servant. The servant
stopped and stared at Effie. Effie came up to her quickly.

"You may be surprised to see me here," she said. "I am Miss Staunton,
Dr. Staunton's daughter. He is ill. I want to see Nurse Fraser
immediately. Take me to her at once."

"We are none of us allowed near that part of the house, miss," replied
the woman.

"You can take me in the direction, anyhow, and explain to me how I am to
get to Miss Fraser," said Effie. "Come, there's not an instant to
lose--be quick."

"Oh, yes! I can take you in the direction," said the girl.

She turned down a corridor; Effie followed her. The servant walked
rather slowly and in a dubious sort of way.

"Can't you hurry?" said Effie. "It is a matter of life and death."

The girl hastened her steps a little. Effie's manner frightened her.
Presently they reached a baize door--the servant pushed it open, but
stood aside herself.

"It is as much as my place is worth to open this door," she said. "It is
here the infectious case is, and Miss Fraser's own orders are that the
door is not to be opened; but you frighten me somehow, miss, and I
suppose there's no harm in it."

"No, of course there is no harm. Now, tell me which is Miss Fraser's
room?"

"The nurseries are entered by the third door as you go down that
passage, miss."

The servant banged to the baize door, and Effie found herself alone.
She ran down the passage, and opened the outer nursery door. It was
quiet and still, in perfect order, the blinds down, and the windows
open. Effie, in spite of all her agitation, walked on tiptoe across this
room. A door which led into another room was half open, and she heard
someone moving about. That step, so quiet and self-possessed, must
belong to Dorothy.

"Dorothy! Dorothy! come here," called Effie.

Dorothy Fraser, in her dressing-gown, came out to the other room at
once.

"Effie!" she exclaimed. "Effie Staunton!"

"Yes, it is I," said Effie; "it is I." She began to unpin her hat as she
spoke. "I have come here to stay; I am going to nurse little Freda, and
you are to go back to father. The gig is waiting outside, and you can
easily drive old Jock. Drive him straight home, and go as fast as ever
you can."

"Is your father ill, Effie?"

"Yes; he has taken the diphtheria. He is very ill. Mother sent me for
you. If father dies, mother will die. They love each other so dearly--so
very dearly. One couldn't live without the other. Go, and save them
both, Dorothy, and I will stay with Freda."

"You are a dear, brave little girl," said Dorothy.

She went and put her strong arms round Effie.

"I will go at once," she said. "But are you prepared to take full charge
here, Effie?"

"Yes; tell me quickly what is to be done!"

"There's nothing to be done now but simply to see that Freda doesn't
take cold. She is not free from infection yet, but she is quite out of
danger, if she does not catch a chill. Treat her as you would any sick
child. Rhoda is here. She is a capital girl, and will help you with
Freda's food. Freda may come into this room for a little to-day, but
you must see that she keeps out of a draught. Good-by. Effie. I won't be
any time getting ready. I'll send you telegrams about your father. God
bless you, Effie."




CHAPTER IX.


From the first it was a bad case. The throat was not so particularly
affected, but the weakness was extreme. All imaginable devices were
resorted to, to keep up the patient's strength. Notwithstanding all
human precautions, however, that strength failed and failed.

In a few days the strong man was like an infant. He could not lift a
finger, he could scarcely turn his head, his voice was completely gone.
His stricken soul could only look dumbly into the world through his
eyes. Those honest eyes were pathetic. Dorothy was unremitting in her
attentions. She took complete charge from the very first. Dr. Edwards
came and went, but he gave the nursing to Dorothy. She had prepared
herself for a great fight. She had hoped to conquer, but on the third
day of the doctor's illness she knew that the battle was not to the
strong nor the race to the swift--in short, the good doctor was called
to render up his account, his short span of mortal life was over.

One evening he had lain perfectly still and in a state of apparent
stupor for several hours. Dorothy stood at the foot of the bed. Her eyes
were fixed on the patient.

"It is strange how much I admire him," she said to herself. "I never met
a nobler, truer-hearted man."

"Dorothy, come here," said the doctor.

She went at once, and bent over him.

"I am going," he said, looking at her.

"Yes, Dr. Staunton," she answered.

He closed his eyes again for a moment.

"The wife," he murmured--"does she know?"

"I am not sure," said Dorothy in her quiet, clear voice, which never for
a moment sank to a whisper. "I think she must guess--I have not told
her."

"She had better know," said the doctor. "Will you bring her here?"

"Yes, I'll go and fetch her at once."

Dorothy left the room. She stood for a moment on the landing.

The task which lay immediately before her made her spirits sink. She
knew just as well as Dr. Staunton did how precarious was Mrs. Staunton's
tenure of life. She knew that a sudden shock might be fatal. Were those
children to lose both parents? The doctor was going,--no mortal aid now
could avail for him,--but must the mother also leave the children?

"I do not know what to do," thought Dorothy. "She must see her
husband--they _must_ meet. He is the bravest man I know, but can he
suppress his own feelings now--now that he is dying? No, no, it is too
much to ask; but I greatly, greatly fear that if he does not, the shock
will kill her."

Dorothy went slowly downstairs. She was generally decisive in her
actions. Now, she trembled, and a terrible nervousness seized her.

When she reached the little entrance hall, and was about to open the
door of the parlor where she expected to find Mrs. Staunton, she was
surprised to come face to face with a tall, bronzed young man, who was
taking off his hat and hanging it on one of the pegs in the hat-rack. He
turned, and started when, he saw her. He was evidently unfamiliar with
nurses and sickness. His face flushed up, and he said in a sort of
apologetic way:

"Surely this is Dr. Staunton's house?"

"Yes," said Dorothy.

"I am George Staunton. I--I came down on pressing business--I want to
see my father in a hurry. What is the matter?"

He stepped back a pace or two, startled by the expression on Dorothy's
face.

"Come in here at once," she said, seizing his hand. She dragged him into
the seldom-used drawing-room. The moment they got inside, she
deliberately locked the door.

"You have come just in time," she said. "You must bear up. I hope you'll
be brave. Can you bear a great shock without--without fainting, or
anything of that sort?"

"Oh, I won't faint!" he answered. His lips trembled, his blue eyes grew
wide open, the pupils began to dilate.

"I believe you are a brave lad," said Dorothy, noticing these signs. "It
is your lot now to come face to face with great trouble. Dr.
Staunton--your father--is dying."

"Good God! Merciful God!" said the lad. He sank down on the nearest
chair--he was white to the lips.

Dorothy went up and took his hand.

"There, there!" she said. "You'll be better in a moment. Try to forget
yourself--we have not, any of us, a single instant just now to think of
ourselves. I have come down to fetch your mother."

"You are the nurse?" said George, glancing at her dress.

"Yes, I am nursing your father. It has been a very bad
case--diphtheria--a very acute and hopeless case from the first. There's
a great deal of infection. Are you afraid?"

"No, no! don't talk of fear. I'll go to him. I--I was in trouble myself,
but that must wait. I'll go to him at once."

"I want you to go to your mother."

"My mother! is she ill too?"

"She is not exactly ill--I mean she is not worse than usual, but her
life is bound up in your father's. It would be a dreadful thing for your
sisters and yourself if your mother were to die. Your coming here at
this moment may mean her salvation. I have to go to her now, to tell her
that her dying husband has sent for her. Will you follow me into the
room? Will you act according to your own impulses? I am sure God will
direct you. Stay where you are for a minute--try to be brave. Follow me
into the room as soon as you can."

Dorothy left the drawing room. As she went away, she heard the young man
groan. She did not give herself time to think--she opened the parlor
door.

Mrs. Staunton was sitting in her favorite seat by the window. Her face
was scarcely at all paler than it had been a week ago. She sat then by
the window, looking out at her trouble, which showed like a speck in the
blue sky. The shadow which enveloped her whole life was coming closer
now, enveloping her like a thick fog. Still she was bearing up. Her eyes
were gazing out on the garden--on the flowers which she and the doctor
had tended and loved together. Some of the younger children had
clustered round her knee--one of them held her hand--another played with
a bunch of keys and trinkets which she always wore at her side.

"Go on, mother," said little Marjory, aged seven. "Don't stop."

"I have nearly finished," said Mrs. Staunton.

"But not quite. Go on, mother; I want to hear the end of the story,"
said Phil.
