armed population, and the Guises and their friends and retainers,
to say nothing of the six thousand Swiss? If our leaders thought
they were going to fight at once, they would hardly have sent two
hundred good troops off in another direction. I expect we shall
have plenty of time to get through this and other expeditions, and
then to join the Prince in front of Paris before any serious
fighting takes place."

"Do you know how far it is across the hills to Orleans?" Philip
asked the gentlemen next to him on the other side.

"It is over fifty miles, but how much more I do not know. I am a
native of the province, but I have never travelled along this road,
which can be but little used. East of Montargis the traffic goes by
the great road through Melun to Paris; while the traffic of
Orleans, of course, goes north through Etampes."

They rode on until noon, and then dismounted by a stream, watered
and fed the horses, partook of a meal from the contents of their
saddlebags, and then rested for four hours to recruit the strength
of their horses. The soldiers mostly stretched themselves on the
sward and slept. A few of the gentlemen did the same, but most of
them sat chatting in groups, discussing the enterprise upon which
they were engaged.

Francois and Philip went among their men with Captain Montpace,
inspected the horses, examined their shoes, saw that fresh nails
were put in where required, chatting with the men as they did so.

"I felt sure we should not be long before we were engaged on some
stirring business," the Captain said. "The Count de la Noue is not
one to let the grass grow under his feet. I saw much of him in the
last campaign; and the count, your father, had a very high opinion
of his military abilities. At first he was looked upon somewhat
doubtfully in our camp, seeing that he did not keep a long face,
but was ready with a jest and a laugh with high and low, and that
he did not affect the soberness of costume favoured by our party;
but that soon passed off, when it was seen how zealous he was in
the cause, how ready to share in any dangerous business; while he
set an example to all, by the cheerfulness with which he bore
fatigue and hardship. Next to the Admiral himself, and his brother
D'Andelot, there was no officer more highly thought of by the
troops.

"This is certainly a bold enterprise that he has undertaken now, if
it be true what I have heard, since we halted, that we are going to
make a dash at Orleans. It is a big city for two hundred men to
capture; even though, no doubt, we have numbers of friends within
the walls."

"All the more glory and credit to us, Montpace," Francois said
gaily. "Why, the news that Orleans is captured will send a thrill
through France, and will everywhere encourage our friends to rise
against our oppressors. We are sure to take them by surprise, for
they will believe that all the Huguenots in this part of France are
hastening to join the Prince before Paris."

At four o'clock the party got in motion again and, an hour after
dark, entered a little village among the hills, about five miles
north of the town. De la Noue at once placed a cordon of sentries,
with orders that neither man, woman, nor child was to be allowed to
leave it. Orders were issued, to the startled peasants, that all
were to keep within their doors, at the peril of their lives. The
horses were picketed in the street, and the soldiers stowed in
barns; trusses of straw were strewn round a fire for La Noue, and
the gentlemen who followed him.

At eight o'clock two videttes, thrown forward some distance along
the road, rode in with a horseman. It was the Master of Grelot who,
as he rode up to the fire, was heartily greeted by the Count.

"I am glad to find you here, Count," he said. "I knew you to be a
man of your word, but in warfare things often occur to upset the
best calculations."

"Is everything going on well at Orleans?" De la Noue asked.

"Everything. I have made all my arrangements. A party of
five-and-twenty men I can depend on will, tomorrow morning at seven
o'clock, gather near the gate this side of the town. They will come
up in twos and threes and, just as the guard are occupied in
unbarring the gate, they will fall upon them. The guard is fifteen
strong and, as they will be taken by surprise, they will be able to
offer but a faint resistance.

"Of course, you with your troop will be lying in readiness near. As
soon as they have taken possession of the gateway, the party will
issue out and wave a white flag, as a signal to you that all is
clear; and you will be in before the news that the gateway has been
seized can spread. After that you will know what to do. In addition
to the men who are to carry out the enterprise, you will shortly be
joined by many others. Word has been sent round to our partisans
that they may speedily expect deliverance; and bidding them be
prepared, whenever they are called upon, to take up their arms and
join those who come to free them.

"A large number of the town folk are secretly either wholly with us
or well disposed towards us; and, although some will doubtless take
up arms on the other side, I think that, with the advantage of the
surprise, and with such assistance as our party can give you, there
is every chance of bringing the enterprise to a successful issue.

"One of our friends, who has a residence within a bow shot of the
gates, has arranged with me that your troop, arriving there before
daylight, shall at once enter his grounds, where they will be
concealed from the sight of any country people going towards the
city. From the upper windows the signal can be seen and, if you are
mounted and ready, you can be there in three or four minutes; and
it will take longer than that before the alarm can spread, and the
Catholics muster strongly enough to recapture the gate."

"Admirably arranged," the Count said warmly. "With a plan so well
laid, our scheme can hardly fail of success. If we only do our part
as well as you have done yours, Orleans is as good as won.

"Now, gentlemen, I advise you to toss off one more goblet of wine,
and then to wrap yourselves up in your cloaks for a few hours'
sleep. We must be in the saddle soon after four, so as to be off
the road by five."

At that hour the troop, led by the Master of Grelot, turned in at
the gate of the chateau. The owner was awaiting them, and gave them
a cordial welcome. The men were ordered to dismount and stand by
their horses, while the leaders followed their host into the house,
where a repast had been laid out for them; while some servitors
took out baskets of bread and flagons of wine to the troopers.

At half-past six groups of countrymen were seen, making their way
along the road towards the gate and, a quarter of an hour later,
the troop mounted and formed up, in readiness to issue out as soon
as the signal was given; their host placing himself at an upper
window, whence he could obtain a view of the city gate.

It was just seven when he called out "The gate is opening!" and
immediately afterwards, "They have begun the work. The country
people outside are running away in a panic.

"Ah! there is the white flag."

Two servitors at the gate of the chateau threw it open and, headed
by La Noue and the gentlemen of the party, they issued out and
galloped down the road at full speed. As they approached the gate
some men ran out, waving their caps and swords.

"Well done!" La Noue exclaimed, as he rode up. "Now, scatter and
call out all our friends to aid us in the capture."

The troop had been already divided into four parties, each led by
gentlemen familiar with the town. Francois and Philip, with the men
from Laville, formed the party led by the Count himself. The news
of the tumult at the gate had spread and, just as they reached the
marketplace, a body of horsemen, equal in strength to their own,
rode towards them.

"For God and the religion!" La Noue shouted, as he led the charge.

Ignorant of the strength of their assailants, and having mounted in
haste at the first alarm, the opposing band hesitated; and before
they could set their horses into a gallop, the Huguenots were upon
them. The impetus of the charge was irresistible. Men and horses
rolled over, while those in the rear turned and rode away; and the
combat was over before scarce a blow had been struck.

A party of infantry, hastening up, were next encountered. These
offered a more stubborn resistance, but threw down their arms and
surrendered, when another of the Huguenot parties rode into the
square.

At the sound of the conflict the upper windows of the houses were
opened, and the citizens looked out in alarm at the struggle. But
the Catholics, having neither orders nor plan, dared not venture
out; while the Huguenots mustered rapidly, with arms in their
hands; and rendered valuable assistance to the horsemen, in
attacking and putting to flight the parties of Catholic horse and
foot, as they came hurriedly up.

In an hour all resistance had ceased and Orleans was taken. The
Count at once issued a proclamation to the citizens, assuring all
peaceable persons of protection; and guaranteeing to the citizens
immunity from all interference with personal property, and the
right of full exercise of their religion. The charge of the gates
was given over to the Huguenot citizens. Parties of horse were told
off to patrol the streets, to see that order was preserved, and to
arrest any using threats or violence to the citizens; and in a very
few hours the town resumed its usual appearance.

Now that all fear of persecution was at an end, large numbers of
the citizens, who had hitherto concealed their leanings towards the
new religion, openly avowed them; and La Noue saw with satisfaction
that the town could be safely left to the keeping of the Huguenot
adherents, with the assistance only of a few men to act as leaders.
These he selected from the gentlemen of the province who had come
with him and, as soon as these had entered upon their duties, he
felt free to turn his attention elsewhere.

Two days were spent in appointing a council of the leading
citizens, the Huguenots of course being in the majority. To them
was intrusted the management of the affairs of the town, and the
maintenance of order. The young nobleman appointed as governor was
to have entire charge of military matters. All Huguenots capable of
bearing arms were to be formed up in companies, each of which was
to appoint its own officers. They were to practise military
exercises, to have charge of the gates and walls, and to be
prepared to defend them, in case a hostile force should lay siege
to the city.

Three of the nobles were appointed to see to the victualling of the
town; and all citizens were called upon to contribute a sum,
according to their means, for this purpose. A few old soldiers were
left to drill the new levies, to see that the walls were placed in
a thorough condition of defence, and above all to aid the leaders
in suppressing any attempt at the ill-treatment of Catholics, or
the desecration of their churches, by the Huguenot portion of the
population.

When all arrangements were made for the peace and safety of the
town, De la Noue despatched most of the gentlemen with him, and
their followers, to join the Prince of Conde before Paris;
retaining only his Cousin Francois, Philip, the troop from Laville,
and his own band of forty men-at-arms.



Chapter 6: The Battle Of Saint Denis.


Francois de Laville and Philip had fought by the side of La Noue,
in the engagement in the streets of Orleans; but had seen little of
the Count afterwards, his time being fully employed in completing
the various arrangements to ensure the safety of the town. They had
been lodged in the house of one of the Huguenot citizens, and had
spent their time walking about the town, or in the society of some
of the younger gentlemen of their party.

"Are you both ready for service again?" the Count de la Noue, who
had sent for them to come to his lodgings, asked on the evening of
the third day after the capture of Orleans.

"Quite ready," Francois replied. "The horses have all recovered
from their fatigue, and are in condition for a fresh start. Are we
bound for Paris, may I ask?"

"No, Francois, we are going on a recruiting tour: partly because we
want men, but more to encourage our people by the sight of an armed
party, and to show the Catholics that they had best stay their
hands, and leave us alone for the present.

"I take a hundred men with me, including your troop and my own,
which I hope largely to increase. Sometimes we shall keep in a
body, sometimes break up into two or three parties. Always we shall
move rapidly, so as to appear where least expected, and so spread
uneasiness as to where we may next appear.

"In the south we are, as I hear, holding our own. I shall therefore
go first to Brittany and, if all is quiet, there raise another
fifty men. We shall travel through Touraine and Anjou as we go, and
then sweep round by Normandy and La Perche, and so up to Paris.

"So you see, we shall put a good many miles of ground under our
feet, before we join the Prince. In that way not only shall we
swell our numbers and encourage our friends, but we shall deter
many of the Catholic gentry from sending their retainers to join
the army of the Guises."

"It will be a pleasant ride, cousin," Francois said, "and I hope
that we shall have an opportunity of doing some good work, before
we reach Paris; and especially that we shall not arrive there too
late to join in the coming battle."

"I do not think that there is much fear of that," the Count
replied. "The Prince has not sufficient strength to attack Paris.
And for my part, I think that it would have been far better, when
it was found that his plan of seizing the court had failed, to have
drawn off at once. He can do nothing against Paris, and his
presence before it will only incite the inhabitants against us, and
increase their animosity. It would have been better to have applied
the force in reducing several strong towns where, as at Orleans,
the bulk of the inhabitants are favourable to us. In this way we
should weaken the enemy, strengthen ourselves, and provide places
of refuge for our people in case of need. However, it is too late
for such regrets. The Prince is there, and we must take him what
succour we can.

"I was pleased with you both, in the fights upon the day we
entered. You both behaved like brave gentlemen and good swordsmen.
I expected no less from you, Francois; but I was surprised to find
your English cousin so skilled with his weapon."

"He is a better swordsman than I am," Francois said; "which is a
shame to me, since he is two years my junior."

"Is he indeed!" the Count said in surprise. "I had taken him to be
at least your equal in years. Let me think, you are but eighteen
and some months?"

"But a month over eighteen," Francois said, "and Philip has but
just passed sixteen."

"You will make a doughty warrior when you attain your full
strength, Philip. I saw you put aside a thrust from an officer in
the melee, and strike him from his horse with a backhanded cut with
your sword, dealt with a vigour that left nothing to be desired."

"I know that I am too fond of using the edge, sir," Philip said,
modestly. "My English masters taught me to do so and, although my
French instructors at home were always impressing upon me that the
point was more deadly than the edge, I cannot break myself
altogether from the habit."

"There is no need to do so," the Count said. "Of late the point has
come into fashion among us, and doubtless it has advantages; but
often a downright blow will fetch a man from his saddle, when you
would in vain try to find, with the point, a joint in his armour.
But you must have been well taught, indeed, if you are a better
swordsman than my cousin; whose powers I have tried at Laville, and
found him to be an excellent swordsman, for his age."

"I have had many masters," Philip said. "Both my French and English
teachers were good swordsmen; and it was seldom a Frenchman who had
been in the wars passed through Canterbury, that my uncle did not
engage him to give me a few lessons. Thus, being myself very
anxious to become a good swordsman, and being fond of exercises, I
naturally picked up a great many tricks with the sword."

"You could not have spent your time better, if you had an intention
of coming over to take part in our troubles here. Your grandfather,
De Moulins, was said to be one of the best swordsmen in France; and
you may have inherited some of his skill. I own that I felt rather
uneasy at the charge of two such young cockerels, though I could
not refuse when the countess, my aunt, begged me to let you ride
with me; but in future I shall feel easy about you, seeing that you
can both take your own parts stoutly.

"Well, order your men to be ready and mounted, in the marketplace,
at half-past five. The west gate will be opened for us to ride
forth at six."

Philip had every reason to be satisfied with the conduct of his new
servant. In the town, as at Laville, Pierre behaved circumspectly
and quietly; assuming a grave countenance in accordance with his
surroundings, keeping his arms and armour brightly polished, and
waiting at table as orderly as if he had been used to nothing else
all his life.

"I am glad to hear it, sir," Pierre said, when Philip informed him
that they would start on the following morning. "I love not towns;
and here, where there is nought to do but to polish your armour,
and stand behind your chair at dinner, the time goes mighty
heavily."

"You will have no cause to grumble on that account, Pierre, I
fancy, for your ride will be a long one. I do not expect we shall
often have a roof over our heads."

"All the better, sir, so long as the ride finishes before the cold
weather sets in. Fond as I am of sleeping with the stars over me; I
own that, when the snow is on the ground, I prefer a roof over my
head."

At six o'clock the party started. Only two other gentlemen rode
with it, both of whom were, like the Count, from Brittany. The
little group chatted gaily as they rode along. Unless they happened
to encounter parties of Catholics going north, to join the royal
army, there was, so far as they knew, no chance of their meeting
any body of the enemy on their westward ride.

The towns of Vendome, Le Mans, and Laval were all strongly
Catholic, and devoted to the Guises. These must be skirted. Rennes
in Brittany must also be avoided, for all these towns were strongly
garrisoned, and could turn out a force far too strong for La Noue
to cope with.

Upon the march, Pierre was not only an invaluable servant but the
life of the troop; he being full of fun and frolic, and making even
the gravest soldier smile at his sallies. When they halted, he was
indefatigable in seeing after Philip's comforts. He cut boughs of
the trees best suited for the purpose of making a couch, and
surprised his master and Francois by his ingenuity in turning out
excellent dishes from the scantiest materials. He would steal away
in the night to procure fowls and eggs from neighbouring farmhouses
and, although Philip's orders were that he was to pay the full
price for everything he required, Philip found, when he gave an
account a fortnight later of how he had spent the money he had
given him, that there was no mention of any payment for these
articles. When he rated Pierre for this, the latter replied:

"I did not pay for them, sir. Not in order to save you money, but
for the sake of the farmers and their families. It would have been
worse than cruelty to have aroused them from sleep. The loss of a
fowl or two, and of a dozen eggs, were nothing to them. If they
missed them at all, they would say that a fox had been there, and
they would think no more of it. If, on the other hand, I had waked
them up in the middle of the night to pay for these trifles, they
would have been scared out of their life; thinking, when I knocked,
that some band of robbers was at the door. In their anger at being
thus disturbed they would have been capable of shooting me; and it
is well nigh certain that, at any rate, they would have refused to
sell their chickens and eggs at that time of the night.

"So you see, sir, I acted for the best for all parties. Two
chickens out of scores was a loss not worth thinking of, while the
women escaped the panic and terror that my waking them up would
have caused them. When I can pay I will assuredly do so, since that
is your desire; but I am sure you will see that, under such
circumstances, it would be a crime to wake people from their sleep
for the sake of a few sous."

Philip laughed.

"Besides, sir," Pierre went on, "these people were either Huguenots
or Catholics. If they were Huguenots, they would be right glad to
minister to those who are fighting on their behalf. If they were
Catholics, they would rob and murder us without mercy. Therefore
they may think themselves fortunate, indeed, to escape at so
trifling a cost from the punishment they deserve."

"That is all very well, Pierre; but the orders are strict against
plundering and, if the Admiral were to catch you, you would get a
sound thrashing with a stirrup leather."

"I have risked worse than that, sir, many times in my life; and if
I am caught, I will give them leave to use the strap. But you will
see, Monsieur Philip, that if the war goes on these niceties will
soon become out of fashion. At present the Huguenot lords and
gentlemen have money in their pockets to pay for what they want,
but after a time money will become scarce. They will see that the
armies of the king live on plunder, as armies generally do; and
when cash runs short, they will have to shut their eyes and let the
men provide themselves as best they can."

"I hope the war won't last long enough for that, Pierre. But at any
rate, we have money in our pockets at present, and can pay for what
we require; though I do not pretend that it is a serious matter to
take a hen out of a coop, especially when you can't get it
otherwise, without, as you say, alarming a whole family. However,
remember my orders are that everything we want is to be paid for."

"I understand, sir, and you will see that the next time we reckon
up accounts every item shall be charged for, so that there will be
nothing on your conscience."

Philip laughed again.

"I shall be content if that is the case, Pierre; and I hope that
your conscience will be as clear as mine will be."

On the third of November, just a month after leaving Orleans, De La
Noue, with his troop augmented to three hundred, joined the Prince
of Conde before Paris. During the interval, he had traversed the
west of France by the route he had marked out for himself, had
raised fifty more men among the Huguenots of Brittany, and had been
joined on the route by many gentlemen with parties of their
retainers.

Several bodies of Catholics had been met and dispersed. Two or
three small towns, where the Huguenots had been ill treated and
massacred, were entered. The ringleaders in the persecutions had
been hung, and the authorities had been compelled to pay a heavy
fine, under threat of the whole town being committed to the flames.
Everywhere he passed La Noue had caused proclamations to be
scattered far and wide, to the effect that any ill treatment of
Huguenots would be followed by his return, and by the heaviest
punishment being inflicted upon all who molested them.

And so, having given great encouragement to the Huguenots, and
scattered terror among their persecutors; having ridden great
distances, and astonished the people of the western provinces by
his energy and activity; La Noue joined the Prince of Conde, with
three hundred men. He was heartily welcomed on his arrival at the
Huguenot camp at Saint Denis.

Francois de Laville and Philip Fletcher had thoroughly enjoyed the
expedition. They had often been in the saddle from early morning to
late at night; and had felt the benefit of having each two horses
as, when the party halted for a day or two, they were often sent
out with half their troop to visit distant places--to see friends;
to bring into the camp magistrates, and others, who had been
foremost in stirring up the people to attack the Huguenots; to
enter small towns, throw open prisons and carry off the Huguenots
confined there; and occasionally to hang the leaders of local
massacres. In these cases they were always accompanied by one or
other of the older leaders, in command of the party.

Their spare chargers enabled them to be on horseback every day,
while half the troop rested in turn. Sometimes their halts were
made in small towns and villages, but more often they bivouacked in
the open country; being thus, the Count considered, more watchful
and less apt to be surprised.

On their return from these expeditions, Pierre always had a meal
prepared for them. In addition to the rations of meat and bread,
chicken and eggs, he often contrived to serve up other and daintier
food. His old poaching habits were not forgotten. As soon as the
camp was formed, he would go out and set snares for hares, traps
for birds, and lay lines in the nearest stream; while fish and
game, of some sort, were generally added to the fare.

"Upon my word," the Count, who sometimes rode with them, said one
evening, "this varlet of yours, Master Philip, is an invaluable
fellow; and Conde, himself, cannot be better served than you are. I
have half a mind to take him away from you, and to appoint him
Provider-in-General to our camp. I warrant me he never learned thus
to provide a table, honestly; he must have all the tricks of a
poacher at his fingers' end."

"I fancy, when he was young, he had to shift a good deal for
himself, sir," Philip replied.

"I thought so," La Noue laughed. "I marked him once or twice,
behind your chair at Orleans; and methought, then, that he looked
too grave to be honest; and there was a twinkle in his eye, that
accorded badly with the gravity of his face, and his sober attire.

"Well, there can be no doubt that, in war, a man who has a spice of
the rogue in him makes the best of servants; provided he is but
faithful to his master, and respects his goods, if he does those of
no one else. Your rogue is necessarily a man of resources; and one
of that kind will, on a campaign, make his master comfortable,
where one with an over-scrupulous varlet will well-nigh starve. I
had such a man, when I was with Brissac in Northern Italy; but one
day he went out, and never returned. Whether a provost marshal did
me the ill service of hanging him, or whether he was shot by the
peasants, I never knew; but I missed him sorely, and often went
fasting to bed, when I should have had a good supper had he been
with me.

"It is lucky for you both that you haven't to depend upon that
grim-visaged varlet of Francois'. I have no doubt that the countess
thought she was doing well by my cousin, when she appointed him to
go with him, and I can believe that he would give his life for him;
but for all that, if you had to depend upon him for your meals, you
would fare badly, indeed."

De la Noue was much disappointed, on joining the Prince, at finding
that the latter's force had not swollen to larger dimensions. He
had with him, after the arrival of the force the Count had brought
from the west, but two thousand horse. Of these a large proportion
were gentlemen, attended only by a few personal retainers. A fifth
only were provided with lances, and a large number had no defensive
armour. Of foot soldiers he had about the same number as of horse,
and of these about half were armed with arquebuses, the rest being
pikemen.

The force under the command of the Constable de Montmorency, inside
the walls of Paris, was known to be enormously superior in
strength; and the Huguenots were unable to understand why he did
not come out to give them battle. They knew, however, that Count
Aremberg was on his way from the Netherlands, with seventeen
hundred horse, sent by the Duke of Alva to the support of the
Catholics; and they supposed that Montmorency was waiting for this
reinforcement.

On the 9th of November news arrived that Aremberg was approaching,
and D'Andelot, with five hundred horse and eight hundred of the
best-trained arquebusiers, was despatched to seize Poissy, and so
