better than brute beasts, made so by the war.

"An order came for them.  They marched away, leaving a company of other
soldiers like those yonder."  He pointed to the men on the floor.

"And what became of them?"

"There was an attack from the woods at night--a little handful of
French soldiers.  They beat them off and followed them down the road.
They have been gone half an hour.  We heard the firing.  We came out
thinking to plunder the train.  We opened wagon after wagon but found
nothing but arms.  We can't eat steel or powder.  We killed two
sentries, made prisoners of the officers.  We'll set fire to the house
and leave them presently.  As for this man, we'll kill him, and as for
this woman----"

He laughed meaningly, basely, leering at the girl in hideous
suggestiveness that made her shudder; and which his wretched companions
found highly amusing.

"You have done well," said the young officer quickly, although he was
cold with rage at the ruffian's low insinuation.  "I hope to have some
interest with the king later.  If you will give me your names I will
see that you are rewarded."

"Never mind our names," growled the leader, still suspicious, evidently.

"Food and drink would reward us better now," shouted a second.

"Aye," yelled one of the others, seconding this happy thought.  "We
have eaten nothing since yesterday, and as for drink, it is a week
since my lips have tasted a swallow of wine."

"And what would you give me if I could procure you some of the fine
wine of the country, my friends?" said Marteau quietly, putting great
restraint upon himself to continue trafficking with these scoundrels.

"Give?  Anything," answered several in chorus, their red eyes gleaming.

"If you've got it we'll take it for nothing," said the brutal leader
with ferocious cunning.

"Do I look as if I concealed wine and provisions on my person?" asked
the officer boldly, confident now that he had found the way to master
these men.

"No," was the answer.  "But where is it?"

"And be quick about it," cried a second threateningly.  "Those Russians
may be back at any moment."

"Is this a jest?" asked a third with a menacing gesture.

"It would be ill-done to joke with men as hungry as you are, I take
it," answered Marteau.

"Hurry, then," cried a fourth.

"In good time, my friends.  First, a word with you.  What are you going
to do with those two prisoners?"

"Knock the men in the head, I told you," answered the leader.

"And the woman?"

"We are trying to settle who should have her--first."

"It's a pity there's only one, still----" began another.

"I'll make a bargain with you, then," interrupted Marteau quickly,
fingering his weapon while he spoke.  "Food and drink in plenty for
you, the woman for me."

"And what do you want of the woman?"

"Before I was a soldier I lived in Aumenier, I told you.  I served
these people.  This woman is an aristocrat.  I hate her."

It was an old appeal and an old comment but it served.  These were wild
days like those of the revolution, the license and rapine and ravagings
of which some of the older men present could very well recall.

"She treated me like dirt under her feet," went on the officer.  "Now I
want to have my turn."

"Marteau!" cried the woman for the first time, recognizing him as he
turned a grim face toward her, upon which he had very successfully
counterfeited a look of hatred.  "Is it indeed----"

"Silence," thundered the young soldier, stepping near to her and
shaking his clenched fist in her face.  "These worthy patriots will
give you to me, and then----"

There was a burst of wild laughter throughout the room.

"It's these cursed aristocrats that have brought these hateful Russians
upon us," cried one.

"Give her to the lad and let us have food and drink," cried another.

"He'll deal with her," cried a third.

"You hear?" asked the chief.

"I hear," answered Marteau.  "Listen.  My father kept this house for
its owners.  He is dead in the village yonder."

"The wine, the wine," roared one, licking his lips.

"Food.  I starve," cried another, baring his teeth.

"Wait.  Naturally, fleeing from the army, I came to him.  My sister is
dead too, outraged, murdered.  You know?"

"Yes, yes, we know."

"I want to get my revenge on someone and who better than she?"

The young officer did not dare again to look at the young woman.  He
could feel the horror, the amazement, the contempt in her glance.  Was
this one of the loyal Marteaux?

"Make her suffer for us!"

"Our children!"

"Our mothers!"

"Our daughters!" cried one after the other, intoxicated with their
wrongs, real or fancied, their faces black with rage, their clenched
hands raised to heaven as if invoking vengeance.

"Have no fear," said Marteau.  "Because of my father's position I know
where the wine cellar is, and there is food there."

"Lead on," said the chief.  "We've talked too much."

"This way," replied the young captain, lifting the only candlestick
from the table.  "Leave two men to watch the woman and give the alarm,
the rest follow me."

Marteau knew the old castle like a book.  He knew where the keys were
kept.  Chatting carelessly and giving them every evidence of his
familiarity, he found the keys, unlocked the doors, led them from room
to room, from level to level, until finally they reached the wine
cellar.  It was separated from the cellar in which they stood by a
heavy iron-bound oaken door.  In spite of his easy bearing and manner,
suspicions had been aroused in the uneasy minds of the rabble, but when
Marteau lifted the candle and bade them bring their own lights and see
through an iron grating in the door what the chamber beyond contained
and they recognized the casks and bottles, to say nothing of hams,
smoked meats and other eatables, their suspicions vanished.  They burst
into uproarious acclamation.

"Hasten," cried the leader.

"This is the last door."

"Have you the key?"

"It is here."

Marteau lifted the key, thrust it in the lock and turned it slowly, as
if by a great effort and, the door opening outward, he drew it back.

"Enter," he said.  "Help yourselves."

With cries of joy like famished wolves the whole band poured into the
wine cellar.  All, that is, but Marteau.  As the last men entered he
flung the door to and with astonishing quickness turned the key in the
lock and turned away.  The door had shut with a mighty crash, the noise
had even stopped the rioting plunderers.  The first man who had seized
a bottle dropped it crashing to the floor.  All eyes and faces turned
toward the door.  The last man threw himself against it frantically.
It held as firmly as if it had been the rock wall.  They were trapped.
The leader was quicker than the rest.  He still had his weapon.
Thrusting it through the iron bars of the grating in the door he pulled
the trigger.  There was a mighty roar, a cloud of smoke, but
fortunately in the dim light his aim was bad.  Marteau laughed grimly.

"Enjoy yourselves, messieurs.  The provisions are good and you may eat
as much as you like.  The wine is excellent.  Drink your fill!"

The next instant he leaped up the stairs and retraced his steps.  It
was a long distance from the wine-cellar to the great room, but through
the grating that gave entrance to the courtyard the sound of shots had
penetrated.  One of the ruffians, committing the woman to the care of
the remaining man, started to follow his comrades.  He had his pistol
in his hand.  He went noisily, muttering oaths, feeling that something
was wrong but not being able to divine exactly what.  Marteau heard him
coming.  He put the candle down, concealed himself and, as the man
came, struck him heavily over the head with the butt of his remaining
pistol.  He fell like a log.  Leaving the candle where it was, the
young officer, dispossessing his victim of his pistols, entered the
hall and, instead of entering the great room by the door by which he
had left it, ran along the hall to the main entrance and thus took the
remaining brigand in the rear.

This man was one of those who had seized the Countess Laure.  In spite
of herself the girl started as the officer appeared in the doorway.
The man felt her start, wheeled, his eyes recognized the officer.  He
had no pistol, but his fingers went to his belt and with the quickness
of light itself he hurled a knife straight at Marteau.  The woman with
equal speed caught the man's arm and disturbed his aim.  Her movement
was purely instinctive.  According to his own words she had even more
to fear from Marteau than from this ruffian.  The young officer
instantly dropped to his knees and as he did so presented his pistol
and fired.  The knife whistled harmlessly over his head and buried
itself in the wood paneling of the door.  The bullet sped straight to
its mark.  The unfortunate blackguard collapsed on the floor at the
feet of the girl, who screamed and shrank back shuddering.

"Now, mademoiselle," said the young man, advancing into the room, "I
have the happiness to inform you that you are free."




CHAPTER VII

A RESCUE AND A SIEGE

The woman stared at him in wild amazement.  That she was free
temporarily at least, could not be gainsaid.  Her captors had not seen
fit to bind her and she now stood absolutely untouched by anyone.  The
shooting, the fighting, had confused her.  She had only seen Marteau as
an accomplice and friend of her assailants, she had no clew to his
apparent change of heart.  She did not know whether she had merely
exchanged masters or what had happened.  Smiling ironically at her
bewilderment, which he somehow resented in his heart, Marteau proceeded
to further explanation.

"You are free, mademoiselle," he repeated emphatically, bowing before
her.

"But I thought----"

"Did you think that I could be allied with such cowardly thieves and
vagabonds as those?"

"But you said----"

"It was simply a ruse.  Could you imagine that one of my family, that
I, should fail in respect and devotion to one of yours, to you?  I
determined to free you the instant I saw you."

"And will you not complete your good work?" broke out the man tied to
the chair in harsh and foreign but sufficiently comprehensible French,
"by straightway releasing me, young sir?"

"But who is this?"

"This is Sir Gervaise Yeovil," answered Mademoiselle Laure, "my
attorney, an English officer-of-the-law, of Lord Castlereagh's suite,
who came with me from Chatillon to get certain papers and----"

"Why all this bother and explanation?" burst out Sir Gervaise.  "Tell
him to cut these lashes and release me from this cursed bondage," he
added in English.

"That is quite another matter, sir," said Marteau gravely.  "I regret
that you are an enemy and that I can not----"

"But we are not enemies, Monsieur," cried one of the officers, who had
just succeeded in working a gag out of his mouth.  "We are Russian
officers of the Imperial Guard and since you have deserted the cause of
the Corsican you will----"

"Deserted!" thundered Marteau, his pale face flaming.  "That was as
much a ruse as the other."

"What, then, do you mean by wearing a Russian coat over your uniform
and----"

"He is a spy.  He shall be hanged," said the other, also freeing
himself of his gag.

"Indeed," laughed Marteau.  "And do you gentlemen ask me to release you
in order that you may hang me?"

"I won't hang you," burst out the Englishman.  "On the contrary, I'll
give you fifty pounds if you'll cut these cords and----"

Marteau shook his head.

"Countess," bellowed Yeovil angrily, "there's a knife on the table
yonder, pray do you----"

The young woman made a swift step in that direction, but the Frenchman
was too quick for her.

"Pardon me, mademoiselle, I beg that the first use you make of your new
life be not to aid my enemies."

"Your enemies, Marteau?"

"The enemies of France, then."

"Not my uncle's France," said the girl.

"But your father's, and I had hoped yours."

"No, no."

"In any event, these gentlemen must remain bound for the time being.
No harm shall come to you from me," continued Marteau, addressing the
two officers.  "But as for these hounds----"  He stepped over to the
two Cossacks, who lay mute.  He bent over them with such a look of
rage, ruthless determination and evil purpose in his face as startled
the woman into action.

"Monsieur!" she cried, stepping over to him and striving to interpose
between him and the two men.  "Marteau, what would you do?"

"My sister--dead in the cottage yonder after--after----" he choked out.
He stopped, his fingers twitching.  "My old father!  If I served them
right I would pitch them into yonder fireplace or torture them, the
dogs, the cowards!"

"My friend," said the young Countess gently, laying her hand on his arm.

Marteau threw up his hands, that touch recalled him to his senses.

"I will let them alone for the present," he said.  "Meanwhile----"  He
seized the dead man and dragged the body out of sight behind the tables.

"Will monsieur give a thought to me?" came another voice from the dim
recesses of a far corner.

"And who are you?" asked Marteau, lifting the light and staring.

"A Frenchman, sir.  They knocked me on the head and left me for dead,
but if monsieur would assist me I----"

Marteau stepped over to him, bent down and lifted him up.  He was a
stout, hardy looking peasant boy, pale cheeked, with blood clotted
around his forehead from a blow that he had received.  Feverish fire
sparkled in his eyes.

"If monsieur wishes help to put these brutes out of the way command
me," he said passionately.

"We will do nothing with them at present," answered Marteau.

"Quick, Laure, the knife," whispered the Englishman.

The Frenchman heard him, however, and wheeled around.

"Mademoiselle," he cried, "on your honor I charge you not to abuse the
liberty I have secured for you and that I allow you."

"But, my friends----"

