the water the groom quickly brought from the well outside.

Then he poured a little of the wine down the wounded man's throat, next
slit the sleeve of his coat, and saw that the scarcely healed wound in
the arm had broken out again.  He bandaged it up with no small skill
with some of the other neglected table linen, and the effect upon
Seymour of the stimulant and of these ministrations was at once
apparent.  With a stronger voice he said slowly,--

"Dunmore's men--Captain Johnson--colonel a prisoner--Katharine
also--God grant--no harm intended."

"Hush, hush!  I understand.  But where are the slaves?"

"Terrified, I suppose--in hiding."

"Dick, see if you can find any of them.  Hurry up!  We must take Mr.
Seymour back to Fairview tonight, and report this outrage to the
military commander at Alexandria.  Oh that I had a boat and a few men!"
he murmured.  Katharine was gone.  He would not tell his story
to-night; she was in the hands of a gang of ruffians.  He knew the
reputation of Johnson, and the motives which might actuate him.  There
had been a struggle, it was evident; perhaps she had been wounded,
killed.  Agony!  He knew now how he loved her, and it was too late.

Presently the groom returned, followed by a mob of frightened,
terror-stricken negroes who had fled at the first advent of the party.
Talbot issued his orders rapidly.  "Some of you get the carriage ready;
we must take Lieutenant Seymour to Fairview Hall.  Some of you go down
to the landing and bring up the bodies of the three men there.  You go
with that party, Dick.  Phoebus, you get this room cleared up.  Hurry,
stir yourselves!  You are all right now; the raiders have gone and are
not likely to return."

"Why, where is Master Philip, I wonder?  Was he also taken?" he said
suddenly.  "Have any of you seen him?" he asked of the servants.

"He done gone away fishin' wid Mars' Bentley," replied the old butler,
pausing; "and dey ain't got back yit, tank de Lawd; but I spec 'em ev'y
minute, suh."




CHAPTER IX

_Bentley's Prayer_

As he spoke, a fresh youthful voice was heard in the hall.  "Father,
Kate, where are you?  Come see our string of--  Why, what's all this?"
said a young man, standing astonished in the door of the room.  It was
Philip Wilton, holding a long string of fish, the result of their day's
sport; behind him stood the tall stalwart figure of the old sailor.
"Talbot--you?  Where are father and Kate?  What are these men doing in
the dining-room?  Oh, what is that?" he said, shrinking back in horror
from the corpse of the soldier.

"Dunmore's raiders have been here."

"And Katharine?"

"A prisoner, with your father, Philip, but I trust both are uninjured."

"Mr. Seymour, sir, where is he?" said the deep voice of the boatswain,
as he advanced farther into the room.  The light fell full upon him.
He was a splendid specimen of athletic manhood; tall, powerful,
long-armed, slightly bent in the shoulders; decision and courage were
seen in his bearing, and were written on his face, burned a dull
mahogany color by years of exposure to the weather.  He was clothed in
the open shirt and loose trousers of a seafaring man, and he stood with
his feet slightly apart, as if balancing himself to the uneasy roll of
a ship.  Honesty and fidelity and intelligence spoke out from his eyes,
and affection and anxiety were heard in his voice.

"Lieutenant Seymour," he repeated, "where is he, sir?"

"There," said Talbot, stepping aside and pointing to the floor.

"Not dead, sir, is he?"

"Not yet, Bentley," Seymour, with regaining strength, replied; "I am
not done for this time."

"Oh, Mr. John, Mr. John," said the old man, tenderly, bending over him,
"I thank God to see you alive again.  But, as I live, they shall pay
dear for this--whoever has done it,--the bloody, marauding, ruffians!"

"Yes, Bentley, I join you in that vow," said Talbot.

"And I too," added Philip, bravely.

"And I," whispered the wounded man.

"It's one more score that has got to be paid off by King George's men,
one more outrage on this country, one more debt we owe the English,"
Bentley continued fiercely.

"No; these were Americans, Virginians,--more's the shame,--led by that
blackguard Johnson.  He has long hated the colonel," replied Talbot.

"Curses on the renegades!" said the old man.  "Who is it that loves
freedom and sees not that the blow must be struck to-day?  How can any
man born in this land hesitate to--"  He stopped suddenly, as his eyes
fell upon Talbot, whose previous irresolution and refusal had been no
secret to him.

"Don't stop for me, Bentley," said that young man, gently; "I am with
you now.  I came over this evening to tell our friends here that I
start north tomorrow as a volunteer to offer my services to General
Washington."

"Oh, Hilary," exclaimed Philip, joyfully, "I am so glad.  Would that
Katharine and father could hear you now!"

Seymour lifted his unwounded arm, and beckoned to Talbot.  "God bless
you, Talbot," he said; "to hear you say that is worth a dozen cracks
like this, and I feel stronger every minute.  If it were not for the
old wound, I would n't mind this thing a bit.  But there is something
you must do.  There is an armed cutter stationed up the river at
Alexandria; send some one to notify the commander of the Virginia naval
militia there.  They will pursue and perhaps recapture the party.  But
the word must be carried quickly; I fear it will be too late as it is."

"I will go, Hilary, if you think best."

"Very well, Philip; take your best horse and do not delay a moment.
Katharine's liberty, your father's life perhaps, depend upon your
promptness.  Better see Mr. West as you go through the town,--your
father's agent, you know,--and ask him to call upon me to-morrow.  Stop
at the Hall as you come back."

"All right, Hilary, I will be in Alexandria in four hours," said
Philip, running out.

"Bentley, I am going to take Lieutenant Seymour over to my plantation.
Will you stay here and look after the house until I can notify Colonel
Wilton's agent at Alexandria to come and take charge, or until we hear
from the colonel what is to be done?  You can come over in the morning,
you know, and hear about our protege.  I am afraid the slaves would
never stay here alone; they are so disorganized and terrorized now over
these unfortunate occurrences as to be almost useless."

"Ay, ay, sir; if Lieutenant Seymour can spare me, I will stay."

"Yes, Bentley, do; I shall be in good hands at Fairview Hall."

"This is arranged, then," said Talbot.  "It is nine o'clock.  I think
we would better start at once.  I will go out and see that the
arrangements about the carriage are made properly, myself," he said,
stepping through the door.

Seymour's hand had closed tightly over something which had happened to
fall near where it lay.  "Bentley," he called, "what is this in my
hand?"

"It is a handkerchief, Mr. John,--a woman's handkerchief too, sir, and
covered with blood."

"Has it any marks on it?" said Seymour, eagerly.

"Yes, sir; here are the letters K. W. embroidered in this corner."

"I thought so," he smiled triumphantly.  "Will you put it inside my
waistcoat, there, over my heart?  Yes," he added, as if in answer to
the old man's anxious look, "it is true; I love her, and she has
confessed that she loves me.  Oh, who will protect her now?"

"God, sir," said Bentley, solemnly, but with a strange pang of almost
womanly jealousy in his faithful old heart.

"Ay, old friend, He will watch over her.  He knows best.  Now help me
up."

"No, sir.  Beg pardon for disobeying orders, but you are to lie still.
We will carry you to the carriage.  Nay, sir, you must.  You are too
weak from loss of blood with two wounds on you to stand it.  A few days
will bring you about all right, though, I hope, sir."

"All ready, Bentley?" said Talbot, coming into the room.  "The negro
boys have rigged up a stretcher out of a shutter, and with a mattress
and blankets in the carriage, I think we can manage, driving carefully,
to take him over without any great discomfort.  I have sent Dick on
ahead to ride over to Dr. Craik's and bid him come to the Hall at once;
so Mr. Seymour will be well looked after.  By the way, Blodgett is
dead.  I had almost forgotten him.  He evidently met and fought those
fellows at the landing.  We found him at the foot of the steps by the
boat-landing with two bodies.  That reminds me, one of them was alive
when we came by.  I told the men to bring all three of the bodies up.
Here they are now.  Are any of them alive yet, Caesar?"

"No, suh, dey 'se all ob 'em daid."

"Take the two redcoats into the dining-room with the other one.  Lay
Blodgett here in the hall.  He must have been killed instantly.  Well;
good-by, I shall be over in the morning," he exclaimed, extending his
hand.

"Good-by, sir," said the seaman, taking it in his own huge palm.  "Take
care of Lieutenant Seymour."

"Oh, never fear; we will."

"And may God give the men who did this into our hands!" added Bentley,
raising his arms solemnly.

"Amen," said Talbot, with equal gravity.

Seymour was tenderly lifted into the carriage, and attended by Talbot,
who sat by his side.  Followed by two servants who had orders to get
the horses, which they found tied where they had been left, the
carriage drove off to the Hall.  With what different thoughts was the
mind of the young man busy!  Scarcely an hour had elapsed since he
galloped over the road, a light-hearted boy, flushed with hope, filled
with confidence, delighted in his decision, anticipating a reception,
meditating words of love.  In that one hour the boy had changed from
youth to man.  The love which he had hardly dreamed was in his heart
had risen like a wave and overwhelmed him; the capture and abduction of
his sweetheart, the whole brutal and outrageous proceeding, had filled
him with burning wrath.  He could not wait to strike a blow for liberty
against such tyranny now, and his soul was full of resentment to the
mother he had loved and honored, because she had held him back; all of
the devoted past was forgotten in one impetuous desire of the present.
To-morrow should see him on the way to the army, he swore.  He wrung
his hands in impotent passion.

"Katharine, Katharine, where are you?" he murmured.  Seymour stirred.
"Are you in pain, my friend?"

"No," said the sailor quietly, his heart beating against the
blood-stained handkerchief, as he echoed in his soul the words he had
heard: "Katharine, Katharine, where are you? where are you?"




CHAPTER X

_A Soldier's Epitaph_

Left to himself in the deserted hall, the old sailor walked over to the
body of the old soldier.  Many a quaint dispute these two old men had
held in their brief acquaintance, and upon no one thing had they been
able to agree, except in hatred of the English and love of their common
country.  Still their disputes had been friendly, and, if they had not
loved, they had at least respected each other.

"I wish I had not been so hard on the man.  I really liked him,"
soliloquized the sailor.  "Poor Blodgett, almost forgotten, as Mr.
Talbot says.  He died the right way, though, doing his duty, fighting
for his country and for those he loved.  Well, he was a brave man--for
a soldier," he murmured thoughtfully.

Out on the river the little sloop was speeding rapidly along.  Ride as
thou wilt, Philip, she cannot be overtaken.  Most of the exhausted men
lay about the decks in drunken slumber.  Johnson stood moodily by the
man at the helm; his triumph had been tempered by Desborough's
interference.  Two or three of the more decent of his followers were
discussing the events of the night.

"Poor Joe!" said one.

"Yes, and Evans and Whitely too," was the reply.

"Ay, three dead, and nobody hurt for it," answered the other.

"You forget the old fellow at the landing, though."

"Yes, he fought like the devil, and came near balking the whole game.
That was a lucky shot you got in, Davis, after Evans missed and was
hit.  That fellow was a brave man--for a rebel," said the raider.


In the cabin of the sloop Colonel Wilton was sitting on one of the
lockers, his arm around Katharine, who was leaning against him,
weeping, her hands before her face.  Desborough was standing
respectfully in front of them.

"And you say he made a good fight?" asked the colonel, sadly.

"Splendid, sir.  We stole up to the boat-house with muffled oars,
wishing to give no warning, and before he knew it half of us were on
the wharf.  He challenged, we made a rush; he shot the first man in the
breast and brained the next with his clubbed musket, shouting words of
warning the while.  The men fell back and handled their pistols.  I
heard two or three shots, and then he fell, never making another sound.
But for Johnson's forethought in sending a second boat load to the
upper landing to get to the back of the house, you might have escaped
with the warning and the delay he caused.  He was a brave man, and died
like a soldier," continued the young man, softly.

"He saved my life at Cartagena, and when I caught the fever there, he
nursed me at the risk of his own.  He was faithfulness itself.  He died
as he would have liked to die, with his face to the enemy.  I loved him
in a way you can hardly understand.  Yes, he was a brave man,--my poor
old friend."


On the rustic bench beside the driveway overlooking the river sat a
little woman, older by ten years in the two hours which had elapsed
since she looked after the disappearing figure of her son.

She heard the sound of wheels upon the gravel road, and recognized
Colonel Wilton's carriage and horses coming up the hill; there were her
own two horses following after, but neither of the riders was her son.
What could have happened?  She rose in alarm.  The carriage stopped
near her.

"What, mother, are you still here?" said Hilary, opening the door and
stepping out, his voice cold and stern.

"Yes, my son; what has happened?"

"Dunmore's men have raided the Wilton place.  Katharine and her father
have been carried away by that brute Johnson, who commanded the party.
Seymour has been wounded in defending Katharine.  I have brought him
here.  This is the way," he went on fiercely, "his majesty the king
wages war on his beloved subjects of Virginia."

"'They that take the sword, shall perish with the sword,'" she quoted
with equal resolution.

"And Blodgett is killed too," he added.

"What else have those who rebel against their rightful monarch a right
to expect?" she replied.  "Is Mr. Seymour seriously wounded?"

"No, madam," answered that young man, from the carriage; "but I fear me
my cause makes me an unwelcome visitor."

"Nay, not so, sir.  No wounded helpless man craving assistance can ever
be unwelcome at my--at the home of the Talbots, whatever his creed.
How died Blodgett, did you say, Hilary?"

"Fighting for his master, at the foot of the path, shot by those
ruffians."

"So may it be to all enemies of the king," she replied; "but after all
he was a brave man.  'T is a pity he fell in so poor a cause."
