to give up, without an effort, his promise to be his friend.

Tom, however, was by no means in need of friends.  Not many weeks after
the day when Charlie had left his study, disappointed and miserable, he
might have been seen entertaining company of quite a different sort.

[My readers, let me here observe, must not be too curious to understand
how it is I am able to speak of so many things which must have taken
place beyond the range of my observation.  They will find the reason all
in good time.]

The supper party over which Tom presided consisted of four boys,
including himself.  One was Shadbolt, on whose account, it will be
remembered, Tom had desired to borrow Charlie's watch.  Shadbolt was an
unwholesome-looking fellow of fifteen, with coarse features and eyes
that could not look you straight in the face if they had tried.  He was
accompanied by his chum Margetson, who certainly had the advantage of
his friend in looks, as well as in intellect.  The quartet was completed
by Gus Burke, one of the smallest and most vicious boys at Randlebury.
He was the son of a country squire, who had the unenviable reputation of
being one of the hardest drinkers and fastest riders in his county; and
the boy had already shown himself only too apt a pupil in the lessons in
the midst of which his childhood had been passed.  He had at his
tongue's tip all the slang of the stables and all the blackguardisms of
the betting-ring; and boy--almost child--as he was, he affected the
swagger and habits of a "fast man," like a true son of his father.

At Randlebury he had wrought incredible mischief.  Tom Drift was not the
only soft-minded vain boy whom he had infected by his pernicious
example.  Like all reckless swaggerers, he had his band of admirers, who
marked every action and drank in every word that fell from their hero's
lips.

It was just with such boys as Drift that his influence was most telling;
for Tom was a boy not without aptitude to note and emulate a powerful
example, whether it were good or bad, while his vanity rendered him as
pliant as wax to the hand of the flatterer.

Such was the party which assembled surreptitiously in Tom's study that
evening and partook of the smuggled supper.

Tom had had hard work to provide for his guests, and had succeeded only
at the risk of grave penalties if detected.

"I say, Tom, old horse, this is a prime spread!" said Gus; "where did
you get it?"

"Oh!" said Tom, "I had a new hat coming from Tiler's, so I got old
Tripes (the butcher) to make a neat brown-paper parcel of the kidneys,
and got them up in my gossamer.  The old donkey might have done the
thing better though, for the juice squeezed through, and the inside of
my hat looks as if I had lately been scalped."

"Hard lines!  But never mind, perhaps they'll put it down to the crack
you got on your forehead."

Tom flushed scarlet; any reference to his inglorious scuffle with
Charlie Newcome was odious to him, as Gus and the others knew well
enough.  He said nothing, however, only scowled angrily.

"What!" said Gus, "does it hurt you still then?  Never mind, it was a
good shot, and I wouldn't be ashamed of having floored you myself."

"He didn't floor me; I fell!" cried Tom indignantly.

"Did you?  Rather a way fellows have when they get knocked down!"

"I was not knocked down, Gus, I tell you; and you'd better shut up!"

"All right, old horse! you mustn't mind a bit of chaff.  I'm sure you've
taken it all very well."

"Yes," said Margetson, "everybody thinks you must take after your
mother; you're such a sweet-tempered chap."

"What do you know about my mother?" snarled Tom.

"Only what your young friend tells everybody about her."

"What business has he to go talking all over the school about my
affairs?" exclaimed Tom furiously.  "What's my mother to do with him?"

"A great deal, it seems," replied Margetson, "for he promised her, on
the strength of her assertion that you were a nice boy, to be your
friend, and now he's awfully hurt you won't let him."

"I thought it was Tom who was awfully hurt," put in Gus, by way of
parenthesis.

"I tell you what it is, you fellows," said Tom, "it may be all very
funny for you, but I've had quite enough of it.  Ever since that young
canting humbug came here I've led the life of a dog.  If, instead of
making a fool of me, you'd tell me how I can pay him out, I should be
better pleased."

"All very fine," said Margetson; "why don't you pay your own bills?"

"If you want some one to punch his head," said Shadbolt the ugly, "I
don't mind trying; my life is insured."

"Suppose we make him stupid," suggested Gus, "with milk punch, and shove
him inside the doctor's study."

"Couldn't you get hold of his watch and boil it?" said Margetson, who
had heard of the experiments practised on me in Mrs Packer's parlour.

"If I got hold of it I'd smash it into fifty pieces!" growled Tom
between his teeth.

"Look here, you fellows, I've got a glorious plan!" exclaimed Gus
suddenly.

"What is it?" they all cried.

But Gus's plan requires a new chapter.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

HOW A PLEASANT TREAT IN STORE WAS PREPARED FOR MY MASTER.

Gus proceeded then to divulge his plan for giving Tom Drift his revenge
on my master.

"Let's take him to Gurley races on Saturday," said he.  "You know it's a
holiday, and if we can only get him with us, well astonish his
sanctimonious young soul.  What do you say?"

"You'll never get him to come," said Margetson.

"Won't we?  Well see about that," replied Gus, "he needn't know where
he's going."

"But even so," said Drift, "you won't get him; he's not in love with me,
and I don't fancy any of you are much in his line."

"Oh, you'll have to manage that part, Tom.  You know how the young
idiot's pining to make it up with you, for your dear old mother's sake!"

"Now you needn't start that nonsense again," put in Tom sulkily.

"All right; but don't you see, if you were to take a forgiving fit and
make up to him, and talk about the old lady and his watch, and all that,
he'd be out of his wits with joy? and then if you asked him to come for
a day's fishing on Saturday, we could meet you somewhere on the road,
and then he'd have to come whether he liked or not; and won't we
astonish him!"

Tom mused a little.

"It's not a bad idea," said he presently, "if it would only work.  But I
can't make up to the young puppy as you think.  Ten to one I should stop
short in the middle and kick him."

"That would spoil all the fun.  Try it on, any way, it'll be a nice
little excitement to have young Innocent with us.  And now, Tom, where
are blacks and reds; I'm just in the humour for a rubber, aren't you?"

The host produced from a locked desk a dirty and much-worn pack of
cards, and the party sat down to play.

They played for penny points, and as Gus and Margetson were partners, it
is hardly necessary to say that Drift and his ill-looking friend lost
every game.

Before this amiable and congenial quartet separated, Gus had referred
again to the scheme of getting Charlie to Gurley races, and got Drift to
promise he would secure his victim next day.

Next day, accordingly, as Charlie was in the midst of a desperate game
of fives with his friend Jim, a small boy came to him and said that Tom
Drift wanted him.

"What for?" demanded Charlie, who, since his talk with the elder
Halliday, had felt somewhat "shy" about Tom.

"I don't know," said the boy.

"Your turn, Charlie," called out Jim from the end of the court.

Charlie took his turn while he was revolving on his answer to this
mysterious summons.

"What does that child want?" inquired Jim, with all the loftiness of a
second-form boy speaking of a first.

"He says Tom Drift wants me."

"Whew!" whistled Jim, who of course knew the whole mystery of the affair
between his chum and Tom; "tell him to go to Jericho!  Look out for
yourself!"

And so saying, he took his turn with the ball.

"That wouldn't do," said Charlie; "I don't want to rile him."

"_I'd_ like to have a chance," retorted the implacable Jim.  "Well,
then, tell him you can't come.  Here, young un, tell Tom Drift Charlie
can't come.  Do you hear?  Cut your sticks!"

But Charlie called the messenger back.  "I _could_, go if I wanted, Jim.
Better tell him I'd rather not come.  Say that, youngster--I'd rather
not."

So off the youngster ran, and Charlie and Jim finished their game.  Of
coarse, the youthful messenger gave Tom a full, true, and particular
account of this conversation in all its details, which rendered that
young gentleman rather less eager than ever for his enterprise.
However, he had the fear of Gus before his eyes, and strolled out into
the playground on the chance of coming across Charlie.

And he did come across him, arm-in-arm with the faithful Jim.  Tom
worked his face into the ghastly similitude of a friendly smile as he
approached, and said, in as genial a voice as he could pretend, "I'm
glad I met you, Newcome, because I want to speak to you, if you don't
mind taking a turn round the playground."

Charlie, of course, was astonished; he had expected at the very least to
be kicked over the wall when he saw Tom approach, and he was utterly at
a loss to understand this not unfriendly greeting.  Innocent boy! it
never occurred to him the demonstration could be anything but real.  Jim
would have been a tougher subject to deal with.  Indeed, as he let go
Charlie's arm, and saw him walk off with Tom, he muttered to himself,
not caring particularly whether the latter heard him or not.

"Gammon! that's what it is."

Charlie had not long to wait before his companion began the
conversation.

"I suppose you wonder why I want you, Newcome?" said he.  "The fact is,
I've been thinking I wasn't altogether right in being down on you the
other day about lending me that watch, especially as you were a new boy;
and I'm sorry if I hurt you."

Charlie sprung towards him and caught his arm.

"Oh, Tom Drift, don't say that, please!  It was my fault--all my fault,
and I have been so sorry ever since.  And you will be friends now, won't
you?  I do so want to be, because I promised your mother--"

Tom gave a quick gesture of impatience, which, if Charlie had
understood, he would have known how near receiving a kick he was at that
moment.

Tom, however, restrained himself, and said,--

"Oh, yes, for her sake I'd like to be friends, of course, and I hope
you'll forget all about that wretched quarrel."

"Indeed I will," cried Charlie; "and don't let us say any more about it.
I am ever so much happier now, and it was so good of you to come to me
and make it up."

"Well," said Tom loftily, "you know it's no use for two fellows to be at
loggerheads when it can be helped, and I dare say we shall get on all
the better now.  How are you going on in the second?"

Whereupon Charlie launched into a lengthy and animated account of his
experiences, to which Tom pretended to listen, but scarcely heard a
word.

"So you are fond of fishing?" he said, casually, after the boy had
mentioned something on that subject.

"Ain't I, though?" cried Charlie, now quite happy, and his old self
again.  "I say, Tom Drift, would you like to see the new lance-wood top
I've got to my rod?  It's a stunner, I can tell you.  I'll lend it you,
you know, any time you like."

"Have you caught much since you were here!" asked Tom, anxious to get
this hateful business over.

"No.  You know the brook here isn't a good one for fish, and I don't
know anywhere else near."

"Well, I'll tell you what," said Tom, as if the idea had then for the
first time occurred to him.  "Suppose we go off for a regular good day
on Saturday?  It's a holiday, you know, and we could go and try up the
Sharle, near Gurley.  There's lots of trout there, and we are certain to
have a good day."

"How jolly!" exclaimed Charlie.  "It would be grand.  But I say, Tom
Drift, are you sure you wouldn't mind coming?  It wouldn't be a bother
to you, would it?"

"Not a bit.  I like a good day's fishing.  But, I say, young un, you'd
better not say anything about it to any one, or we shall have a swarm of
fellows come too, and that will spoil all the sport."

"All right," said Charlie.  "I say what a day we shall have!  I'll bring
my watch and knife, you know, and some grub, and we can picnic there,
eh?"

"That'll be splendid.  Well, I must go in now, so good-bye, Newcome, and
shake hands."

What a grip was that! on one side all trust and fervour, and on the
other all fraud and malice!

Tom Drift was not yet utterly bad.  Would that he had allowed his
conscience to speak and his better self prevail!  Half a dozen times in
the course of his walk from the playground to the school he repented of
the wicked part he was playing in the scheme to injure Charlie.  But
half a dozen times the thought of Gus and his taunts, and the
recollection of his own bruised forehead came to drive out all passing
sentiments of pity or remorse.

Charlie rejoined his chum with a beaming face.

"Well," asked Jim, "what has he been saying to humbug you this time?"

"Nothing very particular; and I won't let you call him a humbug.  I say,
Jim, old boy, he's made it up at last, and we're friends, Tom Drift and
I!  Hurrah!  I was never so glad, isn't it jolly?"

Jim by no means shared his friend's enthusiasm.  Like his elder brother,
he instinctively disliked Tom Drift, without exactly being able to give
a reason.

His reserve, however, had no effect on Charlie's high spirits.  At last
