the sailor's story. It seemed to him that God had not quite cast off one
who had such a tender care for the happiness and purity of his child.
Blair gently laid his slender hand on Derry's brawny fingers, and looked
up earnestly into his face as he said, "Why can't you be just such a
father, Derry?"

Derry laughed a sorrowful, derisive laugh, and then said almost
fiercely, "You don't know me, lad. It would chill your very blood to
know what I've done, and where I've been. There are spots on me that
nothing can wash out. I've grown into it, boy. It's my life. I'm hard
and tough, soul and body. There's no making me over. I'm spoiled in the
grain. I tell you it's too late. I a'n't a father for her to know. I
can't be made into one. That a'n't what I came here to talk about. Will
you write my letter, that's the question?"

"Certainly I will write for you in the way that seems to me the best.
But, Derry, 'there is a fountain opened for sin and all uncleanness.'
'The blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all sin.' 'If any man be in
Christ Jesus, he is a _new creature_; old things have passed away.'
'With God all things are possible.' 'Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners.' 'Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as
snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.'"

As Blair spoke these words, he fixed his earnest eyes on the sailor's
face, and seemed pleading for his very soul.

"There is a look about you like her, like her _up there_," said Derry,
almost trembling. "I see her face in the dark night when I'm on the
watch, and her eyes speak to me just as yours do--Oh, so pleading. Hush!
There's some one coming. Write the letter as if it was one of your own.
They wont hector you now. I've taught 'em better manners. Let me see 'em
touch a hair of your head, and I'll finish 'em quick."

As Derry spoke, he gave a thrust with his clenched fist as at an
imaginary enemy. The eyes that had lately been softened into tenderness
had their old fierce twinkle, and his hard features settled into their
fixed expression of determined daring.

The men gave place as he forced his way up the hatchway. On he went,
stamping along the deck as if he ground an enemy beneath his heel at
every step.




CHAPTER XV.

A LETTER.


Blair would gladly have chosen another time and place for the
composition of the difficult letter he was called on to write, but he
felt compelled to fulfil his promise at once. The men passed by him in
silence, save the single remark of Brimstone, "Give my love to your
_sweet_ mother," delivered in an insulting tone, and with a laugh more
repulsive than the hiss of a snake.

Blair glanced anxiously in the direction where Derry had disappeared,
almost fearing to see that clenched hand coming forth to do its
threatened work of vengeance. But Derry was already far away, and
Brimstone joined his mess-mates without receiving a word or sign of
rebuke.

Blair took up his pen with a silent prayer that it might be guided by
Him without whose aid vain are the most eloquent words of the wisest
counsellor. His letter was as follows:

    "DEAR ---- I don't know your name, but your father is my friend, and
    of course I feel interested in you for his sake. He has been very
    kind to me, and it is a great pleasure to me to do any thing for
    him. He has been talking to me of you, and while he has gone on deck
    he wants me to write to you. How he loves you. You are the bright
    spot to him in life, his oasis in the desert of this weary world.
    When he is far out on the wide sea, your face comes up before him,
    and makes the loneliest place a home. He loves to think that you
    pray for him. He feels that he needs your prayers. Happy are the
    fathers who, plunged in earthly cares on sea and land, have children
    to fold their hands and lift their hearts in prayer for them. This
    is all you can do for your absent father. Though you could give him
    crowns and kingdoms, wealth and honor, they would not be worth as
    much as one earnest, faithful, importunate prayer in Jesus' name.
    That name is all-powerful, and _must prevail_. Your father calls you
    his 'little flower.' He wants his little flower to be pure and
    modest and simple, like the lily, which all may consider and see in
    it the handiwork of God. Only God, who made this beautiful world,
    can purify and cleanse our souls and help us to walk in his holy
    ways. I know that you have been taught all this by the kind friends
    who have watched over you from infancy. Your father wants you to
    give good heed to their counsel, and ever watch and pray and
    struggle against temptation. No blow could fall on him so sore as to
    know his little darling was walking in the wrong path. May you never
    so grieve his fond heart. Again I must tell you, though you have
    read it in his repeated caresses, how your father loves you. May you
    be to him that best of treasures, a prayerful, pious daughter, is
    the sincere wish of

     "Your father's friend,

     "BLAIR ROBERTSON."



Blair folded his letter, and then addressing a few lines to his mother,
he inclosed the two in a single envelope, and sought out Derry for
further directions. Derry was pacing up and down the deck, making the
boards ring with his heavy tread.

"Shall I read you what I have written?" said Blair, laying his hand on
Derry's shoulder.

Derry started as if in a dream; but recollecting himself, he said
quickly, "Yes, yes. Here, here in the moonlight. No one will listen
here."

The light of the full moon fell on the open letter, and Blair read it
without difficulty.

"That's it, that's it. Every word of it true," said Derry in a voice
trembling with feeling. "It would kill me to think of her going wrong.
But she wont. Her way is _up_, and mine is _down, down, down_. Give me
the letter; I'll put the right name on it. You don't mind my seeing what
goes to your mother. That's no more than fair. I tell you I don't like
folks to know where my flower hides. I'll see it into the bag, and mind
you don't breathe a word of this. Mind!"

Derry's finger was raised in a threatening attitude as he spoke, and he
stopped after he had moved some steps away to give again to Blair this
sign of silence and secrecy.

Blair lingered on deck, not to enjoy the calm moonlight which so
lovingly crowned and silvered the crests of the waves. His eyes were
lifted upward, but not to gaze on the deep blue of the moonlit sky. To
the great Creator, without whom was not any thing made that was made,
Blair was pouring out the earnest petitions of his loving heart. For
Derry and his little daughter prayed the young Christian, as they only
can pray who believe the blessed words, "If ye shall ask any thing in my
name, I will do it."




CHAPTER XVI.

A MARVEL.


Weeks flew by while the Molly was cruising about, waiting and watching
for the expected East Indiaman. The privateer, meanwhile, was not losing
time. Several small merchant vessels came in her way, and submitted
without a blow to the argument of her compelling pair of guns. These
vessels were either stripped of their cargo and then burnt, or else sent
with a few sailors as their prize crew to some American port. The
capture of the British merchant ships kept the Molly supplied with the
necessaries for her continued cruise, and served besides to calm the
impatience of the men, who were beginning to complain of their captain's
pertinacious clinging to the hope of taking the East Indiaman, which
might already be safely harbored in English waters. There had been dark
nights and foggy days in which she might well have passed them, so they
reasoned. But Derry Duck said there was no moving the captain, and
grumblers would do best to "keep their tongues between their teeth." The
mail-bag of the Molly had gone home on board one of the captured
vessels, and it was a pleasant thought to Blair that his dear mother
would soon feel almost as if she heard the voice of her son at her side.
Derry's little daughter too would receive her letter, and Blair tried to
picture her joy as she held this treasure in her hands.

Derry moved about in his usual way, but was inclined to avoid Blair
since the night when he had given the boy his confidence. Blair often
found it hard to believe that those gentle, tender tones had come from
Derry's great closely shut mouth, and that those snapping eyes had
softened almost to tears as he spoke of his darling child.

Sunday on board the Molly was precisely like other days, as far as the
movements and occupations of the men were concerned. To Blair there was
ever a more solemn stillness over the sea, and a more imposing grandeur
in the wide canopy of the overhanging sky. One great temple it seemed to
him, the sunlit waves its shining floor, the firmament its arching roof,
and the unseen angels the countless worshippers, singing, "Praise and
glory and honor be unto the name of God most high." In this adoring song
Blair heartily joined, and he longed and prayed for the time to come
when on every white-winged ship there should be gathered the servants of
the Lord of sabaoth, rejoicing to call upon his holy name and give him
glory for all his wondrous works.

Absorbed in such thoughts as these, Blair was leaning over the side of
the ship one Sunday morning. Suddenly a strong voice close at his side
spoke with deep earnestness the words, "Bless the Lord, O my soul; and
all that is within me, bless his holy name."

Blair turned in astonishment, and saw Derry Duck close at his side.
Tears were coursing down those rough cheeks, and the almost blinded eyes
were lifted reverently upward, and silently spoke the same language as
the song of praise.

Blair's heart bounded. He could not be deceived. One of God's great
miracles of grace had been wrought. The devil had been cast out, and the
ransomed was giving God the glory. It must be so.

Blair seized the hand of his companion, and looking into his face, said
quickly, "Oh, Derry, are you really in earnest?"

"Bless the Lord, my soul, and forget not all his benefits: who forgiveth
all thine iniquities; who healeth all thy diseases; who redeemeth thy
life from destruction; who crowneth thee with loving-kindness and tender
mercies,'" continued Derry with deep feeling. "He found me dead in
trespasses and sins; he has given me new life in Christ Jesus. Praise
and honor unto his holy name."

Tears rushed to the eyes of Blair Robertson. A fervent "Thank God!" was
all he could utter. Blair's whole being did indeed "magnify the Lord" at
this wonderful evidence of his power. Curses had been changed to
praises. The blaspheming lips had been touched by the Saviour's hand,
and taught the language of the children of God. His young servant could
not but "stand in awe," and own the might and the wonderful mercy of
the King of kings.

Derry was the first to break the solemn silence. "Those words never left
me: 'Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow; though
they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool,'" he said. "They stuck
to me, and rang in my ears and searched every nook and cranny of my
wicked heart. Often I had longed to be a Christian man for the little
dear's sake, if not for my own; but I said to myself, 'No, Derry Duck,
you are all pitch, you can't be made white;' and Satan helped me to hold
on to that way of thinking. Your scripture gave the lie again and again
to that. It seemed to say to me, _You_ choose blackness and damnation,
when God asks you to wash and be clean. What I've suffered these weeks,
no soul out of perdition can tell. The devil clung to me. He would not
let me go. He claimed me for his own. He told over to me my dark, hidden
sins, and taunted me that I had gone too far to go back now. He hissed
in my ear that no power could cleanse and save such as me. Then came up
the words, 'With God all things are possible,' 'Though your sins be as
scarlet, they shall be white as snow.' 'Christ Jesus came into the world
to save _sinners_.' And he has saved _me_. I am _His_. He has given me a
mouth to praise him. O Blair, think of his wonderful mercy, to take poor
wicked Derry Duck into the kingdom of heaven."

The boy's heart throbbed and swelled with joy and praise. What was the
changing of water to wine, or the calming of the stormy sea, compared to
this marvellous miracle wrought in a living human soul? "He to whom much
is forgiven, loveth much," said our blessed Saviour; and in Derry this
truth was abundantly verified. The Christ whose blood could wash such as
he, was a Lord for whom he was willing to suffer even unto death. The
mercy that could stoop to ransom such a transgressor, claimed an
affection before which poor Derry's deep love for his earthly darling
paled, as the things of time fade into insignificance before the things
of eternity.

Blair had longed to see his rude shipmates forsaking their sins; he had
prayed and wrestled in prayer for them. Yet now, when he saw the work
begun before his eyes, he felt the faithlessness of those very prayers,
and knew that they could have won no fulfilment, but for the merits of
the great Intercessor in whose name they had ever been offered.

"Why should it be thought a thing incredible to you that God should
raise the dead?" This question of the apostle comes with power to the
Christians of our own day. Do you really believe it _possible_ for God
to raise to newness of life the dead in trespasses and sins? There is no
soul so hardened that it cannot be melted to penitence by the touch of
the mighty Spirit of God. Let this thought make us fervent, importunate,
instant in prayer for the souls that are at death's door and hasting to
destruction.

Can any thing but the power of God make the moral man, once proud of his
own uprightness, humble as the little child, leaning only on the cross
of Christ for salvation? He who works this wonder can do yet more. What
are the sins and self-will of the human heart, in comparison with the
might of the majesty of Jehovah? He who laid the strong foundations of
the earth, and led forth the marshalled millions of the stars in their
wonderful order, can mould and fashion the soul of man at his will. Let
us not stand doubting, timid, and faint-hearted, discouraged by the foul
sins which blot and efface in man the fair image of his Maker. Let us
rather "come boldly to the throne of grace," and plead through the great
Intercessor for every wanderer from the right path, and specially and
perseveringly for those dear ones of our own households, who, like the
prodigal, have left the Father's house, to be in misery and want in
sin's far foreign land.




CHAPTER XVII.

THE CONFLICT.

  Each kind affection nature gives
    Religion makes more bright,
  As sunshine on the landscape falls,
    And beautifies with light.


The patriot had hitherto been sleeping in the heart of Derry Duck; but
now he was to awake like a "strong man armed." There is not one kindly,
pleasant, honorable feeling, but is strengthened and ennobled by the
touch of divine grace. Nor only so: he who finds himself suddenly alive
to his allegiance to God, has at the same time his vision cleared to see
around him a thousand hitherto unknown or neglected ties, which bind him
to his fellow-men. In a whisper of conscience, he is taught that

  He is the faithful patriot,
   Who keeps his Maker's laws;
  Nor will the servant of his Lord
   Forsake his country's cause.

Among the sins of which Derry Duck was called deeply to repent, was the
dishonor which he had brought on his own Christian land, in many a port
where his wild deeds had left their guilty trace. What had he done for
the glory of Christian America? Bravely he had fought under her flag;
but it had been through reckless daring, or a thirst for gold. Not for a
noble principle, not for the defence of home and kindred, altar and
hearth-stone, had he raised his strong right arm.

Blair Robertson rejoiced to see the spirit of true patriotism awaking in
the bosom of the hardy sailor. The high-souled boy had now a sharer in
his enthusiastic love of his country, and devotion to her cause. They
joined their labors at once to improve the defenders of the flag, who
were their shipmates, and yet a disgrace to their native land. Blair
went on in his own peculiar way; while Derry at once announced his
position as a Christian mate, who would suffer no profanity in his
hearing, and would see the crew of the Molly engage in no deeds on the
high seas, not sanctioned by the letters of marque which were their
warrant for their blows struck against the common foe.

Some outward change had been produced in the men of the privateer, when
all thoughts were suddenly turned into a new channel. A fast sailing
American merchant ship informed Captain Knox that the expected East
Indiaman was not more than half a day behind her.

All was at once stir and bustle from stem to stern of the Molly. The
