was a strong vegetable poison which he also knew how to prepare; and the
upas-tree, that had so nearly proved fatal to all of them, was now
called into requisition to effect a friendly service.  Drawing upon its
sap, and mixing it with that of another poisonous plant--the _bina_--
Saloo gave the points of his sumpits a coating of the combined juices,
so that they would carry death into the veins of any animal having the
ill-fortune to be pierced by them.

Thus armed and equipped, he had little fear on the score of a scarcity
of provisions during the journey.  On the contrary, he declared himself
confident of being able to keep the commissariat up to a point of supply
sufficient for the whole party.

It may be thought strange that they did not speculate on the chances of
arriving at some town or settlement of the natives.  Indeed they did so,
but only with the thought of avoiding them; for the minds of all--the
Malay not excepted--were filled with apprehensions respecting the Dyak
and other savage tribes, which report places in the interior of Borneo,
and to whom long accredited, though perhaps only imaginative, stories
have given a character alike terrible and mysterious.  They could think
of them only as savages--wild men of the woods--some of them covered
with hair, and whose chief delight and glory are the cutting off men's
heads, and not unfrequently feasting on men's flesh!  No wonder that,
with these facts, or fancies, acting upon their imagination, our
travellers set forth upon their journey determined to give a wide berth
to everything that bore the shape of a human being.  It was a strange
commentary on man's superiority to the lower animals, and not very
creditable to the former, that he himself was the thing they most feared
to meet with in the wooded wilderness.  And yet, humiliating as the
reflection may appear, it depressed the minds of the castaways, as,
looking their last upon the bright blue sea, they turned their faces
toward the interior of the forest-covered land of Borneo.

For the first day they pursued a course leading along the bank of the
stream at whose mouth they had been sojourning ever since their arrival
on the island.  They had more than one reason for keeping to the stream.
It seemed to flow in a due easterly direction, and therefore to ascend
it would lead them due west--the way they wanted to go.  Besides, there
was a path along its banks, not made by man, but evidently by large
animals; whose tracks, seen here and there in soft places, showed them
to be tapirs, wild-boars, and the larger but more rare rhinoceros.

They saw none of these animals during their day's journey, though many
of the traces were fresh.  Generally nocturnal in their habits, the huge
pachydermatous creatures that had made them were, during daylight,
probably lying asleep in their lairs, amid the thick underwood of the
adjacent jungles.

The travellers might have brought the pinnace up the river--so far it
was deep enough to be navigated by a row-boat; and they had at first
thought of doing so.  But for several reasons they had changed their
minds, and abandoned their boat.  It was too heavy to be easily
propelled by oars, especially against the current of a stream which in
many places was very rapid.  Besides, if there should be a settlement of
savages on the bank, to approach in a boat would just be the way to
expose themselves to being seen, without first seeing.

But to Captain Redwood the chief objection was, that a mountain-range
rose only a short distance off, and the stream appeared to issue from
its steep sloping side; in which case it would soon assume the character
of a headlong torrent utterly unfit for navigation.  Even had water
travel been easier, it could not have been long continued--perhaps not
beyond a single day; and it was not deemed worth while to bring the
pinnace with them.  So thought the captain, and the others agreeing, the
boat was left where they had long since concealed her--under the
banyan-tree.

The captain's conjectures proved correct.  The evening of the first
day's march brought them to the base of the mountain-ridge, down whose
rocky flank the stream poured with the strength and velocity of a
torrent.  No boat could have further ascended it.

As the path leading along its edge, and hitherto comparatively level and
smooth, now changed to a difficult ascent up a rough rock-strewn ravine,
they encamped at the mountain-foot for the first night of their journey.

Next day was spent in ascending the mountain; following the ravine up to
its head, where were found the sources of the stream.  Staying only for
a short noon-tide rest, they kept upward, and reached the highest point
of the ridge just as the sun was again sinking into the depths of the
forest before them.

At their camping-place on the second night no water was near; and they
might have suffered from the want of it, had they not taken the
precaution to provide against such a deficiency.  Their experience as
castaways, especially the memory of their sufferings from thirst, had
rendered them wary of being again subjected to so terrible a torture.
Each of the three men carried a "canteen" strung to his waist--the joint
of a large bamboo that held at least half a gallon; while the boy and
girl also had their cane canteens, proportioned to their size and
strength.  All had been filled with cool clear water before leaving the
last source of the stream, a supply sufficient to serve during their
transit of the dry mountain-ridge.

The remainder of that night was spent upon its summit; but as this
proved of considerable breadth, and was covered with a thick growth of
jungle-trees, it was near sunset the next day before they arrived at the
edge of its eastern declivity, and obtained a view of the country
beyond.

The sun was descending behind the crest of another mountain-ridge,
apparently parallel with that upon which they were, and not less than
twenty miles distant from it.  Between the two extended a valley, or
rather a level plain, thickly covered with forest, except where a sheet
of water gleamed in the setting sun like a disc of liquid gold.

Nor was the plain all level.  Here and there, above the wooded surface,
rose isolated hills, of rounded mound-like shape, also clothed with
timber, but with trees whose foliage, of lighter sheen, showed them to
be of species different from those on the plain below.

Through a break among the branches of those now shadowing them on the
mountain brow, the travellers for some time contemplated the country
before them, and across which, upon the morrow, they would have to make
their way.

At this moment Saloo muttered some words, which, coupled with the
expression upon his countenance as he gave utterance to them, alarmed
his companions.  The words were,--

"It lookee like countly of _mias lombi_.  Cappen Ledwad, if dat wild
debbel lib in dem wood below, bettel we go all lound.  We tly closs it,
may be we get eat up.  Singapo tiga not so dang'lous as _mias_--he not
common kind, but gleat _mias lombi_--what Poltugee people callee `_led
golilla_.'"

"The _red gorilla_!" ejaculated Captain Redwood.  "Is it the
_ourang-outang_ you mean?"

"Same ting, Sahib cappen.  Some call him _oolang-ootang_, some say _led
golilla_.  One kind belly big--belly bad--he call _mias lombi_.  He
cally away women, childen; take 'em up into top ob de highest tallee
tlee.  Nobody know what he do then.  Eat 'em up may be.  What fol else
he want 'em?  Ah!  Cappen Ledwad, we dlead de oolang-Dyak.  He no half
dang'lous like oolang-ootang led golilla."

Notwithstanding the _patois_ of his speech, what Saloo said was well
enough understood by his companions, for in the _led golilla_ or
_oolang-ootang_ of his peculiar pronunciation, they recognised the long
known and world-renowned ape of Borneo, which, although safe enough when
seen inside the cage of the showman, is a creature to be dreaded--at
least the species spoken of--when encountered in its native haunts, the
forests of Sumatra and Borneo.



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

TOUGH TRAVELLING.

Next morning they did not start so early, because the great plain before
them was shrouded under a fog, and they waited for it to pass off.

It was not dispelled until the sun had risen in the heavens behind them,
for their backs were still to the east, their route lying due westward.

During the night, and again in the morning, they had discussed the
question of striking straight across the plain, or making a circuitous
march around it.  When the fog at length lifted, this point was
definitely settled by what they saw before and on each side of them,
that the great valley plain extended both to right and left beyond the
limits of their vision.  To go round it might add scores of miles and
many days to their journey.  They could not think of taking such a
circuitous route, even with the fear of the wild men before them; a
danger Captain Redwood believed to be greatly exaggerated by the Malay,
who in such matters was of a somewhat imaginative turn.  Throwing aside
all thought of such an encounter, they struck down the mountain slope,
determined on crossing the plain.

It was sunset when they arrived at the mountain-foot, and another night
was passed there.

On the following morning they commenced the passage of the plain; which
introduced them to a very different and much more difficult kind of
travelling than any they had experienced since leaving the sea-coast.
Some parts of their journey, both in the ascent and descent, had been
toilsome enough; but the slopes, as well as the summits, were
comparatively clear of underwood.  On the low level it was quite another
affair.  The huge forest-trees were loaded with parasitical creepers,
which, stretching from trunk to trunk in all directions, formed here and
there an impenetrable net or trellis-work.  In such places the kris of
Saloo, and the ship's axe carried by Murtagh, were called into
requisition, and much time was expended in cutting a way through the
tangled growth.

Another kind of obstacle was also occasionally met with, in the brakes
of bamboo, where these gigantic canes, four or five inches in diameter,
and rising to a height of over fifty feet, grew so close together that
even a snake would have found difficulty in working its way through
them.  Fortunately, their stems being hollow, they are easily brought
down, and a single stroke from the axe, or even Saloo's sharp kris,
given slantingly, would send one of them crashing over, its leafy top
bearing along with it the long ribbon-like leaves of many others.

One of these cane brakes proved to be upwards of a mile in width, and
its passage delayed them at least three hours.  They might have
attempted to get round it, but they did not know how far it extended.
Possibly ten or twenty miles--for the bamboo thickets often run in
belts, their growth being due to the presence of some narrow water
track, or the course of a stream.  In the Indian Archipelago are several
species of these tall canes, usually known by the general name of
_bamboo_, though differing from each other in size and other respects.
They furnish to the inhabitants of these islands the material for almost
every article required for their domestic economy--as the various
species of palms do to the natives of South America--more especially the
denizens of the great Amazon valley.  Not only are their houses
constructed of bamboo, but the greater portion of their praus; while
utensils of many kinds, cups, bottles, and water-casks of the best make,
are obtained from its huge joints, cheaply and conveniently.  A bare
catalogue of bamboo tools and utensils would certainly occupy several
pages.

Notwithstanding its valuable properties, our travellers hated the sight
of it; and more than once the Irishman, as he placed his axe upon the
silicious culms, was heard to speak disrespectfully about it, "weeshin'
that there wasn't a stalk of the cane in all Burnayo."

But another kind of obstruction vexed Murtagh even more than the brakes
of bamboo.  This was the webs of huge spiders--ugly tarantula-looking
animals--whose nets in places, extending from tree to tree, traversed
the forest in every direction, resembling the seines of a
fishing-village hung out to dry, or miles of musquito-curtain depending
from the horizontal branches.  Through this strange festoonery they had
to make their way, often for hundreds of yards; the soft silky substance
clutching disagreeably around their throats and clinging to their
clothes till each looked as though clad in an integument of ragged
cotton, or the long loose wool of a merino sheep yet unwoven into cloth.
And as they forced their way through it--at times requiring strength to
extricate them from its tough retentive hold--they could see the hideous
forms of the huge spiders who had spun and woven these strangely
patterned webs scuttling off, and from their dark retreats in the
crevices of the trees looking defiant and angry at the intruders upon
their domain--perhaps never before trodden by man.

Yet another kind of obstruction our travellers had to encounter on their
way across the great plain.  There were tracts of moist ground,
sometimes covered with tall forest-trees, at others opening out into a
sedgy morass, with perhaps a small lake or water-patch in the centre.
The first required them to make way through mud, or thick stagnant water
covered with scum, often reaching above their knees.  These places were
especially disagreeable to cross; for under the gloomy shadow of the
trees they would now and then catch a glimpse of huge newt-like lizards
of the genus _hydrosaurus_--almost as large as crocodiles--slowly
floundering out of the way, as if reluctant to leave, and
half-determined to dispute the passage.

Moreover, while thus occupied, they lived in the obscurity of an eternal
twilight, and could travel only by guess-work.  They had no guide save
the sun, which in these shadows is never visible.  Through the thick
foliage overhead its disc could not be seen; nor aught that would enable
them to determine its position in the sky, and along with it their
direction upon the earth.  It was, therefore, not only a relief to their
feelings, but a positive necessity for their continuance in the right
direction, that now and then a stretch of open swamp obstructed their
track.  True, it caused them to make a detour, and so wasted their time;
but then it afforded them a glimpse of the sun's orb, and enabled them
to pursue their journey in the right course.

During the mid-day hours they were deprived of even this guidance: for
the meridian sun gives no clue to the points of the compass.  They did
not much feel the disadvantage; as at noon-tide the hot tropical
atmosphere had become almost insupportable, and the heat, added to their
fatigue from incessant toiling through thicket and swamp, made it
necessary for them to take several hours of rest.

They resumed their journey in the evening, as the sun, declining toward
the western horizon, pointed out to them the way they were to go.  They
aimed to reach the sheet of water seen by them from the brow of the
mountain.  They wished to strike it at its southern end, as this was
right in the direction westward.  It appeared to lie about midway
between the two mountain-ranges; and, in such a case, would be a proper
halting-place on their journey across the plain.  On starting from the
higher ground, they expected to reach it in a few hours, or at the
latest by sunset of that same day.  But it was twilight of the third
day, when, with exhausted strength and wearied limbs, their clothing
torn and mud-stained, they stood upon its nearest shore!  They did not
stand there long, but dropping down upon the earth, forgetful of
everything--even the necessity of keeping watch--they surrendered
themselves over to sleep.



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

A RED SATYR.

They slept until a late hour of the morning; when, rousing themselves
with difficulty, they kindled a fire and cooked a breakfast of the
boar's ham cured by them before leaving the coast.  It was the second,
and of course the last, already becoming rapidly reduced to a "knuckle;"
for their journey was now entering upon the second week.

They bethought them of making a halt on the bank of the lake; partly to
recruit their strength after the long-continued fatigue, and partly, if
possible, to replenish their larder.

Saloo got ready his blow-gun and poisoned arrows; Captain Redwood looked
to his rifle; while the ship-carpenter, whose speciality was fishing,
and who for this purpose had brought his hooks and lines along with him,
determined on trying what species of the finny tribe frequented the
inland lake, in hopes they might prove less shy at biting than their
brethren of the sea-coast stream.

Again the three men started off, Murtagh traversing in solitude the edge
of the lake, while Captain Redwood, with his rifle--accompanied by
Saloo, carrying his sumpitan and quiver of poisoned arrows--struck
direct into the woods.

Henry and Helen remained where they had passed the night, under the
shadow of a spreading tree; which, although of a species unknown to the
travellers, had been cautiously scrutinised by them, and seemed to be
neither a durion nor a upas.  They were cautioned not to stir a step
from the spot till the others should return.

Though in other respects a good, obedient boy, Henry Redwood was not
abundantly gifted with prudence.  He was a native-born New Yorker, and
as such, of course, precocious, courageous, daring, even to a fault--in
short, having the heart of a man beating within the breast of a boy.  So
inspired, when a huge bird, standing even taller than himself on its
great stilt-like legs--it was the adjutant stork of India (_ciconia
argalia_)--dropped down upon the point of a little peninsula which
projected into the lake, he could not resist the temptation of getting a
shot at it.

Grasping the great ship's musket--part of the paraphernalia they had
brought along with them, and which was almost as much as he could
stagger under--he started to stalk the great crane, leaving little Helen
under the tree.

Some reeds growing along the edge of the lake offered a chance by which
the game might be approached, and under cover of them he had crept
almost within shot of it, when a cry fell upon his ear, thrilling him
with a sudden dread.

It was the voice of his sister Helen, uttered in tones of alarm?

Turning suddenly, he wondered not that her cries were continued in the
wildest terror, mingled with convulsive ejaculations.  A man had drawn
near her, and oh! such a man!  Never in all his experience, nor in his
darkest and most distorted dreams, had he seen, or dreamt of, a human
being so hideous, as that he now saw, half-standing, half-crouching,
only a short distance from his sister's resting-place.

It was a man who, if he had only been in an erect attitude, would have
stood at least eight feet in height, and this would have been in an
under-proportion to the size of his head, the massive breadth of his
body across the breast and shoulders, and the length of his arms.  But
it was not his gigantic size which made him so terrible, or which
electrified the heart of the boy, at a safe distance, as it had done
that of the girl, nearer and in more danger.  It was the _tout ensemble_
of this strange creature in human shape--a man apparently covered all
over with red hair, thick and shaggy, as upon the skin of a wolf or
bear; bright red over the body and limbs, and blacker upon the face,
where it was thinnest--a creature, in short, such as neither boy nor
girl had ever before seen, and such as was long believed to exist only
in the imagination of the ancients, under the appellation of "satyr."



CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

SILENCE RESTORED.

At first sight of the brute, notwithstanding its strangely monstrous
appearance, Henry had really mistaken it for a man; but a moment's
reflection convinced him that he was looking upon an ape instead of a
man, and one of such gigantic size as to make him certain it must be the
animal spoken of by Saloo under the various appellations of _mias
rombi_, _ourang-outang_, and _red gorilla_.  Saloo's remarks concerning
this ape, and his emphatic warnings, were not at all pleasant to be now
recalled.  Though brave as a young lion, he looked upon the shaggy
monster with fear and trembling.  Far less for himself than for his
sister; who, being nearer to it, was, of course, in greater peril of an
attack.  This, indeed, seemed imminent, and his first thought was to
rush to the spot and discharge his musket into the monster's face.  He
was restrained only by seeing that Helen, moved by an instinct of
self-preservation, had made an effort to save herself by gliding round
the trunk of the tree, and seeking concealment on its opposite side.  At
the same time she had prudently ceased her cries; and as the animal did
not show any intention of following her, but rather seemed inclined to
keep toward the edge of the lake, the boy bethought him that his best
course would be not to discharge his musket until the ape should make
some hostile demonstration.

Saloo had told them that the brute is not always disposed to commence
the attack upon man.  If left alone, it will go its own way, except
during certain seasons, when the females are fearful for their young
offspring.  Then they will assail every intruder that comes near,
whether man or animal.  But when wounded or enraged they will not only
act on the defensive, but attack their enemies in the most spiteful and
implacable manner.

Remembering these things, and hoping the huge creature might take a
peaceful departure from the place, Henry, who had already held his
musket at the level, lowered its muzzle, at the same time dropping upon
his knees among some tall grass, which, in this attitude, tolerably well
concealed him.

He soon saw that he had acted wisely.  The hairy monster seemed
altogether to ignore the presence of his sister and himself; and as if
neither were within a thousand miles of the spot, kept on its course
toward the margin of the water.  Fortunately for Henry, it went quite
another way, which, widening diagonally, did not bring the creature at
all near him.  It was evidently directing its course toward some
liliaceous plants with large succulent stems, which formed a patch or
bed, standing in the water, but close to the brink of the lake.

In all probability there was not enough fruit in the neighbourhood to
satisfy the hirsute gentleman now passing before their eyes; or else he
had a fancy to vary his diet by making a meal upon simple vegetables.
He soon reached the patch of tall water-plants; waded in nearly
knee-deep; and then with arms, each of which had the sweep of a mower's
scythe, drew in their heads toward him, and with a mouth wide as that of
a hippopotamus, cropped off the succulent shoots and flower-stems, and
munched them like an ox in the act of chewing its cud.

Seeing the huge hairy creature thus peaceably disposed, and hoping it
would for some time continue in this harmless disposition, Henry rose
from his kneeling attitude, and glided silently, but swiftly, toward the
tree.  Joining his sister Helen, he flung his arms around her as he rose
erect, and kissed her to chase away the effects of the terrible fright
she had sustained.



CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

IN FEAR AND TREMBLING.

The kiss which Henry gave his little sister was not one of
congratulation.  He was not yet sure of her safety, or of his own.  The
hairy monster was still in sight--not more than a hundred yards off--and
though apparently busy with his banquet on the tender shoots of the
water-plants, might at any moment discontinue it, and spring upon them.

What was the best thing to be done in order to escape him?  Run off into
the forest, and try to find their father and Saloo?  They might go the
wrong way, and by so doing make things worse.  The great ape itself
would soon be returning among the trees, and might meet them in the
teeth; there would then be no chance of avoiding an encounter.

To go after Murtagh would be an equally doubtful proceeding; they were
ignorant of the direction the ship-carpenter had taken.

Young as they were, a moment's reflection admonished them not to stir
from the spot.

But what, then?  Cry out, so that the absent ones might hear them?  No;
for this might also attract the attention of the ourang-outang, and
bring it upon them.  Besides, Helen had shrieked loudly on the first
alarm.  If any of the hunters had been within hearing, they would have
needed no further signal to tell them that some danger threatened her.
If not within hearing, it would be worse than idle for either of them to
cry out again.  They determined, therefore, to remain silent, and keep
to their position, in the hope that either their father, the Malay, or
Murtagh, might come to their speedy relief.

But they were prudent enough not to expose themselves to any wandering
glance of the red gorilla's.  The moment Henry had joined his sister he
had hurried her behind the trunk of the tree, and they were now on the
side facing toward the forest.  There, by looking through the leaves of
some orchideous creepers that wreathed the great stem, they could see
the dreaded creature without being seen by it.  Hand in hand, still
trembling, they stood silently and cautiously regarding the gorilla and
its movements.

Under other and safer circumstances it would have been a curious and
interesting spectacle: this gigantic, human-like ape, stretching forth
its hairy arms, each full four feet in length--gathering in the heads of
the tall water-plants, and munching them in great mouthfuls, then
letting the stalks go and sweeping round to collect a fresh sheaf, at
intervals wading a pace or two to reach some that were more tempting to
its taste.  For several minutes they remained looking at this rare
sight, which would have absorbed the attention of the spectators could
it have been witnessed in a menagerie.

But they regarded it with fear and awe.  Their eyes and ears were at the
same time more occupied in looking and listening for some sign that
might veil them of the return of their protectors.

Time passed; none was seen, none heard.

A long time passed, and no sound from the forest; no murmur of men's
voices, or cry of scared bird, to proclaim that any one was approaching
the spot.

The brute was still browsing, but with less apparent voracity.  He drew
the shoots toward him with a gentler sweep of his arms, selecting only
the most succulent.  His appetite was on the wane; it was evident he
would soon leave off eating and return to his roosting or resting-place.
In the forest, of course, though they knew not where.  It might be on
the tree over their heads, or on one close at hand; or it might be afar
off.  In any case, they felt that a crisis was approaching.

Both trembled, as they thought how soon they might be face to face with
the hideous creature--confronting it, or perhaps enfolded in its long
hairy arms.  And in such an embrace, how would it fare with them?  What
chance of escape from it?  None!  They would be crushed, helpless as
flies in the grasp of a gigantic spider.  If the creature should come
that way, and resolve upon assailing them, one or other, or both of
them, would surely be destroyed.

If only one, Henry had fully made up his mind who it should be.  The
brave boy had determined to sacrifice his own life, if need be, to save
his sister.  Firmly grasping the great musket, he said:--

"Sister Nell, if it come this way and offer to attack us, you keep out
of the scrape.  Leave everything to me.  Go a good way off when you see
me preparing to fire.  I shan't draw trigger till it is close up to the
muzzle of the gun.  Then there'll be no fear of missing it.  To miss
would only make it all the madder.  Saloo said so.  If the shot
shouldn't kill it right off, don't mind me.  The report may be heard,
and bring father or some of the others to our assistance.  Dear sis, no
matter what happens, keep out of the way, and wait till they come up.
Promise me you will do so!"

"Henry!  I will not leave you.  Dear, dear brother, if you should be
killed I would not care to live longer.  Henry!  I will die with you!"

"Don't talk that way, sis.  I'm not going to be killed; for I fancy that
we can run faster than it can.  It don't appear to make much speed--at
least along the ground; and I think we might both escape it if we only
knew which way it was going to take.  At any rate, you do as I say, and
leave the rest to me."

While they were thus discussing the course to be pursued--Henry urging
his sister to retreat in the event of his being attacked, and Helen
tearfully protesting against leaving him--a movement on the part of the
mias claimed all their attention.  It was not a movement indicating any
design to leave the spot where it had been browsing; but rather a start,
as if something caused it a surprise.  The start was quickly followed by
a gesture, not of alarm, but one that plainly betokened anger.  Indeed,
it spoke audibly of this, being accompanied by a fierce growl, and
succeeded by a series of hoarse barkings, just like those of a bull-dog
or angry mastiff, whose mouth, confined in a muzzle, hinders him from
giving full vent to his anger.  At the same time, instead of rising
erect, as a human being under similar circumstances would have done, the
frightful ape, that had been already in the most upright position
possible to it, dropped down upon all fours, which still, however, from
the great length of its arms, enabled it to preserve a semi-erect
attitude.

With its huge cheek callosities puffed out beyond their natural
dimensions--(they far exceed a foot in breadth)--its crested hair thrown
forward in a stiff coronal ruff; underneath a pair of eyes, gleaming
like two coals of fire, and, further down, its mouth wide agape,
displaying two rows of great glistening teeth, it stood--or rather
crouched--as if awaiting for the onset of some well-known enemy; a
dangerous enemy, but yet not so dangerous that it need be avoided.  On
the contrary, the attitude now assumed by the red gorilla, as also its
voice and gestures, told them that it was affected by no fear, but
breathed only fury and defiance.

Why should it fear?  Was there any living thing in the forests of
Borneo--biped, quadruped, or reptile possessed of sufficient powers to
cope with the hairy colossus now before their eyes, which seemed to
partake of the characters of all three, and twice the strength of any of
them individually?  Saloo had said there was none.

But it was not from the forests of Borneo its enemy was to come.  Out of
its waters was approaching the antagonist that had caused it to assume
its attitude of angry defiance; and the spectators now saw this
antagonist in the shape of an enormous lizard--a crocodile larger than
they had ever seen before.



CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

