ere he could respond a rush was heard, followed by a fierce growl, and
they understood at once that Terror had appeared upon the scene.

They let him rage for a few moments and then, Tim having informed them
that the snake was "kilt entirely," they cautiously crept forth. As they
looked furtively around they saw at once that the Newfoundland had done
his work well. The reptile was torn into shreds and strewn over an area
of several yards. Its fangs had entered the blanket where, while they
did not pierce through they stuck irrevocably, holding the reptile a
prisoner to the fury of the dog.

Thankful indeed were the boys for their providential escape from this
dreaded creature. Elwood had been awakened by its slight rattling, when,
suspecting the danger that was closing around his cousin, he uttered the
warning words which we have given and which proved the means of robbing
the blow of the reptile of its danger.

The fangs were carefully extracted from the blanket, and Howard declared
his intention of preserving them as a curiosity; but within a half-hour
after leaving the camp they were lost, and he did not judge it worth
while to search for them.




CHAPTER XVI.

THE CAMP-FIRE.


As our three friends on that bright summer morning stood on the slope of
the mountains and gazed down into the beautiful Salinas Valley before
them, Elwood Brandon suddenly pointed a little to the north and said:

"See! there are others beside us!"

About a mile distant, and not far from the river, they saw a thin, black
column of smoke rising among the trees, of so dark and palpable a
character that it could be distinguished at once.

"Another party of Indians," replied Howard. "We seem to be getting into
their neighborhood."

"I only wish they were a party of white hunters or miners, for I long to
see a friendly face."

"What good could it do us? They wouldn't accompany us home, or take any
trouble to see that we were protected."

"Perhaps not, but I tell you, Howard, this begins to look dangerous when
we see nothing but enemies. There are but three of us, and one gun only
between us. I believe a single Indian could destroy us all if he chose
to do so."

"Except in one contingency."

"What is that?"

"That you should aim the gun. He would then flee at once."

Elwood laughed and added:

"But we have no breakfast, and we may as well be moving."

"You're a sensible boy," added Tim O'Rooney, "be the towken that when ye
spakes ye quiverally anticipates me own thoughts."

They soon reached the level of the valley, and then took a direction
straight toward the spot where they had seen the camp-fire burning. The
intervening space was quite thickly grown with trees and vegetation, so
that they could obtain no sight of the fire itself until they were very
close to it.

"We must be careful," admonished Howard. "If it is a party of Indians
they may discover us before we do them."

"I don't suppose it will do for us all to walk straight up to them, for
they'll be sure to see us then."

"No, one must creep up and find whether the coast is clear. Tim has seen
more of California than we have, and he can do that if he wishes."

"Sinsible agin, for I was about to spake the same. Do yees tarry here
while I takes a look around. Whist! now, and kaap so still that ye'll
hear me brathe all the way there and back agin."

The boys took their position each behind a large tree, and looking
cautiously forth they awaited the return of their friend.

When these precautions were taken they were not a hundred yards distant
from the strangers. The Irishman stepped very carefully, moving on
tiptoe, and not making any noise that was perceptible. This was no great
attainment in woodcraft, as any person could have done the same with
ordinary care, when the woods were of the character of this one. Had
there been briers or brambles, or swampy ground, or that which was
unusually dry, and covered with twigs, it would have been a feat far
more difficult of attainment.

Just before Tim disappeared from view they saw him sink down upon his
hands and knees and creep forward; but the bushes soon shut him out from
view and they could only wait with all the patience possible.

At the end of about ten minutes the genial face of the Irishman
appeared, and the expression upon it gave rise to pleasant
anticipations.

"Who are they?" asked the two boys together, as soon as they deemed it
prudent.

"Whist! now don't spake so loud. Ye'll wake 'em out."

Tim looked behind, and became satisfied that there was no fear of
discovery, when he arose to his feet, and took his careless, sauntering
manner.

"Well, Tim!'" said Howard inquiringly.

"What is it yez wishes?"

"We wish to know whether these strangers are white men or Indians."

"Well, ye saas, I had to crawl up to 'em mighty careful, for if you step
upon a stick no bigger than a tooth-pick, yees are sortin to wake up a
slaapin' copper-skin----"

"So they were Indians, then," interrupted Elwood somewhat impatiently.

"Do yes be aisy now, and not be interruptin' of me, and yer observations
and questions which ain't naaded in this case. Me owld grandfather used
to till a great many stories to us spalpaans about the part he took with
young Emmett--when owld Ireland stood up against England. He used to
tell us his stories--did the same--and just so sure as one of us axed
him a question, he'd go back to the beginning and till the whole story
over again. He'd begin airly in the evening, and kaap it going till tin
or eleven o'clock. I belave the old gintleman rather liked to have us be
interruptin' him, for he laid bates for us wee ones, and ye see by that
manes one story sometimes kept him going for a waak. Heaven bliss the
owld gintleman--he had a habit of stopping in the middle of an exciting
part and lighting his dudheen, and then when he'd begin again, he'd skip
over a part on purpose to make us ax him a question----"

"Well, Tim, we will talk about your grandfather some other day," said
Howard, who, as naturally may be supposed, was impatient for him to come
to the point.

"Yis, I was just through with him, but yees should never be overmuch in
haste. Me blessed mother always told me that it was the same as being
too slow, and if anybody could spake of the same, could me mother do it.
I was about to obsarve when yees interrupted me, that a man must be
mighty careful in going up to a camp-fire, for these Indians slaap so
quietly that the overturning of a leaf is sure to wake 'em, and you saa
by this, if we'd all three gone up, as we war thinkin' about, they'd
heard us long before we could have got sight of 'em, and our tramping in
Californy would be done with----"

"So they were Indians were they?" asked Elwood again, partly amused and
partly vexed at Tim's persistent dallying with their curiosity.

"Who said the same?"

"You implied it. Were they red or white men? Answer us--yes or no!"

"And that is just the pint I's raching for, as me frind, Michael
O'Shanghangly, said when he took a half-quart of whisky. Yez understands
that I wanted to make sure just who the same might be, and what was
their number. 'Spose, now, I should have come back and said there war
but three of the same, and there should be a half-dozen, or I should say
they was white gintlemen like ourselves, and they should turn out to be
of a darker hue. Ye saas that it wouldn't do."

The boys had become so uneasy by this time that they were walking back
and forth, and talking to each other in low tones.

"I will go forward and see for myself," said Elwood. "I don't care about
waiting an hour or two for him to answer my question."

"He will soon answer us; he is only indulging in a little pleasantry."

"Rather a bad time for jesting."

"I think we can be sure of one thing," added Howard a moment later.

"What is that?"

"That we are not in much danger. If we were he wouldn't wait so long to
tell us."

"I don't know about that; it would be in keeping with his foolishness. I
tell you, Howard, I will ask him once more, and if he doesn't answer me
at once, I shall go forward and learn for myself."

"Well, do so."

"Tim, are those Indians or white men?"

"That's it, is it? Why didn't yez ax me before? They're a party of white
men, be the same!"




CHAPTER XVII.

THE MINERS.


"I wished to give yez a pleasant surprise, as the doctor said when he
told the man that his wife was dead," remarked Tim, in explanation of
his conduct. "Had there really been any of the red gintlemen around I'd
have told you soon enough."

Our young friends were too well pleased at the intelligence to feel
other than good natured, and they gladly forgave Tim for his trespass
upon their patience. Without waiting further they walked hastily
forward, and a moment later stood by the camp-fire.

Three men, apparently, had just aroused themselves from slumber, and
were now stirring around making preparations for their breakfast. They
were shaggy, unshorn, grimy-looking fellows, who had "run wild" for
several years, but who had not necessarily lost their humanity, even
though they had in a great degree lost its outward semblance. In the
center, a large bundle of sticks were burning quite briskly, and one of
the men was turning and watching some meat that was cooking over it. The
others had evidently just returned from the river, for their red temples
and foreheads still glistened with moisture which sparkled like dew on
their patriarchal beards.

They were rough, hardy-looking fellows, but Elwood felt little
apprehension as he stepped forward and said:

"Good morning, gentlemen!"

He who was cook turned his head, but a hot drop of moisture from the
steaming meat at that moment flew in his eye, and clapping his finger to
it, he muttered something, and forthwith and instantly gave his
exclusive attention to his culinary duties.

The second man was rubbing his face with a piece of coarse cloth, and he
suddenly paused with his black eyes glaring over the top, his face
resembling the head of some huge animal clambering over the edge of a
rock, and who, having just gained a foothold, is looking hurriedly
around for his prey.

The third was combing his hair, and just at this moment it was moistened
and sticking straight over his forehead like the horn of an animal. He
would run the comb through with his right hand and then smooth the hair
with his left. He stopped with both arms crooked over his head, and
wheeled around like an automaton, and stared at the boy a moment, and
then said:

"Well, there! Why didn't you ring the door-bell? I say, youngster, come
forward and give us a grip of your hand. Halloo! you've got your brother
with you!"

"Not my brother, but my cousin, Howard Lawrence."

The two boys shook hands with the three, and the grip that they received
from the horny palms made them wince with pain.

"But where'd you come from? We don't see a couple of youngsters dressed
up in your style promenading 'round in these parts every day. Where'd
you come from?"

"The steamer on which we took passage the other day from Panama, was
burned off the coast, and we got ashore on a raft."

"Be you the only ones?"

"No; there were quite a number that escaped."

"Where be they?"

"They were carried away by a vessel while we had wandered inland."

"And you two--halloo! here's your grandfather!"

"No; that is Tim O'Rooney, a good friend of ours."

"Your humble sarvint!" saluted the Irishman, removing his hat, making a
profound bow and scraping a large foot upon the ground.

"Well, there! We're glad to see you. What's all your names?"

They were given several times, and then carefully spelled at the request
of the large-whiskered man, who desired that no mistake might be made.

"You may call me Ned Trimble, and that ugly-looking fellow 'tending to
the fire is George Wakeman, and that horrid-looking chap scrubbing off
his dirty face, is Alfred Wilkins. Neither of them know much, and I
brought them along to black my boots and dress my hair."

It looked as though Ned was a sort of a wag, for his companions smiled
as if they were used to that thing. He continued:

"We're a party of hunters that have been in Californy for the last five
years, and I rather guess I've prospected through every part of it."

"You must be rich by this time."

"Rich!" laughed Ned Trimble. "Well there, we're everything but rich.
Somehow or other we hain't had the luck. We sold a claim up in the
diggings for five hundred dollars, and the next week the party sold it
for fifteen thousand. That's the way it has always gone with us; but we
are going to be rich yet--ain't we, boys."

"Yes, if we only live long enough," replied Wakeman.

"I told you that chap hadn't much sense," remarked Ned, addressing his
three visitors. "He doesn't know enough to answer a question as he
oughter. I've been trying to teach him something, but I shall have to
give it up as a bad job. Been to breakfast?"

"No--not yet."

"Thought you hadn't. Cook, put up another slice, douse it in butter,
salt and pepper, and serve it up as you used to do when I employed you
at the Astor. Gentlemen, how do you like it, rare or well done?"

All made answer that they were not particular, and Ned replied thereunto
as follows:

"Sensible fellows! If you don't care what you get, you won't have to
care much for what you don't get. What will you select as a dessert?
Plum, rice, bread, or cherry pudding? Apple, mince, cranberry, plum,
peach, or lemon pie? Cup-custard, tapioca, watermelon, citron, or
sherry, maderia, or port. Order which ever you choose, gentlemen, it
don't make any difference to us. We can give you one just as well as the
other."

"I suppose you can," laughed Howard; "so we'll not take the trouble to
order any."

"All right; as you please, gentlemen. We haven't any turkey or oysters
left so you will have to put up with a little antelope that we shot
yesterday afternoon. Fine condition for this time of year, and the best
kind of flesh to starve to death on."

"We haven't had a taste of it yet; but we devoured a goodly piece of a
mountain sheep."

"Just so. I was going to speak of a mountain sheep, if my servants
hadn't interrupted me so often with inquiries as to how they should make
the wine sauce. Ah! I see our meal is ready; we will therefore repair to
the banquet hall."

The six took their seats upon the leaves, and ate the meal in the usual
primitive manner, verifying the adage, "hunger is the best sauce."

Ned Trimble enlivened the meal in his usual loquacious manner; and after
a great many words and circumlocution, the fact was discovered that he
and his friends had spent the last five years in California, not having
visited a civilized post within two years.

Disgusted with their ill success in the Sacramento Valley, they had
pulled up stakes and started off to hunt new fields for themselves. They
were very cheerful and hopeful, and according to their accounts had
encountered every imaginable danger of the California wilds.

Elwood inquired whether they had met any grizzly bears.

"Grizzly bears!" repeated Ned, stopping just as he was about to insert a
huge piece of meat in his mouth. "Grizzly bears? Well, there! _We've
lived among 'em!_"

"Is it possible?"

"Yes; I tracked a big grizzly in the Sierra Nevada for two days and then
I stopped."

"What made you stop?"

_"I concluded the bear tracks were getting a little too fresh!"_




CHAPTER XVIII.

A WANT SUPPLIED.


One thing attracted the notice and pleased our friends, and gave them a
hope of being able to supply a want they had felt every moment since
landing upon the California coast. Each of the miners had two rifles,
and were abundantly supplied with ammunition and mining tools. The
wonder was how they could carry so heavy a load for such a distance. It
could not be understood until Ned Trimble stated that they had two good,
tough mules pasturing in a secluded place about a half-mile distant.

"That 'ere Injin blanket you're carryin' is rather pretty!" remarked Ned
as he rubbed his greasy fingers through his hair.

"Yes, we got it of an Indian girl, and take great pride in it."

"You did, eh? What did you give her for it?"

"A gold watch."

"Ah! Well, if the watch was a first-rate one maybe she got her pay; but
what did she want with a watch? That's just the way with all women.
They'll give ten times the value for some little gewgaw to wear about
'em. I was engaged to a fine-looking girl in North Carolina, but I seen
she was getting so extravagant that I couldn't understand it, so I left
before it was too late."

"A very wise plan."

"Yes, she was very extravagant."

"In what respect?" asked Elwood, who was quite amused at their
newly-found friend.

"Well, you see, she would persist in wearing shoes on Sunday instead of
going barefoot like the rest of the young ladies. I warned her two or
three times, but I catched her at church one day with them on, and so I
went over to the house that night and told her I couldn't trust her any
longer, and we exchanged presents and parted."

"Exchanged presents?" laughed Wakeman. "What sort of presents were
they?"

"I wish no trifling insinuations, sir," replied Ned, with a
grandiloquent air. "She returned to me a tooth brush that I had
presented her some months before, and I gave back to her a tin button
that she had bought of a traveling peddler, and that I had been wearing
on Sundays for my breastpin. 'Tis not the intrinsic worth you know, but
