
Much refreshed, he pulled out the Bible again, and looked earnestly at
it.

"Strange," he said, in the Indian tongue, turning his eyes on his
surgeon-nurse; "often have I heard of men saved from death by bullets
being stopped by Bibles, but in my case it would seem as if God had made
it a key to unlock the gates of the better land."

"Does my white father think he is going to die?" asked the girl in her
own tongue, with a look of anxiety.

"It may be so," replied the man gently, "for I feel very, _very_ weak.
But feelings are deceptive; one cannot trust them.  It matters little,
however.  If I live, it is to work for Jesus.  If I die, it is to be
with Jesus.  But tell me, little one, who art thou whom the Lord has
sent to succour me?"

"Me is Softswan, daughter of the great chief Bounding Bull," replied the
girl, with a look of pride when she mentioned her father, which drew a
slight smile from the stranger.

"But Softswan has white blood in her veins," he said; "and why does she
sometimes speak in the language of the pale-face?"

"My mother," returned the girl in a low, sad tone, "was pale-face womans
from the Saskatchewan.  Me speaks English, for my husban' likes it."

"Your husband--what is his name!"

"Big Tim."

"What!" exclaimed the wounded man with sudden energy, as a flush
overspread his pale face; "is he the son of Little Tim, the
brother-in-law of Whitewing the prairie chief?"

"He is the son of Leetil Tim, an' this be hims house."

"Then," exclaimed the stranger, with a pleased look, "I have reached, if
not the end of my journey, at least a most important point in it, for I
had appointed to meet Whitewing at this very spot, and did not know,
when the Blackfoot Indian shot me, that I was so near the hut.  It
looked like a mere accident my finding the track which leads to it near
the spot where I fell, but it is the Lord's doing.  Tell me, Softswan,
have you never heard Whitewing and Little Tim speak of the pale-face
missionary--the Preacher, they used to call me?"

"Yes, yes, oftin," answered the girl eagerly.  "Me tinks it bees you.
Me _very_ glad, an' Leetil Tim he--"

Her speech was cut short at this point by a repetition of the appalling
war-whoop which had already disturbed the echoes of the gorge more than
once that day.

Naturally the attention of Softswan had been somewhat distracted by the
foregoing conversation, and she had allowed the Indians to burst from
the thicket and rush up the track a few paces before she was able to
bring the big-bore gun to bear on them.

"Slay them not, Softswan," cried the preacher anxiously, as he tried to
rise and prevent her firing.  "We cannot escape them."

He was too late.  She had already pressed the trigger, and the roar of
the huge gun was reverberating from cliff to cliff like miniature
thunder; but his cry had not been too late to produce wavering in the
girl's wind, inducing her to take bad aim, so that the handful of slugs
with which the piece had been charged went hissing over the assailants'
heads instead of killing them.  The stupendous hissing and noise,
however, had the effect of momentarily arresting the savages, and
inducing each man to seek the shelter of the nearest shrub.

"Com queek," cried Softswan, seizing the preacher's hand.  "You be
deaded soon if you not com queek."

Feeling the full force of this remark, the wounded man, exerting all his
strength, arose, and suffered himself to be led into the hut.  Passing
quickly out by a door at the back, the preacher and the bride found
themselves on a narrow ledge of rock, from one side of which was the
precipice down which Big Tim had made his perilous descent.  Close to
their feet lay a great flat rock or natural slab, two yards beyond which
the ledge terminated in a sheer precipice.

"No escape here," remarked the preacher sadly, as he looked round.  "In
my present state I could not venture down such a path even to save my
life.  But care not for me, Softswan.  If you think you can escape, go
and--"

He stopped, for to his amazement the girl stooped, and with apparent
ease raised the ponderous mass of rock above referred to as though it
had been a slight wooden trap-door, and disclosed a hole large enough
for a man to pass through.  The preacher observed that the stone was
hinged on a strong iron bar, which was fixed considerably nearer to one
side of it than the other.  Still, this hinge did not account for the
ease with which a mere girl lifted a ponderous mass which two or three
men could not have moved without the aid of levers.

But there was no time to investigate the mystery of the matter, for
another ringing war-whoop told that the Blackfeet, having recovered from
their consternation, had summoned courage to renew the assault.

"Down queek!" said the girl, looking earnestly into her companion's
face, and pointing to the dark hole, where the head of a rude ladder,
dimly visible, showed what had to be done.

"It does not require much faith to trust and obey such a leader,"
thought the preacher, as he got upon the ladder, and quickly disappeared
in the hole.  Softswan lightly followed.  As her head was about to
disappear, she raised her hand, seized hold of a rough projection on the
under surface of the mass of rock, and drew it gently down so as to
effectually close the hole, leaving no trace whatever of its existence.

While this was going on the Blackfeet were advancing up the narrow
pathway with superlative though needless caution, and no small amount of
timidity.  Each man took advantage of every scrap of cover he could find
on the way up, but as the owner of the hut had taken care to remove all
cover that was removable, they did not find much, and if the defenders
had been there, that little would have been found to be painfully
insufficient, for it consisted only of rugged masses and projections of
rock, none of which could altogether conceal the figure of a full-grown
man.  Indeed, it seemed inexplicable that these Indians should have made
this assault in broad day, considering that Indians in general are noted
for their care of "number one," are particularly unwilling to meet their
foes in fair open fight, and seldom if ever venture to storm a place of
strength except by surprise and under the cover of night.

The explanation lay partly in the fact that they were aware of the
advance of friends towards the place, but much more in this, that the
party was led by the great chief Rushing River, a man possessed of that
daring bulldog courage and reckless contempt of death which is usually
more characteristic of white than of red men.

When the band had by galvanic darts and rushes gained the last scrap of
cover that lay between them and the little fortress, Rushing River gave
vent to a whoop which was meant to thrill the defenders with
consternation to the very centre of their being, and made a gallant
rush, worthy of his name, for the breastwork.  Reaching it in gasping
haste, he and his braves crouched for one moment at the foot of it,
presumably to recover wind and allow the first fire of the defenders to
pass over their heads.

But no first fire came, and Rushing River rolled his great black eyes
upward in astonishment, perhaps thinking that his whoop had thrilled the
defenders off the face of the earth altogether!

Suspense, they say, is less endurable than actual collision with danger.
Probably Rushing River thought it so, for next moment he raised his
black head quickly.  Finding a hole in the defences, he applied one of
his black eyes to it and peeped through.  Seeing nothing, he uttered
another whoop, and vaulted over like a squirrel, tomahawk in hand, ready
to brain anybody or anything.  Seeing nobody and nothing in particular,
except an open door, he suspected an ambush in that quarter, darted
round the corner of the hut to get out of the doorway line of fire, and
peeped back.

Animated by a similar spirit, his men followed suit.  When it became
evident that no one meant to come out of the hut Rushing River resolved
to go in, and did so with another yell and a flourish of his deadly
weapon, but again was he doomed to expend his courage and violence on
air, for he possessed too much of natural dignity to expend his wrath on
inanimate furniture.

Of course one glance sufficed to show that the defenders had flown, and
it needed not the practised wit of a savage to perceive that they had
retreated through the back door.  In his eagerness to catch the foe, the
Indian chief sprang after them with such a rush that nothing but a stout
willow, which he grasped convulsively, prevented him from going over the
precipice headlong--changing, as it were, from a River into a Fall--and
ending his career appropriately in the torrent below.

When the chief had assembled his followers on the limited surface of the
ledge, they all gazed around them for a few seconds in silence.  On one
side was a sheer precipice.  On another side was, if we may so express
it, a sheerer precipice rising upward.  On the third side was the steep
and rugged path, which looked sufficiently dangerous to arrest all save
the mad or the desperate.  On the fourth side was the hut.

Seeing all this at a glance, Rushing River looked mysterious and said,
"Ho!"

To which his men returned, "How!"  "Hi!" and "Hee!" or some other
exclamation indicative of bafflement and surprise.

Standing on the trap-door rock as on a sort of pulpit, the chief pointed
with his finger to the precipitous path, and said solemnly--

"Big Tim has gone down _there_.  He has net the wings of the hawk, but
he has the spirit of the squirrel, or the legs of the goat."

"Or the brains of the fool," suggested a follower, with a few drops of
white blood in his veins, which made him what boys call "cheeky."

"Of course," continued Rushing River, still more solemnly, and scorning
to notice the remark, "of course Rushing River and his braves could
follow if they chose.  They could do anything.  But of what use would it
be?  As well might we follow the moose-deer when it has got a long
start."

"Big Tim has got the start, as Rushing River wisely says," remarked the
cheeky comrade, "but he is hampered with his squaw, and cannot go fast."

"Many pale-faces are hampered by their squaws, and cannot go fast,"
retorted the chief, by which reply he meant to insinuate that the few
drops of white blood in the veins of the cheeky one might yet come
through an experience to which a pure Indian would scorn to submit.
"But," continued the chief, after a pause to let the stab take full
effect, "but Softswan is well known.  She is strong as the mountain
sheep and fleet as the mustang.  She will not hamper Big Tim.  Enough!
We will let them go, and take possession of their goods."

Whatever the chief's followers might have thought about the first part
of his speech, there was evidently no difference of opinion as to the
latter part.  With a series of assenting "Ho's," "How's," "Hi's," and
"Hee's," they returned with him into the hut, and began to appropriate
the property, commencing with a cold haunch of venison which they
discovered in the larder, and to which they did ample justice, sitting
in a circle on the floor in the middle of the little room.

Leaving them there, we will return to Softswan and her new friend.

"The place is very dark," remarked the preacher, groping cautiously
about after the trap-door was closed as above described.

"Stan' still; I vill strik light," said Softswan.

In a few moments sparks were seen flying from flint and steel, and after
one or two unsuccessful efforts a piece of tinder was kindled.  Then the
girl's pretty little nose and lips were seen of a fiery red colour as
she blew some dry grass and chips into a flame, and kindled a torch
therewith.

The light revealed a small natural cavern of rock, not much more than
six feet high and ten or twelve wide, but of irregular shape, and
extending into obscurity in one direction.  The only objects in the cave
besides the ladder by which they entered it were a few barrels partially
covered with deerskin, an unusually small table, rudely but strongly
made, and an enormous mass of rock enclosed in a net of strong rope
which hung from an iron hook in the roof.

The last object at once revealed the mystery of the trap-door.  It
formed a ponderous counterpoise attached to the smaller section of the
stone slab, and so nearly equalised the weight on the hinge that, as we
have seen, Softswan's weak arm was sufficient to turn the scale.

The instant the torch flared up the girl stuck it into a crevice in the
wall, and quickly grasping the little table, pushed it under the pendent
rock.  It reached to within half an inch of the mass.  Picking up two
broad wooden wedges that lay on the floor, she thrust them between the
rock and the table, one on either side, so as to cause it to rest
entirely on the table, and thus by removing its weight from the iron
hook, the slab was rendered nearly immovable.  She was anxiously active
in these various operations, for already the Indians had entered the hut
and their voices could be distinctly heard overhead.

"Now," she whispered, with a sigh of relief, "six mans not abil to move
the stone, even if he knowed the hole is b'low it."

"It is an ingenious device," said the preacher, throwing his exhausted
form on a heap of pine branches which lay in a corner.  "Who invented
it--your husband?"

"No; it was Leetil Tim," returned the girl, with a low musical laugh.
"Big Tim says hims fadder be great at 'ventions.  He 'vent many t'ings.
Some's good, some's bad, an' some's funny."

The preacher could not forbear smiling at this account of his old
friend, in spite of his anxiety lest the Indians who were regaling
themselves overhead should discover their retreat.  He had begun to put
some questions to Softswan in a low voice when he was rendered dumb and
his blood seemed to curdle as he heard stumbling footsteps approaching
from the dark end of the cavern.  Then was heard the sound of some one
panting vehemently.  Next moment a man leaped into the circle of light,
and seized the Indian girl in his arms.

"Thank God!" he exclaimed fervently; "not too late!  I had thought the
reptiles had been too much for thee, soft one.  Ah me!  I fear that some
poor pale-face has--" He stopped abruptly, for at that moment Big Tim's
eye fell upon the wounded man.  "What!" he exclaimed, hastening to the
preacher's side; "you _have_ got here after all?"

"Ay, young man, through the goodness of God I have reached this haven of
rest.  Your words seem to imply that you had half expected to find me,
though how you came to know of my case at all is to me a mystery."

"My white father," returned Big Tim, referring as much to the preacher's
age and pure white hair as to his connection with the white men, "finds
mystery where the hunter and the red man see none.  I went out a-purpose
to see that it was not my daddy the Blackfoot reptiles had shot and soon
came across your tracks, which showed me as plain as a book that you was
badly wounded.  I followed the tracks for a bit, expectin' to find you
lyin' dead somewheres, when the whoops of the reptiles turned me back.
But tell me, white father, are you not the preacher that my daddy and
Whitewing used to know some twenty years agone?"

"I am, and fain would I meet with my former friends once more before I
die."

"You shall meet with them, I doubt not," replied the young hunter,
arranging the couch of the wounded man more comfortably.  "I see that my
soft one has bandaged you up, and she's better than the best o' sawbones
at such work.  I'll be able to make you more comfortable when we drive
the reptiles out o'--"

"Call them not reptiles," interrupted the preacher gently.  "They are
the creatures of God, like ourselves."

"It may be so, white father; nevertheless, they are uncommon low, mean,
sneakin', savage critters, an' that's all that I've got to do with."

"You say truth, Big Tim," returned the preacher, "and that is also all
that I have got to do with; but you and I take different methods of
correcting the evil."

