next to impossible for even the infantry of the enemy to make their
way. If this marvel had been accomplished in five days, what hope
was there that the city would be able to withstand this force,
which had so readily triumphed over the defenses of nature?



Chapter 5: The Siege Of Jotapata.


"Well, Joab, what do you think, now?" John said, as he stood on the
wall with his older companion, watching the seemingly endless
column of the enemy. "It seems to me that we are caught here, like
rats in a trap, and that we should have done better, a thousand
times, in maintaining our freedom of movement among the mountains.
It is one thing to cut a road; it would be another to clear off all
the forests from the Anti-Libanus and, so long as there was a
forest to shelter us, the Romans could never have overtaken us.
Here, there is nothing to do but to die."

"That is so, John. I own that the counsel you urged would have been
wiser than this. Here are all the best fighting men in Galilee,
shut up without hope of succor, or of mercy. Well, lad, we can at
least teach the Romans the lesson that the Jews know how to die;
and the capture of this mountain town will cost them as much as
they reckoned would suffice for the conquest of the whole country.
Jotapata may save Jerusalem, yet."

John was no coward, and was prepared to fight to the last; but he
was young, and the love of life was strong within. He thought of
his old father and mother, who had no children but him; of his
pretty Mary--far away now, he hoped, on the slopes of Mount
Hermon--and of the grief that his death would cause to them; and he
resolved that, although he would do his duty, he would strain every
nerve to preserve the life so dear to them.

He had no longer any duties to perform, other than those common to
all able to bear arms. When the Romans attacked, his place would be
near Josephus or, were a sally ordered, he would issue out with the
general; but until then, his time was his own. There was no mission
to be performed, now, no fear of plots against the life of the
general; therefore, he was free to wander where he liked. Save the
newly erected wall, across the neck of rock below the town, there
were no defenses; for it was deemed impossible for man to climb the
cliffs that fell, sheer down, at every other point.

John strolled quietly round the town; stopping, now and then, to
look over the low wall that bordered the precipice--erected solely
to prevent children from falling over. The depth was very great;
and it seemed to him that there could be no escape, anywhere, save
on that side which was now blocked by the wall--and which would,
ere long, be trebly blocked by the Romans.

The town was crowded. At ordinary times, it might contain near
three or four thousand inhabitants; now, over twenty-five thousand
had gathered there. Of these, more than half were men; but many had
brought their wives and children with them. Every vacant foot of
ground was taken up. The inhabitants shared their homes with the
strangers, but the accommodation was altogether insufficient; and
the greater part of the newcomers had erected little tents, and
shelters, of cloths or blankets.

In the upper part of the town there were, at present, comparatively
few people about; for the greater part had gone to the slope,
whence they watched, with terror and dismay, the great Roman column
as it poured down, in an unbroken line, hour after hour. The news
of the destruction which had fallen on Gadara had been brought in,
by fugitives; and all knew that, although no resistance had been
offered there, every male had been put to death, and the women
taken captives.

There was naught, then, to be gained by surrender; even had anyone
dared to propose it. As for victory, over such a host as that which
was marching to the assault, none could hope for it. For, hold out
as they might, and repel every assault on the wall, there was an
enemy within which would conquer them.

For Jotapata possessed no wells. The water had, daily, to be
fetched by the women from the stream in the ravine and, although
stores of grain had been collected, sufficient to last for many
months, the supply of water stored up in cisterns would scarce
suffice to supply the multitudes gathered on the rock for a
fortnight.

Death, then, certain and inevitable, awaited them; and yet, an
occasional wail from some woman, as she pressed her children to her
breast, alone told of the despair which reigned in every heart. The
greater portion looked out, silent, and as if stupefied. They had
relied, absolutely, on the mountains and forests to block the
progress of the invader. They had thought that, at the worst, they
would have had to deal with a few companies of infantry, only.
Thus, the sight of the sixty thousand Roman troops--swelled to nigh
a hundred thousand, by the camp followers and artificers--with its
cavalry and machines of war, seemed like some terrible nightmare.

After making the circuit of the rock, and wandering for some time
among the impromptu camps in the streets, John returned to a group
of boys whom he had noticed, leaning against the low wall with a
carelessness, as to the danger of a fall over the precipice, which
proved that they must be natives of the place.

"If there be any possible way of descending these precipices," he
said to himself, "it will be the boys who will know of it. Where a
goat could climb, these boys, born among the mountains, would try
to follow; if only to excel each other in daring, and to risk
breaking their necks."

Thus thinking, he walked up to the group, who were from twelve to
fifteen years old.

"I suppose you belong to the town?" he began.

There was a general assent from the five boys, who looked with
considerable respect at John--who, although but two years the
senior of the eldest among them, wore a man's garb, and carried
sword and buckler.

"I am one of the bodyguard of the governor," John went on, "and I
dare say you can tell me all sorts of things, about this country,
that may be useful for him to know. Is it quite certain that no one
could climb up these rocks from below; and that there is no fear of
the Romans making a surprise, in that way?"

The boys looked at each other, but no one volunteered to give
information.

"Come!" John went on, "I have only just left off being a boy,
myself, and I was always climbing into all sorts of places, when I
got a chance; and I have no doubt it's the same, with you. When you
have been down below, there, you have tried how far you can get up.

"Did you ever get up far, or did you ever hear of anyone getting up
far?"

"I expect I have been up as far as anyone," the eldest of the boys
said. "I went up after a young kid that had strayed away from its
mother. I got up a long way--half way up, I should say--but I
couldn't get any further. I was barefooted, too.

"I am sure no one with armor on could have got up anything like so
far. I don't believe he could get up fifty feet."

"And have any of you ever tried to get down from above?"

They shook their heads.

"Jonas the son of James did, once," one of the smaller boys said.
"He had a pet hawk he had tamed, and it flew away and perched, a
good way down; and he clambered down to fetch it. He had a rope
tied round him, and some of the others held it, in case he should
slip. I know he went down a good way, and he got the hawk; and his
father beat him for doing it, I know."

"Is he here, now?" John asked.

"Yes, he is here," the boy said. "That's his father's house, the
one close to the edge of the rock. I don't know whether you will
find him there, now. He ain't indoors more than he can help. His
own mother's dead, and his father's got another wife, and they
don't get on well together."

"Well, I will have a chat with him, one of these days. And you are
all quite sure that there is no possible path up, from below?"

"I won't say there isn't any possible path," the eldest boy said;
"but I feel quite sure there is not. I have looked, hundreds of
times, when I have been down below; and I feel pretty sure that, if
there had been any place where a goat could have got up, I should
have noticed it. But you see, the rock goes down almost straight,
in most places. Anyhow, I have never heard of anyone who ever got
up and, if anyone had done it, it would have been talked about, for
years and years."

"No doubt it would," John agreed. "So I shall tell the governor
that he need not be in the least uneasy about an attack, except in
front."

So saying, he nodded to the boys, and walked away again.

In the evening, the whole of the Roman army had arrived; and
Vespasian drew up his troops on a hill, less than a mile to the
north of the city, and there encamped them. The next morning, a
triple line of embankments was thrown up, by the Romans, around the
foot of the hill where, alone, escape or issue was possible; and
this entirely cut off those within the town from any possibility of
flight.

The Jews looked on at these preparations as wild animals might
regard a line of hunters surrounding them. But the dull despair of
the previous day had now been succeeded by a fierce rage. Hope
there was none. They must die, doubtless; but they would die
fighting fiercely, till the last. Disdaining to be pent up within
the walls, many of the fighting men encamped outside, and boldly
went forward to meet the enemy.

Vespasian called up his slingers and archers, and these poured
their missiles upon the Jews; while he himself, with his heavy
infantry, began to mount the slope towards the part of the wall
which appeared the weakest. Josephus at once summoned the fighting
men in the town and, sallying at their head through the gate,
rushed down and flung himself upon the Romans. Both sides fought
bravely; the Romans strong in their discipline, their skill with
their weapons, and their defensive armor; the Jews fighting with
the valor of despair, heightened by the thought of their wives and
children in the town, above.

The Romans were pushed down the hill, and the fight continued at
its foot until darkness came on, when both parties drew off. The
number of killed on either side was small, for the bucklers and
helmets defended the vital points. The Romans had thirteen killed
and very many wounded, the Jews seventeen killed and six hundred
wounded.

John had fought bravely by the side of Josephus. Joab and two
others of the little band were killed. All the others were wounded,
more or less severely; for Josephus was always in the front, and
his chosen followers kept close to him. In the heat of the fight,
John felt his spirits rise higher than they had done since the
troubles had begun. He had fought, at first, so recklessly that
Josephus had checked him, with the words:

"Steady, my brave lad. He fights best who fights most coolly. The
more you guard yourself, the more you will kill."

More than once, when Josephus--whose commanding figure, and evident
leadership, attracted the attention of the Roman soldiers--was
surrounded and cut off, John, with three or four others, made their
way through to him, and brought him off.

When it became dark, both parties drew off; the Romans sullenly,
for they felt it a disgrace to have been thus driven back, by foes
they despised; the Jews with shouts of triumph, for they had proved
themselves a match for the first soldiers in the world, and the
dread with which the glittering column had inspired them had passed
away.

The following day, the Jews again sallied out and attacked the
Romans as they advanced and, for five days in succession, the
combat raged--the Jews fighting with desperate valor, the Romans
with steady resolution. At the end of that time, the Jews had been
forced back behind their wall, and the Romans established
themselves in front of it.

Vespasian, seeing that the wall could not be carried by assault, as
he had expected, called a council of war; and it was determined to
proceed by the regular process of a siege, and to erect a bank
against that part of the wall which offered the greatest facility
for attack. Accordingly the whole army, with the exception of the
troops who guarded the banks of circumvallation, went into the
mountains to get materials. Stone and timber, in vast quantities,
were brought down and, when these were in readiness, the work
commenced.

A sort of penthouse roofing, constructed of wattles covered with
earth, was first raised, to protect the workers from the missiles
of the enemy upon the wall; and here the working parties labored
securely, while the rest of the troops brought up earth, stone, and
wood for their use. The Jews did their best to interfere with the
work, hurling down huge stones upon the penthouse; sometimes
breaking down the supports of the roof and causing gaps, through
which they poured a storm of arrows and javelins, until the damage
had been repaired.

To protect his workmen, Vespasian brought up his siege engines--of
which he had a hundred and sixty--and, from these, vast quantities
of missiles were discharged at the Jews upon the walls. The
catapults threw javelins, balls of fire, and blazing arrows; while
the ballistae hurled huge stones, which swept lanes through the
ranks of the defenders. At the same time the light-armed troops,
the Arab archers, and those of Agrippa and Antiochus kept up a rain
of arrows, so that it became impossible for the Jews to remain on
the walls.

But they were not inactive. Sallying out in small parties, they
fell with fury upon the working parties who, having stripped off
their heavy armor, were unable to resist their sudden onslaughts.
Driving out and slaying all before them, the Jews so often applied
fire to the wattles and timbers of the bank that Vespasian was
obliged to make his work continuous, along the whole extent of the
wall, to keep out the assailants.

But, in spite of all the efforts of the Jews, the embankment rose
steadily, until it almost equaled the height of the wall; and the
struggle now went on between the combatants on even terms, they
being separated only by the short interval between the wall and
bank. Josephus found that in such a conflict the Romans--with their
crowd of archers and slingers, and their formidable machines--had
all the advantage; and that it was absolutely necessary to raise
the walls still higher.

He called together a number of the principal men, and pointed out
the necessity for this. They agreed with him, but urged that it was
impossible for men to work, exposed to such a storm of missiles.
Josephus replied that he had thought of that. A number of strong
posts were prepared and, at night, these were fixed securely,
standing on the wall. Along the top of these, a strong rope was
stretched; and on this were hung, touching each other, the hides of
newly-killed oxen. These formed a complete screen, hiding the
workers from the sight of those on the embankment.

Illustration: Heightening the Walls of Jotapata under Shelter of Ox
Hides.

The hides, when struck with the stones from the ballistae, gave way
and deadened the force of the missiles; while the arrows and
javelins glanced off from the slippery surface. Behind this
shelter, the garrison worked night and day, raising the posts and
screens as their work proceeded, until they had heightened the wall
no less than thirty-five feet; with a number of towers on its
summit, and a strong battlement facing the Romans.

The besiegers were much discouraged at their want of success, and
enraged at finding the efforts of so large an army completely
baffled by a small town, which they had expected to carry at the
first assault; while the Jews proportionately rejoiced. Becoming
more and more confident, they continually sallied out in small
parties, through the gateway or by ladders from the walls, attacked
the Romans upon their embankment, or set fire to it. And it was the
desperation with which these men fought, even more than their
success in defending the wall, that discouraged the Romans; for the
Jews were utterly careless of their lives, and were well content to
die, when they saw that they had achieved their object of setting
fire to the Roman works.

Vespasian, at length, determined to turn the siege into a blockade;
and to starve out the town which he could not capture. He
accordingly contented himself by posting a strong force to defend
the embankment, and withdrew the main body of the army to their
encampment. He had been informed of the shortness of the supply of
water; and had anticipated that, in a very short time, thirst would
compel the inhabitants to yield.

John had taken his full share in the fighting, and had frequently
earned the warm commendation of Josephus. His spirits had risen
with the conflict; but he could not shut his eyes to the fact that,
sooner or later, the Romans must become masters of the place. One
evening, therefore, when he had done his share of duty on the
walls, he went up to the house which had been pointed out to him as
that in which lived the boy who had descended the face of the
rocks, for some distance.

At a short distance from the door, a lad of some fifteen years old,
with no covering but a piece of ragged sackcloth round the loins,
was crouched up in a corner, seemingly asleep. At the sound of
John's footsteps, he opened his eyes in a quick, watchful way, that
showed that he had not been really asleep.

"Are you Jonas, the son of James?" John asked.

"Yes I am," the boy said, rising to his feet. "What do you want
with me?"

"I want to have a talk with you," John said. "I am one of the
governor's bodyguard; and I think, perhaps, you may be able to give
us some useful information."

"Well, come away from here," the boy said, "else we shall be having
her--" and he nodded to the house, "--coming out with a stick."

"You have rather a hard time of it, from what I hear," John began,
when they stopped at the wall, a short distance away from the
house.

"I have that," the boy said. "I look like it, don't I?"

"You do," John agreed, looking at the boy's thin, half-starved
figure; "and yet, there is plenty to eat in the town."

"There may be," the boy said; "anyhow, I don't get my share. Father
is away fighting on the wall, and so she's worse than ever. She is
always beating me, and I dare not go back, now. I told her, this
morning, the sooner the Romans came in, the better I should be
pleased. They could only kill me, and there would be an end of it;
but they would send her to Rome for a slave, and then she would see
how she liked being cuffed and beaten, all day."

"And you are hungry, now?" John asked.

"I am pretty near always hungry," the boy said.

"Well, come along with me, then. I have got a little room to
myself, and you shall have as much to eat as you like."

The room John occupied had formerly been a loft over a stable, in
the rear of the house in which Josephus now lodged; and it was
reached by a ladder from the outside. He had shared it, at first,
with two of his comrades; but these had both fallen, during the
siege. After seeing the boy up into it, John went to the house and
procured him an abundant meal; and took it, with a small horn of
water, back to his quarters.

"Here's plenty for you to eat, Jonas, but not much to drink. We are
all on short allowance, the same as the rest of the people; and I
am afraid that won't last long."

There was a twinkle of amusement in the boy's face but, without a
word, he set to work at the food, eating ravenously all that John
had brought him. The latter was surprised to see that he did not
touch the water; for he thought that if his stepmother deprived him
of food, of which there was abundance, she would all the more
deprive him of water, of which the ration to each person was so
scanty.

"Now," John said, "you had better throw away that bit of sackcloth,
and take this garment. It belonged to a comrade of mine, who has
been killed."

"There's too much of it," the boy said. "If you don't mind my
tearing it in half, I will take it."

"Do as you like with it," John replied; and the boy tore the long
strip of cotton in two, and wrapped half of it round his loins.

"Now," he said, "what do you want to ask me?"

"They tell me, Jonas, that you are a first-rate climber, and can go
anywhere?"

The boy nodded.

"I can get about, I can. I have been tending goats, pretty well
ever since I could walk and, where they can go, I can."

"I want to know, in the first place, whether there is any possible
way by which one can get up and down from this place, except by the
road through the wall?"

The boy was silent.

"Now look here, Jonas," John went on, feeling sure that the lad
could tell something, if he would, "if you could point out a way
down, the governor would be very pleased; and as long as the siege
lasts you can live here with me, and have as much food as you want,
and not go near that stepmother of yours, at all."

"And nobody will beat me, for telling you?" the boy asked.

"Certainly not, Jonas."

"It wouldn't take you beyond the Romans. They have got guards, all
round."

"No, but it might enable us to get down to the water," John urged,
the sight of the unemptied horn causing the thought to flash
through his mind that the boy had been in the habit of going down,
