But the panic-stricken robbers did not await the onset.  They turned and
fled, hotly pursued by the men of Pine Tree Diggings.

"That'll do!" cried Flinders to Brixton; "they'll not need us any more
this night.  Come wid me now."

Fred Westly, who had rushed to the attack with the rest, soon pulled up.
Remembering the appointment, he returned to the stable, where he found
Tom gazing in silence at Flinders, who was busily employed saddling
their three horses.  He at once understood the situation.

"Of course you've made up your mind to go, Tom?" he said.

"N-no," answered Tom.  "I have not."

"Faix, thin, you'll have to make it up pritty quick now, for whin the
boys come back the prisoners an wounded men'll be sure to tell that
their chief came for the express purpose of rescuin' that `thief
Brixton'--an' it's hangin' that'll be too good for you then.  Roastin'
alive is more likely.  It's my opinion that if they catch us just now,
Muster Fred an' I will swing for it too!  Come, sor, git up!"

Tom hesitated no longer.  He vaulted into the saddle.  His comrades also
mounted, and in a few minutes more the three were riding away from Pine
Tree Diggings as fast as the nature of the ground and the darkness of
the hour would permit.

It was not quite midnight when they left the place where they had toiled
so long, and had met with so many disasters, and the morning was not far
advanced when they reached the spring of the Red Man's Teacup.  As this
was a natural and convenient halting-place to parties leaving those
diggings, they resolved to rest and refresh themselves and their steeds
for a brief space, although they knew that the robber-chief had
appointed that spot as a rendezvous after the attack on the camp.

"You see, it's not likely they'll be here for an hour or two," said Tom
Brixton, as he dismounted and hobbled his horse, "for it will take some
time to collect their scattered forces, and they won't have their old
leader to spur them on, as Paddy's rap on the head will keep him quiet
till the men of the camp find him."

"Troth, I'm not so sure o' that, sor.  The rap was a stiff wan, no
doubt, but men like that are not aisy to kill.  Besides, won't the boys
o' the camp purshoo them, which'll be spur enough, an' if they finds us
here, it'll matter little whether we fall into the hands o' diggers or
robbers.  So ye'll make haste av ye take my advice."

They made haste accordingly, and soon after left; and well was it that
they did so, for, little more than an hour later, Stalker--his face
covered with blood and his head bandaged--galloped up at the head of the
mounted men of his party.

"We'll camp here for an hour or two," he said sharply, leaping from his
horse, which he proceeded to unsaddle.  "Hallo! somebody's bin here
before us.  Their fire ain't cold yet.  Well, it don't matter.  Get the
grub ready, boys, an' boil the kettle.  My head is all but split.  If
ever I have the luck to come across that Irish blackguard Brixton
I'll--"

He finished the sentence with a deep growl and a grind of his teeth.

About daybreak the marauders set out again, and it chanced that the
direction they took was the same as that taken by Fred Westly and his
comrades.  These latter had made up their minds to try their fortune at
a recently discovered goldfield, which was well reported of, though the
yield had not been sufficient to cause a "rush" to the place.  It was
about three days' journey on horseback from the Red Man's Teacup, and
was named Simpson's Gully, after the man who discovered it.

The robbers' route lay, as we have said, in the same direction, but only
for part of the way, for Simpson's Gully was not their ultimate
destination.  They happened to be better mounted than the fugitives, and
travelled faster.  Thus it came to pass that on the second evening, they
arrived somewhat late at the camping-place where Fred and his friends
were spending the night.

These latter had encamped earlier that evening.  Supper was over, pipes
were out and they were sound asleep when the robber band rode up.

Flinders was first to observe their approach.  He awoke his comrades
roughly.

"Och! the blackguards have got howld of us.  Be aisy, Muster Brixton.
No use fightin'.  Howld yer tongues, now, an' let _me_ spake.  Yer not
half liars enough for the occasion, aither of ye."

This compliment had barely been paid when they were surrounded and
ordered to rise and give an account of themselves.

"What right have _you_ to demand an account of us?" asked Tom Brixton,
recklessly, in a supercilious tone that was meant to irritate.

"The right of might," replied Stalker, stepping up to Tom, and grasping
him by the throat.

Tom resisted, of course, but being seized at the same moment by two men
from behind, was rendered helpless.  His comrades were captured at the
same moment, and the arms of all bound behind them.

"Now, gentlemen," said the robber chief, "perhaps you will answer with
more civility."

"You are wrong, for I won't answer at all," said Tom Brixton, "which I
take to be _less_ civility."

"Neither will I," said Fred, who had come to the conclusion that total
silence would be the easiest way of getting over the difficulties that
filled his mind in regard to deception.

Patrick Flinders, however, had no such difficulties.  To the amazement
of his companions, he addressed a speech to Stalker in language so
broken with stuttering and stammering that the marauders around could
scarcely avoid laughing, though their chief seemed to be in no mood to
tolerate mirth.  Tom and Fred did not at first understand, though it
soon dawned upon them that by this means he escaped being recognised by
the man with whom he had so recently conversed through the keyhole of
Tom Brixton's prison door.

"S-s-s-sor," said he, in a somewhat higher key than he was wont to
speak, "my c-c-comrades are c-c-cross-g-grained critters b-both of 'em,
th-th-though they're g-good enough in their way, for all that.  A-a-ax
_me_ what ye w-w-want to know."

"Can't you speak without so many k-k-kays an' j-j-gees?" demanded
Stalker, impatiently.

"N-n-no, s-sor, I c-can't, an' the m-more you t-try to make me the
w-w-wus I g-gits."

"Well, then, come to the point, an' don't say more than's needful."

"Y-y-yis, sor."

"What's this man's name!" asked the chief, settling the bandages
uneasily on his head with one hand, and pointing to Brixton with the
other.

"M-Muster T-T-Tom, sor."

"That's his Christian name, I suppose?"

"W-w-well, I'm not sure about his bein' a c-c-c-Christian."

"Do you spell it T-o-m or T-h-o-m?"

"Th-that depinds on t-t-taste, sor."

"Bah! you're a fool!"

"Thank yer honour, and I'm also an I-I-Irish m-man as sure me name's
Flinders."

"There's one of your countrymen named Brixton," said the chief, with a
scowl, "who's a scoundrel of the first water, and I have a crow to pluck
with him some day when we meet.  Meanwhile I feel half-disposed to give
his countryman a sound thrashing as part payment of the debt in
advance."

"Ah! sure, sor, me counthryman'll let ye off the dibt, no doubt,"
returned Flinders.

"Hallo! you seem to have found your tongue all of a sudden!"

"F-faix, then, it's b-bekaise of yer not houndin' me on.  I c-c-can't
stand bein' hurried, ye s-see.  B-besides, I was havin' me little
j-j-joke, an' I scarcely sp-splutter at all whin I'm j-j-jokin'."

"Where did you come from?" demanded the chief, sharply.

"From P-Pine Tree D-Diggin's."

"Oh, indeed?  When did you leave the camp?"

"On M-Monday mornin', sor."

"Then of course you don't know anything about the fight that took place
there on Monday night!"

"D-don't I, sor?"

"Why don't you answer whether you do or not?" said Stalker, beginning to
lose temper.

"Sh-shure yer towld me th-that I d-d-don't know, an I'm too p-p-purlite
to c-contradic' yer honour."

"Bah! you're a fool."

"Ye t-t-towld me that before, sor."

The robber chief took no notice of the reply, but led his lieutenant
aside and held a whispered conversation with him for a few minutes.

Now, among other blessings, Flinders possessed a pair of remarkably
acute ears, so that, although he could not make out the purport of the
whispered conversation, he heard, somewhat indistinctly, the words
"Bevan" and "Betty."  Coupling these words with the character of the men
around him, he jumped to a conclusion and decided on a course of action
in one and the same instant.

Presently Stalker returned, and addressing himself to Tom and Fred,
said--

"Now, sirs, I know not your circumstances nor your plans, but I'll take
the liberty of letting you know something of mine.  Men give me and my
boys bad names.  We call ourselves Free-and-easy Boys.  We work hard for
our living.  It is our plan to go round the country collecting taxes--
revenue--or whatever you choose to call it, and punishing those who
object to pay.  Now, we want a few stout fellows to replace the brave
men who have fallen at the post of duty.  Will you join us?"

"Certainly not," said Fred, with decision.

"Of course not," said Tom, with contempt.

"Well, then, my fine fellows, you may follow your own inclinations, for
there's too many willing boys around to make us impress unwilling ones,
but I shall take the liberty of relieving you of your possessions.  I
will tax _you_ to the full amount."

He turned and gave orders in a low voice to those near him.  In a few
minutes the horses, blankets, food, arms, etcetera, of the three friends
were collected, and themselves unbound.

"Now," said the robber chief, "I mean to spend the night here.  You may
bid us good-night.  The world lies before you--go!"

"B-b-but, sor," said Flinders, with a perplexed and pitiful air.  "Ye
niver axed _me_ if I'd j-j-jine ye."

"Because I don't want you," said Stalker.

"Ah! thin, it's little ye know th-the j-j-jewel ye're th-throwin' away."

"What can you do?" asked the robber, while a slight smile played on his
disfigured face.

"What c-can I _not_ do? ye should ax.  W-w-why, I can c-c-c-cook, an'
f-f-fight, an' d-dance, an' t-t-tell stories, an' s-s-sing an'--"

"There, that'll do.  I accept you," said Stalker, turning away, while
his men burst into a laugh, and felt that Flinders would be a decided
acquisition to the party.

"Are we to go without provisions or weapons?" asked Fred Westly, before
leaving.

"You may have both," answered Stalker, "by joining us.  If you go your
own way--you go as you are.  Please yourselves."

"You may almost as well kill us as turn us adrift here in the
wilderness, without food or the means of procuring it," remonstrated
Fred.  "Is it not so, Tom?"

Tom did not condescend to reply.  He had evidently screwed his spirit
up--or down--to the Turkish condition of apathy and contempt.

"You're young, both of you, and strong," answered the robber.  "The
woods are full of game, berries, roots, and fish.  If you know anything
of woodcraft you can't starve."

"An' sh-sh-sure Tomlin's Diggin's isn't far--far off--straight
f-f-fornint you," said Flinders, going close up to his friends, and
whispering, "Kape round by Bevan's Gully.  You'll be--"

"Come, none of your whisperin' together!" shouted Stalker.  "You're one
of _us_ now, Flinders, so say goodbye to your old chums an' fall to the
rear."

"Yis, sor," replied the biddable Flinders, grasping each of his comrades
by the hand and wringing it as he said, "G-g-good-bye, f-f-foolish
b-boys, (Bevan's Gully--_sharp_!) f-farewell f-for i-i-iver!" and,
covering his face with his hands, burst into crocodile's tears while he
fell to the rear.  He separated two of his fingers, however, in passing
a group of his new comrades, in order to bestow on them a wink which
produced a burst of subdued laughter.

Surprised, annoyed, and puzzled, Tom Brixton thrust both hands into his
trousers pockets, turned round on his heel, and, without uttering a
word, sauntered slowly away.

Fred Westly, in a bewildered frame of mind, followed his example, and
the two friends were soon lost to view--swallowed up, as it were, by the
Oregon wilderness.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

After walking through the woods a considerable distance in perfect
silence--for the suddenness of the disaster seemed to have bereft the
two friends of speech--Tom Brixton turned abruptly and said--

"Well, Fred, we're in a nice fix now.  What is to be our next move in
this interesting little game?"

Fred Westly shook his head with an air of profound perplexity, but said
nothing.

"I've a good mind," continued Tom, "to return to Pine Tree Diggings,
give myself up, and get hanged right off.  It would be a good riddance
to the world at large, and would relieve me of a vast deal of trouble."

"There is a touch of selfishness in that speech, Tom--don't you think?--
for it would not relieve _me_ of trouble; to say nothing of your poor
mother!"

"You're right, Fred.  D'you know, it strikes me that I'm a far more
selfish and despicable brute than I used to think myself."

He looked at his companion with a sad sort of smile; nevertheless, there
was a certain indefinable ring of sincerity in his tone.

"Tom," said the other, earnestly, "will you wait for me here for a few
minutes while I turn aside to pray?"

"Certainly, old boy," answered Tom, seating himself on a mossy bank.
"You know I cannot join you."

"I know you can't, Tom.  It would be mockery to pray to One in whom you
don't believe; but as _I_ believe in God, the Bible, and prayer, you'll
excuse my detaining you, just for--"

"Say no more, Fred.  Go; I shall wait here for you."

A slight shiver ran through Brixton's frame as he sat down, rested his
elbows on his knees, and clasped his hands.

"God help me!" he exclaimed, under a sudden impulse, "I've come down
_very_ low, God help me!"

Fred soon returned.

"You prayed for guidance, I suppose?" said Tom, as his friend sat down
beside him.

"I did."

"Well, what is the result?"

"There is no result as yet--except, of course, the calmer state of my
mind, now that I have committed our case into our Father's hands."

"_Your_ Father's, you mean."

"No, I mean _our_, for He is your father as well as mine, whether you
admit it or not.  Jesus has bought you and paid for you, Tom, with His
own blood.  You are not your own."

"Not my own? bought and paid for!" thought Brixton, recalling the scene
in which words of somewhat similar import had been addressed to him.
"Bought and paid for--twice bought!  Body and soul!"  Then, aloud, "And
what are you going to do now, Fred?"

"Going to discuss the situation with you."

"And after you have discussed it, and acted according to our united
wisdom, you will say that you have been guided."

"Just so!  That is exactly what I will say and believe, for `He is
faithful who has promised.'"

"And if you make mistakes and go wrong, you will still hold, I suppose,
that you have been guided?"

"Undoubtedly I will--not guided, indeed, into the mistakes, but guided
to what will be best in the long-run, in spite of them."

"But Fred, how can you call guidance in the wrong direction _right_
guidance?"

"Why, Tom, can you not conceive of a man being guided wrongly as regards
some particular end he has in view, and yet that same guidance being
right, because leading him to something far better which, perhaps, he
has _not_ in view?"

"So that" said Tom, with a sceptical laugh, "whether you go right or go
wrong, you are sure to come right in the end!"

"Just so!  `_All_ things work together for good to them that love God.'"

"Does not that savour of Jesuitism, Fred, which teaches the detestable
doctrine that you may do evil if good is to come of it?"

"Not so, Tom; because I did not understand you to use the word _wrong_
in the sense of _sinful_, but in the sense of erroneous--mistaken.  If I
go in a wrong road, knowing it to be wrong, I sin; but if I go in a
wrong road mistakenly, I still count on guidance, though not perhaps to
the particular end at which I aimed--nevertheless, guidance to a _good_
end.  Surely you will admit that no man is perfect?"

"Admitted."

"Well, then, imperfection implies mistaken views and ill-directed
action, more or less, in every one, so that if we cannot claim to be
guided by God except when free from error in thought and act, then there
is no such thing as Divine guidance at all.  Surely you don't hold
that!"

"Some have held it."

"Yes; `the fool hath said in his heart, There is no God,'--some have
even gone the length of letting it out of the heart and past the lips.
With such we cannot argue; their case admits only of pity and prayer."

"I agree with you there, Fred; but if your views are not Jesuitical,
they seem to me to be strongly fatalistic.  Commit one's way to God, you
say; then, shut one's eyes, drive ahead anyhow, and--the end will be
sure to be all right!"

"No, I did not say that.  With the exception of the first sentence, Tom,
that is your way of stating the case, not God's way.  If you ask in any
given difficulty, `What shall I do?'  His word replies, `Commit thy way
unto the Lord.  Trust also in Him, and He will bring it to pass.'  If
you ask, `How am I to know what is best?' the Word again replies, `hear,
ye deaf; look, ye blind, that you may see.'  Surely that is the reverse
of shutting the eyes, isn't it?  If you say, `how shall I act?' the Word
answers, `A good man will guide his affairs with discretion.'  That's
not driving ahead anyhow, is it?"

"You may be right," returned Tom, "I hope you are.  But, come, what does
your wisdom suggest in the present difficulty?"

"The first thing that occurs to me," replied the other, "is what
Flinders said, just before we were ordered off by the robbers.  `Keep
round by Bevan's Gully,' he said, in the midst of his serio-comic
leave-taking; and again he said, `Bevan's Gully--sharp!'  Of course
Paddy, with his jokes and stammering, has been acting a part all through
this business, and I am convinced that he has heard something about
Bevan's Gully; perhaps an attack on Bevan himself, which made him wish
to tell us to go there."

"Of course; how stupid of me not to see that before!  Let's go at once!"
cried Tom, starting up in excitement.  "Undoubtedly he meant that.  He
must have overheard the villains talk of going there, and we may not be
in time to aid them unless we push on."

"But in what direction does the gully lie?" asked Fred, with a puzzled
