risk in getting the man into it, on account of the strong tide and sea
on at the time.

So it would appear that the spirit of the far-famed Grace Darling has
not yet departed from the land!

If heroism consists in boldly facing and successfully overcoming dangers
of the most appalling nature, then I hold that thousands of our men of
the coast--from Shetland to the Land's End--stand as high as do those
among our soldiers and sailors who wear the Victoria Cross.  Let us
consider an example.

On that night in which the Royal Charter went down, there was a Maltese
sailor on board named Joseph Rodgers, who volunteered to swim ashore
with a rope.  Those who have seen the effect of a raging sea even on a
smooth beach, know that the power of the falling waves is terrible, and
their retreating force so great that the most powerful swimmers
occasionally perish in them.  But the coast to which Rodgers volunteered
to swim was an almost perpendicular cliff.

I write as an eye-witness, reader, for I saw the cliff myself, a few
days after the wreck took place, when I went down to that dreary coast
of Anglesea to identify the bodies of lost kindred.  Ay, and at that
time I also saw something of the awful aspect of loss by shipwreck.  I
went into the little church at Llanalgo, where upwards of thirty bodies
lay upon the floor--still in their wet garments, just as they had been
laid down by those who had brought them from the shore.  As I entered
that church one body lay directly in my path.  It was that of a young
sailor.  Strange to say, his cheeks were still ruddy as though he had
been alive, and his lips were tightly compressed--I could not help
fancying--with the force of the last strong effort he had made to keep
out the deadly sea.  Just beyond him lay a woman, and beside her a
little child, in their ordinary walking-dresses, as if they had lain
down there and fallen asleep side by side.  I had to step across these
silent forms, as they lay, some in the full light of the windows, others
in darkened corners of the little church, and to gaze earnestly into
their dead faces for the lineaments of those whom I had gone to find--
but I did not find them there.  Their bodies were washed ashore some
days afterwards.  A few of those who lay on that floor were covered to
hide the mutilation they had received when being driven on the cruel
rocks.  Altogether it was an awful sight--well fitted to draw forth the
prayer, "God help and bless those daring men who are willing to risk
their lives at any moment all the year round, to save men and women and
little ones from such a fate as this!"

But, to return to Joseph Rodgers.  The cliff to which he volunteered to
swim was thundered on by seas raised by one of the fiercest gales that
ever visited our shores.  It was dark, too, and broken spars and pieces
of wreck tossing about increased the danger; while the water was cold
enough to chill the life-blood in the stoutest frame.  No one knew
better than Rodgers the extreme danger of the attempt, yet he plunged
into the sea with a rope round his waist.  Had his motive been
self-preservation he could have gained the shore more easily without a
rope; but his motive was not selfish--it was truly generous.  He reached
the land, hauled a cable ashore, made it fast to a rock, and began to
rescue the crew, and I have no doubt that every soul in that vessel
would have been saved if she had not suddenly split across and sunk.
Four hundred and fifty-five lives were lost, but before the catastrophe
took place _thirty-nine_ lives were saved by the heroism of that Maltese
sailor.  The Lifeboat Institution awarded its gold medal, with its vote
of thanks inscribed on vellum, and 5 pounds, to Rodgers, in
acknowledgment of his noble conduct.

All round the kingdom the men are, as a rule, eager to man our
lifeboats.  Usually there is a _rush_ to the work; and as the men get
only ten shillings per man in the daytime, and twenty shillings at
night, on each occasion of going off, it can scarcely be supposed that
they do it only for the sake of the pay!  True, those payments are
increased on occasions of unusual risk or exposure; nevertheless, I
believe that a worthier motive animates our men of the coast.  I do not
say, or think, that religious feeling is the cause of their heroism.
With some, doubtless, it is; with others it probably is not; but I
sincerely believe that the _Word of God_--permeating as it does our
whole community, and influencing these men either directly or
indirectly--is the cause of their self-sacrificing courage, as it is
unquestionably the cause of our national prosperity.



CHAPTER SIX.

SUPPLIES A FEW POINTS FOR CONSIDERATION.

I have now somewhat to say about the Royal National Lifeboat
Institution, which has the entire management and control of our fleet of
273 lifeboats.  That Institution has had a glorious history.  It was
founded by Sir William Hillary, Baronet--a man who deserves a monument
in Westminster Abbey, I think; for, besides originating the Lifeboat
Institution, he saved, and assisted in saving, 305 lives, with his own
hands!

Born in 1824, the Institution has been the means of saving no fewer than
29,608 lives up to the end of 1882.

At its birth the Archbishop of Canterbury presided; the great
Wilberforce, Lord John Russell, and other magnates were present; the
Dukes of Kent, Sussex, and other members of the Royal family, became
vice-patrons, the Earl of Liverpool its president, and George the Fourth
its patron.  In 1850 good Prince Albert became its vice-patron, and her
Majesty the Queen became, and still continues, a warm supporter and
annual contributor.  This is a splendid array of names and titles, but
let me urge the reader never to forget that this noble Institution
depends on the public for the adequate discharge of its grand work, for
it is supported almost entirely by voluntary contributions.

The sole object of the Institution is to provide and maintain boats that
shall save the lives of shipwrecked persons, and to reward those who
save lives, whether by means of its own or other boats.  The grandeur of
its aim and singleness of its purpose are among its great
recommendations.

When, however, life does not require to be saved, and when opportunity
offers, it allows its boats to save property.

It saves--and rewards those who assist in saving--many hundreds of lives
every year.  Last year (1882) the number saved by lifeboats was 741,
besides 143 lives saved by shore-boats and other means, for which
rewards were given by the Institution; making a grand total of 884 lives
saved in that one year.  The number each year is often larger, seldom
less.  One year (1869) the rescued lives amounted to the grand number of
1231, and in the greater number of cases the rescues were effected in
circumstances in which ordinary boats would have been utterly useless--
worse than useless, for they would have drowned their crews.  In respect
of this matter the value of the lifeboat to the nation cannot be
estimated--at least, not until we invent some sort of spiritual
arithmetic whereby we may calculate the price of widows' and orphans'
tears, and of broken hearts!

But in regard to more material things it is possible to speak
definitely.

It frequently happens in stormy weather that vessels show signals of
distress, either because they are so badly strained as to be in a
sinking condition, or so damaged that they are unmanageable, or the
crews have become so exhausted as to be no longer capable of working for
their own preservation.  In all such cases the lifeboat puts off with
the intention in the first instance of saving life.  It reaches the
vessel in distress; some of the boat's crew spring on board, and find,
perhaps, that there is some hope of saving the ship.  Knowing the
locality well, they steer her clear of rocks and shoals.  Being
comparatively fresh and vigorous, they work the pumps with a will,
manage to keep her afloat, and finally steer her into port, thus saving
ship and cargo as well as crew.

Now let me impress on you that incidents of this sort are not of rare
occurrence.  There is no play of fancy in my statements; they happen
every year.  Last year (1882) twenty-three vessels were thus saved by
lifeboat crews.  Another year thirty-three, another year fifty-three,
ships were thus saved.  As surely and regularly as the year comes round,
so surely and regularly are ships and property saved by lifeboats--saved
_to the nation_!  It cannot be too forcibly pointed out that a wrecked
ship is not only an individual, but a national loss.  Insurance protects
the individual, but insurance cannot, in the nature of things, protect
the nation.  If you drop a thousand sovereigns in the street, that is a
loss to you, but not to the nation; some lucky individual will find the
money and circulate it.  But if you drop it into the sea, it is lost not
only to you, but to the nation, indeed to the world itself, for ever,--
of course taking for granted that our amphibious divers don't fish it up
again!

Well, let us gauge the value of our lifeboats in this light.  If a
lifeboat saves a ship worth ten or twenty thousand sovereigns from
destruction, it presents that sum literally as a free gift to owners
_and_ nation.  A free gift, I repeat, because lifeboats are provided
solely to save life--not property.  Saving the latter is, therefore,
extraneous service.  Of course it would be too much to expect our
gallant boatmen to volunteer to work the lifeboats, in the worst of
weather, at the imminent risk of their lives, unless they were also
allowed an occasional chance of earning salvage.  Accordingly, when they
save a ship worth, say 20,000 pounds, they are entitled to put in a
claim on the owners for 200 pounds salvage.  This sum would be divided
(after deducting all expenses, such as payments to helpers, hire of
horses, etcetera) between the men and the boat.  Thus--deduct, say, 20
pounds expenses leaves 180 pounds to divide into fifteen shares; the
crew numbering thirteen men:--

+==================================+==========+
|13 shares to men at 12 pounds each|156 pounds|
+----------------------------------+----------+
|2 shares to boat                  |24 pounds |
+----------------------------------+----------+
|Total                             |180 pounds|
+==================================+==========+

Let us now consider the value of loaded ships.

Not very long ago a large Spanish ship was saved by one of our
lifeboats.  She had grounded on a bank off the south coast of Ireland.
The captain and crew forsook her and escaped to land in their boats.
One man, however, was inadvertently left on board.  Soon after, the wind
shifted; the ship slipped off the bank into deep water, and drifted to
the northward.  Her doom appeared to be fixed, but the crew of the
Cahore lifeboat observed her, launched their boat, and, after a long
pull against wind and sea, boarded the ship and found her with seven
feet of water in the hold.  The duty of the boat's crew was to save the
Spanish sailor, but they did more, they worked the pumps and trimmed the
sails and saved the ship as well, and handed her over to an agent for
the owners.  This vessel and cargo was valued at 20,000 pounds.

Now observe, in passing, that this Cahore lifeboat not only did much
good, but received considerable and well-merited benefit, each man
receiving 34 pounds from the grateful owners, who also presented 68
pounds to the Institution, in consideration of the risk of damage
incurred to their boat.  No doubt it may be objected that this, being a
foreign ship, was not saved to _our_ nation; but, as the proverb says,
"It is not lost what a friend gets," and I think it is very satisfactory
to reflect that we presented the handsome sum of 20,000 pounds to Spain
as a free gift on that occasion.

This was a saved ship.  Let us look now at a lost one.  Some years ago a
ship named the Golden Age was lost.  It was well named though ill-fated,
for the value of that ship and cargo was 200,000 pounds.  The cost of a
lifeboat with equipment and transporting carriage complete is about 650
pounds, and there are 273 lifeboats at present on the shores of the
United Kingdom.  Here is material for a calculation!  If that single
ship had been among the twenty-seven saved last year (and it _might_
have been) the sum thus rescued from the sea would have been sufficient
to pay for all the lifeboats in the kingdom, and leave 22,550 pounds in
hand!  But it was _not_ among the saved.  It was lost--a dead loss to
Great Britain.  So was the Ontario of Liverpool, wrecked in October,
1864, and valued at 100,000 pounds.  Also the Assage, wrecked on the
Irish coast, and valued at 200,000 pounds.  Here are five hundred
thousand pounds--half a million of money--lost by the wreck of these
three ships alone.  Of course, these three are selected as specimens of
the most valuable vessels lost among the two thousand wrecks that take
place _each year_ on our coasts; they vary from a first-rate mail
steamer to a coal coffin, but set them down at any figure you please,
and it will still remain true that it would be worth our while to keep
up our lifeboat fleet, for the mere chance of saving such valuable
property.

But after all is said that can be said on this point, the subject sinks
into insignificance when contrasted with the lifeboat's true work--the
saving of human lives.

There is yet another and still higher sense in which the lifeboat is of
immense value to the nation.  I refer to the moral influence it
exercises among us.  If many hundreds of lives are annually saved by our
lifeboat fleet, does it not follow, as a necessary consequence, that
happiness and gratitude must affect thousands of hearts in a way that
cannot fail to redound to the glory of God, as well as the good of man?
Let facts answer this question.

We cannot of course, intrude on the privacy of human hearts and tell
what goes on there, but there are a few outward symptoms that are
generally accepted as pretty fair tests of spiritual condition.  One of
these is parting with money!  Looking at the matter in this light, the
records of the Institution show that thousands of men, women, and
children, are beneficially influenced by the lifeboat cause.

The highest contributor to its funds in the land is our Queen; the
lowliest a sailor's orphan child.  Here are a few of the gifts to the
Institution, culled almost at random from the Reports.  One gentleman
leaves it a legacy of 10,000 pounds.  Some time ago a sum of 5000 pounds
was sent anonymously by "a friend."  A hundred pounds comes in as a
_second_ donation from "a sailor's daughter."  Fifty pounds come from a
British admiral, and five shillings from "the savings of a child!"
One-and-sixpence is sent by another child in postage-stamps, and 1 pound
5 shillings as the collection of a Sunday school in Manchester; 15
pounds from three fellow-servants; 10 pounds from a shipwrecked pilot,
and 10 shillings, 6 pence from an "old salt."  I myself had once the
pleasure of receiving twopence for the lifeboat cause from an
exceedingly poor but enthusiastic old woman!  But my most interesting
experience in this way was the receipt of a note written by a blind
boy--well and legibly written, too--telling me that he had raised the
sum of 100 pounds for the Lifeboat Institution.

And this beneficial influence of our lifeboat service travels far beyond
our own shores.  Here is evidence of that.  Finland sends 50 pounds to
our Institution to testify its appreciation of the good done by us to
its sailors.  President Lincoln, of the United States, when involved in
all the anxieties of the great war between North and South, found time
to send 100 pounds to the Institution in acknowledgment of services
rendered to American ships in distress.  Russia and Holland send naval
men to inspect--not our armaments and _materiel_ of hateful war, but--
our lifeboat management!  France, in generous emulation, starts a
