
But to return from this digression.  I was much struck with the splendid
contrast of colours that met my eye everywhere here.  The rich variety
of greens in the different trees harmonised with the bright pink plums
and scarlet berries, and these latter were almost dimmed in their lustre
by the bright plumage of the birds, which I felt intense longing to
procure, many of them being quite new to me, and, I am certain, totally
unknown to naturalists, while others I recognised with delight as
belonging to several of the species of which I had read in
ornithological works.  I tried hard to shoot several of these lovely
creatures, intending to stuff them, but, to my regret, was utterly
unable to hit them.  Seeing this, Peterkin took pity on me, and sitting
down in the bow of our canoe, picked off all the birds I pointed out to
him as we passed, with unerring precision.  Most of them fell into the
water, and were easily secured, while one or two toppled off the
branches into the canoe.  Several of them he shot on the wing--a feat
which even filled Jack with surprise, and so astounded the natives that
they surrounded our canoe at last, and gazed open-mouthed at my friend,
whom they evidently regarded as the greatest fetishman that had ever
come amongst them.

He was obliged to stop at last and lay down his gun in order to make the
natives cease from crowding round us and delaying our voyage.  A number
of iguanas were observed on the branches of the trees that overhung the
stream.  They dropped into the water as we approached; but the natives
succeeded in spearing a good many, and I afterwards found that they
considered them excellent food.

If I was charmed with the birds, Peterkin was no less delighted with the
monkeys that chattered at us as we passed along.  I never saw a man
laugh as he did that day.  He almost became hysterical, so much was he
tickled with their antics; and the natives, who have a keen sense of the
ludicrous, seemed quite to sympathise with his spirit, although, of
course, what amused him could not have similarly affected them, seeing
that they were used to monkeys from infancy.

"There's something new!" exclaimed Jack, as we rounded a bend in the
river and came in view of an open flat where it assumed somewhat the
aspect of a pond or small lake.  He pointed to a flock of birds standing
on a low rock, which I instantly recognised to be pelicans.

"Surely," said I, "pelicans are not new to you!"

"Certainly not; but if you look a little more attentively, I think you
will find material for your note-book."

Jack was right.  I observed a very fine fish-hawk circling over the head
of one of the pelicans.  Its head and neck were white, and its body was
of a reddish chocolate colour.  Just as we came in sight, the pelican
caught a fine fish, which it stowed away safe in the pouch under its
chin.  The sly hawk, which had been watching for this, immediately made
a descent towards its victim, making a considerable noise with its wings
as it came down.  Hearing this, the pelican looked hastily up, and
supposing that a terrible and deadly assault was about to be made,
opened its mouth and screamed in terror.  This was just what the hawk
wanted.  The open bill revealed the fish in the pouch.  Down he swooped,
snatched it out, and then soared away with his ill-gotten gains in his
talons.

"Oh, what a thief!" exclaimed Peterkin.

"And the pelican seems to take his loss in a remarkably philosophical
manner," observed Jack.

To my surprise the great stupid bird, instead of flying away, as I had
expected, quietly resumed his fishing as if nothing had happened.  No
doubt he was well pleased to find himself still alive, and it is not
improbable that the hawk made several more meals at the expense of his
long-beaked friend after we had passed by.

We soon put him to flight, however, by landing near the spot where he
stood, this being the place where we were to quit our canoes and pass
through the jungle on foot.  The hunters now prepared themselves for
action, for the recent tracks of elephants were seen on the bank of the
stream, and the natives said they could not be far off.  Jack and
Peterkin were armed with immensely heavy rifles, which carried balls of
the weight of six-ounces.  I carried my trusty, double-barrelled
fowling-piece, which is of the largest size, and which I preferred to a
rifle, because, not being a good shot, I resolved, on all occasions, to
reserve my fire until we should come to close quarters with game,
leaving my more expert comrades to take the longer shots.  We had also
two natives--one being our guide, Makarooroo, who carried Jack and
Peterkin's double-barrelled guns as a reserve.  These were loaded, of
course, with ball.

"This looks something like business," said Jack, as he leaned on his
heavy rifle and looked at the natives, who were selecting their spears
and otherwise making preparations.

"It does," replied Peterkin.  "Are you loaded?"

"Ay, and I have just examined the caps to see that they are dry; for
it's not like grouse-shooting on the Scottish hills this African
hunting, depend upon it.  A snapping cap might cost us our lives,--
Ralph, my boy, you must keep well in rear.  I don't want to hurt your
feelings, but it won't do to go in front when you cannot depend on your
nerves."

I experienced a feeling of sadness not unmingled with shame as my friend
said this, but I could not question the justness of his remark, and I
knew well that he would not have made it at all, but for his anxiety
lest I should run recklessly into danger, which I might find myself,
when too late, unable to cope with.  I was careful, however, to conceal
my feelings as I replied with a smile--

"You are right, Jack.  I shall act the part of a support, while you and
Peterkin skirmish in advance."

"And be careful," said Peterkin, solemnly, "that you don't fire into us
by mistake."

Somewhat of Peterkin's own spirit came over me as I replied, "Indeed, I
have been thinking of that, and I'm not sure that I can restrain myself
when I see a chimpanzee monkey and a gorilla walking through the woods
before me."

"I think we'd better take his gun from him," suggested Jack.

At this moment the king gave the signal to advance, so we shouldered our
weapons and joined him.  As we walked rapidly along, Jack suggested that
we should allow the natives to kill any elephants we might fall in with
in their own way, so as to observe how they managed it, rather than try
to push ourselves forward on this our first expedition.  We all agreed
to this, and shortly after we came to the place which elephants were
known to frequent.

Here great preparations had evidently been made for them.  A space of
more than a mile was partially enclosed by what might be termed a vine
wall.  The huge, thorny, creeping vines had been torn down from the
trees and woven into a rude sort of network, through which it was almost
impossible for any animal except an elephant to break.  This was
intended--not to stop the elephant altogether, but to entangle and
retard him in his flight, until the hunters could kill him with their
spears.  The work, we were given to understand, was attended with
considerable danger, for some of the natives were occasionally caught by
the thorny vines when flying from the charge of the infuriated animal,
and were instantly stamped to death by his ponderous feet.

I felt a new and powerful excitement creep over me as I saw the natives
extend themselves in a wide semicircle of nearly two miles in extent,
and begin to advance with loud shouts and cries, in order to drive the
game towards the vines, and the flashing eyes and compressed lips of my
two companions showed that they were similarly affected.  We determined
to keep together and follow close on that part of the line where the
king was.

"You no be 'fraid?" said Makarooroo, looking down at Peterkin, who, he
evidently supposed, was neither mentally nor physically adapted for an
African hunter.

Peterkin was so tickled with the question that he suddenly began to
tremble like an aspen leaf, and to chatter with his teeth and display
all the symptoms of abject terror.  Pointing over Makarooroo's shoulder
into the bush behind him, he gasped, "The leopard!"

The negro uttered a hideous yell, and springing nearly his own height
into the air, darted behind a tree with the agility of a wild-cat.

Instantly Peterkin resumed his composure, and turning round with a look
of cool surprise, said--

"What! you're not afraid, Makarooroo?"  The good-humoured fellow burst
into a loud laugh on perceiving the practical joke that had been passed
on him, and it was evident that the incident, trifling though it was,
had suddenly raised his estimation of Peterkin to a very exalted pitch.

We now began to draw near to the enclosure, and I was beginning to fear
that our hunt was to prove unsuccessful that day.  A considerable
quantity of small game had passed us, alarmed by the cries of the
natives; but we purposely withheld our fire, although I saw that Jack
was sorely tempted once or twice, when several beautiful gazelles and
one or two wild pigs ran past within shot.  Presently we heard a shrill
trumpeting sound, which Peterkin, who had hunted in the forests of
Ceylon, told us, in an excited voice, was the cry of the elephant.  We
hastened forward with our utmost speed, when suddenly we were brought to
a stand by hearing a tremendous roar close in front of us.  Immediately
after, a large male lion bounded from among the bushes, and with one
stroke of his enormous paw struck down a negro who stood not twenty
yards from us.  The terrible brute stood for an instant or two, lashing
his sides with his tail and glaring defiance.  It chanced that I
happened to be nearest to him, and that the position of the tangled
underwood prevented my companions from taking good aim; so without
waiting for them, being anxious to save, if possible, the life of the
prostrate negro, I fired both barrels into the lion's side.  Giving
utterance to another terrible roar, he bounded away into the bush,
scattering the negroes who came in his way, and made his escape, to our
great disappointment.

We found, to our horror, on going up to the fallen hunter, that he was
quite dead.  His skull had been literally smashed in, as if it had
received a blow from a sledge-hammer.

I cannot describe my feelings on beholding thus, for the first time, the
king of beasts in all the savage majesty of strength and freedom,
coupled with the terrible death of a human being.  My brain was in a
whirl of excitement; I scarce knew what I was doing.  But I had no time
to think, for almost immediately after firing the shots at the lion, two
elephants came crashing through the bushes.  One was between ten and
eleven feet high, the other could not have been less than twelve feet.
I had never seen anything like this in the menageries of England, and
their appearance, as they burst thus suddenly on my vision, was
something absolutely appalling.

Those who have only seen the comparatively small and sluggish animals
that are wont to ring their bells to attract attention, and to feed on
gingerbread nuts from the hands of little boys, can form no idea of the
terrible appearance of the gigantic monsters of Africa as they go
tearing in mad fury through the forests with their enormous ears, and
tails, and trunks erect, their ponderous tusks glistening in the
sunshine, and their wicked little eyes flashing like balls of fire as
they knock down, rend asunder, and overturn all that comes in their way.

The two that now approached us in full career were flying before a crowd
of negroes who had already fixed a number of spears in their sides, from
which the blood was flowing copiously.  To say that the bushes went down
before them like grass would not give a correct idea of the ponderous
rush of these creatures.  Trees of three and four inches diameter were
run against and snapped off like twigs, without proving in any degree
obstructive.

By this time the negroes had crowded in from all sides, and as the
elephants approached the place where we stood, a perfect cloud of spears
and javelins descended on their devoted sides.  I observed that many of
the active natives had leaped up into the trees and discharged their
spears from above, while others, crouching behind fallen trees or
bushes, threw them from below, so that in a few seconds dozens of spears
entered their bodies at every conceivable angle, and they appeared as if
suddenly transformed into monstrous porcupines or hedgehogs.  There was
something almost ludicrous in this, but the magnitude and aspect of the
animals were too terrible, and our danger was too imminent, to permit
anything like comic ideas to enter our brains.  I observed, too, that
the natives were perfectly wild with excitement.  Their black faces
worked convulsively, and their white eyes and teeth glittered as they
leaped and darted about in a state of almost perfect nudity, so that
their aspect was quite demoniacal.

The suddenness and violence of the attack made near to us had the effect
of turning the elephants aside, and the next instant they were tearing
and wrenching themselves through the meshes of the tough and thorny
vines.  The natives closed in with wild cries and with redoubled energy.
Nothing surprised me so much as to observe the incredible number of
spears that were sticking all over these creatures, and the amount of
blood that they lost, without any apparent diminution of strength
resulting.  It seemed as if no human power could kill them, and at that
moment I almost doubted Peterkin's assertion that he had, while in
Ceylon, actually killed elephants with a single ball.

While Jack and Peterkin and I were gazing in deep interest and surprise
at the curious struggle going on before us, and holding ourselves in
readiness to act, should there be any chance of our game escaping, the
larger of the two elephants succeeded in disentangling himself by
backing out of the snare.  He then wheeled round and charged straight at
King Jambai, who stood close to us, with incredible fury.  The beast, as
it came on with the bristling spears all over it, the blood spirting
from its innumerable wounds, and trumpeting shrill with rage, seemed to
me like some huge unearthly phantom.  It was with difficulty I could
believe the whole scene other than a hideous dream.  Jambai launched his
javelin into the animal's chest, and then turned and fled.  The other
natives also darted and scattered hither and thither, so that the
elephant could not make up its mind on which of its enemies to wreak its
vengeance.  We, too, turned and took to our heels at once with right
good will.  All at once I heard Jack utter a wild shout or yell, very
unlike to anything I ever heard from him before.  I looked back, and saw
that his foot had got entangled in a thorny shrub, and that the elephant
was making at him.

To this day I have never been able to account for the remarkable
condition of mind and body that ensued on this occasion.  Instead of
being paralysed as I had been when Peterkin was in imminent danger, all
sensation of fear or hesitancy seemed to vanish on thine instant.  I
felt my nerves and muscles strung, as it were, and rendered firm as a
rock, and with calm deliberation, yet with the utmost rapidity of which
I was capable, I turned round, sprang between Jack and the enraged
beast, and presented my piece at his head.

"Right in the centre of his forehead," gasped Jack, as he endeavoured to
wrench his foot from the entanglement.

At that moment I observed Peterkin leap to my side; the next instant the
report of both our guns rang through the woods; the elephant bounded
completely over Jack, as Peterkin and I leaped to either side to let it
pass, and fell to the ground with such violence that a tree about six
inches thick, against which it struck, went down before it like a willow
wand.

We immediately assisted Jack to extricate himself; but we had no time to
congratulate ourselves on our narrow escape, for mingled shouts and
yells from the men in the bushes ahead apprised us that some new danger
menaced them in that direction.

Reloading as fast as we could, we hastened forward, and soon gained the
new scene of battle.  Here stood the other elephant, trying to break
down a small tree up which King Jambai had climbed, partly for safety
and partly in order to dart a javelin down on the brute as it passed.

This was a common custom of the natives; but the king, who was a bold,
reckless man, had neglected to take the very necessary precaution of
selecting a strong tree.  The elephant seemed actually to have observed
this, for instead of passing on, it suddenly rushed headlong against the
tree and began to break it down.  When we came up the beast was heaving
and straining with all its might, the stout tree was cracking and
rending fearfully, so that the king could scarcely retain his position
on it.  The natives were plying their spears with the utmost vigour; but
although mortally wounded, it was evident that in a few more seconds the
elephant would succeed in throwing down the tree and trample the king to
death.

Peterkin instantly sprang forward, but Jack laid his hand on his
shoulder.

"It's my turn this time, lad," he cried, and leaping towards the
monster, he placed the muzzle of his rifle close to its shoulder and
sent a six-ounce ball right through its heart.

The effect was instantaneous.  The elephant fell to the ground, a
mountain of dead flesh.

The delight of the negroes at this happy termination of the battle was
excessive.  They leaped and laughed and danced like insane men, and we
had much ado to prevent them seizing us in their arms and rubbing noses
with us.

As we had not commenced the hunt until well on in the day, evening was
now closing in; so the king gave orders to encamp on a dry rising ground
not far distant, where the jungle was less dense, and thither we all
repaired, the natives bringing in all the game, and cutting up the
elephants in a very short space of time.

"Your shot was not such a bad one this time, Ralph," observed Peterkin,
as we three stood looking at the large elephant which the natives were
cutting up.  "There they are, just above the proboscis.  But let me warn
you never again to venture on such a foolhardy thing as to fire in the
face of a charging elephant unless you are a dead shot."

"Thank you, Peterkin, for your advice, which, however, I will not take
when a comrade's life may depend on my doing so."

"I give you full credit for the excellence of your intention," rejoined
my friend; "but if Jack's life had depended on those two shots from your
double-barrel, he would have been but a dead man now.  There is only one
vulnerable spot in the front of an elephant's head; that is, exactly in
the centre of the forehead.  The spot is not bigger than a saucer, and
the bone is comparatively thin there.  If you cannot make _sure_ of
hitting that, you simply face certain death.  I would not have tried it
on any account whatever, had I not seen that both you and Jack would
have been killed had I not done so."

