
Disco had an easy way of changing a subject when he felt that he was
getting out of his depth.

"Well, to return to that.  The fact is, I would not mind the men, for
it's likely that men of some sort will turn up somewhere, but I am very
anxious about an interpreter.  Without an interpreter we shall get on
badly, I fear, for I can only speak French, besides a very little Latin
and Greek, none of which languages will avail much among niggers."

Disco assumed a severely thoughtful expression of countenance.

"That's true," he said, placing his right fist argumentatively in his
left palm, "and I'm afeard I can't help you there, sir.  If it wos to
steer a ship or pull a oar or man the fore-tops'l yard in a gale o'
wind, or anything else in the seafarin' line, Disco Lillihammer's your
man, but I couldn't come a furrin' lingo at no price.  I knows nothin'
but my mother tongue,--nevertheless, though I says it that shouldn't, I
does profess to be somewhat of a dab at that.  Once upon a time I spent
six weeks in Dublin, an' havin' a quick ear for moosic, I soon managed
to get up a strong dash o' the brogue; but p'raps that wouldn't go far
with the niggers."

About two hours after the above conversation, while Harold Seadrift was
walking on the beach, he observed his faithful ally in the distance
grasping a short thickset man by the arm, and endeavouring to induce him
to accompany him, with a degree of energy that fell little short of main
force.  The man was evidently unwilling.

As the pair drew nearer, Harold overheard Disco's persuasive
voice:--"Come now, Antonio, don't be a fool; it's the best service you
could enter.  Good pay and hard work, and all the grub that's goin'--
what could a man want more?  It's true there's no grog, but we don't
need that in a climate where you've only got to go out in the sun
without yer hat an' you'll be as good as drunk in ten minutes, any day."

"No, no, not possibil," remonstrated the man, whose swarthy visage
betrayed a mixture of cunning, fun, and annoyance.  He was obviously a
half-caste of the lowest type, but with more pretensions to wealth than
many of his fellows, inasmuch as he wore, besides his loin-cloth, a
white cotton shooting-coat, very much soiled, beneath the tails of which
his thin black legs protruded ridiculously.

"Here you are, sir," cried Disco, as he came up; "here's the man for
lingo: knows the native talkee, as well as Portuguese, English, Arabic,
and anything else you like, as far as I know.  Antonio's his name.
Come, sir, try him with Greek, or somethin' o' that sort!"

Harold had much ado to restrain a smile, but, assuming a grave aspect,
he addressed the man in French, while Disco listened with a look of
profound respect and admiration.

"W'y, wot's wrong with 'ee, man," exclaimed Disco, on observing the
blank look of Antonio's countenance; "don't 'ee savay that?"

"I thought you understood Portuguese?" said Harold in English.

"So me do," replied Antonio quickly; "but dat no Portigeese--dat
Spanaish, me 'spose."

"What _can_ you speak, then?" demanded Harold sternly.

"Portigeese, Arbik, Fengleesh, an' two, tree, four, nigger lungwiches."

It was very obvious that, whatever Antonio spoke, he spoke nothing
correctly, but that was of no importance so long as the man could make
himself understood.  Harold therefore asked if he would join his party
as interpreter, but Antonio shook his head.

"Why not man--why not?" asked Harold impatiently, for he became anxious
to secure him, just in proportion as he evinced disinclination to
engage.

"Speak up, Antonio, don't be ashamed; you've no need to," said Disco.
"The fact is, sir, Antonio tells me that he has just bin married, an' he
don't want to leave his wife."

"Very natural," observed Harold.  "How long is it since you were
married?"

"Von veek since I did bought her."

"Bought her!" exclaimed Disco, with a broad grin; "may I ax wot ye paid
for her?"

"Paid!" exclaimed the man, starting and opening his eyes very wide, as
if the contemplation of the vast sum were too much for him; "lat me
zee--me pay me vife's pairyints sixteen yard ob cottin clothe, an' for
me's hut four yard morer."

"Ye don't say that?" exclaimed Disco, with an extended grin.  "Is she
young an' good-lookin'?"

"Yonge!" replied Antonio; "yis, ver' yonge; not mush more dan baby, an'
exiquitely bootiful."

"Then, my good feller," said Disco, with a laugh, "the sooner you leave
her the better.  A week is a long time, an' absence, you know, as the
old song says, makes the heart grow fonder; besides, Mr Seadrift will
give you enough to buy a dozen wives, if 'ee want 'em."

"Yes, I'll pay you well," said Harold; "that is, if you prove to be a
good interpreter."

Antonio pricked up his ears at this.

"How mush vill 'oo gif?" he asked.

"Well, let me think; I shall probably be away three or four months.
What would you say, Antonio, to twenty yards of cotton cloth a month,
and a gun into the bargain at the end, if you do your work well?"

The pleased expression of Antonio's face could not have been greater had
he been offered twenty pounds sterling a month.  The reader may estimate
the value of this magnificent offer when we say that a yard of cotton
cloth was at that time sevenpence-halfpenny, so that Antonio's valuable
services were obtained for about 12 shillings, 6 pence a month, and a
gun which cost Harold less than twenty shillings in Zanzibar.

We may remark here that Antonio afterwards proved to be a stout, able,
willing man, and a faithful servant, although a most arrant coward.

From this time Harold's difficulties in regard to men vanished.  With
Antonio's able assistance nine were procured, stout, young, able-bodied
fellows they were, and all more or less naked.  Two of these were
half-caste brothers, named respectively Jose and Oliveira; two were
half-wild negroes of the Somali tribe named Nakoda and Conda; three were
negroes of the Makololo tribe, who had accompanied Dr Livingstone on
his journey from the far interior of Africa to the East Coast, and were
named respectively Jumbo, Zombo, and Masiko; and finally two, named
Songolo and Mabruki, were free negroes of Quillimane.  Thus the whole
band, including Disco and the leader, formed a goodly company of twelve
stout men.

Of course Harold armed them all with guns and knives.  Himself and Disco
carried Enfield rifles; besides which, Harold took with him a spare
rifle of heavy calibre, carrying large balls, mingled with tin to harden
them.  This latter was intended for large game.  Landing near the East
Luavo mouth of the Zambesi, our hero was fortunate enough to procure two
serviceable canoes, into which he transferred himself, his men, and his
goods, and, bidding adieu to the Arab skipper of the dhow, commenced his
journey into the interior of Africa.



CHAPTER FIVE.

IN WHICH THE TRAVELLERS ENJOY THEMSELVES EXTREMELY, AND DISCO
LILLIHAMMER SEES SEVERAL ASTONISHING SIGHTS.

Behold our travellers, then, fairly embarked on the waters of the great
African river Zambesi, in two canoes, one of which is commanded by
Harold Seadrift, the other by Disco Lillihammer.

Of course these enterprising chiefs were modest enough at first to allow
two of the Makololo men, Jumbo and Zombo, to wield the steering-oars,
but after a few days' practice they became sufficiently expert, as Disco
said, to take the helm, except when strong currents rendered the
navigation difficult, or when the weather became so "piping hot" that
none but men clad in black skins could work.

We must however guard the reader here from supposing that it is always
piping hot in Africa.  There are occasional days when the air may be
styled lukewarm, when the sky is serene, and when all nature seems
joyful and enjoyable,--days in which a man opens his mouth wide and
swallows down the atmosphere; when he _feels_ his health and strength,
and rejoices in them, and when, if he be not an infidel, he also feels a
sensation of gratitude to the Giver of all good.

On such a day, soon after entering the East Luavo mouth of the Zambesi,
the explorers, for such we may almost venture to style them, ascended
the smooth stream close to the left bank, Harold leading, Disco
following closely in his wake.

The men rowed gently, as if they enjoyed the sweet calm of early
morning, and were unwilling to disturb the innumerable flocks of
wild-fowl that chuckled among the reeds and sedges everywhere.  Harold
sat in the stern, leaning back, and only dipping the steering-oar lazily
now and then to keep the canoe from running on the bank, or plunging
into a forest of gigantic rushes.  Disco, having resolved to solace
himself with a whiff of his darling pipe, had resigned "the helm" to
Jumbo, and laid himself in a position of comfort which admitted of his
resting his head on the gunwale in such a manner that, out of the
corners of his eyes, he could gaze down into the water.

The part of the river they had reached was so perfectly still that every
cloud in the sky, every mangrove, root and spray, and every bending
bulrush, was perfectly reproduced in the reflected world below.
Plaintive cries of wild-fowl formed appropriate melody, to which
chattering groups of monkeys and croaking bull-frogs contributed a fine
tenor and bass.

"Hallo, Disco!" exclaimed Harold in a subdued key, looking over his
shoulder.

"Ay, ay, sir?" sighed the seaman, without moving his position.

"Range up alongside; I want to speak to you."

"Ay, ay, sir.--Jumbo, you black-faced villain, d'ee hear that? give way
and go 'longside."

Good-humoured Jumbo _spoke_ very little English, but had come to
understand a good deal during his travels with Dr Livingstone.  He
wrinkled his visage and showed his brilliant teeth on receiving the
order.  Muttering a word to the men, and giving a vigorous stroke, he
shot up alongside of the leader's canoe.

"You seem comfortable," said Harold, with a laugh, as Disco's vast
visage appeared at his elbow.

"I is."

"Isn't this jolly?" continued Harold.

"No, sir, 'taint."

"Why, what d'you mean?"

"I means that jolly ain't the word, by a long way, for to express the
natur' o' my feelin's.  There ain't no word as I knows on as 'ud come up
to it.  If I wor a fylosipher, now, I'd coin a word for the occasion.
P'raps," continued Disco, drawing an unusually long whiff from his pipe,
"p'raps, not bein' a fylosipher, I might nevertheless try to coin one.
Wot's the Latin, now, for heaven?"

"Caelum," replied Harold.

"Sailum, eh?  An' wot's the 'arth?"

"Terra."

"Terra? well now, wot rediklous names to give to 'em," said Disco,
shaking his head gravely, "I can't see why the ancients couldn't ha' bin
satisfied with the names that _we'd_ given 'em.  Hows'ever, that's
neither here nor there.  My notion o' the state o' things that we've got
into here, as they now stand, is, that they are sailumterracious, which
means heaven-upon-earth, d'ee see?"

As Disco pronounced the word with a powerful emphasis on the _u-m_ part
of it the sound was rather effective, and seemed to please him.

"Right; you're right, or nearly so," replied Harold; "but don't you
think the word savours too much of perfection, seeing that breakfast
would add to the pleasure of the present delightful state of things, and
make them even more sailumterracious than they are?"

"No, sir, no; the word ain't too parfect," replied Disco, with a look of
critical severity; "part of it is 'arth, and 'arth is imparfect, bein'
susceptible of a many improvements, among which undoubtedly is
breakfast, likewise dinner an' supper, to say nothin' of lunch an' tea,
which is suitable only for babbies an' wimen; so I agrees with you, sir,
that the state o' things will be sailumterraciouser if we goes ashore
an' has breakfast."

He tapped the head of his very black little pipe on the edge of the
canoe, and heaved a sigh of contentment as he watched the ash-ball that
floated away on the stream; then, rousing himself, he seized the
steering-oar and followed Harold into a small creek, which was
pleasantly overshadowed by the rich tropical foliage of that region.

While breakfast was being prepared by Antonio, whose talents as
_chef-de-cuisine_ were of the highest order, Harold took his rifle and
rambled into the bush in search of game--any kind of game, for at that
time he had had no experience whatever of the sport afforded by the
woods of tropical Africa, and, having gathered only a few vague ideas
from books, he went forth with all the pleasurable excitement and
expectation that we may suppose peculiar to discoverers.

Disco Lillihammer having only consumed his first pipe of tobacco, and
holding it to be a duty which he owed to himself to consume two before
breakfast, remained at the camp-fire to smoke and chaff Antonio, whose
good-nature was only equalled by his activity.

"Wot have 'ee got there?" inquired Disco, as Antonio poured a quantity
of seed into a large pot.

"Dis? vy, hims be mapira," replied the interpreter, with a benignant
smile.  "Hims de cheef food ob dis konterie."

It must be remarked here that Antonio's English, having been acquired
from all sorts of persons, in nearly every tropical part of the globe,
was somewhat of a jumble, being a compound of the broken English spoken
by individuals among the Germans, French, Portuguese, Arabs, and
Negroes, with whom he had at various times associated, modified by his
own ignorance, and seasoned with a dash of his own inventive fancy.

"Is it good?" asked Disco.

"Goot!" exclaimed Antonio.  Being unable to find words to express
himself, the enthusiastic cook placed his hand on the region which was
destined ere long to become a receptacle for the mapira, and rolled his
eyes upwards in rapture.  "Hah! oo sall see behind long."

"Before long, you mean," observed the seaman.

"Dat all same ting, s'long's you onerstand him," replied Antonio
complacently.--"Bring vatter now, Jumbo.  Put him in careful.  Not spill
on de fire--zo--goot."

Jumbo filled up the kettle carefully, and a broad grin overspread his
black visage, partly because he was easily tickled into a condition of
risibility by the cool off-hand remarks of Disco Lillihammer, and partly
because, having acquired his own small smattering of English from Dr
Livingstone, he was intelligent enough to perceive that in regard to
Antonio's language there was something peculiar.

"Now, go fitch noder kittle--queek."

"_Yis_, sar--zo--goot," replied Jumbo, mimicking the interpreter, and
going off with a vociferous laugh at his little joke, in which he was
joined by his sable clansmen, Masiko and Zombo.

"Hims got 'nuff of impoodidence," said the interpreter, as he bustled
about his avocations.

"He's not the only one that's got more than enough impoodidence," said
Disco, pushing a fine straw down the stem of his "cutty," to make it
draw better.  "I say, Tony," (our regardless seaman had already thus
mutilated his name), "you seem to have plenty live stock in them parts."

"Plenty vat?" inquired the interpreter, with a perplexed expression.

"Why, plenty birds and beasts,--live stock we calls it, meanin' thereby
livin' creeturs."  He pointed towards an opening in the mangroves,
through which were visible the neighbouring mud and sand flats, swarming
with wild-fowl, and conspicuous among which were large flocks of
pelicans, who seemed to be gorging themselves comfortably from an
apparently inexhaustible supply of fish in the pools left by the
receding tide.

"Ho, yis, me perceive; yis, plenty bird and beast--fishes too, and
crawbs--look dare."

He pointed to a part of the sands nearest to their encampment which
appeared to be alive with some small creatures.

"That's coorious," said Disco, removing his pipe, and regarding the
phenomenon with some interest.

"No, 'taint koorous, it's crawbs," replied Antonio.

"Crabs, is it?" said Disco, rising and sauntering down to the sands; for
he possessed an inquiring mind, with a special tendency to investigate
the habits (pranks, as he called them) of the lower animals, which, in
other circumstances, might have made him a naturalist.

Muttering to himself--he was fond of muttering to himself, it felt
companionable,--"coorious, very coorious, quite 'stroanary," he crept
stealthily to the edge of the mangroves, and there discovered that the
sands were literally alive with myriads of minute crabs, which were
