each other.  When they meet with strong men with womanlike tenderness
they are puzzled, and puzzlement, we think, goes a long way to shake the
nerves even of the brave.  At all events it is well known that a sudden
burst of wrath from one whose state of temper is usually serene, exerts
a surprising and powerful effect on average mankind.

Whatever be the truth as to these things, it is certain that nearly
every one who looked up at the face of Bladud liked him, and more than
once when his ponderous sword sprang from its sheath, and his blue eyes
flashed, and his fair face flushed, and his magnificent teeth went
together with a snap, he has been known to cause a dozen men to turn and
flee rather than encounter the shock of his onset.

Little Maikar, who was himself as brave as a lion, nearly lost his life
on one occasion, because he was so taken up and charmed with the sight
of one of Bladud's rushes, that he utterly forgot what he was about, and
would have been crushed by the smite of a savage club, if the captain
had not promptly turned aside the blow and struck the club-man down.

"At last!" exclaimed the prince, with a gaze of enthusiasm at the
opposite cliffs, "my native land!  Well do I love it and well do I know
it, for I have stood on this shore and seen it from this very spot when
I was quite a boy."

"Indeed!  How was that?" asked Arkal.

"I used to be fond of the sea, and was wont to travel far from my
father's home to reach it.  I made friends with the fishermen, and used
to go off with them in their little skiffs.  One day a storm arose
suddenly, blew us off shore, and, when we were yet a long distance from
this coast, overturned our skiff.  What became of my companions I know
not.  Probably they were drowned, for I never more saw them; but I swam
ashore, where I think I should have died of exhaustion if I had not been
picked up by an old fisherman of this land, who carried me to his hut
and took care of me.  With the old man I remained several months, for
the fishermen on the two sides of the channel had been quarrelling at
the time, and the old man did not dare to venture across.  I did not
care much, for I enjoyed playing with his grandson, and soon learned
their language.  After a time the quarrelling ceased, and the old man
landed me on my own side."

"That is interesting.  I only wish the old fisherman was here now with
his skiff, for there is no village in sight and no skiff to be seen, so
how we are to get over I cannot tell,--swimming being impossible and
wings out of the question."

"Ay, except in the case of fish and birds," observed Maikar.

"True, and as we are neither fish nor birds," rejoined the captain,
"what is to be done?"

"We must find a skiff," said the prince.

"Good, but where?"

"On the other side of yon bluff cape," replied Bladud.  "It was there
that my friend the old fisherman lived.  Mayhap he may live there
still."

Pushing on along shore they passed the bold cape referred to, and there,
sure enough, they found the old man's hut, and the old man himself was
seated on a boulder outside enjoying the sunshine.

Great was his surprise on seeing the three strangers approach, but
greater was his joy on learning that the biggest of the three was the
boy whom he had succoured many years before.

After the first greetings were over, Bladud asked if he and his friends
could be taken across in a skiff.

The old man shook his head.

"All that I possess," he said, "you are welcome to, but my skiff is not
here, and if it was I am too old to manage it now.  My son, your old
companion, has had it away these two days, and I don't expect him home
till to-morrow.  But you can rest in my poor hut till he comes."

As there seemed nothing better to be done, the travellers agreed to
this.  Next day the son arrived, but was so changed in appearance, that
Bladud would not have recognised his old playmate had not his father
called him by name.

The skiff, although primitive and rude in its construction, was
comparatively large, and a considerable advance on the dug-outs, or
wooden canoes, and the skin coracles of the period.  It had a square or
lug-sail, and was steered by a rudder.

"My son is a strange man," remarked the old fisherman, as the party
sauntered down to the shore, up which the skiff had been dragged.  "He
invented that skiff as well as made it, and the curious little thing
behind that steers it."

"Able and strange men seem to work their minds in the same way,"
returned Bladud; "for the thing is not altogether new.  I have seen
something very like it in the East; and, to my mind, it is a great
improvement on the long oar when the boat is driven through the water,
but it is of no use at all when there is no motion."

"No; neither is it of use when one wishes to sweep round in a hurry,"
observed the captain, when this was translated to him.  "If it had not
been for my steering-oar bringing you sharp round when we were attacking
the pirate, you would hardly have managed to spit the chief as you did,
strong though you be."

It was found that the new style of skiff was a good sailer, for,
although the wind was light, her lug-sail carried her over to the coast
of Albion in about four hours.

"There has been some bad feeling of late between the men from the
islands and the men of our side--there often is," said the young
fisherman, who steered.  "I am not sure that it will be safe to land
here."

"If that be so, hold on close along the shore in the direction of the
setting sun," returned Bladud, "and land us after nightfall.  I know the
whole country well, and can easily guide my comrades through the woods
to my father's town on the great river."

The young fisherman did not reply for a few seconds.  He seemed in doubt
as to this proposal.

"There has been war lately," he said, "between your father and the
southern tribes, and it may be dangerous for so small a party to
traverse the lands of the enemy.  I would gladly go and help you, but
what could one arm more do to aid you against a host?  Besides, my
father is dependent on me now for food.  I may not forsake the old one
who has fed and guarded me since I was a little boy."

"Concern yourself not about that, friend," replied the prince.  "We need
no help.  During many days we have travelled safely enough through the
great woods of the interior, and have held our own against all foes."

"Without doubt we are well able to take care of ourselves," remarked the
captain, "though it is but fair to admit that we have had some trouble
in doing so."

"Ay, and some starvation, too," added Maikar; "but having come safe over
the mainland, we are not afraid to face the dangers of the isles, young
man."

"I said not that you were afraid," rejoined the fisherman, with
something of dignified reproof in his manner; "but it is not disgraceful
for brave men to act with caution."

"Well said, my old comrade!" exclaimed Bladud; "and so we shall be
pleased if you will land us here.  But your speech leads me to
understand that you have had news of my father's doings lately.  Is the
old man well?"

"Ay, King Hudibras is well, and as fond of fighting as ever, besides
being well able for it.  I am not sure that he would be pleased if he
heard you call him the `old man.'"

"Indeed?  Yet nearly fifty winters have passed over his head, and that
is somewhat old for a warrior.  And my mother and sister--have you heard
of them?"

"Excellently well, I believe.  At least, so I have been told by the
Hebrew merchant who came over sea with one of the Phoenician ships, and
wanders over the whole land with his pack of golden ornaments--which so
take the fancy of the women, indeed of the men also.  How the fellow
escapes being robbed on his journeys is more than I can tell.  It is
said that he travels by night and sleeps in caves during the day.  Some
people even think that he is in league with evil spirits.  I doubt that;
but he told me the other day, when I met him on our side of the channel,
that your sister is about to be married to a neighbouring chief--I
forget his name--Gunrig, I think--with whom your father wishes to be on
friendly terms."

"Married!" exclaimed Bladud, with a troubled look.

"Ay, and it is said she does not like the match."

"Does my mother approve of it?"

"I think not, though the Hebrew did not seem to feel quite sure on that
point.  But your father seems resolved on it, and you know he is not
easily turned from his purpose when determined to have his way.  He is
more difficult to move than a woman in that matter."

"Come, friend," said Bladud gravely, "don't be too free in your remarks
on my father."

"And don't be too hard on the women-folk," added the captain, with a
grim smile, "they are not all alike.  At least there is one that I know
of in the East, whose spirit is like that of the lamb, and her voice
like the notes of the songbird."

Maikar looked as if he were on the point of adding something to the
conversation, but his thoughts seemed too deep for utterance, for he
only sighed.

"Land us in yon creek," said Bladud promptly.  "It seems that I have not
returned home a moment too soon.  There, under the cliff--so."

The skiff ran alongside of a ledge of rock as he spoke, and next moment
the prince leaped upon the shores of his native land.

With a brief farewell to his old playmate, he turned, led his companions
up the neighbouring cliff, and, plunging into the forest, set off at a
pace which betrayed the urgency of his desire to reach home.

Although they travelled almost night and day, it took them the better
part of two weeks to reach the river, on the banks of which King
Hudibras' chief town was built.  They arrived at the eastern bank
without mishap, and found that people were crowding over from the
western side to attend some display or fete which was obviously going on
there.  Mingling with the crowd they went to the river's edge, where
numerous wooden canoes and coracles were busily engaged in ferrying the
people over.

Approaching a man, whose apparel betokened him one of the poorer class,
Bladud addressed him--

"Can you tell me, friend, what is going on here to-day?"

"Truly you must be a stranger if you know not, for every one--far and
near--has heard of the wedding of our king's pretty daughter."

"Is she, then, married?" asked the prince, scarcely able to conceal his
anxiety.

"Not yet, but she is to be married to-morrow--if no champion comes to
claim her."

"How?  What mean you?"

"I mean what I say.  Gunrig, the great chief whom she is to wed, is a
proud and a stout man.  Many chiefs have been courting the fair
princess, and, in his pride of heart and strength, Gunrig has challenged
any one to fight him in single combat, promising that the bride shall be
given to the conqueror."

"And does my--does the king agree to such a base proposal?"

"Well, he objected to it at first, but Gunrig is such a dangerous enemy,
and his tribe so powerful, that the king has given in at last.  Besides,
he knows that the chief is so strong and big, and so well able to use
his weapons, that none of the other chiefs are likely to venture a trial
with him, or, if they do, they are sure to get the worst of it."

"You don't seem to like this Gunrig, I think."

"No.  I hate him.  Everybody hates him; he is such a proud brute, but
what can _we_ do? when the king commands, all must obey.  If I was as
big and stout as you are," added the man with a steady gaze at the
prince, "I'd go at this fellow and win the fair princess myself."

"Perchance I may have a try," returned Bladud with a light laugh.  "Does
the princess hate him? and the queen?"

"Ay, worse than poison."

"Come, let us go and see the sport," said the prince to his companions,
as he hurried away from the river.  "You know our language well enough,
I think, captain, to understand what has been said?"

"Ay, the most of it; and there is no doubt you are much wanted at this
feast."

In a few minutes our travellers arrived at the suburbs of the little
town, which was embosomed among trees and green fields.

As hundreds of people had come in from all the country round, and some
of them were Phoenician mariners from ships then in port, our three
adventurers might not have attracted much attention, had it not been for
the towering height, stalwart frame, and noble bearing of Bladud.  As it
was, people commented on them, bestowing looks of admiration
particularly on the prince, but they did not address or molest them in
any way--supposing, of course, that they had come from a distance to see
the show; though many wondered that such a strapping fellow as the tall
one could have come to the land without having been heard of.

"Perhaps he has only just arrived in one of the ships," was the
sagacious remark of one.

"But the ships have been here a long time, and we have seen all their
crews," was the comment of another.

On arriving at the scene of festivities, they found that an immense
assemblage encircled the arena, in which a number of young men were
competing in athletic sports.  The captain and Maikar gently elbowed
their way to the front, where they could see what was going on.

"I will remain in the back row where I can see well enough," said
Bladud.  "Keep a look-out for me when you feel lost.  I don't mean to
make myself known just yet."

CHAPTER TEN.

THE SPORTS.

At the further end of the ground enclosed for the sports, a slightly
raised platform had been prepared for the king and his household.  The
royal party ascended it soon after the travellers arrived, but the
distance was too great to permit of faces being distinguished.  Bladud
could easily perceive, however, the tall form of his father, and the
graceful figure of his mother, as they took their places, closely
followed by the chief warriors.  These, however, did not bring their
women--that privilege being reserved for the household of the king only.
Close behind the king and queen walked the young Princess Hafrydda.
She was not only graceful, but beautiful, being very fair like her
mother, with light-blue eyes like those of her brother Bladud; she had
peach-bloom cheeks, and a brow of snow, save where her cap failed to
protect it from the sun.

After the princess, and shrinking behind her as if to escape the gaze of
the courtiers, or rather warriors, who crowded the platform, came a girl
of about nineteen summers, the companion of Hafrydda.  Branwen was a
complete contrast to her friend in complexion.  She was the daughter of
a famous northern chief, and was quite as beautiful as the princess,
while her jet-black eyes and curly brown hair gave more of force and
character to features which were delicately moulded.

There was reason for poor Branwen's desire to escape observation, for
the proud Gunrig was paying her attentions which were far too pointed
and familiar in one who was about to marry the king's daughter.  Indeed,
it was whispered that he had changed his mind since he had seen Branwen,
and would have even resigned the princess in her favour, if he had dared
to offer such an affront to the king.

Hudibras himself was the last to ascend the platform.  He was a
fine-looking, portly man, with a great shock of black hair, a long
beard, and limbs so well proportioned that he did not seem taller than
other men until he stood beside them.  He was a worthy sire of such a
son as Bladud, though three inches shorter.

There was a sort of barbaric splendour in the costumes of both men and
women, combined with some degree of graceful simplicity.  The king was
clothed in a softly-dressed deer-skin jacket, over which he wore a
wolf-skin with the hair outside.  A tunic of purple cotton, brought by
Phoenician ships from the far East, covered him as far down as the
knees, which were bare, while his lower limbs were swathed in strips of
scarlet cloth.  Leather sandals, resembling those made by Bladud while
in Gaul, protected his feet.  No crown or other token of royalty rested
on his brow, but over his dark and grizzled locks he wore a species of
leather skull-cap which, being exceeding tough, served the purpose of a
helmet.  On his breast was a profusion of ornaments in the form of beads
and bosses of gold and tin, the former of which had been brought from
the East, the latter from the mines of his native land.  A bronze sword
with an ivory sheath, inlaid with gold, hung at his left side, and a
knife of the same material at his right.  Altogether King Hudibras,
being broad and strong in proportion to his height, presented a very
regal appearance indeed, and bore himself with becoming dignity.  He had
married the daughter of a Norse Jarl; and his two children, Bladud and
Hafrydda, had taken after their gentle mother in complexion and
disposition, though they were not altogether destitute of a sub-current
of their father's passionate nature.

