up in pieces of old cloth and birchbark, which, from its form, was
evidently a human body.  A few words with the Indians soon drew from
them the information that this was one of their wives who had been
ailing for a long time, and at length had died.  They were Roman
Catholic converts, and had come to bury the body in the graveyard of the
fort which had been "consecrated" by a priest.

To whatever pitch of excitement Jack and his man had risen at the
unexpected appearance of the Indians, their spirits fell to an
immeasurably profounder depth than before when their errand was made
known.

Everything connected with this burial was sad and repulsive, yet Jack
and his man felt constrained, out of mere sympathy, to witness it all.

The Indians were shabby and squalid in the extreme, and, being destitute
of the means of making a coffin, had rolled the corpse up in such
wretched materials as they happened to possess.  One consequence of this
was, that it was quite supple.  On being lifted out of the canoe, the
joints bent, and a sort of noise was emitted from the mouth, which was
exceedingly horrible.  Had the dead face been visible, the effect would
not have been so powerful, but its being covered tended to set the
imagination free to conceive things still more dreadful.

The grave was soon dug in the sand inside the graveyard, which was not
more than a hundred yards on one side of the fort.  Here, without
ceremony of any kind, the poor form was laid and covered over.  While
being lowered into the grave, the same doubling-up of the frame and the
same noise were observed.  After all was over, the Indians returned to
their canoe and paddled away, silently, as they had come; not before
Jack, however, had gone to the store for a large piece of tobacco, which
he threw to them as they were pushing off.

During the remainder of that day, Jack Robinson and his man went about
their vocations with hearts heavy as lead.  But it was not till night
that this depression of spirits culminated.  For the first time in his
life Jack Robinson became superstitiously nervous.  As for Teddy
O'Donel, he had seldom been entirely free from this condition during any
night of his existence; but he was much worse than usual on the present
occasion!

After sunset, Jack had his tea alone in the hall, while O'Donel took
his--also, of course, alone--in the kitchen.  Tea over, Jack sat down
and wrote part of a journal which he was in the habit of posting up
irregularly.  Then he went into the kitchen to give Teddy his orders for
the following day, and stayed longer than usual.  Thereafter, he read
parts of one or two books which he had brought with him from the
civilised world.  But, do what he would, the image of the dead woman
lying so near him invariably came between him and the page, and obtruded
itself on his mind obstinately.  Once he was so exasperated while
reading, that he jumped violently off his chair, exclaiming, "This is
childish nonsense!"  In doing so he tilted the chair over, so that it
balanced for an instant on its hind legs, and then fell with an awful
crash, which caused him to leap at least three feet forward, clench his
fists, and wheel round with a look of fury that would certainly have put
to flight any _real_ ghost in creation.

Jack gasped, then he sighed, after which he smiled and began to pace the
hall slowly.  At last he said, half aloud, "I think I'll smoke my pipe
to-night with that poor fellow, O'Donel.  He must be lonely enough, and
I don't often condescend to be social."

Taking up his pipe and tobacco-pouch, he went towards the kitchen.

Now, while his master was enduring those uncomfortable feelings in the
hall, Teddy was undergoing torments in the kitchen that are past
description.  He had had a grandmother--with no nose to speak of, a
mouth large enough for two, four teeth, and one eye--who had stuffed him
in his youth with horrible stories as full as a doll is of sawdust.
That old lady's influence was now strong upon him.  Every gust of wind
that rumbled in the chimney sent a qualm to his heart.  Every creak in
the beams of his wooden kitchen startled his soul.  Every accidental
noise that occurred filled him with unutterable horror.  The door, being
clumsily made, fitted badly in all its parts, so that it shook and
rattled in a perfectly heartrending manner.

Teddy resolved to cure this.  He stuck bits of wood in the opening
between it and the floor, besides jamming several nails in at the sides
and top.  Still, the latch _would_ rattle, being complicated in
construction, and not easily checked in all its parts.  But Teddy was an
ingenious fellow.  He settled the latch by stuffing it and covering it
with a mass of dough!  In order further to secure things, he placed a
small table against the door, and then sat down on a bench to smoke his
pipe beside the door.

It was at this point in the evening that Jack resolved, as we have said,
to be condescending.

As he had hitherto very seldom smoked his pipe in the kitchen, his
footstep in the passage caused O'Donel's very marrow to quake.  He
turned as pale as death and became rigid with terror, so that he
resembled nothing but an Irish statue of very dirty and discoloured
marble.

When Jack put his hand on the latch, Teddy gasped once--he was incapable
of more!  The vision of the poor Indian woman rose before his mental
eye, and he--well, it's of no use to attempt saying what he thought or
felt!

The obstruction in the latch puzzled Jack not a little.  He was
surprised at its stiffness.  The passage between the hall and kitchen
was rather dark, so that he was somewhat nervous and impatient to open
the door.  It happened that he had left the door by which he had quitted
the hall partially open.  A gust of wind shut this with a bang that sent
every drop of blood into his heart, whence it rebounded into his
extremities.  The impulse thus communicated to his hand was
irresistible.  The door was burst in; as a matter of course the table
was hurled into the middle of the kitchen, where it was violently
arrested by the stove.  Poor Teddy O'Donel, unable to stand it any
longer, toppled backwards over the bench with a hideous yell, and fell
headlong into a mass of pans, kettles, and firewood, where he lay
sprawling and roaring at the full power of his lungs, and keeping up an
irregular discharge of such things as came to hand at the supposed
ghost, who sheltered himself as he best might behind the stove.

"Hold hard, you frightened ass!" shouted Jack as a billet of wood
whizzed over his head.

"Eh! what?  It's _you_, sur?  O, musha, av I didn't belave it was the
ghost at last!"

"I tell you what, my man," said Jack, who was a good deal nettled at his
reception, "I would advise you to make sure that it _is_ a ghost next
time before you shie pots and kettles about in that way.  See what a
smash you have made.  Why, what on earth have you been doing to the
door?"

"Sure I only stuffed up the kayhole to keep out the wind."

"Humph! and the ghosts, I suppose.  Well, see that you are up betimes
to-morrow and have these salmon nets looked over and repaired."

So saying, Jack turned on his heel and left the room, feeling too much
annoyed to carry out his original intention of smoking a pipe with his
man.  He spent the evening, therefore, in reading a pocket copy of
Shakespeare, and retired to rest at the usual hour in a more composed
frame of mind, and rather inclined to laugh at his superstitious fears.

It happened, unfortunately, that from his window, as he lay on his bed,
Jack could see the graveyard.  This fact had never been noticed by him
before, although he had lain there nightly since his arrival, and looked
over the yard to the beach and the sea beyond.  Now, the night being
bright moonlight, he could see it with appalling distinctness.  Sleep
was banished from his eyes, and although he frequently turned with
resolution to the wall and shut them, he was invariably brought back to
his old position as if by a species of fascination.

Meanwhile Teddy O'Donel lay absolutely quaking in the kitchen.  Unable
to endure it, he at last rose, opened the door softly, and creeping up
as near us he dared venture to his master's door, sat down there, as he
said, "for company."  In course of time he fell asleep.

Jack, being more imaginative, remained awake.  Presently he saw a figure
moving near the churchyard.  It was white--at least the upper half of it
was.

"Pshaw! this is positive folly; my digestion must be out of order,"
muttered Jack, rubbing his eyes; but the rubbing did not dissipate the
figure which moved past the yard and approached the fort.  At that
moment Teddy O'Donel gave vent to a prolonged snore.  Delivered as it
was against the wooden step on which his nose was flattened, it sounded
dreadfully like a groan.  Almost mad with indignation and alarm, Jack
Robinson leaped from his bed and pulled on his trousers, resolved to
bring things to an issue of some sort.

He threw open his chamber door with violence and descended the staircase
noisily, intending to arouse his man.  He _did_ arouse him, effectually,
by placing his foot on the back of his head and crushing his face
against the steps with such force as to produce a roar that would have
put to shame the war-whoop of the wildest savage in America.

In endeavouring to recover himself, Jack fell upon Teddy and they rolled
head-over-heels down the steps together towards the door of the house,
which was opened at that instant by Ladoc, who had walked up to the
fort, clad only in his shirt and trousers, (the night being warm), to
give a report of the condition of things at the fishery, where he and
Rollo had quarrelled, and the men generally were in a state of mutiny.



CHAPTER NINE.

THE BULLY RECEIVES A LESSON.

We regret to be compelled to chronicle the fact, that Jack Robinson lost
command of his temper on the occasion referred to in the last chapter.
He and Teddy O'Donel rolled to the very feet of the amazed Ladoc, before
the force of their fall was expended.  They sprang up instantly, and
Jack dealt the Irishman an open-handed box on the ear that sent him
staggering against one of the pillars of the verandah, and resounded in
the still night air like a pistol-shot.  Poor Teddy would have fired up
under other circumstances, but he felt so deeply ashamed of having
caused the undignified mishap to his master, that he pocketed the
affront, and quietly retired towards his kitchen.  On his way thither,
however, he was arrested by the tremendous tone in which Jack demanded
of Ladoc the reason of his appearance at such an untimely hour.

There was a slight dash of insolence in the man's reply.

"I come up, monsieur," said he, "to tell you if there be _two_ masters
at fishery, _I_ not be one of 'em.  Rollo tink he do vat him please,
mais I say, no; so ve quarrel."

"And so, you take upon you to desert your post," thundered Jack.

"Vraiment, oui," coolly replied Ladoc.

Jack clenched his fist and sprang at the man as a bull-terrier might
leap on a mastiff.  Almost in the act of striking he changed his mind,
and, instead of delivering one of those scientific blows with which he
had on more than one occasion in his past history terminated a fight at
its very commencement, he seized Ladoc by the throat, tripped up his
heels, and hurled him to the ground with such force, that he lay quite
still for at least half a minute!  Leaving him there to the care of
O'Donel, who had returned, Jack went up to his bedroom, shut the door,
thrust his hands into his pockets, and began to pace the floor rapidly,
and to shake his head.  Gradually his pace became slower, and the
shaking of his head more sedate.  Presently he soliloquised in an
undertone.

"This won't do, John Robinson.  You've let off too much steam.  Quite
against your principles to be so violent--shame on you, man.  Yet after
all it was very provoking to be made such a fool of before that insolent
fellow.  Poor Teddy--I wish I hadn't hit you such a slap.  But, after
all, you deserved it, you superstitious blockhead.  Well, well, it's of
no use regretting.  Glad I didn't hit Ladoc, though, it's too soon for
_that_.  Humph! the time has come for action, however.  Things are
drawing to a point.  They shall culminate _to-morrow_.  Let me see."

Here Jack's tones became inaudible, and he began to complete his
toilette.  His thoughts were busy--to judge from his knitted brows and
compressed lips.  The decision of his motions at last showed that he had
made up his mind to a course of action.

It was with a cleared brow and a self-possessed expression of
countenance that he descended, a few minutes later, to the hall, and
summoned O'Donel.

That worthy, on making his appearance, looked confused, and began to
stammer out--

