hope may be soon realised--I must bid you goodbye now, Gertie, we
separate here."

"Do you go far away?" asked the girl, with a touch of sadness, as she
put her little hand into that of the young giant.

"A goodish bit.  Some six or eight days' journey from here,--according
to the weather."

"You'll come and see us some day, won't you, Hans?"

"Ja--I will," replied Hans, with emphasis.

The whips cracked again, the oxen strained, the lumbering waggons
groaned as they moved away, and while the Scotch band passed over the
Zuurbergen range and headed in the direction of the Winterberg
mountains, their English friends spread themselves over the fertile
plains of Albany.

A few days of slow but pleasant journeying and romantic
night-bivouacking brought the latter to their locations on the Kowie and
Great Fish River.

On the way, the party to which Edwin Brook belonged passed the ground
already occupied by the large band of settlers known as "Chapman's
party," which had left Algoa Bay a few weeks before them in an imposing
procession of ninety-six waggons.  They had been accompanied to their
future home by a small detachment of the Cape Corps, the officer in
command of which gave them the suggestive advice, on bidding them
goodbye, never to leave their guns behind them when they went out to
plough!  Although so short a time located, this party had produced a
marvellous change in the appearance of the wilderness, and gave the
settlers who passed farther eastward, an idea of what lay before
themselves.  Fields had already been marked out; the virgin soil broken
up; timber cut, and bush cleared; while fragile cottages and huts were
springing up here and there to supplant the tents which had given the
first encampments a somewhat military aspect.  Grotesque dwellings
these, many of them, with mats and rugs for doors, and white calico or
empty space for windows.  It was interesting, in these first locations,
to mark the development of character among the settlers.  Those who were
practical examined the "lie" of the land and the nature of the soil,
with a view to their future residence.  Timid souls chose their sites
with reference to defence.  Men of sentiment had regard to the
picturesque, and careless fellows "squatted" in the first convenient
spot that presented itself.  Of course errors of judgment had to be
corrected afterwards on all hands, but the power to choose and change
was happily great at first, as well as easy.

As Brook's party advanced, portions of it dropped off or turned aside,
until at last Edwin found himself reduced to one family besides his own.
Even this he parted from on a ridge of land which overlooked his own
"location," and about noon of the same day his waggons came to a halt on
a grassy mound, which was just sufficiently elevated to command a
magnificent view of the surrounding country.

"Your location," said his Dutch waggon-driver, with a curious smile, as
though he should say, "I wonder what you'll do with yourselves."

But the Dutchman made no further remark.  He was one of the taciturn
specimens of his class, and began at once to unload the waggon.  With
the able assistance of Brook and his men, and the feeble aid of the
"Tottie," or Hottentot leader of the "span" of oxen, the boxes, ploughs,
barrels, bags, cases, etcetera, which constituted the worldly wealth of
the settlers, were soon placed on the green sward.  Then the Dutchman
said "goeden-dag," or farewell, shook hands all round, cracked his long
whip, and went off into the unknown wilderness, leaving the Brook family
to its reflections.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

THE "LOCATION."

In the midst of the confused heap of their property, Edwin Brook sat
down on a large chest beside his wife and daughter, and gazed for some
time in silence on his new estate and home.

To say truth, it was in many respects a pleasant prospect.  A bright
blue sky overhead, a verdant earth around.  Grassy hills and undulations
of rich pasture-land swept away from their feet like a green sea, until
stopped in the far distance by the great blue sea itself.  These were
dotted everywhere with copses of the yellow-flowered mimosa-bush,
through openings in which the glitter of a stream could be seen, while
to the left and behind lay the dark masses of a dense jungle filled with
arboreous and succulent plants, acacias and evergreens, wild-looking
aloes, tall euphorbias, quaint cactuses, and a great variety of
flowering shrubs--filled also, as was very soon discovered, with
antelopes, snakes, jackals, hyenas, leopards, and other wild creatures.
The only familiar objects which broke the wild beauty of the scene were
the distant white specks which they knew to be the tents just put up by
those settlers who chanced to be their "next neighbours."

"May God protect and bless us in our new home!" said Edwin Brook,
breaking the silence, and reverently taking off his cap.

A heartfelt "Amen" was murmured by Mrs Brook and Gertie, but a strange,
though not unpleasant, feeling of loneliness had crept over their
spirits, inducing them to relapse into silence, for they could not avoid
realising strongly that at last they were fairly left alone to fight the
great battle of life.  Edwin Brook in particular, on seeing the long
team of the Dutch driver disappear over a distant ridge, was for the
first time deeply impressed with, as it were, the forsaken condition of
himself and his family.  It was plain that he must take root there and
grow--or die.  There was no neighbouring town or village from which help
could be obtained in any case of emergency; no cart or other means of
conveyance to remove their goods from the spot on which they had been
left; no doctor in case of sickness; no minister in cases either of joy
or sorrow--except indeed (and it was a blessed exception) Him who came
to our world "not to be ministered unto, but to minister."

Strong in the comfort that this assurance gave, Edwin Brook shook off
the lethargy that had been stealing over him, and set about the duties
of the present hour.  The tent had to be pitched, the trunks and boxes
conveyed into it, a fire kindled, the kettle boiled, the goods and
chattels piled and secured from the weather, firewood cut to prepare for
the night-bivouac, etcetera.

Much of this work was already in progress, for George Dally,--with that
ready resource and quiet capacity of adaptation to circumstances which
he had displayed on the voyage out and on the journey to the location,--
had already kindled a fire, sent Scholtz to cut firewood, and was busy
erecting the tent when Brook joined him.

"That's right, George," he said, seizing a tent-peg and mallet; "we have
plenty to do here, and no time to waste."

"Very true, sir," replied George, touching his cap, for George was an
innately respectful man--respectful to _all_, though with a strong
tendency to humorous impudence; "very true, sir; that's just what I
thought when I see you a-meditatin', so I went to work at once without
wastin' any time."

"Is zat enough?" asked Scholtz, staggering up at the moment with a heavy
load of firewood, which he threw on the ground.

The question was put to George, for whom the big German had a special
regard, and whose orders he consequently obeyed with unquestioning
alacrity, although George had no special right to command.

"Enough!" exclaimed George, with a look of surprise, "why, _zat_ is not
enough to scare a weasel with, much less a elephant or a--a
platzicumroggijoo."

George was ignorant of South African zoology, and possessed inventive
powers.

"Bring ten times as much," he added; "we shall have to keep a blazin'
bonfire agoin' all night."

Scholtz re-shouldered his axe, and went off to the jungle with a broad
grin on his broader countenance.

He was a man who did not spare himself, yet of a temperament that kicked
at useless labour, and of a size that forbade the idea of compulsion,
but George Dally could have led him with a packthread to do anything.

Before he had reached the jungle, and while the smile was yet on his
visage, his blood was curdled and his face elongated by a most appalling
yell!  It was not exactly a war-whoop, nor was it a cry of pain, though
it partook of both, and filled the entire family with horror as they
rushed to the tent on the mound from which the cry had issued.

The yell had been given by Junkie, who had been bitten or stung by
something, and who, under the combined influence of surprise, agony, and
wrath, had out-Junkied himself in the fervour and ferocity of his
indignant protest.

The poor child was not only horrified, but inconsolable.  He wriggled
like an eel, and delivered a prolonged howl with intermittent bursts for
full half an hour, while his distracted nurse and mother almost tore the
garments off his back in their haste to discover the bite or the brute
that had done it.

"It _must_ have bin a serpent!" cried the nurse, agonising over a
knotted string.

"Perhaps a tarantula," suggested Gertie, who only clasped her hands and
looked horrified.

"Quick!" exclaimed Mrs Brook, breaking the unmanageable tape.

"Ze chile is growing black and vill bust!" murmured Scholtz in real
alarm.

It did seem as if there were some likelihood of such a catastrophe, for
Junkie's passion and struggles had rendered him blue in the face; but it
wes found that the bite or sting, whichever it was, had done little
apparent damage, and as the child cried himself out and sobbed himself
to sleep in half an hour without either blackening or bursting, the
various members of the family were relieved, and resumed their suspended
labours.

The shades of evening had fallen, and, among other orbs of night, the
stars of that much too highly complimented constellation, the "Southern
Cross," had for some time illumined the sky before these labours were
completed, and the wearied Brook family and household retired to rest,
with weapons ready at hand and fires blazing.  Wild beasts--to whose
cries they were by that time accustomed--soon began their nightly
serenade and carried it on till morning, but they were not wild enough
to disturb the newcomers with anything more formidable than sound.

Next morning early, George Dally was the first to bestir himself.  On
taking a general view of surrounding nature he observed a thin column of
smoke rising above the tree-tops in the direction of the stream or river
to which reference has already been made.

"Perhaps it's Kafirs," thought George.

Following up that thought he returned to what we may style his lair--the
place where he had spent the night--under a mimosa-bush, and there
girded himself with a belt containing a long knife.  He further armed
himself with a fowling-piece.  Thus accoutred he sallied forth with the
nonchalant air of a sportsman taking his pleasure.  Going down to the
stream, and following its course upwards, he quickly came in sight of
the camp-fire whose smoke had attracted his attention.  A tall man in
dishabille was bending over it, coaxing the flame to kindle some rather
green wood over which a large iron pot hung from a tripod.  The fire was
in front of a large, but not deep, cavern, in the recesses of which
three slumbering figures were visible.

Drawing cautiously nearer, George discovered that the man at the fire
was John Skyd, and of course jumped to the conclusion that the three
slumbering figures were his brothers and friend.  These enterprising
knights of the quill, having found what they deemed a suitable spot, had
selected a cave for their residence, as being at once ready and
economical.

Now, George Dally, being gifted with a reckless as well as humorous
disposition, suddenly conceived the idea of perpetrating a practical
joke.  Perhaps Junkie's performances on the previous evening suggested
it.  Flinging his cap on the ground, he ran his fingers through his
thick hair until it stood up in wild confusion, and then, deliberately
uttering a hideous and quite original war-whoop, he rushed furiously
towards the cave.

The brothers Skyd and company proved themselves equal to the occasion,
for they received him at the cavern mouth with the muzzles of four
double-barrelled guns, and a stern order to halt!

Next moment the muzzles were thrown up as they exclaimed in surprise--

"Why, Dally, is it you?"

"Didn't you hear it?" gasped George, supporting himself on the side of
the cavern.

"Hear what?"

"The war-whoop!"

"Of course we did--at least we heard a most unearthly yell.  What was
it?"

"We'd best go out and see," cried George, cocking his gun; "if it was
Kafirs the sooner we follow them up the better."

"Not so, friend George," said Frank Dobson, in a slightly sarcastic
tone.  "If it was Kafirs they are far beyond our reach by this time, and
if they mean us harm we are safer in our fortress here.  My opinion is
that we should have our breakfast without delay, and then we shall be in
a fit state to face our foes--whether they be men or beasts."

Acting on this suggestion, with a laugh, the brothers leaned their guns
against the wall of the cavern and set about the preparation of
breakfast in good earnest.

Meanwhile George gravely assented to the wisdom of their decision, and
sat down to his morning pipe, while he questioned the brothers as to
their intentions.

They pointed out to him the spot where they thought of commencing
agricultural operations and the site of their future dwelling--close,
they said, to the cave, because that would be conveniently near the
river, which would be handy for both washing, drinking, and boiling
purposes.

"That's true--wery true," said George, "but it seems to me you run a
risk of bein' washed away, house and all, if you fix the site so low
down, for I've heard say there are floods in these parts now and again."

"Oh, no fear of that!" said Robert Skyd, who was the quietest of the
three brothers; "don't you see the foundation of our future house is at
least ten feet above the highest point to which the river seems to have
risen in times past?"

"Ah, just so," responded George, with the air of a man not convinced.

"Besides," added John Skyd, lifting the iron pot off the fire and
setting it down, "I suppose that floods are not frequent, so we don't
need to trouble ourselves about 'em.--Come, Dally, you'll join us?"

"No, thank 'ee.  Much obleeged all the same, but I've got to prepare
breakfast for our own party.--Goin' to begin plantin' soon?"

"As soon as ever we can get the soil broken up," replied Dobson.

"Studied farmin'?" inquired George.

"Not much, but we flatter ourselves that what we do know will be of some
service to us," said John.

Dally made no reply, but he greatly doubted in his own mind the capacity
of the brothers for the line of life they had chosen.

His judgment in this respect was proved correct a week later, when he
and Edwin Brook had occasion to visit the brothers, whom they found hard
at work ploughing and sowing.

"Come, this looks business-like!" exclaimed Brook heartily, as he shook
hands with the brothers; "you've evidently not been idle.  I have just
come to ask a favour of you, gentlemen."

"We shall grant it with pleasure, if within our powers," said Robert
Skyd, who leaned on a spade with which he had been filling in a trench
of about two feet deep.

"It is, that you will do me and Mrs Brook the pleasure of coming over
to our location this afternoon to dinner.  It is our Gertie's birthday.
She is thirteen to-day.  In a rash moment we promised her a treat or
surprise of some sort, but really the only surprise I can think of in
such an out-of-the-way place is to have a dinner-party in her honour.
Will you come?"

The brothers at once agreed to do so, remarking, however, that they must
complete the sowing of their carrot-seed before dinner if possible.

"What did you say you were sowing?" asked Brook, with a peculiar smile.

"Carrot-seed," answered Robert Skyd.

"If your carrot-seed is sown _there_," said George Dally, pointing with
a broad grin to the trench, "it's very likely to come up in England
about the time it does here,--by sendin' its roots right through the
world!"

"How? what do you mean?"

"The truth is, my dear sir," said Brook good-humouredly, "that you've
made a slight mistake in this matter.  Carrot-seed is usually sown in
trenches less than an inch deep.  You'd better leave off work just now
and come over to my place at once.  I'll give you some useful hints as
we walk along."

The knights of the quill laughed at their mistake, and at once threw
down their implements of husbandry.  But on going over their farm, Brook
found it necessary to correct a few more mistakes, for he discovered
that the active brothers had already planted a large quantity of Indian
corn, or "mealies," entire, without knocking it off the cobs, and, in
