exhibited obstinate tendencies, and only gave in when it was nearly too
late for repentance.  Little children, also, became sources of danger,
standing in the middle of roads until, perceiving a possible
catastrophe, they dashed wildly aside--always to the very side on which
the riders had resolved to pass,--and escaped by absolute miracle!

Presently they came to a steep hill.  It was not steep enough to
necessitate dismounting, but it rendered a rush inadvisable.  They
therefore worked up slowly, and, on gaining the top, got off to breathe
and rest a while.

"That _was_ a glorious run, wasn't it, Sam?" said Welland, flicking the
dust from his knees with his handkerchief.  "What d'ye say to a glass of
beer?"

"Can't do it, Stephen, I'm Blue Ribbon."

"Oh! nonsense.  Why not do as I do--drink in moderation?"

"Well, I didn't think much about it when I put it on," said Sam, who was
a very sensitive, and not very strong-minded youth; "the rest of us did
it, you know, by father's advice, and I joined because they did."

Welland laughed rather sarcastically at this, but made no rejoinder, and
Sam, who could not stand being laughed at, said--

"Well, come, I'll go in for one glass.  I'll be my own doctor, and
prescribe it medicinally!  Besides, it's an exceptional occasion this,
for it is awfully hot."

"It's about the best run I ever had in the same space of time," said
Welland on quitting the beer shop.

"First-rate," returned Sam, "I wish my old dad could ride with us.  He
_would_ enjoy it so."

"Couldn't we bring him out on a horse?  He could ride that, I suppose?"

"Never saw him on a horse but once," said Sam, "and that time he fell
off.  But it's worth suggesting to him."

"Better if he got a tricycle," said Welland.

"I don't think that would do, for he's too old for long rides, and too
short-winded.  Now, Stephen, I'm not going to run down this hill.  We
_must_ take it easy, for it's far too steep."

"Nonsense, man, it's nothing to speak of; see, I'll go first and show
you the way."

He gave the treadle a thrust that sent him off like an arrow from a bow.

"Stay! there's a caravan or something at the bottom--wild beasts' show,
I think!  Stop! hold on!"

But Sam Twitter shouted in vain.  Welland's was a joyous spirit, apt to
run away with him.  He placed his legs over the handles for security,
and allowed the machine to run.  It gathered speed as it went, for the
hill became steeper, insomuch that the rider once or twice felt the
hind-wheel rise, and had to lean well back to keep it on the ground.
The pace began to exceed even Welland's idea of pleasure, but now it was
too late to use the brake, for well did he know that on such a slope and
going at such a pace the slightest check on the front wheel would send
him over.  He did not feel alarmed however, for he was now near the
bottom of the hill, and half a minute more would send him in safety on
the level road at the foot.

But just at the foot there was a sharpish turn in the road, and Welland
looked at it earnestly.  At an ordinary pace such a turn could have been
easily taken, but at such a rate as he had by that time attained, he
felt it would require a tremendous lean over to accomplish it.  Still he
lost no confidence, for he was an athlete by practice if not by
profession, and he gathered up his energies for the moment of action.

The people of the caravan--whoever they were--had seen him coming, and,
beginning to realise his danger to some extent, had hastily cleared the
road to let him pass.

Welland considered the rate of speed; felt, rather than calculated, the
angle of inclination; leaned over boldly until the tire almost slipped
sideways on the road, and came rushing round with a magnificent sweep,
when, horrible sight! a slight ridge of what is called road-metal
crossed the entire road from side to side!  A drain or water pipe had
recently been repaired, and the new ridge had not yet been worn down by
traffic.  There was no time for thought or change of action.  Another
moment and the wheel was upon it, the crash came, and the rider went off
with such force that he was shot well in advance of the machine, as it
went with tremendous violence into the ditch.  If Welland's feet had
been on the treadles he must have turned a complete somersault.  As it
was he alighted on his feet, but came to the ground with such force that
he failed to save himself.  One frantic effort he made and then went
down headlong and rolled over on his back in a state of insensibility.

When Sam Twitter came to the bottom of the hill with the brake well
applied he was able to check himself in time to escape the danger, and
ran to where his friend lay.

For a few minutes the unfortunate youth lay as if he had been dead.
Then his blood resumed its flow, and when the eyes opened he found Sam
kneeling on one side of him with a smelling bottle which some lady had
lent him, and a kindly-faced elderly man with an iron-grey beard
kneeling on the other side and holding a cup of water to his lips.

"That's right, Stephen, look up," said Sam, who was terribly frightened,
"you're not much hurt, are you?"

"Hurt, old fellow, eh?" sighed Stephen, "why should I be hurt?  Where am
I?  What has happened?"

"Take a sip, my young friend, it will revive you," said the man with the
kindly face.  "You have had a narrow escape, but God has mercifully
spared you.  Try to move now; gently--we must see that no bones have
been broken before allowing you to rise."

By this time Welland had completely recovered, and was anxious to rise;
all the more that a crowd of children surrounded him, among whom he
observed several ladies and gentlemen, but he lay still until the kindly
stranger had felt him all over and come to the conclusion that no
serious damage had been done.

"Oh!  I'm all right, thank you," said the youth on rising, and affecting
to move as though nothing had happened, but he was constrained to catch
hold of the stranger rather suddenly, and sat down on the grass by the
road-side.

"I do believe I've got a shake after all," he said with a perplexed
smile and sigh.  "But," he added, looking round with an attempt at
gaiety, "I suspect my poor bicycle has got a worse shake.  Do look after
it, Sam, and see how it is."

Twitter soon returned with a crestfallen expression.  "It's done for,
Stephen.  I'm sorry to say the whole concern seems to be mashed up into
a kind of wire-fencing!"

"Is it past mending, Sam?"

"Past mending by any ordinary blacksmith, certainly.  No one but the
maker can doctor it, and I should think it would take him a fortnight at
least."

"What is to be done?" said Stephen, with some of his companion's regret
of tone.  "What a fool I was to take such a hill--spoilt such a glorious
day too--for you as well as myself, Sam.  I'm _very_ sorry, but that
won't mend matters."

"Are you far from home, gentlemen?" asked the man with the iron-grey
beard, who had listened to the conversation with a look of sympathy.

"Ay, much too far to walk," said Welland.  "D'you happen to know how far
off the nearest railway station is?"

"Three miles," answered the stranger, "and in your condition you are
quite unfit to walk that distance."

"I'm not so sure of that," replied the youth, with a pitiful look.  "I
think I'm game for three miles, if I had nothing to carry but myself,
but I can't leave my bicycle in the ditch, you know!"

"Of course you can't," rejoined the stranger in a cheery tone, "and I
think we can help you in this difficulty.  I am a London City
Missionary.  My name is John Seaward.  We have, as you see, brought out
a number of our Sunday-school children, to give them a sight of God's
beautiful earth; poor things, they've been used to bricks, mortar, and
stone all their lives hitherto.  Now, if you choose to spend the
remainder of the day with us, we will be happy to give you and the
injured bicycle a place in our vans till we reach a cabstand or a
railway station.  What say you?  It will give much pleasure to me and
the teachers."

Welland glanced at his friend.  "You see, Sam, there's no help for it,
old boy.  You'll have to return alone."

"Unless your friend will also join us," said the missionary.

"You are very kind," said Sam, "but I cannot stay, as I have an
engagement which must be kept.  Never mind, Stephen.  I'll just complete
the trip alone, and comfort myself with the assurance that I leave you
in good hands.  So, good-bye, old boy."

"Good-bye, Twitter," said Stephen, grasping his friend's hand.

"Twitter," repeated the missionary, "I heard your friend call you Sam
just now.  Excuse my asking--are you related to Samuel Twitter of
Twitter, Slime, and Company, in the city?"

"I'm his eldest son," said Sam.

"Then I have much pleasure in making your acquaintance," returned the
other, extending his hand, "for although I have never met your father, I
know your mother well.  She is one of the best and most regular teachers
in our Sunday-schools.  Is she not, Hetty?" he said, turning to a
sweet-faced girl who stood near him.

"Indeed she is, I was her pupil for some years, and now I teach one of
her old classes," replied the girl.

"I work in the neighbourhood of Whitechapel, sir," continued the
missionary, "and most of the children here attend the Institution in
George Yard."

"Well, I shall tell my mother of this unexpected meeting," said Sam, as
he remounted his bicycle.  "Good-bye, Stephen.  Don't romp too much with
the children!"

"Adieu, Sam, and don't break your neck on the bicycle."

In a few minutes Sam Twitter and his bicycle were out of sight.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

A GREAT AND MEMORABLE DAY.

When young Stephen Welland was conducted by John Seaward the missionary
into a large field dotted with trees, close to where his accident had
happened, he found that the children and their guardians were busily
engaged in making arrangements for the spending of an enjoyable day.

And then he also found that this was not a mere monster excursion of
ordinary Sunday-schools, but one of exceedingly poor children, whose
garments, faces, and general condition, told too surely that they
belonged to the lowest grade in the social scale.

"Yes," said the missionary, in reply to some question from Welland, "the
agency at George Yard, to which I have referred, has a wide-embracing
influence--though but a small lump of leaven when compared with the mass
of corruption around it.  This is a flock of the ragged and utterly
forlorn, to many of whom green fields and fresh air are absolutely new,
but we have other flocks besides these."

"Indeed!  Well, now I look at them more carefully, I see that their
garments do speak of squalid poverty.  I have never before seen such a
ragged crew, though I have sometimes encountered individuals of the
class on the streets."

"Hm!" coughed the missionary with a peculiar smile.  "They are not so
ragged as they were.  Neither are they as ragged as they will be in an
hour or two."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that these very rough little ones have to receive peculiar
treatment before we can give them such an outing as they are having
to-day.  As you see, swings and see-saws have been put up here, toys are
now being distributed, and a plentiful feast will ere long be
forthcoming, through the kindness of a Christian gentleman whose heart
the Lord has inclined to `consider the poor,' but before we could
venture to move the little band, much of their ragged clothing had to be
stitched up to prevent it falling off on the journey, and we had to make
them move carefully on their way to the train--for vans have brought us
only part of the way.  Now that they are here, our minds are somewhat
relieved, but I suspect that the effect of games and romping will undo
much of our handiwork.  Come, let us watch them."

The youth and the missionary advanced towards a group of the children,
whose souls, for the time being, were steeped in a see-saw.  This
instrument of delight consisted of a strong plank balanced on the trunk
of a noble tree which had been recently felled, with many others, to
thin the woods of the philanthropist's park.  It was an enormous
see-saw! such as the ragged creatures had never before seen--perhaps
never conceived of, their experiences in such joys having been hitherto
confined to small bits of broken plank placed over empty beer barrels,
or back-yard fences.  No fewer than eight children were able to find
accommodation on it at one and the same time, besides one of the bigger
boys to straddle in the centre; and it required the utmost vigilance on
the part of a young man teacher at one end of the machine, and Hetty
Frog at the other end, to prevent the little ragamuffins at either
extremity from being forced off.

Already the missionary's anticipation in regard to the undoing of their
labour had begun to be verified.  There were at least four of the eight
whose nether garments had succumbed to the effort made in mounting the
plank, and various patches of flesh-colour revealed the fact that the
poor little wearers were innocent of flannels.  But it was summer-time,
and the fact had little effect either on wearers or spectators.  The
missionary, however, was not so absorbed in the present but that he felt
impelled to remark to Welland: "That is their winter as well as summer
clothing."

The bicyclist said nothing in reply, but the remark was not lost upon
him.

"Now, Dick Swiller," said the young man teacher, "I see what you're up
to.  You mustn't do it!"

Richard Swiller, who was a particularly rugged as well as ragged boy of
about thirteen, not being in the habit of taking advice, did do it.
That is, he sent his end of the plank up with such violence that the
other end came to the ground with a shock which caused those who sat
there to gasp, while it all but unseated most of those who were on the
higher end.  Indeed one very small and pinched but intelligent little
boy, named by his companions Blobby, who looked as if Time, through the
influence of privation and suffering, had been dwindling instead of
developing him,--actually did come off with a cry of alarm, which,
however, changed into a laugh of glee when he found himself in his
teacher's arms, instead of lying "busted on the ground," as he
afterwards expressed it when relating the incident to an admiring
audience of fellow ragamuffins in the slums of Spitalfields.

Blobby was immediately restored to his lost position, and Swiller was
degraded, besides being made to stand behind a large tree for a quarter
of an hour in forced inaction, so that he might have time to meditate on
the evil consequences of disobedience.

"Take care, Robin," said Hetty, to a very small but astonishingly
energetic fellow, at her end of the see-saw, who was impressed with the
notion that he was doing good service by wriggling his own body up and
down, "if you go on so, you'll push Lilly Snow off."

Robin, unlike Dick, was obedient.  He ceased his efforts, and thereby
saved the last button which held his much too small waistcoat across his
bare bosom.

"What a sweet face the child she calls Lilly Snow has--if it were only
clean," observed Welland.  "A little soap and water with a hair brush
would make her quite beautiful."

"Yes, she is very pretty," said the missionary and the kindly smile with
which he had been watching the fun vanished, as he added in a sorrowful
voice, "her case is a very sad one, dear child.  Her mother is a poor
but deserving woman who earns a little now and then by tailoring, but
she has been crushed for years by a wicked and drunken husband who has
at last deserted her.  We know not where he is, perhaps dead.  Five
times has her home been broken up by him, and many a time has she with
her little one been obliged to sit on doorsteps all night, when
homeless.  Little Lilly attends our Sunday-school regularly, and Hetty
is her teacher.  It is not long since Hetty herself was a scholar, and I
know that she is very anxious to lead Lilly to the Lord.  The sufferings
and sorrows to which this poor child has been exposed have told upon her
severely, and I fear that her health will give way.  A day in the
country like this may do her good perhaps."

As the missionary spoke little Lilly threw up her arms and uttered a cry
of alarm.  Robin, although obedient, was short of memory, and his
energetic spirit being too strong for his excitable little frame he had
recommenced his wriggling, with the effect of bursting the last button
off his waistcoat and thrusting Lilly off the plank.  She was received,
however, on Hetty's breast, who fell with her to the ground.

"Not hurt, Hetty!" exclaimed the missionary, running forward to help the
girl up.

"Oh! no, sir," replied Hetty with a short laugh, as she rose and placed
Lilly on a safer part of the see-saw.

"Come here, Hetty," said John Seaward, "and rest a while.  You have done
enough just now; let some one else take your place."

After repairing the buttonless waistcoat with a pin and giving its owner
a caution, Hetty went and sat down on the grass beside the missionary.

"How is Bobby?" asked the latter, "I have not found a moment to speak to
you till now."

"Thank you, sir, he's better; much better.  I fear he will be well too
soon."

"How so?  That's a strange remark, my girl."

"It may seem strange, sir, but--you know--father's very fond of Bobby."

"Well, Hetty, that's not a bad sign of your father."

"Oh but, sir, father sits at his bedside when he's sober, an' has such
long talks with him about robberies and burglaries, and presses him very
hard to agree to go out with him when he's well.  I can't bear to hear
it, for dear Bobby seems to listen to what he says, though sometimes he
refuses, and defies him to do his worst, especially when he--"

"Stay, dear girl.  It is very very sad, but don't tell me anything more
about your father.  Tell it all to Jesus, Hetty.  He not only
sympathises with, but is able to save--even to the uttermost."

"Yes, thank God for that `uttermost,'" said the poor girl, clasping her
hands quickly together.  "Oh, I understood that when He saved _me_, and
