of the guard, Colonel McDougal, came and told us that a man had arrived
with the horns and tail of the Firedrake, and was claiming the reward.
Her majesty and I rose and went into the outer court, where we
found, sitting on that carpet with a glass of beer in his hand, a
respectable-looking upper servant, whom I recognised as your butler. He
informed us that he had just killed the beast, and showed us the horns
and tail, sure enough; there they are! The tail is like the iron
handle of a pump, but the horns are genuine. A pair were thrown up by
a volcano, in my great-grandfather's time Giglio I.* Excellent coffee
this, of yours!"

     * The History of this Prince may be read in a treatise
     called _The Rose and the Ring_, by M. A. Titmarsh.
     London, 1855.

[Illustration: Page 72]

The ambassador bowed.

"Well, we asked him _where_ he killed the Firedrake, and he said in a
garden near Gluckstein. Then he began to speak about the reward, and the
'perkisits,' as he called them, which it seems he had read about in my
proclamation. Rather a neat thing; drew it up myself," added his
majesty.

"Very much to the point," said the ambassador, wondering what the king
was coming to.

"Glad you like it," said the king, much pleased. "Well, where was I? Oh,
yes; your man said he had killed the creature in a garden, quite near
Gluckstein. I didn't much like the whole affair: he is an alien, you
see; and then there was my niece, Molinda--poor girl, _she_ was certain
to give trouble. Her heart is buried, if I may say so, with poor
Alphonso. But the queen is a very remarkable woman--very remarkable--"

"Very!" said the ambassador, with perfect truth.

"'Caitiff!' she cries to your butler," his majesty went on; "'perjured
knave, thou liest in thy throat! Gluckstein is a hundred leagues from
here, and how say est thou that thou slewest the molester, and earnest
hither in a few hours' space?' This had not occurred to me,--I am a
plain king, but I at once saw the force of her majesty's argument.
Yes,' said I; 'how did you manage it?' But he--your man, I mean--was
not a bit put out. 'Why, your majesty,' says he, 'I just sat down on
that there bit of carpet, wished I was here, and here _I ham_. And I 'd
be glad, having had the trouble,--and my time not being my own,--to see
the colour of them perkisits, according to the proclamation.' On this
her majesty grew more indignant, if possible. 'Nonsense!' she cried; 'a
story out of the 'Arabian Nights' is not suited for a modern public, and
fails to win aesthetic credence.' These were her very words."

"Her majesty's expressions are ever choice and appropriate," said the
ambassador.

"'Sit down there, on the carpet, knave,' she went on; 'ourself and
consort'--meaning _me_--'will take our places by thy side, and I shall
wish us in Gluckstein, at thy master's! When the experiment has failed,
thy head shall from thy shoulders be shorn!' So your man merely said,
'Very well, mum,--your majesty, I mean,' and sat down. The queen took her
place at the edge of the carpet; I sat between her and the butler, and
she said, 'I wish I were in Gluckstein!' Then we rose, flew through the
air at an astonishing pace, and here we are! So I suppose the rest of
the butler's tale is true, which I regret; but a king's word is sacred,
and he shall take the place of that sneak, Prigio. But as we left home
before dinner, and _yours_ is over, may I request your lordship to
believe that I should be delighted to take something cold?"

The ambassador at once ordered a sumptuous collation, to which the king
did full justice; and his majesty was shown to the royal chamber, as he
complained of fatigue. The queen accompanied him, remarking that she
was sound asleep, but would waken presently. Neither of them said
"Good-night" to the prince. Indeed, they did not see him again, for he
was on the balcony with Lady Rosalind. They found a great deal to say
to each other, and at last the prince asked her to be his wife; and she
said that if the king and her father gave their permission--why, then
she would! After this she went to bed; and the prince, who had not slept
at all the night before, felt very sleepy also. But he knew that first
he had something that must be done. So he went into the drawing-room,
took his carpet, and wished to be--now where do you suppose? Beside the
dead body of the Firedrake! There he was in a moment; and dreadful
the body looked, lying stark and cold in the white moonshine. Then the
prince cut off its four hoofs, put them in his wallet, and with these
he flew back in a second, and met the ambassador just as he came from
ushering the king to bed. Then the prince was shown his own room, where
he locked up the hoofs, the carpet, the cap of darkness, and his other
things in an iron box; and so he went to bed and dreamed of his Lady
Rosalind.

[Illustration: Chapter Fifteen]




CHAPTER XV.--_The King's Cheque_

WHEN they all awakened next morning, their first ideas were confused.
It is often confusing to wake in a strange bed, much more so when you
have flown through the air, like the king, the queen, and Benson the
butler. For her part, the queen was the most perplexed of all; for she
did undeniably wake, and yet she was not at home, where she had expected
to be. However, she was a determined woman, and stood to it that nothing
unusual was occurring. The butler made up his mind to claim the crown
princeship and the hand of the Lady Molinda; because, as he justly
remarked to William, here was such a chance to better himself as might
not soon come in his way again. As for the king, he was only anxious
to get back to Falkenstein, and have the whole business settled in a
constitutional manner. The ambassador was not sorry to get rid of the
royal party; and it was proposed that they should all sit down on the
flying carpet, and wish themselves at home again. But the queen would
not hear of it: she said it was childish and impossible; so the carriage
was got ready for her, and she started without saying a word of good-bye
to anyone. The king, Benson, and the prince were not so particular, and
they simply flew back to Falkenstein in the usual way, arriving there at
11.35--a week before her majesty.

The king at once held a Court; the horns and tail of the monster were
exhibited amidst general interest, and Benson and the prince were
invited to state their claims.

Benson's evidence was taken first. He declined to say exactly where
or how he killed the Firedrake. There might be more of them left, he
remarked,--young ones, that would take a lot of killing,--and he refused
to part with his secret. Only he claimed the reward, which was offered,
if you remember, _not_ to the man who killed the beast, but to him wha
brought its horns and tail. This was allowed by the lawyers present
to be very sound law; and Benson was cheered by the courtiers, who
decidedly preferred him to Prigio, and who, besides, thought he was
going to be crown prince. As for Lady Molinda, she was torn by the most
painful feelings; for, much as she hated Prigio, she could not bear the
idea of marrying Benson. Yet one or the other choice seemed certain.

Unhappy lady! Perhaps no girl was ever more strangely beset by
misfortune!

Prince Prigio was now called on to speak.

He admitted that the reward was offered for bringing the horns and tail,
not for killing the monster. But were the king's _intentions_ to go for
nothing? When a subject only _meant_ well, of course he had to suffer;
but when a king said one thing, was he not to be supposed to have meant
another? Any fellow with a waggon could _bring_ the horns and tail; the
difficult thing was to kill the monster. If Benson's claim was allowed,
the royal prerogative of saying one thing and meaning something else was
in danger.

On hearing this argument, the king so far forgot himself as to cry,
"Bravo, well said!" and to clap his hands, whereon all the courtiers
shouted and threw up their hats.

The prince then said that whoever had killed the monster could, of
course, tell where to find him, and could bring his hoofs. He was
ready to do this himself. Was Mr. Benson equally ready? On this being
interpreted to him--for he did not speak Pantouflian--Benson grew pale
with horror, but fell back on the proclamation. He had brought the horns
and tail, and so he must have the perquisites, and the Lady Molinda!

The king's mind was so much confused by this time, that he determined to
leave it to the Lady Molinda herself.

"Which of them will you have, my dear?" he asked, in a kind voice.

But poor Molinda merely cried. Then his majesty was almost _driven_ to
say that he would give the reward to whoever produced the hoofs by that
day week. But no sooner had he said this than the prince brought them
out of his wallet, and displayed them in open Court. This ended the
case; and Benson, after being entertained with sherry and sandwiches
in the steward's room, was sent back to his master, And I regret to
say that his temper was not at all improved by his failure to better
himself. On the contrary, he was unusually cross and disagreeable
for several days; but we must, perhaps, make some allowance for his
disappointment.

But if Benson was irritated, and suffered from the remarks of his
fellow-servants, I do not think we can envy Prince Prigio. Here he was,
restored to his position indeed, but by no means to _the royal favour_.
For the king disliked him as much as ever, and was as angry as ever
about the deaths of Enrico and Alphonso. Nay, he was even _more_ angry;
and, perhaps, not without reason. He called up Prigio before the whole
Court, and thereon the courtiers cheered like anything, but the king
cried:

"Silence! McDougal, drag the first man that shouts to the serpent-house
in the zoological gardens, and lock him up with the rattlesnakes!"

After that the courtiers were very quiet.

"Prince," said the king, as Prigio bowed before the throne, "you are
restored to your position, because I cannot break my promise. But your
base and malevolent nature is even more conspicuously manifest in your
selfish success than in your previous dastardly contempt of duty. Why,
confound you!" cried the king, dropping the high style in which he had
been speaking, and becoming the _father_, not the monarch,--"why, if you
_could_ kill the Firedrake, did you let your poor little brothers go and
be b--b--b--broiled? Eh! what do you say, you sneak? 'You didn't believe
there _were_ any Firedrakes?' That just comes of your eternal conceit
and arrogance! If you were clever enough to kill the creature--and I
admit that--you were clever enough to know that what everybody said must
be true. 'You have not generally found it so?' Well, you _have_ this
time, and let it be a lesson to you; not that there is much comfort
in that, for it is not likely you will ever have such another
chance"--exactly the idea that had occurred to Benson.

Here the king wept, among the tears of the lord chief justice, the
poet laureate (who had been awfully frightened when he heard of the
rattlesnakes), the maids of honour, the chaplain royal, and everyone
but Colonel McDougal, a Scottish soldier of fortune, who maintained a
military reserve.

When his majesty had recovered, he said to Prigio (who had not been
crying, he was too much absorbed):

"A king's word is his bond. Bring me a pen, somebody, and my
cheque-book."

The royal cheque-book, bound in red morocco, was brought in by eight
pages, with ink and a pen. His majesty then filled up and signed the
following satisfactory document--(Ah! my children, how I wish Mr.
Arrowsmith would do as much for _me_!):

[Illustration: The King's Cheque]

"There!" said his majesty, crossing his cheque and throwing sand over
it, for blotting-paper had not yet been invented; "there, take _that_,
and be off with you!"

Prince Prigio was respectfully but rapidly obeying his royal command,
for he thought he had better cash the royal cheque as soon as possible,
when his majesty yelled:

"Hi! here! come back! I forgot something; you've got to marry Molinda!"

[Illustration: Chapter Sixteen]




CHAPTER XVI.--_A Melancholy Chapter_

THE prince had gone some way, when the king called after him. How he
wished he had the seven-league boots on, or that he had the cap of
darkness in his pocket! If he had been so lucky, he would now have got
back to Gluckstein, and crossed the border with Lady Rosalind. A million
of money may not seem much, but a pair of young people who really love
each other could live happily on less than the cheque he had in his
pocket. However, the king shouted very loud, as he always did when he
meant to be obeyed, and the prince sauntered slowly back again.

"Prigio!" said his majesty, "where were you off to? Don't you remember
that this is your wedding-day? My proclamation offered, not only the
money (which you have), but the hand of the Lady Molinda, which the
Court chaplain will presently make your own. I congratulate you, sir;
Molinda is a dear girl."

"I have the highest affection and esteem for my cousin, sir," said the
prince, "but:--"

