stole them?'

'Perhaps _you_ can answer that question.  Who was it made such an
indecent fuss this morning because a poor fatherless and motherless babe
cried?  Who threatened to leave if that same poor babe wasn't sent to the
workhouse?  Answer me that, Mr Martin, and then tell me if you know
nothing of the fate of the hapless innocents.'

Mr Martin looked cautiously round at the door, which was slightly ajar.
He got up softly and shut it.  Then he advanced gently across the room
and came up close to Mrs Potts.

'Answer _me_ this,' he said.  'Did you like it, yourself?'

'Did I like what?  Good gracious, the man frightens me.'

'Did you like the wailing sounds of the fatherless and motherless baby?
You were nearer to it than I was.  If you heard it last night, and felt
all the pity you now express, you had a good opportunity of putting it to
the test by going up-stairs and lulling the unfortunate babe to rest.  A
woman's mission, too, I have always understood.'

Mrs Potts turned scarlet.

'I!  I do what you describe!' she said.  'You forget yourself, Mr
Martin.'

'I fail to see that I do, Mrs Potts.  It strikes me that it is rather the
other way.  Perhaps you will do me the kindness to let me have my room in
peace.'

Mrs Potts made a sweeping curtsey and vanished, and Mr Martin stood for
some time in his deserted parlour feeling far more uncomfortable than he
liked to confess.  He was methodical and fussy, but he was by no means an
ill-natured man.  He thought Mrs Potts most impertinent, but her news
distressed him.  After reflecting for a few moments, he went across to
the fireplace, and pulled his bell sharply.  After a short pause the
kitchen slavey answered his summons: her eyes were red with weeping, and
her nose very smutty.  Mr Martin hated dirty servants.  He turned his
back to her as he spoke.

'Jane, is your mistress in?'

'Yes, sir.  Please sir, we're all distraught with grief.  You have heard
of the--the--'

'I have heard of the calamity, through Mrs Potts.  Can I speak to your
mistress?'

'I'll inquire, please sir.  Missus is having her fourth hysteric fit just
now.'

'Then I beg'--Mr Martin's face grew quite white--'I beg you won't disturb
her until she is equal to seeing me.'  ('How awful if the fifth comes on
in this room,' he mentally thought.  'I've a good mind to tell her not to
disturb herself.')

But Jane had vanished.

In about a quarter of an hour Mrs Franklin appeared.  She was pale, but
her grief was temperate.

'Yes,' she said, 'I am in very great distress.  The children, Peter and
Flossy, have evidently run away with that poor baby.  Flossy was in the
room when you spoke to me this morning, Mr Martin, and she must have
taken fright at your words.  The children took the opportunity to leave
the house when I was out marketing.  Your steak is being cooked, Mr
Martin.  I must apologise for the delay.'

'Madam, I beg you won't mention it.  I am deeply grieved that this should
have happened, and that I am the cause.  I am more grieved than I can
possibly express.  I would rather lie awake all night listening to those
yells of that miserable infant than that this--this--should have
happened.  The alarm, the upsetting of the household routine, the inroad
into my sanctum of that awful female--h'm--of your drawing-room
lodger--and last but not least, the danger to three innocent human
creatures.  I am overpowered with remorse at the sorry part I have played
myself.'

'Don't mention it, Mr Martin.  I always said there'd be trouble when the
baby was brought.  It can't be helped now.  Of course we must keep it,
but I'm sorry to lose a valuable and considerate lodger like yourself,
sir.'

'H'm!  Are any steps being taken to recover the children?'

'My husband has gone to the nearest police-station, sir.  Poor mites, and
Flossy's not so strong in her chest.  They're safe to be back by
to-night, Mr Martin.  And perhaps you'd like some one to help you with
your packing, sir?'

'H'm!  I'll consider it,' said Mr Martin.  'I'm--I'm not such a young man
as I was, Mrs Franklin.'

'Oh, I'm sure, sir.  Well, we're none of us that, are we?  I should take
you, sir, begging your pardon, to be but a very little way on the wrong
side of forty.'

Mr Martin chuckled, and then grew grave.

'On the wrong side of sixty,' he said.  'Now, now, no humbugging, I beg.'

'Well, sir, about the packing.  My head is all in a muddle, it is true,
but any help that I can give'--

'What do you say to a baize door?' replied Mr Martin, rather
irrelevantly.

'I--I beg your pardon, sir?'

'And a very thick curtain inside my room door?  It is true I have heard
it remarked that the wails of an infant when teething will penetrate
through any obstacles.  Still, a baize door inside your nursery door, and
thick curtains inside mine would soften the disturbance--yes, would
soften it.  I was going to say that I would provide them.'

'Then you will stay after all, sir?'

'Well, well, do you agree with me? do you think my plan will make matters
easier?'

'Oh, won't they just!' said Mrs Franklin, tears now brimming over in her
eyes.  'You're a good man, Mr Martin, and God will bless you, sir.'

* * * * *

'Mother,' said Flossy, when at last she got home, 'it's all right about
Dickory.  We took her to the lady what cried.'

Mrs Franklin had Flossy in her arms when she made this remark.  Now she
pressed her close with one arm, and with the other drew Peter to her
side.

'Tell me the whole story, my darlings,' she said.

Which they did, Mr Martin himself coming into the kitchen and listening
to them.
