  right foot.

corner,

  Inter.;-- Bend knees deeply.

2nd Line;-- Eating a Christmas pie;

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "eating," children encircle imaginary plate
  with the left arm and imitate eating with the right hand.

3rd Line;-- He put in his thumb, And pulled out a plum,

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "put," children imitate the action of putting
  thumb in pie and pulling out a plum, making the action vigorous upon
  the word, "pulled," stretching the arm overhead. Look at plum.

4th Line;-- And said, "What a good boy am I!"

  Inter.;-- Proudly pats the chest with the left hand.

Conclusion;-- Nice Plum! Nice Plum! Nice Plum! Nice Plum!

  Inter.;-- Lowers plum to mouth, imitating eating, tapping the chest
  the while.


[Illustration: THE SPIDER FRIGHTENING MISS MUFFET (_See page 46_)]




LITTLE MISS MUFFET


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Little Miss Muffet sat on a tuffet,
  eating of curds and whey,
  Along came a spider
  And sat down beside her;
  And frighten'd Miss Muffet away.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Double circle formation facing line of direction with hands
on hips.

Inner circle:-- The Spider.

Outer circle:-- Miss Muffet.

Suggestion;-- In so far as possible have the boys form the inner circle
and the girls the outer circle.


1st Line;-- Little Miss Muffet sat on a

  Interpretation;-- Outer circle (Miss Muffet); starting with the right
  foot execute three steps in line of direction. (Right; left; right and
  close left to right.)

  Inter.;-- Inner circle (Spider); No activity.

tuffet,

  Inter.;-- [Outer circle] Bend knees deeply.

eating of curds and whey,

  Inter.;-- Hold imaginary plate in the left hand (palm up) and imitate
  eating. Hands are replaced to hips upon the completion of the word,
  "whey."

  Inter.;-- Inner circle (Spider); No activity.

2nd Line;-- Along came a spider

  Inter.;-- Outer circle (Miss Muffet); No activity.

  Inter.;-- Inner circle (Spider); Starting with the left foot execute
  five running steps in line of direction. (This should bring partners
  together.)

3rd Line;-- And

  Inter.;-- Inner circle (Spider); Bend knees slightly.

sat down beside her;

  Inter.;-- [Inner circle] Spring upward and upon return bend knees
  deeply and face partner. Raise hands, fingers extended and flexed.
  (Eye height.)

And

sat down beside her;

  Inter.;-- Outer circle (Miss Muffet); Turns head to the left, holds
  hands in position to ward off attack of the Spider.

4th Line;-- And

frighten'd Miss Muffet away.

  Inter.;-- Outer circle (Miss Muffet); Place hands on hips; stretch
  knees and with six running steps encircle the Spider and return to
  place.

  Inter.;-- Inner circle (Spider); No activity.




JACK AND JILL


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Jack and Jill went up the hill,
  To fetch a pail of water;
  Jack fell down and broke his crown,
  And Jill came tumbling after.
  Boohoo! Boohoo! Boohoo! Boohoo!]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Double circle formation. Children bend knees deeply;
place outside hand on hip and clasp partner's hand.

Inner circle:-- Jill.

Outer circle:-- Jack.


1st Line;-- Jack and Jill went up the hill,

  Interpretation;-- Starting with the left foot marching in line of
  direction execute three steps, closing right foot to left upon
  completion of movement. As the steppings are taken, the knees are
  stretched gradually until reaching erect position.

2nd Line;-- To fetch a pail of wa-

  Inter.;-- Bend trunk forward, stretching left arm (hand clenched)
  downward, holding imaginary pail under spout of pump. Bend right arm
  (hand clenched) to thrust, grasping the imaginary pump handle. Imitate
  pumping of water (Three times.)

ter;

  Inter.;-- Assume erect position with hands on hips.

3rd Line;-- Jack fell down and broke his crown,

  Activity as applied to children representing Jack. (Outer circle.)

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "Jack," bend knees slightly; upon the word,
  "fell," pupils spring lightly upward and assume deep knee position,
  placing right hand upon the head (the crown) and left hand upon the
  floor. (The hand on floor is in the forward plane.)

4th Line;-- And Jill came tumbling after.

  Activity as applied to children representing Jill. (Inner circle.)

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "Jill," bend knees slightly; upon the word,
  "came," spring lightly upward and assume deep knee position, covering
  face with right hand (crying) and placing left hand on floor. (The
  hand on floor is in the forward plane.)


Upon completion of the song all children gradually stretch the knees,
shaking the head in sorrow as they sing--

  Boo-hoo! Boo-hoo! Boo-hoo! Boo-hoo!

  Cover the face with the hands.

  Movement of head;--
  Right; left; right; left; right; left; right and front.


[Illustration: PUMPING A PAIL OF WATER]




DICKORY, DICKORY, DOCK


_Permission to use words and music:-- McLoughlin Bros._ +J. W. Elliott+

[Music:
  Dickory, dickory, dock;
  The mouse ran up the clock;
  The clock struck One,
  The mouse ran down;
  Dickory, dickory, dock.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Single circle facing line of direction with hands on hips.


1st Line;-- Dickory,

  Interpretation;-- Arms stretched overhead with hands clasped. Bend
  trunk to the left.

dickory,

  Inter.;-- Bend trunk to the right.

dock;

  Inter.;-- Assume erect position.

2nd Line;-- The

mouse ran up the clock;

  Inter.;-- Place hands on hips; turn to the left and starting with the
  left foot execute six running steps forward, closing left foot to
  right, completing the movement. (Seven counts.)

3rd Line;-- The clock

  Inter.;-- Turn right about.

struck

One,

  Inter.;-- Clap hands overhead and replace to hips.

The

mouse ran

  Inter.;-- Three running steps forward. (Left; right and left.)

down;

  Inter.;-- Step forward, right, and turn to the left, closing left foot
  to right foot.

4th Line;-- Dickory,

  Inter.;-- Arms stretched overhead with hands clasped. Bend trunk to
  the left.

dickory,

  Inter.;-- Bend trunk to the right.

dock.

  Inter.;-- Assume erect position.

Position!




LOOBY LOO


_Permission to use words and music:--
Miss Lydia Clark and Benj. H. Sanborn & Co._

Arr. by +Fannie Robertson+

[Music:
  1. Here we dance Looby Loo,
  Here we dance Looby light,
  Here we dance Looby Loo,
  All on a Saturday night,
  I put my right hand in,
  I put my right hand out,
  I give my right hand a shake, shake, shake,
  And turn myself about, Oh!]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Single circle formation, facing counter clock-wise (right),
in close order formation. Hands are placed upon the shoulders of the
pupil in front.

NOTE.-- In classroom:-- Single circle around one row of seats.


Verse

  Here we dance Looby Loo,
  Here we dance Looby Light,
  Here we dance Looby Loo,
  Every Saturday night.

  Interpretation;-- Children march in line of direction, starting with
  inside foot (left), swaying inward (left) and outward (right). Upon
  the completion of the verse, the children immediately cease the
  movement and face the center of the circle.

Chorus

  I put my right hand in,
  I put my right hand out,
  I give my right hand a shake, shake, shake,
  And turn myself about. Oh!

  Inter.;-- Imitate activity as suggested and in turning execute same by
  spinning about upon the right foot to the right. Upon completion of
  the turn immediately face line of direction, placing hands upon
  pupil's shoulders in front in readiness for the verse action.

Chorus

  2nd;-- I put my left hand in, etc.
  3rd;-- I put my right foot in, etc.
  4th;-- I put my left foot in, etc.
  5th;-- I put my little head in, etc.
  6th;-- I put my whole self in, etc.




BAA, BAA, BLACK SHEEP


_Permission to use words and music:--
Miss Lydia Clark and Benj. H. Sanborn & Co._

Arr. by +Fannie Robertson+

[Music:
  Baa, baa, Black Sheep, have you any wool?
  Yes, sir; yes, sir!
    Three bags full;
  One for my master,
    One for my dame.
  But none for the little boy
    That cries in the lane.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Children form a single circle with hands joined. (The
Sheep.) A boy is chosen who stands in the center of the circle. (The
little boy in the lane.) Outer, front and rear aisles of room utilized.


