death. His whole thoughts are given to loading and firing.

Any thought that the boys had given to danger was not for
themselves, but for each other; and Ralph--though his own position
was unsheltered--had once or twice spoken, to Percy, to keep his
body better sheltered by the trees behind which he was standing.

It was a long chase before the frightened animals were collected
together, and driven up towards the spot where the fight had taken
place. By the time that it was accomplished, the wounded had been
collected, and the surgeons had bandaged many of their wounds. A
qualified surgeon had accompanied the corps, as its regular doctor,
and two other young surgeons had enlisted in its ranks; and these,
their arms laid by, were now assisting to stanch the wounds and to
apply bandages. Of the franc tireurs, there were only four so
seriously wounded that they were unable to walk.

By that time two carts arrived from the village of Douteppe, which
stood in the valley, half a mile only from the scene of action; and
to which place Major Tempe had sent off a messenger directly the
affair had terminated. In one of these the wounded were placed,
while in the other were piled the arms and accouterments of the
fallen Uhlans. One of the young surgeons was to accompany the
wounded as far as Baccarat, where they were to remain for
treatment.

Twenty-three horses of the Uhlans had also been captured, by the
party who had driven in the cattle--among whom they were galloping.
Four men were told off to take them back to Epinal, and there
dispose of them, with their accouterments, for the benefit of the
military chest of the corps.

The question then arose as to what was to be done with the Prussian
wounded. Major Tempe decided this by saying that, as it was quite
impossible for the corps to be burdened with wounded men, the best
plan was to allow one of the slightly wounded among the prisoners
to walk back to Blamont; with a message that the Uhlans could come
back to fetch their wounded without molestation, as the franc
tireurs were upon the point of taking their departure.

The corps then assembled round a grave which had already been dug,
and into it the bodies of their comrades who had fallen were
placed. Major Tempe then said a few brief words of adieu, hoping
that all who fell might die equally bravely, and victoriously. Then
the sods were shoveled in; and the men, saddened by the
scene--though still flushed with the triumph of their first, and
signal, success--prepared to leave the spot.

Major Tempe had already held a consultation with his officers, and
their plan of operation had been decided upon. The difficulty which
they had encountered the evening before, with the horse and cart,
had already proved that it would be impossible to drag it about
with them. They had also taken thirty fine cattle, and upwards of a
hundred sheep from the enemy; and it was therefore resolved to
establish a sort of headquarters in the mountains, where they could
retire after their expeditions, and defy the efforts of the
Prussians to disturb them. The spot fixed upon was the forest of
Bousson, high up among the Vosges, and distant two hard days'
marching.

A portion of the troop, therefore, went round to Halloville, to
fetch the accouterments, blankets, etc. which had been left there;
while the rest marched, by the road, to the place where the cart
had been left the night before. Two peasants were engaged as guides
and, in the afternoon, the corps started for their destination.

It was a terrible march. The roads were mere tracks, and the
weather was terrible. Over and over again, the men had to unload
the carts, shoulder the contents, and carry them for a considerable
distance, until ground was reached where the cart could again be
loaded.

It was not until late on the evening of the third day's march that,
thoroughly done up by fatigue and hardship, the corps reached the
little village of Raon, in the heart of the forest of Bousson.
There was no possible fear of attack, here; and the commandant
decided that, for the night, there was no occasion for any of the
men to be out as sentries. The villagers at once took charge of the
animals, and turned them into a rough enclosure. The men were too
much done up even to care about keeping awake until supper could be
cooked and--being divided among the houses of the village--they
threw themselves down, and were fast asleep in a few minutes.

The next morning, the sun shone out brightly; and the men, turning
out after a long sleep, felt quite different creatures to the tired
band who had wearily crawled into the village. The bright sky, the
fresh morning air, the pleasant odor of the great pine forest
around them, and the bracing atmosphere--at the height of fifteen
hundred feet above the sea--at once refreshed and cheered them.

There was a brief morning parade--at which Tim Doyle, for the first
time, took his place with a rifle on his shoulder--and then the
major dismissed them, saying that there would be no further parade
that day, and that the men could amuse themselves as they liked. In
a short time, every man was following the bent of his own
inclination. First, however, there was a general cleaning of the
rifles and accouterments; then most of the men went down to the
stream, and there was a great washing of clothes, accompanied with
much laughing and joking. Then needles and thread were obtained,
from the women of the village, and there was much mending and
darning--for the past three days' work, among rocks and woods, had
done no little damage to their uniforms.

Next came the grand operation of breakfast, for which two of the
sheep had been killed. This, being the first regular meal that they
had had, for three days, was greatly enjoyed. After it was eaten
most of the men lit their pipes, and prepared to pass a day of
delightful idleness. Two or three of the village boys had been
engaged, as cowherds and shepherds; and the animals were all driven
out into the woods where, in the open glades, they would find an
abundance of food.

The cart was unanimously condemned as worse than useless. An empty
shed was turned into a storehouse; and it was determined that such
stores of powder, etc. as might be required, upon each expedition,
should be packed upon the horse's back and, if the horse could not
take all required, that other horses should be hired.

The Barclays, with their cousins, started for a ramble in the wood;
taking with them the Irishman, whose good humor and unflagging
spirits, during the last three days, had made him a general
favorite.

"Sure, and are there any wild bastes in the wood, your honor
Because, if there be, it would be well to take our rifles with us.
It would be mighty unpleasant to come across a lion, or a tiger,
and not to be able to pass him the time of day."

"No, Tim, we shall meet neither lions nor tigers, so you need not
trouble yourself with a rifle. A hundred years ago, we might have
met with a bear, or a wild boar; but they have disappeared, long
since. It is possible that there are a few wolves scattered about;
but they are never formidable to any but a solitary person, even in
winter; and at all other times fly from man's approach."

The party had a charming ramble, for the scenery here was very
fine. At times, the forest was so thick that they could see no
glimpse of the sky, and the trunks of the trees seemed to make a
wall, all round them; then again, it would open, and they would
obtain a glimpse over the country far away, rise beyond rise, to
the plain of Champagne or--if the view were behind, instead of in
front of them--they could see the tops of the highest range of the
Vosges, rising hill above hill, and often wooded to the very
summit--the Donon, one of the highest points of the range, being
immediately behind them.

The villages are, here, few and far between, and the people
extremely poor; for the soil is poor, and although in summer the
cattle--which form their only wealth--are able to pick up an
abundance of food, in the forests, they have a hard struggle to
keep them alive during the winter. Their language is German, and
their appearance and dress rather German than French but,
notwithstanding this, they were thoroughly French in spirit, and
regarded the invaders with an intense hatred.

Another day, passed in rest, completely restored the most exhausted
of the band. Orders were therefore issued for an early start, the
next morning; the object, this time, being to endeavor to cut the
railway. The band were to march in a body for the slopes of the
Vosges, behind Sarrebourg and Saverne; and were then to divide into
companies, and scatter themselves among the villages between
Lorquin and Marmontier, so as to act together or separately, as it
might seem expedient.



Chapter 6: The Tunnel Of Saverne.


It is needless to follow the corps, step by step, through their
marches; for the names of the little villages through which they
passed would not be found in any maps published in England, and
would therefore possess little interest for English readers. After
two days' long marches, the main body of the corps reached a
village situated in a wood, at about four miles from the great rock
tunnel of Saverne. The fourth company had been left at a village,
five miles to the left; while the third company were, next day, to
march forward to a place at about the same distance to the right.
Their orders were to keep a sharp lookout, to collect news of the
movements and strength of the enemy; but not to undertake any
expedition, or to do anything, whatever, to lead the enemy to guess
at their presence in the neighborhood--as it was of vital
importance that they should not be put upon their guard, until the
great blow was struck.

As soon as they had marched into the village, the principal
inhabitants came forward, and a consultation was held as to
providing lodgings. After some conversation, it was agreed that the
officers should have quarters in the village; and that the
schoolrooms--two in number--should be placed at the disposal of the
men. They were good-sized rooms, and would hold thirty men each,
without difficulty. The company who were to march forward in the
morning were provided with quarters in the village.

Ralph and Percy Barclay, as usual, acted as interpreters between
Major Tempe and the inhabitants; for neither the major, nor any of
his officers, spoke German. That language, indeed, was spoken only
by a few men in the whole corps; and these the commandant had
divided among the other companies, in order that each company might
be able to shift for itself, when separated from the main body.

"Have you seen this proclamation?" one of the villagers asked. "You
see that we are running no little risk, in taking you in."

Ralph read it, and as he did so his face flushed with indignation,
and he exclaimed:

"This is infamous! Infamous!"

"What is it?" Major Tempe asked.

"It is a proclamation from the Prussian General commanding the
district, major, giving notice that he will shoot every franc
tireur he may catch; and also giving notice to the inhabitants that
if any Prussian soldier be killed, or even shot at, by a franc
tireur--if a rail be pulled up, or a road cut--that he will hold
the village near the spot accountable; will burn the houses, and
treat the male inhabitants according to martial law, and that the
same penalties will be exacted for sheltering or hiding franc
tireurs."

"Impossible!" Major Tempe said, astounded. "No officer of a
civilized army could issue such an edict. Besides, during an
invasion of Germany, the people were summoned by the King of
Prussia to take up arms, to cut roads, destroy bridges, and shoot
down the enemy--just as we are going to do, now. It is too
atrocious to be true."

"There it is, in black and white," Ralph said. "There can be no
mistake as to the wording."

Major Tempe looked grieved, as well as indignant.

"This will be a terrible business," he said, "if the war is to be
carried on in this way. Of course, if they give us no quarter, we
shall give them none. That is, we must make as many prisoners as we
can in order that, if any of our men are taken prisoners, we may
carry out reprisals if they shoot them.

"It will, besides this, do us great harm. Naturally, the villagers,
instead of looking upon us as defenders, will regard us as the most
dangerous of guests. They will argue:

"'If we make no resistance, the Prussians may plunder us, but at
least our houses and our lives are safe; whereas if these franc
tireurs are found to have been with us, or if they make any attack
in our neighborhood, we are not only plundered, but burnt out, and
shot!'

"Of course, we are always liable to treachery. There are scoundrels
always to be found who would sell their own mothers, but now even
the most patriotic cannot but feel that they are running an immense
risk in sheltering us.

"Never before, I believe, in the annals of civilized nations, did a
man in authority dare to proclaim that persons should suffer for a
crime with which they had nothing, whatever, to do. If we arrive at
a little village, how are the people to say to us, 'We will not
allow you to pull up a rail!'? And yet, if they do not prevent us,
they are to be punished with fire and sword. And these people call
themselves a civilized nation!

"One of the evil consequences of this proclamation is that we shall
never dare trust to the inhabitants to make inquiries for us. They
will be so alarmed, in case we should attempt anything in their
neighborhood, that they would be sure to do and say everything they
could to dissuade us from it and, if inclined to treachery, might
even try to buy their own safety by betraying us."

Major Tempe was speaking to the other officers, who thoroughly
agreed with his opinion. Ralph and Percy had remained in the room,
in case any further questions might be asked in reference to the
proclamation. They now asked if anything else were required and,
upon a negative answer being given, saluted and took their leave.
It was dusk when they went out and, as they walked towards the
schoolroom, they heard a great tumult of voices raised in anger,
among which they recognized that of Tim Doyle.

"Howld yer jaw, you jabbering apes!" he exclaimed, in great wrath.
"Give me a lantern, or a candle, and let me begone. The boys are
all waiting for me to begin."

Hurrying up, they found Tim surrounded by a few of the principal
inhabitants of the village, and soon learned the cause of the
dispute. Supper was served, but it was too dark to see to eat it;
and Tim--always ready to make himself useful--had volunteered to go
in search of a light. He had in vain used his few words of French
with the villagers he met, and these had at last called the
schoolmaster, the only person in the village who understood French.
This man had addressed Tim first in French and then in German and,
upon receiving no coherent answer in either language, had arrived
at the conclusion that Tim was making fun of them. Hence the
dispute had arisen.

The boys explained matters, and the villagers--whose knowledge of
England was of the very vaguest description; and most of whom,
indeed, had previously believed that all the world spoke either
French or German--were profuse in apologies, and immediately
procured some candles, with which Tim and the boys hastened to the
schoolroom. Two candles were given to each company and--one being
lighted at each end of the room, and stuck upon nails in the
wall--the boys were enabled to see what the place was like.

Clean straw had been littered, a foot deep, down each side of the
room; and fifteen blankets were folded, side by side, along by each
wall. Upon pegs above--meant for the scholars' caps--hung the
haversacks, water bottles, and other accouterments; while the
rifles were piled along the center of the room, leaving space
enough to walk down upon either side, between them and the beds. At
the farther end of the room was a large fireplace, in which a log
fire was blazing; and a small shed, outside, had been converted
into a kitchen.

"We might be worse off than this, a long way, Ralph," said Louis
Duburg, as Ralph took his place on the straw next to him.

"That we might, Louis. The fire looks cheerful, too, and the nights
are getting very cold."

"That they are, Ralph.

"Ah! Here is supper. I am quite ready for that, too."

The men who officiated as cooks--and who, by agreement, had been
released from all night duty in consideration of their regularly
undertaking that occupation--now brought in a large saucepan full
of soup; and each man went up with his canteen, and received his
portion, returning to his bed upon the straw to eat it.

"Anything new, Barclay?" one of the men asked, from the other side
of the room.

"Yes, indeed," Ralph said. "New, and disagreeable. Mind none of you
get taken prisoners, for the Prussian General has issued a
proclamation that he shall shoot all franc tireurs he catches."

"Impossible!" came in a general chorus, from all present.

"Well, it sounds like it, but it is true enough," and Ralph
repeated, word for word, the proclamation which he had translated
to Major Tempe.

As might have been expected, it raised a perfect storm of
indignation; and this lasted until, at nine o'clock, the sergeant
gave the word:

"Lights out."

In the morning, after parade, Ralph and Percy strolled away
together and had a long talk and, at the end of an hour, they
walked to the house where Major Tempe had established his
headquarters.

"Good morning, my friends," he said, as they entered. "Is there
anything I can do for you? Sit down."

"We have been thinking, sir--Percy and I--that we could very easily
dress up as peasants, and go down to Saverne, or anywhere you might
think fit, and find out all particulars as to the strength and
position of the enemy. No one would suspect two boys of being franc
tireurs. It would be unlikely in the extreme that anyone would ask
us any questions and, if we were asked, we should say we belonged
to some village in the mountains, and had come down to buy coffee,
and other necessaries. The risk of detection would be next to
nothing, for we speak German quite well enough to pass for lads
from the mountains."

Major Tempe was silent a minute.

"You know you would be shot, at once, if you were detected."

"No doubt, sir, but there is no reason in the world why we should
be detected. The Prussians can't know everyone by sight, even
within the town itself; and will not notice us, at all. If they do,
our answer is sufficient."

"I tell you frankly, boys, I was thinking only last night of the
matter; but--however much you may make light of it--there is, of
course, a certain amount of danger in acting as spies; and your
father--my friend Captain Barclay--might say to me, if evil came of
it:

"'I gave you my boys to fight for France, and you have sent them to
their death, as spies.'

"So I resolved to say nothing about it."

"But now we have offered, sir, the case is different," Ralph said.
"From our knowledge of the language, and from our age, we are
better fitted than anyone in the corps to perform this service; and
therefore it would be clearly our duty to perform it, were it
greatly more dangerous than it is. Our father said to us, at
starting:

"'Do your duty, boys, whatever the danger.'

"We will see about our clothes--there can be no difficulty about
that, there are several lads in the village whose things would fit
us. Shall we come in this afternoon, for instructions?"

"Thank you, lads," Major Tempe said, warmly. "I trust, with you,
that no harm will come of it. But your offer is of too great
advantage to the corps for me to persist in my refusal."

Upon leaving the quarters of the commandant, the boys went at once
to the house of a farmer a short distance from the village where,
the day before, they had noticed two boys of about their own size.
They explained to the farmer that they wanted to buy of him a suit
of the working clothes of each of his sons. Greatly surprised at
this request, the farmer had inquired what they could possibly want
them for; and Ralph--who thought it better not to trust him with
the secret--replied that, as the Prussian General had given notice
that he should shoot all franc tireurs he might take prisoners,
they wanted a suit of clothes, each, which they might slip on in
case of defeat or danger of capture. The pretense was a plausible
one; and the farmer sold them the required clothes, charging only
about twice their cost, when new.

The boys took the parcel and, instead of returning to the village
direct, they hid it carefully in a wood, at a short distance away.
They then returned and, in the afternoon, received detailed
instructions from Major Tempe.

It was arranged that the matter should be kept entirely secret,
