rapidly along the different desks and forms.  And the other masters
followed in due order.  And, when all were in their respective places,
prayers were said, and Dr Palmer, amid breathless silence, spoke as
follows:

"You are most of you, if not all, aware of what occurred last night.
One of your number, Campbell, has, in a fit of rashness and haste, run
away, and as yet has not been found.  There must be some special reason
for this;" and the Doctor paused and looked round the room.  "I left
him in my study at half-past seven last night, having his tea, and as
happy as he could be under the sad circumstances of his mother's
death."  And his voice trembled; "On reaching home a few minutes after
nine I find he has disappeared.  The dormitory, in which he slept, is
discovered in a disgraceful state of disorder and confusion.  The boys
who sleep there must have an explanation to give.  On another matter
with regard to Campbell, I shall have to speak presently."  And again
the dignified voice was broken with ill-concealed emotion.  "Sit down,
all of you, except those who sleep in No. 7 dormitory."

The order was obeyed, and the sixteen stood in their places, the
observed of all eyes.

"Egerton, you are eldest in the dormitory.  Did you do anything, or see
anything done, that might provoke Campbell to this rash act?"

"No, sir; nothing at all," answered Egerton, fearlessly.

"You did not interfere with him in any way?"

Egerton hesitated.  "No, sir, I didn't.  I didn't even speak to him.
It wasn't likely after what he said of me to you."

"That will do," said Doctor Palmer, in a strange tone.  "You may sit
down.  Warburton!"

"Yes, sir!"

"Did you interfere with Campbell in any way last night?"

"No, sir, not at all," answered Warburton.

"Sit down!" again said the Doctor.

Two deliberate liars out of sixteen is a large proportion, and it is
not to be supposed that there would be more such.  The rest would
either maintain a frightened silence or tell the truth.  Fortunately,
the boy next questioned was one of the latter class.  And his fearless
answer gave courage to the rest.

"Yes, sir, I did.  I pulled his bed out into the room and upset it,"
answered Williams, when the same question was put to him.  And before
the Doctor could say a word, the remaining three implicated with
Egerton, Warburton, and Williams, confessed their share in the matter.
The rest denied, with truth, having done anything to Campbell, and were
told to sit down.

Those who had confessed were then called into the centre of the room
and further questioned as to who commenced the attack on Campbell, and
what was the cause of it.

Williams looked at the other three who stood with him, and the three
looked at Williams; and all got very red, and said nothing.

The Doctor repeated his question.

The boys hesitated, and looked doubtfully towards Egerton and
Warburton, to see if they would come forward; but no! the two preserved
the same stolid demeanour.  So at length Williams told the whole story,
not exculpating himself in the least degree, but only saying how sorry
he was; and the others confirmed his statement.

"Egerton and Warburton, stand out.  Do you hear what Williams says?  Do
you still deny the charge brought against you?"

The room was breathless.  The two culprits turned deadly pale, and
began to stammer out what was partially denial, partially excuse.  And
then in an abject tone implored forgiveness.

Doctor Palmer took no notice of their entreaties, but mentioned to them
to stand by his desk.  The other four he dismissed to their seats.

He then addressed the whole assemblage of boys and masters:

"I have now another matter of very serious moment to speak to you
about.  A great injustice has been done to Campbell--an injustice which
has in a measure contributed, I fear, to his reasons for running away.
To set you an example of the manliness of confession, I tell you
openly, and Mr Prichard wishes me to say the same for him, that we--he
and I--have made a great mistake, and judged and punished Campbell
unjustly.  You will understand that I am referring to the book found in
his possession during the examination.  At the same time, I wish you
all fully to understand that appearances went decidedly against
Campbell, and evidence proved his guilt.  And it was acting upon these
appearances and this evidence that we punished him.  Mr Franklyn,
however, will kindly explain the matter to you;" and the Doctor sat
down overcome by excitement and emotion.

And then Mr Franklyn (the Examiner), after a preliminary "ahem!" spoke
to the boys in a clear ringing voice, going straight to the point
without any introductory remarks.

"On Tuesday last I received the papers done by you on Monday morning.
With those of the Lower Third Form came a note from Mr Prichard, saying
that he had sent with the papers a book--a Delectus translation ('Crib'
as you would call it)--which he had found in Campbell's possession
during the examination.  And he requested me, and very properly, too,
to take the necessary steps respecting Campbell's place in his class.
Here, however, Mr Prichard begs me to plainly state the mistake he
made.  He did not compare the papers sent in, with the translation of
the book.  This would at once have acquitted Campbell.  For I at once
emphatically say that, even if the book were his, he never used it
during the examination.  His work was correct, but boyish in style.
The rendering of the book is the work of a man.  So much, then, is
clear, that of the charge of using the book during the examination,
Campbell is perfectly innocent; and I only wish he were here to hear me
say so."

At these words all reverence for masters was thrown aside, and the
vehement clapping of hands soon showed that Harry's good name was once
more firmly established, and not only established, but that his
clearance gave joy to the school.

"But," resumed Mr Franklyn, when the noise had abated, "to make
assurance doubly sure, I will go a step further, and tell you who _did_
use the book during the examination."

With a sort of presentiment of what was coming, all eyes were turned
upon Egerton; while in the hearts of many a feeling of shame--honest,
good-producing shame--sprang up for the unkind part they had played to
Harry.

"On turning to Egerton's papers," continued Mr Franklyn, "I at once
detected a strong similarity to the translation I had just examined;
and on a close comparison found his translation coincided word for word
with the book found in Campbell's possession, and which he was accused
of using.  Whether the book belongs to Egerton or not, I do not know;
but this is evident, that it was he, and not Campbell, who was guilty
of taking unfair advantage of his companions.  How the book came into
Campbell's desk I know not.  But as Egerton has been, in these two
matters, convicted of telling a wilful untruth, I am ready to believe
him capable of any further deceitful conduct to screen himself.  It
rests with Doctor Palmer to conclude this most painful affair."

As Mr Franklyn ended, and resumed his seat, there was a mixed murmur,
partly from pleasure at Harry's innocence, partly from an impulse,
which seemed to take possession of all, of snatching the punishment of
Egerton out of the lawful hands.

The noise, however, instantly ceased when Doctor Palmer rose.

"None of you can be more glad than I am," he said, "that Campbell's
innocence has been fully proved, and none of you more sorry than I,
that he has been punished unjustly.  At the same time, you must clearly
understand that the mistake, which Mr Prichard and I made, does not in
the least degree exonerate Egerton.  He has done that for which I
punished Campbell; removing as he thought all traces of his guilt, and
throwing them on another's shoulders.  And then, not merely to screen
himself, but to ruin that other, he tells one deliberate lie after
another.  Not content even with that, he provokes the innocent boy
whose reputation he had blasted, and the result you all know.  Those
who joined in bullying Campbell last night, I forgive.  They have
confessed.  Warburton has not done so.  For his lie, I punish him."

And then, calling Warburton, he caned him severely before the whole
school, a punishment but rarely adopted, and once only remembered to
have taken place by the elder boys.

"With regard to Egerton," he resumed, "there is but one course for me
to adopt."  And he rang a bell which communicated with his house, and,
after a breathless pause of about three minutes, William entered,
bearing a birch, with an expression of mock gravity on his countenance.
Egerton's appearance was one of abject meanness; his indifference was
all gone; he was the picture of trembling, tearful cowardice.

The birch had never been used in the recollection of any of the boys.
It had only existed--a shadowy terror.  But now that it appeared in all
its stern dignity, Egerton, the destined recipient, fell on his knees,
and, with streaming eyes--coward as he was--begged imploringly for
forgiveness.

It was not likely his cries would be of any avail.  Nor, indeed, were
they.  Nor would the Doctor prolong the sickening scene.  The birch did
its duty, and well.

In five minutes Egerton had been birched in such a manner that every
one thought he would certainly never forget it till his dying day.
Egerton himself was too "personally affected" to think of anything, but
contented himself with howling lustily.  And finally he heard the
Doctor's voice, telling him he was expelled, and would leave the school
in two hours.

"There will be no more work to-day," said Doctor Palmer, when he had
recovered breath from his exertions.  "Besides the pleasure of
proclaiming Campbell's innocence, I have to add that Mr Franklyn tells
me his papers were far superior to those of the rest of his class; and
that, judging from them, he would have easily maintained his position
as head boy, had he not left us of his own accord, provoked and
ill-treated, I cordially allow.  I only trust we may be able to
discover him, and have him once more among us.  You see, boys," he
added affectionately, "truth and innocence will always right themselves
sooner or later."

And then, as the masters left the room, there rose the loud ringing
cheers that English boys know so well to give.  The innocent was
justified; the guilty punished!  Was not that enough to make all hearts
glad?

But meantime, he, whom all this most chiefly concerned, still slept in
the barn on his bed of hay, a dreamless sleep, unconscious alike of
sorrow and of that which might have changed the whole colour of his
life--the removing of the burden of guilt which had weighed him down.
But it had come too late.  Was it better so?  Maybe it was.




CHAPTER XVI.

BLEWCOME'S ROYAL MENAGERIE.

A well-matched pair--Harry awakes--New
characters--Introduction--Breakfast--A trifle happier--His new life.


Mr Blewcome and his wife, Mrs Blewcome, were great travellers.  There
were few places, large and small, in England, where the forms of Mr and
Mrs Blewcome were unknown.

Mr Blewcome was the proprietor of a travelling menagerie, and was a
very distinguished personage in his own way, a man with a mind far
above your ordinary proprietors of "wild beastesses," as Mrs Blewcome
informed all whom she met.  A man who had adopted that profession with
the noble object of raising it to its proper level.  Noble and
enthusiastic Blewcome!

Mr Blewcome was tall and thin; Mrs B. was short and stout.  The face of
the manager and proprietor of Blewcome's Royal Menagerie was sallow and
cadaverous.  The face of his spouse was rubicund to a degree.  In fact,
in everything, the pair were admirably suited, according to the
principle, that the more unlike two people are, the better they will
agree; and they led a very prosperous "Jack Sprat and his wife" sort of
life, roaming from place to place, with their caravans of wild beasts
and yellow chariot of unhealthy-looking musicians, whose performance
consisted of a very small quantity of trumpet, and a very great deal of
drum.  First-rate things in bands, drums are; they make so much noise,
and hide such a multitude of mistakes.  Besides, one tune will last so
much longer with a judicious intermixture of drum.  So Mr and Mrs
Blewcome went about England, and Mr Blewcome gave incorrect lectures
about impossible wild beasts, and Mrs Blewcome took the money at the
door; while outside, the band played to delighted audiences, who always
came to hear the music because they had not to pay anything for that
pleasure.

Now it so happened that Blewcome's Royal Menagerie had made a most
successful sojourn in Wilton, and was now on its way to the
neighbouring town of Newbury; and, having reached the third milestone
from Wilton, was passing the barn where Harry slept, fancying himself
miles away from the hated grammar-school.  Like most boys, he had not
much idea of distance, and, besides, the night had deceived him.

The rumbling of the vans, and the growling of the beasts, who were
making a great deal of very unnecessary noise, startled Harry from his
sleep; and he ran out of his strange sleeping-chamber to see what it
all meant, and stood staring open-mouthed at the curious
divers-coloured caravans as they rolled along.  The yellow chariot led
the way.  But the musicians were silent, and the drum swung from the
back of the vehicle unbeaten and at peace.  Last of all came Mr and Mrs
Blewcome in the gaudiest of the caravans, drawn by two piebald steeds
with very long manes and very thin tails, and who seemed to have seen
their best days.

The eagle eye of Timothy Blewcome caught sight of Harry, and, turning
to his wife, he remarked, in a tragic tone (he was a bit of an orator,
was Blewcome; at least, he thought so):

"Jemimar, he'll do!"

And their conveyance came to a standstill, and Harry saw the portly
form of the said Jemima Blewcome descending the caravan-steps and
coming towards him.

He was not the least afraid, she looked so kind and good-natured.

"My dear!" said Mrs Blewcome, courteously, with the blandest of smiles.

"Yes," answered Harry, vacantly.

"My dear!" repeated Mrs Blewcome, "come along with me!"

Harry wanted his breakfast.  He was ravenously hungry.

"Give me something to eat, then," he said stolidly, "and I'll come."

"Get up into the van, my dear, and I will.  Here, Tim, help the boy up."

And Harry, nothing daunted, reached out his hand, and Timothy Blewcome
gravely assisted him up the steps.

Gazing admiringly at the gorgeous colouring of the door and sides of
the strange habitation on wheels, Harry sat himself down in one corner
of the van, and, somehow or other, soon began to feel quite at home.
Mrs Blewcome then ascended, the word was given, and the whole cavalcade
moved on.

It was the work of a moment; and there was Harry, not the least
realising his position, a member of a travelling menagerie.  It was a
change from the previous day, certainly.

The space of the apartment was somewhat confined, and the springs
seemed to be very bad, for the caravan jolted along in such a manner
that he could scarcely help upsetting the cup of bread and milk the
motherly hands of Mrs Blewcome had given him.

He never uttered a word, but ate his breakfast, and enjoyed it
thoroughly, thinking it far nicer than all the good things he had had
in the Doctor's study on the previous night.  Last night!  Could it
