[Illustration]




JACK.


The name of the bear is "Jack." I fetched him from the West India Import
Dock on the 5th of November, 1870. He was running about with another
bear on board ship, but the job was to catch him. After many attempts we
at last put a strong collar round his neck, to which was attached a long
chain, and then we got him into a large barrel, and fastened the head on
with hoop-iron, lowered him over the side of the vessel into a boat, and
then pulled to the quay, and hauled him up into a cart. For a time the
little fellow was quiet enough, but he got very inquisitive when being
driven toward the city, and wanted to have a look round. I managed to
quiet him by giving him pieces of lump sugar. He arrived safely at the
Crystal Palace, and has lived in an aviary till the beginning of last
month, when he was put into his new bear-pit. The little fellow has
grown twice the size he was when he first came. He is very playful, but
sometimes shows his teeth when he is teased.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: JUST ARRIVED!]




[Illustration]


S--THE SWALLOW.


_Now hovering on rapid wing,
  Now down to earth, now high,
And, circling round in airy ring
  To chase the painted fly._


[Illustration]


T--THE TIGER.


_Fiercest of all the beasts of prey,
  With eyes that glow like fire,
And glossy hide, who does not dread
  The Tiger, yet admire?_


[Illustration]


U--THE URSINE OPOSSUM.


_In hollow trees the Opossum lives,
  And slumbers through the day,
But when the shades of night descend,
  Goes forth in search of prey._




A SINGULAR HABIT OF THE WOODCOCK.


Among several curious habits of the woodcock, described by the editor of
the _Zoologist_, its practice of carrying its young is perhaps the most
interesting. The testimony of many competent witnesses is cited to
corroborate the statement. The late L. Lloyd, in his "Scandinavian
Adventures," wrote, "If, in shooting, you meet with a brood of
woodcocks, and the young ones cannot fly, the old bird takes them
separately between her feet, and flies from the dogs with a moaning
cry."

The same author makes a similar statement in another work, this habit of
the woodcock having been observed by a friend.

One of the brothers Stuart gives, in "Lays of the Deer Forest," a
graphic account of the performance. He says, "As the nests are laid on
dry ground, and often at a distance from moisture, in the latter case,
as soon as the young are hatched, the old bird will sometimes carry them
in her claws to the nearest spring or green strip. In the same manner,
when in danger, she will rescue those which she can lift; of this we
have frequent opportunities for observation in Tarnaway. Various times
when the hounds, in beating the ground, have come upon a brood, we have
seen the old bird rise with the young one in her claws and carry it
fifty or a hundred yards away."




THE SKY-LARK


Has any one ever told you that they were "happy as a lark," and have you
stopped to think how happy a lark is?--its joyous flight up into the
sky, as high or higher than the sight of man can reach, singing louder
and louder, and more and more gayly the higher it ascends? When the
sweet hay-time comes on, and mowers are busy in the fields with their
great scythes, it is sometimes a dangerous season for larks, who make
their nests on the ground. Often the poor little nests must suffer; but
only think how ingenious their owners are if they do. A mower once cut
off the upper part of a lark's nest. The lark sitting in it was
uninjured. The man was very sorry for what he had done; but there was no
help for it--at least so he thought. The lark knew better, and soon
afterward a beautiful dome was found made of grass over the nest by the
patient, brave bird.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: THE SILKWORM.

THE BAT.

CARRION BEETLES.

THE SPIDER.]

[Illustration: THE SYRIAN OX.

THE HORSE.

THE MULE.

THE ARABIAN HORSE.]




THE STORY OF A SEAL.


Some years ago a German Artist was travelling in Norway, on foot, with
his knapsack on his back and his stick in his hand. He lodged most of
time in the cottages that he fell in with on his road. In one of them
there was a seal, which the fisherman had found on the sand, after
harpooning the mother of the poor animal. No sooner was it admitted into
the cottage than the seal became the friend of the family and the
playmate of the children. It played from morning till night with them,
would lick their hands, and call them with a gentle little cry, which is
not unlike the human voice, and it would look at them tenderly with its
large blue eyes, shaded by long black lashes. It almost always followed
its master to fish, swimming around the boat and taking a great many
fish, which it delivered to the fisherman without even giving them a
bite. A dog could not have been more devoted, faithful, teachable, or
even more intelligent.

[Illustration]




THE KING OF THE MOUNTAINS.


"What is that, mother?" "The eagle, boy,
Proudly careering his course with joy,
Firm on his own mountain vigor relying,
Breasting the dark storm, the red bolt defying;
His wing on the wind, and his eye on the sun,
He swerves not a hair, but bears onward, right on.
Close to the sun in lonely lands,
Ringed with the azure world he stands;
The wrinkled sea beneath him crawls,
He watches from his mountain walls.
Boy, may the eagle's flight ever be thine,
Onward and upward, and true to the line."

[Illustration]




THE BEE.


Oh! busy bee,
On wing so free,
  Yet all in order true;
Each seems to know,
Both where to go,
  And what it has to do.

'Mid summer heat,
The honey sweet,
  It gathers while it may;
In tiny drops,
And never stops
  To waste its time in play.

I hear it come,
I know its hum;
  It flies from flower to flower;
And to its store,
A little more
  It adds, each day and hour.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: THE LARK AND YOUNG.]




[Illustration]

V--THE VULTURE.


_On rugged rods the Vulture waits
  To scent its carrion prey,
When down, into the plains below
  It takes its rapid way._


[Illustration]


W--THE WOLF.


_Fierce is the wolf, and crafty too,
  And swift of foot is he;
In forest depths and mountain glens
  He loves to wander free._


[Illustration]


X--THE XEMA.


_In far-off lands, 'neath northern skies,
  And on the surfy shore,
Lives the lone Xema, and delights
  In ocean's thunder roar._




MOTHER AND PUPS.


The dog that you see here looking quite maternal with her family around
her, is the sheep dog, the shepherd's faithful and invaluable friend. It
is the most sagacious and intelligent of all dogs, and volumes of
anecdotes might be written of its intelligence and affection.

Mr. St. John, in his "Highland Sports," tells the following: "A shepherd
once, to prove the quickness of his dog, who was lying before the fire
where we were talking, said to me in the middle of a sentence concerning
something else, 'I'm thinking, sir, the cow is in the potatoes;' when
the dog, who appeared to be asleep, immediately jumped up, and leaping
through the open window and on to the roof of the house, where he could
get a view of the potato field, and not seeing the cow there, he looked
into the farm-yard, where she was, and finding that all was right,
returned to his old position before the fire."

[Illustration]




THE FRIENDLY TERNS.


One day Mr. Edward, the Scotch naturalist shot at a Tern, hoping to
secure the beautiful creature as a specimen. The ball broke the bird's
