"I'll have the law of ye for this," he shouted.

Achilles laughed.

"It's as you like," he said. "I've got my witnesses here," pointing to
the two boys.

Mr. Bickford got over the fence, and sullenly turned in the direction of
his deserted wagon.

"You'll hear from me again, all of you!" he shouted, shaking his fist.

"Don't trouble yourself to write," said the giant, jocosely. "We can
worry along without a letter."

The blacksmith was too full of wrath for utterance. He kept on his way,
muttering to himself, and shaking his fist at intervals.

"Now what's all this about?" asked Achilles. "What's the matter with our
amiable friend?"

Kit explained.

"So you don't want to be a blacksmith? Where are you going, if I may
inquire?"

"I'm going to join the circus," answered Kit.

"In what capacity--as a lion tamer?"

"No; I shouldn't fancy that business. I am to be an acrobat."

"An acrobat! But are you qualified?" asked Achilles, somewhat surprised.

He had not heard of Kit's practice with the Vincenti brothers on the day
of his first visit to the circus.

"I am pretty well qualified already," answered Kit, "I saw Mr. Barlow
yesterday morning, and he promised me an engagement at ten dollars a
week."

"Good!" said Achilles, heartily. "I am pleased to hear it. I took a
liking to you the other day, and I'm glad you're going to join us. But
do you think it wise to choose such a life?"

"You have chosen it," said Kit.

"Yes; but what could I do--a man of my size? I must earn more than a
common man. My board and clothes both cost more. What do you think I
paid for this suit I have on?"

"I couldn't tell, sir."

"Sixty dollars. The tailor only charges thirty dollars to a man of
ordinary size, but I am so absurdly large that I have to pay double
price."

"Why don't you buy your suits ready made?" asked Kit, smiling.

Achilles laughed heartily at the idea.

"Show me a place where I can get ready made clothes to fit me," he
answered, "and I will gladly accept your suggestion."

"That may be a little difficult, I admit."

"Why, you have no idea how inconvenient I find it to be so large. I
can't find a bed to suit me in any hotel. If I go to the theater I can't
crowd myself into an ordinary seat. I have to have all kinds of
clothing, inside and outside, made to order. My hats and shoes must also
be made expressly for me."

"I suppose you get very well paid," suggested Kit.

"Seventy-five dollars a week sounds pretty large, and would be if my
expenses were not so great. You wouldn't be a giant for that money,
would you?"

"I am not so ambitious," replied Kit, smiling. "But there was a moment
when I wished myself of your size."

"When was that?"

"When the blacksmith grasped me by the collar."

"You don't have to work very hard," said William Morris.

"My boy, it is pretty hard work to be stared at by a crowd of people. I
get tired of it often, but I see no other way of making a living."

"You would make a pretty good blacksmith."

"I couldn't earn more than a man of average strength, and that wouldn't
be enough, as I have explained."

"Were your parents very tall?" asked Kit.

"My father was six feet in height, but my mother was a small woman. I
don't know what put it into me to grow so big. But here we are at the
lot. Will you come in?"

"When can I see Mr. Barlow?" asked Kit, anxiously.

"He is at the hotel. He won't be round till half-past nine. Have you two
boys had breakfast?"

"No," answered Kit; "I'm nearly famished."

"Come round to the circus tent. You are to be one of us, and will board
there. I guess we can provide for your friend, too."

Never was invitation more gladly accepted. Both Kit and William felt as
if they had not broken their fast for a week.




CHAPTER XIII.

BREAKFAST IN THE CIRCUS TENT.


Achilles entered the circus inclosure--the "lot," as it is generally
called,--and made his way to a small tent situated not far from the one
devoted to the performances. An attendant was carrying in a plate of hot
steak and potatoes from the cook tent near by.

"Is breakfast ready?" asked Achilles.

"Yes; any time you want it."

"Is anybody inside?"

"Only Mademoiselle Louise."

"Well, I want three breakfasts--for myself and my two young friends
here."

"I didn't know you had sons," said Mike, the attendant, regarding Kit
and William with some curiosity.

"I haven't. One of these young men is an acrobat, who will be one of us.
The other is his friend. Bring along the grub as quick as possible--we
are all hungry."

"All right, sir."

Running the length of the tent, which was about twenty feet by ten, was
a long table surrounded by benches.

The giant took his seat and placed the boys one on each side of him.
Just opposite sat a woman of twenty-five or thereabouts, who was already
eating breakfast.

"Good morning, Mlle. Louise," said the giant.

"Good morning, Mr. Henderson," responded the lady. "Who are your young
companions?"

"I don't know their names, but this one," placing his hand on Kit's
shoulder, "has been engaged by Mr. Barlow as an acrobat."

"Indeed! He looks young."

"I am sixteen," volunteered Kit.

"What circus have you traveled with before this season?" asked Mlle.
Louise.

"I have never traveled with any, madam."

"But you are an acrobat?"

"I have had my practice in a gymnasium."

"How came Mr. Barlow to engage you?"

"At Smyrna I practiced a little with the Vincenti brothers."

"At Smyrna? Why, that's where the lion dashed into the arena!"

"Yes."

"Do you know the boy who had the courage to face him?"

Kit blushed.

"I am the boy," he said.

"You don't mean it!" exclaimed the lady, vivaciously. "Why, you're a
hero. I must shake hands with you," and she reached across the table and
gave Kit a hearty grasp of the hand.

"Is that so?" interposed Achilles. "Why, I didn't know you were the boy.
I was not present at the time, and only heard of it afterwards. Mlle.
Louise is right. You are a brave fellow."

"I am much obliged to you both for your favorable opinion," said Kit
modestly, "but I didn't realize my danger till afterwards."

"Oh, heavens! I can see him now--that wicked beast!" exclaimed the lady.
"I was nearly scared out of my senses. As for poor Dupont, he was nearer
death than I ever want to be till my time comes."

"Was Dupont the clown?" asked Kit.

"Yes. The lion held him down, with his foot upon the poor clown's back,
and but for your brave act he would have torn the poor fellow to pieces.
Mr. Henderson, you missed the most thrilling act of the evening."

"So I begin to think. By the way, boys, I ought to have introduced this
lady. She is the famous aerial artist, whom you saw the other evening in
her wonderful feats upon the trapeze."

"Yes," said Mlle. Louise, complacently, "I think I have a pretty good
act. I get plenty of applause, eh, Mr. Henderson?"

"That's true. I think I should leave the circus if I had to appear in
your act. I never could summon up courage."

The lady laughed.

"Monsieur Achilles," she said, "I wouldn't advise you to emulate me. I
don't believe you could find a rope strong enough to support you, and if
you should fall, I pity the audience."

"You have convinced me. I shall give up all thoughts of it," said the
giant, with mock gravity. "It would suit better our young friend here,
who is an acrobat."

"Did you ever practice on a trapeze?" asked Mlle. Louise, turning to
Kit.

"Yes, often," answered Kit, "but never at a great height."

"Would it frighten you to find yourself so high up in the air?"

"I don't think so; I have a cool head."

"You must practice. I will give you a few hints myself. If you are cool
and courageous, as I judge you will soon learn. By the way, what is your
name?"

"Kit Watson."

"It'll be something else when you begin work."

"Do all performers have assumed names?"

"Generally. Here I am Mademoiselle Louise Lefroy, but it isn't a bit
like my real name."

Before this the boys had been served with breakfast. The steak was
rather tough, and the coffee not of the best quality, but Kit and
William thoroughly enjoyed it, and thought it about the best breakfast
they had ever eaten. Mlle. Louise continued to converse with them, and
was very gracious.

"Are you too an acrobat?" she asked William.

William became so confused that he swallowed some coffee the wrong way,
and came near choking.

"No, ma'am," he answered bashfully, "but I'd like to go round with the
show."

"You'll be better off at home if you've got one," said the giant. "You
are not a performer; you are too small for a property man, and not
strong enough for a razorback."

"What's a razorback?" asked William, in amazement.

Achilles smiled.

"It's a boy or man who helps load and unload the circus cars," he
answered. "It is heavy work, and you would be thrown among a low lot of
people--canvasmen, and such. Our young friend here, on the other hand,
will have a good sleeping berth, eat at the first table, and be well
provided for generally."

William looked disappointed. He had never thought particularly about
traveling with a circus till now, but his meeting with Kit had given him
a circus fever.

At ten o'clock Mr. Barlow came to the grounds, and Achilles volunteered
to go with Kit to speak with him about his engagement.




CHAPTER XIV.

SOME CIRCUS PEOPLE.


Mr. Barlow recognized Kit instantly.

"So you have kept your promise, my young friend," he said. "Well, have
you come to join us?"

"Yes, sir, if your offer holds good."

"My offers always hold good; I never go back on my word."

Kit was glad to hear this, for he would have been placed in an
embarrassing position if, like some men, Mr. Barlow had forgotten an
offer made on the impulse of the moment.

"Have you any directions to give, sir?"

"You may report to my manager, Mr. Bryant. First, however, it may be
well for you to see the Vincenti brothers, and arrange for a joint act."

"When do you wish me to appear, sir?"

"Whenever you are ready. You may take a week to rehearse, if necessary.
Your pay will commence at once."

"Thank you, Mr. Barlow; you are very kind and considerate."

Mr. Barlow smiled, and, waving his hand, passed on.

He was very popular with all who were in his employ, and had a high
reputation for kindness and strict integrity.

"I'd like to work for him," said William Morris, who had listened to the
conversation between Kit and the circus proprietor.

"I should like to have you along with me," replied Kit, "but from what
Mr. Henderson says there is no good opening."

It was not till eleven o'clock that Kit met his future partners, the
Vincenti brothers.

"Good!" said Alonzo, in a tone of satisfaction. "We must get up a joint
act. I suppose you haven't got a suit of tights?"

"No. I never expected to need one."

"I have an extra one which I think will fit you. Though I am ten years
older than you we are about the same size."

Kit had occasion to remark that circus performers are short as a rule.
Many of them do not exceed five feet four inches in height, but
generally they are compactly built, with well developed muscles, and
possess unusual strength and agility.

The circus suit was brought out. It proved to be an excellent fit.

William Morris eyed Kit with admiration.

"You look like a regular circus chap, Kit!" he exclaimed. "I wish I was
in your shoes."

"Wait till you see whether I am a success, William," replied Kit.

"Now, if you are ready, we will have a little practice," said Alonzo
Vincenti.

"May I look on?" asked William.

"Oh, yes; we don't generally admit spectators, but you are a friend of
the boy."

They all entered the tent, and for an hour Kit was kept hard at work.

In the act devised by the Vincenti brothers, he stood on the shoulders
of the second, who in his turn stood on the shoulders of the first.
Various changes were gone through, in all of which Kit proved himself an
adept, and won high compliments from his new associates.

"Can you tumble?" asked Antonio.

Kit smiled.

"I was afraid I should when I first got on your shoulders," he answered.

"That was what I meant,--something like this," and he whirled across the
arena, rolling over and over on hands and feet in the manner of a cart
wheel.

Kit imitated Antonio rather slowly and awkwardly at first, but rapidly
showed improvement.

"You'll soon learn," said Antonio. "Now let me show you something else."

This something else was a succession of somersaults, made in the most
rapid manner.

Kit tried this also, slowly at first, as before, but proving a rapid
learner.

"In the course of three or four days you will be able to do it in
public," said Alonzo.

"When do you advise me to make my first appearance?" asked Kit.

"To-night, in our first act."

"But shall I be ready?"

"You'll do. We may as well make a beginning."

"I wish I could see you, Kit," said William.

"Can't you?"

"I was going to the afternoon performance. It would make me too late
home if I stayed in the evening."

"Won't there be some people over from Oakford that you can ride back
with?"
