"I rather think you can take care of yourself, ma'am," he said.

"You can bet your bottom dollar on that, stranger," said the woman,
cheerfully. "Brown--that's my husband--knew what I was. We was ekal
partners--Brown and me--and he knew too much to tread on me."

"I'm glad I wasn't Brown," thought John Miles. "When I marry, it'll be a
woman, and not a man in petticoats."

"If you're hungry, stranger," said the woman, "just jump off that horse
of yours, and come in. I can give you a square meal, and I reckon you
haven't had one lately."

"You are right, Mrs. Brown," said Miles, dismounting with alacrity. "My
provisions are dry and stale, and I shall enjoy a square meal amazingly.
But I ought to tell you that last night I was robbed of a bag of
gold-dust, and I have nothing to pay you."

"Who asks for pay?" returned the woman. "I don't keep a hotel, but I'm
tired of eating alone. I want to see how it seems to have a man setting
opposite me agin. So come in, and I won't keep you waiting long."

"Thank you, Mrs. Brown. If you don't mind, I'll light my pipe, and sit
out here till I've had a smoke."

"You can smoke inside if you want to. I always let Brown. It makes me
feel better, now that he's pegged out, that I didn't deny him any of his
little comforts."

"Clearly Mrs. Brown was a considerate wife," thought Miles; "but she
doesn't look like a woman to fall in love with."

Tying his horse, he threw himself down on the grass, and enjoyed the
luxury of a smoke while Mrs. Brown was heard bustling about inside,
preparing the square meal which she had promised to her unexpected
guest.

Presently she reappeared.

"The victuals is ready, if you are, stranger," she said.

"I am ready, Mrs. Brown," said Miles, rising at once, and entering the
cabin.

The cabin was rough, and ill-adapted to a fastidious tenant, but it
looked comfortable. What attracted Miles most, however, was a table set
in the middle of the floor, covered with a substantial and appetizing
meal. Mrs. Brown was a fair cook--perhaps her only feminine
accomplishment. She placed Miles at the head of the table, and seated
herself opposite him. She watched his attacks upon the fare she had
provided with evident satisfaction.

"I hope you like it," she said.

"Mrs. Brown, I haven't tasted anything so good for a long time."

She nodded, with a pleased look.

"Brown allus liked my cookin," she said. "He had a good appetite most
generally, and it was a pleasure to see him eat. It's kinder lonesome
cookin' for yourself. Then, too, it takes away my appetite sittin' down
alone to eat."

"You must be very lonely, Mrs. Brown."

"Yes, its lonesome like bein' a widder. I'm kinder used to seein' a man
about the house."

"So I suppose."

"Be you a married man?" asked the lady, pointedly.

"No, ma'am."

"How old be you?"

"Twenty-eight," answered Miles, rather amused.

"Then you're old enough to get married?"

"Oh yes, I am old enough."

"Be you in love with any girl?"

"The old woman's getting curious," thought Miles. "However, I don't mind
gratifying her curiosity."

"No, I'm not in love," he replied.

Mrs. Brown eyed him thoughtfully. She seemed to be revolving some plan
in her mind.

"Take a good look at me, stranger," she said, bracing herself up, as if
on exhibition.

"Certainly," said John Miles, considerably astonished.

"I want to ask you a few questions."

"Go ahead, Mrs. Brown."

"Am I hump-backed?"

"Certainly not. Who said you were?"

"Just attend to my questions, if you please, stranger. Am I
squint-eyed?"

"Mrs. Brown must be crazy," thought Miles. However, he answered in the
negative.

"Am I as homely as a hedge-fence?" pursued the widow.

"Has anybody been calling you so? If so, tell me who it is."

"Never you mind, stranger. Am I old and wrinkled?"

"Certainly she's out of her mind," thought Miles. "I must humor her."

"I think you are a very good-looking woman," he said, soothingly.

"No, I'm not," said the strong-minded lady, "but at the same time I
ain't a scarecrow."

"Certainly not."

"Don't talk too much, stranger. I expect you're surprised at my
questions, but I'll come to the p'int at once. I'm tired of livin' here
alone. I didn't think I'd miss Brown so much. He wasn't any great shakes
of a man, but he was better than nothing. He was company for me, Brown
was, in the long evenin's, and I miss him. I've made up my mind to take
on somebody in his place, and I reckon I'd like to engage you, stranger.
Will you marry me?"

Mrs. Brown did not blush when she asked this extraordinary question. She
was entirely self-possessed, and could not have been cooler, if she had
been transacting an ordinary piece of business.

John Miles had never before received a proposal of marriage. He felt as
awkward and confused as a young girl, and began to hesitate and
stammer.

"Really, Mrs. Brown," he began, "you have taken me by surprise."

"I expect I have," said the widow, "but I'll give you time to think it
over. Brown left me I pretty comfortable, though I did more to get the
property together than he. You wouldn't think it, perhaps, but I've got
five thousand dollars in gold hid away somewheres near, and there's a
claim not far away, that belongs to me, and will pay for workin'."

"I am glad you are so well off, Mrs. Brown," said Miles.

"If you marry me," continued the widow, "you can work that claim. You're
a strong, able-bodied man, and a year from now, if you want to, we'll go
to the city, and settle down. I'm older than you; but a matter of a few
years don't make much difference. You were robbed, you told me?"

"Yes, of all that I had."

"How much was it?"

"About two hundred dollars."

"That ain't much."

"It's a good deal when it's all you have," answered Miles.

"If you marry me you won't miss it," said Mrs. Brown. "I won't give you
my money right off, for you might run off with it, but at the end of the
first year you shall have half of it. There's a parson a few miles up
the canon, at Dirt Hole, that will marry us any time we ride over. What
do you say, stranger?"

It was an embarrassing moment for John Miles. He had no desire to
succeed the deceased Brown, notwithstanding the little property he had
left behind him. Mrs. Brown did not in the least resemble the wife of
whom he had sometimes dreamed. But how could he decline without exciting
the resentment of that singular female? He bore in mind that Mrs. Brown
carried a revolver, and she might take a notion to shoot him down. He
must temporize.

"Your proposal is a very kind and flattering one, Mrs. Brown, but I
don't care to marry just at present. I want to go to the city and try
my fortune. I've only lately arrived in California, and I am not ready
to settle down yet."

To his relief Mrs. Brown accepted his objection in good part.

"No offence, stranger," she said. "I didn't know how you might feel
about it. I've made you a fair offer."

"Indeed you have. The time may come when I shall return, and--"

"I won't promise to wait for you, stranger. Somebody else may happen
along that'll take the situation."

"It would be too much to expect you to wait for me, I admit."

"All right, stranger. You've answered fair, and now we'll let the matter
drop."

When Miles left the cabin he carried with him an addition to his stock
of provisions, for which he was indebted to Mrs. Brown's liberality. It
was evident that she bore no malice, notwithstanding her suit had been
rejected.




CHAPTER XI.

BILL CRANE'S GOOD LUCK.


About an hour after John Miles rode away from the widow's door Mr.
William Crane came in sight of the cabin. He had strayed from the direct
course, and that had delayed him. Otherwise he would not have fallen
behind Miles.

Bill Crane was in rather a melancholy mood. He had not got over his
disappointment of the morning. He was fagged out and hungry, and felt
that luck was against him. When he saw the cabin, and the widow Brown
sitting in the door-way, it instantly occurred to him that here was a
chance to get a dinner. He had nothing to pay, to be sure, but he need
say nothing about it till after the dinner was eaten.

As he rode up, he removed his hat, and said, "Good-day, ma'am."

Mrs. Brown scrutinized the new-comer with critical eyes. She decided
that he was not as good-looking as John Miles. Indeed Bill Crane never
could have been accounted handsome; but on this point the widow was not
exacting. She was looking for somebody to fill the place of her lamented
Brown, and relieve her loneliness, and it was Crane's eligibility in
this respect that she was considering. Beauty was but skin deep, as Mrs.
Brown was practical enough to admit, and she was not overstocked with
that attractive quality herself. Though Crane did not know it, the
resolute, middle-aged female, from whom he hoped to obtain a gratuitous
dinner, was making up her mind to offer him the position of husband.

"Good-day, stranger," she answered composedly. "Are you travelin' fur?"

"I'm thinkin' of goin' to Frisco," he said, "but it's a long journey and
I'm fagged out. If you have no objection, I'll stop at your place and
see if I can rest a few minutes."

"You can stop if you want to," she said. "I don't see much company, and
I like to see a new face now and then."

"So do I," said Crane, thinking a little flattery might help him;
"especially when it's the face of a good-looking woman."

"I ain't good-lookin' enough to hurt me," returned Mrs. Brown, with a
frankness which rather disconcerted and puzzled Crane, "but I don't mind
you callin' me so. If you are anyways hungry, I haven't cleared away the
dinner, and--"

"You are very kind," broke in Crane, eagerly; "I don't mind saying I am
a little bit hungry."

"All right, stranger. If you'll wait long enough for me to make some hot
tea, and warm the victuals, you shall have a chance to judge of my
cookin'."

Bill Crane was quite elated. He decided that the widow would not ask him
for payment, thus saving him from embarrassing excuses. In due time he
was called in and seated in the chair not long since occupied by John
Miles.

"You're the second man that's dined with me to-day," said the widow.

"And who was the first lucky man?" inquired Crane, suspecting at once
that it might have been Miles.

"I don't know his name, but he was a good-looking young man, who said he
had had a bag of gold-dust stolen from him."

"That's Miles," thought Crane; and he at once decided not to betray any
knowledge of him.

"He was in bad luck," said Bill. "Did he know who stole it?"

"He didn't tell me. I don't think he knew."

"That's well," thought Crane.

"Did he say where he was going?"

"To the city."

"Do you live here all the year round, Mrs.----?"

"My name's Brown, stranger."

"All I can say is, that Brown is a lucky man. Another cup of tea if you
please, Mrs. Brown."

"You might not like to exchange places with him, for all his luck,
stranger," remarked the widow.

"Indeed I would," said Bill, with a languishing look.

"He's six feet under ground!" explained Mrs. Brown, dryly.

"Dead?" ejaculated Crane.

"Yes; he's been dead these three weeks."

"And you are a widow?"

"That's so, stranger."

"But you don't mean to stay a widow?" interrogated Crane.

"Well, it is kinder lonesome. It seems natural like to have a man
round."

"I wonder if she's got any money," thought Crane. "I'll find out if I
can."

"Yes, Mrs. Brown, I feel for you," he said. "A woman can't struggle with
the world as a man can."

"I don't know about that, stranger. I can take care of myself, if that's
what you mean."

"But a woman needs a man to protect and work for her," insinuated
Crane.

"I don't need any one to protect me," said the widow; "and, as for
support, I've got a matter of five thousand dollars laid by, and a good
claim that'll pay for the workin'. I don't think I shall need to go to
the poor-house yet awhile."

Bill Crane's eyes sparkled. The widow Brown seemed wonderfully
attractive in his eyes. He was willing to barter his young affections
for five thousand dollars and a claim, even if the widow had been thrice
