  'Twas autumn--and sunshine arose on the way
    To the home of my fathers, that welcomed me back.

  I flew to the pleasant fields traversed so oft
    In life's morning march, when my bosom was young;
  I heard my own mountain-goats bleating aloft,                       15
    And knew the sweet strain that the corn-reapers sung.

  Then pledged we the wine-cup, and fondly I swore
    From my home and my weeping friends never to part;
  My little ones kissed me a thousand times o'er,
    And my wife sobbed aloud in her fulness of heart.                 20

  "Stay, stay with us--rest, thou art weary and worn;"
    And fain was their war-broken soldier to stay;
  But sorrow returned with the dawning of morn,
    And the voice in my dreaming ear melted away.

      --_Thomas Campbell_


  PREPARATORY.--Describe the picture suggested by this
  poem.

  Compare the soldier's dream with the vision of _The
  Private of the Buffs_ in the hour of danger, or with
  _The Slave's Dream_ in Longfellow's poem.

  Divide the poem into three distinct parts, giving to
  each a descriptive title.

  Expand the thoughts contained in the last two lines of
  the poem, using, if possible, illustrations from
  literature or real life. What feelings do these lines
  arouse?

  Observe the difficulties of Articulation in ll. 1, 2, 13
  and 16. (Appendix A, 6 and 3.)

  How can each part of the poem be made to stand out by
  itself? (Introduction, p. 10.)

  2. SENTINEL STARS. Select other phrases which call up
  mental images.

  How does the process of mental imagery affect the Time?
  (Introduction, p. 12.)

  3. How can it be shown that OVERPOWERED and GROUND are
  disconnected? (Introduction, p. 7.)

  4. Why do we pause after WEARY AND WOUNDED?
  (Introduction, p. 10.)

  6. Why is there no pause after FAGGOT? (Introduction, p.
  11.)

  What lines of stanza ii contain the leading thought? How
  does the voice indicate this? (Introduction, p. 33.)

  9. How is the mind prepared for the description of the
  dream?

  21. What feeling does the voice express? Does Imitation
  play any part here? (Introduction, pp. 5 and 6.)

  22. Expand the thought of this line, and show how your
  thinking affects the Time. (Introduction, p. 14.)
  Compare with the Time of l. 21, and explain the
  difference.

       *       *       *       *       *


VAN ELSEN


  God spake three times and saved Van Elsen's soul;
  He spake by sickness first, and made him whole;
          Van Elsen heard him not,
          Or soon forgot.

  God spake to him by wealth; the world outpoured                      5
  Its treasures at his feet, and called him lord;
          Van Elsen's heart grew fat
          And proud thereat.

  God spake the third time when the great world smiled,
  And in the sunshine slew his little child;                          10
          Van Elsen like a tree
          Fell hopelessly.

  Then in the darkness came a voice which said,
  "As thy heart bleedeth, so My heart hath bled;
          As I have need of thee                                      15
          Thou needest Me."

  That night Van Elsen kissed the baby feet,
  And kneeling by the narrow winding-sheet
          Praised him with fervent breath
          Who conquered death.                                        20

      _-Frederick George Scott_ (_By permission_)


  By what means is the introductory line kept distinct
  from the rest of the poem? (Introduction, p. 10.)

  How does the reader indicate the comparatively long
  space of time which elapses between the events of the
  first, second, and third stanzas respectively?
  (Introduction, p. 9.)

  Show that each of the first three stanzas falls
  according to meaning, into two parts. How does the
  reader indicate this division?

  Why should the last two stanzas, in this respect, be
  together treated as one of the preceding? Illustrate by
  means of Pause.

       *       *       *       *       *


PIBROCH OF DONUIL DHU


  Pibroch of Donuil Dhu,
    Pibroch of Donuil,
  Wake thy wild voice anew,
    Summon Clan Conuil.
  Come away, come away,                                                5
    Hark to the summons!
  Come in your war array,
    Gentles and commons.

  Come from deep glen, and
    From mountains so rocky,                                          10
  The war-pipe and pennon
    Are at Inverlocky.
  Come every hill-plaid, and
    True heart that wears one,
  Come every steel blade, and                                         15
    Strong hand that bears one.

  Leave untended the herd,
    The flock without shelter;
  Leave the corpse uninterr'd
    The bride at the altar;                                           20
  Leave the deer, leave the steer,
    Leave nets and barges:
  Come with your fighting gear,
    Broadswords and targes.

  Come as the winds come, when                                        25
    Forests are rended,
  Come as the waves come, when
    Navies are stranded;
  Faster come, faster come,
    Faster and faster,                                                30
  Chief, vassal, page and groom,
    Tenant and master.

  Fast they come, fast they come;
    See how they gather!
  Wide waves the eagle plume,                                         35
    Blended with heather.
  Cast your plaids, draw your blades,
    Forward each man set!
  Pibroch of Donuil Dhu
    Knell for the onset!                                              40

      --_Sir Walter Scott_


  HERD, UNINTERR'D. What sound has the vowel _e_?
  (Appendix A, 1.)

  GENTLES AND COMMONS; NETS AND BARGES; FIGHTING GEAR;
  BROADSWORDS AND TARGES; FORESTS ARE RENDED; NAVIES ARE
  STRANDED. (Appendix A, 3 and 6.)

  For Pause read (Introduction, pp. 7 and 8.)

  How is the gradually increasing excitement and energy
  indicated in Time, Pitch, and Force? (Introduction, pp.
  13, 23, and 27.)

       *       *       *       *       *


THE DAY IS DONE


  The day is done, and the darkness
    Falls from the wings of Night,
  As a feather is wafted downwards
    From an eagle in its flight.

  I see the lights of the village                                      5
    Gleam through the rain and the mist,
  And a feeling of sadness comes o'er me,
    That my soul cannot resist:

  A feeling of sadness and longing,
    That is not akin to pain,                                         10
  And resembles sorrow only
    As the mist resembles the rain.

  Come, read to me some poem,
    Some simple and heartfelt lay,
  That shall soothe this restless feeling,                            15
    And banish the thoughts of day.

  Not from the grand old masters,
    Not from the bards sublime,
  Whose distant footsteps echo
    Through the corridors of Time.                                    20

  For, like strains of martial music,
    Their mighty thoughts suggest
  Life's endless toil and endeavour;
    And to-night I long for rest.

  Read from some humbler poet,                                        25
    Whose songs gushed from his heart,
  As showers from the clouds of summer,
    Or tears from the eyelids start;

  Who, through long days of labour,
    And nights devoid of ease,                                        30
  Still heard in his soul the music
    Of wonderful melodies.

  Such songs have power to quiet
    The restless pulse of care,
  And come like the benediction                                       35
    That follows after prayer.

  Then read from the treasured volume
    The poem of thy choice,
  And lend to the rhyme of the poet
    The beauty of thy voice.                                          40

  And the night shall be filled with music,
    And the cares that infest the day,
  Shall fold their tents, like the Arabs,
    And as silently steal away.

      --_Henry Wadsworth Longfellow_


  What is the atmosphere of this poem? Compare it in this
  respect with _Pibroch of Donuil Dhu_.

  How does it differ from the latter in expression, so far
  as Time, Pitch, and Force are concerned? (Introduction,
  pp. 13, 22 and 26.)

  WAFTED, AFTER, MASTERS, POEM, CORRIDORS, SORROW.
  (Appendix A, 1.)

  Observe the difficulties of Articulation in ll. 3, 11,
  15, 18, 22, 26, 28 and 31. (Appendix A, 3 and 6.)

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SCHOOLMASTER AND THE BOYS

From "The Old Curiosity Shop"


1. The schoolmaster had scarcely arranged the room in due order, and
taken his seat behind his desk, when a white-headed boy with a
sunburnt face appeared at the door, and stopping there to make a
rustic bow, came in and took his seat upon one of the forms. The
white-headed boy then put an open book, astonishingly dog-eared, upon
his knees, and thrusting his hands into his pockets, began counting
the marbles with which they were filled. Soon afterwards another
white-headed little boy came straggling in, and after him a red-headed
lad, and after him two more with white heads, and then one with a
flaxen poll, and so on until there were about a dozen boys in all,
with heads of every colour but gray, and ranging in their ages from
four years old to fourteen years or more; for the legs of the youngest
were a long way from the floor when he sat upon the form, and the
eldest was a heavy, good-tempered, foolish fellow, about half a head
taller than the schoolmaster.

2. At the top of the first form--the post of honour in the school--was
the vacant place of the little sick scholar, and at the head of the
row of pegs on which the hats and caps were hung, one peg was left
empty. No boy attempted to violate the sanctity of seat or peg, but
many a one looked from the empty spaces to the schoolmaster, and
whispered to his idle neighbour behind his hand.

3. Then began the hum of conning over lessons and getting them by
heart, the whispered jest and stealthy game, and all the noise and
drawl of school; and in the midst of the din sat the poor
schoolmaster, the very image of meekness and simplicity, vainly
attempting to fix his mind upon the duties of the day, and to forget
his little sick friend. But the tedium of his office reminded him more
strongly of the willing scholar, and his thoughts were rambling from
his pupils--it was plain. None knew this better than the idlest boys,
who, growing bolder with impunity, waxed louder and more
daring--eating apples under the master's eye, pinching each other in
sport or malice, and cutting their autographs in the very legs of his
desk. The puzzled dunce, who stood beside it to say his lesson out of
book, looked no longer at the ceiling for forgotten words, but drew
closer to the master's elbow and boldly cast his eyes upon the page.
If the master did chance to rouse himself and seem alive to what was
going on, the noise subsided for a moment, and no eyes met his but
wore a studious and deeply humble look; but, the instant he relapsed
again, it broke out afresh, and ten times louder than before.

4. Oh, how some of those idle fellows longed to be outside, and how
they looked at the open door and window, as if they half meditated
rushing violently out, plunging into the woods, and being wild boys
and savages from that time forth. What rebellious thoughts of the cool
river, and some shady bathing-place beneath willow-trees with branches
dipping in the water, kept tempting and urging that sturdy boy, who
sat fanning his flushed face with a spelling-book wishing himself a
whale, or a fly, or anything but a boy at school on that hot, broiling
day!

5. Heat! Ask that other boy, whose seat being nearest the door gave
him opportunities of gliding out into the garden and driving his
companions to madness by dipping his face into the bucket of the well
and then rolling on the grass--ask him if there were ever such a day
as that, when even the bees were diving deep down into the cups of
flowers and stopping there, as if they had made up their minds to
retire from business and be manufacturers of honey no more. The day
was made for laziness, and lying on one's back in green places, and
staring at the sky till its brightness forced one to shut one's eyes
and go to sleep; and was this a time to be poring over musty books in
a dark room, slighted by the very sun itself? Monstrous!

6. The lessons over, writing-time began; and there being but one desk
and that the master's, each boy sat at it in turn and laboured at his
crooked copy, while the master walked about. This was a quieter time;
for he would come and look over the writer's shoulder, and tell him
mildly to observe how such a letter was turned in such a copy on the
wall, and bid him take it for his model. Then he would stop and tell
them what the sick child had said last night, and how he had longed to
be among them once again; and such was the schoolmaster's gentle and
affectionate manner that the boys seemed quite remorseful that they
had worried him so much, and were absolutely quiet; eating no apples,
cutting no names, inflicting no pinches, for full two minutes
afterwards.

7. "I think, boys," said the schoolmaster, when the clock struck
twelve, "that I shall give an extra half-holiday this afternoon."

8. At this intelligence the boys, led on and headed by the tall boy,
raised a great shout, in the midst of which the master was seen to
speak, but could not be heard. As he held up his hand, however, in
token of his wish that they should be silent, they were considerate
enough to leave off, as soon as the longest-winded among them were
quite out of breath.

9. "You must promise me first," said the schoolmaster, "that you 'll
not be noisy, or, at least, if you are, that you'll go away and be
so--away out of the village, I mean. I'm sure you wouldn't disturb
your old playmate and companion."

10. There was a general murmur in the negative.

11. "Then, pray, don't forget--there's my dear scholars," said the
schoolmaster--"what I have asked you, and do it as a favour to me. Be
as happy as you can, and likewise be mindful that you are blessed with
health. Good-bye, all!"

12. "Thank you, sir," and "Good-bye, sir," were said a great many
times in a variety of voices, and the boys went out very slowly and
softly.

13. But there was the sun shining and there were the birds singing, as
the sun only shines and the birds only sing on holidays and
half-holidays; there were the trees waving to all free boys to climb
and nestle among their leafy branches; the hay, entreating them to
come and scatter it in the pure air; the green corn, gently beckoning
toward wood and stream; the smooth ground rendered smoother still by
blending lights and shadows, inviting to runs and leaps, and long
walks no one knows whither. It was more than boy could bear, and with
a joyous whoop the whole company took to their heels and spread
themselves about, shouting and laughing as they went.

14. "It's natural, thank heaven!" said the poor schoolmaster, looking
after them. "I'm very glad they didn't mind me!"

      --_Charles Dickens_


  Par. 1. DUE. (Appendix A 2.)

  Indicate the pauses required to allow time for the
  Imaging process. Discriminate between the short and the
  long pauses. (Introduction, pp. 8 and 11.)

  ORDER, DESK, DOOR. Account for the Inflection on each of
  these words. (Introduction, pp. 15 and 16.)

  What clause in the first sentence should be made most
  prominent? Indicate the relative value of each part of
  this sentence by the Shading. (Introduction, p. 33.)
