indeed that iron is dangerous, and at any price it should be avoided.

On one occasion, when she and five others were planning to raid a Sheep
yard, she held back at the last minute because some newstrung wires
appeared. The others rushed in to find the Sheep beyond their reach,
themselves in a death-trap.

Thus she had learned the newer dangers, and while it is unlikely that
she had any clear mental conception of them she had acquired a
wholesome distrust of all things strange, and a horror of one or two in
particular that proved her lasting safeguard. Each year she raised her
brood successfully and the number of Yellow Wolves increased in the
country. Guns, traps, men and the new animals they brought had been
learned, but there was yet another lesson before her--a terrible one
indeed.

About the time Duskymane's brothers were a month old his foster-mother
returned in a strange condition. She was frothing at the mouth, her
legs trembled, and she fell in a convulsion near the doorway of the
den, but recovering, she came in. Her jaws quivered, her teeth rattled
a little as she tried to lick the little ones; she seized her own front
leg and bit it so as not to bite them, but at length she grew quieter
and calmer. The Cubs had retreated in fear to a far pocket, but now
they returned and crowded about her to seek their usual food. The
mother recovered, but was very ill for two or three days, and those
days with the poison in her system worked disaster for the brood. They
were terribly sick; only the strongest could survive, and when the
trial of strength was over, the den contained only the old one and the
Black-maned Cub, the one she had adopted. Thus little Duskymane became
her sole charge; all her strength was devoted to feeding him, and he
thrived apace.

Wolves are quick to learn certain things. The reactions of smell are
the greatest that a Wolf can feel, and thenceforth both Cub and
foster-mother experienced a quick, unreasoning sense of fear and hate
the moment the smell of strychnine reached them.


IV

THE RUDIMENTS OF WOLF TRAINING

With the sustenance of seven at his service the little Wolf had every
reason to grow, and when in the autumn he began to follow his mother on
her hunting trips he was as tall as she was. Now a change of region was
forced on them, for numbers of little Wolves were growing up. Sentinel
Butte, the rocky fastness of the plains, was claimed by many that were
big and strong; the weaker must move out, and with them Yellow Wolf and
the Dusky Cub.

Wolves have no language in the sense that man has; their vocabulary is
probably limited to a dozen howls, barks, and grunts expressing the
simplest emotions; but they have several other modes of conveying
ideas, and one very special method of spreading information--the
Wolf-telephone. Scattered over their range are a number of recognized
"centrals." Sometimes these are stones, sometimes the angle of
cross-trails, sometimes a Buffalo-skull--indeed, any conspicuous object
near a main trail is used. A Wolf calling here, as a Dog does at a
telegraph post, or a Muskrat at a certain mud-pie point, leaves his
body-scent and learns what other visitors have been there recently to
do the same. He learns also whence they came and where they went, as
well as something about their condition, whether hunted, hungry,
gorged, or sick. By this system of registration a Wolf knows where his
friends, as well as his foes, are to be found. And Duskymane, following
after the Yellow Wolf, was taught the places and uses of the many
signal-stations without any conscious attempt at teaching on the part
of his foster-mother. Example backed by his native instincts was indeed
the chief teacher, but on one occasion at least there was something
very like the effort of a human parent to guard her child in danger.

The Dark Cub had learned the rudiments of Wolf life: that the way to
fight Dogs is to run, and to fight as you run, never grapple, but snap,
snap, snap, and make for the rough country where Horses cannot bring
their riders.

He learned not to bother about the Coyotes that follow for the pickings
when you hunt; you cannot catch them and they do you no harm.

He knew he must not waste time dashing after Birds that alight on the
ground; and that he must keep away from the little black and white
Animal with the bushy tail. It is not very good to eat, and it is very,
very bad to smell.

Poison! Oh, he never forgot that smell from the day when the den was
cleared of all his foster-brothers.

He now knew that the first move in attacking Sheep was to scatter them;
a lone Sheep is a foolish and easy prey; that the way to round up a
band of Cattle was to frighten a Calf.

He learned that he must always attack a Steer behind, a Sheep in front,
and a Horse in the middle, that is, on the flank, and never, never
attack a man at all, never even face him. But an important lesson was
added to these, one in which the mother consciously taught him of a
secret foe.


V

THE LESSON ON TRAPS

A Calf had died in branding-time and now, two weeks later, was in its
best state for perfect taste, not too fresh, not over-ripe--that is, in
a Wolf's opinion--and the wind carried this information afar. The
Yellow Wolf and Duskymane were out for supper, though not yet knowing
where, when the tidings of veal arrived, and they trotted up the wind.
The Calf was in an open place, and plain to be seen in the moonlight. A
Dog would have trotted right up to the carcass, an  old-time Wolf might
have done so, but constant war had developed constant vigilance in the
Yellow Wolf, and trusting nothing and no one but her nose, she slacked
her speed to a walk. On coming in easy view she stopped, and for long
swung her nose, submitting the wind to the closest possible chemical
analysis. She tried it with her finest tests, blew all the membranes
clean again and tried it once more; and this was the report of the
trusty nostrils, yes, the unanimous report. First, rich and racy smell
of Calf, seventy per cent.; smells of grass, bugs, wood, flowers,
trees, sand, and other uninteresting negations, fifteen per cent.;
smell of her Cub and herself, positive but ignorable, ten per cent.;
smell of human tracks, two per cent.; smell of smoke, one per cent.; of
sweaty leather smell, one per cent.; of human body-scent (not
discernible in some samples), one-half per cent.; smell of iron, a
trace.

The old Wolf crouched a little but sniffed hard with swinging nose; the
young Wolf imitatively did the same. She backed off to a greater
distance; the Cub stood. She gave a low whine; he followed unwillingly.
She circled around the tempting carcass; a new smell was
recorded--Coyote trail-scent, soon followed by Coyote body-scent. Yes,
there they were sneaking along a near ridge, and now as she passed to
one side the samples changed, the wind had lost nearly every trace of
Calf; miscellaneous, commonplace, and uninteresting smells were there
instead. The human track-scent was as before, the trace of leather was
gone, but fully one-half per cent, of iron-odor, and body smell of man
raised to nearly two per cent.

Fully alarmed, she conveyed her fear to the Cub, by her rigid pose, her
air intent, and her slightly bristling mane.

She continued her round. At one time on a high place the human body
scent was doubly strong, then as she dropped it faded. Then the wind
brought the full calf-odor with several track-scents of Coyotes and
sundry Birds. Her suspicions were lulling as in a smalling circle she
neared the tempting feast from the windward side. She had even advanced
straight toward it for a few steps when the sweaty leather sang loud
and strong again, and smoke and iron mingled like two strands of a
parti-colored yarn. Centring all her attention on this, she advanced
within two leaps of the Calf. There on the ground was a scrap of
leather, telling also of a human touch, close at hand the Calf, and now
the iron and smoke on the full vast smell of Calf were like a snake
trail across the trail of a whole Beef herd. It was so slight that the
Cub, with the appetite and impatience of youth, pressed up against his
mother's shoulder to go past and eat without delay. She seized him by
the neck and flung him back. A stone struck by his feet rolled forward
and stopped with a peculiar clink. The danger smell was greatly
increased at this, and the Yellow Wolf backed slowly from the feast,
the Cub unwillingly following.

As he looked wistfully he saw the Coyotes drawing nearer, mindful
chiefly to avoid the Wolves. He watched their really cautious advance;
it seemed like heedless rushing compared with his mother's approach.
The Calf smell rolled forth in exquisite and overpowering excellence
now, for they were tearing the meat, when a sharp clank was heard and a
yelp from a Coyote. At the same time the quiet night was shocked with a
roar and a flash of fire. Heavy shots spattered Calf and Coyotes, and
yelping like beaten Dogs they scattered, excepting one that was killed
and a second struggling in the trap set here by the ever-active
wolvers. The air was charged with the hateful smells redoubled now, and
horrid smells additional. The Yellow Wolf glided down a hollow and led
her Cub away in flight, but, as they went, they saw a man rush from the
bank near where the mother's nose had warned her of the human scent.
They saw him kill the caught Coyote and set the traps for more.



VI

THE BEGUILING OF THE YELLOW WOLF

The life game is a hard game, for we may win ten thousand times, and if
we fail but once our gain is gone. How many hundred times had the
Yellow Wolf scorned the traps; how many Cubs she had trained to do the
same! Of all the dangers to her life she best knew traps.

October had come; the Cub was now much taller than the mother. The
wolver had seen them once--a Yellow Wolf followed by another, whose
long, awkward legs, big, soft feet, thin neck, and skimpy tail
proclaimed him this year's Cub. The record of the dust and sand said
that the old one had lost a right front toe, and that the young one was
of giant size.

It was the wolver that thought to turn the carcass of the Calf to
profit, but he was disappointed in getting Coyotes instead of Wolves.
It was the beginning of the trapping season, for this month fur is
prime. A young trapper often fastens the bait on the trap; an
experienced one does not. A good trapper will even put the bait at one
place and the trap ten or twenty feet away, but at a spot that the Wolf
is likely to cross in circling. A favorite plan is to hide three or
four traps around an open place, and scatter some scraps of meat in the
middle. The traps are buried out of sight after being smoked to hide
the taint of hands and iron. Sometimes no bait is used except a little
piece of cotton or a tuft of feathers that may catch the Wolf's eye or
pique its curiosity and tempt it to circle on the fateful, treacherous
ground. A good trapper varies his methods continually so that the
Wolves cannot learn his ways. Their only safeguards are perpetual
vigilance and distrust of all smells that are known to be of man.

The wolver, with a load of the strongest steel traps, had begun his
autumn work on the 'Cottonwood.'

An old Buffalo trail crossing the river followed a little draw that
climbed the hills to the level upland. All animals use these trails,
Wolves and Foxes as well as Cattle and Deer: they are the main
thoroughfares. A cottonwood stump not far from where it plunged to the
gravelly stream was marked with Wolf signs that told the wolver of its
use. Here was an excellent place for traps, not on the trail, for
Cattle were here in numbers, but twenty yards away on a level, sandy
spot he set four traps in a twelve-foot square. Near each he scattered
two or three scraps of meat; three or four white feathers on a spear of
grass in the middle completed the setting. No human eye, few animal
noses, could have detected the hidden danger of that sandy ground, when
the sun and wind and the sand itself had dissipated the man-track taint.

The Yellow Wolf had seen and passed, and taught her giant son to pass,
such traps a thousand times before.

The Cattle came to water in the heat of the day. They strung down the
Buffalo path as once the Buffalo did. The little Vesper-birds flitted
before them, the Cowbirds rode on them, and the Prairie-dogs chattered
at them, just as they once did at the Buffalo.

Down from the gray-green mesa with its green-gray rocks, they marched
with imposing solemnity, importance, and directness of purpose. Some
frolicsome Calves, playing along-side the trail, grew sober and walked
behind their mothers as the river flat was reached. The old Cow that
headed the procession sniffed suspiciously as she passed the "trap
set," but it was far away, otherwise she would have pawed and bellowed
over the scraps of bloody beef till every trap was sprung and harmless.

But she led to the river. After all had drunk their fill they lay down
on the nearest bank till late afternoon. Then their unheard dinner-gong
aroused them, and started them on the backward march to where the
richest pastures grew.

One or two small birds had picked at the scraps of meat, some
blue-bottle flies buzzed about, but the sinking sun saw the sandy mask
untouched.

A brown Marsh Hawk came skimming over the river flat as the sun began
his color play. Blackbirds dashed into thickets, and easily avoided his
clumsy pounce. It was too early for the Mice, but, as he skimmed the
ground, his keen eye caught the flutter of feathers by the trap and
turned his flight. The feathers in their uninteresting emptiness were
exposed before he was near, but now he saw the scraps of meat.
Guileless of cunning, he alighted and was devouring a second lump
when--clank--the dust was flirted high and the Marsh Hawk was held by
his toes, struggling vainly in the jaws of a powerful wolf-trap. He was
not much hurt. His ample wings winnowed from time to time, in efforts
to be free, but he was helpless, even as a Sparrow might be in a
rat-trap, and when the sun had played his fierce chromatic scale, his
swan-song sung, and died as he dies only in the blazing west, and the
shades had fallen on the melodramatic scene of the Mouse in the
elephant-trap, there was a deep, rich sound on the high flat butte,
answered by another, neither very long, neither repeated, and both
instinctive rather than necessary. One was the muster-call of an
ordinary Wolf, the other the answer of a very big male, not a pair in
this case, but mother and son--Yellow Wolf and Duskymane. They came
trotting together down the Buffalo trail. They paused at the telephone
box on the hill and again at the old cottonwood root, and were making
for the river when the Hawk in the trap fluttered his wings. The old
Wolf turned toward him,-a wounded bird on the ground surely, and she
rushed forward. Sun and sand soon burn all trail-scents; there was
nothing to warn her. She sprang on the flopping bird and a chop of her
jaws ended his troubles, but a horrid sound--the gritting of her teeth
on steel--told her of peril. She dropped the Hawk and sprang backward
from the dangerous ground, but landed in the second trap. High on her
foot its death-grip closed, and leaping with all her strength, to
escape, she set her fore foot in another of the lurking grips of steel.
Never had a trap been so baited before. Never was she so unsuspicious.
Never was catch more sure. Fear and fury filled the old Wolf's heart;
she tugged and strained, she chewed the chains, she snarled and foamed.
One trap with its buried log, she might have dragged; with two, she was
helpless. Struggle as she might, it only worked those relentless jaws
more deeply into her feet. She snapped wildly at the air; she tore the
dead Hawk into shreds; she roared the short, barking roar of a crazy
Wolf. She bit at the traps, at her cub, at herself. She tore her legs
that were held; she gnawed in frenzy at her flank, she chopped off her
tail in her madness; she splintered all her teeth on the steel, and
filled her bleeding, foaming jaws with clay and sand.

She struggled till she fell, and writhed about or lay like dead, till
strong enough to rise and grind the chains again with her teeth.

And so the night passed by.

And Duskymane? Where was he? The feeling of the time when his
foster-mother had come home poisoned, now returned; but he was even
more afraid of her. She seemed filled with fighting hate. He held away
and whined a little; he slunk off and came back when she lay still,
only to retreat again, as she sprang forward, raging at him, and then
renewed her efforts at the traps. He did not understand it, but he knew
this much, she was in terrible trouble, and the cause seemed to be the
same as that which had scared them the night they had ventured near the
