
Perhaps you have been to Atlantic City or some other seashore place and
have seen the Atlantic Ocean. Do you remember the big waves which rolled
in on the sandy beach and the pretty white-caps far out? Did you see the
big nets drawn in full of hundreds of fish? Perhaps you bathed in the
ocean and got your mouth full of water. It did not taste like the water
we drink, for it was salty. All of the water of the ocean is salt water,
but the water of rivers is fresh.

The oceans are very large. It would take us five or six days and nights
on a great steamer to cross to the other side of the Atlantic Ocean. In
what direction should we go?


5

On the western side of America there is another great ocean, the Pacific
Ocean. It has salt water like the Atlantic Ocean, and it also is
constantly in motion with great waves.

North of North America, in the intensely cold region, is the Arctic
Ocean. Great masses of ice called icebergs and ice floes are floating
through this ocean.

Far south of South America is the Antarctic Ocean. It does not touch
South America. It too is in a cold part of the world.


6

Do you know of any people who came here from England, Ireland, France,
Germany, Italy or Russia? Their homes were in the Eastern Hemisphere.
The Eastern Hemisphere has a great mass of land called the Eastern
Continent. The Eastern Continent is composed of three grand divisions,
Europe, Asia and Africa.

Find the great island named Australia. That is sometimes called the
Australian Continent because it is so large.


7

The same oceans which are in the Western Hemisphere extend into the
Eastern Hemisphere. Can you name them? The Eastern Hemisphere also
contains the Indian Ocean, which is not in the Western Hemisphere.


8

1. How can people go from North America to Europe?

2. How do the Chinese, whose home is in Asia, come to America?

3. Nearly all of the rubber which we use for automobile tires,
overshoes, erasers, and hundreds of other articles comes from South
America. Over what ocean does it come?

4. On what ocean did Peary sail on his journey to the North Pole?

5. When Amundsen searched for the South Pole, he started from an island
near Australia. On what oceans did he sail?

6. When the first negroes were brought here from Africa over what ocean
did they come?

7. What ocean trip is shortest from Africa to Asia?

8. Of what use is the ocean?

9. Which ocean can we reach most quickly from our home? How long would
it take us to get to this ocean?

10. How long would it take us to reach the Pacific Ocean?

    "Behold the sea, ... splendid and strong, yet beautiful as the rose
    or the rainbow; full of food, nourisher of man, purger of the world,
    creating a sweet climate."--_Emerson_.




CHAPTER II

THE SEASONS


1

What kind of weather are we having now? What kind will we have in July,
in December, in April, in October?

What do we call the warm season? What is the cold season? What are the
mild seasons? How many seasons have we?


2

What kind of clothing do we need in winter?

What work in your home is different in winter from what is done in
summer? What season gives the school janitor most work? Why?

If you live in the country you have seen how different it looks in
winter time and in summer time. Tell how. In what ways do the town
streets and country roads differ in winter and in summer?

Name some winter and some summer sports and games.

There are certain kinds of industries which can be engaged in only in
summer and some only in winter. Decide which of the following are summer
and which are winter industries, and which require work in more than
one season:

  Ice cutting    Building
  Farming        Preserving
  Lumbering      Fishing


3

What season do we have when the warm summer is over, and before the cold
winter has set in? How do the city streets look then? How do you think
the farm looks then?

Autumn or fall is a busy time on the farm. The last of the vegetables
must be taken in and stored away for the winter. The ripe apples and
nuts must be gathered too. The corn is brought in from the fields and
stored in the barns for the winter food of the farm animals.


4

After the long cold winter is over the days grow gradually milder and
warmer until spring has come. Are you glad when spring comes? Why?

In your schoolroom you can tell when spring is here. How pleasant the
air feels as it blows in through the window! It seems to kiss us with
its warm breath. You can hear the birds chirping as if they were happy.
Perhaps a bee will buzz into the room. Many of the children will bring
to school the dainty little spring flowers, anemones, blood root,
hepatica, violets and buttercups.

Out in the country all nature is busy. The tree buds are swelling and
bursting. The grass and flowers are springing up. The birds are building
their nests. The farmer is ploughing and planting his fields.




CHAPTER III

THE ZONES


1

All parts of the earth do not have seasons such as we have. If we should
travel north we should find the climate growing colder and colder. After
a long time we should come to a region of intense cold. The ground would
be covered with ice and snow all the year through, both winter and
summer. This most northern part of the earth is called the North Pole.
The region around it is the North Frigid Zone. There is a South Pole and
a South Frigid Zone as cold as the northern one. You can see where they
are on the diagram.

If we start from here and take a trip south we find it constantly
growing warmer. At last we come to a place where it is extremely warm in
both summer and winter. That region is called the Torrid Zone because
"torrid" means "hot." This hot zone extends right around the middle part
of the earth. The very hottest part through the middle is the Equator.
Notice on the drawing that we live in a zone between the very cold
region, or Frigid Zone, and the very warm region, or Torrid Zone. Our
zone is called the North Temperate Zone. We have here spring, summer,
autumn and winter. Our weather is seldom so cold as in the Frigid Zones,
nor so warm as in the Torrid Zone. Our spring and autumn are mild or
temperate.

[Illustration: World map]

[Illustration: THE ZONES.]

Find the South Temperate Zone. Its climate is just like ours. What
seasons do they have there? What zone lies north of it and which south
of it?

Copy the diagram of the zones in your note-book.


2

THE TEMPERATE ZONE--OUR ZONE

Most of the people of the world live in one of the Temperate Zones, and
most of the great cities are in these zones. People can work better here
where we do not have either intensely hot or intensely cold weather all
of the time. There are two Temperate Zones, the North Temperate Zone
and the South Temperate Zone. In which do we live?

Some plants grow best in the Temperate Zones, while others live best in
the Torrid Zone. Scarcely any grow in the Frigid Zones. Name all the
plants you can think of that live in our zone. These plants grow during
the summer and rest or die when winter comes.

SOME PLANTS OF THE TEMPERATE ZONES

  Poplar      Fruit trees
  Maple       Wheat
  Chestnut    Corn
  Oak         Cotton
  Walnut      Farm vegetables
  Pine        Familiar garden plants

None of these plants can grow well in either the intense cold of the
Frigid Zones or the great heat of the Torrid Zone.


3

Many animals live better in our zone than in any other zone. They need
temperate climate.

SOME ANIMALS OF THE TEMPERATE ZONES

  Horse      Squirrel
  Cow        Bear
  Sheep      Wolf
  Pig        Rabbit
  Cat        Fox
  Dog        Deer
  Zebra      Buffalo
  Giraffe    Goat

Which are domestic and which are wild animals? Describe each and tell
how it is useful to man.

[Illustration: ZEBRA.]


4

THE HOT ZONE

If we take a long trip to the south we find it growing warmer and warmer
until at last we have reached a land where it is warm all the year
through. This is the Torrid Zone.

The plants do not rest nor die in winter there, for there is no cold
weather. These plants keep right on growing through the year. Many of
the trees grow very, very high and have tremendous leaves.

In some cities there are large greenhouses where the Torrid Zone plants
are raised. The temperature must be kept as warm there as in the Torrid
Zone. These are some of the Torrid or Hot Zone plants:

  Palm      Rubber    Giant ferns
  Coffee    Bamboo    Banana

[Illustration: IN THE TORRID ZONE.]

In the forests of the Hot Zone the trees grow very close together. The
sunlight cannot shine through. It is impossible to walk through these
forests without first chopping out a pathway with a hatchet.


5

In these forests live many of the fierce animals which you have seen in
cages in the Zoological Gardens or at the circus.

SOME ANIMALS OF THE TORRID ZONE

  Monkey     Elephant
  Camel      Snake
  Lion       Parrot
  Tiger      Rhinoceros
  Leopard    Wild Cat

Describe these and tell of what use they are.

[Illustration: A TROPICAL JUNGLE.]

Why are some of the buildings in the Zoological Gardens so warm?


6

The Torrid Zone was the first home of the negroes before they were
brought to America. There are many negroes and Indians living in the
Hot Zone now. Many are but half-civilized. Some are savage. As they do
not need large warm homes like ours, some live in small huts made of the
branches of trees, earth and straw. A few of these homes together make a
village. These people get their food by hunting in the forest and
