
At the mention of models, old John Potter's eyes lighted up, for it
brought the memory of former days vividly before him.

"He means to build it of stone," said the son.

"Stone, say 'ee? that's right, Tommy, that's right," said old John, with
a nod of strong approval, "I've always thought that the weak point in
the old light'ouses was _want of weight_.  On such a slope of a
foundation, you know, it requires great weight to prevent the seas
washin' a lighthouse clean away."

"I've thought the same thing, father, but what you and I only thought of
Smeaton has stated, and intends to act upon.  He means to build a tower
so solid that it will defy the utmost fury of winds and waves.  He is
going to cut the sloping foundation into a series of steps or shelves,
which will prevent the possibility of slipping.  The shape of the
building is to be something like the trunk of an oak tree, with a wider
base than the lighthouse of Rudyerd.  The first twenty feet or so of it
is to be built solid; each stone to be made in the shape of a dovetail,
and all the stones circling round a central key to which they will
cling, as well as to each other, besides being held by bolts and cement,
so that the lower part of the building will be as firm as the rock on
which it stands.  But I daresay, father," continued his son, with a
glance at Teddy Maroon, "our friend here, being engaged on the work, has
told you all about this already."

"Not I," said Maroon, quickly, "I've bin too busy to come here until
to-day, and though I've got me own notions o' what Mr Smeaton intends,
by obsarvin' what's goin' on, I han't guessed the quarter o' what you've
towld me, sur.  Howsever, I can spake to what's bin already done.  You
must know," said Teddy, with a great affectation of being particular,
"Mr Smeaton has wisely secured his workmen by howldin' out pleasant
prospects to 'em.  In the first place, we've got good regular wages, an'
additional pay whin we're on the Rock.  In the second place, extra work
on shore is paid for over an' above the fixed wages.  In the third
place, each man has got his appinted dooty, an's kep close at it.  In
the fourth place, the rules is uncommon stringent, and instant dismissal
follers the breakin' of 'em.  In the fifth place--"

"Never mind the fifth place, Teddy," interrupted old John, "like yer
father, ye was ever too fond o' waggin' yer tongue.  Just tell us
straight off, if ye can, what's been already done at the Rock."

"Well, well," said Maroon, with a deprecatory smile, "owld father an'
me's always bin misonderstud more or less; but no matter.  Av coorse
we've had the usual difficulties to fight agin, for the owld Eddystone
Rock ain't agoin' to change its natur to please nobody.  As me father
described it in _his_ day, so I finds it in mine.  On most of our first
visits we got wet skins; but little or no work done, for though it might
be ever so calm here at Plymouth, it always seemed to be blowin' a
private gale out at the Rock--leastwise, av it warn't blowin', there was
swell enough most days to make the landin' troublesome.  So we got wan
hour's work at wan time, an' two hours, or may be three, at another, off
an' on.  As the saison advanced we got on better, sometimes got five and
six hours on the Rock right on ind, and whin the tide sarved we wint at
it by torch-light.  Wan week we got no less than sixty-four an' a half
hours on it, an' we was all in great sperrits intirely over that, for
you see, mister Potter, we're all picked men an' takes a pride in the
work--to say nothin' of havin' a good master.  Av coorse we've had the
usual botherations wid the sharp rocks cuttin' the cable of our
attendin'-sloop, an' gales suddinly gettin' up whin we was at the Rock
wantin' to land, as well as suddinly goin' down whin we wasn't at the
Rock, so that we missed our chances.  But such sorrows was what we
expicted, more or less.  The wust disappointment we've had has bin wi'
the noo store-ship, the _Neptune Buss_.  I wish it was the Neptune
_bu'st_, I do, for it's wus than a tub, an' gives us more trouble than
it's all worth.  Now the saison's drawin' to a close, it's clear that
we'll do no more this year than cut the foundations."

"An' that's not a bad season's work, lad," said old John.  "Ain't it
not, Tommy?"

"Not bad, indeed, father, for there are always unusual and vexatious
delays at the beginning of a great work; besides, some of the greatest
difficulties in connexion with such buildings are encountered in the
preparation of the foundations.  I suppose Mr Smeaton means to dress
the stones on shore, ready for laying?" continued Potter the younger,
turning to Maroon, who had risen and was buttoning up his monkey-jacket.

"Why, yes sur, haven't you bin down at the yard?"

"Not yet.  I've only just arrived in town; and must be off again
to-morrow.  You can't think how disappointed I am at being prevented by
business from taking part in the building of the new lighthouse--"

"What's that you say, Tommy?" interrupted old Martha, putting her hand
to her ear and wrinkling her brow interrogatively.

"That I'm grieved, mother, at not being able to help in building the new
lighthouse," shouted her son, in a voice that might have split an
ordinary ear.

Old Martha's visage relaxed into a faint smile as she turned towards the
fire and looked earnestly at it, as if for explanation or consolation.

"Ay ay," she muttered, "it would have bin strange if you hadn't wished
that; you was always up to mischief, Tommy; always; or else wishin' to
be up to it, although you might know as well as I know myself, that if
you did get leave to go hout to the Rock (which you're for ever wantin'
to do), it would be wet feet an dirty pinafores mornin', noon, an'
night, which it's little you care for that, you bad boy, though it
causes me no end of washin' an' dryin',--ay ay!"

The old woman looked up in the smiling countenance of her stalwart son,
and becoming apparently a little confused by reminiscences of the past
and evidences of the present, retired within herself and relapsed into
silence.

"Well, sur," continued Teddy, "just give a look down if you can; it's
worth your while.  Mr Smeaton means to have every stone cut in the yard
here on shore, and to lay down each `course' in the yard too, to be sure
that it all fits, for we'll have no time out at the Rock to correct
mistakes or make alterations.  It'll be `sharp's the word, boys, and
look alive O!' all through; ship the stones; off to the Rock; land 'em
in hot haste; clap on the cement; down wi' the blocks; work like
blazes--or Irishmen, which is much the same thing; make all fast into
the boats again; sailors shoutin' `Look alive, me hearties! squall
bearin' down right abaft of the lee stuns'l gangway!'--or somethin' like
that; up sail, an' hooroo! boys, for the land, weather permittin'; if
not, out to say an' take things aisy, or av ye can't be aisy, be as aisy
as ye can!"

"A pleasant prospect, truly," said Mr T.  Potter, laughing, as he shook
the Irishman's horny hand.

"Good-bye, John.  Good-bye, Nora, me darlin'; Good-bye, owld ooman."

"Hold your noise, lad," said old Martha, looking gravely into her
visitor's face.

"That's just what I manes to do, mavoorneen," replied Teddy Maroon, with
a pleasant nod, "for I'll be off to the Rock to-morrow by day-break,
weather permittin', an' it's little help any noise from me would give to
the waves that kape gallivantin' wid the reefs out there like mad
things, from Sunday to Saturday, all the year round."

When the door shut on the noisy Irishman, it seemed as though one of the
profound calms so much needed and desired out at the Eddystone Rock had
settled down in old John Potter's home--a calm which was not broken for
some minutes thereafter except by old Martha muttering softly once or
twice, while she gravely shook her head: "Hold your noise, Teddy, hold
your noise, lad; you're very like your father; hold your noise!"



CHAPTER EIGHT.

EXPERIENCES, DIFFICULTIES, AND DANGERS OF THE FIRST SEASON.

While the building of the new lighthouse was being thus calmly discussed
on shore, out at the Eddystone the wild waves were lashing themselves
into fierce fury, as if they had got wind of what was being done, and
had hurried from all ends of the sea to interdict proceedings.  In
hurrying to the field of battle these wild waves indulged in a little of
their favourite pastime.  They caught up two unfortunate vessels--a
large West Indiaman and a man-of-war's tender--and bore them
triumphantly towards the fatal Rock.  It seemed as though the waves
regarded these as representative vessels, and meant thus to cast the
royal and the merchant navies on the Eddystone, by way, as it were, of
throwing down the gauntlet to presumptuous Man.

For want of the famous light the vessels bore straight down upon the
Rock, and the wild waves danced and laughed, and displayed their white
teeth and their seething ire, as if in exultation at the thought of the
shattered hulls and mangled corpses, which they hoped ere long to toss
upon their crests.

Fortunately, Man was on the "look out!"  The _Buss_ was tugging at her
moorings off the Rock, and some of the seamen and hands were
perambulating the deck, wishing for settled weather, and trying to
pierce the gloom by which they were surrounded.  Suddenly the two
vessels were seen approaching.  The alarm was given.  Those on board the
doomed ships saw their danger when too late, and tried to sheer off the
fatal spot, but their efforts were fruitless.  The exulting waves
hurried them irresistibly on.  In this extremity the Eddystone men
leaped into their yawl, pushed off, and succeeded in towing both vessels
out of danger; at once demonstrating the courage of English hearts and
the need there was for English hands to complete the work on which they
were then engaged.

Next day Mr Smeaton came off to visit the Rock, and the news of the
rescue served him for a text on which to preach a lay-sermon as to the
need of every man exerting himself to the uttermost in a work which was
so obviously a matter of life and death.  It was, however, scarcely
necessary to urge these men, for they were almost all willing.  But not
all; in nearly every flock there is a black sheep or so, that requires
weeding out.  There were two such sheep among the builders of the
Eddystone.  Being good at everything, Smeaton was a good weeder.  He
soon had them up by the roots and cast out.  A foreman proved to be
disorderly, and tried to make the men promise, "that if he should be
discharged they would all follow him."  Smeaton at once assembled the
men and gave orders that such of them as had any dependence on, or
attachment to, the refractory foreman, should take up his tools and
follow him.  Only one did so--the rest stood firm.

At this time the weather was very unsettled, and the work progressed
slowly.  Once or twice it was still further retarded, by men who should
have known better, in the following manner:

One evening one of the lighthouse boats was boarded by a cutter, the
officer in charge of which proceeded to "impress" several of the men
into the navy.

"It's to be pressed we are," murmured Teddy Maroon to one of his mates,
in a vexed tone, "sure the tater-heads might know we've got an Admiralty
protection."

Whether the officer knew this or not, it was evident that he had
overheard the remark, for, after selecting two of the best men, he
turned, and, pointing to Maroon, said aloud:--

"Let that tater-head also jump on board.  He's not worth much, but the
service is in want of powder-monkeys just now.  Perhaps he'll do.  If
not, I'll send him back."

Thus was the poor Irishman carried off with his two mates to fight the
battles of his country!  In a few days, however, they were all sent
back, and the indiscreet officer who had impressed them got a reprimand
for his pains.  After the first season they had no further interruptions
from this source.

Large mainsails were given them for their boats, with a lighthouse
painted on each, and every man obtained besides a silver medal of
exemption from impressment.

But this was only the commencement of poor Teddy's "throubles" at that
time.  He had scarcely returned to his work when a new one overtook him.
This was, however, in the way of business.

"Teddy, my fine fellow," said Richardson, the foreman, as they stood on
the deck of the _Buss_ holding on to the mizzen shrouds, "it's quite
clear to me that with the wind dead against them like this, the relief
boat with Hill's company won't be able to get off, and as we're short of
provisions, I mean to take the big yawl and go ashore with my gang.  As
the best men are always chosen for posts of danger, I shall leave you in
charge of the _Buss_ with two hands--Smart and Bowden;--both stanch
fellows as you know."

"I'm your servant, sir," said Teddy, "only if the best men are wanted
here, hadn't you better stop yourself, an' I'll take the rest ashore?"

Richardson did not see his way to this, though he acknowledged the
compliment, and that evening Teddy found himself in command of the
despised _Buss_, with half a gale blowing, and, as he observed, "more
where that came from."

Teddy was right, "more" did come, and kept him and his mates idle
prisoners for a week.  Indeed the whole of that month had been so stormy
that from the 16th to the 30th only twenty hours' work had been done on
the Rock.

During six days the three men stuck to their post, but at the end of
that time Teddy called a council of war.

"Gintlemen," said he, "(for men in our pursition must be purlite to sich
other), it's our dooty to stick by this here tub so long's it's of any
use to do so; but as she seems to be well able to look after herself,
an' our purvisions has come down to the last ounce, it's my opinion--
founded on profound meditations over me last pipe--that we'd better go
ashore."

To this speech John Bowden replied "I'm agreeable, for it's not my dooty
to starve myself."

William Smart, however, intimated that he was "_dis_agreeable."

"Because," said he, "its blowin' great guns, an' looks as if it meant to
go on, which is not a state of weather suitable for goin' over a dozen
miles of sea in a small open boat, without even a mast or a rag of sail
to bless herself with."

"Pooh!" exclaimed Maroon, contemptuously; "a blanket'll make the best of
sails."

"Ay," added Bowden, "and an oar will do well enough for a mast--anyhow
we'll try, for most votes carry in all well-regulated meetin's."

This plan, although attended with considerable danger, was finally
agreed to, and forthwith acted on.

That afternoon the men on shore observed a very Robinson-Crusoe-like
boat coming in from the sea with an oar-mast and a blanket-sail, from
which landed "Captain" Teddy Maroon and his two mates.  The same
evening, however, the wind moderated and shifted a little, so that the
relief boat, with provisions and the gang of men whose turn it was to do
duty in the store-ship, succeeded in getting off and reaching their
_Buss_ in safety.

The weather became so bad soon after this that Smeaton thought it wise
to bring his operations for that season to a close.  Accordingly, on the
7th November, he visited the Rock, which had been cut into a regular
floor of successive terraces or steps, and was considerably larger in
circumference than the foundation on which Rudyerd's building had
rested.  On the 15th the _Buss_ sailed into Plymouth, the men having run
out of provisions, and having been unable to do anything on the Rock.

A great storm raged on the 22nd.  On the previous day Smeaton had gone
off in the _Buss_ to attach a buoy to the mooring chains for that
winter.  The task was laborious, and when it was completed they found it
impossible to return to Plymouth, owing to the miserable sailing
qualities of their vessel.  There was nothing for it but to cast loose
and run before the wind.  While doing so they snapt the painter of the
yawl, and lost it.

Thus they were, as it were, cast adrift upon the sea with neither maps,
charts, books, nor instruments to guide them.  No alarm, however, was
felt, the neighbouring headlands being bold, and all on board having
previously been at Fowey, to which port Smeaton now gave orders to
steer.

Wet and worn out with labour, he then went below to snatch a few hours'
repose.  In the night he was awakened by a tremendous noise overhead.
The men were rushing about the deck, and shouting wildly.  He sprang up
without dressing.  A voice, exclaiming, "For God's sake heave hard on
