"Why, man," said Fred Harper, "in these lands the whole forest goes on
fire sometimes--surely that would suffice to keep your spirits up and
your heart warm."

"Let's have a look at Jim's last epistle, mother," said Dick, when the
feast was nearly over, and fragrant coffee smoked upon the board, (for
you know the Thorogood Family were total abstainers), "and let Fred read
it aloud.  He's by far the best reader amongst us."

"Well, that's not sayin' much for him," remarked the fireman, with a sly
glance at his sister.

"Your lamp is not as powerful as it might be, mother," said Fred,
drawing his chair nearer to that of the fair invalid, as he unfolded the
letter.  "Turn your eyes this way, Molly,--there, keep 'em steady on the
page; I can see _now_!"

"Eagle's Nest, Rocky Mountain Slopes, 5th October 18---," began Fred.
"Darling Mother,--You've no idea what a charming place God has given me
here, with plenty of work to do of the most congenial kind.  I have only
an opportunity for a short letter this time, because the postboy has
arrived unexpectedly, and won't wait.  Postboy!  You would smile at that
word if you saw him.  He's a six-foot man in leather, with a big beard,
and a rifle and tomahawk.  He was attacked by Indians on the way over
the mountains, but escaped, and he attacked a grizzly bear afterwards
which didn't escape--but I must not waste time on _him_, Well, I must
devote all my letter this post to urging you to come out.  This is a
splendid country for big, strong, hearty, willing men like father and my
brothers.  Of course it is no better than other countries--rather
worse--for weak men, either in mind or body.  Idlers go to the wall here
as elsewhere; but for men willing and able to work--ready to turn their
hands to anything--it is a splendid opening.  For myself--I feel that my
Heavenly Father has sent me here because there is work for me to do, and
a climate which will give me health and strength to do it.  My health is
better now than it has ever been mince the day of that fall which
damaged my constitution so much as to render me one of the confirmed
cripples of the earth.  But it was a blessed fall, nevertheless.  I was
cast down in order that I might be lifted up.  You would smile,
mother,--perhaps you'd laugh--if you saw me at my work.  I'm a
Jack-of-all-trades.  Among other things I'm a farmer, a gardener, a
carpenter, a schoolmaster, a shoemaker, and a missionary!  The last, you
know, I consider my real calling.  The others are but secondary matters,
assumed in the spirit of Paul the tent-maker.  You and dear Molly would
rejoice with me if you saw my Bible Class on week-days, and my
congregation on Sundays.  It is a strange congregation to whom I have
been sent to tell the old old story of Jesus and His love.  There are
farmers, miners, hunters, even painted savages among them.  My church is
usually a barn--sometimes a tent--often the open air.  There are no
denominations here, so that I belong to none.  Only two sects exist--
believers and unbelievers.  But the place is growing fast.  Doubtless
there will be great changes ere long.  Meanwhile it is my happy duty and
privilege to scatter seed in the wilderness.

"Now, I urge you to come, because there is health for Molly to be found
on these sunny slopes of this grand Backbone of America.  That is my
strongest point.  If that does not move you, nothing else will!  One
glance from the windows of my wooden house--this Eagle's Nest on the
Rocky Mountain Slopes--would be sufficient to begin the work of
convalescence.  Woods, dells, knolls, hills, plains, prairies, lakes,
streams--with the blue mountains in the far, far distance.  Oh! if I
were a poet, what a flight I would make into the realms of--of--well,
you understand me!  I have no time for more.  The big-bearded postboy is
growing impatient.  Only this much will I add,--do, _do_ come, if you
love me.  My kindest love to you all.  May God guide you in this
matter.--Your affectionate son, JIM.

"P.S.--One of the members of my congregation is a celebrated hunter
named Reuben Dale.  His wife is also one of my flock, and so is his
friend Jacob Strang.  The manner in which Reuben got married is so
curious that I have amused myself by writing an account of it for
mother.  I enclose it."

"Read the story aloud, Fred," said Molly.  "What Jim thought interesting
must be well worth reading."

Thus urged, Fred took the manuscript and read as follows:--

THE HUNTER'S WEDDING.

A STORY OF THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS.

On the summit of a green knoll, in one of those beautiful valleys which
open from the prairies--like inviting portals--into the dark recesses of
the Rocky Mountains, there stands, or stood not long ago, a small
blockhouse surrounded by a wooden palisade.

Although useless as a protection from artillery, this building was found
to be a sufficient defence against the bullets and arrows of the red men
of North America, and its owner, Kenneth MacFearsome, a fiery Scotch
Highlander, had, up to the date on which our story opens, esteemed it a
convenient and safe place for trade with the warlike savages who roamed,
fought, and hunted in the regions around it.  Some people, referring to
its peaceful purposes, called it MacFearsome's trading post.  Others,
having regard to its military aspect, styled it Mac's Fort.

Reuben Dale stood at the front gate of the Fort conversing with a
pretty, dark-haired, bright-faced girl of eighteen years or thereabouts:
Reuben himself being twenty-eight, and as strapping a hunter of the
Rocky Mountains as ever outwitted a redskin or circumvented a grizzly
bear.  But Reuben was naturally shy.  He had not the courage of a rabbit
when it came to making love.

"Loo," said Reuben, resting his hand on the muzzle of his long rifle and
his chin on his hands, as he gazed earnestly down into the quiet, soft
little face at his elbow.

"Well, Reuben," said Loo, keeping her eyes prudently fixed on the ground
lest they should betray her.

The conversation stopped short at this interesting point, and was not
resumed.  Indeed, it was effectually checked by the sudden appearance of
The MacFearsome.

"What, have ye not managed it yet, Reuben?" said the Highlander, as his
daughter tripped quickly away.

"Not yet," said the hunter despondingly.

"Man, you're not worth a gunflint," returned MacFearsome, with a
twinkling glance from under his bushy grey eyebrows; "if ye had not
saved Loo's life twice, and mine three times, I'd scorn to let you wed
her.  But you'll have to settle it right off, for the parson won't stop
another day.  He counted on spendin' only one day here, on his way to
the conference, and he has been two days already.  You know it'll take
him all his time to get to Beaver Creek by the tenth."

"But I'll mount him on my best buffalo-runner and guide him myself by a
short cut," said the hunter, "so that he shall still be in good time for
the circumference, and--"

"The conference, Reuben; don't misuse the English language.  But it's of
no use, I tell you.  He won't stop another day, so you must have it
settled right off to-day, for it shall never be said that a MacFearsome
was married without the benefit of the clergy."

"Well, I'll do it--slick off;" said the hunter, shouldering his rifle,
and striding away in the direction of a coppice into which he had
observed Loo disappear, with the air of a man who meant to pursue and
kill a dangerous creature.

We will not do Reuben Dale the injustice to lift the curtain at this
critical point in his history.  Suffice it to say that he went into that
coppice pale and came out red--so red that his handsome sunburned
countenance seemed on the point of catching fire.  There was a pleased
expression on it, however, which was eminently suggestive.

He went straight to a wigwam which stood near the fort, lifted the skin
door, entered, and sat down beside the fire opposite to a hunter not
unlike himself.  The man was as tall and strong, though not quite so
good-looking.  He was at the time smoking one of those tomahawks which
some Indians have made with pipe bowls in their heads, the handles
serving for stems, so that, when not employed in splitting skulls, they
may be used for damaging stomachs--i.e. for smoking tobacco!

"I've done it, Jacob Strang," said Reuben, with a grave nod, as he
slowly filled his pipe.

These two hunters were knit together with somewhat of the love that
David bore to Jonathan.  Jacob gazed at his friend for some time in mute
admiration.

"Honour bright?" he asked at length.

"Honour bright," replied Reuben.

"Well now," said Jacob to the cloud that issued from his lips, "I
couldn't ha' done that to save my scalp.  I've tried it, off an' on for
the last six year, and alers stuck at the p'int--or raither just before
it, for I never got quite the length o' the p'int.  But I've bin very
near it, Reuben, more than once, uncommon near.  One time I got so close
to the edge o' the precipice that another inch would have sent me right
over.  `My dear Liz,' says I; but I stuck there, an' the sweet little
thing runned away, larfin', an' so I'm a bachelor still.  But I'm right
glad, Reuben, that you've got it over at last.  How did it feel?"

"Feel!" echoed the hunter, "it felt as bad, or wuss, nor the time that
grizzly bar up the Yellowstone River got his claws into the small o' my
back--only I hadn't you to help me out o' the difficulty this time.  I
had to do it all myself, Jacob, and hard work it was, I tell 'ee, boy.
Hows'ever, it's all over now, an' we're to be spliced this evenin'."

"That's raither sharp work, ain't it, Reuben?" said Jacob, with a
critical wrinkle of his eyebrows, and a remonstrative tone in his voice.
"I ain't much of an authority on sitch matters, but it do seem to me as
if you might have given the poor gal a day or two to make sure whether
her head or heels was uppermost."

"You're right, Jacob; you're judgment was always sound, but, you see, I
was forced to do it slick off because the parson won't wait another day,
an' I'd like to have it done all ship-shape, for I've a respec' for the
parsons, you see.  A man who's come straight down from the Pilgrim
Fathers, like me, behoves to act discreetly--so, the weddin's to be this
evenin'."

"Well, you are the best judge, Reuben, an' it's as well that it should
come off when old Fiddlestrings is here, for a weddin' without a fiddle
ain't much of a spree.  By good luck, too, there's the lads from Buffalo
Creek at the fort just now, so we'll muster strong.  No, I wouldn't give
much for a weddin' without a good dance--not even yours, Reuben."

That afternoon The MacFearsome arranged with the Reverend William Tucker
to delay his departure for one day in order to unite his only daughter
Loo to Reuben Dale.

"You must know, Mr Tucker," he explained, in a slightly apologetic
tone, "although Reuben is only a hunter, his parents were gentlefolks.
They died when Reuben was quite a little fellow, so that he was allowed
to run wild on a frontier settlement, and, as a matter of course, took
to the wilderness as naturally as a young duck takes to the water.  But
Reuben is a superior person, Mr Tucker, I assure you, and as fine a
disposition as you could wish.  He's as bold as a lion too, and has
saved my girl's life twice, and my own three times--so, you see, he--"

"He deserves a good wife," said the Reverend William Tucker heartily.

"Just so," replied the old trader, wrinkling his fierce yet kindly face
with a bland smile, "and you'll confer a great favour on me if you will
stay and perform the ceremony.  Of course, according to Scotch law, we
could marry them without your assistance, but I respect the church, Mr
Tucker, and think it becoming to have a clergyman on occasions of this
kind."

Having settled this important piece of business, Kenneth MacFearsome
went off to make arrangements for the indispensable dance, and the
clergyman, being fond of equestrian exercise, went out alone for an
afternoon ride.

That same afternoon a band of Indians belonging to the Blackfeet tribe
encamped in a gloomy defile of the Rocky Mountains, not far from Mac's
Fort.  It was easy to see that they were a war-party, for, besides being
armed to the teeth, their faces were hideously painted, and they had no
women or children with them.

They had stopped for the double purpose of eating a hasty meal and
holding a council of war.

One of the warriors stood up in the midst of his brethren and made a
speech, which, to judge from its effect on the others, must have been
highly inflammatory and warlike.  During the delivery of it he turned
his ugly visage frequently, and pointed, with his blue-striped nose, as
it were, in the direction of Fort MacFearsome.

Whatever might have been the tendency of the speech, it was suddenly cut
short by the sound of a horse's hoofs clattering in the glen below.
After bestowing a united eagle glance on the approaching horseman, the
Blackfeet warriors turned a look of intelligence on each other, lay flat
down in the long grass, and melted from the scene as completely and
silently as snow-wreaths melt before the sun in spring.

The Reverend William Tucker was a muscular Christian.  That is to say,
he believed that the body, as well as the soul, ought to be cultivated
to the highest possible extent--both having the same origin--and held
that physical health, strength, and vigour, if not absolutely necessary
to the advancement of Christianity in the earth, were at least eminently
conducive thereto.  Holding such opinions, and being powerfully built,
he threw himself heart and soul into whatever he did.  Hence the clatter
of his horse's hoofs as he galloped swiftly up the glen.

But the Reverend William Tucker was also merciful, and not only drew
rein when the path became too steep, but dismounted and led his steed by
the bridle when he reached the rugged ground near the spot where the
war-party had melted away.

Great and grand were the preparations made for the approaching
festivities at Mac's Fort.  Michel, the cook, constructed a venison pie,
the tin dish of which, (repaired expressly for the occasion that
afternoon by the Fort blacksmith), might have served for a bath to an
average baby.  The carpenter arranged the hall, or large public room,
cleared away the tables, fitted up a device in evergreens which was
supposed to represent the words _Loo_ and _Reu_, and otherwise garnished
the ball-room with specimens of his originality and taste, while old
Fiddlestrings, who was a self-taught half-breed, fitted to his violin a
new string made by his wife that day from a deer-sinew.

When the hour arrived for the performance of the ceremony, Reuben Dale
appeared among the men of the Fort, dressed, not like a gentleman in
broadcloth, but, in hunter's costume of the most approved cut and
material--a yellow deerskin coat, ornamented with bead and quill work;
blue cloth leggings, a small fur cap, moccasins garnished with silk
flowers, fitting as tight to his feet as gloves fit the hands, and a
crimson worsted sash round his waist.  He also wore, slung on his
shoulder by scarlet worsted cords, a powder-horn and shot-pouch--not
that these implements of the chase were necessary to the occasion, but
because he would as soon have thought of appearing at any time without
them as without his nose.  For the same reason his rifle accompanied him
to the wedding.
