surface of the glacier, and go back many months after and you will find
the stone lying a little further down the valley than when you first saw
it.  Thus glaciers are formed and thus they slowly move.  But what has
all this to do with ice-bergs?  We shall see.

As the great glaciers of the north, then, are continually moving down
the valleys, of course their ends are pushed into the sea.  These ends,
or tongues, are often hundreds of feet thick.  In some places they
present a clear glittering wall to the sea of several hundreds of feet
in height, with perhaps as much again lost to view down in the deep
water.  As the extremities of these tongues are shoved farther and
farther out they chip off and float away.  _These chips are ice-bergs_!
I have already said that ice-bergs are sometimes miles in extent--like
islands; that they sink seven or eight hundred feet below the surface,
while their tops rise more than a hundred feet above it--like mountains.
If these, then, are the "chips" of the Greenland glaciers, what must
the "old blocks" be?

Many a long and animated discussion the sailors had that winter in the
cabin of the _Hope_ on the subject of ice and ice-bergs!

When the dark nights drew on, little or nothing could be done outside by
our voyagers, and when the ice everywhere closed up, all the animals
forsook them except polar bears, so that they ran short of fresh
provisions.  As months of dreary darkness passed away, the scurvy, that
terrible disease, began to show itself among the men, their bodies
became less able to withstand the cold, and it was difficult for them at
last to keep up their spirits.  But they fought against their troubles
bravely.

Captain Harvey knew well that when a man's spirits go he is not worth
much.  He therefore did his utmost to cheer and enliven those around
him.

One day, for instance, he went on deck to breathe a mouthful of fresh
air.  It was about eleven in the forenoon, and the moon was shining
brightly in the clear sky.  The stars, too, and the aurora borealis,
helped to make up for the total absence of the sun.  The cold air cut
like a knife against his face when he issued from the hatchway, and the
cold nose of one of the dogs immediately touched his hand, as the animal
gambolled round him with delight; for the extreme severity of the
weather began to tell on the poor dogs, and made them draw more lovingly
to their human companions.

"Ho! hallo!" shouted the captain down the hatchway.  "A fox-chase! a
fox-chase!  Tumble up, all hands!"

The men were sitting at the time in a very dull and silent mood.  They
were much cast down, for as it had been cloudy weather for some weeks
past, thick darkness had covered them night and day, so that they could
not tell the one from the other, except by the help of their watches,
which were kept carefully going.  Their journals, also, were written up
daily, otherwise they must certainly have got confused in their time
altogether!

In consequence of this darkness the men were confined almost entirely to
the cabin for a time.  Those who had scurvy, got worse; those who were
well, became gloomy.  Even Pepper, who was a tremendous joker, held his
tongue, and Joe Davis, who was a great singer, became silent.  Jim
Crofts was in his bunk "down" with the scurvy, and stout Sam Baker, who
was a capital teller of stories, could not pluck up spirit enough to
open his mouth.  "In fact," as Mr Dicey said, "they all had a most
'orrible fit o' the blues!"  The captain and officers were in better
health and spirits than the men, though they all fared alike at the same
table, and did the same kind of work, whatever that might chance to be.
The officers, however, were constantly exerting themselves to cheer the
men, and I have no doubt that this very effort of theirs was the means
of doing good to themselves.  "He that watereth others shall be
watered," says the Word of God.  I take this to mean--he that does good
to others shall get good to himself.  So it certainly was with the
officers of the _Hope_.

When the captain's shout reached the cabin Jim Crofts had just said:
"I'll tell 'ee what it is, messmates, if this here state of things goes
on much longer, I'll go out on the floes, walk up to the first polar
bear I meet, and ask him to take his supper off me!"

There was no laugh at this, but Pepper remarked, in a quiet way, that
"he needn't put himself to so much trouble, for he was such a
pale-faced, disagreeable looking object that no bear would eat him
unless it was starving."

"Well, then, I'll offer myself to a starvin' bear--to one that's a'most
dead with hunger," retorted Jim gloomily.

"What's that the cap'en is singin' out?" said Davy Butts, who was
mending a pair of canvas shoes.

The men roused themselves at once; for the hope of anything new turning
up excited them.

"Hallo! ho!" roared the captain again, in a voice that might have
started a dead walrus.  "Tumble up, there!--a fox-chase!  I'll give my
second-best fur-coat to the man that catches foxey!"

In one instant the whole crew were scrambling up the ladder.  Even Jim
Crofts, who was really ill, rolled out of his bunk and staggered on
deck, saying he would have a "go after foxey if he should die for it!"

The game of fox is simple.  One man is chosen to be the fox.  He runs
off and the rest follow.  They are bound to go wherever the fox leads.
In this case it was arranged that the fox should run round the deck
until he should be caught; then the man who caught him should become
fox, and continue running on with all the rest following, until he, in
turn, should be caught, and so on until the one who could run longest
and fastest should break down all the rest.  The warm fur-coat was a
prize worth running for in such a cold climate, so the game began with
spirit.  Young Gregory offered to be fox first, and away they went with
a yell.  Mr Mansell was a little lame, and soon gave in.  Mr Dicey
fell at the second round, and was unable to recover distance.  Gregory
would certainly have gained the coat, for he was strong, and had been a
crack racer at school; but he did not want the coat, so allowed Sam
Baker to catch him.  Sam held on like a deer for a few minutes, and one
after another the men dropped off as they were blown.  Jim Crofts, poor
fellow, made a gallant burst, but his limbs refused to help his spirit.
He fell, and was assisted below by the captain and replaced in his bunk,
where, however, he felt the benefit of his efforts.

The race was now kept up by Sam Baker, Joe Davis, and Butts.  These
three were struggling on and panting loudly, while their comrades danced
about, clapped their mittened hands, and shouted, "Now then, Sam!--go in
and win, Joe!--Butts, forever!" and such-like encouraging cries.

To the surprise of everyone Davy Butts came off the winner, and for many
a day after that enjoyed the warm coat which he said his long legs had
gained for him.

This effort of the captain to cheer the men was very successful, so he
resolved to follow it up with an attempt at private theatricals.
Accordingly this thing was proposed and heartily agreed to.  Next day
everyone was busy making preparations.  Tom Gregory agreed to write a
short play.  Sam Baker, being the healthiest man on board, was willing
to act the part of an invalid old lady, and Jim Crofts consented to
become a gay young doctor for that occasion.

Meanwhile the captain arranged a piece of real work, for he felt that
the attempt to keep up the spirits alone would not do.  They had been
for a long time living on salt provisions.  Nothing could restore the
crew but fresh meat--yet fresh meat was not to be had.  The walrus and
deer were gone, and although foxes and bears were still around them,
they had failed in all their attempts to shoot or trap any of these
animals.  A visit to the Eskimo camp, therefore, (if such a camp really
existed), became necessary; so, while the theatricals were in
preparation, a small sledge was rigged up, Gregory and Sam Baker were
chosen to go with him; the dogs were harnessed, and, on a fine, starry
forenoon, away they went to the south at full gallop, with three hearty
cheers from the crew of the brig, who were left in charge of the first
mate.

The journey thus undertaken was one full of risk.  It was not known how
far distant the natives might be, or where they were likely to be found.
The weather was intensely cold.  Only a small quantity of preserved
meat could be taken--for the rest, they trusted in some measure to their
guns.  But the captain's great hope was to reach the Eskimo village in a
day or two at the farthest.  If he should fail to do so, the prospect of
himself and his crew surviving the remainder of the long winter was, he
felt, very gloomy indeed.

Success attended this expedition at the very beginning.  They had only
been eight hours out when they met a bear sitting on its haunches behind
a hummock.  "Hallo! look out!" cried Gregory, on catching sight of him.
"Fire, lads," said the captain, "I'm not quite ready."  Gregory fired
and the bear staggered.  Baker then fired and it fell!

This was a blessing which filled their hearts so full of thankfulness
that they actually shook hands with each other, and then gave vent to
three hearty cheers.  Their next thoughts were given to their comrades
in the _Hope_.

"You and Baker will camp here, Tom," said the captain, "and I will
return to the brig with a sledge-load of the meat.  When I've put it
aboard I'll come straight back to you.  We'll keep a ham for ourselves,
of course.  Now then, to work."

To work the three men went.  A hind leg of the bear was cut off, the
rest was lashed firmly on the sledge, and the dogs enjoyed a feed while
this was being done.  Then the captain cracked his whip.  "Good-bye,
lads", "Good-bye, captain," and away he and the dogs and sledge went,
and were soon lost to view among the hummocks of the frozen sea.



CHAPTER NINE.

A VISIT TO THE ESKIMOS--WONDERFUL DOINGS--A MYSTERY.

The proceedings of this sledge party were so interesting that I give
them in the words of Tom Gregory's journal:

"_Sunday_.--We have indeed cause to rejoice and to thank God for His
mercies this morning.  Last night we shot a bear, and the captain is
away with the carcass of it to our poor scurvy-smitten friends in the
_Hope_.  This Sunday will be a real day of rest for me and Sam Baker,
though our resting-place is a very queer one.  After the captain left
us, we looked about for a convenient place to encamp, and only a few
yards from the spot where we killed the bear we found the ruins of an
old Eskimo hut made partly of stones, partly of ice.  We set to work to
patch it up with snow, and made it perfectly air-tight in about two
hours.

"Into this we carried our bear-skins and things, spread them on the
snowy floor, put a lump of bear's fat into our tin travelling lamp, and
prepared supper.  We were not particular about the cookery.  We cut a
couple of huge slices off our bear's ham, half roasted them over the
lamp, and began.  It was cut, roast, and come again, for the next hour
and a half.  I positively never knew what hunger was until I came to
this savage country!  And I certainly never before had any idea of how
much I could eat at one sitting!

"This hearty supper was washed down with a swig of melted snow-water.
We had some coffee with us, but were too tired to infuse it.  Then we
blocked up the door with snow, rolled our bear-skins round us, and were
sound asleep in five minutes.

"Lucky for us that we were so careful to stop up every hole with snow,
for, during the night the wind rose and it became so intensely cold that
Baker and I could scarcely keep each other warm enough to sleep, tired
though we were.  At this moment my fingers are so stiff that they will
hardly hold the pencil with which I write, and the gale is blowing so
furiously outside that we dare not open the door.  This door, by the
way, is only a hole big enough to creep through.  The captain cannot
travel to-day.  He knows we are safe, so I will not expect him.  I have
brought my small Testament with me.  It has hitherto been my constant
travelling companion.  I am thus provided with mental food.  But, in
truth, I shall not want much of that for the next twelve hours.  Rest!
rest! rest! is what we require.  No one can imagine how a man can enjoy
rest, after he has been for many months exposed to constant, exhausting,
heart-breaking toil, with the thermometer _always_ below zero, and with
nothing but salt food to keep him alive.

"_Tuesday night_.--Here we are at last--among the Eskimos! and what a
queer set they are, to be sure.  All fat and fur!  They look as broad as
they are long.  They wear short fox and seal-skin coats, or shirts, with
hoods to then; no trousers, but long boots, that come up and meet the
coats.  Women, men, and babies, all dressed alike, or nearly so.  The
only difference is that the women's boots are longer and wider than
those of the men.  But I forgot--yes, there is one other difference; the
women have _tails_ to their coats; the men have none!  Real tails--not
like the broad skirts of our dress-coats, but long, narrow tails,
something like the tail of a cow, with a broadish flap at the end of it.
This they evidently look upon as a handsome ornament, for I observe
that when they go off on a journey, each woman buttons her tail up to
her waist, to keep it out of the way, and when she returns she unbuttons
it, and comes into camp with her tail flowing gracefully behind her!

"We had a terrible journey of it down here.  The captain returned to us
on Monday morning early, and the next two days we spent struggling over
the hummocks and out upon the floes.  It was so cold that the wind cut
into our very marrow.  We have all had our faces frozen, more or less,
but not badly.  Baker will have an ugly spot on the end of his nose for
some weeks to come.  It is getting black now, and as the nose itself is
bright red and much swelled, his appearance is not improved.  I
foolishly tried to eat a little snow yesterday morning, and the
consequence is that my lips are sore and bloody.  On Monday afternoon
the dogs and sledge went head over heels into a deep rut in the ice, and
it cost us two hours to get them out again.  Luckily no damage was done,
although the captain was on the sledge at the time.

"We had almost despaired of finding the village when we came upon a
sledge track that led us straight up to it.  I shall never forget the
beauty of the scene on our arrival.  The sky was lighted up with the
most beautiful aurora I have yet seen in these regions.  Stars spangled
the sky in millions.  Great ice-bergs rose in wild confusion in the
distance, and all along the shore for a few hundred yards were clusters
of snow-huts.  They looked exactly like bee-hives.  I have seen many a
strange house, but the strangest of all is certainly a house of snow!
To-day I was fortunate enough to see one built.  It was done very
neatly.  The hard snow was cut into slabs with a wooden knife.  These
were piled one above another in regular order, and cemented with snow--
as bricks are with lime.  The form of the wall was circular, and the
slabs were so shaped that they sloped inwards, thus forming a dome, or
large bee-hive, with a key-stone slab in the top to keep all firm.  A
hole was then cut in the side for a door--just large enough to admit of
a man creeping through.  In front of this door a porch or passage of
snow was built.  The only way of getting into the hut is by creeping on
hands and knees along the passage.  A hole was also cut in the roof,
into which was inserted a piece of clear ice, to serve for a window.

"The natives received us with wild surprise, and I found my old friends,
the walrus-hunters, among them.  They were remarkably friendly.  One
stout, middle-aged fellow invited us to his hut.  I am now seated in it
beside the Eskimo's wife, who would be a good-looking woman if she were
not so fat, dirty, and oily!  But we cannot expect people living in this
fashion, and in such a country, to be very clean.  Although the hut is
white outside, it is by no means white inside.  They cook all their food
over an oil-lamp, which also serves to heat the place; and it is
wonderful how warm a house of snow becomes.  The cold outside is so
great as to prevent the walls melting inside.  Besides Myouk, our host,
and his wife, there are two of the man's sisters, two lads, two girls,
and a baby in the hut.  Also six dogs.  The whole of them--men, women,
children, and dogs, are as fat as they can be, for they have been
successful in walrus-hunting of late.  No wonder that the perspiration
is running down my face!  The natives feel the heat, too, for they are
all half-naked--the baby entirely so; but they seem to like it!

"What a chattering, to be sure!  I am trying to take notes, and Myouk's
wife is staring at me with her mouth wide open.  It is a wonder she can
open her eyes at all, her cheeks are so fat.  The captain is trying, by
the language of signs, to get our host to understand that we are much in
want of fresh meat.  Sam Baker is making himself agreeable to the young
people, and the plan he has hit upon to amuse them is to show them his
watch, and let them hear it tick.  Truly, I have seldom seen a happier
family group than this Eskimo household, under their snowy roof!

"There is to be a grand walrus-hunt to-morrow.  We shall accompany them,
and see whether our endurance on a long march, and our powers with the
rifle, cannot impress them with some respect for us.  At present they
have not much.  They seem to think us a pale-faced set of helpless
creatures.

"_Wednesday night_.--We have just returned from the hunt; and a
tremendous hunt it was!  Six walrus and two bears have been killed, and
the whole village is wild with delight.  Cooking is going on in every
hut.  But they have no patience.  Nearly everyone is munching away at a
lump of raw walrus flesh.  All their faces are more or less greasy and
bloody.  Even Myouk's baby--though not able to speak--is choking itself
