by man, he is found of many different breeds and varieties: too many to
be minutely described in these pages.  Suffice it to say, that almost
every civilised nation possesses several kinds of horses--differing from
one another in size, shape, colour, and qualities: in size especially--
since this fine animal may be observed not much bigger than a mastiff;
while other members of his family attain almost to the dimensions of an
elephant!  Even savage tribes, both in Asia and America, are in
possession of peculiar breeds of horses; and it may be assumed as a
fact, that more than a hundred varieties exist upon the earth.  These
have all been regarded as springing from one original stock; but here
again there is only vague conjecture; and it is far more probable, that
the domesticated horses are the descendants of several kinds originally
distinct in their wild state.

There are wild horses at the present day in Asia, Africa, and America;
but it is questionable whether any of these are the descendants of an
originally wild stock.  More likely they are the progeny of horses
escaped from the domesticated breeds.  Of course we refer to the _true_
horses of the genus _equus_; and not to the dziggetais, quaggas, and
zebras--to which we shall presently refer.  These last-mentioned kinds
are still found wild, as they have ever been; and, with one or two
exceptions, none of their species have been tamed to the use of man.

In America--both in the northern and southern divisions of the
continent--herds of wild horses are numerous.  These have all sprung
from individuals that escaped from their owners, and in process of time
have multiplied to a great extent.  Of course they could have no other
origin: since it is well-known that, previous to the time of Columbus,
no animal of the horse kind existed in America.  The wild horses now
found there are descended then from a domestic breed; and this breed has
been easily ascertained to be that used by the Spaniards in their
conquests of Mexico and Peru.  It is a race known as the Andalusian
horse--nearly allied to the Arabian--and no doubt at an earlier period
imported into the peninsula of Spain by the Moors.  These horses are
much smaller than the English hunter; but possess all the properties of
a true horse--the shape, action, etcetera--and cannot, therefore, be
considered as mere _ponies_.  They are, in reality, well-blooded horses,
of small stature; and no breed could be better suited to the climate of
most parts of Spanish America, where they now run wild.

On the pampas of South America these horses exist in vast droves.  The
Gauchos, a half-civilised race of men, live amidst their herds, and hunt
them chiefly for the hides.  They early learn to capture and ride them;
and a Gaucho is seldom seen off the back of his horse.  He can capture
and break one in in the course of an hour.  The flesh also serves him as
an article of food.  Down as far as the Straits of Magellan the droves
of wild horses are found.  There the native Indians have tamed many of
them--even the women and children going most of their time on horseback.
On the llanos, or great plains, that extend northward from the Amazon
and Orinoco--that is, in the provinces of Venezuela--other droves of
wild horses exist; and these, along with half-wild oxen, form the sole
property and pursuit of a class of men called Llaneros, who in many
respects resemble the Gauchos.  Again, proceeding to North America, we
find the same species of horse running wild on the great plains to the
north of Mexico; in California, and upon the prairies east of the Rocky
Mountains.  In Mexico Proper, as also in California, they are _owned_ by
great landed proprietors; and are annually caught, branded, and sold.
Many of these proprietors can count from 10,000 to 20,000 head roaming
within the boundaries of their estates, besides large droves of horned
cattle and mules.  In the vast regions between the settled parts of
Mexico and the frontier settlements of the United States, the wild
horses are the property of no one, but range freely over the prairies
without mark or brand.  These are hunted and captured by different
tribes of Indians--Comanches, Pawnees, Sioux, Blackfeet, etcetera, who
also possess large numbers of them tamed and trained to various uses.
Like the Gauchos and Llaneros of the south, these Indians use the flesh
of the horse for food, and esteem it the greatest delicacy!  Among some
tribes, where the buffalo is not found, the horse takes the place of the
latter as an article of diet; and forms the principal article of
subsistence of thousands of these people.  Among most of the prairie
tribes the chase of this animal, or the buffalo, is the sole pursuit of
their lives.

Still further north ranges the wild horse, even as far as the prairies
extend; and among the tribes of the Saskatchewan he is also found--used
by them for the saddle, and also as a beast of burden.  In these
regions, however, the buffalo still exists in great numbers; and the
horse, besides being eaten himself, is also employed to advantage in the
chase of this animal.

The wild horses of America are not all exactly of one breed.  Those of
the Mexico-American prairies, called by the Spaniards _mustenos_
(mustangs), differ slightly from those found upon the llanos of South
America; and these again from the horses of the pampas, and the
parameros of Peru.  These differences, however, are but slight, and
owing solely to climatic and other little causes.  But the mustangs of
the northern prairies have among them an admixture of breeds, derived
from American runaways along the borders of the Mississippi, and others
escaped from travellers on the prairies; and there have latterly been
discovered mustangs of large size--evidently sprung from the
English-Arabian horse.

In the Falkland Islands the horse is also found in an untamed state.
These were introduced by the French in 1764; but have since become
perfectly wild.  Strange to say, they are only found in the eastern part
of the island--although the pasture there is not more rich than in the
west, and there is no natural boundary between the two!

In Asia the horse runs wild in large herds--just as in America.  The
range in which they are found in this state is chiefly on the great
plains, or steppes--stretching from the Himalaya Mountains to Siberia.
The Calmuck Tartars tame them; and possess vast droves, like the Gauchos
and Indians.  They also eat their flesh; and among many tribes of
Tartars mare's milk is esteemed the most delicious of beverages.

After the true horse, the most beautiful species is the _Zebra_.  Every
one knows the general appearance of this handsomely marked animal, which
appears as if Nature had painted his body for effect.

Of the zebra there are two distinct kinds--both of them natives of
Africa, and belonging to the southern half of that great continent.
They are easily distinguished from each other by the stripes.  One of
them is literally striped to the very hoofs--the dark bands running
around the limbs in the form of rings.  The stripes extend in the same
way over the neck and head, to the very snout or muzzle.  This is the
true zebra, an animal that inhabits the mountainous regions of South
Africa, and which differs altogether from the _dauw_ or Burchell's
zebra, also found upon the great plains or karoos of the same region.
The latter has the stripes only over the body; while the head and legs
are very faintly streaked, or altogether of a plain brownish colour.
Attempts have been made at taming both of these kinds, and with some
success.  They have been trained both to the saddle and draught; but,
even in the most tractable state to which they have been yet reduced,
they are considered as "treacherous, wicked, obstinate, and fickle."

Another species of horse found also in South America is the _Quagga_.
This is very much like the zebra in size, shape, and in fact everything
except colour.  In the last respect it differs from both, in being of a
plain ashy brown hue over the upper parts of the body, very indistinctly
striped, and of a dirty white colour underneath.  Like the dauw, it
frequents the open plains--trooping together in vast droves, and often
herding with several species of antelopes.

Another species of quagga, called the Isabella quagga, is supposed to
exist in South Africa; but there are doubts upon this subject.  The name
is derived from the colour of a specimen seen by a very untrustworthy
traveller, which was of the hue known as Isabella colour; but nothing is
known of the animal, and most naturalists believe that the Isabella
quagga is identical with the other species, and that the specimen
reported by Le Vaillant was only a young quagga of the common kind.

All these species of African horses are generally classed with the genus
_Asinus_; that is, they are considered as _asses_, not _horses_.

We now come to other species of the ass genus, which were all originally
natives of Asia.

First, then, there is the domestic _Ass_; and of this species there are
almost as many varieties as of the horse,--some of them, as the Guddha
of the Mahrattas, not larger than a mastiff, while others exist in
different parts of the world as large as a two-year-old heifer.  Asses
are found of a pure white, and black ones are common, but the usual
colour is that to which they have given their name--the "colour of an
ass."

Besides the domestic species, there are several others still found wild.
There is the Koulan, which is exceedingly shy and swift--so much so
that it is difficult to capture or even kill one of them; since before
the hunter can approach within rifle range of them, they take the alarm
and gallop out of sight.  They live in troops, inhabiting the desert
plains of Persia and Mesopotamia in winter, while in summer they betake
themselves to the mountain ranges.  They are also found on the steppes
bordering the Caspian and Aral Seas.

Another species of wild ass is the Kiang.  This inhabits Thibet.  It is
of a bright bay colour, and has a smooth coat; but the males are deeper
coloured than the females.  They live in troops of about a dozen
individuals under a solitary male; and frequent places where the
thermometer is below zero--though they dwell indifferently either on
open plains or mountains.

The kiang has a variety of appellations, according to the country in
which it is found.  It is the Dziggetai, and the Wild Ass of Cutch, and
also the Yototze of the Chinese; but it is very probable that all these
are the names of different species.  It is further probable, that there
exist several other species of wild asses in the Thibetian and Tartar
countries of Asia--and also in the vast unknown territories of
North-eastern Africa--yet to be classified and described; for it may be
here observed that a monograph of the horse tribe alone, fully
describing the different species and breeds, would occupy the whole life
of a naturalist.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

THE OX TRIBE.

Our common domestic cattle furnish the type on which this family is
founded; and it is well-known that of this type there are many varieties
in different countries.  Even in our own, so many are there, that a mere
list of their names would fill one of our pages.  We shall refrain
therefore from giving any description of the different varieties--simply
remarking that they are all supposed to spring from one original.  This
is, to say the least, a very doubtful hypothesis, since cattle have been
found domesticated in many countries, and the period of their first
introduction to the society of man is altogether unknown.  It is far
more likely that different species have furnished the varieties now
known as domestic cattle.

We shall proceed to describe the other bovine animals--which, although
of the same family, are beyond doubt of a distinct species from the
common cattle.

The _Zebu_ is one of the most remarkable.  Its home is India and the
adjacent regions; where it branches off into almost as many varieties as
there are breeds of our own oxen.  These varieties have different names;
and they differ in size, shape, and other particulars; but the hump and
long hanging dewlap render the zebu easily recognisable.

In India they are sometimes employed as beasts of the saddle and
draught; and their flesh is also eaten, though with the exception of the
hump (which is esteemed a great delicacy) it is not equal to English
beef.  Among the Hindus the zebus are regarded as sanctified creatures;
and to slaughter them is deemed sin.  For all that, these fanatics do
not hesitate to _work_ them--sometimes hard enough.  There are some
zebus, however, that are considered more holy than common.  These may be
seen wandering idly about the villages, fed from the hands of the
people; and if neglected in this regard, they walk uninvited into the
rice enclosures, and help themselves!

The zebus are usually of an ashy-grey colour, though many are white; and
their size varies from that of an ordinary calf, to the stature of a
full-grown bull.

There is a variety of the zebu--or perhaps a distinct species--known as
the Dante.  It is an African animal--that is, Egypt is the country where
it is chiefly found.  Very little knowledge of it exists among
naturalists.  It is distinguished from the Indian zebu by having a
smaller hump upon the withers and a narrower face; and it is supposed to
be the animal represented on the ancient Egyptian tombs.

We next come to the kind of oxen termed _Buffaloes_; and of these there
are several species.

First, there is the _Indian buffalo_; and it may here be remarked, that
when the word buffalo is used, an animal with a huge hump upon its
shoulders is usually understood.  This is an error, arising, no doubt,
from the fact that the _bison_ of America, which _has_ a hump, is
generally called a buffalo.  But the Indian buffalo has no such
protuberance; nor yet the African species.  The Indian animal is found
both in a domesticated and wild state; but both are clearly of the same
species.  The wild one is called the Arna, and the tame one Bhainsa, in
the language of the natives.  The former is of much greater size than
the latter--standing, when full-grown, as high as the tallest man!  So
strong are these animals, that an arna bull has been known to butt down
a good-sized elephant with a single stroke of his horns!

It is the Indian buffalo that is found in Italy--where it has been
introduced, and is used for draught; its great strength giving it the
advantage over horses, especially on the deep miry roads that exist in
some parts of the peninsula.

The _Manilla buffalo_ is a smaller variety or species of the arna,
inhabiting, as its name imports, the Philippine Islands.

The _African buffalo_, sometimes known as the _Kaffir buffalo_, is
another of these great oxen, and not the least celebrated of the tribe.
It is an inhabitant of Africa, and is found chiefly in the southern half
of that continent, from the Cape of Good Hope northwards.  It is an
animal of vast size and strength; often waging war with the lion, and
frequently with man himself.  In these encounters the buffalo is but too
successful; and it is asserted among the natives of South Africa, that
there are more deaths among them, caused by buffalo bulls, than by all
the other wild beasts of the country.  Like his Indian congener, the
shock from the massive horns of an African buffalo is almost
irresistible; and both the lion and elephant at times succumb to it.

There is a smaller African species about which less is known.  This is
the Zamouse or Bush cow, which differs from the true buffalo in having a
flatter forehead, and being altogether without the dewlap.

We now come to the _American buffalo_, or _Bison_, as it should be
called.  This is indigenous to North America; and its present range is
confined to the great prairies that extend eastward from the foot of the
Rocky Mountains.  It was formerly found much farther to the east--in
fact, to the Atlantic coast; but its limits are now far beyond the
meridian of the Mississippi.  Hunters (both red and white) have driven
it across the Rocky Mountains; and of late years it has been met with in
the territory of the Upper Columbia.  Its habits are too well-known to
call for a description here, and its shaggy coat, with the deformity of
its huge shoulder-hump, are familiar to every eye.  With one exception,
it is the only species of the ox tribe indigenous to America--and it may
be added, to North America--since no native bovine animal is known to
exist in the southern half of the Transatlantic continent.

The _European buffalo_--or as it is sometimes called _Lithuanian
buffalo_--bears a considerable resemblance to that of the prairies.  In
size it is perhaps superior; but the two are much alike in general
appearance--especially in their massive form, and the long brown hair,
of woolly texture, so thickly set upon their necks and shoulders.

The European buffalo is nearly extinct, and exists only in some of the
forests of Lithuanian Poland, where it is rather half-wild than wild;
that is, it freely roams the forests, but only as the deer in our own
extensive parks, or the white cattle, known as the wild Scotch oxen--in
other words, it has an owner.

A very remarkable species is the _Yak_, or _Grunting Ox_.  This is found
only in the high, cold countries that lie to the north of the Himalayan
Mountains--in Thibet and Tartary.  There is only one species, but this
is both wild and tame--the wild sort being the larger and more
formidable animal.  The domestic variety is used by the people of Thibet
for carrying burdens; and both its milk and flesh are in great demand in
these cold countries of poverty and hunger.

The yaks dislike the warmth of summer; and during that season seek to
hide themselves in the shade, or under water, in which they swim well.
Their grunt exactly resembles that of a hog.  The calves are covered
with rough black hair like a curly-haired dog; but, when three months
old, they obtain the long hair that distinguishes the full-grown animal,
and which hangs so low as to give it the appearance of being without
legs!  They willingly live with common cattle, and will breed with them;
but the wild yak bull is an exceedingly fierce and dangerous animal.
The tail of the grunting ox is very full, or bushy; and although the
hair of the body is usually black, that upon the tail is universally of
a pure white.  This hair, when dyed red, is used by the Chinese to form
the tufts worn in the caps of the mandarins.  It is the _chowry_ or
fly-brush of India.

Like other domesticated cattle, the yak is found of different breeds--
known by the names of Noble yak, Plough yak, etcetera.

Next in succession comes the _Musk Ox_ of America, which, from its long
hanging hair, and also from many of its habits, bears a good deal of
resemblance to the grunting ox.  The musk ox is a native of North
America; and there his range is confined to the most remote regions of
the Hudson's Bay territory.  He is met with in the inhospitable track
known as the Barren Grounds--and also along the coasts and islands of
the Arctic Ocean--but nowhere so far south as the boundary of the United
States or the Great Lakes.  But for the land expeditions of several
Arctic explorers, the existence of the musk ox would hardly have been
known; and, as it is, his habits are but little understood.  He is not
of large size--being between the stature of an ox and a sheep--and in
general appearance he resembles the latter more than the former; hence,
among naturalists, he is styled the Sheep ox (_ovibos_).  He and the
Bison, as already remarked, are the only _indigenous_ oxen of America.

To return to Asia.  In its south-eastern parts--the Indies--we find
several other species of the ox tribe.  There is the _Gayal_ or
_Jungly-gau_, which inhabits the eastern parts of Bengal, especially the
mountains that separate this province from Arracan.  Of this there is a
tame and wild species--the latter an inhabitant of forests, living
rather upon the shoots of trees than upon grass.  It is a large animal,
more like the common ox than any of the buffaloes; and it is also less
fierce in its disposition than the latter.

Next to the gayal is the _Gam_--also a forest-dwelling ox, of large
size; and, like the other, browsing upon the leaves and twigs of trees.

The gam inhabits several forest-covered mountains in Central India,
where it is only found wild.  Attempts have been made to domesticate it,
but without success--since it is both a shy and fierce animal; so much
so that even the calves will not live in captivity!

Another Indian ox is the _Takin_, which inhabits the country of the
Kamptis, in the eastern ranges of the Himalayas, and about which there
is a dispute among naturalists, as to whether _it is an ox_!

We conclude our sketch with the _Anoa_, which belongs to Celebes--a
small species bearing some resemblance to the antelopes; and the
_Banting_ or _Sumatran Ox_, a native of Java, Borneo, and also, as its
second name denotes, of the Island of Sumatra.



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

SHEEP.

The Sheep is one of the animals which man has subjected to his use; and
one, too, of primary importance in the domestic economy of almost every
civilised nation.  Like the horse, dog, cat, ox, and pig, it has assumed
the greatest possible variety.  Many naturalists have treated these
varieties as species; but those writers of greatest authority agree in
considering all the domestic breeds as having originated from one common
stock; and it would be idle here to speculate upon this question.

Of the _tame sheep_ there are not less than forty very distinct kinds,
besides numerous varieties of each of these kinds!  These, of course,
are distributed among many nations, and exhibit a very great difference
in point of size and general appearance.  Some are without horns, while
others have these appendages very large, and of eccentric shape; some
are covered with long crisp wool; others have the wool lank and
straight; while still others have no wool at all, but instead a coat of
hair resembling that of a spaniel or Newfoundland dog!  But, besides
these distinct kinds, as already stated, there are numerous varieties of
each kind.  For instance, the common sheep of England is itself branched
out into quite as many as twenty breeds, each of which has a name of its
own, and differs from all the others in many essential characteristics.

Leaving the common sheep of our own country, we shall say a few words of
some of the more noted kinds that are in the possession of different
nations abroad.

From Spain comes the Merino, so celebrated for the quality of its wool;
while in Astracan and other Oriental countries there is a breed, the
lambs of which furnish the well-known Astracan lambs'-skin, one of the
most beautiful and valuable of furs.  The Wallachian sheep, bred in
Hungary, Transylvania, and the Danubian principalities, also produces a
flue fur-like skin, much worn by the peasantry of Eastern Europe, in
jackets and cloaks termed "bundas."

A very similar kind of hairy-coated sheep is propagated throughout
Asiatic Russia and Siberia--the skins affording a warm and comfortable
clothing for the natives of these cold countries.

In the Indian countries there are many varieties, such as the Barwall of
Nepaul, and also the Huniah, Cago, and Seeling, belonging to the same
kingdom.  Again, in the Deccan there is a breed known as Deccan sheep,
another called Garar, and two others in Mysore denominated respectively
the Carrimbar and Shaymbliar.  China has a variety known as the Morvan,
with very long legs; and in Russia, again, there is a kind with tails so
long that their tops drag upon the ground; and another in Northern
Russia, with tails so short that they appear altogether wanting!

With regard to tails, no breed has these appendages so developed as the
broad or fat-tailed sheep.  This kind is supposed to have originally
come from Barbary; but they are now propagated in different parts of the
world.  In Asia they are found among the Tartars, Persians, Buchanans,
and Thibetians.  In Africa itself they are common among the Abyssinians,
and are also kept in large flocks by the Dutch colonists of the Cape.
The tails of these sheep are sometimes so large and heavy, that it is
with difficulty the animals can carry them; and in some instances they
are dragged along the ground as the sheep move from place to place!  The
fat of which this appendage is composed is esteemed a great delicacy;
and at the Cape, as elsewhere, it constitutes an important article of
the _cuisine_.

There are several other curious breeds of sheep reared in the different
countries of Africa.  These are, the Guinea sheep of the western coast;
the Morocco sheep, bred in the kingdom of the same name; the African
sheep, an inhabitant of the Sahara; and the smooth-haired African sheep.
There are also the Tezzan sheep, belonging to Tripoli; the Saint Helena
sheep, of the celebrated Island of Saint Helena; the Congo sheep, of
Congo; and the Angolas, of the same region, famous for the quality of
their wool--not to be confounded, however, with the Angora wool, which
is the produce of a goat.  There are sheep in Tartary that eat bones
like dogs, and in Hindustan and Nepaul there are kinds that have four
horns each.  These are the Dumbas.  A little species exists in Iceland,
in which the horns sometimes grow to the number of eight--though four is
the more common number.  America, too, has its varieties.  These are the
Brazilian sheep, the Demerara breed, the South American sheep, and a
variety known as the West Indian.

In fact, go to whatever part of the world you may, you will find a
species or variety of this valuable animal, different in some respects
from all the others.

The _wild sheep_, like the wild goats, do not number a great many
species; but there are certainly several that are yet undescribed, and
perhaps there may be about a dozen in all.  No doubt the great central
mountains of Asia, and also the ranges of Northern Africa, still
unexplored, will in time yield several new species of wild sheep.
Indeed, late travellers in the Himalayas speak of wild sheep that appear
to be essentially different from the _argali_, and other species already
known.

One species of wild sheep belongs to Europe--the Moufflon, which is to
this day found plentifully in the mountainous parts of Corsica, Cyprus,
and Candia.  It was supposed to be the original of the tame breeds; but
this is a mere conjecture.

In America there is also but one species of wild sheep, though it has
also a variety.  This is the Bighorn of the Rocky Mountains, lately much
spoken of by prairie travellers and fur-hunters.  It is not known in
tropical North America, nor does its range extend to the Andes of the
south; but it is found to the west, in the mountains of California, in a
variety called the Californian sheep.  The bighorn is extremely like the
Asiatic argali, and was for a long time regarded as identical with the
latter; but this was an error.  It is now ascertained that not only is
the American animal of another species, but also that there are several
distinct species of the argali itself in the different ranges of Asiatic
mountains.

Africa has its wild sheep, but only in its northern parts.  This is the
Aoudad, which dwells in the mountains of Barbary.

Asia appears to be the head-quarters of the wild sheep.  One species is
found in Armenia, and another in the Caucasus.  Siberia has an argali,
that appears altogether to differ from the argali of the Himalayas.
Again, in the Himalayan Mountains themselves, there is one species which
ranges north only as far as Thibet; while on the Thibetian plateaux, as
far as the Altai Mountains, there is another, if not two other species,
quite distinct from the latter.

It has been observed by competent travellers, that these Thibetian
argalis bear a very strong resemblance to the different breeds of tame
sheep found in the same regions; from which it may be reasonably
inferred that the domesticated varieties of different countries have
sprung from several wild species, instead of being all descended from
one common origin.



CHAPTER TWENTY.

GOATS.

My young readers will be surprised to hear that nothing is more
difficult than to tell a _Goat_ from a _Sheep_.  Yet such is in reality
the fact.  Of course the common goat is easily distinguished from the
common sheep; but then there are species and varieties of both these
animals so like in shape, size, colour, and habits, that the most
