A feeble cheer from Fred caused an abrupt halt:--

"What is it?"

"Hallo!"

"What now?"

"The lake at last!--Our own loch!  I know the shape of it well!
Hurrah!"

Everyone was overjoyed.  They all gazed at it long and earnestly, and
unitedly came to the conclusion that it was the loch--probably at the
distance of a mile or so.  Pushing forward with revived spirits, they
came upon the object of their hopes much sooner than had been
anticipated.  In fact, it was not more than two hundred yards distant.
A wild yell of laughter mingled with despair burst from Fred as the lake
galloped away in the shape of a _white horse_!  The untravelled reader
may possibly doubt this.  Yet it _is a fact_ that a white horse was thus
mistaken for a distant lake!

The revulsion of feeling was tremendous.  Everyone sighed, and Mr
Sudberry groaned, for at that moment the thought of poor Peter recurred
to his mind.  Yet there remained a strange feeling of kindliness in the
breast of each towards that white horse.  It was an undeniable proof of
the existence of animal life in those wild regions, a fact which the
deep solitude of all around had tempted them madly to doubt--unknown
even to themselves.  Besides, it suggested the idea of an owner to the
horse; and by a natural and easy process of reasoning they concluded
that the owner must be a human being, and that, when at home, he
probably dwelt in a house.  What more probable than that the house was
even then within hail?

Acting on the idea, Mr Sudberry shouted for two minutes with all his
might, the only result of which was to render himself extremely hoarse.
Then George tried it, and so did Fred, and Jacky awoke and began to
whimper and to ask to be let down.  He also kicked a little, but, being
very tired, soon fell asleep again.

"You _must_ let me carry him now!" said Fred.

"I won't!"

Fred tried force, but George was too strong for him, so they went on as
before, Lucy leaning somewhat heavily on her father's arm.

Presently they heard the sound of water.  It filled them with mitigated
joy and excitement, on the simple principle that _anything_ in the shape
of variety was better than _nothing_.  A clap of thunder would have
raised in their depressed bosoms a gleam of hope.  A flash of lightning
would have been a positive blessing.  Mr Sudberry at once suggested
that it must be a stream, and that they could follow its course--wade
down its bed, if necessary--till they should arrive at "something!"
Foolish man! he had been long enough in the Highlands by that time to
have known that to walk down the bed of a mountain-burn was about as
possible as to walk down the shaft of a coal-mine.  They came to the
edge of its banks, however, and, looking over, tried to pierce its
gloom.  There was a pale gleam of white foam--a rumbling, rustling sound
beneath, and a sensation of moisture in the atmosphere.

"It rains!" said Mr Sudberry.

"I rather think it's the spray of a fall!" observed George.

Had Mr Sudberry known the depth of the tremendous gulf into which he
was peering, and the steep cliff on the edge of which he stood, he would
have sprung back in alarm.  But he did not know--he did not entertain
the faintest idea of the truth so he boldly, though cautiously, began to
clamber down, assisting Lucy to descend.

Man, (including woman), knows not what he can accomplish until he tries.
Millions of glittering gold would not have induced any member of that
party to descend such a place in the dark, had they known what it was--
yet they accomplished it in safety.  Down, down they went!

"Dear me, when shall we reach the foot?  We must be near it now."

No, they were not near it; still down they went, becoming more and more
alarmed, yet always tempted on by the feeling that each step would bring
them to the bottom.

"What a noise the stream makes! why, it must be a river!"

No, it was not a river--it was a mere burn; quite a little burn, but--
what then?  Little men are always fussier and noisier than big men;
little boys invariably howl more furiously than big boys.  Nature is
full of analogies; and little streams, especially mountain streams,
always make more ado in finding their level than big rivers.

They got down at last, and then they found the stream rushing, bursting,
crashing among rent and riven rocks and boulders as if it had gone
furiously mad, and was resolved never more to flow and murmur, but
always to leap and roar.  It was impassable; to walk down its banks or
bed was impossible, so the wanderers had to re-ascend the bank, and roam
away over black space in search of another crossing.  They soon lost the
sound in the intricacies of cliffs and dells, and never again found that
stream.  But they found a narrow path, and Fred announced the discovery
with a cheer.  It was an extremely rugged path, and appeared to have
been macadamised with stones the size of a man's head.  This led them to
suspect that it must be a ditch, not a path; but it turned out to be the
dry bed of a mountain-torrent--dry, at least, as regards running water,
though not dry in respect of numerous stagnant pools, into which at
various times each member of the party stepped unintentionally.  It
mattered not--nothing could make them wetter or more miserable than they
were--so they thought.  They had yet to learn that the thoughts of men
are forever misleading them, and that there is nothing more certain than
the uncertainty of all human calculations.



STORY ONE, CHAPTER 11.

STILL LOST!

Meanwhile, Mrs Sudberry was thrown into a species of frenzied horror,
which no words can describe, and which was not in any degree allayed by
the grave shaking of the head, with which Mr McAllister accompanied his
vain efforts to comfort and re-assure her.  This excellent man quoted
several passages from the works of Dugald Stewart and Locke, tending to
show, in common parlance, that "necessity has no law," and that the
rightly constituted human mind ought to rise superior to all
circumstances--quotations which had the effect of making Mrs Sudberry
more hysterical than ever, and which induced Mrs Brown to call him who
offered such consolation a "brute!"

But McAllister did not confine his efforts solely to the region of mind.
While he was earnestly administering doses of the wisdom of Stewart and
Locke to the agitated lady in the parlour, Dan and Hugh, with several
others, were, by his orders, arming themselves in the kitchen for a
regular search.

"She's ready," said Dan, entering the parlour unceremoniously with a
huge stable lantern.

"That's right, Dan--keep away up by the slate corrie, and come down by
the red tarn.  If they've taken the wrong turn to the right, you're sure
to fall in wi' them thereaway.  Send Hugh round by the burn; I'll go
straight up the hill, and come down upon Loch Cognahoighliey.  Give a
shout now and then, as ye goo."

Dan was a man of action and few words: he vouchsafed no reply, but
turned immediately and left the room, leaving a powerful odour of the
byre behind him.

Poor Mrs Sudberry and Tilly were unspeakably comforted by the grave
business-like way, in which the search was gone about.  They recalled to
mind that a search of a somewhat similar nature, in point of manner and
time, was undertaken a week before for a stray sheep, and that it had
been successful; so they felt relieved, though they remained, of course,
dreadfully anxious.  McAllister refrained from administering any more
moral philosophy.  As he was not at all anxious about the lost party,
and was rather fond of a sly joke, it remains to this day a matter of
doubt whether he really expected that his nostrums would be of much use.
In a few minutes he was breasting the hill like a true mountaineer,
with a lantern in his hand, and with Hobbs by his side.

"Only think, ma'am," said Mrs Brown, who was not usually judicious in
her remarks, "only think if they've been an' fell hover a precipice."

"Shocking!" exclaimed poor Mrs Sudberry, with a little shriek, as she
clapped her hands on her eyes.

"Poor Jacky, ma'am, p'raps 'e's lyin' hall in a mangled 'eap at the foot
of a--"

"Leave me!" cried Mrs Sudberry, with an amount of sudden energy that
quite amazed Mrs Brown, who left the room feeling that she was an
injured woman.

"Darling mamma, they will come back!" said Tilly, throwing her arms
round her mother's neck, and bursting into tears on her bosom.  "You
know that the sheep--the lost sheep--was found last week, and brought
home quite safe.  Dan is _so_ kind, though he does not speak much, and
Hugh too.  They will be sure to find them, darling mamma!"

The sweet voice and the hopeful heart of the child did what philosophy
had failed to accomplish--Mrs Sudberry was comforted.  Thus we see, not
that philosophy is a vain thing, but that philosophy and feeling are
distinct, and that each is utterly powerless in the domain of the other.

When Peter was left alone by his master, as recorded in a former
chapter, he sat himself down in a cheerful frame of mind on the sunny
side of a large rock, and gave himself up to the enjoyment of thorough
repose, as well mental as physical.  The poor lad was in that state of
extreme lassitude which renders absolute and motionless rest delightful.
Extended at full length on a springy couch of heath, with his eyes
peeping dreamily through the half-closed lids at the magnificent
prospect of mountains and glens that lay before him, and below him too,
so that he felt like a bird in mid-air, looking down upon the world,
with his right arm under his meek head, and both pillowed on the plaid,
with his countenance exposed to the full blaze of the sun, and with his
recent lunch commencing to operate on the system, so as to render
exhaustion no longer a pain, but a pleasure, Peter lay on that knoll,
high up the mountain-side, in close proximity to the clouds, dreaming
and thinking about nothing; that is to say, about everything or anything
in an imbecile sort of way: in other words, wandering in his mind
disjointedly over the varied regions of memory and imagination; too
tired to originate an idea; too indifferent to resist one when it arose;
too weak to follow it out; and utterly indifferent as to whether his
mind did follow it out, or cut it short off in the middle.

We speak of Peter's mind as a totally distinct and separate thing from
himself.  It had taken the bit in its teeth and run away.  He cared no
more for it than he did for the nose on his face, which was, at that
time, as red as a carrot, by reason of the sun shining full on its tip.
But why attempt to describe Peter's thoughts?  Here they are--such as
they were--for the reader to make what he can out of them.

"Heigh ho! comfortable now--jolly--what a place!  How I hate mountains--
climbing them--dreadful!--Like 'em to lie on, though--sun, I like your
jolly red-hot face--Sunday! wonder if's got to do with sun--p'raps--
twinkle, twinkle, little sun, how I wonder--oh, what fun!--won't I have
sich wonderful tales--tales--tails--stories are tails--stick 'em on the
end of puppy-dogs, and see how they'd look--two or three two-legged
puppies in the office--what a difference now!--no ink-bottles, no
smashings, no quills, plenty of geese, though, and grouse and hares--
what was I thinking about?  Oh, yes--the office--no scribbles--no
stools, no desks, No-vember--dear me, that's funny!  No-vember--what's a
vember?  Cut him in two can't join him again--no--no--snore!"

At this point Peter's thoughts went out altogether in sleep, leaving the
happy youth in peaceful oblivion.  He started suddenly after an hour's
nap, under the impression that he was tumbling over a precipice.

To give a little scream and clutch wildly at the heather was natural.
He looked round.  The sun was still hot and high.  Scratching his head,
as if to recall his faculties, Peter stared vacantly at the sandwiches
which lay beside him on a piece of old newspaper.  Gradually his hand
wandered towards them, and a gleam of intelligence, accompanied by a
smile, overspread his countenance as he conveyed one to his lips.
Eating seemed fatiguing, however.  He soon laid the remnant down, drew
the plaid over him, nestled among the heather, and dropped into a heavy
sleep with a sigh of ineffable comfort.

When Peter again woke up, the sun was down, and just enough of light
remained to show that it was going to be an intensely dark night.  Can
anyone describe, can anyone imagine, the state of Peter's feelings?
Certainly not!  Peter, besides being youthful, was, as we have said, an
extremely timid boy.  He was constitutionally afraid of the dark, even
when surrounded by friends.  What, then, were his sensations when he
found himself on the mountain alone--_lost_!  The thought was horror!
Peter gasped; he leaped up with a wild shout, gazed madly round, and
sank down with a deep groan.  Up he sprang again, and ran forward a few
paces.  Precipices occurred to him--he turned and ran as many paces
backward.  Bogs occurred to him--he came to a full stop, fell on his
knees, and howled.  Up he leaped again, clapped both hands to his mouth,
and shouted until his eyes threatened to come out, and his face became
purple, "Master!  Master!  George! hi! hallo-o!  Jacky! ho-o-o!"  The
"O!" was prolonged into a wild roar, and down he went again quite flat.
Up he jumped once more; the darkness was deepening.  He rushed to the
right--left--all round--tore his hair, and gazed into the black depths
below--yelled and glared into the dark vault above!

Poor Peter!  Thus violently did his gentle spirit seek relief during the
first few minutes of its overwhelming consternation.

But he calmed down in the course of time into a species of mild despair.
A bursting sob broke from him occasionally, as with his face buried in
his hands, his head deep in the heather, and his eyes tight shut, he
strove in vain to blind himself to the true nature of his dreadful
position.  At last he became recklessly desperate, and, rising hastily,
he fled.  He sought, poor lad, to fly from himself.  Of course the
effort was fruitless.  Instead of distancing himself--an impossibility
at all times--doubly so in a rugged country--he tumbled himself over a
cliff, (fortunately not a high one), and found himself in a peat-bog,
(fortunately not a deep one).  This cooled and somewhat improved his
understanding, so that he returned to the knoll a wiser, a wetter, and a
sadder boy.  Who shall describe the agonies, the hopes, the fears, the
wanderings, the faggings, and the final despair of the succeeding hours?
It is impossible to say who will describe all this, for _we_ have not
the slightest intention of attempting it.

Towards midnight Dan reached a very dark and lonely part of the
mountains, and was suddenly arrested by a low wail.  The sturdy Celt
raised his lantern on high.  Just at that moment Peter's despair
happened to culminate, and he lifted his head out of the heather to give
free vent to the hideous groan, with which he meant, if possible, to
terminate his existence.  The groan became a shriek, first of terror,
then of hope, after that of anxiety, as Dan came dancing towards him
like a Jack-o'-lantern.

"Fat is she shriekin' at?" said Dan.

"Oh!  I'm _so_ glad--I'm so-o-ow-hoo!"

Poor Peter seized Dan round the legs, for, being on his knees, he could
not reach higher, and embraced him.

"Fat's got the maister?"

Peter could not tell.

"Can she waalk?"

Peter couldn't walk--his limbs refused their office.

"Here, speel up on her back."

Peter could do that.  He did it, and hugged Dan round the neck with the
tenacity of a shipwrecked mariner clinging to his last plank.  The
sturdy Celt went down the mountain as lightly as if Peter were a fly,
and as if the vice-like grip of his arms round his throat were the
embrace of a worsted comforter.

"Here they are, ma'am!" screamed Mrs Brown.

She was wrong.  Mrs Brown was usually wrong.  Peter alone was deposited
before the eager gaze of Mrs Sudberry, who fainted away with
disappointment.  Mrs Brown said "be off" to Peter, and applied
scent-bottles to her mistress.  The poor boy's grateful heart wanted to
embrace somebody; so he went slowly and sadly upstairs, where he found
the cat, and embraced _it_.  Hours passed away, and the Sudberry Family
still wandered lost, and almost hopeless, among the mountains.



STORY ONE, CHAPTER 12.

FOUND.

We left Mr Sudberry and his children in the nearly dry bed of a
mountain-torrent, indulging the belief that matters were as bad as could
be, and that, therefore, there was no possibility of their getting
worse.

A smart shower of rain speedily induced them to change their minds in
this respect.  Seeking shelter under the projecting ledge of a great
cliff, the party stood for some time there in silence.

"You are cold, my pet," said Mr Sudberry.

"Just a little, papa; I could not help shuddering," said Lucy, faintly.

"Now for the brandy," said her father, drawing forth the flask.

"Suppose I try to kindle a fire," said George, swinging the bundle
containing Jacky off his shoulder, and placing it in a hollow of the
rocks.

"Well, suppose you try."

George proceeded to do so; but on collecting a few broken twigs he found
that they were soaking wet, and on searching for the match-box he
discovered that it had been left in the provision-basket, so they had to
content themselves with a sip of brandy all round--excepting Jacky.
That amiable child was still sound asleep; but in a few minutes he was
heard to utter an uneasy squall, and then George discovered that he had
deposited part of his rotund person in a puddle of water.

"Come, let us move on," said Mr Sudberry, "the rain gets heavier.  It
is of no use putting off time, we cannot be much damper than we are."

Again the worthy man was mistaken; for, in the course of another hour,
they were all so thoroughly drenched, that their previous condition
might have been considered, by contrast, one of absolute dryness.

Suddenly, a stone wall, topped by a paling, barred their further
progress.  Fred, who was in advance, did not see this wall--he only felt
it when it brought him up.

"Here's a gate, I believe," cried George, groping about.  It _was_ a
gate, and it opened upon the road!  For the first time for many hours a
gleam of hope burst in upon the benighted wanderers.  Presently a ray of
light dazzled them.

"What! do my eyes deceive me--a cottage?" cried Mr Sudberry.

"Ay, and a witch inside," said George.

"Why, it's old--no, impossible!"

"Yes, it is, though--it's old Moggy's cottage."

"Hurrah!" cried Fred.

Old Moggy's dog came out with a burst of indignation that threatened
annihilation to the whole party; but, on discovering who they were, it
crept humbly back into the cottage.

"Does she never go to bed?" whispered George, as they approached and
found the old woman moping over her fire, and swaying her body to and
fro, with the thin dirty gown clinging close to her figure, and the
spotlessly clean plaid drawn tightly round her shoulders.

"Good-evening, old woman," said Mr Sudberry, advancing with a
conciliatory air.

"It's mornin'," retorted the old woman with a scowl.

"Alas! you are right; here have we been lost on the hills, and wandering
all night; and glad am I to find your fire burning, for my poor daughter
is very cold and much exhausted.  May we sit down beside you?"

No reply, save a furtive scowl.

"What's that?" asked Moggy, sharply, as George deposited his dirty wet
bundle on the floor beside the fire opposite to her.

The bundle answered for itself; by slowly unrolling, sitting up and
yawning violently, at the same time raising both arms above its head and
stretching itself.  Having done this, it stared round the room with a
vacant look, and finally fixed its goggle eyes in mute surprise on
Moggy.

The sight of this wet, dirty little creature acted, as formerly, like a
charm on the old woman.  Her face relaxed into a smile of deep
tenderness.  She immediately rose, and taking the child in her arms
carried him to her stool, and sat down with him in her lap.  Jacky made
no resistance; on the contrary, he seemed to have made up his mind to
submit at once, and with a good grace, to the will of this strange old
creature--to the amazement as well as amusement of his relations.

The old woman took no further notice of her other visitors.  She
incontinently became stone deaf; and apparently blind, for she did not
deign to bestow so much as a glance on them, while they circled close
round her fire, and heaped on fresh sticks without asking leave.  But
she made up for this want of courtesy by bestowing the most devoted
attentions on Jacky.  Finding that that young gentleman was in a filthy
as well as a moist condition, she quietly undressed him, and going to a
rough chest in a corner of the hut drew out a full suit of clothing,
with which she speedily invested him.  The garb was peculiar--a tartan
jacket, kilt, and hose; and these seemed to have been made expressly for
him, they fitted so well.  Although quite clean, thin, threadbare, and
darned, the appearance of the garments showed that they had been
much-worn.  Having thus clothed Jacky, the old woman embraced him
