throw you down there, did I? Can't shove any of that blame on me, eh? If
I hadn't just happened to stroll this way, I'd never even knowed you was
in such a fix."

"But you do know it," said Fred, "and everybody will say it was up to
you to help me out, after you found me here. That makes you responsible,
Buck, in the eye of the law. I've heard Judge Colon say as much. A
knowledge of the fact makes you a party to it, he told a man he was
talking to. I'm going to ask you once more to take hold of this vine
when I hold it up, and let me pull myself out."

He did raise the rope substitute, but Buck declined to accept his end of
it.

"I don't see why I ought to give you a hand, Fenton," he remarked,
coldly. "I've stood a lot from you, and as I said before, since you came
to town things have all gone wrong with me, so I never do have a good
time any more. I blame you for it. Yes, and right now it's you more'n
any other feller that's got me kicked out of my own home."

"Now I don't understand what you mean there, Buck?" remonstrated Fred,
still holding the end of the vine upward invitingly, though with small
hope that the other would take hold.

"All right, I'll just tell you, then," Buck replied, almost savagely.
"Who led the party that found Colon? You did. Who found a track of a
shoe, with a patch across the sole, on the spot where Colon said he was
nabbed by a bunch of fellers with red cloth over part of their faces?
Why, Freddy again, to be sure. And hang it all, my shoe did have just
such a patch! That's what they told my dad; and brought it all home to
me."

Fred was silent again. He saw that things were working against him once
more. If Buck felt this way about it, all his endeavors to induce the
other to lend his aid were bound to be useless.

"Now, here's a right fine chance for me to get even with you, Fenton,
without taking any risk myself; because I didn't have anything to do
with knocking you into this hole. You took care of that part yourself;
and let me tell you now, you did me the greatest favor in the world when
you slipped, and dropped through these bushes and weeds into the pit."

"Buck! oh, Buck!" said a trembling voice from somewhere back of the
bully.

"You dry up!" exclaimed Buck. "You've got no say in this game, let me
tell you! Good-bye, Fenton; I reckon I'll be going now. Hope you can
keep exercisin' right hearty all through the night; it'll be some chilly
if you let up, I'd think. And if I happen to see any of your chums, an'
they ask questions, why, I might let 'em know I heard _somebody_ yelping
away up this way--thought it was kids playin', but it _might_ be you
calling for help."

"Then you're going to desert me; are you, Buck?" asked Fred, beginning
to himself feel angry at the base intentions of the other.

"I wouldn't put it that way," jeered Buck; "I'm just mindin' my own
business, you see. Not long ago you told me never to poke my nose in
your affairs again. I ain't a-goin' to; I'm follerin' out your own
instructions, Fenton. Nobody c'n blame me for doin' that; can they?"

"But you mustn't leave him there, brother Buck!" cried a voice at that
juncture, and Fred suddenly realized that the partner of the bully's
flight, and through whom he hoped to bring his angry father to terms,
was little Billy, his younger brother, for whom it was said Buck felt
more affection than he did for any other person on the face of the
earth.

"Well," Buck went on to say, "I'm going to do that same, no matter what
you or anybody else says; and so you'd just better be getting along out
of this, Billy. It ain't none of your business what happens to Fred
Fenton, I guess."

"But it is some of my business," insisted the smaller boy, who had by
degrees pushed his way forward, in spite of his big brother's warning,
until Fred could see his head projecting beyond the rim of the pit.

"What's Fred Fenton to you?" demanded Buck, savagely.

"He's my friend, that's what!" declared Billy stoutly.

"Oh! you want to make a friend out of the worst enemy your own brother's
got; do you?" the bully sneered. "Well, why shouldn't I leave him here
to suck his thumb all night, tell me that?"

"Because it'd be wicked," cried the excited boy. "Because if it hadn't
'a been for Fred Fenton you wouldn't be havin' no brother Billy right
now!"

"What d'ye mean, Billy?" roared the astonished bully.

"Remember when your canoe got home without you goin' for it, Buck? That
was the time. It throwed me out in the middle of the river, and I'd 'a
drownded sure, only Fred, he swum out and saved me. And that's why I say
you ain't goin' to leave him here to freeze and shiver all night. 'Cause
he's my friend, that's why!"

And Buck Lemington knelt there, for the minute unable to utter a single
word, so great was his amazement.




CHAPTER XVIII

FORCED TO LEND A HAND


"Is that right, Fenton?" the bully finally demanded, turning to look at
the dimly seen face of the boy deep down in the hole. "Did you haul my
brother out of the Mohunk waters?"

"That's just what happened, Buck," Fred replied, a warm feeling once
more taking possession of his heart; for somehow he seemed to know that
the coming of this unlooked-for ally would turn the scales in his favor;
and, after all, he would not have to spend a horrible night in that damp
hole.

"Don't seem likely you'd do such a thing, and never throw it up at me
some time, when I was naggin' you," went on the other, doubtfully.

"Oh! I felt like doing that same more'n a few times, believe me," said
Fred.

"Then why didn't you?" asked Buck.

"He didn't just because I asked him as a favor to me not to say a word
to a single soul," broke in the eager Billy, just then. "You know, Buck,
father told me he'd whip me if ever he heard of my tryin' that cranky
canoe of yours. And I was afraid he'd do it, too, if he heard how near I
was to bein' drownded."

"Well, that sure just gets me!" muttered Buck, who found it hard to
understand how a fellow could hide his light under a bushel, and not
"blow his own horn," when he had jumped into the river, and pulled out a
drowning boy. "Say, is that so too, Fenton; did you keep mum just
because Billy here asked you to?"

"That was the only reason," replied Fred; "but you must give some of the
credit to Bristles Carpenter, who couldn't swim much then; but he waded
in, and helped to get us ashore. And he pulled the canoe in, too. Then
we took it down to the place you keep it; while Billy played by himself
in the warm sun till his clothes got dry; didn't you, Billy?"

"Just what I did," said the small boy, cheerfully. "And not a person
ever knowed I'd been in the water. Oh! I've always thought it was mighty
nice in Fred; and it used to make me feel so bad when I heard you
talkin' about him the way you did, Buck. More'n a few times I just
wanted to tell you all about it, to show you he couldn't be the mean boy
you said; but I dassent; I was scared you'd think you had to tell father
on me."

As he knelt there Buck was fighting an inward battle; and the enemy
with which he grappled was his own baser nature. Fred did not have a
single fear as to how it was bound to come out. He knew that Buck could
not deny the obligation that had been so unexpectedly forced upon him.

Then Buck suddenly reached down. He had made up his mind, and was even
then groping for the end of the vine which Fred was reaching up to him.

Once he got this firmly in his hands, he simply said:

"Now, climb away, Fenton!"

Fred waited for no second invitation. He was not foolish enough to
decline a favor that came within reach. Possibly Buck's new resolution
might cool off more or less, if given time; and Fred dared not take the
risk.

So he immediately began the task of drawing himself up the short
distance that lay between his eager hands and the rim of the pit.

And Buck, having braced himself firmly, with his foot against a solid
spur of rock, held through the trying ordeal. Fred in a short time was
clambering over the brink, delighted beyond measure at the chance to
once more find himself on the outside of that miserable hole.

He had hardly half raised himself to his knees, when he felt a warm
little hand clasp his, while the voice of Billy sounded in his ears.

"Oh! ain't I glad I was along with brother Buck right now, Fred," the
boy cried; "I'm afraid he'd a left you there if he'd been alone. But
then, you see, Buck never knowed what a good friend you'd been to me
that time. And it was mighty kind of you never to peach on me. But I
guess you'n Buck ain't a-goin' to be fightin' each other after this. You
had ought to be friends right along."

Fred looked at the bully. He even half thrust out a hand, as though to
signify that he was ready to bridge the chasm that had always existed
between them, if the other would come the rest of the way to meet him.

But Buck obstinately kept his hand down at his side. He was not going to
forget all his troubles of the past, many of which he believed he could
lay at the door of the boy who had refused to knuckle down to him, as
most of the Riverport lads had done in the past.

But Fred was not caring in the least. Things had worked almost like a
miracle in his favor. That these two, perhaps heading across lots for
the humble home of Arnold Masterson, to hide from the wrath of the
Squire, should happen within earshot of his cries for help, was in the
nature of a chance in a thousand.

"You won't shake hands, Buck, and be friends, then?" Fred asked.

"What, me?" exclaimed the other, once more showing signs of anger, and
drawing Billy away from Fred as if the sight of them close together was
unpleasant to him; "not in a thousand years. That would mean I'd have to
knuckle down, and crawl before the mighty Fred Fenton, like some of the
other ninnies do. You go your way, and I'll go mine. We've always been
enemies, and that's what we'll be to the end of the chapter."

The old vindictive part in Buck's nature had apparently still a firm
grip on him. Fred no longer offered his hand. If the other chose to call
it square, he must be satisfied, and accept things as they came.

"All the same," he said, positively; "I'm obliged to you, Buck, for
helping me out. You've saved me from a bad time. And I'm going to tell
about it too, whether you want me to or not. Some of the good people in
Riverport will believe they've been wrong when they thought you wouldn't
lift a hand to do a single decent thing."

"Oh! rats, don't give me any of that sort of taffy, Fenton!" exclaimed
the other in a disgusted voice. "And I'll see to it that they don't
believe I'm working the reformed son racket, either. I did
this--well--just because I had to, that's all, and not because I wanted
to. If Billy hadn't been along, and told what he did, you'd 'a spent
your night in that hole, for all of me; understand?"

"Well, just as you will, Buck. Have it as you want. Billy, I'm obliged
to you for standing up for me like you did. It was a lucky day for me,
as well as for you, when I chanced to get you out of the Mohunk."

"Oh! come along, Billy," Buck called out, pulling at the sleeve of his
younger brother; "we've got no more time to waste here, jawing. Right
now I'm some twisted in my bearings, and we might have a tough time
gettin' to that farmhouse."

Fred took it for granted that Buck was heading in a roundabout way for
the home of Arnold Masterson; the same place where he and Bristles had
saved Sarah, the sick farmer's daughter, from the well, into which she
had fallen when trying to hide from the three rough tramps.

He was on the point of directing Buck, so that the other might reach his
destination, when something within seemed to bid him hold his tongue.
Arnold Masterson was not friendly with his rich uncle, Squire Lemington.
He had been worsted by the latter in some land deal, and would not even
come to Riverport to trade. Perhaps Buck knew something about this, and
it may have influenced him when running away from home, with Billy in
his company.

He saw the two go off, Buck talking in low tones to his brother. Once
Billy insisted on turning, and waving his hand toward Fred; though Buck
immediately gave him a rough whirl, as though to make him understand
that he would not allow of any more friendly feelings between his
younger brother and the fellow he chose to look upon as his worst enemy.

"Well, it's too bad Buck feels that way," Fred said to himself, as he
turned his back on the hole that had given him such an unpleasant half
hour. "But just as he says, the score is even now, and the slate cleaned
off. We can start fresh; and chances are, he'll find a way of trying to
get a dig at me before many suns. But I'm lucky to get out of that
scrape as I did. Whew! what if I just had to stay there? Makes me shiver
to think of it."

He started on a run, to get up a circulation; for, despite all his labor
while in the pit, his blood seemed to have become fairly chilled.

At first he thought he would head straight home, as he was only a couple
of miles or so away from Riverport. Then suddenly he found his thoughts
going out in the direction of Arnold Masterson and his daughter, Sarah.
He had not been to see them for several days now, since the man was
able to leave his bed and hobble about the house, in fact.

A sudden notion to drop in on them, and explain about Buck's coming,
seized upon Fred, though he never was able to tell why he should give
way to such a strange resolution. But changing his course he headed
toward the Masterson farm.




CHAPTER XIX

GLORIOUS NEWS


The more Fred thought of it the stronger became his conviction that Buck
and Billy would be a long time in finding the lonely Masterson
farmhouse, that was off the main road.

They had left him going in a direction that was really at right angles
to the shortest way there. But then possibly Buck knew of another route.
And after all it was none of his business.

Evening had now settled down in earnest. There would be a moon later;
but darkness was beginning to shut out the last expiring gleams of
daylight.

Fred was feeling pretty "chipper" as he himself expressed it. So far as
he could ascertain no serious result had accompanied his fall into that
hole, and the exposure that followed the mishap.

His muscles having come back to their old condition, he was running as
easily as ever before; and he believed himself to be in splendid
condition.

This sudden determination to drop in on Arnold Masterson and his
daughter was going to take him a considerable distance out of his way;
but what are a few miles to an aspiring young athlete, in training for a
hard road race on the morrow? It would really do him good to have the
exercise, he believed.

Fred had managed to have a good talk with the Mastersons the last time
he was over. He had taken both father and daughter into his confidence,
and told them how Squire Lemington, in connection with the powerful
syndicate, was trying to swindle his folks out of the rich Alaska claim,
which they truly believed belonged to them, and not to the capitalists.

Of course Fred had met with ready sympathy from the occupants of the
Arnold Masterson house. They themselves had suffered too recently from
the grasping methods of the old Squire not to sympathize with new
victims.

And Fred had a double object in telling the story of the missing
witness, whose evidence, if it could ever be procured, would settle the
lawsuit in favor of the Fentons and against Squire Lemington.

Somehow, he believed that if Hiram Masterson did manage to make his way
back to the neighborhood of Riverport, bent on righting a great wrong,
as he had written in that strange note from Hong Kong, he would be apt
to hunt up his brother, whom he had evidently not seen on his last
visit.

Now he was at the cross-roads tavern, known as Hitchen's, and running
easily. He did not neglect to follow out the instructions which he had
received from the old college graduate and coach, Mr. Shays, about
breathing through his nose, and holding himself fairly erect. Only in
the mad dash of the last stretch could a well trained athlete be
forgiven for neglecting these precautions; since so much depends on
their being constantly employed in order to insure staying qualities.

Presently Fred found himself in familiar regions. He vividly remembered
the cross-country run, when he and Bristles came upon the well under the
apple tree, and were startled at sounds of groans issuing forth from
that place.

Now he could just make it out in the gathering gloom; but really he gave
it only a passing glance, for his attention was directed toward the
farmhouse, where in a lower window he could see a lamp burning.

Fred did not mean to be inquisitive, and would not have thought of going
a foot out of his way in order to peer in at that window; but as he had
to pass it by on his way to the door, he naturally glanced in.

Then he stopped to look again. Evidently the Mastersons had company, for
there were three at the supper table, upon which a bountiful array of
enticingly cooked food could be seen; for the good people of Riverport
had brought out enough provisions to last them half way through the
coming winter.

This might make some difference with Fred's plans.

"Perhaps I ought not to break in on them if they have company," he was
saying to himself, as he continued to look through the window. "But I've
come so far now, I kind of hate to give over the idea of saying
something to Mr. Masterson. Perhaps he'll come to the door if I knock. I
could tell him about Buck, to begin with; and might get a chance to
speak of his letting us know if anything happened that he thought would
interest the Fenton family. Yes, I'll try it."

Before turning away he took another passing glance at the stranger, who
seemed to be an elderly man with gray hair and a beard of the same
color. Whatever he was saying, both Mr. Masterson and Sarah seemed to be
hanging on his words as if they were deeply interested.

Fred gave a sigh. He was secretly disappointed, to tell the truth.
Perhaps he had conceived a faint expectation that something about the
man might seem familiar; for he had not forgotten how the returned
Alaska miner, Hiram Masterson, had looked when he rode about in Squire
Lemington's carriage. But there was not the least resemblance so far as
he could note between this elderly person and the gay-looking young
miner.

"I was foolish to ever think that," Fred said to himself, as he again
started in the direction of the farmhouse door.

In this mood, then he reached the door, and knocked. The sound echoed
through the house, for Fred had laid his knuckles rather heavily on the
upper panel of the double Dutch door.

He heard a scuffling sound, to indicate that chairs had been hurriedly
pushed back. Apparently, then, his knock had created something of a
little panic within, though Fred could hardly understand why that should
be so.

After waiting a reasonable time, without either Sarah or her father
coming to the door, Fred again gave a knock.

"Mr. Masterson!" Fred called out, in the hope that his voice might
happen to be recognized, so as to allay their fears.

Then he saw that someone was coming in answer to his second summons.
Under the door appeared a thin thread of light. This announced that the
door between had been opened, and a lamp was being carried into the
front room.

Fred wondered just at that moment whether it would be Sarah or her
father who might open the door. He knew Mr. Masterson was recovering his
strength; but still he must be more or less weak, after a spell of
sickness. And in that event Sarah was apt to be the one to come.

Well, he would ask to see her father then, so as to get a few minutes
conversation with the other. Sarah would be surprised to see him, of
course, at this queer hour, and in his running costume.

Fred almost wished now he had changed his mind, and turned away before
giving that knock. But it was too late. He could hear someone drawing
back the bolt by which the door was fastened. The Mastersons had gone
through one unpleasant experience, and they did not want another, if
such a small thing as a new bolt on the door would ward it off.

Now the door had begun to open, and Fred allowed a smile to come upon
his face in anticipation of the look of surprise he felt sure would
welcome him.

As it happened, however, the surprise was pretty much the other way. The
door suddenly flew open, at least the upper half of it did, and Arnold
Masterson thrust the muzzle of a double-barrel shotgun through the
opening, at the same time exclaiming:

"Now be off with you, or I'll give you a dose of buck shot that you
won't like!"

He had just managed to say this when he stared at the figure standing
there. Of course Fred had been startled when so suddenly confronted by
the armed and angry farmer; but he immediately recovered.

"Hold on, Mr. Masterson, don't you know me? It's Fred Fenton!" he
exclaimed.

The farmer seemed too surprised for words. But he did hasten to unfasten
the remaining part of the Dutch door, and seize hold of the boy by the
short sleeve of his running tunic.

"Fred Fenton, of all things, and right now too, when we were just
talking about your folks. Come in, my boy, come in. This is a piece of
great luck now. Whatever brings you away up here just at the time we
wanted to see you most? Great news for you, Fred! He's come home again,
and is right in there. Sarah wanted him to hide, because she thought it
was one of my uncle's spies hanging around; but I said no, that they'd
never believe it was him, not in a year of Sundays."

"Who?" gasped Fred, feeling weak; but with a great expectation that
caused him to tremble all over.

The farmer patted him on the back as he went on to say, joyfully:

"It's my brother Hiram, come back to right the wrong he helped do your
people; and defy Uncle Sparks to his face. This is going to be a happy
night for you, Fred; a happy night, my boy!"




CHAPTER XX

A WELCOME GUEST


"Hiram come back!"

That was about all Fred could say. After all these dreary months, with
hope so long deferred, it was hard to understand that the splendid news
could be true. Oh! what joy it would bring in his home, when he arrived
to tell the story! In imagination even at that first moment, Fred could
see the tired face of his mother light up with thankfulness; and his
father taking her in his arms, to shelter her head on his broad
shoulder.

For the return of Hiram meant that the truth must be told about that
false claim the powerful syndicate had put in for the property left to
Mr. Fenton by his brother Fred, up in Alaska; and which had seemed so
necessary to the working of the mines really owned by the big company
that they had been willing to do almost anything to get possession of
the same.

"Yes, that's him in yonder; but nobody'd ever know it, he's got himself
up so smart," the farmer said, proudly, as he closed and bolted the
doors again, ere leading the way into the other room.

Fred saw the supposed old man stare hard at him as he followed Mr.
Masterson into the room; but of course Sarah immediately recognized him.

"Why, I declare if it isn't Fred Fenton himself; and he's been
practicing for the road race to-morrow!" she exclaimed. "You remember,
Uncle, I was telling you he meant to take part in it. Do you know who
this is, Fred? Has father told you?"

"Yes, and I'm mighty glad to see him here," said Fred, as he accepted
the brown and calloused hand which the man, who had been kidnapped by
orders of the combine, thrust out toward him, to wince under the hearty
pressure on his fingers.

"I tell you, Fred," remarked Hiram, with a broad smile, "I'm just as
glad to be here again, after all I've gone through with, as you can be
to see me. They certainly did keep me hustling, from one captain to
another. I've been in the harbors of half the countries of the world, I
reckon, since they took me away."

"And you see," spoke up Sarah, eager to have a hand in the telling; "The
captains of the different boats that were in the pay of this big
company had the word passed along to them. They gave it out that he was
weak in his head. So whenever Uncle tried to tell his story, the sailors
used to pretend to be interested, but wink at each other, as if to say:
'there he goes ranting about being carried off, just like the captain
said he would.' So he never could get to mail a letter till in Hong
Kong, when he managed to escape. Even then they chased him; and he says
he only got away in the end by jumping into the bay, and pretending to
stay under the water."

"But couldn't you manage to escape when the ship put in at some port?"
Fred asked, being very curious.

"They always looked out for that," replied Hiram, with a sad shake of
his head. "Sometimes I was accused of starting a mutiny, and put in
irons, as well as shut up in the lazerette. More'n a few times they gave
me a dose that took away my senses, and I didn't know even my name until
we'd made the open sea again. It was all managed in the smartest way you
ever heard about; and I'm shaking hands with myself right now to know
that in the end I managed to upset their plans."

Fred suddenly remembered something that Buck had let fall when speaking
about the conditions existing at his home.

"I guess someone must have been sending word to Mr. Lemington about
your getting away," he remarked.

"What makes you say that?" asked Hiram, looking uneasy.

Fred, in as few words as possible related what had happened up in the
deserted limestone quarry, when Buck and his little brother Billy found
him caught in a trap.

"He said his father was already in a bad humor," Fred went on, "and that
he must have had news that upset him; because there was an open letter
that had a foreign stamp on it, on the library table. Perhaps that
letter was from Hong Kong or somewhere else, and told the delayed story
of your escape."

"Now that sounds reasonable, Hiram," remarked the farmer; "and if Sparks
Lemington knows you're on your way home, to upset all his nice
calculations, p'raps he might even have this house watched so as to get
you again before you did any damage, by swearing to your story before
Judge Colon and witnesses."

"And I believe Buck is leading his little brother right here now," Fred
went on to remark. "He wants to give his father a scare by having Billy
gone, and expects in that way he may escape punishment for his tricks.
You know they think a heap of little Billy over there."

"And only for you he might have been drowned," said Sarah. "Seems to me
you do nothing else but go around, helping get unlucky people out of
trouble. I was telling Uncle what you did for me."

"And he'll never have cause to regret it, mark my words," said Hiram,
resolutely. "I've come back to let light in on them rascally land
pirates' doings. Soon's they learn that I've sworn to my story before
the judge, you'll see how quick they'll open up communications with your
dad, and be offerin' him a tremendous sum to sell out; because they just
need that property the worst you ever saw."

"But if Buck comes here he might smell a rat, and let his father know,"
remarked Arnold Masterson, nervously. "It's bad enough to be worrying
about tramps, without expecting to have your house raided by spies in
the pay of a combine of shrewd business men. I've got a good notion to
make out nobody's at home, if the boys get here. Then they'd just have
to move on, and find another place to stay."

"I rather think they'd camp out in your barn then, Mr. Masterson,"
remarked Fred.

"What makes you think that?" asked the farmer, looking keenly at the
boy.

"Well," Fred continued, "in the first place, little Billy will be so
tired out after his long tramp, he never could get any further. Then
Buck wants to hide for a while, and he'll make up his mind that if you
are gone away, you'll be back to-morrow morning. Why, he's that bold, he
might try to break in, if he thinks the house is empty."
