


CHAPTER X.

A NEW PROSPECT.


"Well, Frank, and how is your business?" asked the old gentleman, when
they were sitting at the dinner-table.

"Pretty good, sir."

"Are you making your expenses?"

"Yes, sir; just about."

"That is well. Mind you never run into debt. That is a bad plan."

"I shan't have to now, sir. If I had had to buy clothes for myself, I
might have had to."

"Do you find the shirts and stockings fit you?"

"Yes, sir; they are just right."

"I bought half a dozen of each. Susan will give you the bundle when you
are ready to go. If they had not been right, they could have been
exchanged."

"Thank you, sir. I shall feel rich with so many clothes."

"Where do you sleep, Frank?"

"At the Newsboy's Lodging-House."

"Is there any place there where you can keep your clothes?"

"Yes, sir. Each boy has a locker to himself."

"That is a good plan. It would be better if you had a room to yourself."

"I can't afford it yet, sir. The lodging-house costs me only forty-two
cents a week for a bed, and I could not get a room for that."

"Bless my soul! That is very cheap. Really, I think I could save money
by giving up my house, and going there to sleep."

"I don't think you would like it, sir," said Frank, smiling.

"Probably not. Now, Frank, I am going to mention a plan I have for you.
You don't want to be a newsboy all your life."

"No, sir; I think I should get tired of it by the time I was fifty."

"My friend Thompson, the gentleman who was walking with me when we
first saw you, is an officer of the American District Telegraph Company.
They employ a large number of boys at their various offices to run
errands; and, in fact, to do anything that is required of them. Probably
you have seen some of the boys going about the city."

"Yes, sir; they have a blue uniform."

"Precisely. How would you like to get a situation of that kind?"

"Very much, sir," said Frank, promptly.

"Would you like it better than being a newsboy?"

"Yes, sir."

"My friend Thompson, to whom I spoke on the subject, says he will take
you on in a few weeks, provided you will qualify yourself for the post."

"I will do that, sir, if you will tell me how."

"You must be well acquainted with the city in all its parts, know the
locations of different hotels, prominent buildings, have a fair
education, and be willing to make yourself generally useful. You will
have to satisfy the superintendent that you are fitted for the
position."

"I think my education will be sufficient," said Frank, "for I always
went to school till just before I came to the city. I know something
about the lower part of the city, but I will go about every day during
the hours when I am not selling papers till I am familiar with all parts
of it."

"Do so, and when there is a vacancy I will let you know."

"How much pay shall I get, sir, if they accept me?"

"About three dollars a week at first, and more when you get familiar
with your duties. No doubt money will also be given you by some who
employ you, though you will not be allowed to ask for any fees. Very
likely you will get nearly as much in this way as from your salary."

Frank's face expressed satisfaction.

"That will be bully," he said.

"I beg pardon," said the old gentleman, politely. "What did you
remark?"

"That will be excellent," said Frank, blushing.

"I thought you spoke of a bully."

"It was a word I learned from Dick Rafferty," said Frank, feeling rather
embarrassed.

"And who is Dick Rafferty?"

"One of my friends at the Lodging-House."

"Unless his education is better than yours I would not advise you to
learn any of his words."

"I beg your pardon, sir."

"You must excuse my offering you advice. It is the privilege of the old
to advise the young."

"I shall always be glad to follow your advice, Mr. Bowen," said Frank.

"Good boy, good boy," said the old gentleman, approvingly. "I wish all
boys were like you. Some think they know more than their grandfathers.
There's one of that kind who lives next door."

"His name is Victor Dupont, isn't it, sir?"

Mr. Bowen looked surprised. "How is it that you know his name?" he
asked.

"We were together a good deal last summer. His family boarded at the
hotel in the country village where I used to live. He and I went
bathing and fishing together."

"Indeed! Have you seen him since you came to the city?"

"I met him as I was on my way here this afternoon."

"Did he speak to you?"

"Yes, sir; though at first he pretended he didn't remember me."

"Just like him. He is a very proud and conceited boy. Did you tell him
you were coming to dine with me?"

"Yes, sir. He seemed very much surprised, as I had just told him I was a
newsboy. He said he was surprised that you should invite a newsboy to
dine with you."

"I would much rather have you dine with me than him. What more did he
say?"

"He said he shouldn't think I would like to go out to dinner with such a
shabby suit."

"We have removed that objection," said Mr. Bowen, smiling.

"Yes, sir," said Frank; "I think Victor will treat me more respectfully
now when he meets me."

"The respect of such a boy is of very little importance. He judges only
by the outside."

At an early hour Frank took his leave, promising to call again before
long.

"Where can I send to you if you are wanted for a telegraph boy?" asked
Mr. Bowen.

"A letter to me addressed to the care of Mr. O'Connor at the
lodging-house will reach me," said Frank.

"Write it down for me," said the old gentleman. "You will find writing
materials on yonder desk."

When Frank made his appearance at the lodging-house in his new suit,
with two bundles, one containing his old clothes, and the other his
extra supply of underclothing, his arrival made quite a sensation.

"Have you come into a fortun'?" asked one boy.

"Did you draw a prize in the Havana lottery?" asked another.

"Have you been playing policy?" asked a third.

"You're all wrong," said Dick Rafferty. "Frank's been adopted by a rich
man upon Madison avenue. Aint that so, Frank?"

"Something like it," said Frank. "There's a gentleman up there who has
been very kind to me."

"If he wants to adopt another chap, spake a good word for me," said
Patsy Reagan.

"Whisht, Patsy, he don't want no Irish bog-trotter," said Phil Donovan.

"You're Irish yourself, Phil, now, and you can't deny it."

"What if I am? I aint no bog-trotter--I'm the son of an Irish count. You
can see by my looks that I belong to the gintry."

"Then the gintry must have red hair and freckles, Phil. There aint no
chance for you."

"Tell us all about it, Frank," said Dick. "Shure I'm your best friend,
and you might mention my name to the ould gintleman if he's got any more
good clothes to give away."

"I will with pleasure, Dick, if I think it will do any good."

"You won't put on no airs because you're better dressed than the likes
of us?"

"I shall wear my old clothes to-morrow, Dick. I can't afford to wear my
best clothes every day."

"I can," said Dick, dryly, which was quite true, as his best clothes
were the only ones he had.

Bright and early the next morning Frank was about his work, without
betraying in any way the proud consciousness of being the owner of two
suits. He followed Mr. Bowen's advice, and spent his leisure hours in
exploring the city in its various parts, so that in the course of a
month he knew more about it than boys who had lived in it all their
lives. He told Dick his object in taking these long walks, and urged him
to join him in the hope of winning a similar position; but Dick decided
that it was too hard work. He preferred to spend his leisure time in
playing marbles or pitching pennies.




CHAPTER XI.

THE TELEGRAPH BOY.


Six weeks later Frank Kavanagh, through the influence of his patron,
found himself in the uniform of a District Telegraph Messenger. The blue
suit, and badge upon the cap, are familiar to every city resident. The
uniform is provided by the company, but must be paid for by weekly
instalments, which are deducted from the wages of the wearers. This
would have seriously embarrassed Frank but for an opportune gift of ten
dollars from Mr. Bowen, which nearly paid the expense of his suit.

[Illustration: FRANK, THE TELEGRAPH BOY.]

Frank was employed in one of the up-town offices of the company. For the
information of such of my young readers as live in the country it may be
explained that large numbers of houses and offices in the city are
connected with the offices of the District Telegraph by machines,
through which, at any time in the day or night, a messenger may be
summoned for any purpose. It is only necessary to raise a knob in the
box provided, and a bell is rung in the office of the company. Of course
there is more or less transient business besides that of the regular
subscribers.

Boys, on arriving at the office, seat themselves, and are called upon in
order. A boy just returned from an errand hangs up his hat, and takes
his place at the foot of the line. He will not be called upon again till
all who are ahead of him have been despatched in one direction or
another.

Frank was curious to know what would be his first duty, and waited
eagerly for his turn to come.

At length it came.

"Go to No. -- Madison avenue," said the superintendent.

A few minutes later Frank was ascending the steps of a handsome
brown-stone residence.

"Oh, you're the telegraph boy," said a colored servant. "You're to go
upstairs into missus's sitting-room."

Upon entering, Frank found himself in the presence of a rather stout
lady, who was reclining on a sofa.

He bowed politely, and waited for his instructions.

"I hope you are a trustworthy boy," said the stout lady.

"I hope so, ma'am."

"Come here, Fido," said the lady.

A little mass of hair, with two red eyes peeping out, rose from the
carpet and waddled towards the lady, for Fido was about as stout as his
mistress.

"Do you like dogs?" asked Mrs. Leroy, for this was the lady's name.

"Yes, ma'am," answered Frank, wondering what that had to do with his
errand.

"I sent for you to take my sweet darling out for an airing. His health
requires that he should go out every day. I generally take him myself,
but this morning I have a severe headache, and do not feel equal to the
task. My dear little pet, will you go out with this nice boy?"

Fido looked gravely at Frank and sneezed.

"I hope the darling hasn't got cold," said Mrs. Leroy, with solicitude.
"My lad, what is your name?"

"Frank Kavanagh, ma'am."

"Will you take great care of my little pet, Frank?"

"I will try to, madam. Where do you want him to go?"

"To Madison Park. He always likes the park, because it is so gay. When
you get there you may sit down on one of the benches and give him time
to rest."

"Yes, ma'am. How long would you like me to stay out with him?"

"About an hour and a half. Have you a watch?"

"No; but I can tell the time by the clock in front of the Fifth-avenue
Hotel."

"To be sure. I was going to lend you my watch."

"Shall I start now?"

"Yes. Here is the string. Don't make Fido go too fast. He is stout, and
cannot walk fast. You will be sure to take great care of him?"

"Yes, madam."

"And you keep watch that no bad man carries off my Fido. I used to send
him out by one of the girls, till I found that she ill-treated the poor
thing. Of course I couldn't stand that, so I sent her packing, I can
tell you."

"I will try to follow your directions," said Frank, who wanted to laugh
at the lady's ridiculous devotion to her ugly little favorite.

"That is right. You look like a good boy. I will give you something for
yourself when you come back."

"Thank you, ma'am," said Frank, who was better pleased with this remark
than any the lady had previously made.

Mrs. Leroy kissed Fido tenderly, and consigned him to the care of our
