have been my pleasure, now I must go and work. Sing to old nurse until I
come back again. Good-bye!"

But as the cloak hung motionless in air, he suddenly remembered that he
had not made up his mind where to go--indeed, he did not know, and there
was nobody to tell him.

"Godmother," he cried, "you know what I want. Tell me where I ought to
go; show me whatever I ought to see--never mind what I like."

This journey was not for pleasure as before. He was not a baby now, to
do nothing but play. Men work, this much Prince Dolor knew. As the cloak
started off, over freezing mountain tops, and desolate forests, smiling
plains and great lakes, he was often rather frightened. But he crouched
down, and wrapping himself up in his bearskin waited for what was to
happen.

After some time he heard a murmur in the distance, and stretching his
chin over the edge of the cloak, Prince Dolor saw--far, far below him,
yet with his gold spectacles and silver ears on he could distinctly hear
and see--a great city!

Suppose you were to see a large city from the upper air; where, with
your ears and eyes open, you could take in everything at once. What
would it look like? How would you feel about it? I hardly know myself.
Do you?

Prince Dolor was as bewildered as a blind person who is suddenly made to
see.

He gazed down on the city below him, and then put his hand over his
eyes.

"I can't bear to look at it, it is so beautiful--so dreadful. And I
don't understand it--not one bit. I wish I had some one to tell me about
it."

"Do you? Then pray speak to me."

The voice that squeaked out this reply came from a great black and white
bird that flew into the cloak and began walking round and round on the
edge of it with a dignified stride.

"I haven't the honor of your acquaintance," said the boy politely.

"My name is Mag and I shall be happy to tell you everything you want to
know. My family is very old; we have builded in this palace for many
years. I am well acquainted with the King, the Queen, and the little
princes and princesses--also the maids of honor, and all the
inhabitants of the city. I talk a great deal, but I always talk sense,
and I dare say I shall be very useful to a poor, little, ignorant boy
like you."

"I am a prince," said the other gently.

"All right. And I am a magpie."

She settled herself at his elbow and began to chatter away, pointing out
with one skinny claw every object of interest, evidently believing, as
no doubt all its inhabitants did, that there was no city in the world
like the great capital of Nomansland.

Mag said that it was the finest city in the world but there were a few
things in it that surprised Prince Dolor. One half the people seemed so
happy and contented and the other half were so poor and miserable. "I
would try to make it a little more equal if I were king," he said.

"But you're not the king," returned the magpie loftily. "Shall I show
you the royal palace?"

It was a magnificent palace covering many acres of ground. It had
terraces and gardens; battlements and towers. But since the Queen died
the windows through which she looked at the Beautiful Mountains, had
been closed and boarded up. The room was so little that no one cared to
use it.

"I should like to see the King," said Prince Dolor, and as he spoke Mag
flew down to the palace roof, where the cloak rested, settling down
between the great stocks of chimneys as comfortably as if on the ground.
Mag pecked at the tiles with her beak and immediately a little hole
opened, a sort of door, through which could be seen distinctly the
chamber below.

"Now pop down on your knees and take a peep at his Majesty."

[Illustration: HE LIFTED UP HIS THIN, SLENDER HAND, AND THERE CAME A
SILENCE OVER THE VAST CROWD IMMEDIATELY. [PAGE 47.]]

The Prince gazed eagerly down, into a large room, the largest room he
had ever beheld, with furniture and hangings grander than anything he
could have ever imagined. A sunbeam struck across the carpet and it
looked like a bed of flowers.

"Where is the King?" asked the puzzled boy.

"There," said Mag, pointing with one wrinkled claw to a magnificent bed,
large enough to contain six people. In the centre of it quite straight
and still with its head on the lace pillow lay a small figure, something
like waxwork, fast asleep. There were a number of sparkling rings on the
tiny yellow hands; the eyes were shut, and the nose looked sharp and
thin, and the long grey beard hid the mouth, and lay over the breast.
Two little flies buzzing about the curtains of the bed was the only
audible sound.

"Is that the King?" whispered Prince Dolor.

"Yes," replied the bird.

He had been angry ever since he learned how his uncle had taken the
crown and had felt as if, king as he was, he should like to strike him,
this great, strong wicked man.

Why, you might as well have struck a baby! How helpless he lay! with his
eyes shut, and his idle hands folded; they had no more work to do, bad
or good.

"What is the matter with him?" asked the Prince.

"He is dead," said the magpie with a croak.

No, there was not the least use in being angry with him now. On the
contrary, the Prince felt almost sorry for him.

"What shall we do now?" asked the magpie. "There's nothing much more to
be done with his Majesty, except a funeral. Suppose we float up again at
a safe distance and see it all. It will be such fun. There will be a
great row in the city and I wonder who we shall have in his place?"

"What will be fun?"

"A Revolution."

As soon as the Cathedral bell began to toll, and the minute guns to
fire, announcing to the Kingdom that it was without a king, the people
gathered in crowds. The murmur now and then rose into a shout, and the
shout into a roar. When Prince Dolor, quietly floating in the upper air,
caught the sound of their different and opposite cries, it seemed to him
as if the whole city had gone mad together.

"Long live the King!" "The King is dead--down with the King!" "Down with
the crown and the King too!" "Hurrah for the Republic!" "Hurrah for no
government at all."

Such were the shouts which came up to him and then began, oh! what a
scene! The country was in a revolution. Soldiers were shooting down
people by hundreds in the streets, scaffolds were being erected, heads
dropping off, houses burned, and women and children murdered.

Prince Dolor saw it all. Things happened so fast after one another that
he nearly lost his senses.

"Oh, let me go home," he cried at last, stopping his ears and shutting
his eyes, "only let me go home!" for even his lonely tower and its
dreariness and silence, was absolute paradise after this.

Prince Dolor fell into a kind of swoon and when he awoke he found
himself in his own room.




CHAPTER VIII.


Next morning when Prince Dolor awoke he perceived that his room was
empty.

Very uncomfortable he felt, of course; and just a little frightened.
Especially when he began to call again and again, but nobody answered.

"Nurse--dear nurse--please come back!" he called out. "Come back, and I
will be the best boy in all the land."

And when she did not come back, and nothing but silence answered his
lamentable call, he very nearly began to cry.

"This won't do," he said at last, dashing the tears from his eyes. "It's
just like a baby, and I'm a big boy--shall be a man some day. What has
happened, I wonder? I'll go and see."

He sprang out of bed and crawled from room to room on his knees.

"What in the world am I to do?" thought he, and sat down in the middle
of the floor, half inclined to believe that it would be better to give
up entirely, lay himself down and die.

This feeling, however, did not last long. He jumped up and looked out of
the window. No help there. At first he only saw the broad bleak sunshiny
plain. But, by-and-by, in the mud around the base of the tower he saw
clearly the marks of horses' feet, and just in the spot where the deaf
mute always tied his great black charger, there lay the remains of a
bundle of hay.

"Yes, that's it. He has come and gone, taking nurse with him. Poor
nurse! how glad she must have been to go!"

That was Prince Dolor's first thought. His second was one of
indignation at her cruelty.

He decided that it would be easier to die here alone than out in the
world, among the terrible doings which he had just beheld.

The deaf mute had come--contrived somehow to make the nurse understand
that the king was dead, and that she need have no fear in going back to
the capital.

"I hope she'll enjoy it," said the Prince.

And then a kind of remorse smote him for feeling so bitterly towards
her, after all the years she had taken care of him--grudgingly, perhaps,
still, she had taken care of him.

For the second time he tried to dress himself, and then to do everything
he could for himself--even to sweeping the hearth and putting on more
coals.

He then thought of his godmother. Not of calling her or asking her to
help him--she had evidently left him to help himself, and he was
determined to try his best to do it, being a very proud and independent
boy--but he remembered her tenderly.

After his first despair, he was comfortable and happy in his solitude,
