the damage of the State." But as he turned him after making this prayer
he stumbled and fell. And this omen was judged by them that interpreted
it by the things that followed, to look first to the condemnation of
Camillus by the people, and second to the great overthrow of the city at
the hands of the Gauls; both of which things will be related hereafter.

This day, therefore, was spent in the subduing of the enemy and in the
plundering of the city; and never indeed was city more wealthy. The next
day the Dictator sold by public auction all the inhabitants that were
of free condition; the money from which sale was brought into the public
treasury; and though none other was so brought the Commons took it ill.
And indeed for such spoil as each man bare home with him, they thought
themselves to be in debt not indeed to Camillus, that had referred to
the Senate a matter that lay within his own power, but to him that had
prevailed with the Senate that it should be given to the people.

All the possessions of the men of Veii having been now carried away,
the Romans began to remove the offerings of the gods and the gods
themselves; but this they did after the manner of worshippers rather
than of plunderers. For certain young men, chosen out of the whole host,
having first washed their bodies in pure water and clothed themselves in
white garments, came into the temple, having made due obeisance; and so,
with much awe, laid their hands on the goddess. It was the custom among
the Etrurians that none should touch that image save the priests
only. This having been done, one of the youths, whether speaking by
inspiration from heaven, or in boisterous jest, cried, "Wilt thou away
to Rome, Juno?" and the others cried that the image nodded her head. In
after time it was said that the image even spake the words, "I will."
Certainly it is related that it was moved from its place with small
trouble, and that when it was carried to Rome it passed lightly and
easily, as one that followed freely; and so was brought unhurt to its
dwelling on Mount Aventine, where was built a temple, according to the
vow of the Dictator, which temple he himself in due time dedicated.

Thus perished the city of Veii, than which there was none among the
Etrurians more wealthy. For ten years was it besieged, both summer
and winter; and now it fell not so much by force as by the art of the
engineer.

The tidings of this thing being brought to Rome there was great
rejoicing; because, for all the prophecies of the soothsayers and the
answers of the oracle, and the greatness of Camillus, men had scarce
believed that so strong a city, from which so much loss had been
suffered in time past, would indeed be conquered, Straightway the
temples were crowded with women that gave thanks to the gods. And the
Senate decreed a thanksgiving of four days, such as never had been
decreed before.

As for the Dictator, when he came back to the city, there went out to
meet him men of all ranks and conditions. Such honour was rendered
to him as had never before been rendered to any man. But when he rode
through the city in a chariot drawn by white horses, men said, "This
becometh not a citizen, nor indeed a man, how great soever he be.
He maketh himself equal to Jupiter or Apollo." Afterwards, having
contracted for the building of a temple to Queen Juno on Mount Aventine,
and dedicated the temple to Mother Matuta, he resigned the dictatorship.
And now came the paying of the tenth of the spoil to Apollo, according
to the vow which Camillus had vowed. For the priests affirmed that the
people were bound by the vow. It was commanded, therefore, that every
man should set a price on the spoil which he had carried away from Veii,
and should pay a tenth part to the god. This also turned away the hearts
of the Commons from Camillus.




CHAPTER XII. ~~ THE STORY OF CAMILLUS.

In the next year the Senate would have sent a colony into the country
of the Volscians, giving to each man two acres of land and more. But the
thing pleased not the Commons, who said, "Why do ye send us into exile
in the land of the Volscians while this fair city of Veii lieth within
view, having lands both wider and more fertile than are the lands of
Rome?" The city also they preferred to their own, both for its situation
and for the magnificence of its buildings both public and private. Their
counsel, therefore, was that the State should be divided, and that the
nobles should dwell at Rome and the Commons at Veii. But the nobles
steadfastly withstood it, saying, "We will die rather than that such
a thing be done. If there be such trouble in one city, how much more,
think ye, will there be in two? Will ye prefer a city that is vanquished
to that which is victorious? Will ye leave Romulus, your founder, a god
and the son of a god, and follow Sicinius?" (This Sicinius was tribune of
the Commons and had brought this matter forward.)

None was more urgent against this counsel than Camillus. "Verily," he
would say, "there is nothing at which to marvel in these troubles. The
whole state is mad, for, though it is bound by a vow, it careth for
every matter rather than how this vow may best be paid. Of that which
was paid for the tenth, verily a small part in place of the whole, I say
nothing. This toucheth the consciences of all, but the state is free.
But there is another matter of which I dare not be silent any more. We
have set apart a tenth of those things which were moveable. Of the city
and of the lands ye make no mention, yet were these comprehended in the
vow." This matter the Senate referred to the priests, and the priests,
having called Camillus into council, gave this sentence: "There is due
to Apollo a tenth of all that before the uttering of the vow belonged
to the men of Veii, and afterwards came into the power of the Roman
people." Thus the city and the lands thereof were included. The money,
therefore, was paid out of the public treasury; and the magistrates were
commanded to purchase gold therewith. And when there was not found a
sufficient quantity of this metal, the matrons, having first met and
deliberated on the matter, promised that they would themselves supply
the magistrates with gold, and carried all their ornaments to the
treasury.

[Illustration: Roman ladies bringing their ornaments 228]

Never was anything done that more pleased the Senate than this
liberality of the women; and, by way of recompense, it was ordered
that they should thereafter enjoy this privilege, that they should use
covered chariots whensoever they went to public worship or to the
games, and other carriages on any day, whether festival or common.
Notwithstanding, the tribunes of the Commons were still bitter against
Camillus. "Verily," they said, "by his confiscations and consecrations
he hath brought the spoil of Veii to nothing."

The next year there was war with the men of Falerii. These at the
first, for fear of the Romans, kept themselves within their walls; but
afterwards, not enduring to see the plundering of their lands, came
forth, and pitched their camp about the space of a mile from the town,
in a steep and difficult place. But Camillus, for he was the captain of
the host, taking for his guide a man of those parts that had been made
prisoner, left his place by night, and showed himself in the morning
on ground higher by far. And when the enemy assailed him, as he was
fortifying his camp, he put them to flight, putting them into such fear
that they left their camp and fled to the city, but suffered much loss
of slain and wounded before they could arrive at the gates.

The town was now shut up; but because they that were besieged had better
supply of corn and other things needful than they that besieged, the
matter might have been delayed no less than was the taking of Veii, but
for the good fortune and virtue of Camillus.

It was the custom among the men of Falerii to use the same person
for teachers of their children and also for their companions. Also,
according to the Greek fashion, many boys would be taught by the same
man. Now the children of the chief citizens of the place were in the
charge of a certain teacher, that had the repute of excelling all others
in knowledge. This man had been wont in time of peace to lead the boys
out of the city for the sake of exercise and sport; and this custom he
had not ceased even after the beginning of the war, but would take
them away from the gates at one time in longer at another in shorter
journeys. At length he took occasion to lead them farther than before,
and to bring them, occupying them meanwhile with sport and talk, as
far as the camp of the Romans. Taking them therefore to the tent of
Camillus, he said, "I have delivered Falerii into your hands, for these
boys that ye see are the children of the chief men of the city." To this
Camillus made answer, "Neither the general nor the people to whom thou
comest bringing this wicked gift is like unto thyself. With the men of
Falerii we have not indeed friendship, yet we have with them as with all
men a natural fellowship. War also has laws even as peace, and to these
laws we have learnt obedience, even as we have learned courage. Our arms
we carry not against lads of tender age, who are not harmed even in
the storming of cities, but against men that carry arms in their hands.
These I shall conquer, even as I conquered Veii, in Roman fashion, even
by valour, by labour, and by arms."

When he had so spoken he commanded that the man should be stripped of
his clothing, and that his hands should be tied behind his back. In this
plight he delivered him to the lads to be taken back to the city,
giving them rods wherewith to scourge the traitor, and drive him back
to Falerii. There was a great concourse of people to see this sight; and
the Senate was summoned by the magistrates to consider the matter. So
great a change was wrought in the minds of men that they who a little
before had been obstinate to perish like the men of Veii, now with one
voice desired peace. Ambassadors therefore were sent to Camillus, who,
having been bidden by him to go to Rome, had audience of the Senate, to
whom they spake thus: "Fathers, ye and your generals have overcome us in
such a fashion as neither gods nor men can blame. We therefore surrender
ourselves to you, making no doubt that we shall live more happily under
your government than under our own laws." Peace was granted to them on
the condition that they should bring the tax for that year, that the
burden of the Commons might be eased.

After this the Senate sent three messengers to Delphi bearing with them
the offering of the Roman people to the god, namely, a mixing-bowl of
gold. These messsengers were taken by pirates of Lipara and carried
to that town. Now the custom at Lipara was that plunder so taken was
divided among the people. But the chief magistrate of Lipara for
that year, having a reverence for the character of ambassadors, and
considering also that they were carrying an offering to the god, and
knowing for what cause this offering was made, persuaded the multitude
also. The messengers, therefore, were entertained at the public expense,
and having been sent with a convoy of ships to Greece, were so brought
back safe to the city of Rome.

In the fourth year after these things, one Marcus Caedicius, a man of
the Commons, gave information to the magistrates that in the new street
above the temple of Vesta he had heard a voice louder than the voice of
man, that said these words, "The Gauls are coming." No heed was taken of
this thing, both because the man that told it was of little account, and
because the nation of the Gauls, dwelling far off, was little known.

Not only did the people of Rome despise the warnings of the gods, but
also they deprived themselves, as far as in them lay, of all human help,
driving away Camillus from their city. For, having been summoned to
stand his trial by one of the tribunes of the Commons in the matter of
the spoil of Veii (and it had chanced also that in those same days
he had suffered the loss of a son that was almost grown to years of
manhood), he called together to his house the members of his tribe and
his dependants, being themselves no small part of the Commons, and laid
the matter before them. And when they had answered him that they would
contribute among themselves whatsoever fine he might be condemned to
pay, but that they could not bring it about that he should be acquitted,
he went into exile, first putting up to the immortal gods this prayer.
"If I am not deserving of this wrong, cause, I beseech you, that this
people may repent them that they have driven me forth." Being absent on
the day of trial he was condemned to pay fifteen thousand pounds' weight
of copper.




CHAPTER XIII. ~~ THE STORY OF ROME AND THE GAULS.

In this same year, being the three hundred and sixty and fourth from the
building of the City, came ambassadors from Clusium asking help of the
Romans against the Gauls. Now some men say that these Gauls crossed the
Alps and took to themselves the lands which the Etrurians had before
possessed, being drawn by the delightsomeness of the things grown
therein, especially of wine, a pleasure before unknown to them. And they
say also that wine was brought into Gaul by one Aruns of Clusium for the
sake of avenging himself upon a certain Lucumo who had taken from him
his wife, this Lucumo being a prince in his country, whom there was no
hope that he could punish unless he should get help in some such way
from foreigners. However this may be, it is certain that the Gauls
crossed the Alps before this time by many years, and that they fought
many battles with the Etrurians. First, in the days of King Tarquinius
the Elder, one Ambigatus that was king of the Celts, who inhabited the
third part of Gaul, sent his sister's sons to seek out for themselves
new kingdoms, of whom one was directed by the oracle to go towards
Germany, and the other by a far more pleasant way to Italy. These then
having come to the Alps wondered how they might pass them, the top of
them seeming to be joined to the sky. And while they doubted there came
tidings how certain others, strangers like to themselves, and that had
come seeking lands wherein to dwell, were attacked by the natives of the
Salyi. (These strangers were the inhabitants of Phocaea, that had fled
from their town when it was besieged by Cyrus king of Persia.) Having
helped the Phocaeans to build a city, they themselves climbed over the
Alps, and, descending on the other side, put to flight the Etrurians
near the river Ticinus, and formed a city called Mediolanum.

After these came many companies of Gauls by the same way into Italy,
those that were now fighting against Clusium being the nations of the
Senones. And the men of Clusium, seeing how great was the multitude of
this people, and what manner of men they were, being unlike to any that
they had seen before, and of very great stature, and also what arms
they carried, were in great fear. Knowing also that the armies of the
Etrurians had often been put to flight by them, they determined to send
ambassadors to Rome, asking help from the Senate, though, indeed, they
had no claim either for friendship or alliance' sake, save only that
they had not given succour to their kinsmen of Veii. Help the Senate was
not willing to give; but they sent three ambassadors, brothers and sons
of Fabius Ambustus, who should say to the Gauls, "In the name of the
Senate and Commons of Rome we bid you do no harm to them who are allies
and friends of the Roman people, and from whom ye have suffered no
wrong. For them, if occasion demand, we must support even by force of
arms. Nevertheless it will please us well to be friends rather than
enemies of the Gauls, of whom we have now for the first time knowledge."

The message, indeed, was sufficiently gentle, but it was entrusted to
men of too fierce a temper, that were, indeed, like to Gauls rather than
to Romans. When the Fabii had set forth the commission in an assembly
of the Gauls, there was made to them this answer: "We have not, indeed,
before heard the name of the Romans, but we believe you to be brave men,
seeing that the men of Clusium have sought to you for help. Seeing that
ye would stand between us and your allies, and would deal by persuasion
rather than by force of arms, we accept your conditions; only let the
men of Clusium, seeing that they possess more land than they need, give
up that which is over and above to the Gauls. On these terms only will
we give peace. Let them answer now in your presence. And if they will
not give the land, let them fight with us also in your presence, that
ye may tell your countrymen how far we excel all other men in valour."
"Nay," said the Romans, "by what right do ye ask land from them that
possess it, and threaten war to them that refuse? And what concern have
ye, being Gauls, with the men of Etruria?" To this the Gauls made reply
in haughty words: "Our right we carry on the points of our swords, for
to the brave all things belong."

Thus there was great anger stirred up on both sides; and they made ready
for battle. And now (for so the destiny of the city of Rome would have
it) the ambassadors, setting the law of nations at nought, went into the
battle. Nor was this hidden from the Gauls, for not only were the three
conspicuous for strength and courage, but one of them, Quintus by name,
spurring out before the line, slew a chieftain of the Gauls that had
fallen upon the standards of the Etrurians, running him through with
his spear. And the Gauls knew him for one of the ambassadors, while he
spoiled the body of the arms. Straightway the report of this thing was
spread through the whole army, and the signal was given to retreat, for
they thought no more of the Clusines, but would have vengeance on the
Romans. Some indeed would have had the host march straightway; but the
elders prevailed, advising that ambassadors should be sent complaining
of the wrong done, and demanding that the Fabii should be given up to
them for punishment. So ambassadors were sent, and when these had set
forth the matter, the Senate was much displeased with the Fabii, and
confessed that the Gauls demanded only that which was within their
right. Nevertheless, because the Fabii were men of high degree, favour
prevailed against justice. But lest they should be blamed if any
misfortune followed, the Senators referred the decision of the matter to
an assembly of the people; in which assembly favour and wealth availed
so much that the Fabii were not only let go unpunished, but were even
chosen with three others to be tribunes of the soldiers for the year to
come. When the ambassadors of the Gauls knew what had been done, they
were greatly wroth, and returned to their countrymen, having first
proclaimed war against Rome. And now, though so great a peril was at
hand, none at Rome thought or cared. And indeed it is always thus that
they that are doomed to perish have their eyes blinded against that
which is coming upon them. For though the Romans had been wont to
use all means of help against enemies near at hand, and to appoint a
dictator in times of need, yet now, having to deal with an enemy of whom
they had had before no experience or knowledge, they neglected all these
things. They whose rashness had brought about the war, having the charge
of the thing committed to them, used no more diligence in the levying of
an army than if they were dealing with one of the nations round about,
but made light of the matter. In the meanwhile the Gauls, when they
heard that the very men that had set at nought the law of nations had
been promoted to great honour, were filled with fury, and forthwith
snatching up their standards, marched towards Rome with all speed. And
when the inhabitants of the country were terrified at their coming,
the dwellers in the cities running to arms, and the countryfolk leaving
their homes, the Gauls cried out to them that they were bound for Rome.
Nevertheless the report of their coming went before them, messengers
from Clusium and from other states hastening to Rome, from whose
reports, as also from the great speed of the enemy, there arose great
fear among the Romans. These levied an army with all haste and marched
forth, meeting the Gauls at the river Allia, where, flowing down from
the mountains of Crustumeria in a very deep channel, it is joined to the
Tiber, about eleven miles from Rome. There they found the whole country,
both in front and on either side, occupied by great multitudes of Gauls,
and in an uproar with the loud singing and shouting with which this
nation is wont to terrify its enemies.

And now the tribunes of the soldiers, having neither pitched a camp nor
made a rampart to be a defence if they should be driven back, nor taken
any account of omens, nor offered sacrifice (for they were careless
alike of gods and of men), drew up their army in array, extending their
line lest they should be surrounded by the multitude of the enemy. But
even then, though they so weakened the middle part that their ranks
scarce held together, they could not make their front equal to the front
of the enemy. There was a little hill on the right hand, and this they
occupied with a reserve. Against this reserve Brennus, the king of the
Gauls, made his first attack; for seeing that the Romans were few in
number, he judged that they must excel in skill, and that the hill had
been thus occupied to the end that the Gauls might be assailed from
behind while they were fighting with the legions in front. He judged,
therefore, that if he could thrust down them that were on this hill his
army might easily deal with the Romans on the plain, seeing that
they far exceeded them in number. So true is it that on this day the
barbarians were superior not in fortune only but also in judgment and
skill. As for the Romans, neither the captains nor the soldiers were
in anywise worthy of their name. Their souls were wholly possessed with
terror, so that, forgetting everything, they fled to Veii, that had
belonged to their enemies, and this though the Tiber was in their way,
rather than to Rome, to their wives and children. The reserves were
defended for a while by the ground whereon they stood, but the rest of
the army turned their backs forthwith and fled so soon as they heard
the battle shout of the Gauls. For they sought not to come to blows with
them, nor even set up a shout in answer; but without making trial of the
enemy, nor so much as daring to look at him, fled with all haste. In the
battle, indeed, none were slain; but there was great slaughter among the
rereward when these were crowded together in such haste and confusion
that they hindered one another. Many also were slain on the bank of the
Tiber, whither the whole of the left wing of the host had fled, first
throwing away their arms; and many also were swallowed up by the
river, either not knowing how to swim or from lack of strength, being
overburdened by the weight of their coats of mail and other armour.
Nevertheless the greater part of the men escaped safe to Veii; but none
went from this place to the help of Rome, nor did they so much as send
tidings of the battle. As for them that had been set on the right
wing, these all went to Rome; and when they were come thither, delayed
not even to shut the gate of the city, but fled straightway into the
citadel. This battle was fought on the eighteenth day of the month
Quintilis; nor was it ever lawful in Rome thereafter to do any public
business on that day.

The Gauls were beyond measure astonished that they had vanquished their
enemy so easily and in so short a space of time. At the first they stood
still in fear, not knowing what had taken place; afterwards they began
to fear some stratagem; at last they buried the dead bodies of the
slain, and piled together the arms in heaps according to their custom.
And now, not perceiving in any place the sign of an enemy, they began
to march forward, and came to Rome a little before sunset. But when
the horsemen whom they had sent on before brought back tidings that
the gates were open, with none to defend them and no soldiers upon the
walls, they were not less astonished than before, and came to a halt,
fearing lest, in the darkness of the night and in a place whereof they
knew nothing, they might fall into some peril. They took up a station,
therefore, between Rome and the river Anio, sending scouts about the
walls and the gates of the city who should learn what the enemy purposed
to do in the great extremity whereunto they had been brought.




CHAPTER XIV. ~~ THE STORY OF ROME AND THE GAULS (continued).

Meanwhile the city was full of weeping and wailing, for none thought
that they who had fled to Veii were yet alive, or that any had been
saved from the battle, save such as were already come back to Rome. But
when tidings were brought that the Gauls were close at hand, sorrow
gave place to fear. And now the Gauls were seen to move backwards and
forwards before the walls, and there was heard the sound of shouting and
of the barbarous music that this people use. And still the inhabitants
expected till an attack should be made upon the city. At first they
thought that this would be done at the first coming of the enemy; but
afterwards believed that it would be delayed until nightfall, that the
terror might be increased by the darkness. Nevertheless all men bore
themselves bravely, and altogether unlike to them who had turned their
backs in such shameful fashion at the river Allia. For since there was
no hope that the city should be defended by the small number that yet
remained, it was resolved that all the young men that could bear arms,
together with such of the Senators as had strength sufficient for
war, should go up with their wives and children to the Citadel and the
Capitol, where stores of arms and corn having been collected, they
might defend the gods of Rome and the honour of the State. Also it was
determined that the priests of Quirinus, and the virgins of Vesta
with him, should carry away far from peril of fire and sword all that
appertained to the gods, that their worship might not be interrupted so
long as any should be left to perform it. For they said, "If the citadel
and the Capitol, wherein are the dwellings of the Gods, and the Senate,
which is the council of the State, and the youth that are of an age to
carry arms, survive the destruction that hangs over the city, it is but
a small matter that the aged should perish." And that the common people
might bear their fate with the more willingness, the old men of
the nobles that had been honoured in former days with triumphs and
consulships affirmed that they would meet death together with the rest;
neither would they burden the scanty stores of the fighting men with
bodies that had no longer the strength to carry arms.

When the old men had thus comforted one another they addressed
themselves to encourage the young. These they accompanied to the
Capitol, commending to their valour and strength all that now was left
of the greatness of Rome. And now when they who were resolved that they
would not survive the capture and destruction of the city had departed,
the women ran to and fro asking of their husbands and of their sons what
they should do. But of these many were suffered to follow their husbands
and kinsfolk into the Capitol, none forbidding, though none called them,
for that which would have profited the besieged, by diminishing the
number of the useless, seemed to be barbarous and cruel. As for the rest
of the people, for whom there was neither room in so small a hill nor
food in so scanty a provision of corn, these went forth from the city,
as it were in a great host, towards the hill Janiculum.

Thence some scattered themselves over the country, and some made their
way to the neighbouring cities; but there was no leader or common
purpose, and each concerned himself with his own affairs only, for
of the State all despaired. Meanwhile the priests of Quirinus and the
virgins of Vesta, taking no thought for their own affairs, took counsel
together which of the sacred things they should carry away with them and
which they should leave behind, for they had not strength sufficient
for the carrying of all; also in what place they might most safely leave
them. It seemed good to them to put such things as it was needful to
leave behind in a cask and to bury them in the ground within the chapel
that was hard by the dwelling-house of the priests of Quirinus. The rest
they, carried, dividing the burden of them among themselves, and went by
the way that leads to the mount Janiculum, over the wooden bridge. And
while they were mounting the hill, one Lucius Albinius, a man of the
Commons, saw them, who was carrying his wife and children in a cart
amongst the crowd that was leaving the city as having no strength for
arms. This Albinius forgot not even in such peril the reverence due to
religion, and thinking it shame that the priests with the holy things
should go afoot while he and his were carried, bade his wife and
children come down from the cart, and putting therein the virgins, with
the sacred things, carried them to Caere, whither it had been their
purpose to go.

Meanwhile at Rome all things had been set in order, as far as might be,
for the defending of the Citadel; and the old men, going back to their
homes, sat awaiting the coming of the Gauls with minds wholly fixed
on death. And such among them as had borne the more honourable
magistracies, because they would die having on them the emblems of their
old glory, put on them the splendid robes which they wear who draw the
ropes of the chariots of the gods, or ride in triumph, and so sat down
in their ivory chairs before their houses. Some say that, following
a form of words which Marcus Folius the chief priest repeated, they
devoted themselves to death for their country and for the citizens of
Rome.

The next day the Gauls entered the city by the Colline Gate without any
anger or fury, for such as had been stirred by the battle had abated
during the night; and indeed they had met with no peril in the field,
nor did they now take the city by storm. So they came to the marketplace
and thence looked about them on the Citadel, which alone in the city
still preserved some semblance of war, and on the temples of the Gods.
Here they left a guard of no great strength, lest haply some attack
should be made upon them from the Capitol, while they were scattered;
and the rest scattered themselves to gather spoil, some seeking it in
the dwellings that were nigh at hand, and some in such as were more
distant, thinking that they would find these rather untouched and
abounding with riches. Thence again, terrified by the silence of the
place, and fearing lest some stratagem of the enemy might be concealed
thereby, they returned to the market-place and to the parts adjacent
thereto. Here finding that the palaces of the nobles were open, and the
houses of the common folk barred, they were slower to enter the open
than the shut, for they beheld with no small reverence the men that sat
each in the porch of his house, noting how great was the splendour
of their apparel and their ornaments, and that the majesty of their
countenances was rather that of gods than of men. So they stood
marvelling at them as though they had been images of the gods, till a
certain Marcus Papirius, one of the priests, smote a Gaul on the head
