
"Certainly, Miss Arbuckle; and I am sure the young gentlemen will set
an additional value upon the decoration if it is bestowed by you,"
replied Mr. Lowington, as gallantly as though he had been a much
younger man.

"Thank you, sir," answered Grace, blushing at the compliment.

"Miss Arbuckle will give a badge to each of you," continued the
principal to the faithful few.

The crew on deck applauded lustily.

"It will be a white ribbon on the left breast," said Grace.

"A white ribbon on the left breast," repeated Mr. Lowington, as Grace
hastened to the cabin to procure the materials for the decoration. "I
learn that those who refused to answer the boatswain's call, expected
to be asked for an explanation of their conduct. I cannot make terms
with mutineers. I should have proceeded in a different manner if I had
not believed there was a misunderstanding. I am willing to explain for
your benefit, but not for those below. Do you understand?"

"Ay, ay, sir!" shouted the students.

"With a promise on your part to keep your own counsels, I will explain.
Those of you who will agree not to communicate anything I may say to
the mutineers will signify it by going abaft the mizzen-mast on the
quarter-deck. Those who decline to agree to these terms will remain in
the waist."

Every officer, including Perth, and every seaman, promptly marched to
the quarter-deck.

"At the wheel, do you agree to the terms?" said the principal,
addressing the quarter-master and seaman who were steering.

"Yes, sir," replied both.

"Mr. Peaks, you will see that no one is at the ladder of the main
hatch," continued the principal, turning to the adult boatswain.

"Ay, ay, sir," replied Peaks, who soon reported that all the mutineers
were still in the mess-rooms.

"Now, young gentlemen, I am told it is generally believed in the
steerage that the trip down the Rhine has been abandoned; that the ship
is bound to Belfast to convey our good friends to their home. This is a
mistake, and probably the one which made the mischief in part. I have
no idea of going to Belfast, and no idea of abandoning the excursion
into Germany."

The boys applauded with a zeal which indicated how satisfactory the
intelligence was to them.

"Certainly the discipline of the ship needs improving, but I was
satisfied that two or three days' service at sea would restore it to
its former standard. If the squadron remains at Havre during our
absence, both vessels must go into the docks, which involves
considerable expense. I therefore purposed to make a harbor at Brest,
and go from there to the Rhine. For this reason the baggage of our
friends was brought on board. That is really all that need be said. Are
you satisfied?"

"Ay, ay, sir!" shouted the crowd.

"But remember that this explanation is made for your benefit, and not
for that of the students in the steerage. They have chosen their own
remedy, and they must abide the issue. You are now dismissed."

"Not yet, if you please, Mr. Lowington," interposed Grace, who had
stationed herself, with her mother on the port side of the mizzen-mast.
"If the young gentlemen will pass this way, they shall be decorated
with the white ribbon of the Order of the Faithful."

"The Order of the Faithful!" exclaimed Mr. Lowington, laughing, while
all the students applauded. "You will pass forward on the port side of
the mizzen-mast, and be initiated into the Order of the Faithful."

"I shall join that order," said Commodore Kendall, as he placed himself
in the single line formed by the boys.

"Let the flag-officer go first," added some of the students, dragging
Paul to the head of the column.

"Commodore Kendall, you are received into the Order of the Faithful,"
said Grace, as she pinned upon the left breast of his coat the white
ribbon, which was doubled, so that the two ends hung down.

"Thank you, Miss Arbuckle. I will endeavor to be faithful," replied the
flag-officer, as he touched his cap to the fair initiator.

Captain Shuffles followed him, and in half an hour the entire party
were duly initiated and decorated. As fast as Mrs. Arbuckle could cut
off and double the ribbons, Grace adjusted them. She explained that she
had purchased a large quantity of narrow white and blue ribbon in Paris
to make trimmings for a dress; and when the principal had spoken of a
distinguishing mark for those who did their duty, it had suggested to
her the white ribbon of the Order of the Faithful. She was delighted to
have her idea so well received.

"We have had some secret societies on board this ship," laughed Paul
Kendall, after he had received his decoration. "I move you we form
another--the Order of the Faithful."

"We have already taken the obligation," added Shuffles.

"And we have been initiated by Miss Arbuckle," said Gordon.

The suggestion was received with favor, though rather as a pleasantry
than as a serious matter; and, after the faithful had all marched by
the mizzen-mast, the subject was again taken up in the waist.

"I move you that Commodore Kendall be chosen Grand Commander of the
Order of the Faithful," said Shuffles.

"I beg you will excuse me. I couldn't walk if I had to carry around
with me such a magnificent title as that," replied Paul, shrugging his
shoulders like a Frenchman. "I suggest that Miss Grace Arbuckle be the
chief of the order, and that no one be admitted unless initiated by
her. As she is the founder of the order, it is fair that she should be
its head."

"Good!" shouted several of the officers and seamen.

"What shall her title be?" added Shuffles.

"Queen," replied Gordon.

"No; that's too commonplace," answered Haven.

"What shall it be, then?"

"Something outlandish, just for the fun of the thing," said Haven, who
was not a very warm advocate of secret societies.

"The Amazon," suggested one of the seamen.

"O, no! don't call her an Amazon," protested Paul. "It would be a libel
upon her."

"The Queen of the Fairies."

"We are not fairies," objected Haven.

"She is one, at any rate."

"Call her the Empress."

"Simply the President."

"No; the Directress."

The question seemed to be a trying one; and one after another suggested
titles which were satisfactory to no one but the proposers.

"How will the Protectress do?" inquired Shuffles.

"Rather formidable and commonplace," replied Haven. "Make it the Grand
Protectress, and I am with you."

"I like Protectress," added Paul Kendall.

"So do I," said half a dozen others.

"Grand Protectress is better," persisted Haven, who could not help
making a burlesque of the affair.

"Grand Protectress!" shouted a dozen others, who believed in
high-sounding titles.

"Put it to vote," suggested Shuffles.

"Ay, ay! put it to vote."

"Those in favor of Grand Protectress say, ay," continued Haven.

"Ay!" responded a large number.

"Opposed."

"No."

"The ayes have it. Grand Protectress it is."

"I move you that Commodore Kendall and Captain Shuffles be a committee
to wait upon Miss Arbuckle, and inform her that she has been
unanimously chosen Grand Protectress of the Order of the Faithful.
Those in favor say, ay; those opposed, no. It is a vote."

The committee went to the quarter-deck, where Grace and her mother were
conversing with Mr. Lowington. Paul, who was by seniority the
spokesman, touched his cap, and looked as dignified as though he had
been the minister plenipotentiary of one of the great powers.

"Miss Arbuckle, I have the honor--and I should do injustice to my own
feelings if I did not add, the pleasure--to inform you, that you have
been unanimously chosen Grand Protectress of the Order of the
Faithful."

"The what?" asked Grace.

The principal, usually very solemn and dignified, laughed heartily.

"Grand Protectress," replied Paul, gravely. "The order has been duly
established; and, as you have initiated all the members, it is
eminently proper that you should preside over its destinies."

"Please to assure the members of the order, that I accept the high
position, and that I am very grateful to them for the honor they have
done me," answered Grace, when she could restrain her laughter so as to
speak.

"I am happy to be the bearer of such a pleasant message," said Paul, as
he bowed and retired.

"Grand Protectress!" laughed Grace, repeating in measured tones her
magnificent title.

Paul reported the acceptance of the Grand Protectress; and the society
was further organized by the choice of a secretary, whose only duty was
to keep a record of the names of the members.

"Now, we want a motto," said Gordon; "something that will express, in
few words, the objects of the society."

"I don't happen to know what the objects of the society are," replied
Haven; "but I suggest, '_Honi soit qui mal y pense_.'"

"The Queen of England has a mortgage on that motto," said Paul.
"_Semper paratus_ will be better."

"What does it mean?" asked a student.

"Some praties," replied a wag.

"Let us have a motto in plain English, and one that has not been used
by all the engine companies in the United States," added Haven.

"_Semper paratus_ is good, I think," persisted Paul. "_Always ready_ to
answer the boatswain's call, and _always ready_ to do our duty."

"But it is worn out," protested Haven. "I move you we invite the Grand
Protectress to give us a motto."

The motion was carried, and the same committee appointed to make the
request. Paul led the way to Grace again, who was still highly amused
at the grand honor which had been conferred upon her.

"The Order of the Faithful instructs me humbly to petition the Grand
Protectress for a motto suitable to the needs, and expressive of the
objects, of the association," said Paul.

"O, dear me!" exclaimed Grace. "If you ask such things as that of me, I
shall not wish to be Grand Protectress. I think, as your great
philosopher said, it will be paying too dear for the whistle. Must it
be in English, French, Latin, or German?"

"That must be left to the discretion of your Grand Protectresship,"
answered Paul, gravely.

"Please to help me, father," said she, appealing to Mr. Arbuckle.

"Whatever the Grand Protectress vouchsafes to give us shall be
cherished by the order," added Paul.

Mr. Arbuckle wrote a sentence on a slip of paper, and handed it to
Grace.

"Ah, here is your motto!" exclaimed she, laughing heartily.

"Please to repeat it," said Captain Shuffles.

"_Vous ne pouvez pas faire un sifflet de la queue d'un cochon_," added
Grace, reading from the paper, which she handed to Paul, choking with
mirth.

"Thanks, most excellent Grand Protectress," replied the commodore, who
found it very difficult to maintain his gravity.

"It is a literal translation of the English proverb, and perhaps the
idea is not expressed in similar phrase in French," said Mr. Arbuckle;
"but I think it will answer very well for a motto."

Paul smoothed down his face as well as he could, and conveyed the motto
to the assembled order in the waist.

"I have the honor to inform you that the Grand Protectress has provided
a motto," said he.

"What is it?" demanded a dozen.

"It is in French."

"The motto!" called the impatient Faithfuls.

_"Vous ne pouvez pas faire un sifflet de la queue d'un cochon."_

Only two or three laughed, for only a few were as good French scholars
as Paul and Shuffles.

"What's the English of it?" asked several at the same time.

"You must excuse me, for I do not think it is quite proper to translate
the motto," replied Paul.

Those who understood it enjoyed the joke too much to afford the others
any light on the subject. Haven was delighted with the motto, and moved
that it be accepted. As it had been furnished by the Grand Protectress,
it was unanimously adopted. The weak scholars were very curious to know
the meaning of the mystic words. Most of them could make out a part of
the sentence, but not enough to translate it. The business of the
meeting was completed, and the members separated, all of them feeling
that the mutiny of the Young America was more like a merrymaking than
anything else. To be decorated with the white ribbon of the order by a
beautiful young lady was a privilege which they appreciated, and all of
them were thankful that they had not been led astray by the evil
counsels which had prevailed in the steerage.

"If you do not like the motto, I can give you another now," said Grace,
when Paul joined the little party on the quarter-deck.

"The one you gave was unanimously adopted by the order," replied Paul.

"Was it, really?" asked Grace, laughing more heartily than before.

"Certainly it was."

"Did they understand its meaning?"

"Some of them did."

"If you like this one better, it is at your service: 'High aims produce
noble deeds.'"

"While I hope we all believe in the English one, I think the members of
the order prefer the French one."

"If they are suited, I am," replied Grace, cheerfully.

The ship was still going along under easy sail, though the weather
promised to be unfavorable before morning. At eight o'clock, the
starboard watch, with the first and third lieutenants in charge, took
the deck, and the port watch went below. They were to be ready for duty
at twelve. Everything on deck was as pleasant as a merry-making. None
of the passengers were seasick.

Everything was not so lovely in the steerage, and it is necessary to go
back a few hours in order to ascertain what passed among the mutineers.




CHAPTER VI.

IN THE STEERAGE.


After the students finished their supper, those who had decided to
rebel against the authorities of the ship retired to the mess-rooms,
agreeably to the instructions of the leaders. There were forty-four of
them, including the eighteen runaways who still remained in the ship as
seamen, and who were the real mischief-makers, forming a class by
themselves, hardening their hearts in sheer ugliness against the
discipline of the ship. In their exploit with the Josephine, they had
"bucked" against authority, and had suffered the consequences, which
unfortunately had not produced a favorable impression upon them. They
were disposed to do the same thing again.

The rest of the mutineers belonged to a different class. They were
generally well-disposed boys, fond of fun and excitement, not exactly
the "lambs" of the flock, but certainly not the black sheep. If some of
them had assisted in creating the confusion during the drill, they had
not done so with any malicious purpose, as the runaways had, but from a
thoughtless love of sport and excitement. They would never have thought
of such an expedient as rebellion if they had not been cunningly worked
upon by the real mischief-makers. They were not strong-minded young
men, who dare to do right under all circumstances. With good impulses
in the main, their principle was not hardened into that solid element
which constitutes a reliable conscience. They were easily led away, and
believing they had a real grievance, they resorted to doubtful means
for its redress.

Of this class Raymond had been the leading spirit. He would have
resented the appellation of mutineer as an insult. All he expected and
