"Which means, I suppose, that you haven't the least doubt that you
are quite as smart as he," said Old Mother Nature quietly, and
Chatterer looked both guilty and a little bit ashamed.  "I'll admit
that you are smart, Chatterer, but often it is in a wrong way.
Paddy is smart in the very best way.  He is a lumberman, builder
and engineer.  A lot of my little people are workers, but they are
destructive workers.  The busier they are, the more they destroy.
Paddy the Beaver is a constructive worker.  That means that he is a
builder instead of a destroyer."

"How about all those trees he cuts down?  If that isn't destroying,
I don't know what is!" said Chatterer, and with each word jerked
his tail as if somehow his tongue and tail were connected.

"So it is," replied Old Mother Nature good-naturedly.  "But just
think of the number of trees you destroy."

"I never have destroyed a tree in my life!" declared
Chatterer indignantly.

"Yes, you have," retorted Old Mother Nature.

"I never have!" contradicted Chatterer, quite forgetting to whom
he was speaking.

But Old Mother Nature overlooked this.  "I don't suppose you ever
ate a chestnut or a fat hickory nut or a sweet beechnut," said
she softly.

"Of course," retorted Chatterer sharply.  "I've eaten ever and
ever and ever so many of them.  What of it?"

In the heart of each one was a little tree, explained Old Mother
Nature.  "But for you very many of those little trees would have
sprung up and some day would have made big trees.  So you see for
every tree Paddy has destroyed you probably have destroyed a
hundred.  You eat the nuts that you may live.  Paddy cuts down the
trees that he may live, for the bark of those trees is his food.
Like Prickly Porky he lives chiefly on bark.  But, unlike Prickly
Porky, he doesn't destroy a tree for the bark alone.  He wastes
nothing.  He makes use of every bit of that tree.  He does something
for the Green Forest in return for the trees he takes."

Chatterer looked at Happy Jack and blinked in a puzzled way.
Happy Jack looked at Peter Rabbit and blinked.  Peter looked at
Jumper the Hare and blinked.  Jumper looked at Prickly Porky and
blinked.  Then all looked at Paddy the Beaver and finally at Old
Mother Nature, and all blinked.  Old Mother Nature chuckled.

"Don't you think the Green Forest is more beautiful because of
this little pond?" she asked.  Everybody nodded.  "Of course," she
continued.  "But there wouldn't be any little pond here were it
not for Paddy and the trees he has cut.  He destroyed the trees in
order to make the pond.  That is what I meant when I called him a
constructive worker.  Now I want you all to take a good look at
Paddy.  Then he will show us just how as a lumberman he cuts
trees, as a builder he constructs houses and dams, and as an
engineer he digs canals."

As Paddy sat there on his dam, he looked rather like a giant member
of the Rat family, though his head was more like that of a Squirrel
than a Rat.  His body was very thick and heavy, and in color he
was dark brown, lighter underneath than above.  Squatting there
on the dam his back was rounded.  All together, he was a very
clumsy-looking fellow.

Peter Rabbit appeared to be interested in just one thing, Paddy's
tail.  He couldn't keep his eyes off it.

Old Mother Nature noticed this.  "Well, Peter," said she, "what
have you on your mind now?"

"That tail," replied Peter.  "That's the queerest tail I've ever
seen.  I should think it would be heavy and dreadfully in the way."

Old Mother Nature laughed.  "If you ask him Paddy will tell you
that that tail is the handiest tail in the Green Forest," said she.
"There isn't another like it in all the Great World, and if you'll
be patient you will see just how handy it is."

It was a queer-looking tail.  It was broad and thick and flat, oval
in shape, and covered with scales instead of hair.  Just then Jumper
the Hare made a discovery.  "Why!" he exclaimed, "Paddy has feet
like Honker the Goose!"

"Only my hind feet," said Paddy.  "They have webs between the toes
just as Honker's have.  That is for swimming.  But there are no
webs between my fingers."  He held up a hand for all to see.  Sure
enough, the fingers were free.

"Now that everybody has had a good look at you, Paddy," said Old
Mother Nature, "suppose you swim over to where you have been
cutting trees.  We will join you there, and then you can show us
just how you work."

Paddy slipped into the water, where for a second or two he floated
with just his head above the surface.  Then he quickly raised his
broad, heavy tail and brought it down on the water with a slap that
sounded like the crack of a terrible gun.  It was so loud and
unexpected that every one save Old Mother Nature and Prickly Porky
jumped with fright.  Peter Rabbit happened to be right on the edge
of the dam and, because he jumped before he had time to think, he
jumped right into the water with a splash.  Now Peter doesn't like
the water, as you know, and he scrambled out just as fast as ever
he could.  How the others did laugh at him.

"What did he do that for?" demanded Peter indignantly.  "To show
you one use he has for that handy tail," replied Old Mother Nature.
"That is the way he gives warning to his friends whenever he
discovers danger.  Did you notice how he used his tail to aid him
in swimming?  He turns it almost on edge and uses it as a rudder.
Those big, webbed hind feet are the paddles which drive him through
the water.  He can stay under water a long time--as much as five
minutes.  See, he has just come up now."

Sure enough, Paddy's head had just appeared clear across the pond
almost to the opposite shore, and he was now swimming on the surface.
Old Mother Nature at once led the way around the pond to a small
grove of poplar trees which stood a little way back from the water.
Paddy was already there.  "Now," said Old Mother Nature "show us what
kind of a lumberman you are."

Paddy picked out a small tree, sat up much as Happy Jack Squirrel
does, but with his big flat tail on the ground to brace him,
seized the trunk of the tree in both hands, and went to work with
his great orange-colored cutting teeth.  He bit out a big chip.
Then another and another.  Gradually he worked around the tree.
After a while the tree began to sway and crack.  Paddy bit out two
or three more chips, then suddenly slapped the ground with his
tail as a warning and scampered back to a safe distance.  He was
taking no chances of being caught under that falling tree.

The tree fell, and at once Paddy returned to work.  The smaller
branches he cut off with a single bite at the base of each.
The larger ones required a number of bites.  Then he set to work
to cut the trunk up in short logs.  At this point Old Mother
Nature interrupted.

"Now show us," said she, "what you do with the logs."

Paddy at once got behind a log, and by pushing, rolled it ahead
of him until at last it fell with a splash in the water of a ditch
or canal which led from near that grove of trees to the pond.
Paddy followed into the water and began to push it ahead of him
towards the pond.

"That will do," spoke up Old Mother Nature. "Come out and show us
how you take the branches."

Obediently Paddy climbed out and returned to the fallen tree.  There
he picked up one of the long branches in his mouth, grasping it near
the butt, twisted it over his shoulder and started to drag it to
the canal.  When he reached the latter he entered the water and began
swimming, still dragging the branch in the same way.  Once more Old
Mother Nature stopped him.  "You've shown us how you cut trees and
move them, so now I want you to answer a few questions," said she.

Paddy climbed out and squatted on the bank.

"How did this canal happen to be here handy?" asked Old Mother Nature.

"Why, I dug it, of course," replied Paddy looking surprised.  "You
see, I'm rather slow and clumsy on land, and don't like to be far
from water.  Those trees are pretty well back from the pond, so I
dug this canal, which brings the water almost to them.  It makes
it safer for me in case Old Man Coyote or Buster Bear or Yowler the
Bobcat happens to be looking for a Beaver dinner.  Also it makes
it very much easier to get my logs and branches to the pond."

Old Mother Nature nodded.  "Just so," said she.  "I want the rest
of you to notice how well this canal has been dug.  At the other
end it is carried along the bottom of the pond where the water is
shallow so as to give greater depth.  Now you will understand why
I called Paddy an engineer.  What do you do with your logs and
branches, Paddy?"

"Put them in my food-pile, out there where the water is deep near
my house," replied Paddy promptly.  "The bark I eat, and the bare
sticks I use to keep my house and dam in repair.  In the late fall
I cut enough trees to keep me in food all winter.  When my pond is
covered with ice I have nothing to worry about; my food supply
is below the ice.  When I am hungry I swim out under the ice, get
a stick, take it back into my house and eat the bark.  Then I take
the bare stick outside to use when needed on my dam or house."

"How did you come to make this fine pond?" asked Old Mother Nature.

"Oh, I just happened to come exploring up the Laughing Brook and
found there was plenty of food here and a good place for a pond,"
replied Paddy.  "I thought I would like to live here.  Down where
my dam is, the Laughing Brook was shallow--just the place for
a dam."

"Tell us why you wanted a pond and how you built that dam,"
commanded Old Mother Nature.

"Why, I had to have a pond, if I was to stay here," replied Paddy,
as if every one must understand that.  "The Laughing Brook wasn't
deep or big enough for me to live here safely.  If it had been, I
would have made my home in the bank and not bothered with a house
or dam.  But it wasn't, so I had to make a pond.  It required a
lot of hard work, but it is worth all it cost.

"First, I cut a lot of brush and young trees and placed them in
the Laughing Brook in that shallow place, with the butts pointing
up-stream.  I kept them in place by piling mud and stones on them.
Then I kept piling on more sticks and brush and mud.  The water
brought down leaves and floating stuff, and this caught in the
dam and helped fill it in.  I dug a lot of mud in front of it and
used this to fill in the spaces between the sticks.  This made the
water deeper in front of the dam and at the same time kept it from
getting through.  As the water backed up, of course it made a pond.
I kept making my dam longer and higher, and the longer and higher
it became the bigger the pond grew.  When it was big enough and
deep enough to suit me, I stopped work on the dam and built my
house out there."

Everybody turned to look at Paddy's house, the roof of which stood
high out of water a little way from the dam.  "Tell us how you
built that," said Old Mother Nature quietly.

"Oh, I just made a big platform of sticks and mud out there where
it was deep enough for me to be sure that the water could not
freeze clear to the bottom, even in the coldest weather," replied
Paddy, in a matter-of-fact tone.  "I built it up until it was
above water.  Then I built the walls and roof of sticks and mud,
just as you see them there.  Inside I have a fine big room with a
comfortable bed of shredded wood.  I have two openings in the
floor with a long passage leading from each down through the
foundations and opening at the bottom of the pond.  Of course,
these are filled with water.  Some houses have only one passage,
but I like two.  These are the only entrances to my house.

"Every fall I repair my walls and roof, adding sticks and mud and
turf, so that now they are very thick.  Late in the fall I
sometimes plaster the outside with mud.  This freezes hard, and
no enemy who may reach my house on the ice can tear it open.  I
guess that's all."

Peter Rabbit drew a long breath.  "What dreadful lot of work," said
he.  "Do you work all the time?"

Paddy chuckled.  "No, Peter," said he.  And Old Mother Nature nodded
in approval.  "Quite right," said she.  "Quite right.  Are there
any more questions?"

"Do you eat nothing but bark?"  It was Happy Jack Squirrel who spoke.

"Oh, no," replied Paddy.  "In summer I eat berries, mushrooms, grass
and the leaves and stems of a number of plants.  In winter I vary my
fare with lily roots and the roots of alder and willow.  But bark is
my principal food."

Old Mother Nature waited a few minutes, but as there were no more
questions she added a few words.  "Now I hope you understand why I
am so proud of Paddy the Beaver, and why I told you that he is a
lumberman, builder and engineer," said she.  "For the next lesson
we will take up the Rat family."



CHAPTER XIII  A Worker and a Robber

"Now we come to the largest family of the Rodent order, the Rat
family, which of course includes the Mice," said Old Mother Nature,
after calling school to order at the old meeting-place.  "And the
largest member of the family reminds me very much of the one we
learned about yesterday."

"I know!" cried Peter Rabbit.  "You mean Jerry Muskrat."

"Go to the head of the class, Peter," said Old Mother Nature,
smiling.  "Jerry is the very one, the largest member of the Rat
family.  Sometimes he is spoken of as a little cousin of Paddy the
Beaver.  Probably this is because he looks something like a small
Beaver, builds a house in the water as Paddy does, and lives in
very much the same way.  The truth is, he is no more closely related
to Paddy than he is to the rest of you.  He is a true Rat.  He is
called Muskrat because he carries with him a scent called musk.  It
is not an unpleasant scent, like that of Jimmy Skunk, and isn't used
for the same purpose.  Jerry uses his to tell his friends where he
has been.  He leaves a little of it at the places he visits.  Some
folks call him Musquash, but Muskrat is better.

"Jerry is seldom found far from the water and then only when he is
seeking a new home.  He is rather slow and awkward on land; but in
the water he is quite at home, as all of you know who have visited
the Smiling Pool.  He can dive and swim under water a long distance,
though not as far as Paddy the Beaver."

"Has he webbed hind feet like Paddy?" piped up Jumper the Hare.

"Yes and no," replied Old Mother Nature.  "They are not fully webbed
as Paddy's are, but there is a little webbing between some of the
toes, enough to be of great help in swimming.  His tail is of greater
use in swimming than is Paddy's.  It is bare and scaly, but instead
of being flat top and bottom it is flattened on the sides, and he
uses it as a propeller, moving it rapidly from side to side.

"Like Paddy he has a dark brown outer coat, lighter underneath than
on his back and sides, and like Paddy he has a very warm soft under
coat, through which the water cannot get and which keeps him
comfortable, no matter how cold the water is.  You have all seen
his house in the Smiling Pool.  He builds it in much the same way
that Paddy builds his, but instead of sticks he cuts and uses
rushes.  Of course it is not nearly as large as Paddy's house,
because Jerry is himself so much smaller.  It is arranged much the
same, with a comfortable bedroom and one or more passages down to
deep water.  In winter Jerry spends much of his time in this house,
going out only for food.  Then he lives chiefly on lily roots and
roots of other water plants, digging them up and taking them back
to his house to eat.  When the ice is clear you can sometimes see
him swimming below."

"I know," spoke up Peter Rabbit.  "Once I was crossing the Smiling
Pool on the ice and saw him right under me."

"Jerry doesn't build dams, but he sometimes digs little canals
along the bottom where the water isn't deep enough to suit him,"
continued Old Mother Nature.  "Sometimes in the winter Jerry and
Mrs. Jerry share their home with two or three friends.  If there
is a good bank Jerry usually has another home in that.  He makes
the entrance under water and then tunnels back and up for some
distance, where he builds a snug little bedroom just below the
surface of the ground where it is dry.  Usually he has more than
one tunnel leading to this, and sometimes an opening from above.
This is covered with sticks and grass to hide it, and provides
an entrance for fresh air.

"Jerry lives mostly on roots and plants, but is fond of mussels or
fresh-water clams, fish, some insects and, I am sorry to say, young
birds when he can catch them.  Jerry could explain where some of
the babies of Mr. And Mrs. Quack the Ducks have disappeared to.
Paddy the Beaver doesn't eat flesh at all.

"Jerry and Mrs. Jerry have several families in a year, and Jerry
is a very good father, doing his share in caring for the babies.
He and Mrs. Jerry are rather social and enjoy visiting neighbors
of their own kind.  Their voices are a sort of squeak, and you can
often hear them talking among the rushes in the early evening.
That is the hour they like best, though they are abroad during the
day when undisturbed.  Man is their greatest enemy.  He hunts and
traps them for their warm coats.  But they have to watch out for
Hooty the Owl at night and for Reddy Fox and Old Man Coyote whenever
they are on land.  Billy Mink also is an enemy at times, perhaps
the most to be dreaded because he can follow Jerry anywhere.

"Jerry makes little landings of mud and rushes along the edge of
the shore.  On these he delights to sit to eat his meals.  He likes
apples and vegetables and sometimes will travel quite a distance to
get them.  Late in the summer he begins to prepare for winter by
starting work on his house, if he is to have a new one.  He is a
good worker.  There isn't a lazy bone in him.  All things considered,
Jerry is a credit to his family.

"But if Jerry is a credit to his family there is one of its members
who is not and that is--who knows?"

"Robber the Brown Rat," replied Happy Jack Squirrel promptly.  "I
have often seen him around Farmer Brown's barn.  Ugh!  He is an
ugly-looking fellow."

"And he is just as ugly as he looks," replied Old Mother Nature.
"There isn't a good thing I can say for him, not one.  He doesn't
belong in this country at all.  He was brought here by man, and
now he is found everywhere.  He is sometimes called the Norway Rat
and sometimes the Wharf Rat and House Rat.  He is hated by all
animals and by man.  He is big, being next in size to Jerry
Muskrat, savage in temper, the most destructive of any animal I
know, and dirty in his habits.  He is an outcast, but he doesn't
seem to care.

"He lives chiefly around the homes of men, and all his food is
stolen.  That is why he is named Robber.  He eats anything he can
find and isn't the least bit particular what it is or whether it
be clean or unclean.  He gnaws into grain bins and steals the
grain.  He gets into hen-houses and sucks the eggs and kills young
chickens.  He would like nothing better than to find a nest of
your babies, Peter Rabbit."

Peter shivered.  "I'm glad he sticks to the homes of men," said he.

"But he doesn't," declared Old Mother Nature.  "Often in summer he
moves out into the fields, digging burrows there and doing great
damage to crops and also killing and eating any of the furred and
feathered folk he can catch.  But he is not fond of the light of
day.  His deeds are deeds of darkness, and he prefers dark places.
He has very large families, sometimes ten or more babies at a time,
and several families in a year.  That is why his tribe has managed
to overrun the Great World and why they cause such great damage.
Worse than the harm they do with their teeth is the terrible harm
they do to man by carrying dreadful diseases and spreading them--
diseases which cause people to die in great numbers."

"Isn't Robber afraid of any one?" asked Peter.

"He certainly is," replied Old Mother Nature.  "He is in deadly fear
of one whom every one of you fears--Shadow the Weasel.  One good
thing I can say for Shadow is that he never misses a chance to kill
a Rat.  Wherever a Rat can go he can go, and once he finds a colony
he hunts them until he has killed all or driven them away.

"When food becomes scarce, Robber and his family move on to where
it is more plentiful.  Often they make long journeys, a great
number of them together, and do not hesitate to swim a stream that
may be in their path."

"I've never seen Robber," said Peter.  "What kind of a tail does
he have?"

"I might have known you would ask that," laughed Old Mother Nature.
"It is long and slim and has no hair on it.  His fur is very coarse
and harsh and is brown and gray.  He has a close relative called
the Black Rat.  But the latter is smaller and has been largely
driven out of the country by his bigger cousin.  Now I guess this
is enough about Robber.  He is bad, all bad, and hasn't a single
friend in all the Great World."

"What a dreadful thing--not to have a single friend," said
Happy Jack.

"It is dreadful, very dreadful," replied Old Mother Nature.  "But
it is wholly his own fault.  It shows what happens when one becomes
dishonest and bad at heart.  The worst of it is Robber doesn't care.
To-morrow I'll tell you about some of his cousins who are not bad."



CHAPTER XIV  A Trader and a Handsome Fellow

