
The merchant knew that this was meant for them, and Beauty, who was
rather less frightened now that she had passed through so many rooms and
seen nothing of the beast, was quite willing to begin, for her long ride
had made her very hungry. But they had hardly finished their meal when
the noise of the beast's footsteps was heard approaching, and Beauty
clung to her father in terror, which became all the greater when she saw
how frightened he was. But when the beast really appeared, though she
trembled at the sight of him, she made a great effort to hide her horror
and saluted him respectfully.

This evidently pleased the beast. After looking at her he said, in a
tone that might have struck terror into the boldest heart, though he did
not seem to be angry:

"Good-evening, old man. Good-evening, Beauty."

The merchant was too terrified to reply, but Beauty answered sweetly:

"Good-evening, beast."

"Have you come willingly?" asked the beast. "Will you be content to stay
here when your father goes away?"

Beauty answered bravely that she was quite prepared to stay.

"I am pleased with you," said the beast. "As you have come of your own
accord, you may stay. As for you, old man," he added, turning to the
merchant, "at sunrise to-morrow you will take your departure. When the
bell rings get up quickly and eat your breakfast, and you will find the
same horse waiting to take you home; but remember that you must never
expect to see my palace again."

Then turning to Beauty he said:

"Take your father into the next room and help him to choose everything
you think your brothers and sisters would like to have. You will find
two traveling-trunks there; fill them as full as you can. It is only
just that you should send them something very precious as a remembrance
of yourself."

Then he went away after saying, "Good-by, Beauty; good-by, old man"; and
though Beauty was beginning to think with great dismay of her father's
departure, she was afraid to disobey the beast's orders, and they went
into the next room, which had shelves and cupboards all round it. They
were greatly surprised at the riches it contained. There were splendid
dresses fit for a queen, with all the ornaments that were to be worn
with them; and when Beauty opened the cupboards she was quite dazzled by
the gorgeous jewels that lay in heaps upon every shelf. After choosing a
vast quantity, which she divided between her sisters--for she made a
heap of the wonderful dresses for each of them--she opened the last
chest, which was full of gold.

"I think, father," she said, "that as the gold will be more useful to
you we had better take out the other things again and fill the trunks
with it." So they did this; but the more they put in the more room there
seemed to be, and at last they put back all the jewels and dresses they
had taken out, and Beauty even added as many more of the jewels as she
could carry at once; and then the trunks were not too full, but they
were so heavy that an elephant could not have carried them!

"The beast was mocking us," cried the merchant. "He must have pretended
to give us all these things, knowing that I could not carry them away."

"Let us wait and see," answered Beauty. "I cannot believe that he meant
to deceive us. All we can do is to fasten them up and leave them ready."

So they did this and returned to the little room, where, to their
astonishment, they found breakfast ready. The merchant ate his with a
good appetite, as the beast's generosity made him believe that he might
perhaps venture to come back soon and see Beauty. But she felt sure that
her father was leaving her forever, so she was very sad when the bell
rang sharply for the second time and warned them that the time had come
for them to part. They went down into the court-yard, where two horses
were waiting, one loaded with the two trunks, the other for him to ride.
They were pawing the ground in their impatience to start, and, the
merchant was forced to bid Beauty a hasty farewell; and as soon as he
was mounted he went off at such a pace that she lost sight of him in an
instant.

Then Beauty began to cry and wandered back to her own room. But she soon
found that she was very sleepy, and as she had nothing better to do she
lay down and instantly fell asleep. And then she dreamed that she was
walking by a brook bordered with trees and lamenting her sad fate, when
a young prince, handsomer than anyone she had ever seen, and with a
voice that went straight to her heart, came and said to her: "Ah,
Beauty! you are not so unfortunate as you suppose. Here you will be
rewarded for all you have suffered elsewhere. Your every wish shall be
gratified. Only try to find me out, no matter how I may be disguised, as
I love you dearly, and in making me happy you will find your own
happiness. Be as true-hearted as you are beautiful, and we shall have
nothing left to wish for."

"What can I do, prince, to make you happy?" said Beauty.

"Only be grateful," he answered, "and do not trust too much to your
eyes. And above all, do not desert me until you have saved me from my
cruel misery."

After this she thought she found herself in a room with a stately and
beautiful lady, who said to her:

"Dear Beauty, try not to regret all you have left behind you, for you
are destined to a better fate. Only do not let yourself be deceived by
appearances."

Beauty found her dreams so interesting that she was in no hurry to
awake, but presently the clock roused her by calling her name softly
twelve times, and then she got up and found her dressing-table set out
with everything she could possibly want; and when her toilet was
finished she found dinner was waiting in the room next to hers. But
dinner does not take very long when you are all by yourself, and very
soon she sat down cozily in the corner of a sofa and began to think
about the charming prince she had seen in her dream.

"He said I could make him happy," said Beauty to herself. "It seems,
then, that this horrible beast keeps him a prisoner. How can I set him
free? I wonder why they both told me not to trust to appearances. I
don't understand it. But after all it is only a dream, so why should I
trouble myself about it? I had better go and find something to do to
amuse myself."

So she got up and began to explore some of the many rooms of the palace.

The first she entered was lined with mirrors, and Beauty saw herself
reflected on every side, and thought she had never seen such a charming
room. Then a bracelet which was hanging from a chandelier caught her
eye, and on taking it down she was greatly surprised to find that it
held a portrait of her unknown admirer, just as she had seen him in her
dream. With great delight she slipped the bracelet on her arm and went
on into a gallery of pictures, where she soon found a portrait of the
same handsome prince, as large as life and so well painted that as she
studied it he seemed to smile kindly at her.

Tearing herself away from the portrait at last, she passed through into
a room which contained every musical instrument under the sun, and here
she amused herself for a long while in trying some of them and singing
until she was tired. The next room was a library, and she saw everything
she had ever wanted to read, as well as everything she had read, and it
seemed to her that a whole lifetime would not be enough even to read the
names of the books, there were so many. By this time it was growing
dusk, and wax candles in diamond and ruby candlesticks were beginning to
light themselves in every room.

Beauty found her supper served just at the time she preferred to have
it, but she did not see anyone or hear a sound, and though her father
had warned her that she would be alone, she began to find it rather
dull.

But presently she heard the beast coming, and wondered tremblingly if he
meant to eat her up now.

However, as he did not seem at all ferocious, and only said gruffly,
"Good-evening, Beauty," she answered cheerfully and managed to conceal
her terror. Then the beast asked her how she had been amusing herself,
and she told him all the rooms she had seen.

Then he asked if she thought she could be happy in his palace, and
Beauty answered that everything was so beautiful that she would be very
hard to please if she could not be happy. And after about an hour's talk
Beauty began to think that the beast was not nearly so terrible as she
had supposed at first. Then he got up to leave her and said in his gruff
voice:

"Do you love me, Beauty? Will you marry me?"

"Oh! what shall I say?" cried Beauty, for she was afraid to make the
beast angry by refusing.

"Say 'yes' or 'no' without fear," he replied.

"Oh! no, beast," said Beauty hastily.

"Since you will not, good-night, Beauty," he said. And she answered,
"Good-night, beast," very glad to find that her refusal had not provoked
him. And after he was gone she was very soon in bed and asleep and
dreaming of her unknown prince. She thought he came and said to her:

"Ah, Beauty! why are you so unkind to me? I fear I am fated to be
unhappy for many a long day still."

And then her dreams changed, but the charming prince figured in them
all; and when morning came her first thought was to look at the portrait
and see if it was really like him, and she found that it certainly was.

This morning she decided to amuse herself in the garden, for the sun
shone and all the fountains were playing; but she was astonished to find
that every place was familiar to her, and presently she came to the
brook where the myrtle trees were growing where she had first met the
prince in her dream, and that made her think more than ever that he must
be kept a prisoner by the beast. When she was tired she went back to the
palace, and found a new room full of materials for every kind of
work--ribbons to make into bows and silks to work into flowers. Then
there was an aviary full of rare birds, which were so tame that they
flew to Beauty as soon as they saw her and perched upon her shoulders
and her head.

"Pretty little creatures," she said, "how I wish that your cage was
nearer to my room, that I might often hear you sing!"

So saying she opened a door and found to her delight that it led into
her own room, though she had thought it was quite the other side of the
palace.

There were more birds in a room further on, parrots and cockatoos that
could talk, and they greeted Beauty by name. Indeed, she found them so
entertaining that she took one or two back to her room, and they talked
to her while she was at supper; after which the beast paid her his usual
visit and asked the same questions as before, and then with a gruff
"good-night" he took his departure, and Beauty went to bed to dream of
her mysterious prince. The days passed swiftly in different amusements,
and after a while Beauty found out another strange thing in the palace,
which often pleased her when she was tired of being alone. There was one
room which she had not noticed particularly. It was empty, except that
under each of the windows stood a very comfortable chair, and the first
time she had looked out of the window it had seemed to her that a black
curtain prevented her from seeing anything outside. But the second time
she went into the room, happening to be tired, she sat down in one of
the chairs, and instantly the curtain was rolled aside and a most
amusing pantomime was acted before her. There were dances, and colored
lights, and music, and pretty dresses, and it was all so gay that Beauty
was in ecstasies. After that she tried the other seven windows in turn,
and there was some new and surprising entertainment to be seen from each
of them, so that Beauty never could feel lonely any more. Every evening
after supper the beast came to see her, and always before saying
good-night asked her in his terrible voice:

"Beauty, will you marry me?"

And it seemed to Beauty, now she understood him better, that when she
said, "No, beast," he went away quite sad. But her happy dreams of the
handsome young prince soon made her forget the poor beast, and the only
thing that at all disturbed her was to be constantly told to distrust
appearances, to let her heart guide her, and not her eyes, and many
other equally perplexing things, which, consider as she would, she could
not understand.

So everything went on for a long time, until at last, happy as she was,
Beauty began to long for the sight of her father and her brothers and
sisters; and one night, seeing her look very sad, the beast asked her
what was the matter. Beauty had quite ceased to be afraid of him now she
knew that he was really gentle in spite of his ferocious looks and his
dreadful voice. So she answered that she was longing to see her home
once more. Upon hearing this the beast seemed sadly distressed and cried
miserably:

"Ah! Beauty, have you the heart to desert an unhappy beast like this?
What more do you want to make you happy? Is it because you hate me that
you want to escape?"

"No, dear beast," answered Beauty softly, "I do not hate you, and I
should be very sorry never to see you any more, but I long to see my
father again. Only let me go for two months, and I promise to come back
to you and stay for the rest of my life."

The beast, who had been sighing dolefully while she spoke, now replied:

"I cannot refuse you anything you ask, even though it should cost me my
life. Take the four boxes you will find in the room next to your own and
fill them with everything you wish to take with you. But remember your
promise and come back when the two months are over, or you may have
cause to repent it, for if you do not come in good time you will find
your faithful beast dead. You will not need any chariot to bring you
back. Only say good-by to all your brothers and sisters the night before
you come away, and when you have gone to bed turn this ring round upon
your finger and say firmly: 'I wish to go back to my palace and see my
beast again.' Good-night, Beauty. Fear nothing, sleep peacefully, and
before long you shall see your father once more."

As soon as Beauty was alone she hastened to fill the boxes with all the
rare and precious things she saw about her, and only when she was tired
of heaping things into them did they seem to be full.

Then she went to bed, but could hardly sleep for joy. And when at last
she did begin to dream of her beloved prince she was grieved to see him
stretched upon a grassy bank, sad and weary and hardly like himself.

"What is the matter?" she cried.

But he looked at her reproachfully and said:

"How can you ask me, cruel one? Are you not leaving me to my death
perhaps?"

"Ah, don't be so sorrowful!" cried Beauty. "I am only going to assure my
father that I am safe and happy. I have promised the beast faithfully
that I will come back, and he would die of grief if I did not keep my
word!"

"What would that matter to you?" said the prince. "Surely you would not
care?"

"Indeed I should be ungrateful if I did not care for such a kind beast,"
cried Beauty indignantly. "I would die to save him from pain. I assure
you it is not his fault that he is so ugly."

Just then a strange sound woke her--someone was speaking not very far
away; and opening her eyes she found herself in a room she had never
seen before, which was certainly not nearly so splendid as those she was
used to in the beast's palace. Where could she be? She got up and
dressed hastily, and then saw that the boxes she had packed the night
before were all in the room. While she was wondering by what magic the
beast had transported them and herself to this strange place she
suddenly heard her father's voice, and rushed out and greeted him
joyfully. Her brothers and sisters were all astonished at her
appearance, as they had never expected to see her again, and there was
no end to the questions they asked her. She had also much to hear about
what had happened to them while she was away and of her father's journey
home. But when they heard that she had only come to be with them for a
short time, and then must go back to the beast's palace forever, they
lamented loudly. Then Beauty asked her father what he thought could be
the meaning of her strange dreams, and why the prince constantly begged
her not to trust to appearances. After much consideration he answered:

"You tell me yourself that the beast, frightful as he is, loves you
dearly and deserves your love and gratitude for his gentleness and
kindness. I think the prince must mean you to understand that you ought
to reward him by doing as he wishes you to, in spite of his ugliness."

Beauty could not help seeing that this seemed very probable. Still, when
she thought of her dear prince who was so handsome, she did not feel at
all inclined to marry the beast. At any rate, for two months she need
not decide, but could enjoy herself with her sisters. But though they
were rich now and lived in a town again and had plenty of acquaintances,
Beauty found that nothing amused her very much; and she often thought of
the palace where she was so happy, especially as at home she never once
dreamed of her dear prince, and she felt quite sad without him.

Then her sisters seemed to have got used to being without her, and even
found her rather in the way, so she would not have been sorry when the
two months were over but for her father and brothers, who begged her to
stay and seemed so grieved at the thought of her departure that she had
not the courage to say good-by to them. Every day when she got up she
meant to say it at night, and when night came she put it off again,
until at last she had a dismal dream which helped her to make up her
mind. She thought she was wandering in a lonely path in the palace
gardens, when she heard groans which seemed to come from some bushes
hiding the entrance of a cave, and running quickly to see what could be
the matter, she found the beast stretched out upon his side, apparently
dying. He reproached her faintly with being the cause of his distress,
and at the same moment a stately lady appeared and said very gravely:

"Ah, Beauty! you are only just in time to save his life. See what
happens when people do not keep their promises! If you had delayed one
day more you would have found him dead."

Beauty was so terrified by this dream that the next morning she
announced her intention of going back at once, and that very night she
said good-by to her father and all her brothers and sisters, and as soon
as she was in bed she turned her ring round upon her finger and said
firmly, "I wish to go back to my palace and see my beast again," as she
had been told to do.

Then she fell asleep instantly, and only woke up to hear the clock
saying "Beauty, Beauty," twelve times in its musical voice, which told
her at once that she was really in the palace once more. Everything was
just as before, and her birds were so glad to see her; but Beauty
thought she had never known such a long day, for she was so anxious to
see the beast again that she felt as if supper time would never come.

But when it did come and no beast appeared she was really frightened; so
after listening and waiting for a long time she ran down into the garden
to search for him. Up and down the paths and avenues ran poor Beauty,
calling him in vain, for no one answered and not a trace of him could
she find, until at last, quite tired, she stopped for a minute's rest
and saw that she was standing opposite the shady path she had seen in
her dream. She rushed down it, and, sure enough, there was the cave, and
in it lay the beast--asleep, as Beauty thought. Quite glad to have found
him, she ran up and stroked his head, but, to her horror, he did not
move or open his eyes.

"Oh! he is dead, and it is all my fault," said Beauty, crying bitterly.

But then, looking at him again, she fancied he still breathed, and
hastily fetching some water from the nearest fountain, she sprinkled it
over his face, and to her great delight he began to revive.

"Oh, beast! how you frightened me!" she cried. "I never knew how much I
loved you until just now, when I feared I was too late to save your
life."

"Can you really love such an ugly creature as I am?" said the beast
faintly. "Ah, Beauty! you only came just in time. I was dying because I
thought you had forgotten your promise. But go back now and rest. I
shall see you again by and by."

Beauty, who had half expected that he would be angry with her, was
reassured by his gentle voice and went back to the palace, where supper
was awaiting her; and afterward the beast came in as usual and talked
about the time she had spent with her father, asking if she had enjoyed
herself and if they had all been very glad to see her.

Beauty answered politely, and quite enjoyed telling him all that had
happened to her. And when at last the time came for him to go, and he
asked, as he had so often asked before, "Beauty, will you marry me?" she
answered softly: "Yes, dear beast."

As she spoke a blaze of light sprang up before the windows of the
palace; fireworks crackled and guns banged, and across the avenue of
orange trees, in letters all made of fireflies, was written: "Long live
the prince and his bride."

Turning to ask the beast what it could all mean, Beauty found that he
had disappeared, and in his place stood her long-loved prince! At the
same moment the wheels of a chariot were heard upon the terrace and two
ladies entered the room. One of them Beauty recognized as the stately
lady she had seen in her dreams; the other was also so grand and queenly
that Beauty hardly knew which to greet first.

But the one she already knew said to her companion:

"Well, queen, this is Beauty, who has had the courage to rescue your son
from the terrible enchantment. They love one another, and only your
consent to their marriage is wanting to make them perfectly happy."

"I consent with all my heart," cried the queen. "How can I ever thank
you enough, charming girl, for having restored my dear son to his
natural form?"

And then she tenderly embraced Beauty and the prince, who had meanwhile
been greeting the fairy and receiving her congratulations.

"Now," said the fairy to Beauty, "I suppose you would like me to send
for all your brothers and sisters to dance at your wedding?"

And so she did, and the marriage was celebrated the very next day with
the utmost splendor, and Beauty and the prince lived happily ever after.



168

        Peter Asbjoernsen (1812-1885) and Jorgen Moe
        (1813-1882) were the first scientific
        collectors of the folk tales of Norway. Their
        joint interest in folk tales began when they
        were schoolboys wandering on foot through the
        country and listening to peasant stories. This
        interest continued after Moe had become a
        theologian and Asbjoernsen a noted scientist.
        The latter served the government as an expert
        connected with the survey and development of
        his country's natural resources. This resulted
        in taking him to all parts of the land, and he
        never lost an opportunity to hear and copy down
        any folk tale that he found surviving in the
        more isolated districts. In 1842-1844 appeared
        _Norwegian Folk Tales_ by Moe and Asbjoernsen;
        in 1845, _Norwegian Fairy Tales and Folk
        Legends_; and there were subsequent additions.
        The five tales following are from these Norse
        collections. They were first made accessible in
        English in Dasent's _Popular Tales from the
        Norse_ (1858). This book with its long
        introductory essay on the origin and diffusion
        of popular tales constitutes a landmark in the
        study of folklore. It and Dasent's later
        volume, _Tales from the Fjeld_, are still,
        perhaps, the best sources for versions of the
        Norse popular tales. "Why the Bear Is
        Stumpy-tailed" belongs to the class of stories
        which explain how things happened to be as they
        are. It is of great antiquity and is found over
        most of the world. The greatest of all modern
        nature fairy tales, Kipling's _Just So
        Stories_, are of a similar type, though told at
        greater length and, of course, with infinitely
        greater art.


WHY THE BEAR IS STUMPY-TAILED

One day the Bear met the Fox, who came slinking along with a string of
fish he had stolen.

"Whence did you get those?" asked the Bear.

"Oh! my Lord Bruin, I've been out fishing and caught them," said the
Fox.

So the Bear had a mind to learn to fish too, and bade the Fox tell him
how he was to set about it.

"Oh! it's an easy craft for you," answered the Fox, "and soon learnt.
You've only got to go upon the ice, and cut a hole and stick your tail
down into it; and so you must go on holding it there as long as you can.
You're not to mind if your tail smarts a little; that's when the fish
bite. The longer you hold it there the more fish you'll get; and then
all at once out with it, with a cross pull sideways, and with a strong
pull too."

Yes; the Bear did as the Fox had said, and held his tail a long, long
time down in the hole, till it was fast frozen in. Then he pulled it out
with a cross pull, and it snapped short off. That's why Bruin goes about
with a stumpy tail this very day.



169

        The following is from Dasent's _Popular Tales
        from the Norse_ and has long been a favorite
        with the younger children by reason of its
        remarkable compactness and its strong
        accumulative force. The Troll of northern
        stories is the Ogre of those farther south. The
        story has a closing formula which may often
        have been used for other stories as well. (For
        an opening verse formula see the note on "The
        Story of the Three Little Pigs," No. 151.)


THE THREE BILLY-GOATS GRUFF

Once on a time there were three Billy-goats who were to go up to the
hillside to make themselves fat, and the name of all the three was
"Gruff."

On the way up was a bridge over a burn they had to cross; and under the
bridge lived a great ugly Troll, with eyes as big as saucers and a nose
as long as a poker.

So first of all came the youngest billy-goat Gruff to cross the bridge.

"Trip, trap; trip, trap!" went the bridge.

"WHO'S THAT tripping over my bridge?" roared the Troll.

"Oh! it is only I, the tiniest billy-goat Gruff; and I'm going up to the
hill-side to make myself fat," said the billy-goat, with such a small
voice.

"Now, I'm coming to gobble you up," said the Troll.

"Oh, no! pray don't take me. I'm too little, that I am," said the
billy-goat. "Wait a bit till the second billy-goat Gruff comes; he's
much bigger."

"Well! be off with you," said the Troll.

A little while after came the second billy-goat Gruff to cross the
bridge.

"TRIP, TRAP! TRIP, TRAP! TRIP, TRAP!" went the bridge.

"WHO'S THAT tripping over my bridge?" roared the Troll.

"Oh! it's the second billy-goat Gruff, and I'm going up to the hill-side
to make myself fat," said the billy-goat, who hadn't such a small voice.

"Now, I'm coming to gobble you up," said the Troll.

"Oh, no! don't take me. Wait a little till the big billy-goat Gruff
comes; he's much bigger."

"Very well! be off with you," said the Troll.

But just then up came the big billy-goat Gruff.

"TRIP, TRAP! TRIP, TRAP! TRIP, TRAP!" went the bridge, for the
billy-goat was so heavy that the bridge creaked and groaned under him.

"WHO'S THAT tramping over my bridge?" roared the Troll.

"It's I! THE BIG BILLY-GOAT GRUFF," said the billy-goat, who had an ugly
hoarse voice of his own.

"Now, I'm coming to gobble you up," roared the Troll.

        "Well, come along! I've got two spears,
        And I'll poke your eyeballs out at your ears;
        I've got besides two curling-stones,
        And I'll crush you to bits, body and bones."

That was what the big billy-goat said; and so he flew at the Troll and
poked his eyes out with his horns, and crushed him to bits, body and
bones, and tossed him out into the burn, and after that he went up to
the hill-side. There the billy-goats got so fat they were scarce able to
walk home again; and if the fat hasn't fallen off them, why they're
still fat; and so,--

        "Snip, snap, snout,
        This tale's told out."



170

        The following droll seems to indicate that the
        folk had a strain of satirical humor which they
        could use with fine effect. The translation is
        that of Dasent's _Popular Tales from the
        Norse_. (An old English verse form of the same
        story will be found in No. 146.) The old
        proverb about the shoemaker sticking to his
        last is sure to come to mind as one reads, but
        it seems to lose force when we notice that the
        "goody" has no trouble with the mowing, while
        the good "man" has much with the housework!


THE HUSBAND WHO WAS TO MIND THE HOUSE

Once on a time there was a man so surly and cross he never thought his
wife did anything right in the house. So one evening in hay-making time
he came home scolding and swearing and showing his teeth and making a
dust.

"Dear love, don't be so angry; there's a good man," said his goody;
"to-morrow let's change our work. I'll go out with the mowers and mow,
and you shall mind the house at home."

Yes! the husband thought that would do very well. He was quite willing,
he said.

So, early next morning, his goody took a scythe over her neck and went
out into the hay-field with the mowers and began to mow; but the man was
to mind the house, and do the work at home.

First of all, he wanted to churn the butter; but when he had churned a
while, he got thirsty, and went down to the cellar to tap a barrel of
ale. So, just when he had knocked in the bung, and was putting the tap
into the cask, he heard overhead the pig come into the kitchen. Then off
he ran up the cellar steps, with the tap in his hand, as fast as he
could, to look after the pig lest it should upset the churn; but when he
got up, and saw the pig had already knocked the churn over, and stood
there, rooting and grunting amongst the cream which was running all over
the floor, he got so wild with rage that he quite forgot the ale-barrel,
and ran at the pig as hard as he could. He caught it, too, just as it
ran out of doors, and gave it such a kick that piggy lay for dead on the
spot. Then all at once he remembered he had the tap in his hand; but
when he got down to the cellar, every drop of ale had run out of the
cask.

Then he went into the dairy and found enough cream left to fill the
churn again, and so he began to churn, for butter they must have at
dinner. When he had churned a bit, he remembered that their milking cow
was still shut up in the byre, and hadn't had a bit to eat or a drop to
drink all the morning, though the sun was high. Then all at once he
thought 'twas too far to take her down to the meadow, so he'd just get
her up on the house-top--for the house, you must know, was thatched with
sods, and a fine crop of grass was growing there. Now their house lay
close up against a steep down, and he thought if he laid a plank across
to the thatch at the back he'd easily get the cow up.

But still he couldn't leave the churn, for there was his little babe
crawling about on the floor, and "if I leave it," he thought, "the
child is safe to upset it." So he took the churn on his back, and went
out with it; but then he thought he'd better first water the cow before
he turned her out on the thatch; so he took up a bucket to draw water
out of the well; but, as he stooped down at the well's brink, all the
cream ran out of the churn over his shoulders, and so down into the
well.

Now it was near dinner-time, and he hadn't even got the butter yet; so
he thought he'd best boil the porridge, and filled the pot with water
and hung it over the fire. When he had done that, he thought the cow
might perhaps fall off the thatch and break her legs or her neck. So he
got up on the house to tie her up. One end of the rope he made fast to
the cow's neck, and the other he slipped down the chimney and tied round
his own thigh; and he had to make haste, for the water now began to boil
in the pot, and he had still to grind the oatmeal.

So he began to grind away; but while he was hard at it, down fell the
cow off the house-top after all, and as she fell, she dragged the man up
the chimney by the rope. There he stuck fast; and as for the cow, she
hung half way down the wall, swinging between heaven and earth, for she
could neither get down nor up.

And now the goody had waited seven lengths and seven breadths for her
husband to come and call them home to dinner; but never a call they had.
At last she thought she'd waited long enough, and went home. But when
she got there and saw the cow hanging in such an ugly place, she ran up
and cut the rope in two with her scythe. But as she did this, down came
her husband out of the chimney; and so when his old dame came inside the
kitchen, there she found him standing on his head in the porridge pot.



171

        The artistic qualities of "Boots and His
        Brothers," from Dasent's _Popular Tales from
        the Norse_, will impress every reader or
        listener. It belongs to that very numerous
        group of stories dealing with the success of
        the youngest child in the face of opposition,
        mistreatment, or lack of sympathy from others
        of his family. "John was Boots, of course,
        because he was the youngest"; which means that
        it was the rule to give the most menial tasks
        about the house to the youngest. But John had
        the saving trait of always "wondering" about
        things, which led him to find out what would
        always be hidden from his more stupid and less
        imaginative brothers.


BOOTS AND HIS BROTHERS

Once on a time there was a man who had three sons, Peter, Paul, and
John. John was Boots, of course, because he was the youngest. I can't
say the man had anything more than these three sons, for he hadn't one
penny to rub against another; and so he told his sons over and over
again they must go out into the world and try to earn their bread, for
there at home there was nothing to be looked for but starving to death.

Now, a bit off the man's cottage was the King's palace, and you must
know, just against the King's windows a great oak had sprung up, which
was so stout and big that it took away all the light from the King's
palace. The King had said he would give many, many dollars to the man
who could fell the oak, but no one was man enough for that, for as soon
as ever one chip of the oak's trunk flew off, two grew in its stead. A
well, too, the King would have dug, which was to hold water for the
whole year; for all his neighbors had wells, but he hadn't any, and that
he thought a shame. So the King said he would give any one who could dig
him such a well as would hold water for a whole year round, both money
and goods; but no one could do it, for the King's palace lay high, high
up on a hill, and they hadn't dug a few inches before they came upon the
living rock.

But as the King had set his heart on having these two things done, he
had it given out far and wide, in all the churches of his kingdom, that
he who could fell the big oak in the king's court-yard, and get him a
well that would hold water the whole year round, should have the
Princess and half the kingdom. Well! you may easily know there was many
a man who came to try his luck; but for all their hacking and hewing,
and all their digging and delving, it was no good. The oak got bigger
and stouter at every stroke, and the rock didn't get softer either. So
one day those three brothers thought they'd set off and try too, and
their father hadn't a word against it; for even if they didn't get the
Princess and half the kingdom, it might happen they might get a place
somewhere with a good master; and that was all he wanted. So when the
brothers said they thought of going to the palace, their father said
"yes" at once. So Peter, Paul, and Jack went off from their home.

Well! they hadn't gone far before they came to a fir wood, and up along
one side of it rose a steep hillside, and as they went, they heard
something hewing and hacking away up on the hill among the trees.

"I wonder now what it is that is hewing away up yonder?" said Jack.

"You're always so clever with your wonderings," said Peter and Paul both
at once. "What wonder is it, pray, that a woodcutter should stand and
hack up on a hillside?"

"Still, I'd like to see what it is, after all," said Jack; and up he
went.

"Oh, if you're such a child, 'twill do you good to go and take a
lesson," bawled out his brothers after him.

But Jack didn't care for what they said; he climbed the steep hillside
towards where the noise came, and when he reached the place, what do you
think he saw? Why, an axe that stood there hacking and hewing, all of
itself, at the trunk of a fir.

"Good day!" said Jack. "So you stand here all alone and hew, do you?"

"Yes; here I've stood and hewed and hacked a long, long time, waiting
for you," said the Axe.

"Well, here I am at last," said Jack, as he took the axe, pulled it off
its haft, and stuffed both head and haft into his wallet.

So when he got down again to his brothers, they began to jeer and laugh
at him.

"And now, what funny thing was it you saw up yonder on the hillside?"
they said.

"Oh, it was only an axe we heard," said Jack.

So when they had gone a bit farther, they came under a steep spur of
rock, and up there they heard something digging and shoveling.

"I wonder now," said Jack, "what it is digging and shoveling up yonder
at the top of the rock!"

"Ah, you're always so clever with your wonderings," said Peter and Paul
again, "as if you'd never heard a woodpecker hacking and pecking at a
hollow tree."

"Well, well," said Jack, "I think it would be a piece of fun just to see
what it really is."

And so off he set to climb the rock, while the others laughed and made
game of him. But he didn't care a bit for that; up he climbed, and when
he got near the top, what do you think he saw? Why, a spade that stood
there digging and delving.

"Good day!" said Jack. "So you stand here all alone, and dig and delve!"

"Yes, that's what I do," said the Spade, "and that's what I've done this
many a long day, waiting for you."

"Well, here I am," said Jack again, as he took the spade and knocked it
off its handle, and put it into his wallet, and then down again to his
brothers.

"Well, what was it, so rare and strange," said Peter and Paul, "that you
saw up there at the top of the rock?"

"Oh," said Jack, "nothing more than a spade; that was what we heard."

So they went on again a good bit, till they came to a brook. They were
thirsty, all three, after their long walk, and so they lay down beside
the brook to have a drink.

"I wonder now," said Jack, "where all this water comes from!"

"I wonder if you're right in your head," said Peter and Paul, in one
breath. "If you're not mad already, you'll go mad very soon, with your
wonderings. Where the brook comes from, indeed! Have you never heard how
water rises from a spring in the earth?"

"Yes! but still I've a great fancy to see where this brook comes from,"
said Jack.

So up alongside the brook he went, in spite of all that his brothers
bawled after him. Nothing could stop him. On he went. So, as he went up
and up, the brook got smaller and smaller, and at last, a little way
farther on, what do you think he saw? Why, a great walnut, and out of
that the water trickled.

"Good day!" said Jack again. "So you lie here, and trickle and run down
all alone?"

"Yes, I do," said the Walnut, "and here have I trickled and run this
many a long day, waiting for you."

"Well, here I am," said Jack, as he took up a lump of moss, and plugged
up the hole, that the water mightn't run out. Then he put the walnut
into his wallet, and ran down to his brothers.

"Well, now," said Peter and Paul, "have you found out where the water
comes from? A rare sight it must have been!"

"Oh, after all, it was only a hole it ran out of," said Jack; and so the
others laughed and made game of him again, but Jack didn't mind that a
bit.

"After all, I had the fun of seeing it," said he.

So when they had gone a bit farther, they came to the King's palace; but
as every one in the kingdom had heard how they might win the Princess
and half the realm, if they could only fell the big oak and dig the
King's well, so many had come to try their luck that the oak was now
twice as stout and big as it had been at first, for two chips grew for
every one they hewed out with their axes, as I dare say you all bear in
mind. So the King had now laid it down as a punishment, that if any one
tried and couldn't fell the oak, he should be put on a barren island,
and both his ears were to be clipped off. But the two brothers didn't
let themselves be scared by that; they were quite sure they could fell
the oak, and Peter, as he was eldest, was to try his hand first; but it
went with him as with all the rest who had hewn at the oak; for every
chip he cut out, two grew in its place. So the King's men seized him,
and clipped off both his ears, and put him out on the island.

Now Paul, he was to try his luck, but he fared just the same; when he
had hewn two or three strokes, they began to see the oak grow, and so
the King's men seized him too, and clipped his ears, and put him out on
the island; and his ears they clipped closer, because they said he ought
to have taken a lesson from his brother.

So now Jack was to try.

"If you _will_ look like a marked sheep, we're quite ready to clip your
ears at once, and then you'll save yourself some bother," said the King,
for he was angry with him for his brothers' sake.

"Well, I'd like just to try first," said Jack, and so he got leave. Then
he took his axe out of his wallet and fitted it to its haft.

"Hew away!" said he to his axe; and away it hewed, making the chips fly
again, so that it wasn't long before down came the oak.

When that was done, Jack pulled out his spade, and fitted it to its
handle.

"Dig away!" said he to the spade; and so the spade began to dig and
delve till the earth and rock flew out in splinters, and so he had the
well soon dug out, you may think.

And when he had got it as big and deep as he chose, Jack took out his
walnut and laid it in one corner of the well, and pulled the plug of
moss out.

"Trickle and run," said Jack; and so the nut trickled and ran, till the
water gushed out of the hole in a stream, and in a short time the well
was brimful.

Then Jack had felled the oak which shaded the King's palace, and dug a
well in the palace-yard, and so he got the Princess and half the
kingdom, as the King had said; but it was lucky for Peter and Paul that
they had lost their ears, else they had heard each hour and day how
every one said, "Well, after all, Jack wasn't so much out of his mind
when he took to wondering."



172

        For the next story from the Norse group the
        translation by H. L. Braekstad is used. It is
        better known under the more familiar title of
        the Dasent version, "Why the Sea Is Salt."
        Braekstad's translation of the Asbjoernsen and
        Moe stories, illustrated by Norwegian artists,
        appeared in two volumes called _Round the Yule
        Log_ and _Fairy Tales from the North_. The
        story of the magic hand-mill is the story of
        how an evil brother violated the Christmas
        spirit and how his curse was turned into good
        fortune for his better-disposed relative. The
        naive idea of the common folk as to the devil's
        home is especially interesting, as is the
        acceptance of the fact that a Christmas
        celebration includes a fine open fire of wood,
        even in a place of unusual warmth. But perhaps
        we should remember that in Norse mythology the
        evil place would be associated with intense
        cold. Of more importance, however, is the fact
        that the magic quern brings not good but
        disaster to those who try to use it in the
        service of greed.


THE QUERN AT THE BOTTOM OF THE SEA

Once upon a time in the old, old days there were two brothers, one of
whom was rich and the other poor. When Christmas Eve came the poor
brother had not a morsel in the house, neither of meat nor bread; and so
he went to his rich brother and asked for a trifle for Christmas, in
heaven's name. It was not the first time the brother had helped him, but
he was always very close-fisted, and was not particularly glad to see
him this time.

"If you'll do what I tell you, you shall have a whole ham," he said. The
poor brother promised he would, and was very grateful into the bargain.

"There it is, and now go to the devil!" said the rich brother, and threw
the ham across to him.

"Well, what I have promised I must keep," said the other one. He took
the ham, and set out. He walked and walked the whole day, and as it was
getting dark he came to a place where the lights were shining brightly.
"This is most likely the place," thought the man with the ham.

In the woodshed stood an old man with a long white beard, cutting
fire-wood for Christmas.

"Good evening," said he with the ham.

"Good evening to you," said the man. "Where are you going so late?"

"I am going to the devil--that is to say, if I am on the right way,"
answered the poor man.

"Yes, you are quite right; this is his place," said the old man. "When
you get in, they will all want to buy your ham, for ham is scarce food
here; but you must not sell it unless you get the hand-quern, which
stands just behind the door. When you come out again, I'll teach you how
to use it. You will find it useful in many ways."

The man with the ham thanked him for all the information, and knocked at
the door.

When he got in, it happened just as the old man had said. All the imps,
both big and small, flocked around him like ants in a field, and the one
outbid the other for the ham.

"Well," said the man, "my good woman and I were to have it for Christmas
Eve, but since you want it so badly I will let you have it. But if I am
going to part with it, I want that hand-quern which stands behind the
door."

The devil did not like to part with it, and higgled and haggled with the
man, but he stuck to what he had said, and in the end the devil had to
part with the quern.

When the man came out, he asked the old wood-cutter how he was to use
the quern, and when he had learned this, he thanked the old man and set
out homewards as quickly as he could; but after all he did not get home
till the clock struck twelve on Christmas Eve.

"Where in all the world have you been?" said his wife. "Here have I been
sitting, hour after hour, waiting and watching for you, and have not had
as much as two chips to lay under the porridge pot."

"Well, I couldn't get back before," said the man. "I have had a good
many things to look after, and I've had a long way to walk as well; but
now I'll show you something," said he, and put the quern on the table.
He asked it first to grind candles, then a cloth, and then food and
beer, and everything else that was good for Christmas cheer; and as he
spoke the quern brought them forth. The woman crossed herself time after
time and wanted to know where her husband had got the quern from; but
this he would not tell her.

"It does not matter where I got it from; you see the quern is good and
the mill stream is not likely to freeze," said the man. So he ground
food and drink and all good things during Christmas; and the third day
he invited his friends, as he wanted to give them a feast. When the rich
brother saw all that was in the house, he became both angry and furious,
for he begrudged his brother everything.

"On Christmas Eve he was so needy that he came to me and asked for a
trifle in heaven's name; and now he gives a feast, as if he were both a
count and a king," said the brother. "Where did you get all your riches
from?" he said to his brother.

"From just behind the door," he answered, for he did not care to tell
his brother much about it. But later in the evening, when he had drunk a
little freely, he could no longer resist, but brought out the quern.

"There you see that which has brought me all my riches," he said, and so
he let the quern grind first one thing and then another.

When the brother saw this, he was determined to have the quern at all
cost, and at last it was settled he should have it, but three hundred
dollars was to be the price of it. The brother was, however, to keep it
till the harvest began; "for if I keep it so long, I can grind out food
for many years to come," he thought.

During that time you may be sure the quern did not rust, and when the
harvest began the rich brother got it; but the other had taken great
care not to show him how to use it.

It was evening when the rich brother got the quern home, and in the
morning he asked his wife to go out and help the haymakers; he would get
the breakfast ready himself to-day, he said.

When it was near breakfast time he put the quern on the breakfast table.

"Grind herrings and broth, and do it quickly and well," said the man,
and the quern began to bring forth herrings and broth, and filled first
all the dishes and tubs, and afterwards began flooding the whole
kitchen.

The man fiddled and fumbled and tried to stop the quern, but however
much he twisted and fingered it, the quern went on grinding, and in a
little while the broth reached so high that the man was very near
drowning. He then pulled open the parlor door, but it was not long
before the quern had filled the parlor also, and it was just in the very
nick of time that the man put his hand down into the broth and got hold
of the latch, and when he had got the door open, he was soon out of the
parlor, you may be sure. He rushed out, and the herrings and the broth
came pouring out after him, like a stream, down the fields and meadows.

The wife, who was out haymaking, now thought it took too long a time to
get the breakfast ready.

"If my husband doesn't call us soon, we must go home whether or no: I
don't suppose he knows much about making broth, so I must go and help
him," said the wife to the haymakers.

They began walking homewards, but when they had got a bit up the hill
they met the stream of broth with the herrings tossing about in it and
the man himself running in front of it all.

"I wish all of you had a hundred stomachs each!" shouted the man; "but
take care you don't get drowned." And he rushed past them as if the Evil
One was at his heels, down to where his brother lived. He asked him for
heaven's sake to take back the quern, and that at once. "If it goes on
grinding another hour the whole parish will perish in broth and
herrings," he said. But the brother would not take it back on any
account before his brother had paid him three hundred dollars more, and
this he had to do. The poor brother now had plenty of money, and before
long he bought a farm much grander than the one on which his rich
brother lived, and with the quern he ground so much gold that he covered
the farmstead with gold plates and, as it lay close to the shore, it
glittered and shone far out at sea. All those who sailed past wanted to
call and visit the rich man in the golden house, and everybody wanted to
see the wonderful quern, for its fame had spread both far and wide, and
there was no one who had not heard it spoken of.

After a long while there came a skipper who wanted to see the quern; he
asked if it could grind salt. Yes, that it could, said he who owned it;
and when the skipper heard this he wanted the quern by hook or by crook,
cost what it might, for if he had it he thought he need not sail far
away across dangerous seas for cargoes of salt.

At first the man did not want to part with it, but the skipper both
begged and prayed, and at last he sold it and got many, many thousand
dollars for it.

As soon as the skipper had got the quern on his back he did not stop
long, for he was afraid the man would change his mind, and as for asking
how to use it, he had no time to do that; he made for his ship as
quickly as he could, and when he had got out to sea a bit he had the
quern brought up on deck.

"Grind salt, and that both quickly and well," said the skipper, and the
quern began to grind out salt so that it spurted to all sides.

When the skipper had got the ship filled he wanted to stop the quern,
but however much he tried and whatever he did the quern went on
grinding, and the mound of salt grew higher and higher, and at last the
ship sank.

There at the bottom of the sea stands the quern grinding till this very
day, and that is the reason why the sea is salt.



173

        The next seven stories are from the best known
        of all collections of folk tales, the _Kinder
        und Hausmaerchen_ (1812-1815) of the brothers
        Jacob Grimm (1785-1863) and Wilhelm Grimm
        (1786-1859). They worked together as scholarly
        investigators in the field of philology. The
        world is indebted to them for the creation of
        the science of folklore. Other writers, such as
        Perrault, had published collections of
        folklore, but these two brothers were the first
        to collect, classify, and publish folk tales in
        a scientific way. With the trained judgment of
        scholars they excluded from the stories all
        details that seemed new or foreign, and put
        them as nearly as possible into the form in
        which they had been told by the folk. These
        _Household Tales_ were first made accessible in
        English in the translation of Edgar Taylor,
        published in two volumes in 1823 and 1826, and
        revised in 1837. There have been later
        translations, notably the complete one by
        Margaret Hunt in 1884, but the Taylor version
        has been the main source of the popular
        retellings for nearly a hundred years. It
        included only about fifty of the two hundred
        tales, and was illustrated by the famous artist
        George Cruikshank. An edition including all the
        Taylor translations and the original etchings
        was issued in 1868 with an introduction by John
        Ruskin. It is still reprinted under the title,
        _Grimm's Popular Stories_.

        "The Traveling Musicians" is from the Taylor
        translation. It is sometimes called "The Bremen
        Town Musicians," or simply "The Town
        Musicians." The story is widespread, showing
        its great popularity. Jacobs finds "the fullest
        and most dramatic form" in the Irish "Jack and
        His Comrades," which he includes in his _Celtic
        Fairy Tales_. Jacobs also gives an English
        version by way of America, "How Jack Sought His
        Fortune," in his _English Fairy Tales_. The
        successful outcome for these distressed and
        deserving poor adventurers appeals as a fine
        stroke of poetic justice.


THE TRAVELING MUSICIANS

An honest farmer had once an ass that had been a faithful servant to him
a great many years, but was now growing old and every day more and more
unfit for work. His master therefore was tired of keeping him and began
to think of putting an end to him; but the ass, who saw that some
mischief was in the wind, took himself slyly off and began his journey
towards the great city, "for there," thought he, "I may turn musician."

After he had traveled a little way, he spied a dog lying by the
road-side and panting as if he were very tired. "What makes you pant so,
my friend?" said the ass.

"Alas!" said the dog, "my master was going to knock me on the head
because I am old and weak and can no longer make myself useful to him in
hunting; so I ran away: but what can I do to earn my livelihood?"

"Hark ye!" said the ass, "I am going to the great city to turn musician:
suppose you go with me and try what you can do in the same way?" The dog
said he was willing, and they jogged on together.

Before they had gone far, they saw a cat sitting in the middle of the
road and making a most rueful face. "Pray, my good lady," said the ass,
"what's the matter with you? You look quite out of spirits!"

"Ah, me!" said the cat, "how can one be in good spirits when one's life
is in danger? Because I am beginning to grow old and had rather lie at
my ease by the fire than run about the house after the mice, my mistress
laid hold of me and was going to drown me; and though I have been lucky
enough to get away from her, I do not know what I am to live upon."

"Oh!" said the ass, "by all means go with us to the great city. You are
a good night-singer and may make your fortune as a musician." The cat
was pleased with the thought and joined the party.

Soon afterwards, as they were passing by a farmyard, they saw a cock
perched upon a gate, screaming out with all his might and main. "Bravo!"
said the ass; "upon my word you make a famous noise; pray what is all
this about?"

"Why," said the cock, "I was just now saying that we should have fine
weather for our washing-day, and yet my mistress and the cook don't
thank me for my pains, but threaten to cut off my head tomorrow and make
broth of me for the guests that are coming on Sunday."

"Heaven forbid!" said the ass; "come with us, Master Chanticleer; it
will be better, at any rate, than staying here to have your head cut
off! Besides, who knows? If we take care to sing in tune, we may get up
some kind of a concert: so come along with us."

"With all my heart," said the cock: so they all four went on jollily
together.

They could not, however, reach the great city the first day: so when
night came on they went into a wood to sleep. The ass and the dog laid
themselves down under a great tree, and the cat climbed up into the
branches; while the cock, thinking that the higher he sat the safer he
should be, flew up to the very top of the tree, and then, according to
his custom, before he went to sleep, looked out on all sides of him to
see that everything was well. In doing this, he saw afar off something
bright and shining; and calling to his companions said, "There must be a
house no great way off, for I see a light."

"If that be the case," said the ass, "we had better change our quarters,
for our lodging is not the best in the world!"

"Besides," added the dog, "I should not be the worse for a bone or two,
or a bit of meat." So they walked off together towards the spot where
Chanticleer had seen the light; and as they drew near, it became larger
and brighter, till they at last came close to a house in which a gang of
robbers lived.

The ass, being the tallest of the company, marched up to the window and
peeped in. "Well, Donkey," said Chanticleer, "what do you see?"

"What do I see?" replied the ass, "why I see a table spread with all
kinds of good things, and robbers sitting round it making merry."

"That would be a noble lodging for us," said the cock.

"Yes," said the ass, "if we could only get in": so they consulted
together how they should contrive to get the robbers out; and at last
they hit upon a plan. The ass placed himself upright on his hind-legs,
with his fore-feet resting against the window; the dog got upon his
back; the cat scrambled up to the dog's shoulders, and the cock flew up
and sat upon the cat's head. When all was ready, a signal was given, and
they began their music. The ass brayed, the dog barked, the cat mewed,
and the cock screamed; and then they all broke through the window at
once and came tumbling into the room, amongst the broken glass, with a
most hideous clatter! The robbers, who had been not a little frightened
by the opening concert, had now no doubt that some frightful hobgoblin
had broken in upon them, and scampered away as fast as they could.

The coast once clear, our travelers soon sat down and dispatched what
the robbers had left, with as much eagerness as if they had not expected
to eat again for a month. As soon as they had satisfied themselves, they
put out the lights and each once more sought out a resting-place to his
own liking. The donkey laid himself down upon a heap of straw in the
yard; the dog stretched himself upon a mat behind the door; the cat
rolled herself up on the hearth before the warm ashes; and the cock
perched upon a beam on the top of the house; and, as they were all
rather tired with their journey, they soon fell asleep.

But about midnight, when the robbers saw from afar that the lights were
out and that all seemed quiet, they began to think that they had been in
too great a hurry to run away; and one of them, who was bolder than the
rest, went to see what was going on. Finding everything still, he
marched into the kitchen and groped about till he found a match in order
to light a candle; and then, espying the glittering fiery eyes of the
cat, he mistook them for live coals and held the match to them to light
it. But the cat, not understanding this joke, sprung at his face, and
spit, and scratched at him. This frightened him dreadfully, and away he
ran to the back door; but there the dog jumped up and bit him in the
leg; and as he was crossing over the yard the ass kicked him; and the
cock, who had been awakened by the noise, crowed with all his might. At
this the robber ran back as fast as he could to his comrades and told
the captain "how a horrid witch had got into the house, and had spit at
him and scratched his face with her long bony fingers; how a man with a
knife in his hand had hidden himself behind the door and stabbed him in
the leg; how a black monster stood in the yard and struck him with a
club, and how the devil sat upon the top of the house and cried out,
'Throw the rascal up here!'"

After this the robbers never dared to go back to the house; but the
musicians were so pleased with their quarters that they took up their
abode there; and there they are, I dare say, at this very day.



174

        The Taylor translation of Grimm is used for
        "The Blue Light." This tale contains several of
        the elements most popular in children's
        stories. There is merit in distress, an old
        witch, the magic blue light, the little black
        dwarf, and the exceeding great reward at the
        end. From this very story or some variant of it
        Hans Christian Andersen must have drawn the
        inspiration for "The Tinder Box" (No. 196).


THE BLUE LIGHT

A soldier had served a king his master many years, till at last he was
turned off without pay or reward. How he should get his living he did
not know; so he set out and journeyed homeward all day in a very
downcast mood, until in the evening he came to the edge of a deep wood.
The road leading that way, he pushed forward; but before he had gone
far, he saw a light glimmering through the trees, towards which he bent
his weary steps; and soon he came to a hut where no one lived but an old
witch. The poor fellow begged for a night's lodging and something to eat
and drink; but she would listen to nothing. However, he was not easily
got rid of; and at last she said, "I think I will take pity on you this
once; but if I do, you must dig over all my garden for me in the
morning." The soldier agreed very willingly to anything she asked, and
he became her guest.

The next day he kept his word and dug the garden very neatly. The job
lasted all day; and in the evening, when his mistress would have sent
him away, he said, "I am so tired with my work that I must beg you to
let me stay over the night."

The old lady vowed at first she would not do any such thing; but after a
great deal of talk he carried his point, agreeing to chop up a whole
cart-load of wood for her the next day.

This task too was duly ended; but not till towards night, and then he
found himself so tired that he begged a third night's rest; and this too
was given, but only on his pledging his word that he next day would
fetch the witch the blue light that burnt at the bottom of the well.

When morning came she led him to the well's mouth, tied him to a long
rope, and let him down. At the bottom sure enough he found the blue
light as the witch had said, and at once made the signal for her to draw
him up again. But when she had pulled him up so near to the top that she
could reach him with her hands, she said, "Give me the light: I will
take care of it,"--meaning to play him a trick by taking it for herself
and letting him fall again to the bottom of the well.

But the soldier saw through her wicked thoughts, and said, "No, I shall
not give you the light till I find myself safe and sound out of the
well."

At this she became very angry and dashed him, with the light she had
longed for many a year, down to the bottom. And there lay the poor
soldier for a while in despair, on the damp mud below, and feared that
his end was nigh. But his pipe happened to be in his pocket still half
full, and he thought to himself, "I may as well make an end of smoking
you out; it is the last pleasure I shall have in this world." So he lit
it at the blue light and began to smoke.

Up rose a cloud of smoke, and on a sudden a little black dwarf was seen
making his way through the midst of it. "What do you want with me,
soldier?" said he.

"I have no business with you," answered he.

But the dwarf said, "I am bound to serve you in every thing, as lord and
master of the blue light."

"Then first of all, be so good as to help me out of this well." No
sooner said than done: the dwarf took him by the hand and drew him up,
and the blue light of course with him. "Now do me another piece of
kindness," said the soldier: "pray let that old lady take my place in
the well."

When the dwarf had done this, and lodged the witch safely at the bottom,
they began to ransack her treasures; and the soldier made bold to carry
off as much of her gold and silver as he well could. Then the dwarf
said, "If you should chance at any time to want me, you have nothing to
do but to light your pipe at the blue light, and I will soon be with
you."

The soldier was not a little pleased at his good luck, and went to the
best inn in the first town he came to and ordered some fine clothes to
be made and a handsome room to be got ready for him. When all was ready,
he called his little man to him and said, "The king sent me away
penniless and left me to hunger and want. I have a mind to show him that
it is my turn to be master now; so bring me his daughter here this
evening, that she may wait upon me and do what I bid her."

"That is rather a dangerous task," said the dwarf. But away he went,
took the princess out of her bed, fast asleep as she was, and brought
her to the soldier.

Very early in the morning he carried her back; and as soon as she saw
her father, she said, "I had a strange dream last night. I thought I was
carried away through the air to a soldier's house, and there I waited
upon him as his servant." Then the king wondered greatly at such a
story; but told her to make a hole in her pocket and fill it with peas,
so that if it were really as she said, and the whole was not a dream,
the peas might fall out in the streets as she passed through, and leave
a clue to tell whither she had been taken. She did so; but the dwarf had
heard the king's plot; and when evening came, and the soldier said he
must bring him the princess again, he strewed peas over several of the
streets, so that the few that fell from her pocket were not known from
the others; and the people amused themselves all the next day picking up
peas and wondering where so many came from.

When the princess told her father what had happened to her the second
time, he said, "Take one of your shoes with you and hide it in the room
you are taken to."

The dwarf heard this also; and when the soldier told him to bring the
king's daughter again, he said, "I cannot save you this time; it will be
an unlucky thing for you if you are found out--as I think you will." But
the soldier would have his own way. "Then you must take care and make
the best of your way out of the city gate very early in the morning,"
said the dwarf.

The princess kept one shoe on as her father bid her, and hid it in the
soldier's room; and when she got back to her father, he ordered it to be
sought for all over the town; and at last it was found where she had hid
it. The soldier had run away, it is true; but he had been too slow and
was soon caught and thrown into a strong prison and loaded with chains.
What was worse, in the hurry of his flight, he had left behind him his
great treasure, the blue light, and all his gold, and had nothing left
in his pocket but one poor ducat.

As he was standing very sorrowful at the prison grating, he saw one of
his comrades, and calling out to him said, "If you will bring me a
little bundle I left in the inn, I will give you a ducat."

His comrade thought this very good pay for such a job; so he went away
and soon came back bringing the blue light and the gold. Then the
prisoner soon lit his pipe. Up rose the smoke, and with it came his old
friend, the little dwarf. "Do not fear, master," said he: "keep up your
heart at your trial and leave everything to take its course;--only mind
to take the blue light with you."

The trial soon came on; the matter was sifted to the bottom; the
prisoner found guilty, and his doom passed:--he was ordered to be hanged
forthwith on the gallows-tree.

But as he was led out, he said he had one favor to beg of the king.
"What is it?" said his majesty.

"That you will deign to let me smoke one pipe on the road."

"Two, if you like," said the king.

Then he lit his pipe at the blue light, and the black dwarf was before
him in a moment. "Be so good as to kill, slay, or put to flight all
these people," said the soldier: "and as for the king, you may cut him
into three pieces."

Then the dwarf began to lay about him, and soon got rid of the crowd
around: but the king begged hard for mercy; and, to save his life,
agreed to let the soldier have the princess for his wife and to leave
the kingdom to him when he died.



175

        The following tale is from Taylor's translation
        of Grimm. The cheerful industry and the kindly
        gratitude of the shoemaker and his wife,
        together with the gayety of the little elves,
        make the story altogether charming. No doubt
        its popularity was helped by Cruikshank's
        famous accompanying etching, showing the scene
        at the close, in which the two elves "are drawn
        with a point at once so precise and vivacious,
        so full of keen fun and inimitably happy
        invention, that I have not found their equal in
        comic etching anywhere. . . . The picturesque
        details of the room are etched with the same
        felicitous intelligence; but the marvel of the
        work is in the expression of the strange little
        faces, and the energy of the comical wee
        limbs." (Hamerton, _Etching and Etchers_.)


THE ELVES AND THE SHOEMAKER

There was once a shoemaker who worked very hard and was very honest; but
still he could not earn enough to live upon, and at last all he had in
the world was gone, except just leather enough to make one pair of
shoes. Then he cut them all ready to make up the next day, meaning to
get up early in the morning to work. His conscience was clear and his
heart light amidst all his troubles; so he went peaceably to bed, left
all his cares to heaven, and fell asleep. In the morning, after he had
said his prayers, he set himself down to his work, but to his great
wonder, there stood the shoes, all ready made, upon the table. The good
man knew not what to say or think of this strange event. He looked at
the workmanship: there was not one false stitch in the whole job, and
all was so neat and true that it was a complete masterpiece.

That same day a customer came in, and the shoes pleased him so well that
he willingly paid a price higher than usual for them; and the poor
shoemaker with the money bought leather enough to make two pairs more.
In the evening he cut out the work and went to bed early that he might
get up and begin betimes next day: but he was saved all the trouble, for
when he got up in the morning the work was finished ready to his hand.
Presently in came buyers, who paid him handsomely for his goods, so that
he bought leather enough for four pairs more. He cut out the work again
over night, and found it finished in the morning as before; and so it
went on for some time: what was got ready in the evening was always done
by daybreak, and the good man soon became thriving and prosperous again.

One evening about Christmas time, as he and his wife were sitting over
the fire chatting together, he said to her, "I should like to sit up and
watch to-night, that we may see who it is that comes and does my work
for me." The wife liked the thought; so they left a light burning and
hid themselves in the corner of the room behind a curtain that was hung
up there, and watched what should happen.

As soon as it was midnight, there came two little naked dwarfs; and they
sat themselves upon the shoemaker's bench, took up all the work that was
cut out, and began to ply with their little fingers, stitching and
rapping and tapping away at such a rate that the shoemaker was all
amazement and could not take his eyes off for a moment. And on they went
till the job was quite finished, and the shoes stood ready for use upon
the table. This was long before daybreak; and then they bustled away as
quick as lightning.

The next day the wife said to the shoemaker, "These little wights have
made us rich, and we ought to be thankful to them and do them a good
office in return. I am quite vexed to see them run about as they do;
they have nothing upon their backs to keep off the cold. I'll tell you
what, I will make each of them a shirt, and a coat and waistcoat, and a
pair of pantaloons into the bargain; do you make each of them a little
pair of shoes."

The thought pleased the good shoemaker very much; and one evening, when
all the things were ready, they laid them on the table instead of the
work that they used to cut out, and then went and hid themselves to
watch what the little elves would do. About midnight they came in and
were going to sit down to their work as usual; but when they saw the
clothes lying for them, they laughed and were greatly delighted. Then
they dressed themselves in the twinkling of an eye, and danced and
capered and sprang about as merry as could be, till at last they danced
out at the door and over the green; and the shoemaker saw them no more;
but everything went well with him from that time forward, as long as he
lived.



176

        In a note regarding "The Fisherman and His
        Wife," Taylor calls attention to the
        interesting fact that this tale became a great
        favorite after the battle of Waterloo "during
        the fervor of popular feeling on the downfall
        of the late Emperor of France." The catastrophe
        attendant upon Napoleon's ambitious efforts
        seemed to the popular mind to be paralleled by
        the penalty following the final wish of the
        wife "to be like unto God." But observe that
        Taylor, unlike more recent translators, felt
        under the necessity of softening "the boldness
        of the lady's ambition." The versions of the
        verse charm used in summoning the fish differ
        strikingly in the various translations. That of
        Taylor's first edition, used here, seems to fit
        the story better than any other, though tellers
        of the story may, properly enough, not agree.
        Taylor's revised version of 1837 reads:

        "O man of the sea!
        Hearken to me!
        My wife Ilsabill
        Will have her own will,
        And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!"

        Mrs. Hunt's version runs:

        "Flounder, flounder in the sea,
        Come, I pray thee, come to me;
        For my wife, good Ilsabil,
        Wills not as I'd have her will."

        The moral of the story is plain for those who
        need it: Greed overreaches itself. Who grasps
        too much loses all. Don't ride a free horse to
        death.


THE FISHERMAN AND HIS WIFE

There was once a fisherman who lived with his wife in a ditch, close by
the sea-side. The fisherman used to go out all day long a-fishing; and
one day, as he sat on the shore with his rod, looking at the shining
water and watching his line, all on a sudden his float was dragged away
deep under the sea: and in drawing it up he pulled a great fish out of
the water. The fish said to him, "Pray let me live: I am not a real
fish; I am an enchanted prince. Put me in the water again, and let me
go."

"Oh!" said the man, "you need not make so many words about the matter. I
wish to have nothing to do with a fish that can talk; so swim away as
soon as you please." Then he put him back into the water, and the fish
darted straight down to the bottom and left a long streak of blood
behind him.

When the fisherman went home to his wife in the ditch, he told her how
he had caught a great fish, and how it had told him it was an enchanted
prince, and that on hearing it speak he had let it go again.

"Did you not ask it for anything?" said the wife.

"No," said the man, "what should I ask for?"

"Ah!" said the wife, "we live very wretchedly here in this nasty
stinking ditch. Do go back, and tell the fish we want a little cottage."

The fisherman did not much like the business; however he went to the
sea, and when he came there the water looked all yellow and green. And
he stood at the water's edge, and said,

          "O man of the sea!
          Come listen to me,
          For Alice my wife,
          The plague of my life,
        Hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!"

Then the fish came swimming to him, and said, "Well, what does she
want?"

"Ah!" answered the fisherman, "my wife says that when I had caught you,
I ought to have asked you for something before I let you go again. She
does not like living any longer in the ditch, and wants a little
cottage."

"Go home, then," said the fish. "She is in the cottage already."

So the man went home and saw his wife standing at the door of a cottage.
"Come in, come in," said she; "is not this much better than the ditch?"
And there was a parlor, and a bed-chamber, and a kitchen; and behind the
cottage there was a little garden with all sorts of flowers and fruits,
and a court-yard full of ducks and chickens.

"Ah!" said the fisherman, "how happily we shall live!"

"We will try to do so at least," said his wife.

Everything went right for a week or two, and then Dame Alice said,
"Husband, there is not room enough in this cottage; the court-yard and
garden are a great deal too small. I should like to have a large stone
castle to live in; so go to the fish again, and tell him to give us a
castle."

"Wife," said the fisherman, "I don't like to go to him again, for
perhaps he will be angry. We ought to be content with the cottage."

"Nonsense!" said the wife; "he will do it very willingly. Go along, and
try."

The fisherman went; but his heart was very heavy: and when he came to
the sea, it looked blue and gloomy, though it was quite calm, and he
went close to it and said,

          "O man of the sea!
          Come listen to me,
          For Alice my wife,
          The plague of my life,
        Hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!"

"Well, what does she want now?" said the fish.

"Ah!" said the man very sorrowfully, "my wife wants to live in a stone
castle."

"Go home then," said the fish. "She is standing at the door of it
already." So away went the fisherman and found his wife standing before
a great castle.

"See," said she, "is not this grand?" With that they went into the
castle together and found a great many servants there and the rooms all
richly furnished and full of golden chairs and tables; and behind the
castle was a garden, and a wood half a mile long, full of sheep, and
goats, and hares, and deer; and in the court-yard were stables and
cow-houses.

"Well," said the man, "now will we live contented and happy in this
beautiful castle for the rest of our lives."

"Perhaps we may," said the wife; "but let us consider and sleep upon it
before we make up our minds": so they went to bed.

The next morning when Dame Alice awoke, it was broad daylight, and she
jogged the fisherman with her elbow and said, "Get up, husband, and
bestir yourself, for we must be king of all the land."

"Wife, wife," said the man, "why should we wish to be king? I will not
be king."

