stupid, and my book is a disgrace, but I never could get it straight."
And with great trepidation, Rose gave up her funny little accounts.

It really was good in Dr. Alec not to laugh, and Rose felt deeply
grateful when he said in a mildly suggestive tone,

"The dollars and cents seem to be rather mixed, perhaps if I just
straightened them out a bit we should find things all right."

"Please do, and then show me on a fresh leaf how to make mine look nice
and ship-shape as yours do."

As Rose stood by him watching the ease with which he quickly brought
order out of chaos, she privately resolved to hunt up her old arithmetic
and perfect herself in the four first rules, with a good tug at
fractions, before she read any more fairy tales.

"Am I a rich girl, uncle?" she asked suddenly, as he was copying a
column of figures.

"Rather a poor one, I should say, since you had to borrow a ninepence."

"That was your fault, because you forgot my pocket-money. But, really,
shall I be rich by and by?"

"I am afraid you will."

"Why afraid, uncle?"

"Too much money is a bad thing."

"But I can give it away, you know; that is always the pleasantest part
of having it I think."

"I'm glad you feel so, for you can do much good with your fortune if you
know how to use it well."

"You shall teach me, and when I am a woman we will set up a school where
nothing but the three R's shall be taught, and all the children live
on oatmeal, and the girls have waists a yard round," said Rose, with a
sudden saucy smile dimpling her cheeks.

"You are an impertinent little baggage, to turn on me in that way right
in the midst of my first attempt at teaching. Never mind, I'll have an
extra bitter dose for you next time, miss."

"I knew you wanted to laugh, so I gave you a chance. Now, I will be
good, master, and do my lesson nicely."

So Dr. Alec had his laugh, and then Rose sat down and took a lesson in
accounts which she never forgot.

"Now come and read aloud to me; my eyes are tired, and it is pleasant to
sit here by the fire while the rain pours outside and Aunt Jane lectures
upstairs," said Uncle Alec, when last month's accounts had been put in
good order and a fresh page neatly begun.

Rose liked to read aloud, and gladly gave him the chapter in "Nicholas
Nickleby" where the Miss Kenwigses take their French lesson. She did her
very best, feeling that she was being criticised, and hoping that she
might not be found wanting in this as in other things.

"Shall I go on, sir?" she asked very meekly, when the chapter ended.

"If you are not tired, dear. It is a pleasure to hear you, for you read
remarkably well," was the answer that filled her heart with pride and
pleasure.

"Do you really think so, uncle? I'm so glad! Papa taught me, and I read
for hours to him, but I thought perhaps, he liked it because he was fond
of me."

"So am I; but you really do read unusually well, and I'm very glad of
it, for it is a rare accomplishment, and one I value highly. Come here
in this cosy, low chair; the light is better, and I can pull these curls
if you go too fast. I see you are going to be a great comfort as well
as a great credit to your old uncle, Rosy." And Dr. Alec drew her close
beside him with such a fatherly look and tone that she felt it would
be very easy to love and obey him, since he knew how to mix praise and
blame so pleasantly together.

Another chapter was just finished, when the sound of a carriage warned
them that Aunt Jane was about to depart. Before they could go to meet
her, however, she appeared in the doorway looking like an unusually tall
mummy in her waterproof, with her glasses shining like cat's eyes from
the depths of the hood.

"Just as I thought! petting that child to death and letting her sit up
late reading trash. I do hope you feel the weight of the responsibility
you have taken upon yourself, Alec," she said, with a certain grim sort
of satisfaction at seeing things go wrong.

"I think I have a very realising sense of it, sister Jane," answered
Dr. Alec, with a comical shrug of the shoulders and a glance at Rose's
bright face.

"It is sad to see a great girl wasting these precious hours so. Now, my
boys have studied all day, and Mac is still at his books, I've no doubt,
while you have not had a lesson since you came, I suspect."

"I've had five to-day, ma'am," was Rose's very unexpected answer.

"I'm glad to hear it; and what were they, pray?" Rose looked very demure
as she replied,

"Navigation, geography, grammar, arithmetic, and keeping my temper."

"Queer lessons, I fancy; and what have you learned from this remarkable
mixture, I should like to know?"

A naughty sparkle came into Rose's eyes as she answered, with a droll
look at her uncle,

"I can't tell you all, ma'am, but I have collected some useful
information about China, which you may like, especially the teas. The
best are Lapsing Souchong, Assam Pekoe, rare Ankoe, Flowery Pekoe,
Howqua's mixture, Scented Caper, Padral tea, black Congou, and green
Twankey. Shanghai is on the Woosung River. Hong Kong means 'Island of
Sweet waters.' Singapore is 'Lion's Town.' 'Chops' are the boats they
live in; and they drink tea out of little saucers. Principal productions
are porcelain, tea, cinnamon, shawls, tin, tamarinds and opium. They
have beautiful temples and queer gods; and in Canton is the Dwelling of
the Holy Pigs, fourteen of them, very big, and all blind."

The effect of this remarkable burst was immense, especially the fact
last mentioned. It entirely took the wind out of Aunt Jane's sails; it
was so sudden, so varied and unexpected, that she had not a word to say.
The glasses remained fixed full upon Rose for a moment, and then, with
a hasty "Oh, indeed!" the excellent lady bundled into her carriage and
drove away, somewhat bewildered and very much disturbed.

She would have been more so if she had seen her reprehensible
brother-in-law dancing a triumphal polka down the hall with Rose in
honour of having silenced the enemy's battery for once.



Chapter 9--Phebe's Secret

"Why do you keep smiling to yourself, Phebe?" asked Rose, as they were
working together one morning, for Dr. Alec considered house-work the
best sort of gymnastics for girls; so Rose took lessons of Phebe in
sweeping, dusting and bed-making.

"I was thinking about a nice little secret I know, and couldn't help
smiling."

"Shall I know it, sometime?"

"Guess you will."

"Shall I like it?"

"Oh, won't you, though!"

"Will it happen soon?"

"Sometime this week."

"I know what it is! The boys are going to have fireworks on the fourth,
and have got some surprise for me. Haven't they?"

"That's telling."

"Well, I can wait; only tell me one thing is uncle in it?"

"Of course he is; there's never any fun without him."

"Then it's all right, and sure to be nice."

Rose went out on the balcony to shake the rugs, and, having given them
a vigorous beating, hung them on the balustrade to air, while she took a
look at her plants. Several tall vases and jars stood there, and a month
of June sun and rain had worked wonders with the seeds and slips she had
planted. Morning-glories and nasturtiums ran all over the bars, making
haste to bloom. Scarlet beans and honeysuckles were climbing up from
below to meet their pretty neighbours, and the woodbine was hanging its
green festoons wherever it could cling.

The waters of the bay were dancing in the sunshine, a fresh wind stirred
the chestnut-trees with a pleasant sound, and the garden below was full
of roses, butterflies and bees. A great chirping and twittering went on
among the birds, busy with their summer house-keeping, and, far away,
the white-winged gulls were dipping and diving in the sea, where ships,
like larger birds, went sailing to and fro.

"Oh, Phebe, it's such a lovely day, I do wish your fine secret was going
to happen right away! I feel just like having a good time; don't you?"
said Rose, waving her arms as if she was going to fly.

"I often feel that way, but I have to wait for my good times, and don't
stop working to wish for 'em. There, now you can finish as soon as the
dust settles; I must go do my stairs," and Phebe trudged away with the
broom, singing as she went.

Rose leaned where she was, and fell to thinking how many good times
she had had lately, for the gardening had prospered finely, and she was
learning to swim and row, and there were drives and walks, and quiet
hours of reading and talk with Uncle Alec, and, best of all, the old
pain and ennui seldom troubled her now. She could work and play all
day, sleep sweetly all night, and enjoy life with the zest of a healthy,
happy child. She was far from being as strong and hearty as Phebe, but
she was getting on; the once pale cheeks had colour in them now, the
hands were growing plump and brown, and the belt was not much too loose.
No one talked to her about her health, and she forgot that she had "no
constitution." She took no medicine but Dr. Alec's three great remedies,
and they seemed to suit her excellently. Aunt Plenty said it was the
pills; but, as no second batch had ever followed the first, I think the
old lady was mistaken.

Rose looked worthy of her name as she stood smiling to herself over
a happier secret than any Phebe had a secret which she did not know
herself till she found out, some years later, the magic of good health.

    "'Look only,' said the brownie,
     'At the pretty gown of blue,
     At the kerchief pinned about her head,
     And at her little shoe,"'

said a voice from below, as a great cabbage-rose came flying against her
cheek.

"What is the princess dreaming about up there in her hanging-garden?"
added Dr. Alec as she flung back a morning-glory.

"I was wishing I could do something pleasant this fine day; something
very new and interesting, for the wind makes me feel frisky and gay."

"Suppose we take a pull over to the Island? I intended to go this
afternoon; but if you feel more like it now, we can be off at once."

"I do! I do! I'll come in fifteen minutes, uncle. I must just scrabble
my room to rights, for Phebe has got a great deal to do."

Rose caught up the rugs and vanished as she spoke, while Dr. Alec went
in, saying to himself, with an indulgent smile,

"It may upset things a trifle, but half a child's pleasure consists in
having their fun when they want it."

Never did duster flap more briskly than the one Rose used that day, and
never was a room "scrabbled" to rights in such haste as hers. Tables and
chairs flew into their places as if alive; curtains shook as if a gale
was blowing; china rattled and small articles tumbled about as if a
young earthquake was playing with them. The boating suit went on in a
twinkling, and Rose was off with a hop and a skip, little dreaming how
many hours it would be before she saw her pretty room again.

Uncle Alec was putting a large basket into the boat when she arrived,
and before they were off Phebe came running down with a queer, knobby
bundle done up in a water-proof.

"We can't eat half that luncheon, and I know we shall not need so many
wraps. I wouldn't lumber the boat up so," said Rose, who still had
secret scares when on the water.

"Couldn't you make a smaller parcel, Phebe?" asked Dr. Alec, eyeing the
bundle suspiciously.

"No, sir, not in such a hurry," and Phebe laughed as she gave a
particularly large knob a good poke.

"Well, it will do for ballast. Don't forget the note to Mrs. Jessie, I
beg of you."

"No, sir. I'll send it right off," and Phebe ran up the bank as if she
had wings to her feet.

"We'll take a look at the lighthouse first, for you have not been there
yet, and it is worth seeing. By the time we have done that it will be
pretty warm, and we will have lunch under the trees on the Island."

Rose was ready for anything, and enjoyed her visit to the lighthouse on
the Point very much, especially climbing up the narrow stairs and going
inside the great lantern. They made a long stay, for Dr. Alec seemed in
no hurry to go, and kept looking through his spy-glass as if he expected
to discover something remarkable on sea or land. It was past twelve
before they reached the Island, and Rose was ready for her lunch long
before she got it.

"Now this is lovely! I do wish the boys were here. Won't it be nice to
have them with us all their vacation? Why, it begins to-day, doesn't it?
Oh, I wish I'd remembered it sooner, and perhaps they would have come
with us," she said, as they lay luxuriously eating sandwiches under the
old apple-tree.

"So we might. Next time we won't be in such a hurry. I expect the lads
will take our heads off when they find us out," answered Dr. Alec,
placidly drinking cold tea.

"Uncle, I smell a frying sort of a smell," Rose said, pausing suddenly
as she was putting away the remains of the lunch half an hour later.

"So do I; it is fish, I think."

For a moment they both sat with their noses in the air, sniffing like
hounds; then Dr. Alec sprang up, saying with great decision,

"Now, this won't do! No one is permitted on this island without asking
leave. I must see who dares to fry fish on my private property."

Taking the basket on one arm and the bundle on the other, he strode away
towards the traitorous smell, looking as fierce as a lion, while Rose
marched behind under her umbrella.

"We are Robinson Crusoe and his man Friday going to see if the savages
have come," she said presently, for her fancy was full of the dear old
stories that all children love so well.

"And there they are! Two tents and two boats, as I live! These rascals
mean to enjoy themselves, that's evident."

"There ought to be more boats and no tents. I wonder where the prisoners
are?"

"There are traces of them," and Dr. Alec pointed to the heads and tails
of fishes strewn on the grass.

"And there are more," said Rose, laughing, as she pointed to a scarlet
heap of what looked like lobsters.

"The savages are probably eating their victims now; don't you hear the
knives rattle in that tent?"

"We ought to creep up and peep; Crusoe was cautious, you know, and
Friday scared out of his wits," added Rose, still keeping up the joke.

"But this Crusoe is going to pounce upon them, regardless of
consequences. If I am killed and eaten, you seize the basket and run for
the boat; there are provisions enough for your voyage home."

With that Uncle Alec slipped round to the front of the tent and, casting
in the big bundle like a bomb-shell, roared out, in a voice of thunder,

"Pirates, surrender!"

A crash, a shout, a laugh, and out came the savages, brandishing knives
and forks, chicken bones, and tin mugs, and all fell upon the intruder,
pommelling him unmercifully as they cried,

"You came too soon! We are not half ready! You've spoilt it all! Where
is Rose?"

"Here I am," answered a half-stifled voice, and Rose was discovered
sitting on the pile of red flannel bathing clothes, which she had
mistaken for lobsters, and where she had fallen in a fit of merriment
when she discovered that the cannibals were her merry cousins.

"You good-for-nothing boys! You are always bursting out upon me in some
ridiculous way, and I always get taken in because I'm not used to such
pranks. Uncle is as bad as the rest, and it's great fun," she said,
as the lads came round her, half scolding, half welcoming, and wholly
enjoying the double surprise.

"You were not to come till afternoon, and mamma was to be here to
receive you. Everything is in a mess now, except your tent; we got that
in order the first thing, and you can sit there and see us work," said
Archie, doing the honours as usual.

"Rose felt it in her bones, as Dolly says, that something was in the
wind, and wanted to be off at once. So I let her come, and should
have kept her away an hour longer if your fish had not betrayed you,"
explained Uncle Alec, subsiding from a ferocious Crusoe into his
good-natured self again.

"As this seat is rather damp, I think I'll rise," said Rose, as the
excitement lessened a little.

Several fishy hands helped her up, and Charlie said, as he scattered the
scarlet garments over the grass with an oar,

"We had a jolly good swim before dinner, and I told the Brats to spread
these to dry. Hope you brought your things, Rose, for you belong to the
Lobsters, you know, and we can have no end of fun teaching you to dive
and float and tread water."

"I didn't bring anything--" began Rose, but was interrupted by the Brats
(otherwise Will and Geordie), who appeared bearing the big bundle, so
much demoralised by its fall that a red flannel tunic trailed out at one
end and a little blue dressing-gown at the other, while the knobs proved
to be a toilet-case, rubbers, and a silver mug.

"Oh, that sly Phebe! This was the secret, and she bundled up those
things after I went down to the boat," cried Rose, with sparkling eyes.

"Guess something is smashed inside, for a bit of glass fell out,"
observed Will, as they deposited the bundle at her feet.

"Catch a girl going anywhere without a looking-glass. We haven't got one
among the whole lot of us," added Mac, with masculine scorn.

"Dandy has; I caught him touching up his wig behind the trees after our
swim," cut in Geordie, wagging a derisive finger at Steve, who promptly
silenced him by a smart rap on the head with the drum-stick he had just
polished off.

"Come, come, you lazy lubbers, fall to work, or we shall not be ready
for mamma. Take Rose's things to her tent, and tell her all about it,
Prince. Mac and Steve, you cut away and bring up the rest of the straw;
and you small chaps, clear off the table, if you have stuffed all you
can. Please, uncle, I'd like your advice about the boundary lines and
the best place for the kitchen."

Everyone obeyed the chief, and Rose was escorted to her tent by Charlie,
who devoted himself to her service. She was charmed with her quarters,
and still more so with the programme which he unfolded before her as
they worked.

"We always camp out somewhere in vacation, and this year we thought we'd
try the Island. It is handy, and our fireworks will show off well from
here."

"Shall we stay over the Fourth? Three whole days! Oh, me! what a frolic
it will be!"

"Bless your heart, we often camp for a week, we big fellows; but this
year the small chaps wanted to come, so we let them. We have great
larks, as you'll see; for we have a cave and play Captain Kidd, and have
shipwrecks, and races, and all sorts of games. Arch and I are rather
past that kind of thing now, but we do it to please the children," added
Charlie, with a sudden recollection of his sixteen years.

"I had no idea boys had such good times. Their plays never seemed a bit
interesting before. But I suppose that was because I never knew any boys
very well, or perhaps you are unusually nice ones," observed Rose, with
an artless air of appreciation that was very flattering.

"We are a pretty clever set, I fancy; but we have a good many
advantages, you see. There are a tribe of us, to begin with; then our
family has been here for ages, and we have plenty of 'spondulics,' so
we can rather lord it over the other fellows, and do as we like. There,
ma'am, you can hang your smashed glass on that nail and do up your back
hair as fine as you please. You can have a blue blanket or a red one,
