what to do, so I went and got some water, but he motioned it away, and
wouldn't drink it, but kept on groanin'.

"'He mustn't be left here to die without any assistance,' thinks I, so I
ran off as fast I could to find the doctor.

"I found him eatin' dinner----

"Come quick," says I, "to old Keziah Onthank's. He's dyin', as sure as
my name is Jehoshaphat."

"Well," said the doctor, "die or no die, I can't come till I've eaten my
dinner."

"But he's dyin', doctor."

"Oh, nonsense. Talk of old Keziah Onthank's dyin'. He'll live longer
than I shall."

"I recollect I thought the doctor very unfeelin' to talk so of a fellow
creetur, just stepping into eternity, as a body may say. However, it's
no use drivin' a horse that's made up his mind he won't go, so although
I did think the doctor dreadful deliberate about eatin' his dinner (he
always would take half an hour for it), I didn't dare to say a word
for fear he wouldn't come at all. You see the doctor was dreadful
independent, and was bent on havin' his own way, pretty much, though for
that matter I think it's the case with most folks. However, to come back
to my story, I didn't feel particularly comfortable while I was waitin'
his motions.

"After a long while the doctor got ready. I was in such a hurry that I
actilly pulled him along, he walked so slow; but he only laughed, and
I couldn't help thinkin' that doctorin' had a hardinin' effect on the
heart. I was determined if ever I fell sick I wouldn't send for him.

"At last we got there. I went in all of a tremble, and crept to the bed,
thinkin' I should see his dead body. But he wasn't there at all. I felt
a little bothered you'd better believe."

"Well," said the doctor, turning to me with a smile, "what do you think
now?"

"I don't know what to think," said I.

"Then I'll help you," said he.

"So sayin', he took me to the winder, and what do you think I see? As
sure as I'm alive, there was the old man in the back yard, a squattin'
down and pickin' up chips."

"And is he still living?"

"Yes, or he was when I come along last. The doctor's been dead these
ten years. He told me old Keziah would outlive him, but I didn't believe
him. I shouldn't be surprised if he lived forever."

Paul listened with amused interest to this and other stories with which
his companion beguiled the way. They served to divert his mind from
the realities of his condition, and the uncertainty which hung over his
worldly prospects.




XII.

ON THE BRINK OF DISCOVERY.


"If you're in no great hurry to go to New York," said the pedler, "I
should like to have you stay with me for a day or two. I live about
twenty-five miles from here, straight ahead, so it will be on your way.
I always manage to get home by Saturday night if it is any way possible.
It doesn't seem comfortable to be away Sunday. As to-day is Friday, I
shall get there to-morrow. So you can lie over a day and rest yourself."

Paul felt grateful for this unexpected invitation. It lifted quite a
load from his mind, since, as the day declined, certain anxious thoughts
as to where he should find shelter, had obtruded themselves. Even now,
the same trouble would be experienced on Monday night, but it is the
characteristic of youth to pay little regard to anticipated difficulties
as long as the present is provided for.

It must not be supposed that the pedler neglected his business on
account of his companion. On the road he had been traveling the houses
were few and far between. He had, therefore, but few calls to make.
Paul remarked, however, that when he did call he seldom failed to sell
something.

"Yes," said Mr. Stubbs, on being interrogated, "I make it a p'int to
sell something, if it's no more than a tin dipper. I find some hard
cases sometimes, and sometimes I have to give it up altogether. I can't
quite come up to a friend of mine, Daniel Watson, who used to be in
the same line of business. I never knew him to stop at a place without
selling something. He had a good deal of judgment, Daniel had, and knew
just when to use 'soft sodder,' and when not to. On the road that he
traveled there lived a widow woman, who had the reputation of being as
ugly, cross-grained a critter as ever lived. People used to say that
it was enough to turn milk sour for her even to look at it. Well, it so
happened that Daniel had never called there. One night he was boasting
that he never called at a house without driving a bargain, when one
of the company asked him, with a laugh, if he had ever sold the widow
anything.

"Why, no," said Daniel, "I never called there; but I've no doubt I
could."

"What'll you bet of it?"

"I'm not a betting man," said Daniel, "but I feel so sure of it that I
don't mind risking five dollars."

"Agreed."

"The next morning Daniel drove leisurely up to the widow's door and
knocked. She had a great aversion to pedlers, and declared they were
cheats, every one of them. She was busy sweeping when Daniel knocked.
She came to the door in a dreadful hurry, hoping it might be an old
widower in the neighborhood that she was trying to catch. When she saw
how much she was mistaken she looked as black as a thundercloud.

"Want any tin ware to-day, ma'am?" inquired Daniel, noways discomposed.

"No, sir," snapped she.

"Got all kinds,--warranted the best in the market. Couldn't I sell you
something?"

"Not a single thing," said she, preparing to shut the door; but Daniel,
knowing all would then be lost, stepped in before she could shut it
quite to, and began to name over some of the articles he had in his
wagon.

"You may talk till doomsday," said the widow, as mad as could be, "and
it won't do a particle of good. Now, you've got your answer, and you'd
better leave the house before you are driven out."

"Brooms, brushes, lamps----"

"Here the widow, who had been trying to keep in her anger, couldn't hold
out any longer. She seized the broom she had been sweeping with, and
brought it down with a tremendous whack upon Daniel's back. You can
imagine how hard it was, when I tell you that the force of the blow
snapped the broom in the middle. You might have thought Daniel would
resent it, but he didn't appear to notice it, though it must have hurt
him awful. He picked up the pieces, and handing them, with a polite bow,
to the widow, said, 'Now, ma'am, I'm sure you need a new broom. I've got
some capital ones out in the cart.'"

"The widow seemed kind of overpowered by his coolness. She hardly knew
what to say or what to think. However, she had broken her old broom,
that was certain, and must have a new one; so when Daniel ran out and
brought in a bundle of them, she picked out one and paid for it without
saying a word; only, when Daniel asked if he might have the pleasure
of calling again, she looked a little queer, and told him that if he
considered it a pleasure, she had no objection."

"And did he call again?"

"Yes, whenever he went that way. The widow was always very polite to him
after that, and, though she had a mortal dislike to pedlers in general,
she was always ready to trade with him. Daniel used to say that he
gained his bet and the widow's custom at ONE BLOW."

They were now descending a little hill at the foot of which stood a
country tavern. Here Mr. Stubbs declared his intention of spending the
night. He drove into the barn, the large door of which stood invitingly
open, and unharnessed his horse, taking especial care to rub him down
and set before him an ample supply of provender.

"I always take care of Goliah myself," said he. "He's a good friend to
me, and it's no more than right that I should take good care of him.
Now, we'll go into the house, and see what we can get for supper."

He was surprised to see that Paul hung back, and seemed disinclined to
follow.

"What's the matter?" asked Mr. Stubbs, in surprise. "Why don't you
come?"

"Because," said Paul, looking embarrassed, "I've got no money."

"Well, I have," said Mr. Stubbs, "and that will answer just as well, so
come along, and don't be bashful. I'm about as hungry as a bear, and I
guess you are too."

Before many minutes, Paul sat down to a more bountiful repast than
he had partaken of for many a day. There were warm biscuits and fresh
butter, such as might please the palate of an epicure, while at the
other end of the table was a plate of cake, flanked on one side by an
apple-pie, on the other by one of pumpkin, with its rich golden hue,
such as is to be found in its perfection, only in New England. It will
scarcely be doubted that our hungry travellers did full justice to the
fare set before them.

When they had finished, they went into the public room, where were
engaged some of the village worthies, intent on discussing the news
and the political questions of the day. It was a time of considerable
political excitement, and this naturally supplied the topic of
conversation. In this the pedler joined, for his frequent travel on this
route had made him familiarly acquainted with many of those present.

Paul sat in a corner, trying to feel interested in the conversation; but
the day had been a long one, and he had undergone an unusual amount of
fatigue. Gradually, his drowsiness increased. The many voices fell upon
his ears like a lullaby, and in a few minutes he was fast asleep.

Early next morning they were up and on their way. It was the second
morning since Paul's departure. Already a sense of freedom gave his
spirits unwonted elasticity, and encouraged him to hope for the best.
Had his knowledge of the future been greater, his confidence might have
been less. But would he have been any happier?

So many miles separated him from his late home, that he supposed himself
quite safe from detection. A slight circumstance warned him that he must
still be watchful and cautious.

As they were jogging easily along, they heard the noise of wheels at a
little distance. Paul looked up. To his great alarms he recognized
in the driver of the approaching vehicle, one of the selectmen of
Wrenville.

"What's the matter?" asked his companion, noticing his sudden look of
apprehension.

Paul quickly communicated the ground of his alarm.

"And you are afraid he will want to carry you back, are you?"

"Yes."

"Not a bit of it. We'll circumvent the old fellow, unless he's sharper
than I think he is. You've only got to do as I tell you."

To this Paul quickly agreed.

The selectman was already within a hundred rods. He had not yet
apparently noticed the pedler's cart, so that this was in our hero's
favor. Mr. Stubbs had already arranged his plan of operations.

"This is what you are to do, Paul," said he, quickly. "Cock your hat on
the side of your head, considerably forward, so that he can't see much
of your face. Then here's a cigar to stick in your mouth. You can make
believe that you are smoking. If you are the sort of boy I reckon you
are, he'll never think it's you."

Paul instantly adopted this suggestion.

Slipping his hat to one side in the jaunty manner characteristic of
young America, he began to puff very gravely at a cigar the pedler
handed him, frequently taking it from his mouth, as he had seen older
persons do, to knock away the ashes. Nothwithstanding his alarm, his
love of fun made him enjoy this little stratagem, in which he bore his
part successfully.

The selectman eyed him intently. Paul began to tremble from fear of
discovery, but his apprehensions were speedily dissipated by a remark of
the new-comer, "My boy, you are forming a very bad habit."

Paul did not dare to answer lest his voice should betray him. To his
relief, the pedler spoke----

"Just what I tell him, sir, but I suppose he thinks he must do as his
father does."

By this time the vehicles had passed each other, and the immediate peril
was over.

"Now, Paul," said his companion, laughing, "I'll trouble you for that
cigar, if you have done with it. The old gentleman's advice was good. If
I'd never learned to smoke, I wouldn't begin now."

Our hero was glad to take the cigar from his mouth. The brief time he
had held it was sufficient to make him slightly dizzy.




XIII.

PAUL REACHES THE CITY.


Towards evening they drew up before a small house with a neat yard in
front.

"I guess we'll get out here," said Mr. Stubbs. "There's a gentleman
lives here that I feel pretty well acquainted with. Shouldn't wonder if
he'd let us stop over Sunday. Whoa, Goliah, glad to get home, hey?" as
the horse pricked up his ears and showed manifest signs of satisfaction.

"Now, youngster, follow me, and I guess I can promise you some supper,
if Mrs. Stubbs hasn't forgotten her old tricks."

They passed through the entry into the kitchen, where Mrs. Stubbs was
discovered before the fire toasting slices of bread.

"Lor, Jehoshaphat," said she, "I didn't expect you so soon," and she
looked inquiringly at his companion.

"A young friend who is going to stay with us till Monday," explained the
pedler. "His name is Paul Prescott."

"I'm glad to see you, Paul," said Mrs. Stubbs with a friendly smile.
"You must be tired if you've been traveling far. Take a seat. Here's a
rocking-chair for you."

This friendly greeting made Paul feel quite at home. Having no children,
the pedler and his wife exerted themselves to make the time pass
pleasantly to their young acquaintance. Paul could not help contrasting
them with Mr. and Mrs. Mudge, not very much to the advantage of
the latter. On Sunday he went to church with them, and the peculiar
circumstances in which he was placed, made him listen to the sermon with
unusual attention. It was an exposition of the text, "My help cometh
from the Lord," and Paul could not help feeling that it was particularly
applicable to his own case. It encouraged him to hope, that, however
uncertain his prospects appeared, God would help him if he put his trust
in Him.

On Monday morning Paul resumed his journey, with an ample stock of
provisions supplied by Mrs. Stubbs, in the list of which doughnuts
occupied a prominent place; this being at the particular suggestion of
Mr. Stubbs.

Forty or fifty miles remained to be traversed before his destination
would be reached. The road was not a difficult one to find, and he made
it out without much questioning. The first night, he sought permission
to sleep in a barn.

He met with a decided refusal.

He was about to turn away in disappointment, when he was called back.

"You are a little too fast, youngster. I said I wouldn't let you sleep
in my barn, and I won't; but I've got a spare bed in the house, and if
you choose you shall occupy it."

Under the guise of roughness, this man had a kind heart. He inquired
into the particulars of Paul's story, and at the conclusion terrified
him by saying that he had been very foolish and ought to be sent back.
Nevertheless, when Paul took leave of him the next morning, he did not
go away empty-handed.

"If you must be so foolish as to set up for yourself, take this," said
the farmer, placing half a dollar in his hand. "You may reach the city
after the banks are closed for the day, you know," he added, jocularly.

But it was in the morning that Paul came in sight of the city. He
climbed up into a high tree, which, having the benefit of an elevated
situation, afforded him an extensive prospect. Before him lay the great
city of which he had so often heard, teeming with life and activity.

Half in eager anticipation, half in awe and wonder at its vastness, our
young pilgrim stood upon the threshold of this great Babel.

Everything looked new and strange. It had never entered Paul's mind,
that there could be so many houses in the whole State as now rose up
before him. He got into Broadway, and walked on and on thinking that
the street must end somewhere. But the farther he walked the thicker the
houses seemed crowded together. Every few rods, too, he came to a cross
street, which seemed quite as densely peopled as the one on which he was
walking. One part of the city was the same as another to Paul, since
he was equally a stranger to all. He wandered listlessly along, whither
fancy led. His mind was constantly excited by the new and strange
objects which met him at every step.

As he was looking in at a shop window, a boy of about his own age,
stopped and inquired confidentially, "when did you come from the
country?"

"This morning," said Paul, wondering how a stranger should know that he
was a country boy.

"Could you tell me what is the price of potatoes up your way?" asked the
other boy, with perfect gravity.

"I don't know," said Paul, innocently.

"I'm sorry for that," said the other, "as I have got to buy some for my
wife and family."

Paul stared in surprise for a moment, and then realizing that he was
being made game of, began to grow angry.

"You'd better go home to your wife and family," he said with spirit, "or
you may get hurt."

"Bully for you, country!" answered the other with a laugh. "You're not
as green as you look."

"Thank you," said Paul, "I wish I could say as much for you."

Tired with walking, Paul at length sat down in a doorway, and watched
with interest the hurrying crowds that passed before him. Everybody
seemed to be in a hurry, pressing forward as if life and death depended
on his haste. There were lawyers with their sharp, keen glances;
merchants with calculating faces; speculators pondering on the chances
of a rise or fall in stocks; errand boys with bundles under their arms;
business men hurrying to the slip to take the boat for Brooklyn or
Jersey City,--all seemed intent on business of some kind, even to the
ragged newsboys who had just obtained their supply of evening papers,
and were now crying them at the top of their voices,--and very
discordant ones at that, so Paul thought. Of the hundreds passing and
repassing before him, every one had something to do. Every one had a
home to go to. Perhaps it was not altogether strange that a feeling of
desolation should come over Paul as he recollected that he stood alone,
homeless, friendless, and, it might be, shelterless for the coming
night.

"Yet," thought he with something of hopefulness, "there must be
something for me to do as well as the rest."

Just then a boy some two years older than Paul paced slowly by, and
in passing, chanced to fix his eyes upon our hero. He probably saw
something in Paul which attracted him, for he stepped up and extending
his hand, said, "why, Tom, how came you here?"

"My name isn't Tom," said Paul, feeling a little puzzled by this
address.

"Why, so it isn't. But you look just like my friend, Tom Crocker."

To this succeeded a few inquiries, which Paul unsuspiciously answered.

"Do you like oysters?" inquired the new-comer, after a while.

"Very much."

"Because I know of a tip top place to get some, just round the corner.
Wouldn't you like some?"

Paul thanked his new acquaintance, and said he would.

Without more ado, his companion ushered him into a basement room near
by. He led the way into a curtained recess, and both boys took seats one
on each side of a small table.

"Just pull the bell, will you, and tell the waiter we'll have two
stews."

Paul did so.

"I suppose," continued the other, "the governor wouldn't like it much if
he knew where I was."

"The governor!" repeated Paul. "Why, it isn't against the laws, is it?"

"No," laughed the other. "I mean my father. How jolly queer you are!" He
