
"You are entirely mistaken, Mr. Wade. I am not a thief. I never stole
anything in my life."

"It is very easy to say that," sneered John Wade. "You and Mrs. Bradley
were the only persons present when I showed the articles, and I suppose
you won't pretend that she stole them?"

"No, sir; though she appears to agree with you that I am a thief. I
never thought of accusing her," replied Frank.

"Mr. Wade," said the housekeeper, "I feel that it is my duty to insist
upon search being made in my room."

"Do you make the same offer?" asked John Wade, turning to Frank.

"Yes, sir," answered our hero, proudly. "I wish you to satisfy yourself
that I am not a thief. If you will come to my room at once, Mr. Wade,
you and Mrs. Bradley, I will hand you the key of my trunk."

The two followed him upstairs, exulting wickedly in his discomfiture,
which they had reason to forsee.

He handed his key to his artful enemy, and the latter bending over,
opened the trunk, which contained all our hero's small possessions.

He raised the pile of clothes, and, to Frank's dismay, disclosed the
missing pocketbook and sleeve-buttons in the bottom of the trunk.

"What have you got to say for yourself now, you young villain?" demanded
John Wade, in a loud voice.

"I don't understand it," Frank said, in a troubled tone. "I don't know
how the things came there. I didn't put them there."

"Probably they crept in themselves," sneered John.

"Someone put them there," said Frank, pale, but resolute; "some wicked
person, who wanted to get me into trouble."

"What do you mean by that, you young vagabond?" demanded John Wade,
suspiciously.

"I mean what I say," he asserted. "I am away all day, and nothing is
easier than to open my trunk and put articles in, in order to throw
suspicion on me."

"Look here, you rascal!" said John Wade, roughly. "I shall treat you
better than you deserve. I won't give you over to the police out of
regard for my uncle, but you must leave this house and never set foot in
it again. It will be the worse for you if you do."

John Wade and the housekeeper left the room, and our hero was left to
realize the misfortune which had overwhelmed him.

Frank arose at an early hour the next morning and left the house. It was
necessary for him to find a new home at once in order to be at the
store in time. He bought a copy of the Sun and turned to the advertising
columns. He saw a cheap room advertised near the one he had formerly
occupied. Finding his way there he rang the bell.

The door was opened by a slatternly-looking woman, who looked as if she
had just got up.

"I see by the Sun you have a room to let," said Frank.

"Yes; do you want to see it now?"

"I should like to."

"Come upstairs and I will show you the room."

The room proved to be small, and by no means neat in appearance, but
the rent was only a dollar and a quarter a week, and Frank felt that he
could not afford to be particular, so he quickly closed the bargain.

The next day, about eleven o'clock in the forenoon, he was surprised at
seeing Mrs. Bradley enter the store and thread her way to that part of
the counter where her nephew was stationed. She darted one quick look at
him, but gave him no sign of recognition. His heart sank within him, for
he had a presentiment that her visit boded fresh evil for him.



CHAPTER XV

FROM BAD TO WORSE


Frank's misgivings were not without good cause. The housekeeper's call
at the store was connected with him. How, will be understood from a
conversation which took place that morning between her and John Wade.

"It's a relief to get that boy out of the house, Mrs. Bradley," he said
at the breakfast table.

"That it is, Mr. John," she replied. "But he'll be trying to get back,
take my word for it."

"He won't dare to," said John Wade, incredulously. "I told him if he
came near the house I would give him up to the police."

"I am afraid he will write to your uncle. He's bold enough for
anything."

"I didn't think of that," said John, thoughtfully.

"Do you know his handwriting, Mrs. Bradley?"

"I think I should know it."

"Then if any letters come which you know to be from him, keep them back
from my uncle."

"What shall I do with them?"

"Give them to me. I don't want my uncle worried by his appeals."

"Your uncle seems to be very attached to him. He may go to the store to
see him."

"That is true. I should not like that. How shall we prevent it, that's
the question."

"If Gilbert & Mack knew that he was not honest they would discharge
him."

"Exactly," said John Wade; "and as probably he would be unable to get
another situation, he would be compelled to leave the city, and we
should get rid of him. I commend your shrewdness, Mrs. Bradley. Your
plan is most excellent."

John Wade had more reasons than the housekeeper knew of for desiring the
removal of our young hero from the city--reasons which the reader has
probably guessed. There was a dark secret in his life connected with a
wrong done in years past, from which he hoped some day to reap personal
benefit. Unconsciously Frank Fowler stood in his way, and must be
removed. Such was his determination.

"I am going out this morning," said the housekeeper. "I will make it in
my way to call at Gilbert & Mack's. My nephew is a salesman there, as I
have told you. I will drop a word in his ear, and that will be enough to
settle that boy's hash."

"Your language is professional, Mrs. Bradley," said John Wade, laughing,
"but you shouldn't allude to hash in an aristocratic household. I shall
be glad to have you carry out your plan."

"I hope you'll speak to your uncle about my nephew, Mr. John. He gets
very poor pay where he is."

"I won't forget him," said John, carelessly.

In his heart he thought Thomas Bradley a very low, obtrusive fellow,
whom he felt by no means inclined to assist, but it was cheap to make
promises.

The reader understands now why Mrs. Bradley made a morning call at
Gilbert & Mack's store.

She knew at what part of the counter her nephew was stationed, and made
her way thither at once. He did not at first recognize her, until she
said:

"Good-morning, Thomas."

"Good-morning, aunt. What brings you here this morning? Any good news
for me? Has the old gentleman come around and concluded to do something
handsome?"

"Mr. Wharton is not in the city. He has gone to Washington. But that
isn't what I came about this morning. You remember that boy who has been
reading to Mr. Wharton?"

"One of our cash-boys. Yes; there he is, just gone by."

"Well, he has stolen Mr. John's pocketbook and some jewelry belonging to
him."

"What have you done about it? What does Mr. Wharton say?"

"He's away from home. He doesn't know yet. Mr. John gave him a lecture,
and ordered him to leave the house."

"Does he admit that he took the things?"

"No; he denied it as bold as brass, but it didn't do him any good. There
were the things in his trunk. He couldn't get over that."

Thomas fastened a shrewd glance on his aunt's face, for he suspected the
truth.

"So you've got rid of him?" he said. "What do you propose to do next?"

"Mr. John thinks your employer ought to know that he is a thief."

"Are you going to tell them?"

"I want you to do it."

"You must tell them yourself, aunt. I shan't."

"Then introduce me to Mr. Gilbert, Thomas, and I'll do it."

"Follow me, aunt."

He led his aunt to the rear of the store, where Mr. Gilbert was
standing.

"Mr. Gilbert," he said, "allow me to introduce my aunt, Mrs. Bradley."

The housekeeper was courteously received, and invited to be seated. She
soon opened her business, and blackened poor Frank's character as she
had intended.

"Really, Mrs. Bradley, I am sorry to hear this," said Mr. Gilbert. "You
think there is no doubt of the boy's guilt?"

"I am sorry to say that I have no doubt at all," said the housekeeper,
hypocritically.

"Mr. Mack and myself have had a very good opinion of him. He is faithful
and prompt."

"Of course, sir, you will retain him in your employ if you are willing
to take the risk, but I thought it my duty to put you on your guard."

"I am obliged to you, Mrs. Bradley; though, as I said, I regret to find
that my confidence in the boy has been misplaced."

Late in the afternoon, Frank was called to the cashier's desk.

"I am directed by Mr. Gilbert to say that your services will not be
required after to-day," he said. "Here are the week's wages."

"Why am I discharged? What have I done?" demanded Frank, while his heart
sank within him.

"I don't know. You must ask Mr. Gilbert," answered the cashier.

"I will speak to him, at any rate," and Frank walked up to the senior
partner, and addressed to him the same question.

"Can you not guess?" asked Mr. Gilbert, sternly.

"I can guess that a false accusation has been brought against me," said
Frank.

"A respectable lady has informed me that you are not honest. I regret
it, for I have been pleased with your diligence. Of course, I cannot
retain you in my employ."

"Mr. Gilbert," said Frank, earnestly, "the charge is false. Mrs. Bradley
is my enemy, and wishes me harm. I don't understand how the things came
into my trunk, but I didn't put them there."

"I hope you are innocent, but I must discharge you. Business is dull
now, and I had decided to part with four of my cash-boys. I won't pass
judgment upon you, but you must go."

Frank bowed in silence, for he saw that further entreaty would be vain,
and left the store more dispirited than at any moment since he had been
in the city.

Ten days Frank spent in fruitless efforts to obtain a place.

All this time his money steadily diminished. He perceived that he would
soon be penniless. Evidently, something must be done. He formed two
determinations. The first was to write to Mr. Wharton, who, he thought,
must now have returned from Washington, asserting his innocence and
appealing to him to see Gilbert & Mack, and re-establish him in their
confidence. The second was, since he could not obtain a regular place,
to frequent the wharves and seek chances to carry bundles. In this
way he might earn enough, with great economy, to pay for his board and
lodging.

One morning the housekeeper entered the library where John Wade sat
reading the daily papers.

"Mr. John," she said, holding out a letter, "here is a letter from that
boy. I expected he would write to your uncle."

John Wade deliberately opened the letter.

"Sit down, Mrs. Bradley, and I will read the letter aloud."

It will be only necessary to quote the concluding sentences:


"'I hope, Mr. Wharton, you will not be influenced against me by what
Mrs. Bradley and your nephew say. I don't know why it is, but they are
my enemies, though I have always treated them with respect. I am afraid
they have a desire to injure me in your estimation. If they had not
been, they would have been content with driving me from your house,
without also slandering me to my employers, and inducing them to
discharge me. Since I was discharged, I have tried very hard to get
another place, but as I cannot bring a recommendation from Gilbert &
Mack, I have everywhere been refused. I ask you, Mr. Wharton to consider
my situation. Already my small supply of money is nearly gone, and I do
not know how I am to pay my expenses. If it was any fault of mine that
had brought me into this situation, I would not complain, but it seems
hard to suffer when I am innocent.

"'I do not ask to return to your house, Mr. Wharton, for it would not
be pleasant, since your nephew and Mrs. Bradley dislike me, but I have a
right to ask that the truth may be told to my employers, so that if
they do not wish me to return to their service, they may, at least,
be willing to give me a recommendation that will give me a place
elsewhere."'


"I must prevent the boy communicating with my uncle, if it is a possible
thing. 'Strike while the iron is hot,' I say."

"I think that is very judicious, Mr. John. I have no doubt you will know
how to manage matters."

John Wade dressed himself for a walk, and drawing out a cigar, descended
the steps of his uncle's house into the street.

He reached Fifth Avenue, and walked slowly downtown. He was about
opposite Twenty-eighth Street, when he came face to face with the
subject of his thoughts.

"Where are you going?" John Wade demanded sternly.

"I don't know that I am bound to answer your question," answered Frank,
quietly, "but I have no objection. I am going to Thirty-ninth Street
with this bundle."

"Hark you, boy! I have something to say to you," continued John Wade,
harshly. "You have had the impudence to write to my uncle."

"What did he say?"

"Nothing that you would like to hear. He looks upon you as a thief."

"You have slandered me to him, Mr. Wade," he said, angrily. "You might
be in better business than accusingly a poor boy falsely."

"Hark you, young man! I have had enough of your impudence. I will give
you a bit of advice, which you will do well to follow. Leave this city
for a place where you are not known, or I may feel disposed to shut you
up on a charge of theft."

"I shall not leave the city, Mr. Wade," returned Frank, firmly. "I shall
stay here in spite of you," and without waiting for an answer, he walked
on.



CHAPTER XVI

AN ACCOMPLICE FOUND


No sooner had John Wade parted from our hero than he saw approaching him
a dark, sinister-looking man, whom he had known years before.

"Good-morning, Mr. Wade," said the newcomer.

"Good-morning, Mr. Graves. Are you busy just now?"

"No, sir; I am out of employment. I have been unfortunate."

"Then I will give you a job. Do you see that boy?" said John Wade,
rapidly.

"Yes, I see him."

"I want you to follow him. Find out where he lives, and let me know this
evening. Do you understand?"

"I understand. You may rely upon me, sir," answered Nathan Graves; and
quickening his pace, he soon came within a hundred feet of our hero.

After fulfilling his errand, Frank walked downtown again, but did not
succeed in obtaining any further employment. Wherever he went, he was
followed by Graves. Unconsciously, he exhausted the patience of that
gentleman, who got heartily tired of his tramp about the streets. But
the longest day will come to an end, and at last he had the satisfaction
of tracking Frank to his humble lodging. Then, and not till then, he
felt justified in leaving him.

Nathan Graves sought the residence of John Wade. He rang the bell as the
clock struck eight.

"Well, what success?" asked Wade, when they met.

"I have tracked the boy. What more can I do for you?" asked Graves.

"I want to get him away from the city. The fact is--I may as well tell
you--my uncle has taken a great fancy to the boy, and might be induced
to adopt him, and cut me off from my rightful inheritance. The boy is
an artful young rascal, and has been doing all he could to get into the
good graces of my uncle, who is old and weak-minded."

It was nine o'clock when Nathan Graves left the house, John Wade himself
accompanying him to the door.

"How soon do you think you can carry out my instructions?" asked Wade.

"To-morrow, if possible."

"The sooner the better."

"It is lucky I fell in with him," said Nathan Graves to himself, with
satisfaction, as he slowly walked down Fifth Avenue. "It's a queer
business, but that's none of my business. The main thing for me to
consider is that it brings money to my purse, and of that I have need
enough."

Graves left the house richer by a hundred dollars than he entered it.

It was eleven o'clock on the forenoon of the next day when Frank walked
up Canal Street toward Broadway. He had been down to the wharves
since early in the morning, seeking for employment. He had offered his
services to many, but as yet had been unable to secure a job.

As he was walking along a man addressed him:

"Will you be kind enough to direct me to Broadway?"

It was Nathan Graves, with whom Frank was destined to have some
unpleasant experiences.

"Straight ahead," answered Frank. "I am going there, and will show you,
if you like."

"Thank you, I wish you would. I live only fifteen or twenty miles
distant," said Graves, "but I don't often come to the city, and am not
much acquainted. I keep a dry-goods store, but my partner generally
comes here to buy goods. By the way, perhaps you can help me about the
errand that calls me here today."

"I will, sir, if I can," said Frank, politely.

"My youngest clerk has just left me, and I want to find a successor--a
boy about your age, say. Do you know any one who would like such a
position?"

"I am out of employment myself just now. Do you think I will suit?"

"I think you will," said Mr. Graves.

"You won't object to go into the country?"

"No, sir."

"I will give you five dollars a week and your board for the present. If
you suit me, your pay will be raised at the end of six months. Will that
be satisfactory?" asked his companion.

"Quite so, sir. When do you wish me to come?"

"Can you go out with me this afternoon?"

"Yes, sir. I only want to go home and pack up my trunk."

"To save time, I will go with you, and we will start as soon as
possible."

Nathan Graves accompanied Frank to his room, where his scanty wardrobe
was soon packed. A hack was called, and they were speedily on their way
to the Cortland Street ferry.

They crossed the ferry, and Mr. Graves purchased two tickets to
Elizabeth. He bought a paper, and occupied himself in reading. Frank
felt that fortune had begun to shine upon him once more. By and by, he
