kissed him before he mounted. 'I need not be telling you anything. Take
the advice of the horse, and see you obey it.'

So he waved his hand and set out on his journey, and the wind was not
swifter than the brown horse--no, not even the March wind which raced it
and could not catch it. But the horse never stopped nor looked behind,
till in the dark of the night he reached the castle of the king of the
oak windows.

'We are at the end of the journey,' said the horse, 'and you will find
the Sword of Light in the king's own chamber. If it comes to you without
scrape or sound, the token is a good one. At this hour the king is
eating his supper, and the room is empty, so none will see you. The
sword has a knob at the end, and take heed that when you grasp it, you
draw it softly out of its sheath. Now go! I will be under the window.'

Stealthily the young man crept along the passage, pausing now and then
to make sure that no man was following him, and entered the king's
chamber. A strange white line of light told him where the sword was, and
crossing the room on tiptoe, he seized the knob, and drew it slowly out
of the sheath. The king could hardly breathe with excitement lest it
should make some noise, and bring all the people in the castle running
to see what was the matter. But the sword slid swiftly and silently
along the case till only the point was left touching it. Then a low
sound was heard, as of the edge of a knife touching a silver plate, and
the king was so startled that he nearly dropped the knob.

'Quick! quick!' cried the horse, and the king scrambled hastily through
the small window, and leapt into the saddle.

'He has heard and he will follow,' said the horse; 'but we have a good
start,' And on they sped, on and on, leaving the winds behind them.

At length the horse slackened its pace. 'Look and see who is behind
you,' it said; and the young man looked.

'I see a swarm of brown horses racing madly after us,' he answered.

'We are swifter than those,' said the horse, and flew on again.

'Look again, O king! Is anyone coming now?'

'A swarm of black horses, and one has a white face, and on that horse a
man is seated. He is the king of the oak windows.'

'That is my brother, and swifter still than I,' said the horse, 'and he
will fly past me with a rush. Then you must have your sword ready, and
take off the head of the man who sits on him, as he turns and looks at
you. And there is no sword in the world that will cut off his head, save
only that one.'

'I will do it,' replied the king; and he listened with all his might,
till he judged that the white-faced horse was close to him. Then he sat
up very straight and made ready.

The next moment there was a rushing noise as of a mighty tempest, and
the young man caught a glimpse of a face turned towards him. Almost
blindly he struck, not knowing whether he had killed or only wounded
the rider. But the head rolled off, and was caught in the brown horse's
mouth.

'Jump on my brother, the black horse, and go home as fast as you can,
and I will follow as quickly as I may,' cried the brown horse; and
leaping forward the king alighted on the back of the black horse, but
so near the tail that he almost fell off again. But he stretched out his
arm and clutched wildly at the mane and pulled himself into the saddle.

Before the sky was streaked with red he was at home again, and the queen
was sitting waiting till he arrived, for sleep was far from her eyes.
Glad was she to see him enter, but she said little, only took her harp
and sang softly the songs which he loved, till he went to bed, soothed
and happy.

It was broad day when he woke, and he sprang up saying:

'Now I must go to the Gruagach, to find out if the spells he laid on me
are loose.'

'Have a care,' answered the queen, 'for it is not with a smile as on the
other days that he will greet you. Furiously he will meet you, and will
ask you in his wrath if you have got the sword, and you will reply that
you have got it. Next he will want to know how you got it, and to this
you must say that but for the knob you had not got it at all. Then he
will raise his head to look at the knob, and you must stab him in the
mole which is on the right side of his neck; but take heed, for if you
miss the mole with the point of the sword, then my death and your death
are certain. He is brother to the king of the oak windows, and sure
will he be that the king must be head, or the sword would not be in your
hands.' After that she kissed him, and bade him good speed.

'Didst thou get the sword?' asked the Gruagach, when they met in the
usual place.

'I got the sword.'

'And how didst thou get it?'

'If it had not had a knob on the top, then I had not got it,' answered
the king.

'Give me the sword to look at,' said the Gruagach, peering forward; but
like a flash the king had drawn it from under his nose and pierced the
mole, so that the Gruagach rolled over on the ground.

'Now I shall be at peace,' thought the king. But he was wrong, for when
he reached home he found his servants tied together back to back with
cloths bound round their mouths, so that they could not speak. He
hastened to set them free, and he asked who had treated them in so evil
a manner.

'No sooner had you gone than a great giant came, and dealt with us as
you see, and carried off your wife and your two horses,' said the men.

'Then my eyes will not close nor will my head lay itself down till I
fetch my wife and horses home again,' answered he, and he stopped and
noted the tracks of the horses on the grass, and followed after them
till he arrived at the wood, when the darkness fell.

'I will sleep here,' he said to himself, 'but first I will make a fire,'
And he gathered together some twigs that were lying about, and then took
two dry sticks and rubbed them together till the fire came, and he sat
by it.

The twigs cracked and the flame blazed up, and a slim yellow dog pushed
through the bushes and laid his head on the king's knee, and the king
stroked his head.

'Wuf, wuf,' said the dog. 'Sore was the plight of thy wife and thy
horses when the giant drove them last night through the forest.'

'That is why I have come,' answered the king; and suddenly his heart
seemed to fail him and he felt that he could not go on.

'I cannot fight that giant,' he cried, looking at the dog with a white
face. 'I am afraid, let me turn homewards.'

'No, don't do that,' replied the dog. 'Eat and sleep, and I will watch
over you.' So the king ate and lay down, and slept till the sun waked
him.

'It is time for you to start on your way,' said the dog, 'and if danger
presses, call on me, and I will help you.'

'Farewell, then,' answered the king; 'I will not forget that promise,'
and on he went, and on, and on, till he reached a tall cliff with many
sticks lying about.

'It is almost night,' he thought; 'I will make a fire and rest,' and
thus he did, and when the flames blazed up, the hoary hawk of the grey
rock flew on to a bough above him.

'Sore was the plight of thy wife and thy horses when they passed here
with the giant,' said the hawk.

'Never shall I find them,' answered the king, 'and nothing shall I get
for all my trouble.'

'Oh, take heart,' replied the hawk; 'things are never so bad but what
they might be worse. Eat and sleep and I will watch thee,' and the
king did as he was bidden by the hawk, and by the morning he felt brave
again.

'Farewell,' said the bird, 'and if danger presses call to me, and I will
help you.'

On he walked, and on and on, till as dusk was falling he came to a great
river, and on the bank there were sticks lying about.

'I will make myself a fire,' he thought, and thus he did, and by and
bye a smooth brown head peered at him from the water, and a long body
followed it.

'Sore was the plight of thy wife and thy horses when they passed the
river last night,' said the otter.

'I have sought them and not found them,' answered the king, 'and nought
shall I get for my trouble.'

'Be not so downcast,' replied the otter; 'before noon to-morrow thou
shalt behold thy wife. But eat and sleep and I will watch over thee.' So
the king did as the otter bid him, and when the sun rose he woke and saw
the otter lying on the bank.

'Farewell,' cried the otter as he jumped into the water, 'and if danger
presses, call to me and I will help you.'

For many hours the king walked, and at length he reached a high rock,
which was rent into two by a great earthquake. Throwing himself on the
ground he looked over the side, and right at the very bottom he saw his
wife and his horses. His heart gave a great bound, and all his fears
left him, but he was forced to be patient, for the sides of the rock
were smooth, and not even a goat could find foothold. So he got up
again, and made his way round through the wood, pushing by trees,
scrambling over rocks, wading through streams, till at last he was on
flat ground again, close to the mouth of the cavern.

His wife gave a shriek of joy when he came in, and then burst into
tears, for she was tired and very frightened. But her husband did not
understand why she wept, and he was tired and bruised from his climb,
and a little cross too.

'You give me but a sorry welcome,' grumbled he, 'when I have half-killed
myself to get to you.'

'Do not heed him,' said the horses to the weeping woman; 'put him in
front of us, where he will be safe, and give him food, for he is weary.'
And she did as the horses told her, and he ate and rested, till by and
bye a long shadow fell over them, and their hearts beat with fear, for
they knew that the giant was coming.

'I smell a stranger,' cried the giant, as he entered; but it was dark
inside the chasm, and he did not see the king, who was crouching down
between the feet of the horses.

'A stranger, my lord! no stranger ever comes here, not even the sun!'
and the king's wife laughed gaily as she went up to the giant and
stroked the huge hand which hung down by his side.

'Well, I perceive nothing, certainly,' answered he, 'but it is very odd.
However, it is time that the horses were fed;' and he lifted down
an armful of hay from a shelf of rock and held out a handful to each
animal, who moved forward to meet him, leaving the king behind. As soon
as the giant's hands were near their mouths they each made a snap, and
began to bit them, so that his groans and shrieks might have been heard
a mile off. Then they wheeled round and kicked him till they could
kick no more. At length the giant crawled away, and lay quivering in a
corner, and the queen went up to him.

'Poor thing! poor thing!' she said, 'they seem to have gone mad; it was
awful to behold.'

'If I had had my soul in my body they would certainly have killed me,'
groaned the giant.

'It was lucky indeed,' answered the queen; 'but tell me, where is thy
soul, that I may take care of it?'

'Up there, in the Bonnach stone,' answered the giant, pointing to a
stone which was balanced loosely on an edge of rock. 'But now leave me,
that I may sleep, for I have far to go to-morrow.'

Soon snores were heard from the corner where the giant lay, and then
the queen lay down too, and the horses, and the king was hidden between
them, so that none could see him.

Before the dawn the giant rose and went out, and immediately the queen
ran up to the Bonnach stone, and tugged and pushed at it till it was
quite steady on its ledge, and could not fall over. And so it was in the
evening when the giant came home; and when they saw his shadow, the king
crept down in front of the horses.

'Why, what have you done to the Bonnach stone?' asked the giant.

'I feared lest it should fall over, and be broken, with your soul in
it,' said the queen, 'so I put it further back on the ledge.'

'It is not there that my soul is,' answered he, 'it is on the threshold.
But it is time the horses were fed;' and he fetched the hay, and gave it
to them, and they bit and kicked him as before, till he lay half dead on
the ground.

Next morning he rose and went out, and the queen ran to the threshold
of the cave, and washed the stones, and pulled up some moss and little
flowers that were hidden in the crannies, and by and bye when dusk had
fallen the giant came home.

'You have been cleaning the threshold,' said he.

'And was I not right to do it, seeing that your soul is in it?' asked
the queen.

'It is not there that my soul is,' answered the giant. 'Under the
threshold is a stone, and under the stone is a sheep, and in the sheep's
body is a duck, and in the duck is an egg, and in the egg is my soul.
But it is late, and I must feed the horses;' and he brought them the
hay, but they only bit and kicked him as before, and if his soul had
been within him, they would have killed him outright.

It was still dark when the giant got up and went his way, and then
the king and the queen ran forward to take up the threshold, while
the horses looked on. But sure enough! just as the giant had said,
underneath the threshold was the flagstone, and they pulled and tugged
till the stone gave way. Then something jumped out so suddenly, that it
nearly knocked them down, and as it fled past, they saw it was a sheep.

'If the slim yellow dog of the greenwood were only here, he would soon
have that sheep,' cried the king; and as he spoke, the slim yellow dog
appeared from the forest, with the sheep in his mouth. With a blow from
the king, the sheep fell dead, and they opened its body, only to be
blinded by a rush of wings as the duck flew past.

'If the hoary hawk of the rock were only here, he would soon have that
duck,' cried the king; and as he spoke the hoary hawk was seen hovering
above them, with the duck in his mouth. They cut off the duck's head
with a swing of the king's sword, and took the egg out of its body,
but in his triumph the king held it carelessly, and it slipped from his
hand, and rolled swiftly down the hill right into the river.

'If the brown otter of the stream were only here, he would soon have
that egg,' cried the king; and the next minute there was the brown
otter, dripping with water, holding the egg in his mouth. But beside the
brown otter, a huge shadow came stealing along--the shadow of the giant.

The king stood staring at it, as if he were turned into stone, but the
queen snatched the egg from the otter and crushed it between her two
hands. And after that the shadow suddenly shrank and was still, and they
knew that the giant was dead, because they had found his soul.

Next day they mounted the two horses and rode home again, visiting their
friends the brown otter and the hoary hawk and the slim yellow dog by
the way.

From 'West Highland Tales.'




A French Puck


Among the mountain pastures and valleys that lie in the centre of France
there dwelt a mischievous kind of spirit, whose delight it was to play
tricks on everybody, and particularly on the shepherds and the cowboys.
They never knew when they were safe from him, as he could change himself
into a man, woman or child, a stick, a goat, a ploughshare. Indeed,
there was only one thing whose shape he could not take, and that was a
needle. At least, he could transform himself into a needle, but try as
he might he never was able to imitate the hole, so every woman would
have found him out at once, and this he knew.

Now the hour oftenest chosen by this naughty sprite (whom we will
call Puck) for performing his pranks was about midnight, just when the
shepherds and cowherds, tired out with their long day's work, were sound
asleep. Then he would go into the cowsheds and unfasten the chains that
fixed each beast in its own stall, and let them fall with a heavy clang
to the ground. The noise was so loud that it was certain to awaken the
cowboys, however fatigued they might be, and they dragged themselves
wearily to the stable to put back the chains. But no sooner had they
returned to their beds than the same thing happened again, and so on
till the morning. Or perhaps Puck would spend his night in plaiting
together the manes and tails of two of the horses, so that it would take
the grooms hours of labour to get them right in the morning, while Puck,
hidden among the hay in the loft, would peep out to watch them, enjoying
himself amazingly all the time.

One evening more than eighty years ago a man named William was passing
along the bank of a stream when he noticed a sheep who was bleating
loudly. William thought it must have strayed from the flock, and that he
had better take it home with him till he could discover its owner. So
he went up to where it was standing, and as it seemed so tired that it
could hardly walk, he hoisted it on his shoulders and continued on
his way. The sheep was pretty heavy, but the good man was merciful and
staggered along as best he could under his load.

'It is not much further,' he thought to himself as he reached an avenue
of walnut trees, when suddenly a voice spoke out from over his head, and
made him jump.

'Where are you?' said the voice, and the sheep answered:

'Here on the shoulders of a donkey.'

In another moment the sheep was standing on the ground and William was
running towards home as fast as his legs would carry him. But as he
went, a laugh, which yet was something of a bleat, rang in his ears, and
though he tried not to hear, the words reached him, 'Oh, dear! What fun
I have had, to be sure!'
