
"Now it is my turn," said the Englishman. "Here are five dollars to keep
you till your first week's wages come due. I dare say you will find them
useful."

"Thank you very much, sir. I was almost out of money."

After the two gentlemen left the Lodging House Rodney looked at the card
and found that his new place of employment was situated on Reade Street
not far from Broadway.

"It's you that's in luck, Rodney," said his friend Mike. "Who'd think
that a gentleman would come to the Lodging House to give you a place?"

"Yes, I am in luck, Mike, and now I'm going to make you a proposal."

"What is it?"

"Why can't we take a room together? It will be better than living here."

"Sure you wouldn't room with a poor boy like me?"

"Why shouldn't I? You are a good friend, and I should like your company.
Besides I mean to help you get an education. I suppose you're not a
first class scholar, Mike?"

"About fourth class, I guess, Rodney."

"Then you shall study with me. Then when you know a little more you may
get a chance to get out of your present business, and get into a store."

"That will be bully!" said Mike with pleasure.

"Now we'd better go to bed; I must be up bright and early in the
morning. We'll engage a room before I go to work."

There was no difficulty about rising early. It is one of the rules
of the Lodging House for the boys to rise at six o'clock, and after
a frugal breakfast of coffee and rolls they are expected to go out to
their business whatever it may be. Mike and Rodney dispensed with the
regulation breakfast and went out to a restaurant on Park Row where they
fared better.

"Now where shall we go for a room?" asked Rodney.

"There's a feller I know has a good room on Bleecker Street," said Mike.

"How far is that?"

"A little more'n a mile."

"All right! Let us go and see."

Bleecker Street once stood in better repute than at present. It is said
that A. T. Stewart once made his home there. Now it is given over to
shops and cheap lodging houses.

Finally the boys found a room decently furnished, about ten feet square,
of which the rental was two dollars and a half per week. Mike succeeded
in beating down the lodging house keeper to two dollars, and at that
figure they engaged it.

"When will you come?" asked Mrs. McCarty.

"Right off," said Mike.

"I'll need a little time to put it in order."

"Me and my partner will be at our business till six o'clock," returned
Mike.

"You can send in your trunks during the day if you like."

"My trunk is at the Windsor Hotel," said Mike. "I've lent it to a friend
for a few days."

Mrs. McCarty looked at Mike with a puzzled expression. She was one of
those women who are slow to comprehend a joke, and she could not quite
make it seem natural that her new lodger, who was in rather neglige
costume, should be a guest at a fashionable hotel.

"I will leave my valise," said Rodney, "and will send for my trunk. It
is in the country."

Mike looked at him, not feeling quite certain whether he was in earnest,
but Rodney was perfectly serious.

"You're better off than me," said Mike, when they reached the street.
"If I had a trunk I wouldn't have anything to put into it."

"I'll see if I can't rig you out, Mike. I've got a good many clothes,
bought when I was rich. You and I are about the same size. I'll give you
a suit of clothes to wear on Sundays."

"Will you?" exclaimed Mike, his face showing pleasure. "I'd like to see
how I look in good clo'es. I never wore any yet. It wouldn't do no good
in my business."

"You won't want to wear them when at work. But wouldn't you like to
change your business?"

"Yes."

"Have you ever tried?"

"What'd be the use of tryin'? They'd know I was a bootblack in these
clo'es."

"When you wear a better suit you can go round and try your luck."

"I'd like to," said Mike wistfully. "I don't want you to tell at the
store that you room with a bootblack."

"It isn't that I think of, Mike. I want you to do better. I'm going to
make a man of you."

"I hope you are. Sometimes I've thought I'd have to be a bootblack
always. When do you think you'll get the clo'es?"

"I shall write to the principal of the boarding school at once, asking
him to forward my trunk by express. I want to economize a little this
week, and shall have to pay the express charges."

"I'll pay up my part of the rent, Rodney, a quarter a day."

Rodney had advanced the whole sum, as Mike was not in funds.

"If you can't pay a dollar a week I will pay a little more than half."

"There ain't no need. I'll pay my half and be glad to have a nice room."

"I've got three or four pictures at the school, and some books. I'll
send for them later on, and we'll fix up the room."

"Will you? We'll have a reg'lar bang up place. I tell you that'll be
better than livin' at the Lodge."

"Still that seems a very neat place. It is lucky for poor boys that they
can get lodging so cheap."

"But it isn't like havin' a room of your own, Rodney. I say, when we're
all fixed I'll ask some of me friends to come in some evenin' and take a
look at us. They'll be s'prised."

"Certainly, Mike. I shall be glad to see any of your friends."

It may seem strange that Rodney, carefully as he had been brought up,
should have made a companion of Mike, but he recognized in the warm
hearted Irish boy, illiterate as he was, sterling qualities, and he felt
desirous of helping to educate him. He knew that he could always depend
on his devoted friendship, and looked forward with pleasure to their
more intimate companionship.

After selecting their room and making arrangements to take possession of
it, the boys went down town. Rodney stepped into the reading room at the
Astor House and wrote the following letter to Dr. Sampson:


DR. PLINY SAMPSON:

DEAR SIR--Will you be kind enough to send my trunk by express to No. 312
Bleecker Street? I have taken a room there, and that will be my home for
the present. I have obtained a position in a wholesale house on Reade
Street, and hope I may give satisfaction. Will you remember me with best
wishes to all the boys? I don't expect to have so easy or pleasant a
time as I had at school, but I hope to get on, and some time--perhaps in
the summer--to make you a short visit.

Yours truly, RODNEY ROPES.



CHAPTER IX.

THE FIRST DAY AT WORK.


A little before half past nine Rodney paused in front of a large five
story building on Reade Street occupied by Otis Goodnow.

He entered and found the first floor occupied by quite a large number of
clerks and salesmen, and well filled with goods.

"Well, young fellow, what can I do for you?" asked a dapper looking
clerk.

"I would like to see Mr. Goodnow."

"He's reading his letters. He won't see you."

Rodney was provoked.

"Do you decide who is to see him?" he asked.

"You're impudent, young feller."

"Am I? Perhaps you will allow Mr. Goodnow to see me, as long as he told
me to call here this morning."

"That's a different thing," returned the other in a different tone. "If
you're sure about that you can go to the office in the back part of the
room."

Rodney followed directions and found himself at the entrance of a room
which had been partitioned off for the use of the head of the firm.

Mr. Goodnow was seated at a desk with his back to him, and was employed
in opening letters. Without turning round he said, "Sit down and I will
attend to you in a few minutes."

Rodney seated himself on a chair near the door. In about ten minutes Mr.
Goodnow turned around.

"Who is it?" he asked.

"Perhaps you remember telling me to call at half past nine. You saw me
at the Newsboys' Lodging House."

"Ah, yes, I remember. I promised my friend Mulgrave that I would give
you a place. What can you do? Are you a good writer?"

"Shall I give you a specimen of my handwriting?"

"Yes; sit down at that desk."

It was a desk adjoining his own.

Rodney seated himself and wrote in a firm, clear, neat hand:

"I will endeavor to give satisfaction, if you are kind enough to give me
a place in your establishment."

Then he passed over the paper to the merchant.

"Ah, very good!" said Mr. Goodnow approvingly. "You won't be expected
to do any writing yet but I like to take into my store those who are
qualified for promotion."

He rang a little bell on his desk.

A boy about two years older than Rodney answered the summons.

"Send Mr. James here," said the merchant.

Mr. James, a sandy complexioned man, partially bald, made his
appearance.

"Mr. James," said the merchant, "I have taken this boy into my employ.
I don't know if one is needed, but it is at the request of a friend. You
can send him on errands, or employ him in any other way."

"Very well, sir. I can find something for him to do today at any rate,
as young Johnson hasn't shown up."

"Very well. Whats your name, my lad?"

"Rodney Ropes."

"Make a note of his name, Mr. James, and enter it in the books. You may
go with Mr. James, and put yourself at his disposal."

Rodney followed the subordinate, who was the head of one of the
departments, to the second floor. Here Mr. James had a desk.

"Wait a minute," he said, "and I will give you a memorandum of places to
call at."

In five minutes a memorandum containing a list of three places was given
to Rodney, with brief instructions as to what he was to do at each. They
were places not far away, and fortunately Rodney had a general idea as
to where they were.

In his search for positions he had made a study of the lower part of the
city which now stood him in good stead.

As he walked towards the door he attracted the attention of the young
clerk with whom he had just spoken.

"Well, did you see Mr. Goodnow?" asked the young man, stroking a sickly
looking mustache.

"Yes."

"Has he taken you into the firm?"

"Not yet, but he has given me a place."

The clerk whistled.

"So you are one of us?" he said.

"Yes," answered Rodney with a smile.

"Then you ought to know the rules of the house."

"You can tell me later on, but now I am going out on an errand."

In about an hour Rodney returned. He had been detained at two of the
places where he called.

"Do you remember what I said?" asked the young clerk as he passed.

"Yes."

"The first rule of the establishment is for a new hand to treat ME on
his first day."

"That's pretty good for you," said Rodney, laughing; "I shall have to
wait till my pay is raised."

About the middle of the afternoon, as Rodney was helping to unpack a
crate of goods, the older boy whom he had already seen in the office
below, walked up to him and said, "Is your name Ropes?"

"Yes."

"You are wanted in Mr. Goodnow's office."

Rodney went down stairs, feeling a little nervous. Had he done wrong,
and was he to be reprimanded?

He could think of nothing deserving censure. So far as he knew he had
attended faithfully to all the duties required of him.

As he entered the office, he saw that Mr. Goodnow had a visitor, whose
