will become of me?'

I made the best haste I could, but I could see more than one black
dot moving up the hill before me that showed me folks on their way
home had heard the bell and was going to see what it meant. And when
I got up there they were trying the big door of the church, not
knowing it was the little side one where the key was, and Jack, he
come up almost the same moment I did, and I knew well enough he had
come to get that note out of her prayer-book for fear some one else
should see it.

'Here, I've got the key in my pocket,' says he, and with that he
opened the door, the bell clang, clang, clanging from the tower all
the time like as if the bellringer was drunk and had got a wager on
to get more beats out of the bell in half an hour than the next man.

Whoever it was that was ringing the bell--and I could give a pretty
good guess who it was--didn't seem to hear us coming, and they went
up the aisle and pulled back the red baize curtain that hides the
bottom of the tower where the ringers stand on Sundays, and there
was Mattie with her old green gown on, and her hair all loose and
down her back with the hard work of bellringing, I suppose, and her
face as white as the bald-faced stag as is painted on the sign down
at the inn in the village. And directly she saw Jack, I knew it was
all over, for she let go the rope and it swung up like a live thing
over our heads, and she made two steps to Jack and had him round the
neck before them all.

'O Jack!' she cried, 'don't look like that.

I came to fetch your letter, and somebody locked me in.'

Jack, he turned to me, and his face was so that I should have been
afraid to have been along of him in a lonely place.

'This is your doings,' says he, 'and all that pack of lies you told
me was out of your own wicked head.'

He had got his arm round her, and was holding on as if she was
something worth having, instead of a silly girl in a frock three
year old.

'I don't know what you mean, I'm sure,' I said; 'it was only a
joke.'

'A joke!' says he. 'Lies, I call it, and I know they're lies by the
very touch of her in my arm here.'

'Oh, well!' I said, 'if you can't take joking better than this, it's
the last time I'll ever try joking with you.'

And I walked out of the church, and the other folks who had run up
to see what was the matter come out with me. And they two was left
alone.

I suppose it was only human nature that, as I come round the church,
I should get on the top of a tombstone and look in to see what they
was doing. It was the little window where a pane was broken by a
stone last summer, and so I heard what they was saying. He was
trying to tell her what I had told him--quite as much for her own
good as for mine, as you have seen; but she didn't seem to want to
listen.

'Oh, never mind all that now, Jack,' she says, with arms round his
neck. 'What does it matter about a silly joke now that I have got
you, and it's all right betwixt us?'

I thought it my duty to go straight home and tell uncle she was up
in the church, kissing and cuddling with Jack Halibut; and he took
his stick and started off after her.

But he met them at the garden gate, and Jack, he came forward, and
he says--

'Mr. Kenworthy, I have had hard thoughts of you this three year, but
I see you was right, for if I had never gone away, I should never
have been able to keep my little girl as she should be kept, and as
I can now, thanks be! and I should never have known how dear she has
loved me this three year.'

And uncle, like the soft-hearted old thing he is, he holds out his
hands, and he says, 'God bless you, my boy, it was for your own good
and hers.'

And they went in to supper.

As for me, I went to bed. I had had all the supper I wanted. And
uncle has never been the same to me since, though I'm sure I tried
to act for the best.




GUILTY


IT was my first place and my last, and I don't think we should have
got on in business as we have if it hadn't been for me being for six
or seven years with one of the first families in the county. Though
only a housemaid, you can't help learning something of their ways.
At any rate, you learn what gentlefolks like, and what they can't
abide. But the worst of being housemaid where there's a lot of
servants kept is, that one or other or all of the men-servants is
sure to be wanting to keep company with you. They have nothing else
to do in their spare time, and I suppose it's handy having your
sweetheart living in the house. It doesn't give you so much trouble
with going out in the evening, if not fine.

The coachman was promised to the cook, which, I believe, often takes
place. Tim, the head groom, was a very nice, genteel fellow, and I
daresay I might have taken up with him, if I hadn't met with my
James, though never with John, who was the plague of my life. To
begin with, he had a black whisker, that I couldn't bear to look at,
let alone putting one's face against it, as I should have had to
have done when married, no doubt. And he had a roving black eye,
very yellowy in the white of it, and hair that looked all black and
bear's-greasy, though he always said he never put anything on it
except a little bay rum in moderation.

They tell me I was a pretty girl enough in those days, though looks
is less important than you might think to a housemaid, if only she
dresses neat and has a small waist. And I suppose I must think that
John really did love me in his scowling, black whiskery way. He was
a good footman, I will say that, and had been with the master three
years, and the best of characters; but whatever he might have
thought, I never would have had anything to do with him, even if
James and me had had seas between us broad a-rolling for ever and
ever Amen. He asked me once and he asked me twice, and it was 'no'
and 'no' again. And I had even gone so far as to think that perhaps
I should have to give up a good place to get out of his way, when
master's uncle, old Mr. Oliver, and his good lady, came to stay at
the Court, and with them came James, who was own man to Mr. Oliver.

Mr. Oliver was the funniest-looking old gent I ever see, if I may
say so respectfully. He was as bald as an egg, with a sort of frill
of brown hair going from ear to ear behind; and as if that wasn't
enough, he was shaved as clean as a whistle, as though he had made
up his mind that people shouldn't say that it had all gone to beard
and whiskers, anyway. He wrote books, a great many of them, and you
may often see his name in the papers, and he was for ever poking
about into what didn't concern him, and my Lady, she said to me when
she found me a little put out at him asking about how things went on
in the servants' hall, she said to me--

'You mustn't mind him, Mary,' she said; 'you know he likes to find
out all that he can about everything, so as to put it in his books.'

And he certainly talked to every one he came across--even the
stable-boys--in a way that you could hardly think becoming from a
gentleman to servants, if he wasn't an author, and so to have
allowances made for him, poor man! He talked to the housemaids, and
he talked to the groom, and he talked to the footman that waited on
him at lunch when he had it late, as he did sometimes, owing to him
having been kept past the proper time by his story-writing, for he
wrote a good part of the day most days, and often went up to London
while he was staying with us--to sell his goods, I suppose. He wore
curious clothes, not like most gentlemen, but all wool things, even
to his collars and his boots, which were soft and soppy like felt;
and he took snuff to that degree I wouldn't have believed any human
nose could have borne it, and he must have been a great trial to
Mrs. Oliver until she got used to him and his pottering about all
over the house in his soft-soled shoes; and the mess he made of his
pocket-handkerchieves and his linen!

Mrs. Oliver was a round little fat bunch of a woman, if I may say so
in speaking of master's own aunt by marriage, and him a baronet. She
had the most lovely jewellery, and was very fond of wearing it of an
evening, more than most people do when they are staying with
relations and there's no company. She never spoke much except to
say, 'Yes, Dick dear,' and 'No, Dick dear,' when they spoke to each
other; but they were as fond of each other as pigeons on a roof, and
always very pleasant-spoken and nice to wait on.

As for James, he was the jolliest man I ever met, and cook said the
same. He was like Sam Weller in the book, or would have been if he
had lived in those far-off times; but footmen are more genteel now
than they were then.

Anyway, he hadn't been at the Court twenty-four hours before he was
first favourite with every one, and cook made him a Welsh rabbit
with her own hands, 'cause he hadn't been able to get his dinner
comfortable with the rest of us--a thing she wouldn't have done for
Sir William himself at that time of night. As for me, the first time
he looked at me with his jolly blue eyes--it was when he met me
carrying a tray the first morning after he came--my heart gave a
jump inside my print gown, and I said to it as I went downstairs--

'You've met your master, I'm thinking'; and if I did go to church
with him the very first Sunday, which was more than ever I had done
with any of the others, it was after he had asked me plain and
straight to go to church with him some day for good and all.

Now, the next morning, quite early, I was dusting the library, when
John come in with his black face like a thundercloud.

'Look here, Mary,' he says; 'what do you mean by going to church
with that stuck-up London trumpery?'

'Mind your own business,' says I, sharp as you please.

'I am,' he says. 'You are my business--the only business I care a
damn about, or am ever likely to. You don't know how I love you,
Mary,' he says. And I was sorry for him as he spoke. 'I would lie
down in the dirt for you to walk on if it would do you any good, so
long as you didn't walk over me to get to some other chap.'

'I am very sorry for you, John,' says I, 'but I've told you, not
once or twice, but fifty times, that it can never be. And there are
plenty of other girls that would be only too glad to walk out with a
young man like you without your troubling yourself about me.'

He was walking up and down the room like a cat in a cage. Presently
he began to laugh in a nasty, sly, disagreeable way.

'Oh! you think he'll marry you, do you?' says he. 'But he's just
amusing himself with you till he gets back to London to his own
girl. You let him see you was only amusing yourself with him, and
you come out with me when you get your evening.'

And he took the dusting-brush out of my hand, and caught hold of my
wrists.

'It's all a lie!' I cried; 'and I wonder you can look me in the face
and tell it. Him and me are going to be married as soon as he has
saved enough for a little public, and I never want to speak to you
again; and if you don't let go of my hands, I'll scream till I fetch
the house down, master and all, and then where will you be?'

He scowled at that, but he let my hands go directly.

'Have it your own way,' he said. 'But I tell you, you won't marry
him, and you'll find he won't want to marry you, and you'll marry
me, my girl. And when you have married me, you shall cry your eyes
out for every word you have said now.'

'Oh, shall I, Mr. Liar?' says I, for my blood was up; 'before that
happens, you'll have to change him into a liar and me into a fool
and yourself into an honest man, and you'll find that the hardest of
all.' And with that I threw the dusting-brush at him--which was a
piece of wicked temper I oughtn't to have given way to--and ran out
of the door, and I heard him cursing to himself something fearful as
I went down the passage.

'Good thing the gentlefolks are abed still,' I said to myself; and I
didn't tell a soul about it, even cook, the truth being I was
ashamed to.

Well, everything went on pretty much the same as usual for two or
three weeks, and I thought John was getting the better of his
silliness, because he made a show of being friendly to James and was
respectful to me, even when we was alone. Then came that dreadful
day that I shall never forget if I live to be a hundred years old.
Dinner was half an hour later than usual on account of Mr. Oliver
having gone up to town on his business; but he didn't get home when
expected, and they sat down without him after all. I was about my
work, turning down beds and so forth, and I had done Mrs. Oliver's
about ten minutes, and was in my lady's room, when Mrs. Oliver's own
maid came running in with a face like paper.

'Oh, what ever shall I do?' she cried, wringing her hands, as they
say in books, and I always thought it nonsense, but she certainly
did, though I never saw any one do it before or since.

'What is it?' I asked her.

'It's my mistress's diamond necklace,' she said. 'She was going to
wear it to-night. And then she said, No, she wouldn't; she'd have
the emeralds, and I left it on the dressing-table instead of locking
it up, and now it's gone!'

I went into Mrs. Oliver's room with her, and there was the jewel-box
with the pretty shining things turned out on the dressing-table, for
Mrs. Oliver had a heap of jewellery that had come to her from her
own people, and she as fond of wearing it as if she was slim and
twenty, instead of being fifty, and as round as an orange. We looked
on the dressing-table and we looked on the floor, and we looked in
the curtains to see if it had got in any of them. But look high,
look low, no diamond necklace could we find. So at last Scott--that
was Mrs. Oliver's maid--said there was nothing for it but to go and
tell her mistress. The ladies were in the drawing-room by this time.
So she went down all of a tremble, and in the hall there was Mrs.
Oliver looking anxious out of the front door, which was open, it
being summer and the house standing in its own park.

'Mr. Oliver is very late, Scott,' she says. 'I am getting anxious
about him.'

And as she spoke, and before Scott could answer, there was his step
on the gravel, and he came in at the front door with his little
black bag in his hand that I suppose he carried his stories in to
see if people would like to buy them.

'Hullo! Scott,' he says, 'have you seen a ghost?' And, indeed, she
looked more dead than alive. She gulped in her throat, but she could
not speak.

'Here, young woman,' says Mr. Oliver to me, 'you haven't lost your
head altogether. What's it all about?'

So I told him as well as I could, and by this time master had come
out and my Lady, and you never saw any one so upset as they were.
All the house was turned out of window, hunting for the necklace;
though, of course, not having legs, it couldn't have walked by
itself out of Mrs. Oliver's room. All the servants was called up,
even to the kitchen-maid; and those who were not angry, were
frightened, and, what with fright and anger, there wasn't one of us,
I do believe, as didn't look as they had got the necklace on under
their clothes that very minute. John was very angry indeed. 'Do they
think we'd take their dirty necklace?' he said, as we were going up.
'It's enough to ruin all of us, this kind of thing happening, and
leaving the doors open so that any one could get in and walk clear
off with it without a stain on their character, and us left with
none to speak of.'

So when master had asked us all a lot of questions, and we were told
we could go, John stepped out and said--

'I am sure I am only expressing the feelings of my fellow-servants
when I say that we should wish our boxes searched and our rooms, so
that there shall be no chance for any one to say afterwards that it
lays at any of our doors.'

And Mrs. Oliver began to cry, and she said 'No, no, she wouldn't put
that insult on any one.' But Mr. Oliver, who hadn't been saying
much, though so talkative generally, but kept taking snuff at a rate
that was dreadful to see, he said--

'The young man is quite right, my dear; and if you don't mind,' he
says to master, 'I think it had better be done.'

And so it was done, and I don't know how to write about it now,
though it was never true. They came to my room and they looked into
all my drawers and boxes except my little hat-tin, and when they
wanted the key of that, I said, silly-like, not having any idea that
they could think that I could do such a thing, 'I'd rather you
didn't look into that. It's only some things I don't want any one to
see.'

And the reason was that I'd got some bits of things in it that I'd
got the week before in the town towards getting my things for the
wedding ready, and I felt somehow I didn't want any one to see them
till James did. And they all looked very queer at me when I said
that, and my Lady said--

'Mary, give me the key at once.'

So I did, and oh! I shall never forget it. They took out the
flannel, and the longcloth and things, and the roll of embroidery
that I was going to trim them with, and rolled inside that, if
you'll believe me, there was the necklace like a shining snake
coiled up. I never said a word, being struck silly. I didn't cry or
even say anything as people do in books when these things happen to
them; but Mrs. Oliver burst out crying, God bless her for it! and my
Lady said, 'O Mary, I'd never have believed it of you any more than
I would of myself!'

And Mr. Oliver he said to master, 'Have all the servants into the
library, William. Perhaps some one else is in it too.'

But nobody said a word to say that it wasn't me, and indeed how
could they?

I should think it's like being had up for murder, standing there in
the library with all the servants holding off from me as if I had
got something catching, and master and my Lady and Mr. and Mrs.
Oliver in leather armchairs, all of a row, looking like a bench of
magistrates. I could not think, though I tried hard--I could only
feel as if I was drowning and fighting for breath.

'Now, Mary,' says Master, 'what have you got to say?'

'I never touched it, sir,' I said; 'I never put it there; I don't
know who did; and may God forgive them, for I never could.'

Then my Lady said, 'Mary, I can hardly believe it of you even now,
but why wouldn't you let us have the key of your box?'

Then I turned hot and cold all of a minute, and I looked round, and
there wasn't a face that looked kind at me except Mr. Oliver's, and
he nodded at me, taking snuff all over his fat white waistcoat.

'Speak up, girl,' he said, 'speak up.'

So then I said, 'I'm a-going to be married, my Lady, and it was bits
of things I'd got towards my wedding clothes.'

I looked at James to see if he believed it, and his face was like
lead, and his eyes wild that used to be so jolly, and to see him
look like that made my heart stand still, and I cried out--

'O my God, strike me down dead, for live I can't after this!'

And at that, James spoke up, and he said, speaking very quick and
steady, 'I wish to confess that I took it, and I put it in her box,
thinking to take it away again after. We were to have been married,
and I wanted the money to start in a little pub.'

And everybody stood still, and you could have heard a pin drop, and
Mr. Oliver went on nodding his head and taking snuff till I could
have killed him for it; and I looked at James, and I could have
fallen at his feet and worshipped him, for I saw in a minute why he
said it. He believed it was me, and he wanted to save me. So then I
said to master--

'The thing was found in my box, sir, and I'll take the consequences
if I have to be hanged for it. But don't you believe a word James
says. He never touched it. It wasn't him.'

'How do you know it wasn't him,' says master very sharp. 'If you
didn't take it, how do you know who did?'

'How do I know?' I cried, forgetting for a moment who I was speaking
to. 'Why, if you'd half a grain of sense among the lot of you, you'd
know why I know it's not him. If you felt to a young man like I feel
to James, you'd know in your heart that he could not have done such
a thing, not if there was fifty diamond necklaces found in fifty
pockets on him at the same time.'

They said nothing, but Mr. Oliver chuckled in his collar till I'd
have liked to strangle him with my two hands round his fat throat.
And I went on--

'I'm as sure he didn't do it as I am that I didn't do it myself, and
as he would have been that I didn't if he had really loved me, as he
said, instead of believing that I could do such a thing, and trying
to save me with a black lie--God bless him for it.'

And James he never looked at me, but he said again, 'Don't mind
her--she's off her head with fright about me. You send me off to
prison as soon as you like, sir.'

And still none of the others spoke, but Mr. Oliver leaned back in
his chair, and he clapped his hands softly as though he was at a
play. 'Bravo!' he says, 'bravo!'

And the others looked at him as if they thought he had gone out of
his mind.

'It's a very pretty drama, very nicely played, but now it's time to
put an end to it. Do you want to see the villain?' he says to
master, and master never answering him, only staring, he turned
quite sharp and sudden and pointed to John as he stood near the door
with his black eyes burning like coals. 'You took it,' said Mr.
Oliver, 'and you put it in Mary's box. Oh! you needn't start. I know
it's true without that.'

John had started, but he pulled himself together in a minute. The
man had pluck, I will say that. He spoke quite firm and respectful.
'And why should I have done that, sir, if you please, when all the
house knows that I have been courting Mary fair and honest this two
year?'

Mr. Oliver tapped his snuff-box and grinned all over his big smooth
face. 'When you do your courting fair and honest, young man, you
should be careful not to do it in the library with the window open.
I was in the verandah, and I heard you threaten that she should
never marry James, and that she should marry you; and that you would
be revenged on her for her bad taste in preferring him to you.'

John drew a deep breath. 'That's nothing, sir, is it?' he says to
master. 'Every one in the house knows I have been sorry for a hasty
word, and have been the best friends with both of them for these
