Sammy knew all of Lightfoot's hiding-places.  He visited every one
of them.  Lightfoot wasn't to be found, and no one whom Sammy met
had seen Lightfoot for two days.

Sammy felt badly.  You see, he was very fond of Lightfoot.
You remember it was Sammy who warned Lightfoot of the coming of
the hunter on the morning when the dreadful hunting season began.
Ever since the hunting season had opened, Sammy had done his
best to make trouble for the hunters.  Whenever he had found
one of them he had screamed at the top of his voice to warn every
one within hearing just where that hunter was.  Once a hunter had
lost his temper and shot at Sammy, but Sammy had suspected that
something of the kind might happen, and he had taken care to keep
just out of reach.  Sammy had known all about the chasing of
Lightfoot by the hounds.  Everybody in the Green Forest had known
about it.  You see, everybody had heard the voices of those
hounds.  Once, Lightfoot had passed right under the tree in which
Sammy was sitting, and a few moments later the two hounds had
passed with their noses to the ground as they followed Lightfoot's trail.
That was the last Sammy had seen of Lightfoot. He had been able to save
Lightfoot from the hunters, but he couldn't save him from the hounds.

The more Sammy thought things over, the more he worried.  "I am
afraid those hounds drove him out where a hunter could get a shot
and kill him, or else that they tired him out and killed him
themselves," thought Sammy.  "If he were alive, somebody certainly
would have seen him and nobody has, since the day those hounds
chased him.  I declare, I have quite lost my appetite worrying
about him.  If Lightfoot is dead, and I am almost sure he is, the
Green Forest will never seem the same."




CHAPTER XXVIII: The Hunting Season Ends


The very worst things come to an end at last.  No matter how bad a
thing is, it cannot last forever.  So it was with the hunting
season for Lightfoot the Deer.  There came a day when the law
protected all Deer,--a day when the hunters could no longer go
searching for Lightfoot.

Usually there was great rejoicing among the little people of the
Green Forest and the Green Meadows when the hunting season ended
and they knew that Lightfoot would be in no more danger until the
next hunting season.  But this year there was no rejoicing.  You
see, no one could find Lightfoot.  The last seen of him was when
he was running for his life with two hounds baying on his trail
and the Green Forest filled with hunters watching for a chance to
shoot him.

Sammy Jay had hunted everywhere through the Green Forest.  Blacky
the Crow, whose eyes are quite as sharp as those of Sammy Jay,
had joined in the search.  They had found no trace of Lightfoot.
Paddy the Beaver said that for three days Lightfoot had not visited
his pond for a drink.  Billy Mink, who travels up and down the
Laughing Brook, had looked for Lightfoot's footprints in the soft
earth along the banks and had found only old ones.  Jumper the Hare
had visited Lightfoot's favorite eating places at night, but
Lightfoot had not been in any of them.

"I tell you what it is," said Sammy Jay to Bobby Coon, "something
has happened to Lightfoot.  Either those hounds caught him and
killed him, or he was shot by one of those hunters.  The Green
Forest will never be the same without him.  I don't think I shall
want to come over here very much.  There isn't one of all the
other people who live in the Green Forest who would be missed as
Lightfoot will be."

Bobby Coon nodded.  "That's true, Sammy," said he.  "Without
Lightfoot, the Green Forest will never be the same.  He never
harmed anybody.  Why those hunters should have been so anxious to
kill one so beautiful is something I can't understand.  For that
matter, I don't understand why they want to kill any of us.
If they really needed us for food, it would be a different matter,
but they don't.  Have you been up in the Old Pasture and asked
Old Man Coyote if he has seen anything of Lightfoot?"

Sammy nodded.  "I've been up there twice," said he.  "Old Man
Coyote has been lying very low during the days, but nights he has
done a lot of traveling.  You know Old Man Coyote has a mighty
good nose, but not once since the day those hounds chased
Lightfoot has he found so much as a tiny whiff of Lightfoot's
scent.  I thought he might have found the place where Lightfoot
was killed, but he hasn't, although he has looked for it.  Well,
the hunting season for Lightfoot is over, but I am afraid it has
ended too late."




CHAPTER XXIX: Mr. And Mrs. Quack Are Startled


It was the evening of the day after the closing of the hunting
season for Lightfoot the Deer.  Jolly, round, red Mr. Sun had gone
to bed behind the Purple Hills, and the Black Shadows had crept
out across the Big River.  Mr. and Mrs. Quack were getting their
evening meal among the brown stalks of the wild rice along the
edge of the Big River.  They took turns in searching for the rice
grains in the mud.  While Mrs. Quack tipped up and seemed to stand
on her head as she searched in the mud for rice, Mr. Quack kept
watch for possible danger.  Then Mrs. Quack took her turn at
keeping watch, while Mr. Quack stood on his head and hunted for
rice.

It was wonderfully quiet and peaceful.  There was not even a
ripple on the Big River.  It was so quiet that they could hear the
barking of a dog at a farmhouse a mile away.  They were far enough
out from the bank to have nothing to fear from Reddy Fox or Old
Man Coyote.  So they had nothing to fear from any one save Hooty
the Owl.  It was for Hooty that they took turns in watching.
It was just the hour when Hooty likes best to hunt.

By and by they heard Booty's hunting call.  It was far away in the
Green Forest, Then Mr. and Mrs. Quack felt easier, and they
talked in low, contented voices.  They felt that for a while at
least there was nothing to fear.

Suddenly a little splash out in the Big River caught Mr. Quack's
quick ear.  As Mrs. Quack brought her head up out of the water,
Mr. Quack warned her to keep quiet.  Noiselessly they swam among
the brown stalks until they could see out across the Big River.
There was another little splash out there in the middle.  It
wasn't the splash made by a fish; it was a splash made by
something much bigger than any fish.  Presently they made out a
silver line moving towards them from the Black Shadows.  They knew
exactly what it meant.  It meant that some one was out there in
the Big River moving towards them.  Could it be a boat containing
a hunter?

With their necks stretched high, Mr. and Mrs. Quack watched.
They were ready to take to their strong wings the instant they
discovered danger.  But they did not want to fly until they were
sure that it WAS danger approaching.  They were startled, very
much startled.

Presently they made out what looked like the branch of a tree
moving over the water towards them.  That was queer, very
queer.  Mr. Quack said so.  Mrs. Quack said so.  Both were growing
more and more suspicious.  They couldn't understand it at all, and
it is always best to be suspicious of things you cannot
understand.  Mr. and Mrs. Quack half lifted their wings to fly.




CHAPTER XXX: The Mystery Is Solved


It was very mysterious.  Yes, Sir, it was very mysterious.
Mr. Quack thought so.  Mrs. Quack thought so.  There, out in the Big
River, in the midst of the Black Shadows, was something which looked
like the branch of a tree.  But instead of moving down the river, as
the branch of a tree would if it were floating, this was coming
straight across the river as if it were swimming.  But how could the
branch of a tree swim?  That was too much for Mr. Quack.  It was too
much for Mrs. Quack.

So they sat perfectly still among the brown stalks of the wild
rice along the edge of the Big River, and not for a second did
they take their eyes from that strange thing moving towards
them.  They were ready to spring into the air and trust to their
swift wings the instant they should detect danger.  But they did
not want to fly unless they had to.  Besides, they were
curious.  They were very curious indeed.  They wanted to find out
what that mysterious thing moving through the water towards them
was.

So Mr. and Mrs. Quack watched that thing that looked like a
swimming branch draw nearer and nearer, and the nearer it drew
the more they were puzzled, and the more curious they felt.  If it
had been the pond of Paddy the Beaver instead of the Big River,
they would have thought it was Paddy swimming with a branch for
his winter food pile.  But Paddy the Beaver was way back in his
own pond, deep in the Green Forest, and they knew it.  So this
thing became more and more of a mystery.  The nearer it came, the
more nervous and anxious they grew, and at the same time the
greater became their curiosity.

At last Mr. Quack felt that not even to gratify his curiosity
would it be safe to wait longer.  He prepared to spring into the
air, knowing that Mrs. Quack would follow him.  It was just then
that a funny little sound reached him.  It was half snort, half
cough, as if some one had sniffed some water up his nose.  There
was something familiar about that sound.  Mr. Quack decided to
wait a few minutes longer.

"I'll wait," thought Mr. Quack, "until that thing, whatever it
is, comes out of those Black Shadows into the moonlight.
Somehow I have a feeling that we are in no danger."

So Mr. and Mrs. Quack waited and watched.  In a few minutes the
thing that looked like the branch of a tree came out of the Black
Shadows into the moonlight, and then the mystery was solved.
It was a mystery no longer.  They saw that they had mistaken the
antlers of Lightfoot the Deer for the branch of a tree.  Lightfoot
was swimming across the Big River on his way back to his home in
the Green Forest.  At once Mr. and Mrs. Quack swam out to meet him
and to tell him how glad they were that he was alive and safe.




CHAPTER XXXI: A Surprising Discovery


Probably there was no happier Thanksgiving in all the Great World
than the Thanksgiving of Lightfoot the Deer, when the dreadful
hunting season ended and he was once more back in his beloved
Green Forest with nothing to fear.  All his neighbors called on
him to tell him how glad they were that he had escaped and how
the Green Forest would not have been the same if he had not
returned.  So Lightfoot roamed about without fear and was
happy.  It seemed to him that he could not be happier.  There was
plenty to eat and that blessed feeling of nothing to fear.
What more could any one ask?  He began to grow sleek and fat and
handsomer than ever.  The days were growing colder and the frosty
air made him feel good.

Just at dusk one evening he went down to his favorite drinking
place at the Laughing Brook.  As he put down his head to drink he
saw something which so surprised him that he quite forgot he was
thirsty.  What do you think it was he saw?  It was a footprint in
the soft mud.  Yes, Sir, it was a footprint.

For a long time Lightfoot stood staring at that footprint.  In his
great, soft eyes was a look of wonder and surprise.  You see, that
footprint was exactly like one of his own, only smaller.
To Lightfoot it was a very wonderful footprint. He was quite sure
that never had he seen such a dainty footprint.  He forgot to drink.
Instead, he began to search for other footprints, and presently
he found them.  Each was as dainty as that first one.

Who could have made them?  That is what Lightfoot wanted to know
and what he meant to find out.  It was clear to him that there was
a stranger in the Green Forest, and somehow he didn't resent it
in the least.  In fact, he was glad.  He couldn't have told why,
but it was true.

Lightfoot put his nose to the footprints and sniffed of them.
Even had he not known by looking at those prints that they
had been made by a stranger, his nose would have told him this.
A great longing to find the maker of those footprints took
possession of him.  He lifted his handsome head and listened for
some slight sound which might show that the stranger was near.
With his delicate nostrils he tested the wandering little Night
Breezes for a stray whiff of scent to tell him which way to go.
But there was no sound and the wandering little Night Breezes told
him nothing.  Lightfoot followed the dainty footprints up the bank.
There they disappeared, for the ground was hard.  Lightfoot paused,
undecided which way to go.




CHAPTER XXXII: Lightfoot Sees The Stranger


Lightfoot the Deer was unhappy.  It was a strange unhappiness,
an unhappiness such as he had never known before.  You see, he had
discovered that there was a stranger in the Green Forest, a
stranger of his own kind, another Deer.  He knew it by dainty
footprints in the mud along the Laughing Brook and on the edge of
the pond of Paddy the Beaver.  He knew it by other signs which he
ran across every now and then.  But search as he would, he was
unable to find that newcomer.  He had searched everywhere but
always he was just too late.  The stranger had been and gone.

Now there was no anger in Lightfoot's desire to find that
stranger.  Instead, there was a great longing.  For the first time
in his life Lightfoot felt lonely.  So he hunted and hunted and
was unhappy.  He lost his appetite.  He slept little.  He roamed
about uneasily, looking, listening, testing every Merry Little
Breeze, but all in vain.

Then, one never-to-be-forgotten night, as he drank at the
Laughing Brook, a strange feeling swept over him.  It was the
feeling of being watched.  Lightfoot lifted his beautiful head and
a slight movement caught his quick eye and drew it to a thicket
