have nothing to worry about. Yet there is something wrong with me. I'm
losing my appetite. Nothing tastes good any more. I want something, but
I don't know what it is I want."

He tried to tell his troubles to his nearest neighbor, Timmy the Flying
Squirrel, but Timmy was too busy to listen. When Peter Rabbit happened
along, Whitefoot tried to tell him. But Peter himself was too happy and
too eager to learn all the news in the Green Forest to listen. No one
had any interest in Whitefoot's troubles. Every one was too busy with
his own affairs.

So day by day Whitefoot the Wood Mouse grew more and more unhappy, and
when the dusk of early evening came creeping through the Green Forest,
he sat about and moped instead of running about and playing as he had
been in the habit of doing. The beautiful song of Melody the Wood Thrush
somehow filled him with sadness instead of with the joy he had always
felt before. The very happiness of those about him seemed to make him
more unhappy.

Once he almost decided to go hunt for another home, but somehow he
couldn't get interested even in this. He did start out, but he had not
gone far before he had forgotten all about what he had started for.
Always he had loved to run about and climb and jump for the pure
pleasure of it, but now he no longer did these things. He was unhappy,
was Whitefoot. Yes, sir, he was unhappy; and for no cause at all so far
as he could see.



CHAPTER XXV: Whitefoot Finds Out What The Matter Was

   Pity the lonely, for deep in the heart
   Is an ache that no doctor can heal by his art.
    --Whitefoot.

Of all the little people of the Green Forest Whitefoot seemed to be the
only one who was unhappy. And because he didn't know why he felt so he
became day by day more unhappy. Perhaps I should say that night by night
he became more unhappy, for during the brightness of the day he slept
most of the time.

"There is something wrong, something wrong," he would say over and over
to himself.

"It must be with me, because everybody else is happy, and this is the
happiest time of all the year. I wish some one would tell me what ails
me. I want to be happy, but somehow I just can't be."

One evening he wandered a little farther from home than usual. He wasn't
going anywhere in particular. He had nothing in particular to do. He was
just wandering about because somehow he couldn't remain at home. Not far
away Melody the Wood Thrush was pouring out his beautiful evening song.
Whitefoot stopped to listen. Somehow it made him more unhappy than
ever. Melody stopped singing for a few moments. It was just then that
Whitefoot heard a faint sound. It was a gentle drumming. Whitefoot
pricked up his ears and listened. There it was again. He knew instantly
how that sound was made. It was made by dainty little feet beating very
fast on an old log. Whitefoot had drummed that way himself many times.
It was soft, but clear, and it lasted only a moment.

Right then something very strange happened to Whitefoot. Yes, sir,
something very strange happened to Whitefoot. All in a flash he felt
better. At first he didn't know why. He just did, that was all. Without
thinking what he was doing, he began to drum himself. Then he listened.
At first he heard nothing. Then, soft and low, came that drumming sound
again. Whitefoot replied to it. All the time he kept feeling better. He
ran a little nearer to the place from which that drumming sound had come
and then once more drummed. At first he got no reply.

Then in a few minutes he heard it again, only this time it came from
a different place. Whitefoot became quite excited. He knew that that
drumming was done by another Wood Mouse, and all in a flash it came over
him what had been the matter with him.

"I have been lonely!" exclaimed Whitefoot. "That is all that has been
the trouble with me. I have been lonely and didn't know it. I wonder if
that other Wood Mouse has felt the same way."

Again he drummed and again came that soft reply. Once more Whitefoot
hurried in the direction of it, and once more he was disappointed when
the next reply came from a different place. By now he was getting quite
excited. He was bound to find that other Wood Mouse. Every time he heard
that drumming, funny little thrills ran all over him. He didn't know
why. They just did, that was all. He simply must find that other Wood
Mouse. He forgot everything else. He didn't even notice where he was
going. He would drum, then wait for a reply. As soon as he heard it,
he would scamper in the direction of it, and then pause to drum again.
Sometimes the reply would be very near, then again it would be so far
away that a great fear would fill Whitefoot's heart that the stranger
was running away.



CHAPTER XXVI: Love Fills The Heart Of Whitefoot

   Joyous all the winds that blow
   To the heart with love aglow.
    --Whitefoot.

It was a wonderful game of hide-and-seek that Whitefoot the Wood Mouse
was playing in the dusk of early evening. Whitefoot was "it" all the
time. That is, he was the one who had to do all the hunting. Just who he
was hunting for he didn't know. He knew it was another Wood Mouse, but
it was a stranger, and do what he would, he couldn't get so much as a
glimpse of this little stranger. He would drum with his feet and after a
slight pause there would be an answering drum. Then Whitefoot would run
as fast as he could in that direction only to find no one at all. Then
he would drum again and the reply would come from another direction.

Every moment Whitefoot became more excited. He forgot everything, even
danger, in his desire to see that little drummer. Once or twice he
actually lost his temper in his disappointment. But this was only for
a moment. He was too eager to find that little drummer to be angry very
long.

At last there came a time when there was no reply to his drumming. He
drummed and listened, then drummed again and listened. Nothing was to be
heard. There was no reply. Whitefoot's heart sank.

All the old lonesomeness crept over him again. He didn't know which
way to turn to look for that stranger. When he had drummed until he
was tired, he sat on the end of an old log, a perfect picture of
disappointment. He was so disappointed that he could have cried if it
would have done any good.

Just as he had about made up his mind that there was nothing to do but
to try to find his way home, his keen little ears caught the faintest
rustle of dry leaves. Instantly Whitefoot was alert and watchful. Long
ago he had learned to be suspicious of rustling leaves. They might have
been rustled by the feet of an enemy stealing up on him. No Wood Mouse
who wants to live long is ever heedless of rustling leaves. As still as
if he couldn't move, Whitefoot sat staring at the place from which that
faint sound had seemed to come. For two or three minutes he heard
and saw nothing. Then another leaf rustled a little bit to one side.
Whitefoot turned like a flash, his feet gathered under him ready for a
long jump for safety.

At first he saw nothing. Then he became aware of two bright, soft little
eyes watching him. He stared at them very hard and then all over him
crept those funny thrills he had felt when he had first heard the
drumming of the stranger. He knew without being told that those eyes
belonged to the little drummer with whom he had been playing hide and
seek so long.

Whitefoot held his breath, he was so afraid that those eyes would
vanish. Finally he rather timidly jumped down from the log and started
toward those two soft eyes. They vanished. Whitefoot's heart sank. He
was tempted to rush forward, but he didn't. He sat still. There was a
slight rustle off to the right. A little ray of moonlight made its way
down through the branches of the trees just there, and in the middle of
the light spot it made sat a timid little person. It seemed to Whitefoot
that he was looking at the most beautiful Wood Mouse in all the Great
World. Suddenly he felt very shy and timid himself.

"Who--who--who are you?" he stammered.

"I am little Miss Dainty," replied the stranger bashfully.

Right then and there Whitefoot's heart was filled so full of something
that it seemed as if it would burst. It was love. All in that instant he
knew that he had found the most wonderful thing in all the Great World,
which of course is love. He knew that he just couldn't live without
little Miss Dainty.



CHAPTER XXVII: Mr. And Mrs. Whitefoot

   When all is said and all is done
   'Tis only love of two makes one.
    --Whitefoot.

Little Miss Dainty, the most beautiful and wonderful Wood Mouse in all
the Great World, according to Whitefoot, was very shy and very timid. It
took Whitefoot a long time to make her believe that he really couldn't
live without her. At least, she pretended not to believe it. If the
truth were known, little Miss Dainty felt just the same way about
Whitefoot. But Whitefoot didn't know this, and I am afraid she teased
him a great deal before she told him that she loved him just as he loved
her.

But at last little Miss Dainty shyly admitted that she loved Whitefoot
just as much as he loved her and was willing to become Mrs. Whitefoot.
Secretly she thought Whitefoot the most wonderful Wood Mouse in the
Great World, but she didn't tell him so. The truth is, she made him feel
as if she were doing him a great favor.

As for Whitefoot, he was so happy that he actually tried to sing. Yes,
sir, Whitefoot tried to sing, and he really did very well for a Mouse.
He was ready and eager to do anything that Mrs. Whitefoot wanted to do.
Together they scampered about in the moonlight, hunting for good things
to eat, and poking their inquisitive little noses into every little
place they could find. Whitefoot forgot that he had ever been sad and
lonely. He raced about and did all sorts of funny things from pure joy,
but he never once forgot to watch out for danger. In fact he was more
watchful than ever, for now he was watching for Mrs. Whitefoot as well
as for himself.

At last Whitefoot rather timidly suggested that they should go see his
fine home in a certain hollow stub. Mrs. Whitefoot insisted that they
should go to her home. Whitefoot agreed on condition that she
would afterwards visit his home. So together they went back to Mrs.
Whitefoot's home. Whitefoot pretended that he liked it very much, but
in his heart he thought his own home was very much better, and he felt
quite sure that Mrs. Whitefoot would agree with him once she had seen
it.

But Mrs. Whitefoot was very well satisfied with her old home and not
at all anxious to leave it. It was in an old hollow stump close to the
ground. It was just such a place as Shadow the Weasel would be sure to
visit should he happen along that way. It didn't seem at all safe to
Whitefoot. In fact it worried him. Then, too, it was not in such a
pleasant place as was his own home. Of course he didn't say this, but
pretended to admire everything.

Two days and nights they spent there. Then Whitefoot suggested that they
should visit his home. "Of course, my dear, we will not have to live
there unless you want to, but I want you to see it," said he.

Mrs. Whitefoot didn't appear at all anxious to go. She began to make
excuses for staying right where they were. You see, she had a great love
for that old home. They were sitting just outside the doorway talking
about the matter when Whitefoot caught a glimpse of a swiftly moving
form not far off. It was Shadow the Weasel. Neither of them breathed.
Shadow passed without looking in their direction. When he was out of
sight, Mrs. Whitefoot shivered.

"Let's go over to your home right away," she whispered. "I've never seen
Shadow about here before, but now that he has been here once, he may
come again."

"We'll start at once," replied Whitefoot, and for once he was glad that
Shadow the Weasel was about.



CHAPTER XVIII: Mrs. Whitefoot Decides On A Home

   When Mrs. Mouse makes up her mind
   Then Mr. Mouse best get behind.
    --Whitefoot.

