see the wheels go round; but that was a thing Tik-tok could not do.
Button-Bright then wanted to wind up the copper man, and Dorothy
promised he should do so as soon as any part of the machinery ran down.
This pleased Button-Bright, who held fast to one of Tik-tok's copper
hands as he trudged along the road, while Dorothy walked on the other
side of her old friend and Billina perched by turns upon his shoulder
or his copper hat.  Polly once more joyously danced ahead and Toto ran
after her, barking with glee.  The shaggy man was left to walk behind;
but he didn't seem to mind that a bit, and whistled merrily or looked
curiously upon the pretty scenes they passed.

At last they came to a hilltop from which the tin castle of Nick
Chopper could plainly be seen, its towers glistening magnificently
under the rays of the declining sun.

"How pretty!" exclaimed Dorothy.  "I've never seen the Emp'ror's new
house before."

"He built it because the old castle was damp, and likely to rust his
tin body," said Billina.  "All those towers and steeples and domes and
gables took a lot of tin, as you can see."

"Is it a toy?" asked Button-Bright softly.

"No, dear," answered Dorothy; "it's better than that.  It's the fairy
dwelling of a fairy prince."




15.  The Emperor's Tin Castle


The grounds around Nick Chopper's new house were laid out in pretty
flower-beds, with fountains of crystal water and statues of tin
representing the Emperor's personal friends.  Dorothy was astonished
and delighted to find a tin statue of herself standing on a tin
pedestal at a bend in the avenue leading up to the entrance.  It was
life-size and showed her in her sunbonnet with her basket on her arm,
just as she had first appeared in the Land of Oz.

"Oh, Toto--you're there too!" she exclaimed; and sure enough there was
the tin figure of Toto lying at the tin Dorothy's feet.

Also, Dorothy saw figures of the Scarecrow, and the Wizard, and Ozma,
and of many others, including Tik-tok.  They reached the grand tin
entrance to the tin castle, and the Tin Woodman himself came running
out of the door to embrace little Dorothy and give her a glad welcome.
He welcomed her friends as well, and the Rainbow's Daughter he declared
to be the loveliest vision his tin eyes had ever beheld.  He patted
Button-Bright's curly head tenderly, for he was fond of children, and
turned to the shaggy man and shook both his hands at the same time.

Nick Chopper, the Emperor of the Winkies, who was also known throughout
the Land of Oz as the Tin Woodman, was certainly a remarkable person.
He was neatly made, all of tin, nicely soldered at the joints, and his
various limbs were cleverly hinged to his body so that he could use
them nearly as well as if they had been common flesh.  Once, he told
the shaggy man, he had been made all of flesh and bones, as other
people are, and then he chopped wood in the forests to earn his living.
But the axe slipped so often and cut off parts of him--which he had
replaced with tin--that finally there was no flesh left, nothing but
tin; so he became a real tin woodman.  The wonderful Wizard of Oz had
given him an excellent heart to replace his old one, and he didn't at
all mind being tin.  Every one loved him, he loved every one; and he
was therefore as happy as the day was long.

The Emperor was proud of his new tin castle, and showed his visitors
through all the rooms.  Every bit of the furniture was made of brightly
polished tin--the tables, chairs, beds, and all--even the floors and
walls were of tin.

"I suppose," said he, "that there are no cleverer tinsmiths in all the
world than the Winkies.  It would be hard to match this castle in
Kansas; wouldn't it, little Dorothy?"

"Very hard," replied the child, gravely.

"It must have cost a lot of money," remarked the shaggy man.

"Money!  Money in Oz!" cried the Tin Woodman.  "What a queer idea!  Did
you suppose we are so vulgar as to use money here?"

"Why not?" asked the shaggy man.

"If we used money to buy things with, instead of love and kindness and
the desire to please one another, then we should be no better than the
rest of the world," declared the Tin Woodman.  "Fortunately money is
not known in the Land of Oz at all.  We have no rich, and no poor; for
what one wishes the others all try to give him, in order to make him
happy, and no one in all Oz cares to have more than he can use."

"Good!" cried the shaggy man, greatly pleased to hear this.  "I also
despise money--a man in Butterfield owes me fifteen cents, and I will
not take it from him.  The Land of Oz is surely the most favored land
in all the world, and its people the happiest.  I should like to live
here always."

The Tin Woodman listened with respectful attention.  Already he loved
the shaggy man, although he did not yet know of the Love Magnet.  So he
said:

"If you can prove to the Princess Ozma that you are honest and true and
worthy of our friendship, you may indeed live here all your days, and
be as happy as we are."

"I'll try to prove that," said the shaggy man, earnestly.

"And now," continued the Emperor, "you must all go to your rooms and
prepare for dinner, which will presently be served in the grand tin
dining-hall.  I am sorry, Shaggy Man, that I can not offer you a change
of clothing; but I dress only in tin, myself, and I suppose that would
not suit you."

"I care little about dress," said the shaggy man, indifferently.

"So I should imagine," replied the Emperor, with true politeness.

They were shown to their rooms and permitted to make such toilets as
they could, and soon they assembled again in the grand tin dining-hall,
even Toto being present.  For the Emperor was fond of Dorothy's little
dog, and the girl explained to her friends that in Oz all animals were
treated with as much consideration as the people--"if they behave
themselves," she added.

Toto behaved himself, and sat in a tin high-chair beside Dorothy and
ate his dinner from a tin platter.

Indeed, they all ate from tin dishes, but these were of pretty shapes
and brightly polished; Dorothy thought they were just as good as silver.

Button-Bright looked curiously at the man who had "no appetite inside
him," for the Tin Woodman, although he had prepared so fine a feast for
his guests, ate not a mouthful himself, sitting patiently in his place
to see that all built so they could eat were well and plentifully
served.

What pleased Button-Bright most about the dinner was the tin orchestra
that played sweet music while the company ate.  The players were not
tin, being just ordinary Winkies; but the instruments they played upon
were all tin--tin trumpets, tin fiddles, tin drums and cymbals and
flutes and horns and all.  They played so nicely the "Shining Emperor
Waltz," composed expressly in honor of the Tin Woodman by Mr. H. M.
Wogglebug, T.E., that Polly could not resist dancing to it.  After she
had tasted a few dewdrops, freshly gathered for her, she danced
gracefully to the music while the others finished their repast; and
when she whirled until her fleecy draperies of rainbow hues enveloped
her like a cloud, the Tin Woodman was so delighted that he clapped his
tin hands until the noise of them drowned the sound of the cymbals.

Altogether it was a merry meal, although Polychrome ate little and the
host nothing at all.

"I'm sorry the Rainbow's Daughter missed her mist-cakes," said the Tin
Woodman to Dorothy; "but by a mistake Miss Polly's mist-cakes were
mislaid and not missed until now.  I'll try to have some for her
breakfast."

They spent the evening telling stories, and the next morning left the
splendid tin castle and set out upon the road to the Emerald City.  The
Tin Woodman went with them, of course, having by this time been so
brightly polished that he sparkled like silver.  His axe, which he
always carried with him, had a steel blade that was tin plated and a
handle covered with tin plate beautifully engraved and set with
diamonds.

The Winkies assembled before the castle gates and cheered their Emperor
as he marched away, and it was easy to see that they all loved him
dearly.




16.  Visiting the Pumpkin-Field


Dorothy let Button-Bright wind up the clock-work in the copper man this
morning--his thinking machine first, then his speech, and finally his
action; so he would doubtless run perfectly until they had reached the
Emerald City.  The copper man and the tin man were good friends, and
not so much alike as you might think.  For one was alive and the other
moved by means of machinery; one was tall and angular and the other
short and round.  You could love the Tin Woodman because he had a fine
nature, kindly and simple; but the machine man you could only admire
without loving, since to love such a thing as he was as impossible as
to love a sewing-machine or an automobile.  Yet Tik-tok was popular
with the people of Oz because he was so trustworthy, reliable and true;
he was sure to do exactly what he was wound up to do, at all times and
in all circumstances.  Perhaps it is better to be a machine that does
its duty than a flesh-and-blood person who will not, for a dead truth
is better than a live falsehood.

About noon the travelers reached a large field of pumpkins--a vegetable
quite appropriate to the yellow country of the Winkies--and some of the
pumpkins which grew there were of remarkable size.  Just before they
entered upon this field they saw three little mounds that looked like
graves, with a pretty headstone to each one of them.

"What is this?"  asked Dorothy, in wonder.

"It's Jack Pumpkinhead's private graveyard," replied the Tin Woodman.

"But I thought nobody ever died in Oz," she said.

"Nor do they; although if one is bad, he may be condemned and killed by
the good citizens," he answered.

Dorothy ran over to the little graves and read the words engraved upon
the tombstones.  The first one said:

  Here Lies the Mortal Part of
      JACK PUMPKINHEAD
  Which Spoiled April 9th.


She then went to the next stone, which read:

  Here Lies the Mortal Part of
      JACK PUMPKINHEAD
  Which Spoiled October 2nd.


On the third stone were carved these words:

  Here Lies the Mortal Part of
      JACK PUMPKINHEAD
  Which Spoiled January 24th.


"Poor Jack!" sighed Dorothy.  "I'm sorry he had to die in three parts,
for I hoped to see him again."

"So you shall," declared the Tin Woodman, "since he is still alive.
Come with me to his house, for Jack is now a farmer and lives in this
very pumpkin field."

They walked over to a monstrous big, hollow pumpkin which had a door
and windows cut through the rind.  There was a stovepipe running
through the stem, and six steps had been built leading up to the front
door.

They walked up to this door and looked in.  Seated on a bench was a man
clothed in a spotted shirt, a red vest, and faded blue trousers, whose
body was merely sticks of wood, jointed clumsily together.  On his neck
was set a round, yellow pumpkin, with a face carved on it such as a boy
often carves on a jack-lantern.

This queer man was engaged in snapping slippery pumpkin-seeds with his
wooden fingers, trying to hit a target on the other side of the room
with them.  He did not know he had visitors until Dorothy exclaimed:

"Why, it's Jack Pumpkinhead himself!"

He turned and saw them, and at once came forward to greet the little
Kansas girl and Nick Chopper, and to be introduced to their new friends.

Button-Bright was at first rather shy with the quaint Pumpkinhead, but
Jack's face was so jolly and smiling--being carved that way--that the
boy soon grew to like him.

"I thought a while ago that you were buried in three parts," said
Dorothy, "but now I see you're just the same as ever."

"Not quite the same, my dear, for my mouth is a little more one-sided
than it used to be; but pretty nearly the same.  I've a new head, and
this is the fourth one I've owned since Ozma first made me and brought
me to life by sprinkling me with the Magic Powder."

"What became of the other heads, Jack?"

"They spoiled and I buried them, for they were not even fit for pies.
Each time Ozma has carved me a new head just like the old one, and as
my body is by far the largest part of me, I am still Jack Pumpkinhead,
no matter how often I change my upper end.  Once we had a dreadful time
to find another pumpkin, as they were out of season, and so I was
obliged to wear my old head a little longer than was strictly healthy.
But after this sad experience I resolved to raise pumpkins myself, so
as never to be caught again without one handy; and now I have this fine
field that you see before you.  Some grow pretty big--too big to be
used for heads--so I dug out this one and use it for a house."

"Isn't it damp?" asked Dorothy.

"Not very.  There isn't much left but the shell, you see, and it will
last a long time yet."

"I think you are brighter than you used to be, Jack," said the Tin
Woodman.  "Your last head was a stupid one."

"The seeds in this one are better," was the reply.

"Are you going to Ozma's party?" asked Dorothy.

"Yes," said he, "I wouldn't miss it for anything.  Ozma's my parent,
you know, because she built my body and carved my pumpkin head.  I'll
follow you to the Emerald City to-morrow, where we shall meet again.  I
can't go to-day, because I have to plant fresh pumpkin-seeds and water
the young vines.  But give my love to Ozma, and tell her I'll be there
in time for the jubilation."

"We will," she promised; and then they all left him and resumed their
journey.




17.  The Royal Chariot Arrives


The neat yellow houses of the Winkies were now to be seen standing here
and there along the roadway, giving the country a more cheerful and
civilized look.  They were farm-houses, though, and set far apart; for
in the Land of Oz there were no towns or villages except the
magnificent Emerald City in its center.

Hedges of evergreen or of yellow roses bordered the broad highway and
the farms showed the care of their industrious inhabitants.  The nearer
the travelers came to the great city the more prosperous the country
became, and they crossed many bridges over the sparkling streams and
rivulets that watered the lands.

As they walked leisurely along the shaggy man said to the Tin Woodman:

"What sort of a Magic Powder was it that made your friend the
Pumpkinhead live?"

"It was called the Powder of Life," was the answer; "and it was
invented by a crooked Sorcerer who lived in the mountains of the North
Country.  A Witch named Mombi got some of this powder from the crooked
Sorcerer and took it home with her.  Ozma lived with the Witch then,
for it was before she became our Princess, while Mombi had transformed
her into the shape of a boy.  Well, while Mombi was gone to the crooked
Sorcerer's, the boy made this pumpkin-headed man to amuse himself, and
also with the hope of frightening the Witch with it when she returned.
But Mombi was not scared, and she sprinkled the Pumpkinhead with her
Magic Powder of Life, to see if the Powder would work.  Ozma was
watching, and saw the Pumpkinhead come to life; so that night she took
the pepper-box containing the Powder and ran away with it and with
Jack, in search of adventures.

"Next day they found a wooden Saw-Horse standing by the roadside, and
sprinkled it with the Powder.  It came to life at once, and Jack
Pumpkinhead rode the Saw-Horse to the Emerald City."

"What became of the Saw-Horse, afterward?" asked the shaggy man, much
interested in this story.

"Oh, it's alive yet, and you will probably meet it presently in the
Emerald City.  Afterward, Ozma used the last of the Powder to bring the
Flying Gump to life; but as soon as it had carried her away from her
enemies the Gump was taken apart, so it doesn't exist any more."

"It's too bad the Powder of Life was all used up," remarked the shaggy
man; "it would be a handy thing to have around."

"I am not so sure of that, sir," answered the Tin Woodman.  "A while
ago the crooked Sorcerer who invented the Magic Powder fell down a
precipice and was killed.  All his possessions went to a relative--an
old woman named Dyna, who lives in the Emerald City.  She went to the
mountains where the Sorcerer had lived and brought away everything she
thought of value.  Among them was a small bottle of the Powder of Life;
but of course Dyna didn't know it was a Magic Powder, at all.  It
happened she had once had a big blue bear for a pet; but the bear
choked to death on a fishbone one day, and she loved it so dearly that
Dyna made a rug of its skin, leaving the head and four paws on the
hide.  She kept the rug on the floor of her front parlor."

"I've seen rugs like that," said the shaggy man, nodding, "but never
one made from a blue bear."

"Well," continued the Tin Woodman, "the old woman had an idea that the
Powder in the bottle must be moth-powder, because it smelled something
like moth-powder; so one day she sprinkled it on her bear rug to keep
the moths out of it.  She said, looking lovingly at the skin: 'I wish
my dear bear were alive again!'  To her horror, the bear rug at once
came to life, having been sprinkled with the Magic Powder; and now this
live bear rug is a great trial to her, and makes her a lot of trouble."

"Why?" asked the shaggy man.

"Well, it stands up on its four feet and walks all around, and gets in
the way; and that spoils it for a rug.  It can't speak, although it is
alive; for, while its head might say words, it has no breath in a solid
body to push the words out of its mouth.  It's a very slimpsy affair
altogether, that bear rug, and the old woman is sorry it came to life.
Every day she has to scold it, and make it lie down flat on the parlor
floor to be walked upon; but sometimes when she goes to market the rug
will hump up its back skin, and stand on its four feet, and trot along
after her."

"I should think Dyna would like that," said Dorothy.

"Well, she doesn't; because every one knows it isn't a real bear, but
just a hollow skin, and so of no actual use in the world except for a
rug," answered the Tin Woodman.  "Therefore I believe it is a good
thing that all the Magic Powder of Life is now used up, as it can not
cause any more trouble."

"Perhaps you're right," said the shaggy man, thoughtfully.

At noon they stopped at a farmhouse, where it delighted the farmer and
his wife to be able to give them a good luncheon.  The farm people knew
Dorothy, having seen her when she was in the country before, and they
treated the little girl with as much respect as they did the Emperor,
because she was a friend of the powerful Princess Ozma.

They had not proceeded far after leaving this farm-house before coming
to a high bridge over a broad river.  This river, the Tin Woodman
informed them, was the boundary between the Country of the Winkies and
the territory of the Emerald City.  The city itself was still a long
way off, but all around it was a green meadow as pretty as a well-kept
lawn, and in this were neither houses nor farms to spoil the beauty of
the scene.

From the top of the high bridge they could see far away the magnificent
spires and splendid domes of the superb city, sparkling like brilliant
jewels as they towered above the emerald walls.  The shaggy man drew a
deep breath of awe and amazement, for never had he dreamed that such a
grand and beautiful place could exist--even in the fairyland of Oz.

Polly was so pleased that her violet eyes sparkled like amethysts, and
she danced away from her companions across the bridge and into a group
of feathery trees lining both the roadsides.  These trees she stopped
to look at with pleasure and surprise, for their leaves were shaped
like ostrich plumes, their feather edges beautifully curled; and all
the plumes were tinted in the same dainty rainbow hues that appeared in
Polychrome's own pretty gauze gown.

"Father ought to see these trees," she murmured; "they are almost as
lovely as his own rainbows."

Then she gave a start of terror, for beneath the trees came stalking
two great beasts, either one big enough to crush the little Daughter of
the Rainbow with one blow of his paws, or to eat her up with one snap
of his enormous jaws.  One was a tawny lion, as tall as a horse,
nearly; the other a striped tiger almost the same size.

Polly was too frightened to scream or to stir; she stood still with a
wildly beating heart until Dorothy rushed past her and with a glad cry
threw her arms around the huge lion's neck, hugging and kissing the
beast with evident joy.

"Oh, I'm SO glad to see you again!" cried the little Kansas girl.  "And
the Hungry Tiger, too!  How fine you're both looking.  Are you well and
happy?"

"We certainly are, Dorothy," answered the Lion, in a deep voice that
sounded pleasant and kind; "and we are greatly pleased that you have
come to Ozma's party.  It's going to be a grand affair, I promise you."

"There will be lots of fat babies at the celebration, I hear," remarked
the Hungry Tiger, yawning so that his mouth opened dreadfully wide and
showed all his big, sharp teeth; "but of course I can't eat any of 'em."

"Is your Conscience still in good order?" asked Dorothy, anxiously.

"Yes; it rules me like a tyrant," answered the Tiger, sorrowfully.  "I
can imagine nothing more unpleasant than to own a Conscience," and he
winked slyly at his friend the Lion.

"You're fooling me!" said Dorothy, with a laugh.  "I don't b'lieve
you'd eat a baby if you lost your Conscience.  Come here, Polly," she
called, "and be introduced to my friends."

Polly advanced rather shyly.

"You have some queer friends, Dorothy," she said.

"The queerness doesn't matter so long as they're friends," was the
answer.  "This is the Cowardly Lion, who isn't a coward at all, but
just thinks he is.  The Wizard gave him some courage once, and he has
part of it left."

The Lion bowed with great dignity to Polly.

"You are very lovely, my dear," said he.  "I hope we shall be friends
when we are better acquainted."

"And this is the Hungry Tiger," continued Dorothy.  "He says he longs
to eat fat babies; but the truth is he is never hungry at all, 'cause
he gets plenty to eat; and I don't s'pose he'd hurt anybody even if he
WAS hungry."

"Hush, Dorothy," whispered the Tiger; "you'll ruin my reputation if you
are not more discreet.  It isn't what we are, but what folks think we
are, that counts in this world.  And come to think of it Miss Polly
would make a fine variegated breakfast, I'm sure."




18.  The Emerald City


The others now came up, and the Tin Woodman greeted the Lion and the
Tiger cordially.  Button-Bright yelled with fear when Dorothy first
took his hand and led him toward the great beasts; but the girl
insisted they were kind and good, and so the boy mustered up courage
enough to pat their heads; after they had spoken to him gently and he
had looked into their intelligent eyes his fear vanished entirely and
he was so delighted with the animals that he wanted to keep close to
them and stroke their soft fur every minute.

As for the shaggy man, he might have been afraid if he had met the
beasts alone, or in any other country, but so many were the marvels in;
the Land of Oz that he was no longer easily surprised, and Dorothy's
friendship for the Lion and Tiger was enough to assure him they were
safe companions.  Toto barked at the Cowardly Lion in joyous greeting,
for he knew the beast of old and loved him, and it was funny to see how
gently the Lion raised his huge paw to pat Toto's head.  The little dog
smelled of the Tiger's nose, and the Tiger politely shook paws with
him; so they were quite likely to become firm friends.

Tik-tok and Billina knew the beasts well, so merely bade them good day
and asked after their healths and inquired about the Princess Ozma.

Now it was seen that the Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger were
drawing behind them a splendid golden chariot, to which they were
harnessed by golden cords.  The body of the chariot was decorated on
the outside with designs in clusters of sparkling emeralds, while
inside it was lined with a green and gold satin, and the cushions of
the seats were of green plush embroidered in gold with a crown,
underneath which was a monogram.

"Why, it's Ozma's own royal chariot!" exclaimed Dorothy.

"Yes," said the Cowardly Lion; "Ozma sent us to meet you here, for she
feared you would be weary with your long walk and she wished you to
enter the City in a style becoming your exalted rank."

"What!" cried Polly, looking at Dorothy curiously.  "Do you belong to
the nobility?"

"Just in Oz I do," said the child, "'cause Ozma made me a Princess, you
know.  But when I'm home in Kansas I'm only a country girl, and have to
help with the churning and wipe the dishes while Aunt Em washes 'em.
Do you have to help wash dishes on the rainbow, Polly?"

"No, dear," answered Polychrome, smiling.

"Well, I don't have to work any in Oz, either," said Dorothy.  "It's
kind of fun to be a Princess once in a while; don't you think so?"

"Dorothy and Polychrome and Button-Bright are all to ride in the
chariot," said the Lion.  "So get in, my dears, and be careful not to
mar the gold or put your dusty feet on the embroidery."

Button-Bright was delighted to ride behind such a superb team, and he
told Dorothy it made him feel like an actor in a circus.  As the
strides of the animals brought them nearer to the Emerald City every
one bowed respectfully to the children, as well as to the Tin Woodman,
Tik-tok, and the shaggy man, who were following behind.

The Yellow Hen had perched upon the back of the chariot, where she
could tell Dorothy more about her wonderful chickens as they rode.  And
so the grand chariot came finally to the high wall surrounding the
