that of Harcourt. It is just because those sort of ideas do flash upon
the minds of some men, and not of others, that the first rise to the
rank of distinguished commanders, while the others remain simple knights
who would play their part in a charge or in the defence of a breach, but
would be of no account as leaders.

"Now row along steadily, men," he went on, speaking to the slaves.
"We are still in good time, for it was not an hour from the moment we
touched the island to our departure from it, and much of that time we
have gained by the speed with which you rowed before. At any rate, we
shall make out the island before sunset, and whether we arrive there a
little sooner or later matters little. Harcourt, hand me that wineskin
and a goblet. A draught will do us good after our climb and swim, and
these good fellows will be none the worse for a cup also."

Inspired with the hope of freedom, the slaves rowed steadily, and the
sun had just set when they entered a little inlet in the rocky isle that
was their place of rendezvous.

"Thanks be to the saints!" Sir John exclaimed, as they reached the
entrance. "There is Santoval's galley."

There was a stir on board the galley as the boat was seen approaching.
The knights had put on their armour, which they had found still lying
in the boat, the pirates, in their haste to pursue, having left her
unexamined, while those who had remained on guard had abstained from
touching anything until the return of their captain and comrades.

"Whence come you, Sir John, and what is the news? No misfortune has
befallen Ricord's galley, I hope?" the Spanish knight in command
shouted, as the boat came near enough for him to recognize the features
of its occupants.

"All is well," Sir John shouted back; "but we have taken more prizes
than we can manage, though not without hard fighting. Seven knights have
fallen, and at least ten others will not be able to buckle their armour
on again for some time to come, so I have been sent here to beg your
assistance; and it is well that it should be given speedily, for if more
pirate vessels come up before you join, Ricord and his companions will
be in a sorry plight."

By this time the boat had reached the side of the galley, and as Sir
John and his two companions stepped on board, the knights crowded
round to hear the details of the news. Exclamations of approval and
satisfaction arose when Sir John related the incidents of the fight, and
told them that the four vessels that had fallen into their hands formed
part of Hassan Ali's fleet.

"That is good news indeed, Boswell," Don Santoval said; "and I would I
had been there to take part in so gallant a fight. It is well you found
us here, for with four prizes on hand, and with half his strength dead
or disabled, Ricord must be in sore need of aid. We will start tomorrow
morning at daybreak. As all the ships were taken, there is little fear
of any of the other pirates hearing news of what has happened."

"I don't know," Sir John replied. "There were, as I told you, some two
hundred pirates left on the island. About half those, we know, seized a
fishing boat and escaped, for they chased us, and we have had as narrow
an escape from death as has ever fallen to my lot, though I have been
in over a score of hard fought battles. The rest may well have taken
another fishing boat and made off also, for we saw several craft along
the shores of the island. If so, they may have made for Hassan Ali's
rendezvous, wherever that may be, just as I made here, and by this time
some of his ships may be on the way there."

"By St. Anthony, this alters the situation gravely!" Don Santoval said.
"Fellow knights, we must lose no time in going to Ricord's assistance.
The slaves have had a long row today, but they must start on another.
Let them have a good meal to strengthen them, and a cup of wine each.
Whatever their scruples at other times, they never refuse wine when
there is heavy work to be done, knowing full well that a draught of it
helps them mightily in their labours. Your men must have rowed well, Sir
John, to have brought you here so quickly?"

"I have promised them their freedom," Sir John said; "and they shall
have it, even if I have to pay their value into the treasury. As I told
you, we were hotly pursued, for the craft with her sail went faster than
we with our oars; and, knowing the importance of bringing the news here,
I encouraged them by promising them their freedom, should we get away.
Not only did they row right manfully, but they proved faithful in our
extremity, and, when all seemed lost, stuck to us instead of deserting
and joining the pirates."

"But how did you get away, Sir John, if their craft outsailed you?"

"I owe my life entirely to the quick wit of my young countryman, Sir
Gervaise Tresham here." And Sir John then related the incidents of their
adventure on the island, his narrative eliciting warm expressions of
approval from the knights.

"Of course, you will go with us, Boswell?" Don Santoval said, when the
master of the slaves announced that these had eaten their meal, and were
ready.

"I must do so," Sir John replied. "I want you, on your way, to look in
at that island where we had so narrow an escape, and if we find their
craft still there we can destroy it. The place is directly in our
course; we shall, therefore, lose but little time in looking in. Of
course, they may have gone as soon as they got their vessel afloat,
but it is hardly likely. They would have no idea of my returning with
a galley so soon, and will probably set to to make a dozen more oars
before they start, for she had but four on board, which will scarce
suffice to send her a mile an hour through the water. Therefore, I fancy
they will not put off until tomorrow morning. If that is so, and we
destroy their craft, they will be trapped in the islet, and on our
return we can capture them all. I think of leaving Harcourt and Tresham
in the boat, in order that when Piccolomini's galley comes in, they may
direct him also to join us."

"He may be in at any moment; we met him three days since. He had
captured a pirate, and sent her off under charge of ten of his knights.
We agreed to meet him this evening; and as he is not here, he will
probably be in the first thing in the morning."

Gervaise and Harcourt took their places in the boat again. The galley
got up its anchor and started. Just as she reached the mouth of the
inlet another galley rounded the point and nearly ran into her.

"I am going to Ricord's assistance, Piccolomini," Don Santoval shouted.

"Is it urgent?" the commander of the galley shouted back. "We have had
a very long row, and can go no farther, unless his strait is a very sore
one."

"No. Come on in the morning. You will hear all the news from a boat
lying two hundred yards astern. Two young English knights are waiting in
her to give you the news. Ricord has made a fine capture. Row on, men."
And the galley proceeded on her way, while the newcomer proceeded up the
harbour.

Harcourt and Gervaise at once went on board, and the former gave the
Italian commander an account of the battle that had taken place, and
the capture of the four pirate vessels. After the exclamations
of satisfaction by the knights had ceased, he recounted their own
adventures, which were heard with lively interest.

"I hope indeed that Santoval will burn that fishing boat, and that we
shall capture the pirates," the commander said. "We have need of
more slaves to carry out the works at Rhodes. Now, let us to supper,
gentlemen, and then to sleep. In six hours we will be off again, for if
some more of these villains have escaped and carried the news to Hassan
Ali, our swords may be sorely needed by Ricord and Santoval tomorrow."



CHAPTER VI KNIGHTED


At three in the morning all on board the galley were astir. A ration
of bread and meat was served out to the slaves, and the boat was soon
afterwards under way. The rowers of the English knight's boat had been
warmly commended by the commander and placed in charge of the overseer,
with instructions that they were to be treated as free men. As soon as
the galley slaves set to work, however, they seated themselves on
the benches and double banked some of the oars, anxious to please the
knights. With the exception of those whose turn it was to be on watch,
most of the knights slept until daybreak.

"At the rate we are rowing, Gervaise," Harcourt said, as they went up
on to the poop together, "it will not take us very long to join our
friends. We are going through the water at fully six miles an hour; and
as we have already been two hours under way, in another three we shall
be there."

An hour and a half later they passed the island where they had landed.
The two young knights pointed out to the others the valley into which
they had descended, and the point round which they had swum. In a few
minutes they caught sight of the landing place.

"Look, Gervaise, there is something black showing just above the water."

"I see it. I think it is a line of timbers. There were certainly no
rocks there when we ran ashore."

"Then Santoval must have found the craft still there and burnt her," one
of the knights standing by remarked, "and the pirates are caged up. It
will take them some time to make a raft that will carry them to the next
island, and before they can do that we shall be back again. I shall be
sorry if they escape, for they are as ruthless a set of villains as sail
the seas."

The galley had traversed half the remaining distance when the sound of
a gun was faintly heard. For a moment there was an absolute hush on the
poop; then three or four shots in rapid succession were heard.

"Some more pirate ships must have come up," the commander exclaimed.
Then he shouted down to the slaves, "Row, men--row for your lives!
Overseer, do not spare your lash if any hang back from their work."

The galley had been travelling fast before, but her speed greatly
increased as the slaves rowed their hardest. Fast as she was travelling,
the impatience of the knights was extreme. They walked up and down the
deck, making vows of candles that should be burnt at the shrine of St.
John if they arrived in time to take a share in the fight, stopping at
times to listen to the sound of artillery, which was now so frequent as
to show that a severe engagement was being fought. Many of the younger
knights ran down to the waist and double banked the oars, and in a
shorter time than it seemed possible the galley arrived at the mouth of
the bay.

A desperate fight was going on. Ricord's ship lay, idle and deserted,
at anchor. Five pirate crafts surrounded Santoval's galley. Two of them
were alongside of her; the others were raking her fore and aft with
their shot. The young knights left the oars, sprang up to the poop and
joined in the shout of encouragement raised by the others, and then,
resuming their helmets and armour, stood ready to leap on board an enemy
as soon as they reached her. Piccolomini directed the helmsman to lay
him alongside one of the ships grappling with Santoval. As they came up,
their galley's cannon poured their fire into her, and a moment later the
knights sprang on board.

In the din of battle their shout had been unheard. The pirates thronging
the other side of their ship were intent only on overcoming the
resistance of the knights, and even the discharge of cannon had not
called their attention to their foe, until the latter, shouting the war
cry of the Order, fell suddenly upon them. A panic at once seized them.
Some were cut down almost unresistingly, but the great majority, running
to the bow or stern, threw themselves overboard and swam to the other
ships. The pirate ship on the other side of Santoval's galley instantly
threw off the grapnels and thrust off from her side, and, immediately
hauling in the sheets of the big sail, began at once to draw away, while
her three consorts made for the mouth of the bay.

"Back to your galley, comrades," Piccolomini shouted, "or with this
brisk wind they will escape us."

The knights at once crossed on to their own craft, the oars were got
out, and the chase began. A minute or two later Don Santoval followed
them, but soon gave up, as so large a number of the oars had been broken
when the two pirate ships ran alongside him, that it would have been
hopeless to pursue. The wind was blowing freshly, and was rapidly
increasing in strength, so that, in spite of the efforts of the galley
slaves, the pirates gradually drew away, running straight before
the wind, and aiding the effects of the sails with oars. Seeing the
hopelessness of the chase, Piccolomini abandoned it, after rowing for
two miles, and returned to the island. The other two galleys were lying
beside each other, and Piccolomini had his craft steered alongside them.

"Thanks, Piccolomini, for arriving so opportunely," Santoval, who was
seated on the deck leaning against the bulwarks, said, as his fellow
commander leapt on board, and came towards him.

"Would that I had arrived sooner, Santoval, for I see that you have been
grievously wounded!"

"Ay. One of the paynims' cannonballs has carried off both my legs below
the knee. The leech has been searing the wounds with a hot iron, and
says that he thinks I shall get over it; but if so I fear that my
fighting days are past, unless, indeed, I fight seated on a chair.
However, I ought not to grumble. I have lost many brave comrades, and
others are wounded more sorely than I am."

Sir Louis Ricord now joined them. He embraced Piccolomini warmly.

"I never heard a more welcome shout, Piccolomini, than that which you
gave when you fell upon the Moslems, for in truth the issue of the
conflict was doubtful. I was delighted when this morning at daybreak
Santoval's galley rowed in. We had all kept watch during the night,
thinking the pirates might obtain boats and make an attack upon us; and,
with but twenty of us fit to wield a sword, our position would have been
a bad one, and at any rate they might have recaptured the prizes. We
agreed that Santoval and his knights should land at once. This they did.
Sir John Boswell had of course told me how his boat had been chased by
a fishing craft, manned by a large number of the pirates, and that he
feared the rest might similarly have escaped, and might have gone to
bring some more of Hassan Ali's ships upon us.

"As soon as Santoval landed, some of the natives came down and told him
that there was not a pirate remaining there, the rest having started
in another boat a few minutes after the one that had chased Boswell.
Santoval left two of his men with orders to ascend to the highest spot
on the island, and to keep watch, and then brought the rest off to
his galley. Our first step was, of course, to send all the women and
children ashore. Then we consulted as to what had best be done if the
pirates should come back in force. We hoped, at any rate, that this
would not happen until you arrived. We expected that you would be here
before noon; but we decided that, should they get here before you, we
from our galley would embark on Santoval's, as it was better to fight in
one strongly manned boat than to divide our forces.

"It was scarce half an hour after Santoval came down before the men left
on the lookout appeared on the beach. On fetching them off, they told us
that as soon as they reached the top of the hill they saw five vessels
approaching with sails and oars, and that they would be here in half an
hour at the outside. We at once abandoned my galley, brought the rowers
and the wounded here, and prepared for the fight. As you saw, they ran
their two biggest ships alongside us, and for two hours the fight went
on. They were crowded with men, who in vain strove to get a footing on
our decks. Had we only had these two to deal with, we should have had
nothing to fear, heavily manned though they were; but the other three
kept sailing backwards and forwards, discharging their guns into us as
they passed, firing not only shot, but bags of bullets.

"Their gunners were skilful, and, as you see, they have completely
riddled our poop. Twenty knights have been killed, and eleven others are
sorely wounded. Scarce one has escaped unscathed. You may guess, then,
how welcome was your aid, which we had not expected for another three
hours. We were on the point of abandoning the waist and gathering on the
poop, which we could still have defended for a considerable time, when,
as if dropped from the skies, you fell upon the pirates, and turned the
tables. How is it that you were here so early?"

"We started at three o'clock, instead of waiting for daybreak. It
seemed, from the story of the two young knights, that it was possible
you might be attacked early, and, crippled as your command was, and with
four prizes on your hands, I deemed it best to come on as soon as the
rowers had had a few hours' rest."

"It is well that you did so; it would have been a grievous affair had
two of our galleys been captured by the pirates. It would have been a
blow to the prestige of the Order, and would have brought such strength
to Hassan Ali and other pirate leaders that nothing short of sending out
a fleet would have recovered our ascendancy; and as every ducat we
can spare has to be spent on the fortifications, it would have been a
misfortune indeed had we been obliged to fit out such an expedition at
present."

"Who have fallen, Sir Louis?"

"Five more of the knights of my galley--Pierre des Vignes, Raoul de
Montpelier, Ernest Schmidt, Raymond Garcia, and Albert Schenck. Here is
the list of the knights of Santoval's galley."

"'Tis a long list, and a sad one," Piccolomini said, after reading
the names. "With the seven who fell in your first fight, twenty-seven
knights have fallen, all brave comrades. Truly, we can ill spare such
a loss. It is true there are five prizes to show for it, and we have
struck Hassan Ali a blow that will resound through the Levant; but the
cost is heavy."

"It is indeed," Ricord agreed. "The four vessels are well filled with
rich spoil that the scoundrels had gathered, and I doubt not the one you
captured is equally rich. Still, had they been ten times as valuable,
the booty would be dearly purchased at such a price."

There was now a consultation among the leaders, and it was agreed that
six knights should be placed in each of the captured ships, with ten of
the galley slaves to work the sails, the others being equally divided
between the three galleys. They were, in the first place, to row to the
island where the pirates were imprisoned, and to slay or capture the
whole of them; afterwards they were to make direct for Rhodes; with
so numerous a fleet there was no fear of their being attacked. The
arrangements took but a short time to complete. An hour later they left
the port, the three galleys rowing ahead, while the five prizes, under
easy sail, followed them.

Sir John Boswell had been wounded, but not so seriously as to altogether
disable him, and he was in command of one of the prizes, having Sir
Adam Tedbond, Harcourt, Gervaise, and a German knight, with him. Sir
Marmaduke Lumley, who, after the first fight was over, was found, to the
surprise and pleasure of his comrades, to be still living, was, with the
rest of the wounded, on board one of the galleys. Two of the pirates
had fallen dead across him, and in the ardour of their attack on the
knights, he had lain there unnoticed until the return of Sir Louis and
his comrades had driven the pirates overboard. The leech was of opinion
that he might yet recover from his wound.

On arriving at the island, sixty of the knights disembarked. The woods
near the shore were first searched, but were found untenanted. They were
about to advance up the hill when a man appeared on the crest above them
waving a white flag. He was told to come down, and on his arrival said
that he was sent by his companions to offer to surrender, on the promise
that their lives should be spared. The knights were well pleased to be
saved the trouble of a long search through the woods, and the messenger
left at once to acquaint the pirates that their terms were accepted. In
a short time some eighty men made their way down the hill. On reaching
the beach they were disarmed, divided equally between the galleys, and
distributed among the rowers, filling up the places of those who had
been killed by the fire of the Moslems, and of the men drafted into the
prizes. They begged for food and water before they began work, and, on
being questioned, admitted that their surrender was due principally
to the fact that they had been unable to find food of any sort on the
island, and that after searching all over it no spring of water could be
discovered.

"In that case," Sir John Boswell said, "I have no doubt they have all
surrendered. I before thought it probable that a good many of them would
have remained hidden, trusting to be able to make a raft after we
had left, and so get away, believing rightly enough that we should be
disinclined to search every foot of the island for them. As it is, I
doubt not, all are here."

The little fleet anchored that night at the rendezvous, and after two
more days' rowing reached Rhodes, where the appearance of the three
galleys, followed by their five prizes, was greeted with great
acclamation. The news, however, that twenty-seven knights had fallen,
and that thirteen or fourteen others were very gravely wounded, damped
the satisfaction that every one had at first felt. D'Aubusson came
down as soon as they reached the mole, and was greatly affected when he
received Ricord's report.

"It is an unfortunate loss indeed, Sir Louis," he said, "though it may
be that the victory is not too dearly purchased. I do not speak of the
captured ships, nor of the spoil they contain, nor even of the slaves
you have brought us, welcome though all may be, but of the effect that
the defeat and capture of these craft of Hassan Ali's will have. It is
plain that the preparations the sultan is making, and the belief that
Rhodes is doomed, have so encouraged the infidels that they are becoming
really formidable at sea. This blow will show them that the Order has
yet power to sweep the sea of pirates. Since, however, this adventure
has taught us that a single leader like Hassan sails with at least nine
ships under his orders, it is clear that in future our galleys must not
adventure singly among the islands. It was fortunate indeed that first
Santoval, and then Piccolomini, arrived to your assistance. How was it
that they happened to come up so opportunely?"

"Sir John Boswell, with Ralph Harcourt and Gervaise Tresham; went in
a boat to the rendezvous we had arranged, and reached it after an
adventure, which I will leave Sir John to tell himself. I may say that
the two young knights named had in our encounter both obtained very high
credit amongst us all for the valour with which they fought. No one bore
himself more stoutly, and I am glad to take this early opportunity of
bringing their conduct before your notice. As you will learn from Sir
John, Gervaise Tresham afterwards showed a quickness of wit that was the
means of saving the lives of those with him, and I may say also of all
with me, for had they failed to reach the rendezvous we should have
fallen easy victims to the five ships Hassan Ali brought against us."

Sending for Sir John Boswell, the grand prior heard from him the details
of his adventure in the boat.

"I am right glad to hear you speak so warmly of Tresham, Sir John, for I
regard him as my special protege, and am pleased indeed to find that at
this outset of his career he has proved himself not only a brave knight,
but full of resource, and quick at invention. I think, Sir John, that
these two young knights have shown themselves well worthy of receiving
the honour of secular knighthood."

"Assuredly they have," Sir John agreed.

"Then, Sir John, will you bestow it upon them? The Order, as an Order,
does not bestow the honour, but its members do not forfeit their right
as knights to bestow it individually, and none among us are more worthy
of admitting them to your rank than yourself."

"I would gladly do it, Sir Peter; but the honour would come far better
from yourself, and would not only be more highly prized by them, but
would be of greater value in the eyes of others. I am but a simple
knight commander of the Order, and my name would scarce be known beyond
its ranks. But to be knighted by one whose name is known and honoured
throughout Europe would give them a standing wherever they went, and
place them on a level with the best."

"If that is your opinion, Boswell, I will myself undertake it, and
will do it at once; it were better done here than at a conclave of the
Order--now, when they are fresh from the battle. Let the knights be
summoned from the other galleys at once."

In a few minutes the whole of the knights were assembled on the poop of
the galley.

"Friends, and brother knights," D'Aubusson said. "First, in the name
of the Order, I have to thank you all most heartily for the brave deeds
that you have performed, and for the fresh honour you have won for it.
Every man has, as I learn from the three commanders, borne himself as
a true and valiant knight, ready to give his life in the cause of the
Order and of humanity. Two names have been specially brought before me
by commander Ricord, and by the good knight Sir John Boswell; they are
those of two young companions who, though knights of our Order, have not
yet received secular knighthood, and this, in the opinion of these
two knights, they have right worthily won. Sir Ralph Harcourt and Sir
Gervaise Tresham, step forward."

The two young knights, colouring with pleasure at this unexpected
