defense."

"You are an insolent villain!" replied Furibon, "and if ever you come
into my presence again, you shall surely die."

Leander made no answer, but retired sad and pensive to his own home,
where he spent the night in pondering what was best for him to do; for
there was no likelihood he should be able to defend himself against
the power of the king's son; therefore he at length concluded he would
travel abroad and see the world. Being ready to depart, he recollected
his snake, and, calling for some milk and fruits, carried them to the
poor creature for the last time; but on opening the door he perceived an
extraordinary luster in one corner of the room, and casting his eye on
the place he was surprised to see a lady, whose noble and majestic air
made him immediately conclude she was a princess of royal birth. Her
habit was of purple satin, embroidered with pearls and diamonds; she
advanced toward him with a gracious smile.

"Young prince," said she, "you find no longer your pet snake, but me,
the fairy Gentilla, ready to requite your generosity. For know that we
fairies live a hundred years in flourishing youth, without diseases,
without trouble or pain; and this term being expired, we become snakes
for eight days. During that time it is not in our power to prevent any
misfortune that may befall us; and if we happen to be killed, we never
revive again. But these eight days being expired, we resume our usual
form and recover our beauty, our power, and our riches. Now you know
how much I am obliged to your goodness, and it is but just that I should
repay my debt of gratitude; think how I can serve you and depend on me."

The young prince, who had never conversed with a fairy till now, was so
surprised that it was a long time before he could speak. But at length,
making a profound reverence, "Madam," said he, "since I have had the
honor to serve you, I know not any other happiness that I can wish for."

"I should be sorry," replied she, "not to be of service to you in
something; consider, it is in my power to bestow on you long life,
kingdoms, riches; to give you mines of diamonds and houses full of gold;
I can make you an excellent orator, poet, musician, and painter; or, if
you desire it, a spirit of the air, the water, or the earth."

Here Leander interrupted her. "Permit me, madam," said he, "to ask you
what benefit it would be to me to be a spirit?"

"Much," replied the fairy, "you would be invisible when you pleased, and
might in an instant traverse the whole earth; you would be able to fly
without wings, to descend into the abyss of the earth without dying,
and walk at the bottom of the sea without being drowned; nor doors, nor
windows, though fast shut and locked, could hinder you from entering
anywhere; and whenever you had a mind, you might resume your natural
form."

"Oh, madam!" cried Leander, "then let me be a spirit; I am going to
travel, and should prefer it above all those other advantages you have
so generously offered me."

Gentilla thereupon stroking his face three times, "Be a spirit," said
she; and then, embracing him, she gave him a little red cap with a plume
of feathers. "When you put on this cap you shall be invisible; but when
you take it off you shall again become visible."

Leander, overjoyed, put his little red cap upon his head and wished
himself in the forest, that he might gather some wild roses which he had
observed there: his body immediately became as light as thought; he flew
through the window like a bird; though, in flying over the river, he was
not without fear lest he should fall into it, and the power of the fairy
not be able to save him. But he arrived in safety at the rose-bushes,
plucked the three roses, and returned immediately to his chamber;
presented his roses to the fairy, overjoyed that his first experiments
had succeeded so well. She bade him keep the roses, for that one of them
would supply him with money whenever he wanted it; that if he put the
other into his mistress' bosom, he would know whether she was faithful
or not; and that the third would keep him always in good health. Then,
without staying to receive his thanks, she wished him success in his
travels and disappeared.

Leander, infinitely pleased, settled his affairs, mounted the finest
horse in the stable, called Gris-de-line, and attended by some of his
servants in livery, made his return to court. Now you must know Furibon
had given out that had it not been for his courage Leander would have
murdered him when they were a-hunting; so the king, being importuned by
the queen, gave orders that Leander should be apprehended. But when he
came, he showed so much courage and resolution that Furibon ran to the
queen's chamber and prayed her to order him to be seized. The queen,
who was extremely diligent in everything that her son desired, went
immediately to the king. Furibon, being impatient to know what would be
resolved, followed her; but stopped at the door and laid his ear to the
keyhole, putting his hair aside that he might the better hear what was
said. At the same time, Leander entered the court-hall of the palace
with his red cap upon his head, and perceiving Furibon listening at the
door of the king's chamber, he took a nail and a hammer and nailed his
ear to the door. Furibon began to roar, so that the queen, hearing her
son's voice, ran and opened the door, and, pulling it hastily, tore her
son's ear from his head. Half out of her wits, she set him in her lap,
took up his ear, kissed it, and clapped it again upon its place; but
the invisible Leander, seizing upon a handful of twigs, with which they
corrected the king's little dogs, gave the queen several lashes upon her
hands, and her son as many on the nose: upon which the queen cried out,
"Murder! murder!" and the king looked about, and the people came running
in; but nothing was to be seen. Some cried that the queen was mad, and
that her madness proceeded from her grief to see that her son had lost
one ear; and the king was as ready as any to believe it, so that when
she came near him he avoided her, which made a very ridiculous scene.
Leander, then leaving the chamber, went into the garden, and there,
assuming his own shape, he boldly began to pluck the queen's cherries,
apricots, strawberries, and flowers, though he knew she set such a high
value on them that it was as much as a man's life was worth to touch
one. The gardeners, all amazed, came and told their majesties that
Prince Leander was making havoc of all the fruits and flowers in the
queen's gardens.

"What insolence!" said the queen: then turning to Furibon, "my pretty
child, forget the pain of thy ear but for a moment, and fetch that vile
wretch hither; take our guards, both horse and foot, seize him, and
punish him as he deserves."

Furibon, encouraged by his mother, and attended by a great number of
armed soldiers, entered the garden and saw Leander; who, taking refuge
under a tree, pelted them all with oranges. But when they came running
toward him, thinking to have seized him, he was not to be seen; he had
slipped behind Furibon, who was in a bad condition already. But Leander
played him one trick more; for he pushed him down upon the gravel walk,
and frightened him so that the soldiers had to take him up, carry him
away, and put him to bed.

Satisfied with this revenge, he returned to his servants, who waited
for him, and giving them money, sent them back to his castle, that
none might know the secret of his red cap and roses. As yet he had
not determined whither to go; however, he mounted his fine horse
Gris-de-line, and, laying the reins upon his neck, let him take his
own road: at length he arrived in a forest, where he stopped to shelter
himself from the heat. He had not been above a minute there before he
heard a lamentable noise of sighing and sobbing; and looking about
him, beheld a man, who ran, stopped, then ran again, sometimes crying,
sometimes silent, then tearing his hair, then thumping his breast like
some unfortunate madman. Yet he seemed to be both handsome and young:
his garments had been magnificent, but he had torn them all to tatters.
The prince, moved with compassion, made toward him, and mildly accosted
him. "Sir," said he, "your condition appears so deplorable that I must
ask the cause of your sorrow, assuring you of every assistance in my
power."

"Oh, sir," answered the young man, "nothing can cure my grief; this day
my dear mistress is to be sacrificed to a rich old ruffian of a husband
who will make her miserable."

"Does she love you, then?" asked Leander.

"I flatter myself so," answered the young man.

"Where is she?" continued Leander.

"In the castle at the end of this forest," replied the lover.

"Very well," said Leander; "stay you here till I come again, and in a
little while I will bring you good news."

He then put on his little red cap and wished himself in the castle. He
had hardly got thither before he heard all sorts of music; he entered
into a great room, where the friends and kindred of the old man and the
young lady were assembled. No one could look more amiable than she;
but the paleness of her complexion, the melancholy that appeared in
her countenance, and the tears that now and then dropped, as it were by
stealth from her eyes, betrayed the trouble of her mind.

Leander now became invisible, and placed himself in a corner of the
room. He soon perceived the father and mother of the bride; and coming
behind the mother's chair, whispered in her ear, "If you marry your
daughter to that old dotard, before eight days are over you shall
certainly die." The woman, frightened to hear such a terrible sentence
pronounced upon her, and yet not know from whence it came, gave a loud
shriek and dropped upon the floor. Her husband asked what ailed her:
she cried that she was a dead woman if the marriage of her daughter went
forward, and therefore she would not consent to it for all the world.
Her husband laughed at her and called her a fool. But the invisible
Leander accosting the man, threatened him in the same way, which
frightened him so terribly that he also insisted on the marriage being
broken off. When the lover complained, Leander trod hard upon his gouty
toes and rang such an alarm in his ears that, not being able any longer
to hear himself speak, away he limped, glad enough to go. The real
lover soon appeared, and he and his fair mistress fell joyfully into one
another's arms, the parents consenting to their union. Leander, assuming
his own shape, appeared at the hall door, as if he were a stranger drawn
thither by the report of this extraordinary wedding.

From hence he traveled on, and came to a great city, where, upon his
arrival, he understood there was a great and solemn procession, in order
to shut up a young woman against her will among the vestal-nuns. The
prince was touched with compassion; and thinking the best use he could
make of his cap was to redress public wrongs and relieve the oppressed,
he flew to the temple, where he saw the young woman, crowned with
flowers, clad in white, and with her disheveled hair flowing about her
shoulders. Two of her brothers led her by each hand, and her mother
followed her with a great crowd of men and women. Leander, being
invisible, cried out, "Stop, stop, wicked brethren: stop, rash and
inconsiderate mother; if you proceed any further, you shall be squeezed
to death like so many frogs." They looked about, but could not conceive
from whence these terrible menaces came. The brothers said it was
only their sister's lover, who had hid himself in some hole; at which
Leander, in wrath, took a long cudgel, and they had no reason to say the
blows were not well laid on. The multitude fled, the vestals ran away,
and Leander was left alone with the victim; immediately he pulled off
his red cap and asked her wherein he might serve her. She answered him
that there was a certain gentleman whom she would be glad to marry, but
that he wanted an estate. Leander then shook his rose so long that he
supplied them with ten millions; after which they were married and lived
happily together.

But his last adventure was the most agreeable. Entering into a wide
forest, he heard lamentable cries. Looking about him every way, at
length he spied four men well armed, who were carrying away by force a
young lady, thirteen or fourteen years of age; upon which, making up to
them as fast as he could, "What harm has that girl done?" said he.

"Ha! ha! my little master," cried he who seemed to be the ringleader of
the rest, "who bade you inquire?"

"Let her alone," said Leander, "and go about your business."

"Oh, yes, to be sure," cried they, laughing; whereupon the prince,
alighting, put on his red cap, not thinking it otherwise prudent to
attack four who seemed strong enough to fight a dozen. One of them
stayed to take care of the young lady, while the three others went after
Gris-de-line, who gave them a great deal of unwelcome exercise.

Meantime the young lady continued her cries and complaints. "Oh, my dear
princess," said she, "how happy was I in your palace! Did you but
know my sad misfortune, you would send your Amazons to rescue poor
Abricotina."

Leander, having listened to what she said, without delay seized the
ruffian that held her, and bound him fast to a tree before he had time
or strength to defend himself. He then went to the second, and taking
him by both arms, bound him in the same manner to another tree. In the
meantime Abricotina made the best of her good fortune and betook herself
to her heels, not knowing which way she went. But Leander, missing her,
called out to his horse Gris-de-line; who, by two kicks with his hoof,
rid himself of the two ruffians who had pursued him: one of them had his
head broken and the other three of his ribs. And now Leander only wanted
to overtake Abricotina; for he thought her so handsome that he wished
to see her again. He found her leaning against a tree. When she saw
Gris-de-line coming toward her, "How lucky am I!" cried she; "this
pretty little horse will carry me to the palace of pleasure." Leander
heard her, though she saw him not: he rode up to her; Gris-de-line
stopped, and when Abricotina mounted him, Leander clasped her in his
arms and placed her gently before him. Oh, how great was Abricotina's
fear to feel herself fast embraced, and yet see nobody! She durst not
stir, and shut her eyes for fear of seeing a spirit. But Leander took
off his little cap. "How comes it, fair Abricotina," said he, "that you
are afraid of me, who delivered you out of the hands of the ruffians?"

With that she opened her eyes, and knowing him again, "Oh, sir," said
she, "I am infinitely obliged to you; but I was afraid, for I felt
myself held fast and could see no one."

"Surely," replied Leander, "the danger you have been in has disturbed
you and cast a mist before your eyes."

Abricotina would not seem to doubt him, though she was otherwise
extremely sensible. And after they had talked for some time of
indifferent things, Leander requested her to tell him her age, her
country, and by what accident she fell into the hands of the ruffians.

"Know then, sir," said she, "there was a certain very great fairy
married to a prince who wearied of her: she therefore banished him from
her presence, and established herself and daughter in the Island of Calm
Delights. The princess, who is my mistress, being very fair, has many
lovers--among others, one named Furibon, whom she detests; he it was
whose ruffians seized me to-day when I was wandering in search of a
stray parrot. Accept, noble prince, my best thanks for your valor, which
I shall never forget."

Leander said how happy he was to have served her, and asked if he could
not obtain admission into the island. Abricotina assured him this was
impossible, and therefore he had better forget all about it. While they
were thus conversing, they came to the bank of a large river. Abricotina
alighted with a nimble jump from the horse.

"Farewell, sir," said she to the prince, making a profound reverence; "I
wish you every happiness."

"And I," said Leander, "wish that I may now and then have a small share
in your remembrance."

So saying, he galloped away and soon entered into the thickest part of
the wood, near a river, where he unbridled and unsaddled Gris-de-line;
then, putting on his little cap, wished himself in the Island of Calm
Delights, and his wish was immediately accomplished.

The palace was of pure gold, and stood upon pillars of crystal and
precious stones, which represented the zodiac and all the wonders of
nature; all the arts and sciences; the sea, with all the variety of fish
therein contained; the earth, with all the various creatures which it
produces; the chases of Diana and her nymphs; the noble exercises of the
Amazons; the amusements of a country life; flocks of sheep with their
shepherds and dogs; the toils of agriculture, harvesting, gardening. And
among all this variety of representations there was neither man nor
boy to be seen--not so much as a little winged Cupid; so highly had the
princess been incensed against her inconstant husband as not to show the
least favor to his fickle sex.

"Abricotina did not deceive me," said Leander to himself; "they have
banished from hence the very idea of men; now let us see what they have
lost by it." With that he entered into the palaces and at every step he
took he met with objects so wonderful that when he had once fixed his
eyes upon them he had much ado to take them off again. He viewed a
vast number of these apartments, some full of china, no less fine than
curious; others lined with porcelain, so delicate that the walls were
quite transparent. Coral, jasper, agates, and cornelians adorned the
rooms of state, and the presence-chamber was one entire mirror. The
throne was one great pearl, hollowed like a shell; the princess sat,
surrounded by her maidens, none of whom could compare with herself. In
her was all the innocent sweetness of youth, joined to the dignity of
maturity; in truth, she was perfection; and so thought the invisible
Leander.

Not seeing Abricotina, she asked where she was. Upon that, Leander,
being very desirous to speak, assumed the tone of a parrot, for there
were many in the room, and addressed himself invisibly to the princess.

"Most charming princess," said he, "Abricotina will return immediately.
She was in great danger of being carried away from this place but for a
young prince who rescued her."

The princess was surprised at the parrot, his answer was so extremely
pertinent.

"You are very rude, little parrot," said the princess; "and Abricotina,
when she comes, shall chastise you for it."

"I shall not be chastised," answered Leander, still counterfeiting the
parrot's voice; "moreover, she will let you know the great desire that
stranger had to be admitted into this palace, that he might convince
you of the falsehood of those ideas which you have conceived against his
sex."

"In truth, pretty parrot," cried the princess, "it is a pity you are not
every day so diverting; I should love you dearly."

"Ah! if prattling will please you, princess," replied Leander, "I will
prate from morning till night."

"But," continued the princess, "how shall I be sure my parrot is not a
sorcerer?"

"He is more in love than any sorcerer can be," replied the prince.

At this moment Abricotina entered the room, and falling at her lovely
mistress' feet, gave her a full account of what had befallen her, and
described the prince in the most glowing colors.

"I should have hated all men," added she, "had I not seen him! Oh,
madam, how charming he is! His air and all his behavior have something
in them so noble; and though whatever he spoke was infinitely pleasing,
yet I think I did well in not bringing him hither."

To this the princess said nothing, but she asked Abricotina a hundred
other questions concerning the prince; whether she knew his name, his
country, his birth, from whence he came, and whither he was going; and
after this she fell into a profound thoughtfulness.

Leander observed everything, and continued to chatter as he had begun.

"Abricotina is ungrateful, madam," said he; "that poor stranger will die
for grief if he sees you not."

"Well, parrot, let him die," answered the princess with a sigh; "and
since thou undertakest to reason like a person of wit, and not a little
bird, I forbid thee to talk to me any more of this unknown person."

Leander was overjoyed to find that Abricotina's and the parrot's
discourse had made such an impression on the princess. He looked upon
her with pleasure and delight. "Can it be," said he to himself, "that
the masterpiece of nature, that the wonder of our age, should be
confined eternally in an island, and no mortal dare to approach her?
But," continued he, "wherefore am I concerned that others are banished
hence, since I have the happiness to be with her, to hear and to admire
her; nay, more, to love her above all the women in the universe?"

It was late, and the princess retired into a large room of marble and
porphyry, where several bubbling fountains, refreshed the air with an
agreeable coolness. As soon as she entered the music began, a sumptuous
supper was served up, and the birds from several aviaries on each side
of the room, of which Abricotina had the chief care, opened their little
throats in the most agreeable manner.

Leander had traveled a journey long enough to give him a good appetite,
which made him draw near the table, where the very smell of such viands
was agreeable and refreshing. The princess had a curious tabby-cat, for
which she had a great kindness. This cat one of the maids of honor held
in her arms, saying, "Madam, Bluet is hungry!" With that a chair was
presently brought for the cat; for he was a cat of quality, and had a
necklace of pearl about his neck. He was served on a golden plate with
a laced napkin before him; and the plate being supplied with meat, Bluet
sat with the solemn importance of an alderman.

"Ho! ho!" cried Leander to himself; "an idle tabby malkin, that perhaps
never caught a mouse in his life, and I dare say is not descended from
a better family than myself, has the honor to sit at table with my
mistress: I would fain know whether he loves her so well as I do."

Saying this, he placed himself in the chair with the cat upon his
knee, for nobody saw him, because he had his little red cap on; finding
Bluet's plate well supplied with partridge, quails, and pheasants,
he made so free with them that whatever was set before Master Puss
disappeared in a trice. The whole court said no cat ever ate with
a better appetite. There were excellent ragouts, and the prince made
use of the cat's paw to taste them; but he sometimes pulled his paw
too roughly, and Bluet, not understanding raillery, began to mew and be
quite out of patience. The princess observing it, "Bring that fricassee
and that tart to poor Bluet," said she; "see how he cries to have them."

Leander laughed to himself at the pleasantness of this adventure; but he
was very thirsty, not being accustomed to make such large meals without
drinking. By the help of the cat's paw he got a melon, with which he
somewhat quenched his thirst; and when supper was quite over, he went to
the buffet and took two bottles of delicious wine.

The princess now retired into her boudoir, ordering Abricotina to follow
her and make fast the door; but they could not keep out Leander, who was
there as soon as they. However, the princess, believing herself alone
with her confidante:

"Abricotina," said she, "tell me truly, did you exaggerate in your
description of the unknown prince, for methinks it is impossible he
should be as amiable as you say?"

"Madam," replied the damsel, "if I have failed in anything, it was in
coming short of what was due to him."

The princess sighed and was silent for a time; then resuming her speech:
"I am glad," said she, "thou didst not bring him with thee."

"But, madam," answered Abricotina, who was a cunning girl, and already
penetrated her mistress' thoughts, "suppose he had come to admire the
wonders of these beautiful mansions, what harm could he have done us?
Will you live eternally unknown in a corner of the world, concealed
from the rest of human kind? Of what use is all your grandeur, pomp,
magnificence, if nobody sees it?"

"Hold thy peace, prattler," replied the princess, "and do not disturb
that happy repose which I have enjoyed so long."

Abricotina durst make no reply; and the princess, having waited her
answer for some time, asked her whether she had anything to say.
Abricotina then said she thought it was to very little purpose her
mistress having sent her picture to the courts of several princes, where
it only served to make those who saw it miserable; that every one would
be desirous to marry her, and as she could not marry them all, indeed
none of them, it would make them desperate.

"Yet, for all that," said the princess, "I could wish my picture were in
the hands of this same stranger."

"Oh, madam," answered Abricotina, "is not his desire to see you violent
enough already? Would you augment it?"

"Yes," cried the princess; "a certain impulse of vanity, which I was
never sensible of till now, has bred this foolish fancy in me."

Leander heard all this discourse, and lost not a tittle of what she
said; some of her expressions gave him hope, others absolutely destroyed
it. The princess presently asked Abricotina whether she had seen
anything extraordinary during her short travels.

"Madam," said she, "I passed through one forest where I saw certain
creatures that resembled little children: they skip and dance upon the
trees like squirrels; they are very ugly, but have wonderful agility and
address."

"I wish I had one of them," said the princess; "but if they are so
nimble as you say they are, it is impossible to catch one."

Leander, who passed through the same forest, knew what Abricotina meant,
and presently wished himself in the place. He caught a dozen of little
monkeys, some bigger, some less, and all of different colors, and with
much ado put them into a large sack; then, wishing himself at Paris,
where, he had heard, a man might have everything for money, he went and
bought a little gold chariot. He taught six green monkeys to draw it;
they were harnessed with fine traces of flame-colored morocco leather.
He went to another place, where he met with two monkeys of merit,
the most pleasant of which was called Briscambril, the other
Pierceforest--both very spruce and well educated. He dressed Briscambril
like a king and placed him in the coach; Pierceforest he made the
coachman; the others were dressed like pages; all which he put into his
sack, coach and all.

The princess not being gone to bed, heard a rumbling of a little coach
in the long gallery; at the same time, her ladies came to tell her that
the king of the dwarfs was arrived, and the chariot immediately entered
her chamber with all the monkey train. The country monkeys began to
show a thousand tricks, which far surpassed those of Briscambril and
Pierceforest. To say the truth, Leander conducted the whole machine. He
drew the chariot where Briscambril sat arrayed as a king, and making
him hold a box of diamonds in his hand, he presented it with a becoming
grace to the princess. The princess' surprise may be easily imagined.
Moreover, Briscambril made a sign for Pierceforest to come and dance
with him. The most celebrated dancers were not to be compared with them
in activity. But the princess, troubled that she could not guess from
whence this curious present came, dismissed the dancers sooner than she
would otherwise have done, though she was extremely pleased with them.

Leander, satisfied with having seen the delight the princess had taken
in beholding the monkeys, thought of nothing now but to get a little
repose, which he greatly wanted. He stayed sometime in the great
gallery; afterward, going down a pair of stairs, and finding a door
open, he entered into an apartment the most delightful that ever was
seen. There was in it a bed of cloth-of-gold, enriched with pearls,
intermixed with rubies and emeralds: for by this time there appeared
daylight sufficient for him to view and admire the magnificence of this
sumptuous furniture. Having made fast the door, he composed himself to
sleep. Next day he rose very early, and looking about on every side,
he spied a painter's pallet, with colors ready prepared and pencils.
Remembering what the princess had said to Abricotina touching her
own portrait, he immediately (for he could paint as well as the most
excellent masters) seated himself before a mirror and drew his own
picture first; then, in an oval, that of the princess. He had all her
features so strong in his imagination that he had no occasion for her
sitting; and as his desire to please her had set him to work, never did
