hunter. If he sees me around again, he'll try to shoot me. I've done all
I can do. Anyway, Dusky ought to have sense enough to be suspicious of
this place after that warning. Hello, who is that? I do believe it is
Farmer Brown's boy. I wish he would come over here. If he should find
out about that hunter, perhaps he would do something to drive him away.
I'll see if I can call him over here."

Blacky began to call in the way he does when he has discovered something
and wants others to know about it. "Caw, caw, caaw, caaw, caw, caw,
caaw!" screamed Blacky, as if greatly excited.

Now Farmer Brown's boy, having no work to do that morning, had started
for a tramp over the Green Meadows, hoping to see some of his little
friends in feathers and fur. He heard the excited cawing of Blacky and
at once turned in that direction.

"That black rascal has found something over on the shore of the Big
River," said Farmer Brown's boy to himself. "I'll go over there to
see what it is. There isn't much escapes the sharp eyes of that black
busybody. He has led me to a lot of interesting things, one time and
another. There he is on the top of that tree over by the Big River."

As Farmer Brown's boy drew near, Blacky flew down and disappeared below
the bank. Fanner Brown's boy chuckled. "Whatever it is, it is right down
there," he muttered.

He walked forward rapidly but quietly, and presently he reached the edge
of the bank. Up flew Blacky cawing wildly, and pretending to be scared
half to death. Again Farmer Brown's boy chuckled. "You're just making
believe," he declared. "You're trying to make me believe that I have
surprised you, when all the time you knew I was coming and have been
waiting for me. Now, what have you found over here?"

He looked eagerly along the shore, and at once he saw a row of low
bushes close to the edge of the water. He knew what it was instantly.
"A Duck blind!" he exclaimed. "A hunter has built a blind over here from
which to shoot Ducks. I wonder if he has killed any yet. I hope not." He
went down to the blind, for that is what a Duck hunter's hiding-place
is called, and looked about. A couple of grains of corn just inside
the blind caught his eyes, and his face darkened. "That fellow has been
baiting Ducks," thought he. "He has been putting out corn to get them to
come here regularly. My, how I hate that sort of thing! It is bad enough
to hunt them fairly, but to feed them and then kill them--ugh! I wonder
if he has shot any yet."

He looked all about keenly, and his face cleared. He knew that if that
hunter had killed any Ducks, there would be tell-tale feathers in the
blind, and there were none.



CHAPTER XXIV: Farmer Brown's Boy Does Some Thinking

Farmer Brown's boy sat on the bank of the Big River in a brown study.
That means that he was thinking very hard. Blacky the Crow sat in the
top of a tall tree a short distance away and watched him. Blacky was
silent now, and there was a knowing look in his shrewd little eyes. In
calling Farmer Brown's boy over there, he had done all he could, and he
was quite satisfied to leave the matter to Farmer Brown's boy.

"A hunter has made that blind to shoot Black Ducks from," thought Farmer
Brown's boy, "and he has been baiting them in here by scattering corn
for them. Black Ducks are about the smartest Ducks that fly, but if they
have been coming in here every evening and finding corn and no sign of
danger, they probably think it perfectly safe here and come straight
in without being at all suspicious. To-night, or some night soon, that
hunter will be waiting for them.

"I guess the law that permits hunting Ducks is all right, but there
ought to be a law against baiting them in. That isn't hunting. No, Sir,
that isn't hunting. If this land were my father's, I would know what to
do. I would put up a sign saying that this was private property and no
shooting was allowed. But it isn't my father's land, and that hunter has
a perfect right to shoot here. He has just as much right here as I have.
I wish I could stop him, but I don't see how I can."

A frown puckered the freckled face of Farmer Brown's boy. You see, he
was thinking very hard, and when he does that he is very apt to frown.

"I suppose," he muttered, "I can tear down his blind. He wouldn't know
who did it. But that wouldn't do much good; he would build another.
Besides, it wouldn't be right. He has a perfect right to make a blind
here, and having made it, it is his and I haven't any right to touch
it. I won't do a thing I haven't a right to do. That wouldn't be honest.
I've got to think of some other way of saving those Ducks."

The frown on his freckled face grew deeper, and for a long time he sat
without moving. Suddenly his face cleared, and he jumped to his feet. He
began to chuckle. "I have it!" he exclaimed. "I'll do a little shooting
myself!" Then he chuckled again and started for home. Presently he began
to whistle, a way he has when he is in good spirits.

Blacky the Crow watched him go, and Blacky was well satisfied. He didn't
know what Farmer Brown's boy was planning to do, but he had a feeling
that he was planning to do something, and that all would be well.
Perhaps Blacky wouldn't have felt so sure could he have understood what
Farmer Brown's boy had said about doing a little shooting himself.

As it was, Blacky flew off about his own business, quite satisfied that
now all would be well, and he need worry no more about those Ducks.
None of the little people of the Green Forest and the Green Meadows knew
Farmer Brown's boy better than did Blacky the Crow. None knew better
than he that Farmer Brown's boy was their best friend. "It is all right
now," chuckled Blacky. "It is all right now." And as the cheery whistle
of Farmer Brown's boy floated back to him on the Merry Little Breezes,
he repeated it: "It is all right now."



CHAPTER XXV: Blacky Gets A Dreadful Shock

   When friends prove false, whom may we trust?
   The springs of faith are turned to dust.
   --Blacky the Crow.

Blacky the Crow was in the top of his favorite tree over near the Big
River early this afternoon. He didn't know what was going to happen, but
he felt in his bones that something was, and he meant to be on hand to
see. For a long time he sat there, seeing nothing unusual. At last he
spied a tiny figure far away across the Green Meadows. Even at that
distance he knew who it was; it was Farmer Brown's boy, and he was
coming toward the Big River.

"I thought as much," chuckled Blacky. "He is coming over here to drive
that hunter away."

The tiny figure grew larger. It was Farmer Brown's boy beyond a doubt.
Suddenly Blacky's eyes opened so wide that they looked as if they were
in danger of popping out of his head. He had discovered that Farmer
Brown's boy was carrying something and that that something was a gun!
Yes, Sir, Farmer Brown's boy was carrying a terrible gun! If Blacky
could have rubbed his eyes, he would have done so, just to make sure
that there was nothing the matter with them.

"A gun!" croaked Blacky. "Farmer Brown's boy with a terrible gun! What
does it mean?"

Nearer came Farmer Brown's boy, and Blacky could see that terrible gun
plainly now. Suddenly an idea popped into his head. "Perhaps he is going
to shoot that hunter!" thought Blacky, and somehow he felt better.

Farmer Brown's boy reached the Big River at a point some distance below
the blind built by the hunter. He laid his gun down on the bank and went
down to the edge of the water. The rushes grew very thick there, and
for a while Farmer Brown's boy was very busy among them. Blacky from
his high perch could watch him, and as he watched, he grew more and more
puzzled. It looked very much as if Farmer Brown's boy was building a
blind much like that of the hunter's. At last he carried an old log
down there, got his gun, and sat down just as the hunter had done in his
blind the afternoon before. He was quite hidden there, excepting from a
place high up like Blacky's perch.

"I--I--I do believe he is going to try to shoot those Ducks himself,"
gasped Blacky. "I wouldn't have believed it if any one had told me. No,
Sir, I wouldn't have believed it. I--I--can't believe it now. Farmer
Brown's boy hunting with a terrible gun! Yet I've got to believe my own
eyes."

A noise up river caught his attention. It was the noise of oars in a
boat. There was the hunter, rowing down the Big River. Just as he had
done the day before, he came ashore above his blind and walked down to
it.

"This is no place for me," muttered Blacky. "He'll remember that I
scared those Ducks yesterday, and as likely as not he'll try to shoot
me."

Blacky spread his black wings and hurriedly left the tree-top, heading
for another tree farther back on the Green Meadows where he would be
safe, but from which he could not see as well. There he sat until the
Black Shadows warned him that it was high time for him to be getting
back to the Green Forest.

He had to hurry, for it was later than usual, and he was afraid to be
out after dark. Just as he reached the Green Forest he heard a faint
"bang, bang" from over by the Big River, and he knew that it came from
the place where Farmer Brown's boy was hiding in the rushes.

"It is true," croaked Blacky. "Farmer Brown's boy has turned hunter."
It was such a dreadful shock to Blacky that it was a long time before he
could go to sleep.



CHAPTER XXVI: Why The Hunter Got No Ducks

The hunter who had come down the Big River in a boat and landed near
the place where Dusky the Black Duck and his flock had found nice yellow
corn scattered in the rushes night after night saw Blacky the Crow leave
the top of a certain tree as he approached.

"It is well for you that you didn't wait for me to get nearer," said the
hunter. "You are smart enough to know that you can't play the same trick
on me twice. You frightened those Ducks away last night, but if you try
it again, you'll be shot as surely as your coat is black."

Then the hunter went to his blind which, you know, was the hiding-place
he had made of bushes and rushes, and behind this he sat down with his
terrible gun to wait and watch for Dusky the Black Duck and his flock.

Now you remember that farther along the shore of the Big River was
Farmer Brown's boy, hiding in a blind he had made that afternoon. The
hunter couldn't see him at all. He didn't have the least idea that any
one else was anywhere near. "With that Crow out of the way, I think I
will get some Ducks to-night," thought the hunter and looked at his gun
to make sure that it was ready.

Over in the West, jolly, round, red Mr. Sun started to go to bed behind
the Purple Hills, and the Black Shadows came creeping out. Far down
the Big River the hunter saw a swiftly moving black line just above the
water. "Here they come," he muttered, as he eagerly watched that black
line draw nearer.

Twice those big black birds circled around over the Big River opposite
where the hunter was crouching behind his blind. It was plain that
Dusky, their leader, remembered Blacky's warning the night before. But
this time there was no warning. Everything appeared safe. Once more the
flock circled and then headed straight for that place where they hoped
to find more corn. The hunter crouched lower. They were almost near
enough for him to shoot when "bang, bang" went a gun a short distance
away.

Instantly Dusky and his flock turned and on swift wings swung off and
up the river. If ever there was a disappointed hunter, it was the one
crouching in that blind. "Somebody else is hunting, and he spoiled
my shot that time," he muttered. "He must have a blind farther down.
Probably some other Ducks I didn't see came in to him. I wonder if he
got them. Here's hoping that next time those Ducks come in here first."

He once more made himself comfortable and settled down for a long wait.
The Black Shadows crept out from the farther bank of the Big River.
Jolly, round red Mr. Sun had gone to bed, and the first little star was
twinkling high overhead. It was very still and peaceful. From out in the
middle of the Big River sounded a low "quack"; Dusky and his flock were
swimming in this time. Presently the hunter could see a silver line on
the water, and then he made out nine black spots. In a few minutes those
Ducks would be where he could shoot them. "Bang, bang" went that gun
below him again. With a roar of wings, Dusky and his flock were in the
air and away. That hunter stood up and said things, and they were not
nice things. He knew that those Ducks would not come back again that
night, and that once more he must go home empty-handed. But first he
would find out who that other hunter was and what luck he had had, so he
tramped down the shore to where that gun had seemed to be. He found the
blind of Farmer Brown's boy, but there was no one there. You see, as
soon as he had fired his gun the last time, Farmer Brown's boy had
slipped out and away. And as he tramped across the Green Meadows toward
home with his gun, he chuckled. "He didn't get those Ducks this time,"
said Farmer Brown's boy.



CHAPTER XXVII: The Hunter Gives Up

Blacky The Crow didn't know what to think. He couldn't make himself
believe that Farmer Brown's boy had really turned hunter, yet what else
could he believe? Hadn't he with his own eyes seen Farmer Brown's boy
with a terrible gun hide in rushes along the Big River and wait for
Dusky the Black Duck and his flock to come in? And hadn't he with his
own ears heard the "bang, bang" of that very gun?

The very first thing the next morning Blacky had hastened over to the
place where Farmer Brown's boy had hidden in the rushes. With sharp eyes
he looked for feathers, that would tell the tale of a Duck killed. But
there were no feathers. There wasn't a thing to show that anything so
dreadful had happened. Perhaps Farmer Brown's boy had missed when he
shot at those Ducks. Blacky shook his head and decided to say nothing to
